Literature Review on Accessibility Guidelines for Self-service Terminals
Yuryeon Lee, Hwaseung Jeon, Hyun K. Kim
School of Information Convergence
Kwangwoon University
20 Kwangwoon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 01897, Republic of
Korea
e-mail: {tkdenddl74, stella668, hyunkkim}@kw.ac.kr
Sunyoung Park
School of Software
Kwangwoon University
20 Kwangwoon-ro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 01897, Republic of
Korea
e-mail: tjsdud9151@gmail.com
Abstract— In the age of informatization, the informatization
equipment domain is expanding worldwide. The introduction
of self-service terminals has accelerated the development of the
unmanned service industry, and currently, people interact with
self-service
terminals
in
various
places.
Although
informatization
using
products
and
services
related
to
information and communication is conducted at a significantly
high
speed,
research
on
the
accessibility
of
self-service
terminals among users with physical and cognitive disabilities
is insufficient. Therefore, we examined the laws and guidelines
on
accessibility
to
self-service
terminals,
compared
and
analyzed the characteristics of each guideline, and highlighted
the factors to be supplemented based on the types of
disabilities and User Interface (UI) functions.
Keywords-self-service
terminal;
kiosk;
guideline;
accessibility; disability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the age of information, a significant amount of data is
being processed rapidly and accurately worldwide, thus
expanding the field of information equipment [1]. The trend
of using touch-screen technology in self-service terminals
has continued to grow, and self-service technology is
becoming increasingly prevalent and crucial [2]. In addition,
the introduction of self-service terminals has accelerated the
development of the unmanned service industry, and the
services replaced by self-service terminals are gradually
expanding into high value-added industries [3]. In addition,
improvement in the functionality and costs of touch-screen
technology has led to self-service terminals becoming
increasingly integrated into our daily lives. People now
interact with self-service terminals at various places, such as
local grocery stores and airport check-in counters [4].
Although informatization using products and services
related to information and communication is conducted at a
significantly
high
speed,
there
are
growing
concerns
regarding the information gap. The primary cause of this
gap is the limitation of physical and cognitive access, which
is a result of insufficient consideration of users with
physical and cognitive disabilities [5].
Therefore, in this study, we aim to analyze the trends of
products
and
services
related
to
information
and
communication and to improve the accessibility of products
and services related to information and communication. So
we examine international guidelines on accessibility to self-
service terminals based on the types of disabilities and User
Interface (UI) functions. In the study results, we present the
characteristics of each accessibility guideline and the
supplementary factors of the guidelines to be developed
later.
In Section II, accessibility guidelines and laws are
introduced, and classification criteria are explained. Section
III deals with the guidelines and statistical results on the
type of disability, and Section IV explains the insights that
can be obtained through statistical results. Finally, Section
V summarizes the study.
II.
METHOD
A.
Guidelines and Law Clauses Survey
We examined new laws and guidelines that emphasize
the importance of accessibility to prevent discrimination
against people with disabilities while using Information
Technology (IT) devices. Among a total of 12 guidelines and
laws, five were selected in consideration of the law's
enforceability, the importance of literature, and the relevance
of kiosk accessibility. In these laws and guidelines, items
related to self-service terminal accessibility have been
selected. Specifically, 78 items from the Guidelines for
Public Access Terminal Accessibility (PATA) [9], 13 items
from Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act (RA) [10], 49
items from The US Air Carrier Access Act (ACAA) [11], 16
items from the 2010 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Standards for Accessible Design [12], and 13 items from the
European Accessibility Act (EAA) [13] were selected. Based
on the judgment that common items are important in terms
of accessibility, 21 items from PATA, 7 from RA, 21 from
ACAA, 14 from ADA, and 5 from EAA were selected as
common items, as shown in the graph below (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Number of Guidelines.
415
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B.
Classification Criteria
The self-service terminal accessibility guidelines were
classified based on accessibility functions used in the
previous studies [5]-[7] and reclassified in detail based on UI
functions (Table 1). As a result of examining previous
studies, the recommendation of manufacturer and service
provider (F) deals with the physical part, unlike other
provisions.
TABLE 1. ACCESSIBILITY AND UI FUNCTION
Accessibility function
UI function
Complement of color
identification ability (A)
Avoid color coding
Contrast
Complement of reaction
time (B)
Sufficient time
Complement and
replacement of hearing (C)
Volume control
Complement and
replacement of vision (D)
Identification of input
control
Tactile information
Input keypad
Braille
Text-size enlargement
Audio output
Complement of cognitive
ability (E)
Display seizure
Recommendation of
manufacturer and service
provider (F)
Display visibility
Privacy
Possibility of operation
without assistive
technology
Floor or ground space
User identification
method
Complement hand or arm
movement (G)
Fine motor control
alternatives
The types of disabilities in the study were limited to
three: visual impairment, hearing impairment, and physical
disability, which are determined to affect the operation of
self-service terminals. When more than one type of disability
was present per clause, it was repeatedly calculated while
determining statistics related to the disability type.
III.
RESULT
A.
Percentage of Disabilities by Guidelines
The study results show that among the types of
disabilities,
provisions
related
to
visual
impairment
accounted for the highest proportion, whereas those related
to hearing impairment accounted for the lowest proportion.
The number of provisions related to visual impairment was
highest in ACAA and lowest in EAA. Meanwhile, provisions
related to hearing impairment were highest in the Guidelines
for PATA and lowest in EAA. Similarly, provisions related
to physical disabilities were highest in the Guidelines for
PATA and lowest in EAA (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Percentage of Disabilities by Guidelines
B.
Percentage of Disabilities by Accessibility Function
The study results show that the most common provisions
related to visual impairment are complement of color
identification ability (A) and complement and replacement of
vision (D). Additionally, recommendation by manufacturer
and service provider (F) and complement of reaction time
(B) are not included in provisions for hearing impairment.
Meanwhile,
complement
of
cognitive
ability
(E)
and
complement hand or arm movement (G) have similar
proportions of the three disability types (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Percentage of Disabilities by Accessibility Function
C.
Percentage of Guidelines by Accessibility Function
The complement of color identification ability (A) and
complement and replacement of hearing (C) items are
included in all the five guidelines and law clauses; however,
the rest are included in only a few. The complement hand or
arm movement (G) item is included in only two guidelines
and has a low percentage. Similarly, the complement of
cognitive ability (E) item is included in three guidelines and
has a low percentage.
416
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. Percentage of Guidelines by Accessibility Function
The complement and replacement of vision (D) item is
significantly included in the ACAA and ADA Standards for
Accessible Design; however, it is completely excluded in the
RA
and
EAA.
In
addition,
the
recommendation
of
manufacturer and service provider (F) item was primarily
noted in PATA (Figure 4).
IV.
DISCUSSION
The statistics of the graph presented in Figure 2 show
that there are many provisions related to visual impairment,
whereas those related to hearing impairment and physical
disability are relatively fewer. The results also show that
more factors are related to visual impairment, compared to
hearing impairment and physical disability, because of the
characteristics of self-service terminals that use touch-
screen technology. The most important provisions related to
physical disabilities are included in the PATA; however, the
other guidelines have relatively fewer provisions related to
physical disabilities. To develop future guidelines, it is
necessary
to
promote
provisions
related
to
physical
disabilities, such as installation location, passageways, and
touch-screen interaction. In fact, most mobile devices
provide touch-screen interaction, which can be particularly
problematic for people with physical disabilities. Moreover,
studies focusing on the design of touch-screen interfaces for
users
with
physical
disabilities
are
insufficient.
The
recommendation of manufacturer and service provider (F)
item was considered a notable factor of visual impairment
and physical disability, because there are many provisions
for installation sites and spaces.
The statistics of the graph presented in Figure 4 show that
the complement of color identification ability (A) and
complement and replacement of hearing (C) items are
included in all five guidelines; however, the others are
included
in only some
guidelines. Therefore, it
was
determined that the specific factors for each guideline
differed.
In
addition,
the
complement
hand
or
arm
movement (G) item is included only in the PATA and the
EAA. Therefore, they must be considered and included in
future provisions of other guidelines. The complement and
replacement of vision (D)
and complement of color
identification ability (A) items related to vision were
primarily noted in the ACAA and the ADA Standards for
Accessible
Design,
whereas
the
recommendation
of
manufacturers and service providers (F) item was primarily
noted in PATA. Hence, the ACAA should be analyzed for
guidelines related to vision, while the PATA should be
analyzed for guidelines related to kiosk manufacturing.
Other disabilities were not considered in this study
because the types of disabilities were limited to visual,
hearing, and physical disabilities, which are related to the
operation of self-service terminals. Future studies may also
focus on mental disabilities, such as intellectual disabilities.
Statistical calculations were conducted based on the
number of guidelines; however, detailed evaluation methods
are required to accurately evaluate the self-service terminal
accessibility guidelines. For example, ANOVA can be used
to evaluate the difference for each guideline, and Fisher test
can be used to perform a post-test.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this study, international guidelines related to self-
service terminal accessibility were examined and classified
based on three types of disabilities and seven accessibility
functions.
Based on statistical information, we determined the UI
functions and types of disabilities that characterize each
guideline, as well as the percentage of the types of
disabilities, according to the accessibility function.
The study results show the characteristics of the overall
self-service terminal accessibility guidelines and the factors
to be supplemented. This information will be useful for
future studies aiming to further develop the self-service
terminal accessibility guidelines.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Ministry of Science
and ICT (MIST), under the National Program for Excellence
in SW (2017-0-00096), and supervised by the Institute for
Information
&
Communication
Technology
Promotion
(IITP). Moreover, this work was supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant and funded by
the Korean government (MIST) (No. 2018R1C1B5086269).
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Sung et al., “Correlation between cognitive function and
ability to use kiosk (KIOSK) in seniors 65 years and older,”
Journal of the Korean Age-Friendly Industry, vol. 11, no. 2, pp.
135-142, 2019.
[2] E. Jokisuu, M. McKenna, A. W. Smith, and P. Day, “Improving
touchscreen
accessibility
in
self-service
technology,”
In
International Conference on Universal Access in Human-Computer
Interaction, pp. 103-113, 2015, Springer, Cham.
[3] H. Lim, D. Ryu, and D. Park, "Kiosk Industry Analysis:
Adoption Effects and Market Prospects," Korea Business Review,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 21-48, 2020.
[4] S. N. Duff, C. B. Irwin, J. L. Skye, M. E. Sesto, and D. A.
Wiegmann, “The effect of disability and approach on touch screen
417
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

performance during a number entry task,” In Proceedings of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 54,
no. 6, pp. 566-570, 2010, Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE
Publications.
[5] J. Jo, S. Lee, and S. Park, “A study on evaluating accessibility of
public institution kiosks: focusing on accessibility,” Regulations on
Informatization Policy, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 51-73, 2004.
[6] H. K. Kim, and J. Park, “Examination of the Protection Offered
by Current Accessibility Acts and Guidelines to People with
Disabilities
in
Using
Information
Technology
Devices,”
Electronics, vol. 9, no. 5, 742, 2020.
[7] H. K. Kim, C. Kim, E. Lim, and H. Kim, “How to develop
accessibility UX design guideline in Samsung,” In Proceedings of
the 18th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction
with Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct, pp. 551-556, 2016.
[8] L. Anthony, Y. Kim, and L. Findlater, “Analyzing user-
generated youtube videos to understand touchscreen use by people
with motor impairments,” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems, pp. 1223-1232, 2013.
[9] Guidelines for Public Access Terminals Accessibility. Available
online: http://universaldesign.ie/Technology-ICT/Irish-National-IT-
Accessibility-Guidelines/Public-Access-Terminals/Guidelines-for-
Public-Access-Terminals-Accessibility/ [retrieved : July 2020].
[10] Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act. Available online:
https://www.fcc.gov/general/section-508-rehabilitation-act
[retrieved : July 2020].
[11]
The
U.S.
Air
Carrier
Access
Act.
Available
online:
https://www.transportation.gov/tags/air-carrier-access-act
[retrieved : July 2020].
[12] 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design. Available online:
https://www.ada.gov/2010ADAstandards_index.htm
[retrieved
:
July 2020].
[13] European Accessibility Act. Available online: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32019L0882 [retrieved : July
2020].
418
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

