Do I Really Have to Accept Smart Fridges?  
An empirical study 
 
Bushra Alolayan 
Department of Computer Science 
Aberystwyth University 
Aberystwyth, Wales 
bua3@aber.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Smart fridges have not taken off as rapidly as their 
creators would have wished. This raises questions about user 
attitudes towards the smart fridge. A small-scale empirical 
study, comprising 17 individual semi-structured interviews, 
results in identification key factors influencing user acceptance 
of the smart fridge.  This leads to a new smart fridge 
acceptance model (SFAM). The SFAM modifies the well-
known Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) by adding social 
influence, technology anxiety and cost to the factors included in 
the original Technology Acceptance Model. The findings 
indicate that participants are willing to use such an innovation 
if it already exists. 
Keywords-technology acceptance model; smart fridge; 
ubiqioutus computing; acceptance factors 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ethnographic studies show that a huge part of people’s 
social life occurs in the kitchen [19]. The kitchen is a place 
where you can combine vital communication and social 
purposes [30], a vast amount of time is spent there and many 
people regularly attach notes and other information to the 
fridge. Consequently, researchers from all over the world are 
working to enhance nutrition and dietary support [12], 
cooking, recipe planning [14] and communications [4]. 
This study is part of a three-year PhD project. The aim of 
this paper is to identify factors that will influence smart 
fridge acceptance based on the Technology Acceptance 
Model (TAM) [8] and provides useful services to users in the 
household. To do this, we performed the following: 
• 
Reviewed the literature on technology acceptance. 
• 
Identified the factors influencing the smart fridge 
based on reviewing the literature review and 
empirical investigation. 
• 
Extended the Technology Acceptance Model based 
on the empirical findings and therefore proposed 
associated the factors with related variables. 
 
New factors that influence the acceptance of the smart 
fridge have been identified empirically by following these 
three steps. This results in an improved acceptance model. 
This paper is organised as follows. Section II presents an 
overview of the smart fridge and technology acceptance. In 
Section III, we empirically investigated set of factors 
influencing smart fridge acceptance. In Section IV and V, the 
results of interviews and discussion are presented, and 
finally, Section VI summarises the conclusions and future 
work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Smart Fridges 
The smart Fridge is a smart home appliance that senses 
items placed inside the fridge and keeps track of stock 
through bar code or Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) 
tags [26]; it also provides users with extra information about 
their products, their nutritional facts and consumption 
history. 
The smart fridge has frequently been used as a 
prototypical instance of the Internet of Things. The smart 
fridge is a new concept; it consists of a large, ﬂat surface that 
is fitted with a touch screen to allow interaction with users. 
One function of the smart fridge is to offer a shopping 
assistant that helps the household to decide what food needs 
to be purchased. It, also, offers a meal planner that plans 
meals to be consumed and determines the necessary grocery 
items necessary for the preparation of those meals [13]. 
Lundberg [17] designed “the Snatcher Catcher”, an 
interactive fridge that keeps track of the items in it using a 
camera. The results indicated that people showed a desire to 
own this fridge. 
Today, the fridge also offers a facility to save energy; 
The Department of Energy and Climate Change in the UK 
published a report saying that using a smart fridge could save 
around 2 million tons of carbon dioxide every year and £222 
million in energy savings [1]. Bigler [5] integrated a smart 
fridge into a Demand Site Management (DSM) network to 
reduce power peaks by more than 25% and to average out 
the overall energy consumption in order to improve grid 
utilization. Moreover, smart fridge specialists in “RLtec” 
have revealed that they are planning to install their demand 
management smart grid technology in smart fridges. 
This technology can be used to balance the power supply and 
demand [24]. 
According to Kuniavsky [16], “the fridge favoured 
technological unification over the user experience in three 
ways”: lack of functional focus, value for money and 
ignorance of differences between the life cycles of consumer 
electronics and those of appliances. He argued that the 
reason behind lack of commercial success for the smart 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

fridge is that multiplying functions, such as support for 
general household management, distracts from the fridge’s 
main purpose of keeping food fresh and offers no clear 
advantage over, for example, buying a tablet computer. In 
other words, the smart fridge should perform something that 
a regular fridge combined with a current computer cannot 
perform. 
B. Technology Acceptance 
User acceptance is crucial to the success of new 
technologies, but it is difficult to predict. Information system 
researchers 
have 
established 
numerous 
theoretical 
frameworks to understand why and how people accept a new 
technology. Some frameworks emphasize user acceptance of 
technology by using dependent variables such as intention or 
usage, while other frameworks emphasize implementation 
success at the organizational level. User acceptance refers to 
“the willingness of the user group to employ information 
technology for tasks the technology is designed to support” 
[9]. 
The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) has gained a 
lot of attention from researchers and experts for many years. 
Hence, it is the most commonly adopted and effective model 
at determining the reasons future users accept or reject a 
specific information technology; it is also capable of 
adaptation to all attitudes in different contexts [11]. TAM 
assumes that primary determinants are perceived usefulness 
and perceived ease of use for attitudes towards using a 
particular technology [8]. Figure 1 shows the original TAM. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The original Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [8].  
Several empirical assessments of TAM recommend that 
perceived usefulness has constantly been the most important 
determinant of intention to use. Perceived usefulness is also 
affected by perceived ease of use. 
The purpose of TAM is to clarify and investigate users’ 
perception of a given system and to facilitate design changes 
before users have experienced a particular system. Moreover, 
the aim is to find out the effect of external variables on 
attitudes and intentions. TAM is an improvement on the 
Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) model [2][10], which is 
influenced by beliefs, behavioral intentions and actual 
behavior. 
The TAM proposed a set of factors that are important in 
determining user attitude towards accepting a technological 
innovation [8][18]. The Technology Acceptance Model 
factors are perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, 
attitudes towards use are defined as “the user’s desirability of 
his or her using the system” [18], actual use (AU) and 
external variables, such as demographic variables. 
Venkatesh and Davis [32] proposed an extended TAM 
called TAM2, which involves social influence and cognitive 
instrumental variables into the original TAM. The social 
influence variable includes subjective norm and image, 
whereas cognitive includes job relevance, output quality and 
result demonstrability. 
Venkatesh [33] extended TAM and proposed the Unified 
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT), 
which attempt to explain user intentions to use and usage 
behavior towards a new technology. UTAUT consists of 
seven 
constructs: 
performance 
expectancy, 
effort 
expectancy, 
social 
influence, 
facilitating 
conditions, 
moderating factors, behavioral intention and use behavior. 
The moderating factors are gender, age, experience, and 
voluntariness.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Smart kitchen acceptance model [21].  
In a similar study, Rothensee [26] found that smart 
fridges are useful, easy to use and users will buy them if they 
are available on the market. He modified the TAM model 
with three main factors: perceived usefulness (PU), 
perceived ease of use (PEU) and affective attitude (A) 
towards behavioral intention. Also, moderators (gender, 
technological competence and sense of presence) have, 
according to the author, no significant impact on the model. 
Mayer [21] adopted the UTAUT model to analyze the user 
acceptance of smart products in smart home environment. 
Figure 2 shows the smart kitchen acceptance model. 
TABLE I.  
FACTORS INFLUENCING SMART FRIDGE ACCEPTANCE 
BASED ON THE LITERATURE REVIEW. 
 
Factors 
TAM 
UTAUT 
Rotheness 
Mayer et al. 
SI 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
BI 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
PEU 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
PU 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
DF 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
A 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
E 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
PE 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
FC 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
 
User acceptance researchers think that more factors 
should be added to the TAM model or integrated with other 
acceptance models in order to improve its explanatory effect 
[20]. On the other hand, it has been found that TAM is the 
best model to explain users’ attitudes toward new technology 
[3]. 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 
The aim of this section is to present an empirical analysis 
that identifies the set of factors influencing the smart fridge. 
A. Procedure 
The initial literature review focused on acceptance 
models used in fields related to new technology, smart 
kitchens and smart homes. Based on those models, as well as 
semi-structured individual interviews, user acceptance 
factors in the smart fridge were identified using the 
Technology Acceptance Model because it is applicable in the 
context of innovative technology. 
As the aim of the investigation was to gain a better 
understanding of the factors influencing acceptance of smart 
fridges rather than to test hypotheses, we adopted a 
qualitative approach.  
The individual interviews were all semi-structured, 
consisting of mainly open-ended questions. According to 
Yin [35], “interviews are one of the most important sources 
of case study information.”  
The interviews took about 30 minutes. Topics for 
discussion emphasized evaluation of the smart fridge system. 
In addition, quota-sampling technique used to identify 
willingness to participate.  
The interviews conducted for this study consisted of 
questions about the interviewees’ technology background 
and demography, their attitudes towards the smart fridge as 
well as their attitudes towards smart kitchens in general. 
Also, the interviewees were asked about their lifestyle, eating 
habits, experiences and opinions regarding online shopping. 
After obtaining ethical approval, email invitations were 
sent to the subjects to solicit voluntary participants. A link of 
a YouTube video about smart fridges and its features was 
sent with the invitation email. Participants watched the 
YouTube video before attending the interviews, which took 
place in a quiet environment to aid audio recording. 
B. Participants 
Subjects were students and staff members from different 
departments in Aberystwyth University. Altogether, 17 
interviews were carried out from June 2013 until July 2013. 
Participants were restricted to over the age of 18 (females = 
9) in order to cover and involve very diverse age groups in 
the study. Participants were recruited via courses and mailing 
lists at Aberystwyth University. Of our participants, 12 were 
students and 5 were self-employed. Table II provides a 
summary of the participants. In interview studies, the 
number of interviews included is normally recommended to 
be between 5 and 25 [31]. However, the number depends on 
the available time and resources for a particular study. 
C. Data Analysis 
All of the interviews were audio-recorded using a digital 
recorder and then transcribed for data analysis according to 
Grounded Theory [29]. These transcripts were imported into 
Dedoose web-based data analysis software for coding and 
analysis. We started with codes that had already been 
identified by previous literature and then added new codes 
from the interviews.  
The code list included: attitude towards the smart fridge, 
risk, cost, performance risk, complex, enjoyment, privacy, 
social influence, memory loss, independence, usefulness and 
ease of use. This final code list covers two categories that are 
thought to impact users’ attitudes to smart fridge: Technical 
factors and social factors. 
The second step of the interview analysis was identifying 
attitudes towards the smart fridge, which were either positive 
or negative. Out of the 17 volunteer interviewees, only 4 
could be described as negative, 12 could be described as 
positive and the final interviewee could be described as 
moderate. 
The final step of data analysis was to focus on and 
analyze participants with either positive or negative attitudes. 
The participant with moderate attitude was not selected for 
further analysis. 
TABLE II.  
OVERVIEW OF THE INTERVIEWEES. 
No. 
Sex 
Occupation 
Age 
Social Status 
1 
F 
Postgraduate Student 
25 
Single 
2 
F 
Lecturer 
46 
Married 
3 
M 
Undergraduate student 
20 
Single 
4 
M 
Postgraduate Student 
26 
Single 
5 
M 
Postgraduate Student 
27 
Single 
6 
F 
Secretary 
47 
Married 
7 
F 
Postgraduate Student 
35 
Married 
8 
F 
Postgraduate Student 
27 
Single 
9 
F 
Postgraduate Student 
26 
Single 
10 
M 
Lecturer 
49 
Married 
11 
F 
Postgraduate Student 
25 
Single 
12 
M 
Postgraduate Student 
25 
Single 
13 
F 
Postgraduate Student 
26 
Single 
14 
M 
Postgraduate Student 
28 
Single 
15 
F 
Postgraduate Student 
25 
Single 
16 
M 
Lecturer 
45 
Married 
17 
M 
Lecturer 
47 
Married 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The qualitative analysis suggested that users’ intention to 
accept the smart fridge is affected by many factors. Based on 
the data analyses, we grouped these factors into two 
categories: technological and social factors.  
Results were analyzed with selected quotations and not 
all of the participants are quoted for each part. The findings 
are based on our analysis of all of the interviews according to 
common practice in qualitative studies. 
None of the participants had any experience with either 
smart fridges or smart kitchens. However, it appears that 
participants accepted the idea of smart fridges and showed a 
high willingness to use them. On the other hand, there were 
numerous aspects identified that make the implementation 
and acceptance of smart fridge measures more difficult. 
The factors mentioned by the participants are described 
below. All names of participants have been changed. 
A. Social Factors 
1) Cost 
Participants agreed that the cost of a smart fridge would 
prevent them from using it; the current cost of a smart fridge 
is around £3000 [25]. Kuniavsky [16] argued that the market 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

price for each of these smart fridges was more expensive 
than the combination of its technologies. Prices this high 
belong to luxury goods, where the price of the goods is not 
based on the functionality. Thus, the price of the smart fridge 
should be based on its functionality and its ability to deliver 
a better user experience.  
From individual interviews, there were mixed reactions 
towards the smart fridge price, 83% of the participants were 
willing to spend up to £600 on the smart fridge. Some 
participants agreed that the price would reduce in the future, 
just like other smart gadgets have, and that every household 
would own a smart fridge in the future because “you have 
got to have it”. (Mark) 
John compared smart fridges with LED TVs: “At the 
moment I think it is going to be a significant issue. However, 
years ago an LED TV cost around £3000-4000; now it is for 
£300. So, what we have to assume at some point is that the 
price will reduce. Because the benefits are less for me than 
for the next 20 years I won’t spend so much money.” 
Moreover, participants argued about the risk if the smart 
fridge system goes wrong; they will end up with a basic 
fridge costing much less than the smart one. Thus, it is 
relative to the perceived usefulness of the system. Kate 
explained: “Price is a serious factor. It is a big investment, 
you know, if part of it goes wrong, if the computer part goes 
wrong, you basically just have a standard fridge again which 
you can get for a couple of quid.” 
2) Technology Anxiety 
Technology anxiety is defined as “the fear and 
apprehension people feel when considering use of or actually 
using technology-related tools” [7][22][28]. 
Most university students and staff members are 
comfortable with using computers and technology. The 
results show that all of the participants have a good 
knowledge of using computers. However, even when 
participants can see the benefits of using the smart fridge, 
they may avoid it if they are not comfortable with using such 
a new technology. 
Other participants argued that they feel anxious using 
new technology, especially when initially interacting with it, 
but the anxiety disappeared as they familiarized themselves 
with the functionality, for example, as David explains: “I 
don’t have any problems using new technology but I feel 
anxious maybe for the first 10 minutes; after that I think I get 
used to it. I don’t give up that easily; I just try to work it 
out.” 
3) Social Influence 
Moore and Benbasat [23] defined it as “the extent to 
which use of an innovation is perceived as enhancement of 
one’s status in a social system”. Davis [8] believed that, in 
some cases, people might use a system to comply with 
others’ mandates rather than their own feeling and beliefs. 
Mark explains: “I think at some point in the future everybody 
will buy it because everybody has to own it. Like the smart 
phone - nowadays everyone owns one because everybody 
does!” 
In addition, some participants indicate that that 
behavioral intention to use a smart fridge is influenced by 
their friends, colleagues and the community. For example, as 
Susanne explains: “If I heard any good reviews about the 
smart fridge from friends I will definitely buy it.”  
B. Technical Factors 
1) Perceived Usefulness 
Davis [8] in his original TAM defined it as “the degree to 
which an individual believes that using a particular system 
would enhance his/her job performance.” 
The results of the interviews indicate that participants all 
acknowledged the system’s usefulness in terms of its 
potential benefits to save food and make their life much 
easier. For example, most participants said that they think the 
smart fridge is “very useful.” 
The smart fridge is useful for elderly people as they 
experience a decrease in memory capacity. Memory loss for 
older adults plays an important role in their preference for 
the smart fridge. Smart fridges will help them to generate 
shopping lists automatically, as well as know what is cooling 
inside the fridge without depending on their memory. Steve 
explains: “I think that very often we forget what we have in 
the fridge we go shopping and then you buy the same thing 
again.” 
Also, Steve added: “I have aging parents so we 
recognize that at some point it is going to be difficult to 
remember everything in the fridge, so I see that the smart 
fridge is quite a useful facility, as we get older.” 
The smart fridge may increase the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the participant’s life by offering many features 
such as grocery shopping and recipe suggestions. Rose 
explains: “It will help me when I am shopping for food. The 
fridge will help me to not buy unnecessary food.”  
2) Perceived Ease of Use 
This is defined as “the degree to which an individual 
believes that using a particular system would be free of 
physical and mental efforts.” [8] 
The majority of participants spoke about the level of 
user-friendliness of the smart fridge. Since most of the 
participants have good experience with computers, it was 
expected that they would be comfortable with using a smart 
fridge in the future to track items and check consumption 
history; however, they think that interacting with this 
technology will be easy. If things are not perceived as easy, 
participants will simply not use them. Hannah explains: “If 
it’s complicated I don’t think I’m going to enjoy using it.”  
Good interface design will also increase perceived ease 
of use, thereby attracting more users to the smart fridge “I 
think the GUI itself will be important. Also, it has to be easy 
to control” (David). Moreover, the convenience of the smart 
fridge and its ability to make grocery orders and deliver 
them to the household reduces travelling, thus increasing the 
well-being and independence as well as increasing the ease 
of everyday activities. For example, Lauren explains: “I 
needed it the most when my children were young and it was 
not easy to take the baby to the store."  
It is, therefore, assumed that when participants perceive 
the smart fridge as easy to use, they will be more likely to 
accept it. 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V. 
DISCUSSION 
The findings suggest that motivation for accepting the 
smart fridge is affected by numerous factors that have been 
categorized as follows: social and technological factors. Five 
main factors have been identified as important for smart 
fridge 
technology 
acceptance: 
perceived 
usefulness, 
perceived ease of use, social influence, technology anxiety 
and cost. 
The interviews confirmed the major elements such as 
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use in affecting 
users’ motivation to accept the smart fridge. Combing the 
findings from the literature review and the results of the 
interviews, an enriched research model, the Smart Fridge 
Acceptance Model (SFAM), is proposed with three 
additional constructs added: social influence, technology 
anxiety and cost (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  Smart Fridge Acceptance Model (SFAM).  
Perceived usefulness and ease of use are considered the 
most important factors in smart fridge acceptance. The easier 
the system is to use, the more users will find it helpful, which 
leads to an increased intention to use a smart fridge in the 
future. 
In terms of perceived usefulness, participants consider 
particularly useful tracking items and expiry dates. This can 
also be very useful for elderly people as they experience 
decrease in memory capacity.  
In the area of perceived ease of use, the results reveal that 
participants think that the smart fridge will be easy to use, 
which 
confirms 
findings 
from 
existing 
technology 
acceptance literature. Each participant indicated familiarity 
with computers therefore makes smart fridge easy to use. 
Participants with satisfying computer experience and low 
technology anxiety were more likely to use the smart fridge 
in the future and more likely to spread positive word-of-
mouth. Therefore, increasing computer experience will 
reduce technology anxiety.  
Participants are generally uncomfortable with uncertainty 
and therefore consult friends, family members and the social 
network on their adoption decisions [6]. Moreover, 
participants regard this kind of new technology as symbolic 
of wealth to enhance their sense of self-importance [27]. 
The only limitation observed from the interviews was 
that participants are not willing to own a smart fridge 
because of its high price. That is in line with the existing 
research of Kim [15] and Wu [34], who found a negative 
impact of the cost on technology acceptance. Participants 
also expressed willingness to try out the smart fridge if it was 
readily available. 
Overall, the majority of the findings support the findings 
from existing literature and related technology acceptance 
research. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper investigated the factors influencing the 
acceptance of the smart fridge. We studied existing 
Technology Acceptance Models and extended a set of 
factors that could influence smart fridge acceptance. These 
factors were identified by studying the literature reviews and 
then validated the qualitative interviews. The original TAM 
was the best user acceptance model to analyze smart fridge 
acceptance; however, the TAM needs to be extended to 
identify smart fridge factors. The results show that perceived 
usefulness, perceived ease of use, social influence, 
technology anxiety and cost are the most important factors 
for smart fridge acceptance. 
The advantage of this research is that its focus is on the 
user, who is the key to acceptance of a new technology; it 
was also based on the original Technology Acceptance 
Model, which has been validated in several studies. The 
main contribution of this study is the domestication theory 
that was used for proposing the SFAM.  
Future research will involve measuring each factor using 
multi-item scales, as well as further empirical investigation 
of the model using a smart fridge prototype. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank participants, the reviewers 
of this paper and Edel Sherratt for their cooperation in this 
study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Adetunji, “UK set to trial 'smart fridges'”, The Guardian, 
Available online at www.theguardian.com, 2008. 
[2] I. Ajzen, and M. Fishbein, Understanding attitudes and 
predicting social behaviour, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1989. 
[3] K. Alshare, E. Grandon, and D. Miller, Antecedents of 
computer technology usage: considerations of the technology 
acceptance model in the academic environment, Journal of 
Computing Sciences in Colleges, vol. 19, April 2004, pp.164-
180. 
[4] J. Bauer, K. Streefkerk, and R. R. Varick, Fridgets: digital 
refrigerator magnets, In: CHI 2005 Student Design 
Competition, Portland, 2005, pp. 2060–2064. 
[5] T. Bigler, G. Gaderer, P. Loschmidt, and T. Sauter, 
SmartFridge: Demand Side Management for the device level,  
Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA), 2011 
IEEE 16th Conference on IEEE. Toulouse, pp. 1-8, 2011. 
[6] M. E. Burkhardt, and D. J. Brass, Changing patterns or 
patterns of change: The effects of a change in technology on 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

social network structure and power, Administrative science 
quarterly, vol. 35, no. 1, March 1990, pp. 104-127. 
[7] M. A. Cambre, and D. L. Cook, Computer anxiety: 
Definition, 
measurement, 
and 
correlates, 
Journal 
of 
Educational Computing Research, vol. 1, 1985, pp. 37-54. 
[8] F. D. Davis, Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and 
user acceptance of information technology, MIS quarterly, 
1989, pp. 319-340. 
[9] A. Dillon, and M. G. Morris, User acceptance of new 
information technology: theories and models, Annual review 
of information science and technology, vol. 31, 1996, pp. 3-
32. 
[10] M. Fishbein, and I. Ajzen, Belief, attitude, intention and 
behavior: An introduction to theory and research. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
[11] L. Gentry, and R. Calantone, A comparison of three models to 
explain shopbot use on the web, Psychology & Marketing, 
vol. 19, pp. 945-956, November 2002. 
[12] V. Hanson-Smith, D. Wimalasuriya, and A. Fortier, NutriStat: 
tracking young child nutrition.  CHI'06 extended abstracts on 
Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2006, pp. 1831-
1836. 
[13] M. Janzen, and Y. Xiang, Probabilistic reasoning for meal 
planning in intelligent fridges, Advances in Artificial 
Intelligence. Springer, 2003. 
[14] W. Ju, R. Hurwitz, T. Judd, and B. Lee, CounterActive: an 
interactive cookbook for the kitchen counter,  CHI'01 
extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, 
ACM, 2001, pp. 269-270. 
[15] H. W. Kim, H. C. Chan, and S. Gupta, Value-based adoption 
of mobile internet: an empirical investigation, Decision 
Support Systems, vol. 43, February 2007, pp. 111-126. 
[16] M. Kuniavsky, Smart things: ubiquitous computing user 
experience design, Morgan Kaufmann, 2010. 
[17] J. Lundberg, A. Ibrahim, D. Jönsson, S. Lindquist, and P. 
Qvarfordt, The snatcher catcher: an interactive refrigerator,  
Proceedings of the second Nordic conference on Human-
computer interaction. ACM, 2002, pp. 209-212. 
[18] Y. Malhotra, D. F. Galletta, Extending the technology 
acceptance model to account for social influence: theoretical 
bases and empirical validation.  System Sciences, 1999. 
HICSS-32, Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on IEEE, 1999, pp. 14. 
[19] M. Mateas, T. Salvador, J. Scholtz, and D. Sorensen, 
Engineering ethnography in the home,  Conference 
companion on Human factors in computing systems, ACM, 
1996, pp. 283-284. 
[20] K. Mathieson, Predicting user intentions: comparing the 
technology acceptance model with the theory of planned 
behavior, Information systems research, vol. 2, September 
1991, pp. 173-191. 
[21] P. Mayer, D. Volland, F. Thiesse, and E. Fleisch, User 
Acceptance of 'Smart Products': An Empirical Investigation, 
In WI 2011 Proceedings, vol. 2, 2011, pp. 1063 – 1072.  
[22] M. L. Meuter, A. L. Ostrom, M. J. Bitner, and R. Roundtree, 
The influence of technology anxiety on consumer use and 
experiences with self-service technologies, Journal of 
Business Research, vol. 56, 2003, pp. 899-906. 
[23] G. C. Moore, and I. Benbasat, Development of an instrument 
to measure the perceptions of adopting an information 
technology innovation. Information systems research, vol. 2, 
1991, pp. 192-222. 
[24] J. Murray, Smart fridge specialist sets sights on supermarket 
chillers. Business Green, April 2010. 
[25] Reuters. Samsung's T9000 smart refrigerator runs on Android, 
includes apps like Evernote and Epicurious. NDTV Gadgets, 
January 2013. 
[26] M. Rothensee, User acceptance of the intelligent fridge: 
empirical results from a simulation, The Internet of Things, 
2008, pp. 123-139. 
[27] S. Sarker, and J. D. Wells, Understanding mobile handheld 
device use and adoption, Communications of the ACM, vol. 
46, 2003, pp. 35-40. 
[28] C. R. Scott, and S. C. Rockwell, The effect of 
communication, writing, and technology apprehension on 
likelihood 
to 
use 
new 
communication 
technologies, 
Communication education, vol. 46, 1997, pp. 44-62. 
[29] A.L. Strauss, J. Corbin, and S. Niewiarra, Grounded theory: 
Grundlagen 
qualitativer 
sozialforschung, 
Beltz, 
PsychologieVerlagsUnion Weinheim, 1996. 
[30] L. Swan, and A. S. Taylor, Notes on fridge surfaces, ACM, 
2005, pp. 1813-1816. 
[31] J. Vaivio, Interviews–Learning the Craft of Qualitative 
Research Interviewing. European Accounting Review, vol. 
21, 2012, pp. 186-189. 
[32] V. Venkatesh, and F. D. Davis, A theoretical extension of the 
technology acceptance model: four longitudinal field studies, 
Management science, vol. 46, 2000, pp. 186-204. 
[33] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, 
User acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified 
view, MIS quarterly, 2003, pp. 425-478. 
[34] C. S. Wu, F. F. Cheng, D. C. Yen, and Y. W. Huang, User 
acceptance of wireless technology in organizations: a 
comparison of alternative models, Computer Standards & 
Interfaces, vol. 33, 2011, pp. 50-58. 
[35] R. K. Yin, Applications of case study research (applied social 
research methods series volume 34). London: Sage, 1993. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

