Fundamental Study for A Noise Reduction Method on Human Brain Activity Data
of NIRS using AR Model
Toshiya Tsubota, Tomohiko Kuroiwa, Takuya Kiryu
Tokyo Univ. of Science, Suwa
Engineering, Management Graduate Course
Chino-city, Japan
e-mail: {GH16606, GH16604, GH17605}@ed.tus.ac.jp
Fumikazu Miwakeichi
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Department of Statistical Modeling
Tachikawa-city, Japan
e-mail: miwake1@ism.ac.jp
Yu Kikuchi, Hiroaki Inoue
Tokyo Univ. of Science, Suwa
Faculty of Engineering
Chino-city, Japan
e-mail: S314015@ed.tus.ac.jp
e-mail: hiroaki-inoue@rs.tus.ac.jp
Shunji Shimizu
Tokyo Univ. of Science, Suwa / Faculty of
Engineering
Jichi Medical University / Psychiatric Course
Chino-city, Japan
e-mail: shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Abstract—Currently, Near Infra-red Spectroscopy (NIRS) is
used as a diagnostic aid for mental illness in hospitals [1]. In
our previous study, we have already reported the relationship
between human brain activity change and turning the corner
while driving a car or carrying out human living motions,
using NIRS [2][3]. In that research, it was very difficult to
discriminate noise from measurement signals not only by using
NIRS but also by using Magnetoencephalography (MEG),
Electroencephalogram (EEG), and so on. In Particular, for a
study to measure the brain activity related to tasks of memory
or intention, the effects of the ratio of signal to noise are very
important. Our experimental results show that our model
removes the noise of the heartbeat and breathing motion from
the brain activity data of NIRS.
Keywords-Near
Infra-Red
Spectroscopy
(NIRS);
Auto
Regressive (AR) model; signal to noise ratio.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The study of brain science is being carried out on a
global scale now. In the future, brain science research is
expected to be applied to various fields, such as medical care
and
Brain-Machine
Interface
(BMI).
Near
Infra-red
Spectroscopy (NIRS) is a device that can easily measure the
limited functions of the brain. Currently, NIRS is used in
hospitals as a diagnostic support device for depressive illness
and epilepsy [1]. In general, psychiatric disorders are
diagnosed by a doctor based on clinical symptoms and
medical history. However, multiple cases have been reported
in which it is extremely difficult for a doctor to make a
diagnosis. NIRS is a device for measuring hemoglobin
concentration contained in blood by using infra-red light.
The areas in the cerebrum related to specific psychological
phenomena and psychiatric disorders can be identified using
a NIRS system based on the theory of brain function
localization.
We
have
been
studying
the
quantitative
evaluation method of brain activity using NIRS. We
confirmed a statistically significant difference in specific
areas of the brain related to movement. The following is an
overview of our previous study.
1)
Basic Study for New Assistive Technology Based on
Brain Activity during Car Driving
In our previous study, we measured road sign recognition
while driving and brain activities during left and right turns.
In this experiment, we studied the cognitive mechanism of
human spatial cognition and road signs. As a result, it was
confirmed by statistical testing that brain activation signals
were activated at different areas at the time of right turns and
left turns [2].
2)
Fundamental Study pn New Evaluation Method
Based on Physical and Psychological Load in Care
In our previous study, "Standing-up movement" and
"Sitting movement" which are essential for human life in
rehabilitation and nursing care workplaces were performed
multiple times, and changes in brain activity accompanying
exercise were evaluated by statistical verification method. As
a result, when the physical exercise load on the human body
increased, a change in activity was confirmed at a specific
brain area [3].
The
above
results
are
considered
to
have
been
experiments on sufficient ratio of signal to noise. NIRS is
able to measure human brain activity under low physical
restriction without being restricted by posture, vocalization,
exercise, etc. NIRS has many advantages such as higher
temporal resolution than functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI). NIRS is suitable for the research on brain
activities associated
with mental tasks and behaviors.
However, problems such as an accumulation of evidence and
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

inadequate elucidation of mechanisms have been pointed
out. In addition, NIRS includes heartbeat, breathing motion,
and body movements as noise and is measured. This also
applies to other brain activity measuring devices such as
fMRI, MEG and, EEG. The problem influences studies
measuring the brain activity related to the task of memory or
intention.
In this study, the purpose of this paper, we attempt to
reduce the artifacts generated by the heartbeat and breathing
motion from the data of NIRS using the Auto Regressive
(AR) model [4].
In Section I, the necessity of this paper is explained. In
Section II, we report the method of this experiment and the
calculation formula of the AR model used in this study.
Section III reports the results obtained by applying the AR
model to the NIRS data and ECG data obtained in this
experiment. In Section IV, an FFT analysis was conducted to
examine the validity of the results compared with the
existing information. Section V summarizes the conclusion
of this research and then summarizes future research
subjects.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD
In this study, we composed two experiments. In the first
experiment, we measured the brain activity data and
electrocardiogram (ECG) of the resting subjects using NIRS
and Multi-Telemeter. These data included artefacts of
heartbeat and breathing. In the second experiment, signal
components for NIRS data were analyzed based on the ECG.
Using the analysis results, we derived heartbeat artefact
components from the NIRS data. Therefore, we could reduce
the artefacts due to the heartbeats from NIRS data when we
used a heartbeat artefact component. Finally, the breathing
artefact components, presumed to be from the NIRS data,
made a reduction in the number of artefacts caused the by
breathing motion frequency.
1)
Near Infra-Red Spectroscopy (NIRS)
NIRS is a device for measuring the density change of
hemoglobin in cerebral neocortical blood flow at a depth of
about 20 to 30 mm from the scalp using near infrared light.
From the theory of localization of brain function, related
brain areas are activated by human thought. At this time, the
hemoglobin carries oxygen necessary for metabolism then,
and the oxygen density throughout the bloodstream of the
activated domain rises. The human body has characteristics
that make it is easy for near infrared light to pass through,
but the hemoglobin contained in the blood has the property
of absorbing near infrared light. NIRS can estimate brain
activity by measuring the difference between incident probe
and detection probe [1].
2)
Auto Regressive (AR) model
The AR model is a method to estimate future data from
past data in time series data. To predict future data in the
time series η(t),t=1,…,S it is necessary to construct a 
prediction model using information obtained from past data.
When only the most recent past data is used, we have:
When using the past two data
The above formula is quoted as an example. Generalizing
this as a linear combination of past -point data yields the
following model
Here,
is the prediction error (noise according to the
normal distribution),
is the dimension of the model, and
is the AR coefficient. The relationship between the AR
coefficient, the frequency f of the stationary vibration and the
sampling frequency Fs can be obtained by the following
equation.
Here,
is a constant which corresponds to the attenuation
factor. When using actual time series data, AR coefficients
can be optimized by the least squares method or Yule-
Walker method, and the dimension of the model can be
determined by Akaike's information criterion [4] [5].
3)
Filtering using the AR model
From (3), the AR model can be deformed as follows.
From (5) is a filter that inputs time series data and
outputs prediction error. This prediction error is called
innovation.
When
the
frequency
to
be
removed
is
predetermined, the AR coefficient is determined from (4) [4]
[5]. The procedure for filtering using the AR model is shown
below. Figure 1 shows the filtering method using the AR
model.
1.
Estimate the AR coefficient in the time series data of
a certain section.
2.
Estimate the AR model from the AR coefficient.
3.
Calculate prediction error using the AR model.
4.
Filter time series data using prediction error.
5.
Measure unpredictable signal
(1)
(4)
(2)
(3)
(5)
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A.
Measurement of rest state by NIRS
In our previous study, we confirmed that NIRS data
includes at least the effects of the heartbeat and breathing
motion as noise [2] [3]. In this experiment, we measured
brain activity and ECG of resting subjects with NIRS
(Shimadzu Corporation FOIRE-3000) and Multi-Telemeter
(NIHON KOHDEN CORPORATION WEB-5000). At this
time, we assumed that the brain activity change of the
subject was very small, and that NIRS data contained many
artefacts due to heart rate and breathing exercise. At this
time, we considered that the brain activity change of the
subject was very small, and that NIRS data contained many
artifacts due to heartbeat and breathing motion. The subjects
were 10 adult men aged 22-24 years, sitting in a chair 60 cm
away from the wall and gazing at the markers at eye height
for 1 minute. At this time, the sampling frequency of NIRS
was 20 Hz, and the sampling frequency of the ECG was 100
Hz. In addition, we did not give any special instructions to
the subjects other than gaze the markers. Figure 2 shows the
state of this experiment and NIRS.
B.
Artefact reduction of NIRS data using the AR method
We filtered the measured NIRS data with the AR model
[4]. At this time, the AR coefficient was obtained from NIRS
data and ECG data. We analyzed the frequency of the ECG
data and constructed a low pass filter. We reduced the
frequency component of the heartbeat from NIRS data using
a low pass filter. We extracted the artefact considered to be
an influence on heartbeat from processed NIRS data using
the AR model. We were later able to confirm the artefact
occurred under the influence of respiratory movement. In
order to remove this artefact, an AR model was created from
the formula (4) using the frequency considered as respiratory
motion from the FFT result of the NIRS data, and filtering
was performed.
We carried out this experiment with sufficient informed
consent of the subjects following the approval of the Tokyo
Univ. of Science, Suwa Ethical Review Board.
III.
EXPERIMETAL RESULTS
A.
Measurement of rest state by NIRS
Heartbeat and breathing are deeply related to oxygen
supply. In this experiment, we focused on the change of
oxygenated hemoglobin in the NIRS data. Figure 3 and 4
show the NIRS data and ECG data of a subject. Figure 5
shows the FFT analysis results of the ECG data and NIRS
data. In the ECG, a general waveform can be confirmed, and
a waveform called an R wave when the ventricle contracts is
recorded.
From
Figures
3
-
5,
we
confirmed
the
correspondence
between
the
R
wave
and
oxygen
concentration change in NIRS data.
B.
Artifact reduction of NIRS data using the AR method
For each data measured in Experiment A, the AR
coefficient is calculated using the Yule-Walker method, and
the data estimated from the AR model is compared with the
measurement data. Figures 6 and 7 compare the AR model
and measurement data for NIRS data and ECG data for 10
seconds to 20 seconds. Figures 8 and 9 show the prediction
errors of the AR model and measurement data. Figure 10
shows the result of reducing the frequency component of the
heartbeat from the NIRS data using the low-pass filter
constructed from the result of the FFT analysis of experiment
A. Figure 11 shows the result of extracting data considered
as the influence of heartbeat from the NIRS data using the
AR coefficient of the electrocardiogram data and the filtered
NIRS data. We calculated AR coefficients from formula (4)
using the frequency (0.2Hz) of the breathing motion of the
average man. We estimated the AR model of respiratory
motion using AR coefficient and filtered NIRS data. Figure
12 shows the AR model of breathing motion. In addition,
Figure 13 shows the NIRS data from which the AR model of
breathing motion and heart beat have been removed.
We were able to confirm the above results from the data
of all subjects. Figures 15 to 25 show the results of other
subjects.
Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of noise removal by AR model
2
3
4
1
2
1
4
3
1
4
3
2
8
7
6
5
9
10
Figure 2. Experimental landscape and NIRS
Figure 3. NIRS data measured by experiment
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. ECG data measured by experiment
Figure 5. FFT analysis results of ECG data and NIRS data
Figure 6. Comparison of NIRS data and AR model
Figure 7. Comparison of ECG data and AR model
Figure 8. Prediction error of NIRS data and AR model
Figure 9. Prediction error of ECG data and AR model
Figure 10. NIRS data calculated from the low pass filter
Figure 11. Data considered to be effects of heartbeat
Figure 12. AR model by breathing motion
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV.
DISCUSSION
A.
Measurement of rest state by NIRS
From the experimental results, we confirmed that the
peaks of NIRS data and ECG data were nearly identical. In
particular, we confirmed a characteristic peak near 1.1 Hz,
which is considered as the period of the R wave in the ECG
data.
Furthermore,
we
confirmed
that
the
amplitude
component of the NIRS data is attenuated by the low pass
filter produced based on 1.1 Hz. The above results were
consistent with the frequency (0.85~1.5Hz [50~100 BPM])
of normal heartbeat of an average male in his twenties.
However, the low-pass filter attenuated frequencies of 1.1 Hz
or higher and had drawbacks such as not being able to
remove breathing motion. Therefore, in Experiment B,
filtering using the AR model was examined.
B.
Artefact reduction of NIRS data using the AR method
Figure 14 shows the results of the FFT analysis of
Figures 11 and 12. From Figure 14, the artefact due to
breathing motion and the artefact due to a decrease in
heartbeat from about 0.3 Hz as the difference in frequency
components increases. We thought that the above results
were
related
to
the
breathing
frequency
(0.2~0.3Hz
[12~18BPM]) of adult males. As a result, Figure 12 has a
very high possibility of being an artefact due to breathing
motion. Also, Figures 5, 14 and 11 show a very high
possibility of artefacts due to heartbeat. From the above
results, Figure 13 considers that respiratory motion and
heartbeat artefact could be removed from NIRS data. In this
study, we succeeded in removing artifacts due to respiratory
motion and heartbeat which could not be eliminated by a
low pass filter using a method based on the AR model.
Figures 15 to 25 show the results of applying the AR
method to NIRS data of other subjects. We confirmed the
removal
of the
noise
ingredient
by
a
heartbeat
and
breathing motion from the NIRS data of all subjects. We
measured brain activity of resting subjects. This study
assumes that there is little change in brain activity. As a
result, by removing the noise component from the NIRS
data, the change of the NIRS signal was reduced.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this experiment, we measured the brain activity of the
resting subjects. In other words, we supposed that a lot of
noise ingredients were included in the NIRS data than a brain
activity signal. We estimated the heartbeat artefacts and
breathing motion artefacts included in noise using the AR
model. We were able to estimate AR coefficients with high
precision from ECG data. In addition, we were able to
estimate the AR coefficient from the frequency that we set
optionally. In this study, we succeeded in removing specific
frequency components using the AR model estimated from
AR coefficients. From these results, it is considered that high
accuracy filter processing is possible using this study method.
In the future, we will also consider ways to eliminate other
noise factors (such as movement of the body). Moreover, by
applying the proposed method to conventional studies, we
aim to improve brain region identification and statistical
accuracy which could not be clarified by conventional
experimental methods.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Kasai, M. Fukuda, N. Yahata, K. Morita, N.Fujii, “The
future of real-world neuroscience: imaging techniques to
assess active brains in social environments,” Neurosci.Res.,
vol. 90, pp. 65-71, 2015.
[2]
H. Inoue, F. Miwakeichi, S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, Y.
Yodhizawa, N. Hirai, “Basic Study for New Assistive
Technology Based on Brain Activity during Car Driving,”
Article Published in International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications(IJACSA)., Volume 5,
Issue 11, 2014.
[3]
H. Inoue, S. Shimizu, H. Ishihara, Y. Nakata, T. Tsuruga, F.
Miwakeichi, “Fundamental Study to New Evaluation Method
Based
on
Physical
and
Psychological
Load
in
Care,”
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and
Applications (IJACSA)., Vol. 5, No. 11, 2014.
[4]
F.
Miwakeichi,
“Extraction
of
Neural
Activation
from
Biological
Spatio-temporal
Imaging
Data
using
Autoregressive
Model-based
Filtering
Technique,”
The
Journal of Global Health., 00, 00, Nov, 2013.
[5]
K. Akaike, S. Amari, G. Kitagawa, S. Kasima, H. Simodaira,
“Akaikejyouhoukijyun AIC,” Japan: Kyoritsu Shuppan Co.,
Ltd. 2007
[6]
K. Sakatani, E. Okada, S. Hoshi,I Miyai, H. Watanabe, “NIRS
-Fundamentals and Applications-,” Japan: Shinkoh Igaku
Shuppan Co., Ltd. 2012
Figure 13. Filtered NIRS data
Figure 14. FFT analysis results of Fig. 11 and 12
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions


Subject B

Subject C

Subject D

Subject E

Subject F
Figure 15. NIRS data of subject B
Figure 19. NIRS data of subject D
Figure 21. NIRS data of subject E
Figure 17. NIRS data of subject C
Figure 23. NIRS data of subject F
Figure 16. Filtered NIRS data of subject B
Figure 24. Filtered NIRS data of subject F
Figure 22. Filtered NIRS data of subject E
Figure 20. Filtered NIRS data of subject D
Figure 18. Filtered NIRS data of subject C
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

