Comparison of Simultaneous Measurement of Lens Accommodation and 
Convergence in Viewing Natural and Stereoscopic Visual Target 
 
Tomoki Shiomi  
Nagoya University 
Nagoya, Japan 
shiomi.tomoki@a.mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
Takehito Kojima 
Nagoya University 
Nagoya, Japan 
kojima.takehito@f.mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
Keita Uemoto  
Nagoya University 
Nagoya, Japan 
uemoto.keita@d.mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
Masaru Miyao  
Nagoya University 
Nagoya, Japan 
miyao@nagoya-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Recent advances have been made in 3D technology. 
However, the influence of stereoscopic vision on human sight 
remains insufficiently understood. The public has come to 
understand that lens accommodation and convergence are 
mismatched during stereoscopic vision, and this is the main 
reason for visual fatigue caused while viewing 3D images. The 
aim in this study is to compare the fixation distance of 
accommodation and convergence in viewing real objects and 
3D video clips. Real objects and 3D video clips perform the 
same movements; therefore, we measured accommodation and 
convergence in subjects who watched both. From the result of 
this experiment, we found that no discrepancy exists in viewing 
either 3D video clips or real objects. Therefore, we argue that 
the symptoms in viewing stereoscopic vision may not be due to 
the discrepancy between lens accommodation and convergence. 
Keywords-component: accommodation, convergence, 
simultaneous measurement, stereoscopic vision 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recently stereoscopic images have been used in various 
ways. In spite of this increase in 3D products, and the many 
studies that have been done on stereoscopic vision, the 
influence of stereoscopic vision on human visual function 
remains 
insufficiently 
understood. 
When 
viewing 
stereoscopic images, people sometimes feel visual fatigue, 
3D sickness, or other discomfort [1]. 
Investigations of the influence of stereoscopic vision on 
the human body are essential in order to ensure the safety of 
viewing virtual 3-dimensional objects People often report 
symptoms such as eye fatigue and 3D sickness when 
continuously viewing 3-dimensional images. However, such 
problems are unreported with so-called natural vision. One 
of the reasons often given for these symptoms is that lens 
accommodation and convergence are inconsistent during the 
viewing of 3D images [1, 2, 3]. 
Accommodation is a reaction that occurs due to the 
differences of refractive power by changing the curvature of 
the lens with the action of the musculus ciliaris of the eye 
along with the elasticity of the lens. The result is that the 
retina focuses on an image of the external world. 
Convergence is a movement where both eyes rotate 
internally, functioning to concentrate the eyes on one point to 
the front (Fig. 1). 
The 
relationship 
between 
accommodation 
and 
convergence is one factor that enables humans to see one 
object with both eyes. Convergence occurs when an image is 
captured differently with both eyes (parallax). At the same 
time, focusing on an object is achieved by accommodation. 
The main method of presenting 3-dimensional images is 
through the manipulation of the viewers mechanism of 
binocular vision, and many improvements have been made in 
this technology. 
We suggest that a discrepancy between accommodation 
and convergence does not exist even when viewing in 
stereoscopic vision. Our previous study obtained results that 
indicate 
that 
the 
supposed 
inconsistency 
between 
accommodation and convergence does not occur [4]. In this 
present study, we performed a more detailed investigation 
confirming the non-existance of this discrepancy. In section 
2, we explained how to measure accommodation and 
convergence simultaneously, and we showed the result of 
our experiment in section 3. Then, we discussed our 
experiment in section 4. Finally, we stated our conclusion 
and future works in section 5. 
Figure 1. Lens accommodation and convergence 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. The overview of the measurement process 
Figure 2. The scene of the measurement  
II. 
METHOD 
We used an original machine developed by combining 
WAM-5500® and EMR-9® to perform the simultaneous 
measurements of accommodation and convergence.  The 
experiment was conducted with the help of seven subjects 
(male and female) 
Subjects gazed in binocular vision at a real object in 
natural vision (a Rubik’s cube) and then at a  virtual object of 
3D video clips presented in front of them (Fig. 2). We 
measured their lens accommodation and convergence (Fig. 
3).  The objects viewed by the subjects in natural and 
stereoscopic vision showed exactly the same motion, and 
there were three kinds of movements of these objects (Fig. 4). 
(1) The objects of natural and stereoscopic vision moved 
forward and backward at a range from 0.5 to 1m with a cycle 
of 10 seconds. It was repeated four cycles per single 
measurement.  
(2) The second movement was the same motion as in 
movement one, but the time of a single cycle of movement 
was 2.5 seconds. 
 
 (3) The object in this movement approached the subject. 
Initially, the position of the object was 1m from the subject.  
The object moved forward to the subject and stopped at the 
position of 1D, 1.5D, 2D for each 10 seconds (D represents 
diopter). A“diopter” is the refractive index of the eye lens, 
which is an index of accommodation power. It would be as 
follows 0D stands for infinity, 1D stands for 1 m, and 2D 
stands for 0.5m.  
The measurements of the objects in both natural and 
stereoscopic vision were taken three times per one 
movement. The illuminance in this experiment was 103 lx. 
III. 
RESULT 
The measurements for all subjects showed roughly 
similar tendencies. Figs. 5 and 6 showed the results of 
movement 1, which were the moving objects in both natural 
and stereoscopic vision with a cycle of 10 seconds. The 
subjects in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 were different. 
Then, Figs. 7 and 8 showed the result of movement 2. 
In all these figures, “accommodation” stands for the focal 
length of lens accommodation, while “convergence” stands 
for the convergent focal length, and “object” stands for the 
location of the real object in natural vision or the position of 
virtual image in stereoscopic vision. 
 
Figure 4. The movement of the object in natural and stereoscopic 
vision. (1) First was a cycle of 10 seconds. (2) Second was a cycle of 
2.5 seconds. (3) Third was step motion, the object stopped at 1D, 1.5D, 
and 2D for each 10seconds. 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 5. The result of natural vision (a cycle of 10 seconds) 
 
Figure 6. The result of stereoscopic vision (a cycle of 10 seconds) 
 
Figure 7. The result of natural vision (a cycle of 2.5 seconds) 
 
 
All figures show that the accommodation and convergence 
of subjects changed in agreement. In Figs. 5 and 6, the 
change in the diopter value occurred within a cycle of about 
ten seconds and those in Figs. 7 and 8 did within a cycle of 
about 2.5 seconds. Moreover, the value nearly agreed with 
the distance from the subject to the position of the real 
object or virtual image. In the case of movement 3, lens 
accommodation and convergence also approximately agreed 
with the position of the virtual images. 
 
Figure 8. The result of stereoscopic vision (a cycle of 2.5 seconds) 
 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
According to Hoffman [2] and Ukai & Howarth [3], lens 
accommodation in viewing 3D images would be fixed at the 
position of the display. However, or experiment found no 
mismatch in the accommodation-vergence.  
In our previous study, we also reported the results of 
simultaneous measurement of lens accommodation and 
convergence while subjects viewed objects in stereoscopic 
vision, and the inconsistency between accommodation and 
convergence did not occur [5]. This study simultaneously 
measured accommodation and convergence in viewing 3D 
video clips of three movements, and the discrepancy was 
unconfirmed as in viewing real object. Therefore, we found 
that subjects watching 3D do not show any discrepancy 
between accommodation and convergence. 
Subjects should be seeing blurred images if lens 
accommodation focuses on the virtual image position while 
a stereoscopic image project outwards.  Subjects focusing 
on a nearer position rather than the display may be 
experiencing the condition in which humans look at a 
position beyond the farthest point of the object as in myopia.  
Smith [6] showed that the relationship between the 
refractive error and visual acuity is linear.  The visual acuity 
of subjects in Smith’s experiment did not decrease much. 
Therefore, the distance from an emerging object in our 
experiment may not have been a problem and was correctly 
viewed by subjects.  
 Meanwhile, Patterson [7] reported that there should be a 
problem in only a near-eye display and that the 
accommodation-vergence mismatch likely would not occur 
under most stereoscopic display viewing conditions because 
of the depth of field. 
Patterson [7] and Wang [8] also found that the depth of field 
was large, and they stated that the average total depth of 
focus was on the order of 1.0 diopter. Based on this value, 
the range of total depth of field would be from a distance of 
about 0.1m in front of a fixed point to about 0.17m behind 
the fixed point of 0.5m. For a fixed distance of 1m, the total 
depth of field would be from a distance of about 0.33m in 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

front of the point to about 1.0m behind the point. For a fixed 
distance of 2 m, the total depth of field would be from about 
1m in front of the point to an infinite distance behind the 
fixed point.  
They also reported that the depth of field was affected in 
various ways by the pupil diameter and resolution.  
Some researchers found that pupil diameter will be slightly 
over 6 mm for a luminance level of 0.03cd/m2 and near to 2 
mm for a luminance level of 300cd/m2. For each millimeter 
of decrease in pupil size, the depth of field increases by 
about 0.12 diopters [7, 9]. 
 Therefore, the value of accommodation can be in the range 
of the depth of field in our experiment. 
In the future research, we plan further investigations 
concerning the influence of age, pupil diameter, the 
illuminance of the experimental environment, and the 
luminance of visual targets. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this experiment, we simultaneously measured 
accommodation and convergence of subjects viewing real 
objects and 3D video clips. The video clips showed exactly 
the same motion as with the real objects. We did not confirm 
the existence of discrepancy between lens accommodation 
and convergence. Therefore, we believe it is inconclusive 
that symptoms such as eye fatigue and 3D sickness are 
caused by this discrepancy and be the result of other factors.  
We plan to perform further investigations including the 
change of pupil diameter in viewing stereoscopic vision, 
luminance level and the difference of the 3D presenting 
method in order to further comprehend the mechanism of 
stereoscopic vision.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Ministry of 
Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Grant-in-Aid for 
Scientific Research (B) Number 24300046. 
REFERENCES  
[1] M. Lambooij, W. IJsselsteijn, M. Fortuin, and I. Heynderickx, 
“Visual Discomfort and Visual Fatigue of Stereoscopic 
Displays: A Review.” J. Imaging Sci. Technol. Vol. 53, 03, 
2009 
[2] D. M. Hoffman, A. R. Girshick, K. Akeley, and M. S. Banks 
“Vergence-accommodation 
conflicts 
hinder 
visual 
performance and cause visual fatigue.” Journal of Vision, 
Vol.8, No.3, 33, pp1-30, 2008 
[3] K. Ukai and P. A. Howarth “Visual fatigue caused by viewing 
stereoscopic motion images: Background, theories, and 
observation.” Displays, Vol.29, 2, pp106-116, 2008 
[4] M. Miyao, S. Ishihara, S. Saito, T. Kondo, H. Sakakibara and 
H. 
Toyoshima 
“Visual 
accommodation 
and 
subject 
performance during a stereographic object task using liquid 
crystal shutters.” Ergonomics, Vol.39, 11, pp1294-1309, 1996 
[5] H. Hori, et al., “Comparison of accommodation and 
convergence by simultaneous measurements during 2D and 
3D vision gaze.”  FORMA Special Issue., 2011 
[6] G. Smith,  “Relation between Spherical Refractive Error and 
Visual Acuity.” Optometry Vision Science, Vol. 68, No.8, 
pp591-598, 1991 
[7] R. Patterson, “Human factors of stereo displays: An Update.” 
Journal of SID, 17, 12, pp987-996, 2009 
[8] B. Wang and K. J. Ciuffreda, “Depth of focus of the human 
eye: Theory and clinical applications.” Surv. Ophthal. 51, 75, 
2006 
[9] K. N. Ogle and J. T. Schwartz, “Depth of focus of the human 
eye.” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 49, pp273–280, 1959 
 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

