Augmented Reality as a Tutorial Tool for Construction Tasks  
Wood frame wall assembly supported by smartphones 
 
Ana Regina Mizrahy Cuperschmid, Marina Graf Grachet, Márcio Minto Fabricio 
Architecture and Urbanism Institute (IAU) 
University of São Paulo (USP) 
São Carlos, Brazil 
e-mail: fale@anacuper.com | marina.grachet@usp.br | marcio@sc.usp.br 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Augmented Reality (AR) applications mix, by 
means of display devices, real world environments with virtual 
objects in real time. The use of AR as a support for the 
implementation in the construction industry is still narrowly 
explored. This study proposes the applicability of AR, using 
smartphones, to aid wood frame assembly. This research 
innovation proposition is the developing assembly guidance in 
AR, displaying a wood frame wall model in real scale through 
smartphones screens. An investigative approach about the 
possibilities of such integration is proposed and developed, 
including the development of a specific application. User 
experience evaluations were conducted. In the evaluation, the 
participants experienced AR in order to assemble a wood 
frame wall panel. After that, the participants answered a 
questionnaire to ascertain the profile characterization and the 
user experience quality. The results obtained indicated that the 
proposed system is a useful tutorial tool. From a technology 
innovation perspective, this initiative has the potential to 
benefit the application of AR as training and technology 
support for construction processes. 
Keywords - Augmented Reality; User Experience; Assembly; 
Civil construction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Augmented Reality (AR) applications associate through 
visualization devices, real environments with virtual objects 
in real time. Unlike Virtual Reality, that completely 
immerses the users in a synthetic environment, AR allows 
them to look at virtual models superimposed onto the 
physical world. By merging a range of digital and physical 
media, AR can be enriched by different perceptions and 
comprehensions offered by both physical and virtual 
environments. 
Currently, there are few in-depth studies that assess and 
evaluate human factors and interaction in mobile AR 
systems [1], especially researches concerning Architectural, 
Engineering and Construction applications. There is a lack of 
formal studies concerning the user experience in mobile AR 
systems [2]. The limited understanding of human factors, 
which are the basis for interaction with AR systems, can be 
an obstacle to the diffusion of this technology beyond the 
laboratory prototypes [3]. 
 
As a tool to assist visualization, AR has the potential to 
contribute to the construction processes as it can exhibit 
additional information that enables better comprehension and 
it can also gradually guide the execution. Additional 
information associated with virtual models can be used if 
connected to the real construction elements and visualized in 
AR. This way, AR can provide a visualization of the 
assembly procedure in an interactive way at the same time it 
shows superimposed models onto the real world.  
The 
wood-frame 
construction 
method 
combines 
commitment to the environment with new construction 
techniques. Considered as a sustainable and dry technology, 
around 95% of the residences in the United States of 
America rely on the aforementioned technology [4]; 
however, in Brazil its adoption is still incipient. The 
embracement of new construction technologies, like wood 
framing, depends on individuals' training to develop and 
execute projects that involve such technologies. Hence, it is 
important to highlight that new competences must be gained 
and applied to the work. By allowing individuals to be aided 
in the assembly process of wood frame edifications, the AR 
technology would act as a facilitator to the diffusion of this 
structural system. 
The issue that leads this research is if and how AR could 
be used as a tool to assist the assembly of wood frame 
panels. The proposal is to convert the assembly steps and 
way of execution into visible and explicit images through an 
AR system. In this case, it is important to ensure a suitable 
user experience while using the AR interface. Therefore, this 
paper describes a User Experience (UX) evaluation of an AR 
application using smartphone, to assist a wood frame wall 
assembly.  
This paper is organized as follows: section II explores the 
state of the art about the user evaluation of AR interfaces; 
section III presents the developed application; section IV 
describes the conducted evaluation; section V contains the 
results and discussion and the conclusion is presented in 
section VI. 
II. 
USER EVALUATION OF AR INTERFACES 
Traditional directives to evaluate the user interface 
cannot be exclusively used in this emerging field [1][5]–[7], 
since AR systems differ from desktop systems in various 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

aspects; the most crucial is that such systems are produced 
for being used as a mediator or amplifier of human 
visualization [5]. An AR system is, in its ideal form, made to 
be transparent and more as part of the system of human 
perception than a separate entity of it [5]. In order for this to 
happen, the user should perceive the reality with added 
information and interact with the system in a natural way. 
As pointed by [3], there are a number of challenges and 
difficulties as the hardware (e.g., display resolution, screen 
brightness and contrast, field of view, device weight) and the 
software (e.g., accuracy of the tracking algorithms, 
robustness, ease of calibration) that need to be overcome 
when evaluating user performance in AR systems. One 
interface of AR includes hardware, software, interface 
elements 
(e.g., 
menus, 
icons), 
markers, 
interaction 
techniques (e.g., mouse control, bare-hand interactions) and 
the content shown in AR. Depending on the device, the 
tracking form, the interaction technique used, the AR 
interface is altered. These factors may justify, in part, the 
lack of standard methods to evaluate AR interfaces.  
According to [1], most AR user evaluations fit into one 
of the four categories: (i) human perception and cognition; 
(ii) user task performance; (iii) collaboration between users; 
(iv) system usability and system design evaluation. Among 
the research that studies user task performance, it is possible 
to mention a few related to this, as in [8]–[12]. 
Some researches aimed the consolidation of AR for 
assembly in the construction field [8][9], targeting the 
comparison between paper-based and AR manuals as 
guidance to the assembly; the former used as model a LEGO 
robot and the latter, a piping system. The results of both 
researches showed that the use of AR reduced significantly 
the operator's cognitive workload, as well as the amount of 
assembly errors and execution time. In [8], one can observe 
that the AR assembly manual lowered the learning curve of 
users. In [9], the use of AR proved to be suitable as guidance 
to trainees in the execution of highly complex tasks, in which 
training time is limited and errors can be either dangerous or 
costly. Corroborating, [9] showed that the use of AR proved 
productive, since it promoted savings in two-thirds of the 
expenses of correcting erroneous assembly. 
Some researches have explored assembly with bare-hand 
interactions using AR [10]–[12]. In these researches, the 
users assemble a virtual model, which is projected through a 
Head Mounted Display (HMD). The virtual objects are 
manipulated by the movement of the thumb tip and index 
fingertip. Lack of realism was classified as a limitation, since 
the assembly is merely virtual and the models and their joints 
are simple. In [11], disregarding the weights of the elements 
contributed to the lack of naturalness and realism when 
handling virtual objects. Also, in [10][12], it is pointed the 
need to improve the level of realism through a more 
sophisticated algorithm for joint recognition, thus more 
complex models could be tested using this system. 
While [8][10]–[12] dealt with the assembly of small 
dimension models, this research explored the assembly of a 
real size wood frame wall panel, hence, the assembly of a 
large dimension model. In [9], the assembly of a real size 
piping system was explored, although the visualization was 
provided by an external projection, while in this research it 
happened through the smartphone screen. Thus, this 
represents an innovation concerning the proposed use of AR 
and the way it can be used. 
III. 
AR APPLICATION 
A system that could assist the assembly of a wood frame 
wall structure was idealized. To support this proposal, an 
application was developed: given a wall and its respective 
virtual model, an AR application that could put in evidence 
the execution steps was built up. This stage was developed in 
three phases, described as follows: 
A. Wood frame modeling 
In the first phase, a wood frame wall structure was 
modeled using the Autodesk Revit® software. This structure 
was idealized to be assembled in laboratory and, for this 
reason, measures of 1.70 meters wide by 1.75 meters high 
were adopted. The proposed structure possesses a central 
opening for window, Fig. 1. Then, the model was exported to 
Unity 3D software, in which the AR application was 
developed. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Unity 3D print screen: wall structure.  
B. Wood components identification 
In the second phase, the eucalyptus components, section 
5 x 11 centimeters, were cut in accordance with the project. 
Each one was identified by color according to its length and 
function. Thus, the scheme shown in Table 1 was adopted.  
TABLE I.  
LIST OF THE WOOD COMPONENTS (SECTION 5 X 11 
CENTIMETERS) THAT COMPRISE THE WALL STRUCTURE 
Length (cm) 
Quantity 
Color 
190 
1 
Orange 
170 
2 
Blue 
145 
6 
Red 
80 
3 
Pink 
80 
1 
Green 
10 
1 
Gray 
 
Subsequently, the panel was physically assembled. At 
this moment, the components were drilled in order to offer a 
pre-set assemble system, Fig. 2. Letters were written to 
identify elements of the same color to favor its location in 
the panel. Corroborating, a triangle was drawn on the top of 
each element to the direction it should be positioned. 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 2.  Components identification and drilling setup. 
C. Application development 
In the third phase, the application functionality, 
characteristics and development were determined. The 
“montAR” application was developed from the Metaio's 
Software Development Kit for Unity 3D. The application 
was developed to run on smartphones with Android 
Operating System. 
Its functionality is based on the use of a marker 
associated with the assembly execution steps of the wood- 
frame panel. The marker is an image with a certain visual 
pattern that can be recognized by the AR system, which 
orientates and locates virtual objects in the scene. This 
marker, when seen in AR, indicates the correct location of 
the components that comprise the panel by the visualization 
of the 3D model in real scale, with highlighted indication of 
its position.  
The “montAR” application can be accessed by its icon on 
the smartphone screen. When running, the application shows 
a 
menu 
with 
the 
options: 
Assemble, 
Verify 
and 
Acknowledgement (in Portuguese: Montar, Verificar e 
Agradecimento). In Assemble, there is a menu on the side 
numbered from 1 to 7 to access the panel execution steps. 
These steps consist of exhibition of the AR model elements 
and also of audio instructions that include the correct 
positioning, orientation (vertical/horizontal), joints and 
additional assembly referral, Fig. 3. In Verify, the virtual 
model in colors is shown, in real size, to facilitate the visual 
verification of the elements and their positioning on the 
panel. 
 
 
Figure 3.  “montAR” print screen: marker, virtual model and the right 
menu with seven steps 
D. Application testing 
Once the application was complete, the system 
functionality was tested. At this moment, its functionality 
was ascertained and issues such as the positioning and scale 
of the virtual elements in respect to those of the real ones 
were verified. 
After the testing, alterations were made in order to refine 
the system, such as in: the execution order, the step-by-step 
audio instructions, the touchscreen options (drag, spin and 
enlarge/reduce), the maintenance of the virtual item in the 
scene even when it is no longer possible to visualize the 
marker and the insertion of a platform on the floor to favor 
the use of the screwdriver during the assembly. 
IV. 
USER EXPERIENCE EVALUATION 
The purpose of this stage was to assess the quality of the 
experience of using the system as means of communication 
of the assembly steps. According to [13], for evaluations that 
aim to enhance the measurement, such as response time to a 
stimulus, objective measures are used and, for experiments 
designed to assess cognitive performance, subjective 
measures and qualitative analyzes are used. [13] and [14] 
suggest that evaluations designed to assess cognitive 
performance are the most indicative of the user experience 
with the interface and, therefore, subjective measures or 
qualitative analyzes should be adopted. In this situation, 
commonly, participants are asked to perform certain tasks. 
The major advantage of using tasks is that they tend to be 
more similar to the actions that users would realize with the 
system. Therefore, the information gained from an 
assessment of cognitive performance tends to be more 
relevant and accurate on the application utility. 
The assessment process was divided in two sections. The 
first, being user characterization: age, gender, level of 
education, frequency of use of smartphone or tablet and 
previous knowledge of AR systems and wood framing. The 
second, being the evaluation of the assembly system itself.  
Initially, the researcher presented the system by 
demonstrating its operation and, after that, the user 
experimented the technology for a few minutes to become 
familiar with it. 
The next step consisted of the task of assembling the 
wood frame wall structure using the AR application through 
a Samsung Galaxy S5 smartphone. Thus, a marker was 
positioned over a wooden platform, which composed the 
assembly space. The eucalyptus components that comprise 
the panel, screws, an electric screwdriver and a Phillips 
screwdriver were disposed alongside the platform, Fig. 4. 
 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 4.  Provided material for the completion of the evaluation 
Following 
the 
assembly, 
a 
questionnaire 
was 
administered to the user in order to assess the quality of 
his/her experience, which is presented in Table 2. The 
method adopted was proposed by [14], in which the user 
experience is classified according to certain characteristics 
and rated in a Likert scale. To each assertion, the participant 
would check one of the following alternatives: Totally agree 
/ Agree / Nothing to declare / Disagree / Totally disagree. 
TABLE II.  
UX QUESTIONNAIRE 
Q1 
The step-by-step provided by the Augmented Reality system to 
the panel assembly was effective  
Q2 
I felt that the Augmented Reality system was appropriate to the 
proposed task 
Q3 
The smartphone screen size was appropriate to visualize the wood 
frame panel 
Q4 
It was comfortable to use the smartphone during the whole time 
Q5 
The Augmented Reality system interface seemed natural to me 
(menu, buttons, control and visualization) 
Q6 
The visualization of virtual information superimposed onto the 
real world did not confuse me 
Q7 
When using the Augmented Reality system, I felt encouraged and 
motived to finish the task 
Q8 
Guided by the Augmented Reality system, I was able to finish the 
assembly task at the first attempt 
Q9 
When I was assembling the wood frame panel, the Augmented 
Reality system enabled the perception and correction of errors  
Q10 
I felt that I accomplished the task of assembling the wood frame 
panel effectively 
Q11 
I felt satisfied with the way I performed and accomplished the 
task of assembling the wood frame panel using Augmented 
Reality 
Q12 
When using the Augmented Reality system, I felt the desire to 
continue 
Q13 
Using this Augmented Reality system made me feel involved in 
something extraordinary, something new 
Q14 
I enjoyed the experience of assembling the wood frame panel 
using Augmented Reality 
a. 
Based on [14] 
In addition to these questions, an open question was 
provided destined to further considerations, where the 
participant could comment on his/her difficulties and suggest 
improvements on the system. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The evaluation involved seven participants, among 
Architecture 
and 
Civil 
Engineering 
students, 
who 
experimented the AR system through the smartphone screen. 
The assessment took place on September 2015. The data 
collected was analyzed aiming the quality of the UX.  
Of the total number of participants, three were female 
and four, male, and all of them were aged between 18 and 
24. When asked about the frequency of use of smartphone or 
tablet, all of them informed daily basis use of this kind of 
mobile device. None of them had previous experience in any 
kind of AR system neither had assembled a wood frame 
panel before. 
Initially, the participants were given information about 
the research aim and explanation on the system operation. 
All of them took a few minutes to become familiar with the 
AR functioning. 
All of the participants accomplished the panel assembly 
successfully. On average, each one took 55 minutes to 
complete the task. Throughout the wood frame structure 
assembly process, the participants' actions were recorded, 
Fig. 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Documentation of the assembly process 
It was observed that while some participants placed the 
smartphone in their pockets, others laid it down on the board 
during the execution. It was only removed when accessing a 
button was necessary in order to move on to the next step, 
Fig. 6. 
 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 6.  Participant during the assembly task 
The results of the questionnaire, in general, indicate 
acceptance of the proposed system. All agreed that: the step-
by-step provided was effective (Q1); the AR system was 
appropriate to the task (Q2); the screen size offered by the 
smartphone was appropriate to the task (Q3); the interface 
provided by the AR system seemed natural to the 
participants (Q5); they felt encouraged and motivated to 
finish the task (Q7); they could accomplish the task free of 
errors at the first attempt (Q8); they accomplished the task 
effectively (Q10); they felt satisfied with the way they 
performed and accomplished the task (Q11); they felt the 
desire to continue using the system (Q12); they enjoyed the 
experience of assembling the wood frame panel using the 
AR system (Q14). 
On the other hand, three participants declared that the use 
of the smartphone did not prove comfortable during the 
whole assembly period (Q4). One participant stated that 
virtual information superimposed onto the real world caused 
confusion (Q6); other opted to abstain from commenting 
about the AR system enabling the perception and correction 
of errors (Q9) and another did not feel involved in something 
extraordinary (Q13). Fig. 7 summarizes the answers. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Results from the UX evaluation questionnaire 
As warned by [15], the visual disorder may cause 
ambiguity or difficulty in comprehending the AR content. 
Corroborating, one participant complained that, at particular 
times, the superposition of virtual elements over the real ones 
wasn't accurate. In order to solve this issue, the participant 
suggested that the virtual elements were more transparent. 
One participant suggested the inclusion of one item on 
the main menu, with initial instructions indicating what is 
necessary for the assembly, such as screws, wooden pieces, 
Phillips screwdriver or electric screwdriver. None of the 
participants, when finished with the assembly, used the 
“Verify” item from the application. Two participants pointed 
the need of visualizing the complete model before starting.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this research, an interactive guide to the assembly of a 
wood frame wall panel using AR is proposed. Therefore, the 
use of the virtual model associated with AR technologies, 
which provide the possibility of interaction between the user 
and the combination of virtual and real environments, is 
presented.  
To that end, an AR application named “montAR” was 
developed for smartphones. The application exhibits the 
assembly process of a wood frame wall structure in an 
interactive way, in order to facilitate the assembly, even for 
beginners. The system was developed so that the users could 
assemble the wall without the need of paper-based manuals.  
In order to better understand how “montAR” can be used, 
this research presents an evaluation of the UX. All of the 
participants were able to successfully accomplish the task of 
assembling the wood frame wall panel using the AR system. 
In general, they indicated the acceptance of the system and 
seemed interested in the technology.  
The system needs further refinement until the application 
achieves a proper operation to that end. Therefore, 
improvements must be made in accordance with what was 
pointed out in the assessment, which are: more transparency 
to the virtual elements, inclusion of initial instructions to the 
menu and the option of visualization of the complete model.  
The proposition of innovation of this research lies in the 
fact that this technology is being used here as means of 
offering a practical tutorial for the execution of the wood 
frame wall panel. Such initiative holds the potential to 
benefit people's training in this construction system, which is 
still incipient in Brazil. 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Hopefully, the assembly of wood-frame edifications can 
be assisted by the development of an application that offers 
an interactive step-by-step in AR. Therefore, this application 
can contribute to the diffusion of the wood-framing in the 
Brazilian construction process, providing its adoption and 
propagation. The resulting artifact of this research can be 
used by workers in the construction site as well as 
Architecture and Construction professionals, teachers and 
students for teaching and learning. 
In a wider perspective, this research indicates that the use 
of AR can be important for the construction process as a 
whole, even those which are already consolidated. For this 
reason, new studies in these terms are essential. 
Future work will focus on developing a comparative 
study between the panel assembly using AR through smart 
glasses and smartphones. This comparative study will aim to 
verify which device is more likely to be accepted by the user 
during the assembly task.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank the support of the Institute of 
Architecture and Urbanism (IAU), University of Sao Paulo 
(USP) and to the National Council of Scientific and 
Technologic Development (CNPq) for the Junior Post-
doctorate scholarship (Process: 151435/2014-6) and for the 
Scientific Initiation scholarship (Process: 149755/2015-5). 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Dünser and M. Billinghurst, “Evaluating augmented reality 
systems,” in Handbook of Augmented Reality, Springer, 
2011, pp. 289–307. 
[2] M. J. Kim, “A framework for context immersion in mobile 
augmented reality,” Autom. Constr., vol. 33, 2013, pp. 79–85. 
[3] A. Y. C. Nee, S. K. Ong, G. Chryssolouris, and D. Mourtzis, 
“Augmented 
reality 
applications 
in 
design 
and 
manufacturing,” CIRP Ann. Technol., vol. 61, no. 2, 2012, 
pp. 657–679. 
[4] J. C. Molina and C. Calil Jr, “Sistema construtivo em ‘wood 
frame’ para casas de madeira.,” Semin. Ciências Exatas e 
Tecnológicas, vol. 31, no. 2, 2010, pp. 143–156. 
[5] S. Nilsson, “Augmentation in the wild: user centered 
development 
and 
evaluation 
of 
augmented 
reality 
applications,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Linköping University, 
2010. 
[6] M. A. Schnabel, “The Immersive Virtual Environment Design 
Studio,” in Collaborative Design in Virtual Environments, 
Springer, 2011, pp. 177–191. 
[7] J. E. Swan and J. L. Gabbard, “Survey of user-based 
experimentation in augmented reality,” in Proceedings of 1st 
International Conference on Virtual Reality, 2005, pp. 1–9. 
[8] L. Hou, X. Wang, L. Bernold, and P. E. D. Love, “Using 
animated augmented reality to cognitively guide assembly,” J. 
Comput. Civ. Eng., vol. 27, no. 5, 2013, pp. 439–451. 
[9] L. Hou, X. Wang, and M. Truijens, “Using augmented reality 
to 
facilitate 
piping 
assembly: 
an 
experiment-based 
evaluation,” J. Comput. Civ. Eng., vol. 29, no. 1, 2015, pp. 
05014007-1 – 05014007-12.  
[10] S. K. Ong and Z. B. Wang, “Augmented assembly 
technologies based on 3D bare-hand interaction,” CIRP Ann. 
Technol., vol. 60, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1–4. 
[11] Z. B. Wang, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee, “Augmented reality 
aided interactive manual assembly design,” Int. J. Adv. 
Manuf. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5–8, 2013, pp. 1311–1321. 
[12] Z. B. Wang, L. X. Ng, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee, 
“Assembly planning and evaluation in an augmented reality 
environment,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 51, no. 23–24, 2013, pp. 
7388–7404. 
[13] M. A. Livingston, “Issues in Human Factors Evaluations of 
Augmented Reality Systems,” in Human Factors in 
Augmented Reality Environments, Springer, 2013, pp. 3–9. 
[14] T. Olsson, “Concepts and subjective measures for evaluating 
user experience of mobile augmented reality services,” in 
Human Factors in Augmented Reality Environments, New 
York: Springer, 2013, pp. 203–232. 
[15] N. Li and H. B.-L. Duh, “Cognitive Issues in Mobile 
Augmented Reality: An Embodied Perspective,” in Human 
Factors in Augmented Reality Environments, Springer, 2013, 
pp. 109–135. 
 
 
 
 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

