Multimodal Human-Robot Interactions: the Neurorehabilitation of Severe Autistic 
Children 
Irini Giannopulu
Cognitive Neuroscience 
Medical Engineering and Reeducation
Pierre & Marie Curie University
email: igiannopulu@gmail.co
 
 m  
Abstract—In  the  context  of  human-robot  interactions,  we 
studied quantitatively and qualitatively the interaction between 
autistic  children  and  a  mobile  toy  robot  during  free 
spontaneous game play. A range of cognitive nonverbal criteria 
including eye contact, touch, manipulation, and posture were 
analysed,  firstly  in  a  dyadic  interaction  and  secondly  in  a 
triadic interaction. Once the cognitive state between the child 
and  the  robot  established,  the  child  interacts  with  a  third 
person displaying positive emotion. Both dyadic and triadic 
interactions of autistic children and a mobile toy robot suggest 
that the mobile toy robot in an ecological situation such as free, 
spontaneous game play could be used as a neural mediator in 
order to improve children's brain activity. 
Keywords-multimodal interactions ; severe autism ; mobile 
toy robot ; spontaneous free game play ; neural mediator.
I. INTRODUCTION 
Different kinds of computer based technologies such as 
robots and virtual  reality, i.e., human-machine-interactions 
(HMI), are being put to effective use in the education of au-
tistic children. The studies we developed aimed to analyse 
the multimodal interactions of severely autistic children, du-
ring free game play with a mobile toy robot in both dyadic 
and triadic situations.
    Autism is a severe neurocognitive disorder. Because the 
effects of autism can range from severe to mild, autism is 
considered to be a spectrum disorder [1]. Severe autism is 
characterized  by  repetitive  and  stereotypical  behavior 
apparent  by  3  years  of  age,  impairment  in  verbal  and 
nonverbal processes, emotional and social interaction. Its 
genetic and neurocognitive aetiology is unknown; different 
hypotheses have been and continue to be discussed. Autism 
is considered a complex multifactor disorder involving many 
genes  [2], [3], [4]. These findings have given rise to new 
insights into neuronal circuits relevant to autism disorders. 
As  would  be  expected,  a  large  number  of  functional 
neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that different brain 
regions are involved in autism. In particular, these studies 
show that the neural substrate underlying cognitive, social 
and emotional impairment involves multimodal areas such 
as the exterior superior temporal sulcus  [5], the interior 
temporal lobe, amygdala included [6], as well as the ventral 
part of the prefrontal cortex, i.e., orbital frontal cortex [7]. In 
addition,  autistic  children  also  show  aberrant  brain 
connectivity and disruption of white matter tracts between 
temporal regions  [8] which disrupt verbal and nonverbal 
acquisition, consolidation as well as social interaction  [9], 
[10], [11], [12]. Taken together, the aforementioned studies 
provide the basis for concluding that in autism the more 
impaired  cortical  areas  are  those  that  are  involved  in 
complex cognitive functions such as perception, language, 
social interaction and emotion. Such complex expression of 
autism  necessitates  a  more  generic  consideration  of  this 
disorder at the neural level.   
From a developmental viewpoint, the most widely accep-
ted hypothesis in autism is the theory-of-mind deficit [13]. 
Even if this theory cannot account for the whole spectrum of 
autistic disorders, it raises many issues which not only in-
volve mental representation of others but also social skills 
such as posture [14], eye contact [15], touching [8] and ma-
nipulation [16] that express social interaction [17].   
Game play is a very important feature of early childhood 
and is of particular importance for children with autism. 
Play in children with autism is more like "learned routine" 
rather than "spontaneous" [18]. Autistic children show diffi-
culty in their play activities which could be associated with 
their deficit in cognitive, and emotional development. Free 
game play characterized by spontaneity could allow children 
with autism the possibility to express themselves and engage 
in satisfying social activity which in turn could lead to deve-
lopment of their cognitive skills.     
Different approaches are currently being utilized to better 
understand the capacity of autistic children to interact with a 
robot [19]. The Aurora project investigates the use of robots 
(Labo-1, Kaspar, Robota doll, for example) in game play. 
The aim is to create a tool based on an autonomous robot 
that convinces autistic children to engage in a process of in-
teraction  [20], [21], [22] [23]. The interactions are tested 
through the analysis of visual contact, joint attention, avoi-
dance or fleeing, visual pursuit, and whether the child imi-
tates the robot [24]. Using a variety of modalities for inter-
action such as music, colour and visual contact, a sensitive 
robot named Tito was employed in social interaction with 
autistic children  [21], [25]. A very small fixed robot named 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Keepon can capture and maintain visual contact with the 
child, drawing its attention and initiating some element of 
conversation [21], [26]. Roboto uses the form of an anima-
ted face (mouth, eyebrows, eyes) that can cause behaviour 
imitation from the part of the autistic child [27].
Regardless of the child's mental age, all these studies 
have reported dyadic interaction between the autistic child 
and the robot. Even though (because of the pathology) the 
number of the children participating in these experiments is 
limited, the dyadic interaction is reflected in attention [22], 
imitation cognition  [27], visual contact  [28], touching and 
verbal conversation [25], manipulating and posture [22]. All 
these studies have shown that animated robots, humanoid or 
not, using different stimulation encourage interaction in au-
tistic children. In other words, HMI, i.e., robot in our case, 
could be used to improve autistic children’s behaviour. In 
the above studies, the focal point of the analysis was on a 
single mode of interaction. Even if quantitative metrics of 
social response for autism diagnosis including robots were 
developed [29]; only one study has used a quantitative tech-
nique for analysing dyadic interaction for autism therapy 
[30]. With the exception of Labo-1 in the Aurora project, 
and Roball in Michaud's project so far, only fixed robots 
have been utilized reducing the child’s spontaneity and self–
expression in game play.
We  used a mobile toy robot named “GIPY 1” (Fig. 1) 
which incites the child to engage in interaction. On the hy-
pothesis that autistic children will be in quasi-constant inter-
action with the robot, the cognitive behavior of autistic chil-
dren in interactive activities with a robot, i.e., dyadic inter-
action, during spontaneous game play using multimodal cri-
teria was analyzed. In addition, we hypothesized that once 
dyadic interaction is established, the child could use the ro-
bot as a mediator to initiate the interaction with the third 
person, an adult, and express emotion, i.e., triadic interac-
tion. This cognitive and emotional interaction of the autistic 
child with a third person was investigated, once again, in 
spontaneous, free game play by means of a multimodal ap-
proach.
 The structure of the paper is the following : first we will 
give the method for both dyadic and triadic interactions ; 
then, we will analyse the results for both interactions ; final-
ly, we will develop the discussion, the conclusion and the fu-
ture work.
II. METHOD  
A.   Participants
•
Dyadic interaction
Four children (3 boys and 1 girl) participated in this study. 
Their chronological ages ranged from 7 to 9 years old (mean 
8.3 years). Their developmental age ranged from 2 to 4 
years old. The children were diagnosed according to the 
D.S.M. IV-TR criteria of autism [31]. The C.A.R.S [32] had 
been administered at the age of 6 years by an experienced 
clinical psychologist. The C.D.I [33]  was used to estimate 
intellectual disability (Table 1). At the time of the expe-
riment all of the children were attending special education 
classes or autism. 
Table 1. General characteristics of population
a) Childhood  b) International Classification of Diseases
Children
Chronolo-
gical age
Sex
C.A.R.S
(a)
C.D.I
(b)
1
7y 11m 
m
46.5
20 to 34
2
8y 6m
m
35.5
35 to 49
3
9y 5m
f
31.4
20 to 34
4
8y 2m
m
43.5
20 to 34
•
Triadic interaction : Case Study
“A” is a right-handed young boy. He exhibits mental retarda-
tion as per the C.D.I. [33]. His chronological age is 8 years 
old and his developmental age is 2 years old. The child was 
diagnosed with autism when he was 3 years old and still dis-
plays all characteristics of autism according to the D.S.M 
IV-TR [31]. In addition, the C.A.R.S. [32] has shown severe 
autism with a score of 43 points. “A” has deficits in recipro-
cal social interactions and communication (speech and lan-
guage), stereotyped behaviour and restricted interests and 
activities. At the time of the experiment he was attending 
special education classes for autism. 
   
B.   Material
•
Room
The room was 4.56 m by 3.34 m. A chair, a small war-
drobe and a table on which the equipment needed for the 
framework of the study was placed (laptop and joystick), 
were used. In order to reduce the presence of disruptive ele-
ments and so as to avoid autistic bend, the room was left 
bare [34].
•
Robot
A mobile robot, called “GIPY-1”, which is cylindrical-
shaped with a diameter of 20 cm and a height of 30 cm, was 
created for use in the experiment. A representation of a neu-
tral facial expression constitutes the cladding of the robot: 
the round eyes and nose triangle were dyed olive green and 
the elliptical mouth was dyed red (Fig. 1). Everything was 
covered with a transparent plastic sheet. The simplicity of 
the robot was driven by the preference of autistic children 
for simple and predictable toy design [35]. An operator ma-
nipulated the robot via a wireless remote control using a 
joystick connected to a laptop. The robot could move for-
ward, backward and turn on itself at low speed. These move-
ments were constant. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

  
Figure 1. GIPY 1
•
Protocol for the dyadic and the triadic interactions 
The duration of the session was 5 minutes. The robot was 
placed on the ground beforehand, in the center of the room, 
its stylised face toward the entrance. The game play session 
began as follows: when the child and the adult entered the 
room, the tele-operated robot carried out three movements 
(move forward, move back, 360° swivel). As in real social 
interaction, the child and the robot altered their responses. If 
the child approached, the robot moved back and conversely. 
If the child moved away from the robot, i.e., ignored the ro-
bot, the robot followed the child in order to attract its atten-
tion. If the child remained motionless, the robot approached 
or turned itself around in order to focus the attention of the 
child. All movements were standardised.
•
Analysis for the dyadic and the triadic interactions 
Two independent judges unfamiliar with the aim of the 
study completed the observations of the game play skills. 
Both performed the analyses of video sequences with Elan 
software. Prior to assessing game play improvement, inter-
judge reliability was assessed to ensure that both judges who 
analysed videotapes were consistent in their analyses. Inter-
judge reliability was assessed using intra-class coefficients 
to make the comparison between them. The inter-judge re-
liability was good (Cohen’s kappa=0.63). 
The  dependent  variable  was  the  time  of  child-robot 
interaction for the dyadic interaction and the time of child-
robot and adult for the triadic interaction. Accordingly, we 
calculated  the  duration of all  the characteristics of each 
criterion. This was defined as the duration between the onset 
time and the offset time of each child’s behaviour toward the 
robot. Four criteria were defined for the dyadic interaction: 
1) eye contact (looking at the robot), 2) touch (touching the 
robot without manipulating it), 3) manipulation (operating 
the robot), 4) posture (changing corporal position toward the 
robot). Based on the hypothesis that cognitive interaction 
could be lead to the expression of an emotional state, a n 
additional  fifth  criterion  was  defined  for  the  triadic 
interaction. This criterion was: the positive emotion (display 
of  enjoyment)  (5).  The  duration  of  each  criterion  was 
calculated in seconds and was considered independent of the 
others.  Concerning,  for  example,  the  characteristic  “s/he 
looks at the immobile robot” (“eye contact”) the onset time 
corresponded to the time when the child looked at the robot 
and the offset time to the moment when the child looked 
away from the robot. We calculated the duration of all the 
characteristics of each criterion. We summed up the duration 
corresponding to each criterion. Only the total duration is 
presented in the results section.
III. RESULTS
•
Dyadic interaction
The mean time of dyadic interaction was 238.7 sec. In 
other words, the children spent nearly 80% of their time 
(156 seconds for the first, 289 seconds for the second, 269 
seconds for the third and 241 seconds for the forth child) 
playing with the robot. The duration of each robot-child in-
teraction  is  presented  in  Fig.  2.  The  duration  of  “eye 
contact” is similar for all the children. However the analysis 
of the duration of “touching”, “manipulating” and “posture” 
possibly reflects inter-individual differences related to dif-
ferent forms of autism. This analysis also showed how autis-
tic children’s behavioral interaction with the robot changes 
over a period of time. This suggests that a mobile toy robot 
could help autistic children to reduce repetitive and stereoty-
pical behavior.
    Figure 2. Duration of dyadic interaction for each criterion
•
Triadic interaction
The mean time of dyadic interaction was 25 sec; the 
mean time of triadic interaction was 30 sec. In other words, 
the child spends half the time playing with the robot and the 
half the time playing with the robot and the adult. 
    
eye contact
touching manipulation
posture
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
child 1
child 2
child 3
child 4
seconds
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. Duration of dyadic and triadic interactions for each criterion
The duration of dyadic and triadic interaction is presen-
ted in Fig. 3. The duration of “eye contact” and of  “tou-
ching” is similar in both situations. However the duration of 
“manipulation”, of “posture” and of “positive emotion” dif-
fer between the two situations. As we can observe, positive 
emotion is more easily expressed when the child interacts 
with the adult and the robot than when the child interacts 
only with the robot. This difference reflective of the changes 
in autistic child behavior with the robot over a period of 
time also tells us that a mobile robot could be used as a me-
diator for social and emotional interaction. This is an encou-
raging conclusion with regard to the potential of human-to-
human interaction.
IV. DISCUSSION 
•
Dyadic interaction 
The aim of the first study was to analyze the interaction 
between autistic children and a mobile toy robot in free, 
spontaneous game play. Consistent with our hypothesis, the 
children are quasi-constantly in interaction with the mobile 
robot using a variety of ways.
As autism is a spectrum disorder where a large variation 
in abilities and interests among autistic children is apparent, 
the interaction of children and robots was evaluated on the 
level  of  each  individual  child.  Consistent  with  various 
studies,  the  present  study shows  that  the  use  of  robots 
engages autistic children in interaction  [20], [24-27], [36-
39]. We  have  calculated  the  duration  of  robot-child 
interaction during free, spontaneous game play. 
More precisely, the behavior of autistic children vis-a-vis 
the robot based on four criteria (“eye contact”, “touching”, 
“manipulation”  and  “posture”)  has  been  analyzed  and  a 
temporal quantification of dyadic interaction with respect to 
the duration was performed. The analysis revealed that the 
duration of eye contact behavior was similar for each child. 
Inter-individual differences were identified for the duration 
of  “touching”,  “manipulating”  and  “posture”  behavior. 
These  differences might be related to different forms of 
autism. This data demonstrated that the autistic children not 
only visually explored the robot  [30]  but also engaged in 
different kinds of play with the robot. In other words, the 
autistic children clearly took an interest in playing with the 
mobile robot. 
In all the studies we have mentioned above, only fixed 
robots were used, with the exception of Labo-1  [22] and 
Roball [21]. In our study as with Labo-1 and Roball studies, 
the autistic children were invited to interact with the robot 
during free, spontaneous game play. Taken together, these 
studies have shown that autistic-children use a variety of 
behavior when playing with a robot in free game play. 
It  seems  that  free  game  play  could  be  a  relevant 
ecological situation where an autistic child spontaneously 
interacts with the robot. Moreover, mobile toy robot could 
help autistic children to reduce repetitive and stereotypical 
behavior.
These findings also reveal that free, spontaneous game 
play with robots is possible with severe autistic children and 
could  better  facilitate  the  transfer  of  social  and  learnt 
abilities to real life. 
But what is important to demonstrate is whether and how 
autistic children can generalize learnt abilities during play 
with the robot to aduts, i.e., proving that the robot could be 
used as a neural mediator tool for the enrichment of child-
human interaction. 
•
Triadic interaction 
In this case study, we analysed the ingredients of child-robot 
two-pronged interaction and child-robot-adult three-pronged 
interaction. Consistent with our hypothesis, the child first es-
tablishes a relationship with the robot and then uses the ro-
bot as an “instrument” to initiate the interaction with the 
adult. At first glance, our results are compatible with recent 
findings according to which HMI i.e., presence of a robot, 
are more effective than other environments in allowing au-
tistic children to express social interest towards the robot 
[22-23], [25], [28], [35], [40-41]. In these studies, resear-
chers have used robots for treating autistic children. Howe-
ver, the relationship between robot and child has been stu-
died solely based on the analysis of a single mode of interac-
tion. Furthermore, the studies have been conducted using 
fixed robots. Our results go beyond these findings because 
we have demonstrated, as far we know for the first time, that 
in spontaneous, free game play, an autistic child uses the ro-
bot to interact with the adult and to express positive emo-
tion. As such, on the one hand, we have shown that the dya-
dic interaction is based on a cognitive state and, on the 
other, that the child uses the robot as a mediator to express 
positive emotion playing with the adult. 
More precisely, in our study, the interaction between 
robot and child was analysed using different criteria such as 
positive emotion
posture
manipulation
touching
eye contact
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
dyadic interaction
triadic interaction
seconds
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

eye contact (looking at the robot), manipulating (operating 
with  the  robot),  touching  (touching  the  robot  without 
manipulating it), posture (changing postural position toward 
the robot). Consistent with our previous studies [42-45], we 
have demonstrated that visual, haptic, tactile perception and 
posture, i.e., multimodal perception, are on the basis of the 
interest the child displays towards the robot. This is because, 
in our approach (as in Quinn & Eimas approach  [46]), 
perception  and  cognition  are  considered  to  be  a  single 
domain rather than two distinct entities. The criteria we have 
chosen are assumed to represent the state of the child's 
cognitive processes, as expressed by the interest the child 
exhibits towards the robot in spontaneous, free game play. 
As  our  second  study  has  shown,  once  this  state  is 
established, the child develops a triadic relation i.e., with the 
robot and the adult, thereby displaying enjoyment, which is 
a  positive  emotion.  The  expression  of  positive  emotion 
could be related to the emergence of a cognitive state, which 
is multimodal in our case. This expression appears when the 
child interacts with the adult using the robot. This is a very 
important finding when we consider that the subject of our 
case study “A” exhibited a score of 43 which corresponds to 
severe autism. Individuals with severe autism exhibit very 
limited social  skills. They don't  express emotions. They 
don't respond well to behavioural therapy and in fact tend to 
show few, if any, signs of improvement after such therapy is 
undertaken. However, as we showed in our study, “A” is in 
constant  interaction  with  the  robot,  expressed  by  a 
multimodal cognitive state which, according to us, allows 
him to express positive emotion with the adult. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Considering  the  above  studies,  it  would  be  fair  to 
conclude  that  autism  therapy  using  robots  seems  to  be 
effective, safe and convenient. What  is important is the 
“passage”  from  dyadic  interaction  to  triadic  interaction. 
Indeed, when “A” interacts with both the robot and the 
adult,  he  changes  his  behaviour.  What  causes  this 
behavioural  modification?  We  think that  the  robot  as  a 
mediator could bring about neurocognitive improvements to 
the autistic child. As the results have shown, the extent of 
that  improvement  seems  to  be  smaller  when  the  child 
interacts with the robot than when he interacts with the 
adult. We believe that the child’s reactions to the robot are 
very important  in  establishing  child  interest  and  are  of 
paramount importance in robot therapy. In fact, this dyadic 
interaction could be thought of as the building block from 
which the relationship among humans may be developed. 
Consistent  with  this  interpretation  may be  the  fact  that 
positive emotion is expressed only when the child interacts 
with the adult via the robot. Positive emotion is quasi-absent 
when  the  child  interacts  with  the  mobile  robot  on  a 
standalone basis. It seems thus reasonable to infer that the 
three-pronged interaction i.e., child-robot-adult could better 
facilitate the transfer of social and emotional abilities to real 
life. 
Moreover, in both studies, the findings tell us that free 
game  play,  i.e.,  an  ecological  situation,  encourages  an 
autistic child to interact with the robot in a spontaneous 
manner  and  could  reduce  repetitive  and  stereotypical 
behavior. They also reveal that free, spontaneous game play 
with robots is possible with autistic children and could better 
facilitate the transfer of learnt abilities to real life. 
One limitation of these studies is the small number of 
autistic  children  which  makes  impossible  inferential 
analysis. Additional studies are required with typical and 
autistic  children.  Longitudinal  follow-up  of  the  same 
children is necessery to examine the efficiency of mobile 
robots  in improving the  neurocognitive  skills  of  autistic 
children.  This  is  what  we're  developing  currently.  In 
addition,  with  a  new  study  we  analyse  the  embedded 
multimodal  nonverbal  and  verbal  interactions between  a 
mobile  toy  robot  and  autistic  children  using  a  new 
paradigme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank all the children who participated to 
the studies, their parents as well as ANR's supporting. The author 
would also like to thank the reviewers for the thoughtful 
comments, which improved the manuscript.  
REFERENCES
[1] L. Crane, S.E. Lind, and D.M. Bowler, “Remembering the past 
and imaging the future in autism spectrum disorder,” Memory, in 
press.
[2] L. Jorde et al. “Complex segregation analysis of autism,” Am. J. 
Hum. Genet. vol. 49, pp. 932-938, 1991.
[3] N.H. Sykes and J.A. Lamb, “Autism: The quest for the genes,” 
Exp. Mol. Med. vol. 9, pp. 1-15,  2007.
[4] P.  Szatmari et al. “Mapping autism risk loci using genetic 
linkage and chromosomal rearrangements,” Nat. Genet. vol. 39, pp. 
319-328, 2007.
[5]  K.A.  Pelphrey  and  E.J.  Caster,  “Charting  the  typical  and 
atypical development of the social brain,” Dev. Psychopathol. vol. 
20, pp. 1081-1102, 2008.
[6] B.A. Corbett et al. “A functional and structural study of emotion 
and face processing in children with autism,”  Psych. Res. 30, 173, 
pp. 196-205, 2009.
[7] L.  Brothers, “The social brain: a project for integrating primate 
behaviour  and  neurophysiology  in  a  new  domain,” Concepts. 
Neurosc. vol. 1, pp. 27–51, 1990. 
[8] U. Frith and C.D. Frith, “Development and neurophysiology of 
mentalizing,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London. vol. 358, pp. 459-473, 
2003.
[9] A. Saitovitch et al. “Social cognition and the superior temporal 
sulcus: Implications in autism,” Rev. Neurol. (Paris), 2012 Sep 13. 
pii: S0035-3787(12)00902-2. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2012.07.017.
[10] R. Adolphs and D. Tranel, «Intact recognition of emotional 
prosody following amygdala damage,” Neuropsychol. vol. 37, pp. 
1285–1292, 1999.
[11]  J.P. Aggleton, The Amygdala: A Functional Analysis. Oxford: 
University Press, 2000. 
[12] B.M. Nacewicz et al. “Amygdala Volume and Nonverbal Social 
Impairment in Adolescent and Adult Males with Autism,” Arch. Gen. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Psychiatry. vol. 63, pp. 1417-1428, 2006.
[13] U. Frith, J. Morton, and A.M. Leslie, "The cognitive basis of a 
biological disorder: autism,” TIN14. pp. 433-438, 1991.
[14] A.M. Leslie, “Pretending and believing: issues in the theory of 
ToMM," Cognition, vol. 50, pp. 211-238, 1994.
[15] T.  Reed and C. Peterson, «A comparative study of autistic 
subjects'  performance  at  two  levels  of  visual  and  cognition 
perspecctive taking,” J. Autism. Dev. Disord. vol. 20, pp. 555-567, 
1990.
[16] A. Escalona, T. Field, J. Nadel, and B. Lundy, “Brief report: 
Imitation effects on children with autism,” J. Autism. Dev. Disord. 
vol. 32, pp. 141-144, 2002 
[17]  B.A.  Taylor et al. “Manipulating establishing operations to 
promote initiations toward peers in children with autism,” Res. Dev. 
Disabil. vol. 26, pp. 385-392, 2005.
[18] E. Williams, V. Reddy, and  A. Costal, “Taking a closer look at 
functional play in children with autism,” J. Autism. Dev. Disord. vol. 
31, pp. 67-77, 2001.
[19] B. Scassellati, H. Admoni, and M. Mataric, “Robots for use in 
autism research,” An. Rev. Biomed. Eng. vol. 14, pp. 275-294, 2012.
[20] M.  Davis, B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, C.L. Nehaniv, and S. 
Powell editors. “A comparison of interactive and robotic systems in 
therapy  and  education  for  children  with  autism,” European 
Conference for the Advancement of Assistive Technology in Europe 
(AAATE’05), pp. 353-357, September 6-9 2005, IOS Press Lille.
[21]  F. Michaud and S. Caron, “Roball, the rolling robot,”  Auto. 
Rob. vol. 12, pp. 211-222, 2002. 
[22] K.  Dautenhahn,  “Socially  intelligent  robots:  dimensions  of 
human-robot interaction,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. vol. B.362, pp. 679-
704, 2007. 
[23]  B.  Robins,  K.  Dautenhahn, and  K.  Dubowski,  “Robots as 
Isoalators or Mediators for children with autism ? A Cautionary 
Tale,” Proc's of the AISB 05 Symposium on Robot Companions, pp. 
82-88, 2005.
[24] A. Duquette, F. Michaud, and H. Mercier, “Exploring the use of 
a  mobile  robot  as  an  imitation  agent  with  children  with  low-
functioning autism,” Auto. Rob. – Special Issue. vol. 2, pp. 147-157, 
2004.  
[25] F.  Michaud,  T.  Salter,  A.  Duquette,  and  J.F.  Laplante, 
“Perspectives  on  mobile  robots  used  as  tools  for  pediatric 
rehabilitation,”  Assist. Technol. vol. 19, pp. 14-19, 2007 
[26] H,  Kozima,  C  Nakagawa,  and  Y.  Yasuda,  «Children-robot 
interaction: a pilot study in autism therapy,” Prog. Brain. Res. vol. 
164, pp. 385-400, 2007.
[27] J.  Nadel,  A.  Revel,  P.  Andry,  and  P.  Gaussier,  “Toward 
communication: first imitations in infants, low-functioning children 
with autism and robots,” Inter St: Soc. Beh. Commun. Biol. Syst. vol. 
5, pp. 45-54, 2004. 
[28] A. Billard, S. Calinon, R. Dillmann, and S. Schaal, «Robot 
programming by demonstration,” in Handbook of Robotics, chapter 
59, B. Siciliano, and O. Khatib, Eds Springer, 2008. 
[29]  B.  Scassellati,  “Quantitative  metrics  of  social  response for 
autism  Diagnosis,”  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Intelligent 
Robots and Systems, pp1134-1138 vol.2, 2002.
[30] Dautenhahn, K and Werry, I,  “A quantitative technique for 
analysing  robot-human  interactions,”  IEEE/RSJ  International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1132-1138, 2002. 
[31]  DSM-IV-TR Manuel diagnostique et statistique des troubles 
mentaux, Paris, Editions Masson, 2003.
[32] E. Schopler, R.J. Reichler, R.F. De Vellis, and K. Daly, “Toward 
objective  classification  of  childhood  autism:  Childhood  Autism 
Rating Scale (CARS),” JADD10, pp. 91-103, 1980.
[33] International Classification of Diseases, Revision, 10, 1990.
[34] P.  Planche  E.  Lemonnier,  K.  Moalic,  C.  Labous,  and  A. 
Lazartigues, “Les modalités de traitement de l’information chez les 
enfants autistes,” Ann. Med. Psychol. vol. 160, pp. 559-564, 2002.
[35] J. Pedersen and J. Schelde, “Behavioral aspects of infantile 
autism: an ethological description”, Eur. Child. Adolesc. Psy. vol. 6, 
pp. 96-100, 1997.
[36] K. Dautenhahn and I. Werry,  “Towards interactive robots in 
autism therapy,”  P & CT, 121, pp. 1–35, 2004.
[37] H.  Kozima and H. Yano, Designing a robot for contingency-
detection  game.  Working  Notes  Workshop  Robotic  &  Virtual 
Interactive  Systems  in  Autism  Therapy,  2001  27-28  September, 
U.K.Hatfield. University of Hertfordshire, 2001, Technical Report 
No 364. 
[38] J.  Martineau,  S.  Cochin,  R.  Magne,  and  C.  Barthelemy, 
“Impaired cortical activation in autistic children: Is the mirror neuron 
system involved?” Int. J. Psychophysiol. vol. 68, pp. 35–40, 2008.
[39] T. Salter, I.P. Werry, and F. Michaud, “Going into the wild in 
child-robot  interaction  studies  -  Issues  in  social  robotic 
development,” Int. J. Robot. vol. 1, pp. 93-98, 2007.
[40] Y. Yokoyama, The Possibility of the Psychiatric Treatment with 
a Robot as an Intervention -From the Viewpoint of Animal Therapy-, 
Proc. of Joint 1st  International Conference on Soft Computing and 
Intelligent Systems and 3rd  International Symposium on Advanced 
Intelligent Systems, paper number 23Q1-1, in CD-ROM Proc. 2002.
[41] C. Kozima and Y. Yasuda, “Children-robot interaction: a pilot 
study in autism therapy,” Prog. Brain. Res. vol. 164, pp. 385-400, 
2007.
[42] I. Giannopulu and G. Pradel, Mobile toy robots can be used in 
autism therapy: an example of application. IEEE Proceedings in the 
IROS 2009 paper number SuT8.pdf in the workshop CD Proc. 2009. 
2009a
[43] I. Giannopulu and G. Pradel, (2009b). Interactions multimodales 
en situation de jeu libre entre enfants autistes et un robot mobile. 7ème 
Journée  Nationale  de  la  recherche  en  Robotique, 
http://jnrr09.lms.sp2mi.univ poitiers.fr/IMG/pdf/Giannopulu_Pradel. 
Novembre,  Domaine  de  La  Grande  Garenne  18330  Neuvy-sur-
Barangeon.
[44] I. Giannopulu and G. Pradel, “Multimodal interactions in free 
game  play  of  children  with  autism  and  a  mobile  robot,” 
NeuroRehabilitation. vol. 27, pp. 305-311, 2010.
[45] I. Giannopulu,  “Cognitive and emotional interactions between 
autistic  child,  mobile  toy  robot  and  therapist,”  Frontiers  in 
Computational
 
Neurosciences,
 
2011 
doi:10.3389/conf.fncom.2011.52.00002.
[46]  P.C.  Quinn  and  P.D.  Eimas,  “The  emergence  of  category 
representations  during  infancy:  are  separate  perceptulal  and 
conceptual processes required?”  J. Cogn. Dev. vol. 1,  pp. 55-61, 
2000. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Présentation conf Nice ACHI 13 
Multimodal human-robot interactions: the neurorehabilitation of severe 
autistic children 
My talk draws from my recent work which concerns the multimodal 
interactions in typically and atypically developing children. 
From my viewpoint, multimodal interactions (which mean different 
informations coming from different sources) express the complex 
relationship between brain, mind and environment (natural/physical or 
artiﬁcial environment).
Multimodal interaction is the foundation of the brain. 
The individual history of a neuron can be summarized as following: a 
neuron creates direct and/or indirect connections with other neurons (via 
synapses). Biological in nature, this operation seems to contribute to the 
formation of a multimodal neuron. This seems to affect the future 
development of brain areas. The individual history of a brain area depends 
on its direct and/or indirect connections with the contiguous cortical areas. 
This constitutes the neural environment also known as the ‘natural or 
physical environment’. 
1                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In typically developing children the realization of a given 
neurocognitive task such as verbal or nonverbal, social and emotional is 
possible because of a wide cortical network. The neural environment.
In atypically developing children such as autistic children the 
emergence of social and emotional behavior interaction could be possible 
because of a mobile toy robot, an articiﬁal environment.
In order to study this hypothesis, we created an artiﬁcial environment 
using a mobile toy robot and we analyzed multimodal interactions in free 
game play with autistic children and that robot in dyadic and triadic 
situations.
Autism: 
"
Autism is a neurocognitive disorder. Because the effects of autism can 
range from severe to mild, autism is considered as a spectrum disorder 
(Bowler, 2012). Autism is characterised by repetitive and stereotypical 
behavior apparent by 3 years of ages; deﬁcits in verbal and nonverbal 
processes; deﬁcits in emotional and social interaction.
"
"
Its genetic and neurocognitive aetiology is unknown. However 
different hypotheses have and continue to be discussed. 
"
Autism is considered a complex multifactor disorder involving many 
genes. 
2                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

"
Neuroimaging studies have demostrated that different brain areas are 
involved in autism. These studies reported aberrant brain connectivity and 
disruption of white matter tracts between temporal regions. They also 
shown abnormal activity in the exterior, the interior temporal and in the 
orbital frontal cortex (ventral part of the prefrontal cortex).     
"
"
This data could provide the basis for concluding that in autism the 
more impaired cortical areas are those that are involved in complex 
cognition functions such as perception, interpersonal interaction and 
emotion, disorders which characterize autism.
 
Artiﬁcial environment such as robots have been used in the education 
of autistic children. They seem to be more effective than real environments. 
 
Different projects exist. 
The Aurora project study investigates the use of robots (Labo-1, 
Kaspar, Robota doll, for example) in game play. The aim is to create a tool 
based on an autonomous robot that convinces autistic children to engage in 
a process of interaction. The interactions are tested through the analysis of 
visual contact, joint attention, avoidance or ﬂeeing, visual pursuit, and 
whether the child imitates the robot. Using a variety of modalities for 
interaction such as music, color and visual contact, a sensitive robot named 
Tito was employed in social interaction with autistic children. A very small 
ﬁxed robot named Keepon captured and maintained visual contact with the 
child, drawing his attention and initiating some element of conversation. 
3                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Roboto used the form of an animated face (mouth, eyebrows, eyes) that, can 
cause behavior imitation from the part of the autistic child. Pleo is a 
dinosaur whic is used to encourage social interaction. 
All these projects have reported dyadic interaction between the 
autistic child and the robot. They have shown that animate robots, 
humanoid or not, using different stimulations, encourage interaction in 
autistic children. 
Even if quantitative metrics of social response for autism diagnosis 
including robots were developed, only one study has used a quantitative 
technique for analysing dyadic interaction. With the exception of Labo-1 in 
the Aurora project, and Rollball (Michaud's project) so far, only ﬁxed robots 
have been utilized reducing the child’s spontaneity and self – expression in 
game play. 
The aim of our studies was to analyse multimodal interactions of 
severely autistic children during free spontaneous game play with a mobile 
toy robot named «GIPY 1» both in dyadic child-robot situation and triadic 
child-robot-adult situation. 
DYADIC INTERACTION
In the dyadic situation, we hypothesized that the autistic child will be 
in quasi-constant interaction with the robot. 
4                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

"
The experimental set up was the following:  The robot was manipulated 
by an operator via a wireless remote control using a joystick connected to a 
laptop. The robot could move forward, backward and turn on itself at low 
speed. These movements did not vary from child to child. The duration of 
the session was 5 minutes. The game play session began in exactly the same 
way for each child. When the child and tutor entered in the room, the tele-
operated robot carried out three movements (move forward, move back, 
360° swivel). As in real social interaction, the child and the robot altered 
their responses. If the child approached, the robot moved back and 
conversely. If the child moved away from the robot, i.e., ignored the robot, 
the robot followed the child in order to attract his/her attention. If the child 
remained motionless, the robot approached or turned around in order to 
focus the attention of the child. All the movements were standardized 
across the children. 
"
4 children were observed during ﬁve minutes.
"
In this study, we analyzed the time of child-robot interaction (dyadic 
interaction). This time was deﬁned as the duration between the onset time 
and the offset time of each child’s behavior toward the robot. Four criteria 
were deﬁned. These criteria were: 1) eye contact (looking at the robot), 2) 
touch (touching the robot without manipulating it), 3) manipulation 
(operating the robot), and 4) posture (changing corporal position toward 
the robot). 
5                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

"
The duration of each criterion was calculated in seconds and was 
considered independently of the others. Concerning, for example, the 
characteristic “s/he looks at the immobile robot” (“eye contact”) the onset 
time corresponded to the time when the child looked at the robot and the 
offset time to the moment when the child looked away from the robot. 
Accordingly, we calculated the duration of all the characteristics of each 
criterion. We summed up the duration corresponding to each criterion for 
each child. Only the total duration is presented in the results section. 
Our results show that the children spent more than 79% of their time 
(156 seconds for the ﬁrst, 289 seconds for the second, 269 seconds for the 
third and 241 seconds for the fourth child) playing with the robot. 
As autism is a spectrum disorder where a large variation in abilities 
and interests among autistic children is apparent. At an individual level, the 
duration of “eye contact” is similar for all the children. However the 
analysis of the duration of “touching”, “manipulating” and “posture” 
possibly reﬂects individual differences among the children. This analysis 
also showed how autistic children’s behavioral interaction with the robot 
changes over a period of time. In other words, this suggests that a mobile 
toy robot could help autistic children to reduce repetitive and stereotypical 
behavior. 
It seems that free game play could be a relevant ecological situation 
where an autistic child spontaneously interacts with the robot. 
6                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

These ﬁndings tell us that an ecological situation, i.e., free game play, 
which is very closed to a real life situation encourages an autistic child to 
interact with the robot in a spontaneous manner. They also reveal that free, 
spontaneous game play with robots is possible with autistic children and 
could better facilitate the transfer of social and learnt abilities to real life. 
What is important to demonstrate is whether and how autistic 
children can generalize learnt abilities during play with the robot to 
therapists and parents, i.e., proving that the robot could be used as a neural 
mediator tool for the enrichment of child-human interaction. 
TRIADIC INTERACTION
This is what we tried to analyze in a third case study involving 
triadic child-robot-adult interaction. 
We used the same criteria as above. 
Based on the hypothsesis that cognitive multimodal interaction could 
be leed to the expression of an emotional state an additional ﬁfth criterion 
was deﬁned for the triadic interaction. This criterion is: positive emotion 
(display of enjoyment). 
The above children were observed for 5 minutes of free game play. 
7                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The results show that the child spends half the time playing with the 
robot and half the time playing with the robot and the adult.
The duration time of “eye contact” and of “touch” is quite similar in 
both situations. However the duration time of “manipulation”, of “posture” 
and of “positive emotion” differ between the two situations. Positive 
emotion is more easily expressed when the child interacts with the adult 
and the robot than when the child interacts only with the robot. This 
difference reﬂective of the changes in autistic child behavoir with the robot 
could be used as a mediator for social and emotional interaction. 
The robot, i.e., the artiﬁcial environment, seems mediate the 
interaction between autistic child and adult once the robot-child interaction 
is established. 
In other words, cognitive and emotional multimodal interactions 
could also play a role  in autism neurorehabilitation.
Robot neurorehabilitation might have high potential for improving 
the brain activity of child with autism. In this context, the robot could be 
considered as a « neural orthesis ».
In other words, artiﬁcial environment rendered possible through the 
use of mobile toy robots could lead to the neurorehabilitation of autistic 
children or atypically developing children.
8                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Certainly, a robot could be considered as a orthesis (ό$%&'()) used as 
a social stimuli mediator, with the ability to activate the same brain areas 
sensitive to humans in order to reduce the impairment of skills related to 
social and emotional information processing. 
Thank you for your attention
9                                                                                                                                  I GIANNOPULU
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

