Detection of Pinbones in Japanese Shime-saba 
Hisayoshi Ito     Oky Dicky Ardiansyah Prima     Takehiro Sasaki 
 
Graduate School of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
152-52, Sugo, Takizawa, Iwate, Japan 
e-mail: {hito, prima}@iwate-pu.ac.jp, g231t201@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Shime-saba is a Japanese seafood marinated in salt 
and rice vinegar, which makes it last longer and gives it a 
sashimi-like flavor. The vinegar softens most bones, but 
pinbones remain hard and need to be removed. The food 
processing industry manually removes these bones. However, 
this process needs to be automated to cope with the shortage of 
human resources. This study attempts to detect the location of 
the tips of pinbones by using infrared imaging techniques to 
highlight bone features and quantifying these features based on 
image geometry. The shape of the response image obtained by 
correlating the gaussian template image to the infrared-
irradiated shime-saba image revealed that the tip of the 
remaining bone resembled convex-up shapes. These shapes 
were detected by applying a quadratic surface equation to the 
resulting image after pre-processed, allowing the location of the 
tips of pinbones to be determined by picking their maxima. 
Future work will include a deep learning solution to improve the 
detection accuracy of pinbones. 
Keywords-fishbone; infrared imaging; bone detection; image 
geometry; template matching; computer vision. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Improvements in quality inspection and food supply chain 
visualization have become necessary to guarantee the safety 
and quality of food products as well as their traceability. 
Methods have been developed to automate these tasks to 
accomplish these tasks more efficiently and cost-effectively 
[1]. Robotics can play an important role as a solution. 
However, the food industry has been slow to adopt robotics 
relative to others. The use of robots instead of people in food 
processing is expected to have many tangible, intangible, 
social, and economic benefits [2][3]. Hygiene and safety risks, 
as well as high labor and social costs, will drive the adoption 
of robots in the food industry. 
Fish and fishery products have long been a large part of 
the Japanese diet. Traditional Japanese seafood preparations 
include the shime-saba (mackerel marinated with sugar, salt 
and rice vinegar) and dried or salted fish for preservation. Raw 
foods such as sashimi and sushi, as well as deep-fried foods 
such as tempura, have also enriched Japanese food culture [4]. 
Hachinohe City, Aomori Prefecture is the center of production 
of shime-saba. It was the first city in Japan to begin producing 
shime-saba in 1968. Although the number of mackerel 
landings is decreasing, the production of shime-saba is on the 
uptrend. 
The food industry in Japan is suffering from a chronic 
shortage of labor. While there are efforts to actively introduce 
robots, it is difficult for small and medium-sized companies to 
consider introducing robots by themselves. The processing of 
shime-saba requires human intervention to remove the bones 
remaining in the fish body. Vinegar can soften most bones, 
but the middle bone remains hard and must be removed 
manually, as shown in Figure 1. This work is physically 
demanding because of the long hours spent standing. In 
addition, more workers are needed to ensure production 
capacity. 
The objective of this study is to develop an image sensing 
system that detects the pinbone tips of shime-saba to assist the 
deboning robot. Our system identifies the tip of the bone by 
analyzing features from fillet image of shime-saba taken by a 
camera that can capture images in both visible and near-
infrared light. The shape geometry of the fillet image is 
analyzed from its features, and the geometry representing the 
tip of the bone is automatically identified. Finally, we will 
discuss the implementation of this system and consider further 
improvements in detection accuracy. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes related works on fish bone detection using image 
sensing techniques. Section III describes our proposed method 
for detecting pinbone tips from near-infrared transmitted 
images. Section IV summarizes our results. Finally, Section V 
concludes our work.  
 
II. RELATED WORKS 
Traditionally, tweezers or needle nose pliers have been 
used to remove bones from fish fillets. Today, hand-held pin 
bones have been made available, allowing for easier manual 
deboning. To use these machines to remove bone, the tip of 
the bone must first be located. Therefore, an important step in 
the automation of bone removal is to find the bone tip. 
Image sensing techniques such as X-ray, Ultraviolet (UV), 
and infrared spectroscopy have been proposed for detecting 
fish bones. Mery et al. (2011) developed an X-ray machine 
vision approach to detect fish bones in fish fillets [5]. Their 
device is a digital radiography system consisting of an X-ray 
source and a flat panel detector. Filter banks including 
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), Discrete Cosine 
Transform (DCT), and Gabor were used to extract features 
from the resulting X-ray images. The results showed that by 
photographing the fish bones, which are arranged in strips and 
range from 14 mm to 47 mm in length, these bones can be 
detected with a high accuracy. Wang et al. (2015) investigated 
the fluorescent properties of cod bone under UV irradiation 
and found that the optimum wavelengths of excitation and 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

emission were 320 nm and 515 nm. They were the first to 
develop UV fluorescence-assisted candling for detecting fish 
bones, but the detection accuracy was lower than that of X-
ray-based techniques [6]. Wei et al. (2018) used infrared 
spectroscopy to identify fish bone contents in surimi. The 
absorption peak in the infrared spectrum at around 9,890 nm
wavelength was observed from fish bones. Song et al. (2019) 
proposed a fish bone detection based on Raman hyperspectral 
imaging technique to improve detection rate and achieve 
automatic detection [7]. This technique was found to 
effectively detect fish bones down to a depth of 2.5 mm.
The above optical sensing at various wavelengths has been 
used to bring up the feature values of fish bones in an attempt 
to locate the position of the bones in the body of the fish.
However, putting these technologies to practical use in food 
processing facilities is problematic due to their high cost.
Furthermore, while it can detect bones of a certain length, it is 
not capable of detecting objects where only the tip of the bone 
can be seen.
III. METHODS
In this study, we focus on the broad application of near-
infrared light to food analysis, based on various sample 
presentation techniques [8]. In addition to reflection, Near 
Infrared Ray (NIR) absorbed and transmitted from the sample 
may be used to detect the presence or absence of pinbones in 
the fish body. Here, we attempt to detect the tips of pinbones
by photographing the NIR transmitted through the fish body.
A. Image Acquisition
The device for NIR imaging in this study is shown in 
Figure 2. The camera can capture images in the wavelength 
Figure 1. Removal of the remaining middle-bone from the shime-saba manually.
Figure 2. The device for NIR imaging in this study.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

range from visible spectrum to near-infrared spectrum. To 
obtain images in each band, an infrared filter is attached to the 
camera lens. By switching these filters electronically, both 
visible and near-infrared images of the fish body can be 
captured. For the NIR source, 840-nm near-infrared LEDs 
were used.
As shown in Figure 3, there are three pinbones in the 
shime-saba mackerel to be deboned. The presence of these 
bones is not clear in the visible spectrum image, so boning 
staff must touch the fillet to check for their presence. In 
contrast, the NIR image reveals features at the tip of the
pinbone.
B. Pre-processing
To enhance the features of the bone tips in the NIR images, 
these images were correlated with a Gaussian template image.
This template image produces a response image with the 
region of image maxima as the convex-up region of the image.
As shown in Figure 4, the obtained response image shows that 
the region at the tip of the bone is clear as a convex-up image. 
The extent of the convex structure can be adjusted by 
changing the size of the Gaussian template image.
C. Detection of Bone Tips Using Qudratic Surface
Given 
the 
above 
observation, 
we 
developed 
a 
morphometric characterization algorithm to determine 
geomorphometric features (e.g., peaks, pits, ravines, or ridges) 
from the derived response images. The quadratic surface is 
fitted to the image within a moving local analysis window 
using least-squares [9], with the general equation being
𝑧 = 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝐴𝑥ଶ + 𝐵𝑥𝑦 + 𝐶𝑦ଶ + 𝐷𝑥 + 𝐸𝑦 + 𝐹
(1)
where (x, y) is the location’s coordinate, z is the pixel value 
calculated by the quadratic function, and A to F are the 
coefficients of the quadratic function. By analyzing the 
second-order coefficients A to C, the shape of the quadratic 
surface can be characterized as follows.
Elliptic paraboloid:       𝐵ଶ − 4𝐴𝐶 < 0
(2)
Hyperbolic paraboloid: 𝐵ଶ − 4𝐴𝐶 > 0
(3)
Parabolic paraboloid:    𝐵ଶ − 4𝐴𝐶 = 0
(4)
Here, if A=B=C=0 then the quadratic is a plane. Equation (2)
divides the quadratic surface into convex-up and concave-up.
If the center of the convex-up surface is within the analysis 
window, this surface can be determined as the peak. Hence, 
this property can be used to determine the location of the 
pinbone tips from the response image.  
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Experiments were conducted to detect pin bones in non-
processed shime-saba using the equipment shown in Figure 2.
Since the pinbones are in the center of the fillet, this region 
was preprocessed as a Region-of-Interest (ROI) and used to 
approximate the quadratic surfaces. Figure 5 shows the 
candidate pinbones detected in the fillet. There are several 
convex-up regions in the ROI, but the five candidates with the 
largest difference in convexity were displayed. Among these 
candidates, the presence of the pinbones were confirmed. 
Thus, the five convex-up candidates from the sample of fillets 
used in this study can be used to narrow down the candidates 
for the correct pinbone locations. At this point, we will 
continue to work on how to select the correct pinbone from 
among the candidates.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, an image sensing system for detecting the 
pinbone tips of shime-saba was developed. By analyzing the 
surface geometry of a fillet transmitted by near-infrared ray, 
Figure 3. Three bones in the shime-saba to be deboned.
Figure 4. The response image obtained by pre-processing.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

we were able to identify convex-up shapes that represent the 
tips of the bones. At this point, we were able to narrow down 
the convex shapes in the center of the fish body to five in order 
of size. The future focus will be on identifying tips of the 
bones from the candidates identified by the current system, 
including deep learning solutions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the IoT Human Resource 
Development Support Project of Iwate Prefecture, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Alejandro, “Food Analysis: Present, Future, and Foodomics,” 
International Scholarly Research Network (ISRN) Analytical 
Chemistry, pp. 1-16, 2012.
[2]
P . Graham, “Robotic Equipment in the Meat Industry,” Meat 
Science, 49(1), pp. 297-307, 1998.
[3]
H. Einarsdottir, B. Guoundsson, and
V. Omarsson, 
“Automation in the fish industry,” Animal Frontiers, 12(2), pp. 
32–39, 2022.
[4]
Fish-Loving Food Culture Refreshed,
https://www.gov-
online.go.jp/eng/publicity/book/hlj/html/201804/201804_07_
en.html [retrieved at May 2022]
[5]
D. Mery, et al., “Automated fish bone detection using X-ray 
imaging,” Journal of Food Engineering, 105(3), pp. 485–492, 
2011, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2011.03.007
[6]
S. Wang, R. Nian, L. Cao, J. Sui, and H. Lin, “Detection of fish 
bones in cod fillets by UV illumination,” Journal of Food 
Protection, 
78(7), 
pp. 
1414–1419, 
2015. 
https://doi.org/10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-14-358
[7]
S. Song, et al., “Detection of fish bones in fillets by Raman 
hyperspectral 
imaging 
technology,” 
Journal 
of 
Food 
Engineering, 272, pp. 1-10, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2019.109808
[8]
B. G. Osborne, “Near-Infrared Spectroscopy in Food Analysis,”
Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry, pp. 1–14, 2006.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470027318.a1018
[9]
D. Wang, S. W. Laffan, Y. Liu, and L. Wu, “Morphometric 
characterisation of landform from DEMs,” International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24(2), pp. 305–
326, 2010. https://doi.org/10.1080/13658810802467969.
Figure 5. Candidates for the pinbones in shime-saba.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

