Unveiling the Potential of Digital Fabrication in Arts & Crafts
Education: A Future Workshop Approach for Technology-Enhanced
Teaching
1st Susanne Stigberg
Department of Computer Science and Communication
Østfold University College, Norway
Halden, Norway
susannks@hiof.no
2nd Nils-Christian Walthinsen Rabben
Department of Computer Science and Communication
Østfold University College, Norway
Halden, Norway
nils.c.rabben@hiof.no
Abstract—This research paper explores the potential of Digital
Fabrication (DF) to incorporate digital competences in arts and
crafts (A&C) education. With the growing emphasis on digital lit-
eracy in K-12 curricula, we aim to investigate what opportunities
and challenges DF can bring to A&C education. To achieve this,
we conducted a Future Workshop with seven A&C teachers from
two different primary schools. Through the Future Workshop
approach, we were able to engage teachers in a participatory
design process that enabled them to explore the potential of DF
in A&C education. Teachers shared their perspectives, identified
challenges, and brainstormed future solutions. The findings reveal
that teachers see clear opportunities of DF to introduce topics
related to STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, the Arts
and Mathematics Education), sustainability and product design
in A&C education, but there are also challenges that need to
be addressed, such as lack of equipment, knowledge, or time
constraints.
Keywords- future workshop, teacher training, digital fabrication,
arts and crafts education
I. INTRODUCTION
The translation of digital designs into physical objects is
known as Digital Fabrication (DF), involving tools like 3D
printers, embroidery machines, laser cutters, and vinyl cutters.
DF technologies have become affordable and accessible at
Makerspaces and FabLabs around the world. They enable
individuals to create professional-looking items quickly and
at a relatively low cost. According to Blickstein [1], DF
and making can have a significant impact on education by
introducing powerful ideas, literacies, and expressive tools
to children. There have been recent efforts to incorporate
programming and digital technologies into A&C curricula [2],
with teachers utilizing DF to teach programming, making, and
design thinking to students [3]. The potential applications of
DF in A&C education are numerous, including accessibility,
versatility, collaboration, customization, automation, and in-
novation. DF provides a distinct approach to model-making,
allowing students to experiment with new materials and tech-
niques while facilitating alternative forms of collaboration
among students. Song et al. [4] found that DF activities can
inspire teachers to explore alternative approaches to A&C,
utilizing technology to push the boundaries of traditional
crafting techniques. Previous research has explored DF in
A&C mainly as part of STEAM projects and with the aim to
introduce computing to diverse student groups using robotics,
e-textiles and 3D as most common DF themes [5]. However,
in K-12 A&C education, the uptake of DF technologies is
lagging. A national education report from 2009, which analysis
the use of digital tools in Norwegian schools, [6] found that
A&C teachers incorporate low levels of technology in their
K-12 practice. This corresponds with relevant research on
challenges incorporating technology into arts education [4],
[7]. In this paper, we are interested in how A&C teachers
reflect on DF and its potential in K-12 A&C education, as a
first step in creating a local professional development project.
In Section 2, we review technology use in A&C education,
before discussing the future workshop approach in Section 3.
We present our method in Section 4 and our findings in Section
5. We conclude the paper with future work in Section 6.
II. TECHNOLOGY IN ARTS AND CRAFTS EDUCATION
While digital tools have been introduced in education in
general, there has been minimal use of technology in arts
education compared to other subjects. Song et al. [4] found
the reluctance of arts education to embrace technological
advancements is not a new phenomenon. Art is considered
a media-specific subject, and the interaction between material
and process is integral to student learning [8], [9]. Technolo-
gies used in this domain have been limited to ICT, image
and video editing, and graphic design, which are predomi-
nantly virtual and two-dimensional e.g., [10]–[12]. Ettinger
[8] has documented the use of digital tools in arts education
for information gathering, particularly using the internet. In
2019, policymakers in Norway emphasized the importance of
digital literacy by introducing explicit changes in all subjects,
including A&C education. The changes in the K-12 curricula
include a clear description of digital literacy as core elements.
For A&C education in grades 5-7, the changes included:
• Using digital tools to plan and present processes and
products (Core element: Art and Design Processes)
• Implementing programming to create interactive and vi-
sual expressions (Core element: Visual Communication)
• Learning how to safely and sustainably use electrical
crafting devices with specific materials (Core element:
Handcrafting)
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I
EMERGING THEMES IN THE CRITIQUE PHASE
Economy
Lacking equipment
Difficult to finance purchase
Cost of raw materials
Lacking dedicated rooms for DF
Knowledge
No experience with DF
No experience with the equipment
How to evaluate pupils’ work
How to make good tasks
Need new work routines
Structure
Big classes, need extra teachers
Need to learn together, in a community
Need cross-disciplinary cooperation, can’t teach all
basic skills in A&C
Time
Need time to learn new skills
Time is limited
For A&C education in grades 7-10, the changes included:
• Exploring the use of technology with materials when
constructing products (Core element: Handcrafting)
• Exploring how new technologies can enhance creative
processes when creating products (Core element: Art and
Design Processes)
• Learning how to create interactive illustrations using hand
drawing, 3D modeling, and other digital tools (Core
element: Visual Communication)
III. FUTURE WORKSHOP IN TEACHER TRAINING
A future workshop is a participatory and collaborative
approach to generate ideas and solutions for a desirable future
through critique, fantasy, and implementation phases [13].
The origins of future workshops (FW) can be traced back
to the 1950s, when Austrian futurist Robert Jungk organized
meetings for a citizen group to address common problems.
The aim was to create ideas for a desirable future and critique
the establishment through collective decision making and
group synergy effects. Three main sources inspired Jungk’s
approach, as described in [14]: the socialist principles of
participative, democratic, and critical citizen decision making
for the initial critique phase, Alex Osborne’s brainstorming
method for the following fantasy phase, and methods based
on group synergy effects and individual intuition for the
concluding implementation phase. FW has been utilized in
teacher training. Forsler [15] introduces teacher students to FW
to visualize media infrastructures in teaching spaces. Dirckinck
et al. [16] use FW to involve teachers in the design and
implementation of digital learning platforms. The bottom-up
approach of FW aligns with our research aim, which is to learn
about teachers’ concerns integrating DF in A&C education; as
well as teachers alternative visions of an ideal future using DF
in A&C education; ending up with a set of concrete action for
us to support teachers in the process.
IV. METHOD
In the following, we will describe how we have imple-
mented the FW and collected and analysed data from the
workshop. The workshop took place on a Thursday from 4:00-
6:00 pm in a meeting room at the university, with two DF
experts (authors of this paper) and seven teachers from two
local secondary schools (four women and three men). An
email invitation was sent to A&C teachers from local schools.
We invited all interested teachers. They had minimal or no
experience with DF. One DF expert facilitated the workshop,
while the other gave a short presentation on DF and supported
the facilitator during the activities. The workshop began with
some food and coffee to help participants get to know each
other and warm up for the workshop. The workshop was
structured as follows:
• Introduction to DF: 10-15 minutes
• Problem phase: 30 minutes
• Critique phase: 30 minutes
• Implementation phase: 30 minutes
• Summary and planning for the upcoming workshop.
In the critique phase, we prompted participants to brain-
storm and identify hindrances or problems that could prevent
them from using DF in their teaching. Each participant was
asked to write down at least three issues individually, while
they could talk to each other for about 10 minutes. Next, we
sorted and grouped the raised concerns to identify common
themes among participants. Finally, we concluded the critique
phase with a brief discussion where participants elaborated
further on the emerging themes.
In the fantasy phase, participants engaged in activities
similar to those in the critique phase, where they individually
wrote down ideas before we grouped and discussed them. In-
stead of identifying problems, participants imagined an ideal,
utopian situation where they could envision the full potential
of DF without any limitations. This included imagining that
all identified problems from the previous phase were solved
and there were no restrictions. The aim was to gain insight
into how teachers envision using DF in their teaching.
During the implementation phase, the ideas and limitations,
that were identified in the earlier stages, were evaluated
against each other to determine their feasibility in the current
situation [14]. The teachers reviewed the previous themes and
prioritized them, discussing the necessary requirements for
implementing each idea, leading to a prioritized action plan
for future workshops in the project.
To collect data, we videotaped the workshop and conducted
a thematic analysis of the data for each phase. We then
engaged in a discussion where we compared and consolidated
our coding to identify common themes. Thematic maps [17]
were created for each phase, and any discrepancies in the cod-
ing were addressed and resolved through further discussion.
V. FINDINGS
During the critique phase, teachers have identified several
challenges to using DF in their teaching, which we have
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Postit notes from the fantasy phase, translated
grouped into four categories as outlined in Table I. Economic
challenges are one of the main concerns, such as the lack
of access to DF equipment, the cost of materials, and the
absence of dedicated spaces for DF activities, such as a
makerspace. Teachers find it difficult to ask for money to buy
DF tools due to budget constraints and purchase restrictions
in schools. However, in one school, the lack of knowledge is
the most immediate challenge using DF, despite having three
3D printers. The person responsible for buying the printers
has left, resulting in the printers being neglected, since no
one in the school knows how to use, maintain, or repair
them. In addition, teachers also feel that they lack pedagogical
knowledge, such as how to create engaging DF tasks and
assess student work. Due to time constraints and large class
sizes, they feel unable to learn new skills on their own. They
mention a need to establish a more structured way of support
such as a community of practice in DF. They also recognize
that DF should be incorporated into various subjects to spread
the responsibility of teaching DF skills.
We categorized several opportunities for incorporating DF
in A&C education, ideated by the teachers during the fantasy
phase. One such opportunity is the potential for interdis-
ciplinary projects that utilize a variety of technologies and
techniques to create meaningful products. This aligns with
the concept of STEAM, as well as the principles of design
thinking and making, as discussed in existing literature [1],
[18]. The teachers believe that the inclusion of DF in A&C will
motivate students to create products they are proud of and that
are meaningful to them. Additionally, they see opportunities
for DF to be used in redesign, repair, and recycling projects
as more sustainable practices. An overview of all generated
ideas is depicted in Figure 1. Surprisingly, none of the teachers
related their DF fantasies to the core elements of the A&C
curricula.
In the implementation phase, the teachers identified two
activities that address their lack of knowledge. Firstly, they
requested 3D printing training to equip themselves with a
better understanding of the technology, which they felt would
help them evaluate how to incorporate it into their teaching.
Secondly, they expressed a need for more inspiration and
teaching examples, which they dubbed an ”idea bank”. The
teachers considered these activities feasible to implement since
they did not require input from other stakeholders.
VI. FUTURE WORK
In conclusion, the Future Workshop proved to be an effec-
tive method for exploring teachers’ perspectives on DF for
A&C education. Teachers gave positive feedback regarding
both receiving information about possibilities in DF and the
opportunity to express and share their thoughts on introducing
technology in A&C education. The insights gained from the
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

workshop will guide further interventions. To address the
challenges raised by the teachers in the critique phase, we have
identified several key steps that need to be taken. Firstly, we
should establish DF technology workshops to provide teachers
with the necessary knowledge and skills to incorporate DF
into their teaching. Secondly, we could create a platform
for DF ideas and resources based on existing sources such
as Thingiverse and Printables. Additionally, we aim to build
a community of practice in DF to foster collaboration and
support among teachers and DF experts. Finally, we need
to communicate with school owners to secure financial and
structural resources for our undertaking. By taking these steps,
we hope to effectively address the challenges highlighted
by the teachers and successfully integrate DF into A&C
education. The emergent themes in the fantasy phase inspire
our work to develop interdisciplinary STEAM projects that
incorporate diverse DF technologies.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Blikstein, “Digital fabrication and ‘making’in education: The democ-
ratization of invention,” FabLabs: Of machines, makers and inventors,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–21, 2013.
[2] S. Hoebeke, I. Strand, and P. Haakonsen, “Programming as a New Cre-
ative Material in Art and Design Education,” Techne serien - Forskning
i sl¨ojdpedagogik och sl¨ojdvetenskap, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 233–240, Aug.
2021.
[3] Anders Dahlbom, “Eva breaks the traditions with craftsmanship
and
programming
(Swedish
text),”
Jan.
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://skolvarlden.se/artiklar/eva-bryter-traditionerna-med-
slojd-och-programmering
[4] M. J. Song, “The application of digital fabrication technologies to
the art and design curriculum in a teacher preparation program:
a case study,” International Journal of Technology and Design
Education, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 687–707, Sep. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10798-019-09524-6
[5] S. Stigberg, D. Blauhut, and F. F. Said, “Digital Fabrication in Arts and
Crafts Education: A critical review,” in 25th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2023, p. in
print.
[6] L. Vavik, S. Andersland, T. E. Arnesen, T. Arnesen, M. Espeland,
I. Flatøy, I. Grønsdal, P. Fadnes, S. Kjetil, and G. A. Tuset, “School
subjects survey 2009: Education, school subjects and technology (Nor-
wegian text),” Høgskolen Stord/Haugesund, vol. Vol. 2010/1, 2010.
[7] K. Sømoe, “Arts and crafts – subject or interdisciplinary wrong?
(Norwegian),” FormAkademisk, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1–15, 2013.
[8] L.
F.
Ettinger,
“Art
Education
and
Computing:
Build-
ing
a
Perspective,”
Studies
in
Art
Education,
vol.
30,
no.
1,
pp.
53–62,
Oct.
1988.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00393541.1988.11650702
[9] A.
Marner
and
H.
¨Ortegren,
“Digitala
medier
i
bild¨amnet
:
m¨oten
och
sp¨anningar.”
Institutionen
f¨or
estetiska
¨amnen.
N¨atverket f¨or ¨amnesdidaktik, 2013, pp. 28–49. [Online]. Available:
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:umu:diva-71269
[10] R. Guillard-Patton and M. Buffington, “Keeping up with our students:
The evolution of technology and standards in art education,” Arts
Education Policy Review, vol. 117, pp. 1–9, May 2016.
[11] E.
M.
Delacruz,
“Art
Education
Aims
in
the
Age
of
New
Media:
Moving
Toward
Global
Civil
Society,”
Art
Education,
vol.
62,
no.
5,
pp.
13–18,
Sep.
2009.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00043125.2009.11519032
[12] G. Hubbard and D. Greh, “Integrating computing into art education:
A progress report,” Art education, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 18–24, 1991,
publisher: Taylor & Francis.
[13] N. M¨ullert and R. Jungk, “Future Workshops: How to create desirable
futures,” London, United Kingdom: Institute for Social Inventions, 1987.
[14] R. V. V. Vidal, “The future workshop: Democratic problem solving,”
Economic analysis working papers, vol. 5, no. 4, p. 21, 2006, publisher:
Citeseer.
[15] I. Forsler, “Imaginary classrooms : Exploring new directions in visual
art education through future workshops in teacher training,” IMAG,
vol. 11, pp. 24–29, 2021, publisher: InSEA Publications. [Online].
Available: http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:sh:diva-46144
[16] L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld, B. J. Ipsen, A. L. Tamborg, J. Dreyøe, B. B.
Allsopp, and M. Misfeldt, “Modes of Teacher Participation in the
Digitalization of School,” Designs for Learning, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.
63–71, 2019, publisher: Stockholm University Press ERIC Number:
EJ1235543. [Online]. Available: https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1235543
[17] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Thematic analysis,” in APA handbook of
research methods in psychology, Vol 2: Research designs: Quantitative,
qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological, ser. APA handbooks
in psychology®.
Washington, DC, US: American Psychological
Association, 2012, pp. 57–71.
[18] I. S. Milara, K. Pitk¨anen, A. Niva, M. Iwata, J. Laru, and J. Riekki,
“The STEAM Path: Building a Community of Practice for Local
Schools around STEAM and Digital Fabrication,” in Proceedings of the
FabLearn Europe 2019 Conference, ser. FabLearn Europe ’19.
New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 1–3.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

