Designing an Information Technology Based Voting Solution 
for Persons with Visual Impairment in Sri Lanka 
Madhuka De Silva, Thushani Weerasinghe, Kapila Dias 
University of Colombo School of Computing 
University of Colombo 
Colombo, Sri Lanka 
desilvamadhuka@gmail.com, taw@ucsc.cmb.ac.lk, gkad@ucsc.cmb.ac.lk 
 
Abstract— Sri Lanka currently uses a paper-based voting 
system for conducting elections. In this system, voters with 
special needs have to depend on the assistance of another to 
mark the vote. Addressing this issue, the present study used 
the design science approach and attempted to create a voting 
solution for visually impaired voters. First, two focus group 
interviews were held with a sample group of visually impaired 
individuals with voting rights and election-related authorities 
and professionals. Finding of this initial data gathering 
identified two categories of interactions: (1) interactions for 
navigating and (2) interactions for selecting. Considering the 
capabilities and preferences of the sample, a prototype was 
designed together with the sample of visually impaired voters 
at a design workshop. The interfaces and design features were 
based on multimodality and universal design guidelines. Thus, 
two interfaces were designed using touch interfaces and 
buttons. A prototype with the interfaces was subjected to user 
evaluation. Feedback received for the prototype could be 
interpreted as that the voters with visual impairment prefer to 
use this multimodal voting solution if it is further improved in 
terms of layouts in the interfaces and flow of the interactions. 
Keywords-Electronic 
Voting; 
Visual 
Impairment; 
Accessibility; Privacy; Usability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Around 253 million people in the world live with vision 
impairment [1]. In Sri Lanka, about a million people with 
visual impairment have the right to vote, which is 5.1% out 
of the total population [2]. Persons with disabilities face 
immense challenges in realizing their voting rights despite 
the 
vast 
technological 
advancements 
taking 
place.  
Internationally, rapid progress is being made to ensure the 
persons with visual disabilities are given equal opportunities 
to exercise their democratic right of voting. For instance, 
United States has passed Help America Vote Act 
2000(HAVA Act) [3], and Section 49N in The Conduct of 
Elections Rules, 1961 of India [4], has provided provisions 
to enable voters with different disabilities to vote. However, 
according to Elections (Special Provisions) Act [5] in Sri 
Lanka, it is allowed for a proven person with a disability (an 
eligible individual adhering to the stated requirements by the 
act) to be accompanied by someone who is capable of 
viewing a ballot paper, and mark the choice upon the 
preference of the voter [6]. Given that everyone deserves to 
vote privately and independently, it is doubtful that the 
prevailing polling process in Sri Lanka caters to the 
requirements of visually impaired voters. Skepticism arises 
as to whether the assisting personnel will maintain the 
secrecy of the vote and whether he will not breach the 
visually impaired voter’s trust in casting the vote. 
This research is an approach to design and propose an 
effective voting solution with the intention of addressing the 
difficulties faced by voters with visual impairments in Sri 
Lanka. The research question aimed to solve by this research 
is, “What are the systems and interface design features 
required to provide a fruitful effective voting experience for 
the Sri Lankans with visual impairment?”. These features 
should enable an independent and accessible vote, which 
supports to maintain the secrecy of the vote. 
Initially, interviews were conducted with the aim of 
understanding the context and requirements. Results from 
the interviews were analyzed. Subsequently, a set of design 
features were listed based on the knowledge which was 
obtained by the interviews conducted and the previously 
conducted literature review [7]. Afterward, a prototype was 
created, which is capable of demonstrating the listed design 
features. Moreover, a design workshop was conducted using 
the prototype to obtain feedback and suggestions from the 
voters with visual impairment. The results from the design 
workshop were used to improve the design features further. 
The remaining sections of the paper are organized as follows. 
Section II explains how the existing voting systems were 
analyzed in order to identify voting design features that 
support voters with visual impairment. Section III describes 
how the research was conducted while Section IV analyses 
the data and presents the results. Section V, VI and VII 
describes the solution design and results of the design 
workshop. Section VIII discusses the results and finally, 
Section IX concludes this paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
Various voting systems are utilized all over the world and 
a preliminary study was conducted through a literature 
review on the existing voting systems that support voters 
with visual impairment [7]. Table I shows the summary of 
the review conducted.  
Paper-based voting systems provide advantages such that 
ease of understanding for the voter and default verification of 
accuracy due to the vote being directly caste by the voter. 
These systems are still being used by different countries even 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

though they have not supported individuals who have visual 
impairments for independent voting [8] unless optical 
scanning or tactile methods are incorporated. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF REVIEW OF EXISTING VOTING SYSTEMS 
Topic 
Findings 
Design features 
relevant to 
accessibility 
Tactile features 
• 
Buttons 
• 
Rotation dials 
• 
Sleeves with punched holes 
Touch features 
• 
Single/Double tap 
• 
Slide rule 
Multimodal features 
• 
Combining tactile, touch and/or voice 
input 
Design features 
relevant 
to 
privacy 
Security aspect 
• 
Cryptography-based solutions 
Interface aspect 
• 
Accessible interfaces 
• 
Screen off feature 
Design 
methodologies 
Design principles & guidelines 
• 
User Centred Design (UCD)  
• 
Universal Design (UD)  
Evaluation models 
• 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use 
of Technology (UTAUT)  
• 
ISO usability standards 
• 
System Usability Scale (SUS)  
 
Most of the systems provide Braille buttons [9], but 
Braille literacy varies context wise. For instance, in Sri 
Lankan context, according to the statistics reported in 2003, 
71% of visually impaired persons had some sort of schooling 
[10] but most were unable to use the Braille knowledge later 
on in their lives. Further, a study conducted in 2015 revealed 
that only 41% of the individuals who know Braille could use 
it [11]. In this backdrop, promoting Braille ballots is 
unsuccessful and unfair. Thus, it is important to have other 
modes of input and navigation, providing blind voters with 
the flexibility to choose a method they prefer. Catering this 
need, multi-modality concept and the 2nd universal design 
principle of Flexibility in Use [12] has been adhered. One 
such example is Prime III [13], an open source, multimodal 
ballot marking. For a completely blind voter, the accessible 
mode of interaction is the buttons with voice-based 
instructions. However, it has only 90% accuracy within an 
SNR (Signal to Noise Ratio) of 1.44 [14]. Additionally, in 
Prime III, a poll worker has to initiate the voting system and 
let the voter begin the voting process. Thus, it is being 
dependent on the assistance of poll worker while having 
space for voter coercion. Another system that adheres to the 
multimodal concept is Universal ballot design interfaces that 
provide two ballots, ‘Quick ballot’ and ‘EZ ballot’ [15]. In 
EZ ballot design, voting is made accessible to blind voters by 
adding slide rule [16] interaction design feature in the touch 
interface. Evaluations report that this slide rule is less 
familiar to blind voters and is poor unnatural interaction [17]. 
However, EZ ballot also has design issues, such as an 
accidental touch on unintended spaces and spending 
excessive time touching inactive areas due to lack of 
guidance on the touch interface [17]. 
In terms of ensuring the privacy of the vote, the majority 
of voting systems consider it as only a security aspect. Few 
systems (e.g., AVC Edge, AutoMARK VAT) have 
addressed interface level privacy by turning off the screen 
when a blind voter uses the system but the voters are not 
pleased by this feature [9].  
In designing an information system, the best practice is to 
follow the guidelines. However, there is a lack of 
information and available evidence on how voting systems 
were designed. Only a few instances have been reported of 
design methodologies that have been followed. Among those 
voting systems, User-Centered Design (UCD) guidelines and 
Universal Design (UD) guidelines were followed for 
designing features, and System Usability Scale (SUS) has 
been used for evaluating those features more frequently. 
These standards and guidelines are to be applied across large 
domains where “they do not address functional issues since 
they cannot account for the intended users, activities, and 
goals of a product” [18]. Thereby even if using guidelines is 
a proper way to initiate designing a voting system, user 
feedback should be obtained both during the design process 
and after the design is finalized, similar to prototyping 
techniques [18]. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The present research aims to design a solution to support 
blind voters and it falls under the use-inspired design 
science [20]. Design Science is fundamentally a problem-
solving paradigm [19] which has its roots in engineering 
and sciences of the artificial intelligence. The research was 
conducted following a methodology based on the design 
science research process (see Figure 1) by Offermann et al. 
[21]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Research Model 
 
In order to identify and solve the research problem, three 
studies were conducted. Two studies were performed by 
conducting interviews with two different focus groups. The 
results obtained from the initial two studies were used to 
design the ballot interfaces. The final study was based on a 
design workshop, which captured the interactions of 
visually impaired voters by providing a software prototype. 
A. Focus Group Studies 
Focus group interviews were conducted with two 
different groups. One group consisted of individuals from the 
election authority and election professionals. The other group 
consisted of voters with visual impairment. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Under the first focus group, one of the key people 
interviewed was the National Inclusion and Program Advisor 
of IFES (International Foundation for Electoral Systems) of 
Sri Lanka who has more than one year of experience in the 
relevant field. Also, she has worked as an independent 
consultant in disability rights, access, and inclusion for more 
than eleven years. Moreover, Additional Commissioner of 
Elections (Local Authorities) of Sri Lanka was interviewed. 
Semi-structured interview questions were used to obtain 
best-suited and more elaborated responses. 
Later on, a group of voters with visual impairment were 
interviewed with the intention of understanding different 
types of individuals who the voting solution should be 
focused on. A questionnaire was constructed in a structured 
format. Succeeding, an expert evaluation was obtained for 
the questionnaire from the National Inclusion and Program 
Advisor of IFES. Here the information was gathered related 
to demography, level of visual impairment, usage of 
technology-based tools, usage of assistive tools, different 
literacy levels, and opinions on electronic voting. A sample 
group of nine (9) potential voters with visual impairments 
from the Sri Lankan Council for the Blind were selected by 
convenience sampling because reaching blind persons from 
all locations was not feasible. Further, it was convenient for 
the person who faced the interviews to reach a place of 
closer proximity. Before conducting all the interviews, 
consent was obtained from the participants ensuring the 
confidentiality of the information provided. Interview 
transcripts and notes were stored in MS Excel sheets. The 
collected data was analyzed and explained using appropriate 
illustrations. 
B. Conducting a Design Workshop 
After conducting interviews and gaining insights, the 
blind voter’s journey in the voting process was identified as a 
sequence of steps in the proposed system. The solution was 
designed incorporating the identified design features and the 
prototype was created based on the designed solution. The 
design considerations of the prototype were discussed with 
the voters with visual impairments.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND FINDINGS OF FOCUS GROUP STUDIES 
The data collected from the interviews with election team 
(authorities and professionals) and our sample of voters with 
visual impairments were analyzed separately.  
A. Interviews with Election Team 
As explained in Methodology Section, the first set of 
focus group interviews conducted with election authorities 
and election professionals, contributed to understanding 
identifying the laws and procedures to be followed at 
elections and how elections are conducted. Elections in Sri 
Lanka consist of three major consecutive steps: (1) voter 
verification, (2) voting and (3) counting the votes. Voter 
verification takes place in three sub-steps where the polling 
officials check for a valid standard identification card, a valid 
polling card and verify whether the voter has not voted 
previously in the same election by any indelible ink left in 
the little finger. Once the verification is successfully 
completed, the voter is supplied with a ballot paper and is 
allowed to reach the voting precinct. Once the voter reaches 
the precinct, he or she marks the ballot and submits the 
folded ballot paper to the ballot box. Once the voting period 
is over, the counting process takes place and the results are 
announced. Voting in the election procedure is further 
divided into more steps based on the type of the election 
held. There are five types of elections taking place in Sri 
Lanka: 
presidential, 
parliamentary, 
provincial, 
local 
authorities, and referendum. Although several types of 
elections exist, there are only two - main variations among 
the election types: elections that require a vote for a 
particular political party only, and which both political party 
and candidate (preferential voting) required to be voted.  
According to interviews held, there is no report of any 
research conducted for designing a new voting solution, 
which supports voters with visual impairment in Sri Lanka. 
However, all are looking forward to a change from the 
existing paper-based voting system to an electronic voting 
system, in the near future. In terms of supporting the voters 
with visual impairment, their opinion was that a digital 
voting system is the only solution to exercise the equal 
voting rights. Even though the existing law addresses only 
the paper-based voting system, according to election 
officials, actions will be taken to introduce an electronic 
ballot. 
Election authorities expect features to ensure privacy, 
accuracy, and trustworthiness in a general electronic voting 
system. However, for a voting system, which supports voters 
with visual impairment, main concerns are to possess 
features that ensure accessibility and usability. Additionally, 
more features were mentioned, such as the ability to vote in a 
preferred language due to multi-ethnicity in Sri Lanka, 
clearness and preciseness in voting instructions on how to 
vote, a simpler solution that can address a long list of 
political parties and candidates without consuming a 
significant time to vote. 
B. Interviews with Voters with Visual Impairment 
The second set of focus group interviews were conducted 
with voters with visual disabilities. These interviews were 
contributed to identifying the demography, skills, and 
experience. Participant ages were in the range of 18 years to 
67 years (Table II), where the average participant age was 
nearly 42 years (SD:17).  
TABLE II.  
DEMOGRAPHY AND BLIND CONTEXT OF THE FOCUS GROUP 
Demography and blind context 
Age 
(years) 
Gender 
Became blind at 
age (years) 
Blind category 
18 
Male 
Birth 
Total blind 
21 
Male 
7 
Partially blind 
35 
Female 
23 
Partially blind 
37 
Male 
9 
Partially blind 
38 
Male 
Birth 
Total blind 
47 
Female 
43 
Partially blind 
53 
Female 
Birth 
Partially blind 
63 
Female 
Birth 
Partially blind 
67 
Female 
4 
Total blind 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Among the participants, three were totally blind and the 
remaining majority of participants were partially blind or 
have low vision with some slight variations in sight. It is 
observed that the age at which they have started experiencing 
a visual impairment is varied as shown in Table II.  
Among the participants, the majority were literate in 
Braille (Table III) but when their preference of using Braille 
was questioned, 88.8% disliked. The reasons for the dislike 
were described as the continuous touch of Braille which 
causes fatigue in hand muscles, complexity in learning 
braille, and lack of teachers to provide Braille education. 
With the evolvement of new technologies, they prefer more 
to listen than reading in Braille. 
TABLE III.  
BRAILLE LITERACY OF THE FOCUS GROUP 
Strongly knows 
55.5% 
Fairly knows 
11.1% 
Slightly knows 
22.2% 
Does not know 
11.1% 
 
Moreover, experience in using mobile phones or 
Automatic Teller Machines (ATM), is considered a potential 
to use an electronic voting solution with ease implying that 
similar interfaces are incorporated [8]. Thus, participants 
were questioned of whether they have prior experience in 
using digital devices, such as an ATM, a computer, or 
mobile phones as shown in Table IV. All of them had some 
sort of experience in using these devices. Further discussions 
led to the understanding of their familiarity in using inbuilt 
accessibility tools, such as Talkback (by Android), Screen 
readers in computers. 
TABLE IV.  
IT LITERACY OF FOCUS GROUP 
Digital device/equipment 
ATM 
11.1% 
Computer 
22.2% 
Mobile phone with basic features 
44.4% 
Mobile phone with touch interface 
66.6% 
 
Participants were asked what functionalities they have 
used in mobile phones and how they have accessed those 
functionalities as the majority of participants were familiar in 
using mobile phones (Table V).  
TABLE V.  
FUNCTIONALITIES AND INTERACTIONS USED IN MOBILE 
PHONES 
Mobile phone 
functionality 
Interaction 
Percentage 
Calling  
Tap (Single/double tap) 
66.6% 
Slide rule 
33.3% 
Messaging/typing 
Tap (Single/double tap) 
22.2% 
Slide rule 
77.7% 
Play music 
Tap (Single/double tap) 
88.8% 
Slide rule 
11.1% 
Using 
calculator/typing 
Tap (Single/double tap) 
22.2% 
Slide rule 
77.7% 
 
Participants who had prior experience in using 
smartphones were familiar with both interaction types found 
in 
smartphones 
which 
provide 
accessibility: 
Using 
single/double tap, and slide rule [16]. Moreover, usage of 
‘Slide Rule’ was questioned because it was used in a 
previous study to design ballots for voters with visual 
disabilities. It is a one-finger scan and lift finger interaction 
[22]. They preferred slide rule for typing purposes like 
messaging and using a calculator. Moreover, they preferred 
tapping for selecting and navigating purposes like calling and 
playing music. When they were questioned further about 
their preferences, a majority of 83.3% liked the tapping 
(single/double tap) interaction over slide rule interaction. 
Some reasoned out stating that it is since the tap selections 
provide a way to confirm the selection made whereas few 
stated that tap selections felt intuitive and natural. Further, 
some explained that unintended selections are caused when 
the finger is dragged and released (Slide Rule). 
Relevant to using touch interfaces, contradicting opinions 
were 
made 
where 
one 
participant 
mentioned 
the 
inconvenience to scan over the touch screen, which is time-
consuming. Few others had opposing ideas stating that they 
prefer using touch phones because of the inbuilt or 
installable accessibility features. 
Among the participants, 44.4% (Table IV) had the 
experience of using mobile phones with keypads. They 
explained that for navigation in menus, they are using the 
arrow buttons. For dialing numbers or typing messages, they 
memorize the keypad structure and the embossment mark on 
the number five on the keypad supports identifying the key 
locations. Irrespective of the experience of using mobile 
phones which only have keypads (not smartphones), every 
participant explained that it would be better if it is 
affordable. Thus, tactile buttons are used to design the voting 
solution. Two participants stated that a feature should be 
facilitated with the ability to change the color contrast. 
V. 
DESIGN OF THE SOLUTION 
Design of the solution is explained in detail through sub-
divided sections of the voter’s journey as design decisions 
and features, and interaction techniques. 
A. Voter Journey 
The journey of the voter with visual impairment starts 
when the voter wears the headphone as indicated in Figure 
2. Thereafter, the audio instructions are initiated to play. At 
first, the voter is instructed to choose the preferred language. 
After the language selection, the voter is acknowledged 
about the ‘settings’ button by stating the options available 
that can be modified: language preference, audio volume, 
audio speed, and color contrast.  
Succeeding the fact, the system directs the voter to the 
voting instructions. If the voter chooses to listen to the 
voting instructions, an approval from the voter is taken to 
make sure that he/she is ready to vote after playing voting 
instructions. After getting the approval the voting list is 
displayed mentioning the number of political parties/ 
candidates with the number of pages.  
The voter can select the preference by pressing the 
appropriate button and confirm the vote. The system 
acknowledges the voter about the successful completion of 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the voting and requests the voter to replace the headphone. 
If the voter does not select any, the system replays the list 
automatically. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Flow chart of the journey of a voter with visual impairment 
B. Design Decisions and Features 
Table VI summarizes the design decisions and features 
of the suggested voting solution to support voters with 
visual impairment.  
TABLE VI.  
DESIGN FEATURES AND JUSTIFICATIONS 
Design feature  
Justification aligning Universal Design (UD) 
Principles 
Having button 
controls with unique 
features 
 
 
UD Principle 4: Perceptible Information  
Satisfying both sub-principles in UD, buttons are 
with different shapes and colours are used as a 
tactile input because then, it is easily understood 
by persons with visual disabilities by feeling the 
shape of the button. 
Having differently shaped buttons also helps to 
guide the voter with instructions. Shapes and 
colors of the buttons based on the EZ control 
keypad [23]. 
To do a selection 
either of 
 
Press ‘select’  
 
Touch the hole  
UD Principle 2: Flexibility in Use  
Voters are given two methods of doing 
selections/voting. They can choose their preferred 
method.  
Voting by listening to 
the list of political 
parties/candidates and 
press the ‘select’ 
within the given time 
interval 
Principle 3: Simple and Intuitive use 
Principle 6: Low Physical Effort  
Here the complexity of voting is maintained by 
the simple press of a button while listening to 
audio clips. Also, it does not require high 
physical effort.  
Voting by single tap/ 
double tap on the 
touch interface  
 
Principle 3: Simple and Intuitive Use 
Voters being familiar with single tap/double tap 
interaction due to their experience in using 
smartphones.  
Tactile sleeve with 
punched holes on top 
of the touch interface 
 
 
Principle 6: Tolerance for Error  
Tactile sleeve acting as guidance for voters that 
would avoid touching unintended areas and less 
prone to errors that were reported in an existing 
voting system, which have touch interfaces [17].  
 
Table VI explains the justifications for these features 
and how the Universal Design guideline has been followed. 
C. Voting Interfaces and Interaction Techniques 
A voting interface with both touch and buttons was 
designed based on the results obtained from the initial focus 
group interviews and previous literature review study 
(Figure 3). However, the findings of the interviews 
informed that there was a difficulty of scanning the whole 
touch screen in terms of using touch phones. Voting systems 
previously designed based on touch interfaces have also 
reported many issues due to the accidental touch [17]. Thus, 
a tactile sleeve was designed to act as guidance as shown in 
Figure 3. It shows that a tactile transparent sleeve with holes 
placed on top of the touch interface. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Voting interface with the tactile sleeve 
 
As shown in Figure 3, the voter with visual impairment 
can vote using either the touch interface or using the 
buttons. 
1) Using Touch Interface: In the touch interface, tap 
interactions on the holes in the tactile sleeve can be 
performed for both navigation and selection. The political 
parties or the candidates are listed on the voting page. When 
a hole is tapped once, the relevant political party/candidate 
is announced. If the voter requires to vote, the relevant hole 
has to be double tapped. Hense, the voter is asked to 
confirm the vote by tapping twice again throughout the 
audio instructions. Here, the transparent sleeve with holes is 
used as a guide to reduce the inconvenience of touching 
unintended areas and screen areas that have no response. 
2) Using Button Interface: In the button interface, next 
option, previous option, next page, previous page, and 
settings buttons are used for navigation and select button 
(circular green) is used for selections as shown in Figure 3. 
Next option button and previous option button are used to 
navigate the previous and next political party/candidate.  
The political parties or the candidates are announced 
through 
audio 
recordings. 
After 
each 
political 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

party/candidate, there is a pause allowing the voters to cast 
their vote. If the voter prefers the particular political 
party/candidate, the voter should press the green circular 
button as indicated in Figure 3. Otherwise, the voter can 
wait till the system announces the next political 
party/candidate or press the yellow triangular button on the 
bottom right side. After a voter presses the green circular 
button, the voter is asked to confirm the vote by again 
pressing the same button. 
VI. 
DESIGN WORKSHOP 
The design workshop was conducted to obtain user 
feedback on the suggested voting interfaces by providing a 
prototype. 
A. Procedure 
A sample of eight persons was selected. There were four 
representing Sri Lankan blind council and four students 
from the University of Colombo in the sample. A pre-survey 
questionnaire was answered by the participants. Further, a 
set of six activities were conducted where each participant 
was allowed to attempt each activity a maximum of three 
times. After three attempts the participant was instructed to 
carry out the next activity. Observations were noted down 
during the activities and feedback was obtained after each 
activity. However, after obtaining the consensus of the 
participants, video recording was carried out for further 
study of observations. 
B. Prototype 
The prototype was built using MS PowerPoint slides to 
show the necessary content, a laptop with a touch interface, 
a tactile sleeve made out of rigifoam, rubber buttons and 
wireless headphone to play audio instructions as shown in 
Figure 4.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. The prototype of the voting interface 
 
The voting list was constructed using country names and 
the symbols show the animals used by the countries to 
represent their nation. A sample set of audio instructions 
were recorded by three voices and was subjected to expert 
evaluation by a voice expert from Sri Lankan Broadcasting 
Corporation. Furthermore, before using the voice clips in 
the prototype, the necessary modifications were made in the 
instructions considering how the speakers should convey the 
instructions. Figure 4 shows how the tactile sleeve appears 
when the screen is off. The feedback and observations of 
using the prototype are identified in three categories: touch 
interface with the tactile sleeve, button interface, and audio 
instructions.  
C. Participants 
Participant’s ages were in the range of 20 years to 74 
years (Table VIII), where the average participant age was 
around 40 years (SD:20).  
TABLE VII.  
DEMOGRAPHY AND BLIND CONTEXT OF FOCUS GROUP 
Demography and blind context 
Age 
(years) 
Gender 
Became 
blind at 
age 
(years) 
Blind 
category 
Smartphone 
experience 
Single 
tap/double 
tap vs 
Slide rule 
20 
Female 
Birth 
Total blind 
Yes 
Tap  
25 
Male 
10 
Total blind 
Yes 
Slide rule 
25 
Female 
15 
Total blind 
Yes 
Tap 
28 
Male 
Birth 
Partially 
blind 
Yes 
Tap 
33 
Male 
17 
Partially 
blind 
Yes 
Tap 
47 
Female 
43 
Partially 
blind 
Yes 
Tap 
67 
Female 
4 
Total blind 
Yes 
Tap 
74 
Male 
10 
Total blind 
Yes 
Tap 
 
Among the participants, three participants were partially 
blind and the remaining majority of participants were totally 
blind. All the participants had the experience of using 
smartphones. 
VII. RESULTS AND FINDINGS OF DESIGN WORKSHOP 
The results have been analyzed to find the effectiveness of 
button and touch interactions and the audio instructions.  
A. Button Interface:  
In the first activity, the participants were instructed to 
find the buttons one by one. Figure 5 shows how the 
participants were able to locate the buttons. All the 
participants were able to recognize the ‘select’ button, ‘next’ 
button, and ‘previous’ button in their first attempt. 
However, the ‘next page’ button and ‘previous page’ 
buttons were not identified by 88% of the participants in any 
of the attempts. Also, only 25% of the participants were able 
to identify the ‘settings’ button in the first attempt and the 
remaining participants were able to identify it at the second 
attempt. Most of the participants who identified the 
‘settings’ button in the second attempt, pressed the ‘next 
page’ button mistakenly in the first attempt. One of the 
participants stated that ‘I did not think that this device has 
that much length. So, I did not take my hand that far’. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

  
 
 
Figure. 5 How the focus group identified buttons 
 
Another participant with partial blindness mentioned that 
contrast of yellow color of triangular buttons and green 
color of the circular button is not sufficient and that it 
confuses the user.  
The second activity was to identify the function of the 
buttons. The button functions were described to the 
participants and they were asked to press the correct button 
relevant to a particular function. For instance, in order to 
identify the ‘settings’ button, the participants were 
instructed “Press the button required to navigate to Settings” 
The instructions were provided to try out all the buttons: 
select, next, previous, next page, previous page, and 
settings. All the participants were able to identify the 
‘select’ button and the ‘settings’ button at the first attempt 
but several attempts were made to identify other buttons as 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. How the focus group identified functions of the buttons 
 
63% of the participants could not figure out the ‘next’ 
button in the first attempt. It was observed that they pressed 
the ‘previous’ button when they were asked to press the 
‘next’ button. Even though they made several attempts to 
identify the ‘next’ button, they easily identified the 
‘previous’ button (triangular button on the bottom left). 
 Only 25% of the participants were able to identify the 
‘next page’ button and the ‘previous page’ button. The 
remaining 75% of the participants pressed the ‘next’ and 
‘previous’ button instead of pressing ‘next page’ and 
‘previous page’ buttons respectively. Some participants 
stated that having pages and navigating through pages is 
uneasy for them.  
Some stated that the space between buttons should be 
increased and few suggested that the button shapes can be 
easily identified if the button sizes are reduced up to an 
extent. The majority stated that shapes are unique and that 
they can figure out what they are while few suggested that it 
would be better to have a mark on the triangular shaped 
buttons to differentiate between previous and next functions. 
B. Touch interface with the tactile sleeve:  
In the third activity, the participants attempted to 
identify and touch the five holes on the tactile sleeve from 
the bottom to the top (1st hole, 2nd hole, 3rd hole, 4th hole, 5th 
hole). All the holes were identified by the participants but 
the attempts at which the holes were identified varied 
slightly as shown in Figure 7.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. How the focus group identified holes in sequential order 
 
All the participants identified the 2nd, 3rd and 5th hole at 
the first attempt. 75% of the participants identified the 1st 
hole in the first attempt but 25% identified it in the second 
attempt. One of the participants who could not attempt 
correctly in the first attempt stated that “I could not figure 
out where the holes started”. 
The fourth activity was to identify and touch the holes in 
a random order (2nd hole, 4th hole, 3rd hole, 5th hole, 1st hole). 
Similarly, as in Activity 3, the participants were able to 
identify all the holes in different attempts. All the 
participants were able to identify the 5th hole or the last hole. 
It was noted that the 4th hole was identified correctly in 
several attempts as in Figure 8 but identifying the 3rd hole 
showed a greater success. The participants explained that 
identifying 3rd hole was easier since they knew where the 4th 
hole was located. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 8 How the focus group identified holes in random order 
 
Similar to the results of the third activity, the participants 
responded commenting that the starting hole of the device 
was not easily identifiable. 
In the fifth activity, the participants attempted to vote for 
the instructed political party. The objective behind this 
activity was to identify their ability to perform single tap 
and double tap with the touch interface as shown in Figure 
9. Here, the participants were asked, ‘What is the political 
party represented by the 1st hole?”. 
They are expected to perform a single tap on the 1st hole, 
which resulted in playing an audio clip that announced the 
political party represented by it. Only 50% were able to do a 
single tap correctly at the first attempt while 12.5% were 
unable to perform.  It was observed that they performed a 
double tap instead of a single tap. 
Thereafter, the participants were asked to vote the same 
political party and they were expected to double tap to vote. 
This was successfully performed by all participants at their 
first attempt. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. How focus group performed interactions with the touch interface 
 
It was observed that all the participants were having the 
grip on the device by their left hand and were pressing the 
buttons only with their right hand. The same observation 
was made in how they used the tactile sleeve. 
C. Audio instructions  
Finally, it was required to find a suitable time interval, 
which acts as the maximum waiting time for a voter’s 
response to a given audio instruction. For this purpose, as 
the sixth activity, the participants were asked to press the 
‘select’ button when a particular political party is played by 
the audio clips. These clips were played with 3 seconds, 4 
seconds and 5 seconds time intervals.  
 
 
 
Figure 10. How the focus group performed at different time intervals for 
response time 
 
All the participants were able to vote within 4 seconds 
and 5 seconds time intervals in the first attempt but only 
62% were able to vote within 3 seconds time interval in the 
first attempt (Figure 10). From the feedback received, 62% 
mentioned that 3 seconds were sufficient but remaining 
stated that at least 4 seconds time interval is required. 
D. Preferences  
Participants were asked to choose their preference 
between the two methods of suggested voting  
 
 
 
Figure 11. Participant preference on using the two methods and their blind 
category (percentage wise) 
 
It was observed that the partial blind voters preferred 
more in using the touch interface with the sleeve and total 
blind voters preferred more in using buttons interface (see 
Figure 11). Participants who preferred the touch interface 
explained that it helped them to touch the appropriate places 
without having to touch the whole screen. Participants with 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

total blindness suggested that the touch interface design can 
be further improved if some guidance is presented to track 
the holes instead of having to guess or remember the 
locations of the holes. It was observed that participants 
required more space on the tactile sleeve without buttons, 
where they can rest their hand. It was stated that the sizes of 
the holes are sufficient but the space between holes required 
to be increased. Two participants stated that having five 
holes is familiar to them and another participant stated, “it is 
not hard to identify 5 holes. 5 is easy. I think I can figure out 
even more”. 
VIII. DISCUSSION 
From the interviews conducted with voters with visual 
impairment, it was understood that almost everyone had 
some sort of experience in using mobile phones. However, 
their experience in using different types of mobile phones 
varied. The majority (66%) had the experience of using 
smartphones but there were persons who had only the 
experience of using a basic mobile phone with buttons or 
keypads. Thus, in order to interact with the voting system, 
voters should be provided with several modes such that they 
will choose the most familiar mode, which is bringing in the 
multimodality concept for voting. The availability of more 
than one way to navigate or use the system is 
accommodating the 2nd Universal Design principle of 
Flexibility in Use [12]. Few systems are designed based on 
this concept whereas certain challenges remain that needs to 
be addressed. As mentioned earlier in the introduction 
section, voice-based voting is claimed accurate only within 
certain environments with respect to sound distortions. 
Thus, it leads to the discussion of tactile (using buttons) 
voting and touch-based voting.  
Tactile voting is facilitated by a button interface, which 
has buttons in different shapes that are uniquely identifiable 
in different locations satisfying the underlying 4th universal 
design principle of Perceptible Information [12]. Button 
shapes and colors were designed similar to the EZ control 
keypad, which is used by some existing voting systems as 
an assistive tool [23].  Based on the evaluation and feedback 
by the focus group users of the design workshop it was 
discovered that colors have to be refined because some blind 
persons have difficulties with respect to color contrast. 
Additionally, this shows that solely depending on color is 
also not sufficient. Thus, different shapes were used to 
improve the uniqueness of the buttons. According to the 
prototype results, ‘next’ and ‘previous’ buttons were 
identified by trial and error even after providing 
instructions. Thus, those buttons should be placed together, 
giving a natural intuitive feeling of going up and down 
rather than placing on the right hand. Although it was 
attempted to make the buttons easily identifiable by keeping 
the buttons in different locations, results showed it was 
inconvenient for the blind voters. For an instance ‘settings’ 
button was far away for the participant to approach. Thus, 
buttons should be placed at close proximity. Next page and 
previous page buttons made less sense to the participants. 
They considered the ‘next’ button as ‘next page’ and 
‘previous’ button as ‘previous page’ button. Instead of 
going through pages, the suggested approach is to consider a 
single page, which can be scrolled down from ‘next’ option 
after every five political parties/candidates. This is more 
intuitive as it is more similar to the paper-based voting, 
where only a single long ballot paper is provided for voting 
in the Sri Lankan context. In existing voting systems with 
touch interfaces [17] some inefficiencies were reported and 
identified as in the literature: accidental touch, vote-
changing errors, unfamiliar touch interaction, tapping 
inactive areas. These inefficiencies can be reduced by 
allowing voters to reach only the active areas in the touch 
interface by the support of a transparent tactile sleeve with 
holes aligned with voting options. Thus, to mark the 
preference, the voter can listen to the voting list announced 
via the audio sequentially and vote for the desired by 
pressing button controls or tapping on the screen. Prototype 
evaluation results informed that users are capable and prefer 
to use the tactile sleeve. However, it was observed that some 
participants used trial and error in tracking the holes. Thus, 
improvements have to be made by including a feature as a 
guide to track the holes, so that they do not require to 
remember the holes or guess.  
In the present study, in order to interact with the touch 
interface, tapping method was used instead of ‘Slide rule’ 
[16]. The slide rule was not considered since it could be less 
natural for blind voters [17]. This consideration confirmed 
the findings of the interview and the workshop pre-survey. 
Even though a single tap is performed when using 
smartphones to listen to a description, prototype results 
showed that majority of the blind persons are familiar with 
double tap more than a single tap. But there were also some 
participants who were familiar with a single tap gesture. 
Thus, in order to listen to a description or make any kind of 
selection (selecting settings options, vote, confirm, etc.) tap 
can be allowed, where no restriction is placed. As in here, 
after any tap gesture (single or double), a description of the 
selected area is described and the voter is asked to tap 
(single or double) again if it is required to be selected. 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The focus group studies with authorities ensured that 
there is a necessity of having an accessible voting solution 
designed which supports the persons with visual impairment 
in their voting process. Henceforth, it was reported that no 
research has been conducted in Sri Lanka with regard to this 
requirement.  
The focus group study with the sample of voters with 
visual impairment showed that they are familiar with the 
touch interfaces as they have experience in using 
smartphones. Equally, some showed their interest in using 
keypads. These findings resulted in designing a multimodal 
voting solution incorporated with Universal Design 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

principles. The prototype was tested through a design 
workshop.  
However, the interfaces were tested only for the voting 
step and no other steps such as language selection, adjusting 
settings, etc. Also, the full comprehensive system was not 
developed in this stage but has to be created after making 
necessary improvements reported in this paper. After 
implementing a full solution, comprehensive evaluation 
method should be used such as System Usability Scale or 
following ISO Usability Standards. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
“Vision impairment and blindness,” World Health 
Organization, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment. [Accessed: 
10-Jan-2019]. 
[2] 
Department of Census and Statistics - Government of Sri 
Lanka, “Census of Population and Housing 2012,” 2012. 
[3] 
“Help America Vote Act,” US Election Assistance 
Commission. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.eac.gov/about/help-america-vote-act/. 
[Accessed: 10-Jan-2019]. 
[4] 
“The Conduct of Elections Rules,” Indian Elections 
Commission, 1961. [Online]. Available: 
https://indiankanoon.org/doc/197923052/. [Accessed: 10-
Jan-2019]. 
[5] 
Sri Lanka - Elections (Special Provisions) Act, No. 28 of 
2011. Sri Lanka, 2011. 
[6] 
“Blind Can Cast Their Vote,” Sunday Leader, 2013. 
[7] 
M. De Silva, T. Weerasinghe, and K. Dias, “A Review on 
Design Features of Electronic Voting Systems supporting 
Voters with Visual Impairment,” International Journal of 
Software Engineering and Applications, in press. 
[8] 
D. P. Tokaji, “The Paperless Chase: Electronic Voting 
and Democratic Values,” Fordham Law, vol. 73, no. 4, 
2004. 
[9] 
D. Burton and M. Uslan, “Cast a Vote by Yourself,” 
2002. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.afb.org/afbpress/pubnew.asp?DocID=aw0306
03. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2019]. 
[10] 
R. Karunaratne, “Providing a good education to blind 
students in your country - Why and how?,” 
Sundaytimes.lk, 2008. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.sundaytimes.lk/081005/Plus/sundaytimesplus
_17.html. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2019]. 
[11] 
D. Weerakkody, “DAISY Implementation in Sri Lanka,” 
Dinf.ne.jp. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.dinf.ne.jp/doc/english/resource/srilanka.html. 
[Accessed: 10-Jan-2019]. 
[12] 
B. R. Connell et al., “The Principles of Universal 
Design,” 1997. [Online]. Available: 
https://projects.ncsu.edu/design/cud/about_ud/udprinciple
stext.htm. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2019]. 
[13] 
J. E. Gilbert et al., “Universal access in e-voting for the 
blind,” Universal Access in the Information Society, vol. 
9, no. 4, pp. 357–365, 2010. 
[14] 
F. Jackson, A. Solomon, K. McMullen, and J. E. Gilbert, 
“To Start Voting, Say Vote: Establishing a Threshold for 
Ambient Noise for a Speech Recognition Voting System,” 
Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, no. Ahfe, pp. 5512–5518, 
2015. 
[15] 
S. Lee, X. Xiong, L. E. Yilin, and J. Sanford, “EZ ballot 
with multimodal inputs and outputs,” Proceedings of the 
14th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on 
Computers and accessibility - ASSETS ’12, p. 215, 2012. 
[16] 
S. K. Kane, J. P. Bigham, and J. O. Wobbrock, “Slide 
Rule: Making mobile touch screens accessible to blind 
people using multi-touch interaction techniques,” 
Proceedings of the 10th international ACM SIGACCESS 
conference on Computers and accessibility (Assets ’08), 
pp. 73–80, 2008. 
[17] 
S. Lee, “Designing Ballot Interfaces for Voters with 
Vision Disabilities,” CHI EA ’14 CHI ’14 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 
933–938, 2014. 
[18] 
S. J. Laskowski, M. Autry, J. Cugini, W. Killam, and J. 
Yen, “Improving the usability and accessibility of voting 
systems and products,” NIST Special Publication 500-
256, no. 202, pp. 1–92, 2004. 
[19] 
P. Antonelli, R. Mathew, A. Hevner, S. Chatterjee, and I. 
Series, “Design Science Research in Information 
Systems,” pp. 9–23, 2010. 
[20] 
T. C. Reeves, J. Herrington, and R. Oliver, “Design 
Research: A Socially Responsible Approach to 
Instructional Technology Research in Higher Education,” 
Journal of Computing in Higher Education, vol. 16, no. 2, 
pp. 96–115, 2005. 
[21] 
P. Offermann and E. R. Platz, “Outline of a Design 
Science Research Process,” 2009. 
[22] 
S. “Tina” Lee, Y. E. Liu, L. Ruzic, and J. Sanford, 
“Universal Design Ballot Interfaces on Voting 
Performance and Satisfaction of Voters with and without 
Vision Loss,” Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16, pp. 
4861–4871, 2016. 
[23] 
“EZ Access,” National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.trace.umd.edu/ez. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2019].
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

