Luminance Contrast Influences Reaction Time in Young and Older Adults 
 
Patrick J. Grabowski and Andrea H. Mason 
Department of Kinesiology 
University of Wisconsin-Madison 
Madison, WI, U.S.A. 
pgrabowski@wisc.edu, amason@education.wisc.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Age-specific design principles for three dimensional 
virtual environment systems are sparse.  Given that 
sensorimotor control systems change across the lifespan, 
understanding age differences in motor performance within 
virtual environments is crucial to designing effective, usable 
interfaces.  This paper investigates the effect of luminance 
contrast level on reaction time to a visual stimulus in both 
young and senior adults.  Results indicate that young adults 
have faster reaction times than seniors, but both groups 
improved reaction times with increasing luminance contrast of 
the target.  Young adults improved at lower levels of contrast 
than seniors.  Implications for age-specific design of virtual 
environments are discussed. 
Keywords- virtual environment; aging; motor control; reach 
to grasp; luminance contrast 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aging of our population presents a number of 
challenges for the coming decades.  In particular, aging 
brings about potential loss of an individual’s function due to 
disease, injury, or the degenerative nature of aging itself.  
This results in significant burden on caregivers, healthcare 
systems, and economies.  For example, the aging of the 
United States’ population is the driving factor behind a 
predicted 
300% 
increase 
in 
medical 
spending 
on 
cardiovascular diseases (i.e., coronary heart disease and 
stroke, among others) by the year 2030 [1].  One potential 
intervention for performance enhancement and rehabilitation 
of elderly individuals involves the development of computer-
based technologies designed as adjuncts to traditional 
intervention methods. Specifically, three-dimensional (3D) 
virtual environments (VE) have been identified as systems 
with good potential to serve in these types of applications [2, 
3].    
The ultimate purpose of VEs is to provide the user with a 
computer-based tool in which a variety of common and 
novel manipulative, cognitive, and exploratory activities can 
be performed easily and efficiently.  Applications of such 
technology often target younger users, such as surgical 
training and flight simulation [4, 5].  A much smaller number 
of applications address special populations of elderly.  For 
example, VEs designed in various formats assist individuals 
in rehabilitation after stroke, including training of obstacle 
avoidance during walking, and enhancement of driving skills 
[6-8].   
While the application of this technology broadens, 
authors continue to point out distinct weaknesses of virtual 
environments [2, 3, 9].  First, cost-effectiveness remains 
problematic, as many systems employ extensive computing 
resources and require technical expertise to run.  VEs also 
typically utilize complex visual graphics, a trait inherent in 
the design of programs targeting young users.  This increases 
the overall cost of production, and these visually rich 
displays also have the potential to be overly distracting, 
hampering motor performance in older individuals and 
producing discomfort or even nausea (i.e., cybersickness) 
[3].  While cost and comfort remain problematic, the 
foremost underlying barrier to implementation of VEs into 
real-world applications for the general population continues 
to be an incomplete understanding of the human 
sensorimotor system [10, 11].  When one considers that this 
system changes across the lifespan, this barrier becomes 
further complicated.  Indeed, the sensorimotor performance 
of older individuals is not equivalent to that of the younger 
users targeted in most 3D computer applications.  Therefore, 
the purpose of this paper is to provide information about the 
age-associated use of specific visual information in virtual 
environments.  Background information will be presented, 
followed by a description of the experimental methodology.  
Results will then be reviewed followed by a discussion of 
their significance and relevance to future work. 
A. Human computer interaction across the lifespan in 3D 
environments  
Evidence of age-related differences in performance 
between young and older adults indicates disparities in 
reactions to environmental immersion, usage of input 
devices, size estimation ability, and navigational skills (for 
review see [12]).  While these studies indicate a need for 
age-specific design principles, very little knowledge 
regarding sensorimotor control in VEs exists.  Currently, the 
International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human 
Factors leaves the explanation of age-related differences in 
virtual environments to a two sentence description 
recommending that equipment be tailored to physically fit 
the smaller frames of children, and for designers to take into 
consideration the changes in sensory and motor functions of 
the elderly [13]. These vague recommendations clearly show 
that evidence on which to base age-specific design is lacking, 
and this lack of guidance leaves a significant gap in scientific 
knowledge.  Because the human sensorimotor system 
changes naturally across the lifespan, such information is 
particularly crucial to the age-specific design of VEs. 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Sensorimotor changes across the lifespan 
The human body constantly changes throughout the 
lifespan.  Most physiologic processes begin to decline at a 
rate of 1% per year beginning around age 30, and the 
sensorimotor system is no exception [14]. Both the 
processing of afferent information and the production of 
efferent signals steadily change as a function of age.  
Multiple studies demonstrate physical changes in brain 
tissues, in the excitability of the corticospinal tract and 
anterior horn cells, and in neurotransmitter systems [15-18].  
A loss of neural substrate, including grey and white matter, 
occurs in both the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum [16, 
17].  Tissue changes result in myriad functional changes 
within the central nervous system (CNS).  A general 
deterioration of motor planning capabilities and feed-forward 
anticipatory control arises with aging [19-21].  Along with a 
decrease in planning ability, there also appears to be 
degradation of timing ability and general slowing of central 
processing [22, 23].  Loss of attentional resources also 
contributes to this slowing of central processing [24, 25].  
The CNS re-weights sensory information when one source of 
feedback is compromised and compensates with alternative 
senses through a general systems neuroplasticity effect [26].  
The implication here is important; the result of these 
attentional and processing changes is a decline in the ability 
to integrate multiple sensory modalities causing a relative 
decrease in the use of proprioceptive feedback and an 
increased reliance on vision for motor performance [25, 27, 
28].   
Comprehending the wide variety of physiologic changes 
occurring across the lifespan is important, but the concept of 
visual dominance for motor control in senior adults is 
especially imperative to the design of virtual environments.  
While VEs can recruit multiple senses for interaction, vision 
is the most common by far.  Hence, provision of useful 
visual information for senior adults is extremely important to 
their success as a user group.  While numerous studies 
characterize age-associated changes in visuomotor control, 
human movement is task specific.  Thus, it is necessary to 
study human performance in VE surroundings [29, 30]. 
C. Aging and luminance contrast 
Contrast sensitivity is one important aspect of visual 
function that declines significantly across the lifespan [31].  
Additionally, it has been shown that reaction times to visual 
stimuli, a measure of general processing speed, vary based 
on the luminance contrast of those stimuli for both young 
and senior adults [32].  As reviewed in Section B, the decline 
of motor performance with aging results from the slowing of 
central sensorimotor processing.  Since speed of processing 
varies with contrast level of the visual stimulus, it follows 
that motor performance will as well.  Prior studies of the 
effects of luminance contrast on motor performance of 
young adults in natural environments support this concept 
[33, 34]. The current experiment seeks to extend these results 
by including a senior adult cohort, and by performing the 
experimental task within a virtual environment. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Participants 
This research received approval from the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison 
Social 
and 
Behavioral 
Sciences 
Institutional Review Board under protocol number SE-2009-
0112.  Individuals participated in single experimental 
sessions totaling approximately 30 minutes each.  We 
recruited the young cohort on the UW-Madison campus and 
the senior cohort on campus, throughout the general 
community, and from a local independent living apartment 
complex.  Prior to participating in the study, individuals 
confirmed by self-report that they were healthy, living 
independently, without history of neurologic disease or 
injury, and right-handed.  When a participant met all pre-
screening criteria, s/he signed the informed consent form and 
filled 
out 
the 
General 
Practice 
Physical 
Activity 
Questionnaire, which provides an overall measure of 
functional level [35].  Participants also performed a standard 
visual acuity test using a Snellen chart [36].  Participants 
were required to demonstrate visual acuity (with glasses or 
contact lenses as needed) at a level of 20/40 or better.  This 
represents the legal limit for driving in the State of 
Wisconsin.  Participants then completed a modified version 
of the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) and the Mini-
Cog [37, 38].  Participants were excluded if they experienced 
dizziness on a daily basis or showed evidence of dementia. 
Finally, we assessed computer via a seven point Likert scale 
ranging from “1-no prior experience” to “7-considerable 
experience.” Thirteen participants met the criteria for the 
young adult group, and 13 for the senior adult group (Table 
I).   
TABLE I.  
PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
Group 
Mean 
age (yrs) 
Age 
range 
Male: 
Female 
GPPAQ Activity Level 
Young 
21.2 
19-24 
5:8 
Active 
Senior 
70.7 
60-85 
6:7 
Moderately Active 
 
Of the 13 senior participants sampled, three resided in the 
independent living apartment complex.  No potential 
participants failed to meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Participants received an honorarium of $10 for completing 
the protocol. 
B. Experimental apparatus 
The Wisconsin Virtual Environment (WiscVE) was used 
to complete the experimental protocol (Fig. 1).  The VE 
provides a head-coupled, stereoscopic experience to a single 
individual, allowing the user to grasp and manipulate 
augmented objects.  A VisualEyez (PTI Phoenix, Inc.) 
motion analysis system, connected to a Windows PC 
workstation, captures three-dimensional motion information 
(e.g., movement of the subject’s hand, head and physical 
objects within the environment) for real-time scene  
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B
 
A
 C
 
Figure 1.  Panel A shows the WiscVE apparatus with downward facing 
monitor projecting to the mirror.  Images are reflected up to the user 
wearing stereoscopic LCD shutter goggles, and thus the images appear at 
the level of the actual work surface below.  Panels B and C demonstrate a 
reach to grasp task commonly utilized in this environment.  The hand and 
physical cube are instrumented with light emitting diodes that are tracked 
by the VisualEyez (PTI Phoenix, Inc) system, not shown. 
rendering and off-line kinematic analysis. The VisualEyez 
system monitors the 3D positions of small infrared light 
emitting diodes (LEDs) located on landmarks of interest.  
These landmarks include the tips of the thumb and index 
finger along with the radial styloid at the wrist to demarcate 
the hand.  Objects in the environment are also equipped with 
three LEDs for motion tracking.  Motion information from 
the VisualEyez system transmits on a subnetwork to a scene 
rendering Linux-based PC.  Using the motion capture 
information, the scene is calculated and then rendered (10 ms 
lag time) on a downward facing CRT monitor placed parallel 
to a work surface.  Also parallel to the computer monitor, a 
half-silvered mirror sits midway between the screen and the 
workspace to reflect images upward to the user.  By wearing 
stereoscopic goggles, participants perceive the reflected 
image as if it were a three-dimensional object located in the 
workspace below the mirror.  The environment is located in 
a dedicated room with blackout shades that provide the 
experimenter with good control of ambient room lighting.  
C. Procedure and design 
Participants completed a reach to grasp task, using a 
small wooden cylinder as the target object (3 mm diameter, 
72 mm total height, Fig. 1B and1C).  The visual scene varied 
from a low contrast condition equivalent to the individual’s 
just noticeable difference contrast threshold, to the maximum 
contrast available in the WiscVE.  Additionally, a moderate 
(50%) contrast condition added a third level to this factor 
(Fig. 2).  To determine these settings, participants completed 
a JND contrast threshold test prior to the start of the 
experiment, as per the methods of Tamura, Satoh, Uchida, 
and Furuhata [39].  Briefly, participants sat for five minutes 
at the environment console to allow for dark adaptation.  At 
this point, we instructed participants to begin increasing the 
luminance of the target object and finger representation 
gradually by tapping their index finger on a virtual button.  
Individuals performed this task in a self-  
A
 
B
 
C
 
Figure 2.  The visual scene varied in luminance contrast from A) the just 
noticeable difference threshold, to B) 50% contrast level, to C) 100% 
maximum luminance contrast. 
paced manner until they just perceived the presence of the 
object and their fingertips in the environment.  Each 
participant performed three JND trials, and the average 
luminance value at which they perceived the target and 
finger spheres determined their individual threshold.  
Luminance was controlled using the standard 255-point Red-
Green-Blue (RGB) scale, maintaining equal values for each 
of the three color values, thereby maintaining white 
(achromatic) visual stimuli.  The moderate contrast level was 
calculated by taking the difference between the maximum 
RGB (i.e., 255) and the individual’s JND threshold, dividing 
this by 2, and adding the result to the JND value.  For 
example, a participant that, on average, perceived the target 
and fingers when they reached an RGB level of 21 would 
have a moderate contrast condition set at: ((255-21)/2) + 21 
= 138.  This normalizes the moderate level to the individual.  
Actual luminance values in candela per square meter (cd/m2) 
for the background and stimuli were obtained using a spot 
luminance photometer (Spectra Cine).  JND values ranged 
from twelve to 26 on the RGB scale.  RGB and luminance 
values are listed in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
VISUAL STIMULUS PARAMETERS 
RGB  
(JND-Low) 
c/m2 
RGB (Mod) 
cd/m2 
12 
0.02 
133.5 
23.24 
13 
0.03 
134 
23.49 
14 
0.04 
134.5 
23.74 
15 
0.05 
135 
24.00 
16 
0.05 
135.5 
24.25 
17 
0.06 
136 
24.51 
18 
0.08 
136.5 
24.77 
19 
0.09 
137 
25.03 
20 
0.10 
137.5 
25.29 
21 
0.12 
138 
25.55 
22 
0.14 
138.5 
25.81 
23 
0.15 
139 
26.08 
24 
0.17 
139.5 
26.35 
25 
0.20 
140 
26.62 
26 
0.22 
140.5 
26.89 
RGB (High) 
cd/m2 
 
 
255 
147.34 
 
 
 
The task instructions for this movement were for 
participants to reach to grasp the target object with a 
precision grasp (i.e., thumb and index finger), initiating the 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

movement as quickly as possible after appearance of the 
target.  The reach to grasp progressed in a mid-sagittal plane, 
in line with the middle of the right shoulder.  Subjects started 
from a designated start mark, identified with a tactile cue (a 
small metal cap nut, 8 mm in diameter, 7 mm in height).  
The target object rested 180 mm away from the start mark, 
resulting in a visual eccentricity of approximately 10 degrees 
from midline.  Each trial began with the participant resting 
their hand away from the start mark.  A visual cue, in the 
form of a green circle in the far right corner of the desktop, 
indicated when to move to the start position.  When the 
participant placed their hand in the correct position over the 
start mark, with their thumb and index finger resting together 
in a light pinch grip, the visual cue disappeared.  The system 
requires participants to maintain this position for one second 
prior to the start of a trial, to ensure individuals start from 
complete rest.  Once the one-second rest period had elapsed, 
the system initiated the trial.  To prevent anticipation, the 
presentation of the target object and fingers varied between 
400-800 ms after trial initiation.  Participants then reached 
out to grasp the cylinder, lifting it vertically about 50 mm 
before replacing it on the desktop.  After replacing the 
object, participants moved their hand near the start mark, 
awaiting the visual cue for initiation of the next trial.   
Participants completed three practice trials in each 
condition prior to the start of the experiment.  There were ten 
trials per contrast condition, with a 2 (age group) x 3 
(contrast level) design, for a total of 30 experimental trials 
presented in random order.  These reaction time trials were 
embedded in a series of other experiments reported 
elsewhere. 
D. Dependent measures 
The primary dependent variable of interest was simple 
reaction time (RT).  Subtracting the time point of stimulus 
presentation from the time point of movement onset 
provided the RT results.  Movement onset was defined as the 
point where the fingers had departed from their starting 
position by 5 mm.  This corresponds to the amount of 
displacement needed to depress a key on a standard 
computer keyboard, which is commonly employed in studies 
of RT. 
E. Hypotheses 
Based on prior studies of luminance contrast and reaction 
times, as well as contrast sensitivity and age, the following 
was hypothesized: 
Hypothesis 1: Young adults will have faster reaction 
times than senior adults.   
Hypothesis 2: Both young and senior adults will 
improve their reaction times as luminance contrast 
increases.   
Hypothesis 3: Young adults will improve their 
reaction time at the moderate and high contrast levels, 
seniors only at the highest contrast. 
F. Data analysis 
SPSS (IBM) was used for statistical analysis.  We 
performed a Mann-Whitney U test to analyze group 
difference in computer experience.  Next, an ANOVA with 
post-hoc blocking was used to assess group difference in RT 
controlling for group difference in computer experience.  
Computer experience (3 levels based on Likert responses: 7, 
6, and ≤ 5) was used as the blocking factor.  This allowed 
evaluation of hypothesis 1.  Planned comparisons of contrast 
level within each age group evaluated hypothesis 2 and 3.  
For all results, the a priori alpha level was set at p ≤ 0.05. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Computer experience level was significantly different 
between groups (Young Median = 7, Mode = 7, Senior 
Median = 6, Mode = 6, p = 0.04).  There was a significant 
main effect of age (F1, 20 = 4.55, p = 0.05) controlling for 
computer experience, with young adults having faster 
reaction times (M = 441 ms, SD = 90.92) than senior adults 
(M = 498 ms, SD = 90.45).  The simple effect of contrast 
within each age group appears in Fig. 3.  This shows that for 
young adults, the low contrast reaction time was significantly 
slower than both the moderate and high contrast conditions, 
which did not differ.  For senior adults, the low and moderate 
contrast conditions did not significantly differ, while both the 
low to high and moderate to high mean differences did reach 
statistical significance. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The first important finding is that young adults have 
faster reaction times than senior adults, replicating numerous 
previous studies and confirming hypothesis 1 [22, 32].  
Further, level of computer experience differed between 
groups, but age group differences remained apparent in the 
analysis.  This lends support to the idea that group 
differences are truly related to sensorimotor differences 
between groups, rather than familiarity with technology.  
The data clearly show that reaction times improve for 
both groups with increasing luminance contrast (Fig. 3).  
While young adults improve from low to moderate contrast, 
they do not get further benefit going from moderate to high 
contrast.  Senior adults, on the contrary, improve 
significantly in the high contrast condition, but do not 
improve going from low to moderate.  This confirms 
hypothesis 2 and 3.   
 
Figure 3.  The simple effect of contrast level on reaction times for (A) 
Young adults and (B) Senior adults. 
Previous study of reaction times, contrast, and age 
demonstrated no age group difference in the pattern of 
contrast-mediated reaction time improvement [32].  The 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

results in the current study differ from that finding, and are 
more consistent with the concept that contrast sensitivity 
changes across the lifespan [31].  Accordingly, luminance 
contrast must be accounted for when designing interfaces for 
specific user groups. 
Considering reaction time as a measure of general 
sensorimotor processing speed, and the strong link between 
motor performance and processing speed, these results 
support the idea that improvements in motor performance 
may be realized through the age-specific utilization of 
luminance contrast levels.  It is important to note that while 
young adults achieved their entire performance enhancement 
with only moderate contrast, seniors required the extra 
increase to the high contrast condition to maximize their 
gains (Fig. 3).  This pattern indicates that young adults can 
make better use of lower contrast visual stimuli, having a 
performance ceiling somewhere below the 50% contrast 
level, while senior adults may not have a distinct ceiling 
within the ranges of luminance contrast available in the 
WiscVE.  This concept will require further exploration of 
other VE tasks under varying conditions of luminance 
contrast with more complex kinematic analyses.   
Given the results of the current study, it may be tempting 
to conclude that the highest available contrast should always 
be used for motor tasks performed in virtual environments. 
While further study is needed, it must be recognized that 
high contrast comes at a cost.  First, high luminance contrast, 
by definition, requires that at least one portion of the visual 
scene be presented at maximum luminance.  This could 
potentially lead to eyestrain, limiting the timeframe for 
comfortable use of the VE.  This may be especially 
important for users that are hypersensitive to light.  Second, 
such contrast restrictions limit the color combinations 
available for use.  Strictly speaking, the highest available 
contrast is black and white.  While this may be acceptable in 
certain circumstances, it is not likely to be common.  This is 
especially apparent in the design of VEs for use with young 
adult populations.  To limit this age group to high contrast 
conditions would unnecessarily limit the potential richness of 
the visual display, adding no extra motor control benefit over 
a moderate contrast visual scene. 
Limitations 
A limitation exists with the assessment of visual acuity in 
this study.  The chart used provides a standard measure of 
acuity at a distance of 20 feet, while the experimental task 
occurs within the personal space of the participant.  A 
number of other sophisticated tests of vision exist, gauging 
such functions as depth perception and figure-ground 
discrimination, and may provide valuable information worth 
considering in future studies.  Next, the method of defining 
each individual’s just noticeable difference contrast threshold 
is inherently subjective.  While carefully scripted instructions 
were used to describe the procedure, each individual had to 
interpret the meaning of “just able to perceive,” and this 
introduces a source of error in defining contrast levels.  
Additionally, the low and moderate contrast levels were set 
relative to each individual’s personal contrast threshold, 
while the high contrast condition was set to the limit of the 
environment.  This means that the high contrast condition 
was relatively different for each subject.  However, given the 
narrow range of JND results, the relative differences are 
quite small.  Finally, although every reasonable attempt was 
made to block ambient light from windows in the Human 
Motor Behavior lab, some minimal fluctuation did occur.  
This did not result in any cases of participants reporting a 
change in their ability to perceive the visual scene. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The virtual environment design process must account for 
the age of the targeted user when considering parameters of 
visual scene rendering.  Luminance contrast is one property 
that is easily programmable, and has a clear age-specific 
effect on motor performance.  Younger adults have a wider 
bandwidth of contrast levels that may result in optimum 
sensorimotor performance.  Older adults, on the contrary, 
need higher levels of contrast to experience their maximum 
motor performance benefits.  The exact range is yet to be 
determined for either group, but will be the subject of future 
research.  General VE implications include the use of high 
luminance contrast to improve sensorimotor processing 
speed.  This is an important consideration when targeting 
user groups known to be deficient in speed of processing, 
such as senior adults.  Additionally, increased processing 
speed with high contrast stimuli is likely to improve 
performance when tasks are of particularly high complexity 
or difficulty. This will be further investigated in future 
research as well.  Potential consequences of high contrast 
visual stimuli, such as eyestrain, were not assessed in this 
experiment.  This also warrants further user-centered study, 
and should be carefully considered along with both the 
intended application and the end-user group of any high 
contrast virtual environment display. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank Mr. Drew Rutherford for his valuable 
assistance with experimental design and data collection.  
Thanks to Stephanie Ehle and Nicole Wenman for data 
collection and analysis assistance.  This work was funded by 
the National Science Foundation, grant number 0916119. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. A. Heidenreich, J. G. Trogdon, O. A. Khavjou, et al., 
"Forecasting the Future of Cardiovascular Disease in the 
United States A Policy Statement From the American Heart 
Association," Circulation, vol. 123, 2011, pp. 933-944.  
[2] C. J. Bohil, B. Alicea, and F. A. Biocca, "Virtual reality in 
neuroscience research and therapy," Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 2011.  
[3] A. S. Rizzo and G. J. Kim, "A SWOT analysis of the field of 
virtual 
reality 
rehabilitation 
and 
therapy," 
Presence: 
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, vol. 14, 2005, pp. 
119-146.  
[4] N. E. Seymour, A. G. Gallagher, S. A. Roman, et al., "Virtual 
reality training improves operating room performance: results 
of a randomized, double-blinded study," Ann. Surg., vol. 236, 
2002, pp. 458.  
[5] R. T. Hays, J. W. Jacobs, C. Prince, and E. Salas, "Flight 
simulator training effectiveness: A meta-analysis," Mil. 
Psychol., vol. 4, 1992, pp. 63-74.  
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[6] M. K. Holden, "Virtual environments for motor rehabilitation: 
review," Cyberpsychol Behav., vol. 8, 2005, pp. 187-211.  
[7] L. Liu, B. Watson, and M. Miyazaki, "VR for the elderly: 
quantitative and qualitative differences in performance with a 
driving simulator," CyberPsychology & Behavior, vol. 2, 
1999, pp. 567-576.  
[8] D. L. Jaffe, "Use of virtual reality techniques to train elderly 
people to step over obstacles," in Technology and Persons 
with Disabilities Conference, Los Angeles, CA, 1998.  
[9] K. M. Stanney, R. R. Mourant, and R. S. Kennedy, "Human 
factors issues in virtual environments: A review of the 
literature," Presence, Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 
vol. 7, 1998, pp. 327-351.  
[10] N.I. Durlach and A.S. Mavor, "Virtual reality: Scientific and 
technical challenges." National Academy Press, Washington, 
D.C., 1995.  
[11] P. J. Grabowski and A. H. Mason, "Sensory feedback for 
motor performance in virtual environments across the 
lifespan," in Proceedings of the IADIS International 
Multiconference on Computer Science and Information 
Systems, Rome, Italy, 2011.  
[12] C. Allen R, J. Singer M, P. McDonald D, and E. Cotton J, 
"Age Differences in a Virtual Reality Entertainment 
Environment: a Field Study," Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Annual Meeting Proceedings, vol. 44, 2000, pp. 542-
545.  
[13] W. 
Karwowski 
(Ed.), 
International 
Encyclopedia 
of 
Ergonomics and Human Factors. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 
2006.  
[14] L. J. Schut, "Motor system changes in the aging brain: what is 
normal and what is not," Geriatrics, vol. 53 Suppl 1, 1998, pp. 
S16-9.  
[15] H. K. Kuo and L. A. Lipsitz, "Cerebral white matter changes 
and geriatric syndromes: is there a link?" J. Gerontol. A Biol. 
Sci. Med. Sci., vol. 59, 2004, pp. 818-826.  
[16] B. B. Andersen, H. J. Gundersen, and B. Pakkenberg, "Aging 
of the human cerebellum: a stereological study," J. Comp. 
Neurol., vol. 466, Nov 17, 2003, pp. 356-365.  
[17] N. Raz and K. M. Rodrigue, "Differential aging of the brain: 
Patterns, cognitive correlates and modifiers," Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev., vol. 30, 2006, pp. 730-748.  
[18] P. Rossini, M. Desiato, and M. Caramia, "Age-related 
changes of motor evoked potentials in healthy humans: non-
invasive evaluation of central and peripheral motor tracts 
excitability and conductivity," Brain Res., vol. 593, 1992, pp. 
14-19.  
[19] J. H. Yan, J. R. Thomas, and G. E. Stelmach, "Aging and 
rapid aiming arm movement control," Exp. Aging Res., vol. 
24, 1998, pp. 155-168.  
[20] A. Sterr and P. Dean, "Neural correlates of movement 
preparation in healthy ageing," Eur. J. Neurosci., vol. 27, 
2008, pp. 254-260.  
[21] J. H. Hwang, Y. T. Lee, D. S. Park, and T. K. Kwon, "Age 
affects the latency of the erector spinae response to sudden 
loading," Clin. Biomech, vol. 23, 2008, pp. 23-29.  
[22] T. A. Salthouse, "Aging and measures of processing speed," 
Biol. Psychol., vol. 54, 2000, pp. 35-54.  
[23] N. Wild-Wall, R. Willemssen, M. Falkenstein, and C. Beste, 
"Time estimation in healthy ageing and neurodegenerative 
basal ganglia disorders," Neurosci. Lett., vol. 442, 2008, pp. 
34-38.  
[24] A. Kluger, J. G. Gianutsos, J. Golomb, et al., "Patterns of 
motor impairement in normal aging, mild cognitive decline, 
and early Alzheimer's disease," J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. 
Soc. Sci., vol. 52, 1997, pp. P28-39.  
[25] D. J. Goble, J. P. Coxon, N. Wenderoth, A. Van Impe, and S. 
P. Swinnen, "Proprioceptive sensibility in the elderly: 
Degeneration, functional consequences and plastic-adaptive 
processes," Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2008.  
[26] S. Heuninckx, N. Wenderoth, and S. P. Swinnen, "Systems 
neuroplasticity in the aging brain: recruiting additional neural 
resources for successful motor performance in elderly 
persons," J. Neurosci., vol. 28 2008, pp. 91-99.  
[27] S. Chaput and L. Proteau, "Aging and motor control," J. 
Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci., vol. 51, 1996, pp. P346-
55.  
[28] R. O. Coats and J. P. Wann, "The reliance on visual feedback 
control by older adults is highlighted in tasks requiring 
precise endpoint placement and precision grip," Experimental 
Brain Research, vol. 214, 2011, pp. 139-150.  
[29] L. Proteau, "On the specificity of learning and the role of 
visual information for movement control." in Vision and 
Motor Control, Proteau, L. and Elliott, D (Eds.), Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, 1992, pp. 67-103.  
[30] M. Mon-Williams and G. P. Bingham, "Discovering 
affordances that determine the spatial structure of reach-to-
grasp movements," Experimental Brain Research, 2011, pp. 
1-16.  
[31] J. Faubert, "Visual perception and aging," Canadian Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, vol. 56, 2002, pp. 164-176.  
[32] V. Porciatti, A. Fiorentini, M. C. Morrone, and D. C. Burr, 
"The effects of ageing on reaction times to motion onset," 
Vision Res., vol. 39, 1999, pp. 2157-2164.  
[33] M. M. Veerman, E. Brenner, and J. B. J. Smeets, "The latency 
for correcting a movement depends on the visual attribute that 
defines the target," Experimental Brain Research, vol. 187, 
2008, pp. 219-228.  
[34] M. Spering, D. Kerzel, D. I. Braun, M. J. Hawken, and K. R. 
Gegenfurtner, "Effects of contrast on smooth pursuit eye 
movements," Journal of Vision, vol. 5, 2005, pp. 455-465.  
[35] Physical Activity Policy and Health Improvement Directorate, 
"The 
general practice physical activity questionnaire 
(GPPAQ): a screening tool to assess adult physical activity 
levels, within primary care," 2009.  
[36] H. 
Snellen, 
"Probebuchstaben 
zur 
Bestimmung 
der 
Sehschärfe,” Utrecht, P. W. van de Weijer, 1862.  
[37] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum, and M. G. 
Lilienthal, "Simulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced 
method for quantifying simulator sickness," The International 
Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 3, 1993, pp. 203-220.  
[38] S. Borson, J. Scanlan, M. Brush, P. Vitaliano, and A. 
Dokmak, "The Mini-Cog: a cognitive‘vital signs’ measure for 
dementia screening in multi-lingual elderly," Int. J. Geriatr. 
Psychiatry, vol. 15, 2000, pp. 1021-1027.  
[39] T. Tamura, T. Satoh, T. Uchida, and T. Furuhata, 
"Quantitative evaluation of luminance nonuniformity mura in 
LCDs based on just noticeable difference (JND) contrast at 
various background luminances." IEICE Transactions on 
Electronics, 89(10), 2006, pp. 1435-1440. 
 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

