 
 
 
Cross-Use of Digital Learning Environments in Higher Education: 
A Conceptual Analysis Grounded in Common Information Spaces 
Diana Saplacan 
Department of Informatics, Digitalization - Design of Information Systems 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: diana.saplacan@ifi.uio.no   
 
 
Abstract—This paper addresses the cross-use of different Digi-
tal Learning Environments (DLE) in Higher Education (HE). 
The paper aims to analyze DLEs and their use in a HE organi-
zational entity through the lens of Common Information Spac-
es (CIS), a concept grounded in Computer Supported Cooper-
ative Work (CSCW). In general, CSCW literature focuses on 
individual systems regarded as CIS. Moreover, the research 
shows that DLEs are often analyzed from an educational per-
spective, and less from a cooperative work perspective. Howev-
er, a teaching/learning context can be viewed as a co-dependent 
cooperative work arrangement, where the exchange of infor-
mation and knowledge is performed through- and with the help 
of DLEs. In this way, DLEs should be rather viewed as being 
part of a complex cooperative ensemble rather than analyzed 
as individual CIS. This paper sheds light on such complex 
information spaces, where the information spaces are formed 
through clusters of DLEs, rather than individual DLE units. 
Finally, the contribution of the paper consists of addressing the 
cross-use of DLEs from a CIS perspective, moving beyond 
looking at DLEs just through an educational perspective. 
Keywords-Digital Learning Environments (DLE); Higher 
Education 
(HE); 
Computer-Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
(CSCW); Common Information Spaces (CIS); information 
spaces. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper presents the cross-use of different Digital 
Learning Environments (DLE) in a Higher Education (HE) 
organizational entity. DLEs are defined here as digital plat-
forms, websites or specific webpages used by course in-
structors and students in a course for exchanging infor-
mation or knowledge, relevant for their learning, respective-
ly teaching, within the frame of the course. In a course, a 
course instructor can use one or more such DLEs: for in-
stance, the course instructor can use both a dedicated Learn-
ing Management System (LMS), the email system, the HE 
website, and a social media platform or channel dedicated to 
the course. Each of these is considered individually as a 
DLE when they are used for the purpose of teach-
ing/learning. We will call in this paper the individual DLE 
as a DLE unit. Therefore the terminology used here is not 
LMS but rather DLEs. They all together form a Common 
Information Space (CIS) in that specific course, for the 
course attendees, and the course instructor. However, the 
complexity of understanding these information spaces in-
crease when each of the course instructors start using sever-
al DLEs in their courses, some of them being officially the 
HE institutions’ DLEs, whereas some of them are not. 
Nevertheless, students may attend several such courses, 
where each of the course instructors may have their own set 
of dedicated DLEs. The students usually have very little 
power regarding the decision on what DLEs to use. At the 
same time, there are cases when the course attendees them-
selves suggest to the course instructors to use some new web 
platforms or the latest social media platform, in the course. 
Through this paper, we wish to understand the complexities 
that come along with this dynamic use of DLEs. Specifical-
ly, we want to understand: what challenges do they set for 
the students, respectively for the course instructors; how do 
DLE translate as CIS: what type of CIS are they, how are 
those represented, and used in a HE setting? Specifically, 
the paper discusses and analyzes DLEs through the lenses of 
Common Information Spaces (CIS) (compare to Communi-
cation Spaces  [1]).  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We con-
tinue with the background of this study in Section II. Sec-
tion III posits this paper on a theoretical level, elaborating 
on the concept of Common Information Spaces (CIS), giv-
ing a detailed account of the existent literature discussing 
CIS, including relevant definitions, examples, and character-
istics. We continue then by introducing the methods in Sec-
tion IV. Section V summarizes the findings, whereas Sec-
tion VI discusses them through the lens of CIS. Finally, 
Section VII concludes the paper and gives directions for 
further work. The acknowledgments close the article. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
DLEs are often analyzed from an educational perspec-
tive, and less from a cooperative or collaborative perspec-
tive. Analyzing DLE in a HE organizational entity through 
the concept of CIS is interesting because it challenges the 
traditional view on DLE as educational platforms and less as 
cooperative or collaborative platforms. This perspective is 
grounded on several arguments.  
First, we argue that DLE should be seen as cooperative 
platforms and as CIS since multiple stakeholders usually use 
them: Course Instructors (CI), Students (S), administrative 
staff (ADM), junior and senior researchers, and nevertheless 
by the IT department (IT) for maintaining, securing or up-
dating them. There are many cases when one individual in 
an organization takes multiple roles: CI are asked to take 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
courses at the same HE institution, students work part-time 
as teaching or research- assistants, or senior CI are both 
researchers using various research platforms and at the same 
time teaching personnel. 
Second, a HE organization usually has its own official 
DLEs that were either bought through a formal agreement or 
built in-house for many years. These can cover a range from 
LMS to web publishing systems, to examination systems, or 
submission systems. Some of these DLEs official systems to 
the HE organization might also be official at a national lev-
el, not only at a local level. The official DLE’s are required 
by the Norwegian law to be universally designed [2][3]. 
However, although there are official DLEs that are usually 
used by multiple internal stakeholders (CI, S, ADM, IT), 
there are also non-official DLEs, i.e., DLEs that are not 
quality ensured, secured, maintained, or tracked by the or-
ganization itself, but by external stakeholders, such as pri-
vately-owned companies, perhaps located in another coun-
try. One such example is social media platforms owned by 
private companies. In this case, the platforms are not pri-
marily LMSs. However, these can be used by a HE organi-
zational entity as DLEs to support communication, ex-
change files, knowledge, and information.   
Third, etymologically, teaching can be defined as show-
ing something to someone by informing or instructing, di-
recting, guiding, sharing, delivering, or making someone 
aware of some specific knowledge, communicating or in-
forming someone about something [4], while learning refers 
to acquiring knowledge or skill(s) through teaching, an ex-
change of experiences, or as a result of studying [5]. Learn-
ing is strongly connected to teaching and the individual’s 
experience.  
Fourth, although much focus is on teaching and learning 
in HE institutions, these entities are after all public organi-
zations with their own procedures, rules, regulations, dedi-
cated laws, own organizational structures, and employees. 
They are workplaces similar to other public institutions: The 
Tax Office, Public Hospitals, or National Employment 
Agency. In the Nordic countries, many of these institutions’ 
procedures and ways of interaction with their “clients” are 
very much automated, digitalized, or in the process of auto-
mation and digitalization. Along the same lines, HE pro-
cesses and ways of interaction between different stakehold-
ers are aimed to be automated and digitalized. For instance, 
in Sweden, the application process to universities is done 
through an online website [6], where the prospective stu-
dents can apply online to educational programs or extra 
curriculum courses, at least twice a year, with some stand-
ards deadlines (April, 15th and October, 15th). The website 
functions as a national database where any citizen can apply 
to any university programs or courses, as long as they fulfill 
the requirements. The whole process is smooth. In Norway, 
an almost similar digital platform exists [7]. 
Nevertheless, once accepted to a program or a course, 
being it campus-, distance-, or Internet-based, the students 
will be asked to use new digital platforms. Moreover, in 
Sweden and Norway, much of the teaching, even the cam-
pus-based one, make use of various DLEs. Nevertheless, 
employees at these institutions will use additional human 
resources platforms, the type of Enterprise Resource Plan-
ning (ERP) systems to plan their resources (teaching staff, 
courses, budget), such as SAP [8], Microsoft Sharepoint [9] 
or Box [10]; time schedule systems that have to be synchro-
nized with teaching staff, courses, class-, laboratory- or 
group rooms; or in some cases digital examination plat-
forms, that have to be secured, and limit the individuals 
taking the exam to navigate the web or reach to other exter-
nal resources during the examination time. Moreover, email 
is usually extensively used for communication within and 
outside of these organizational entities. 
As such, HE institutions are more than educational enti-
ties that produce or prepare individuals for taking part in the 
workforce, but as complex and dynamic cooperative assem-
blages, where interactions, different negotiations amongst 
various stakeholders, communication, and cooperative work 
arrangements take place. Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW) emerged from the need to study group work 
and office automation [11]. As indicated by Schmidt and 
Bannon [12], CSCW is conceived as “an endeavor to un-
derstand the nature and requirements of cooperative work 
to design computer based technologies for cooperative work 
arrangements” (emphasis in original). A subfield of CSCW 
is Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL). As 
shown in a CSCL study, information technology, such as 
DLEs, can support collaborative learning; however, the 
users need to overcome some challenges that come along 
with the use of these technologies [13]. 
Nevertheless, these information technologies also 
change the behaviors and practices of learners and teachers 
[13]. However, CSCL focuses in general on mediated com-
munication technology between teachers and students, and 
not on seeing DLEs as part of large organizations, where 
DLEs can be seen as information spaces. Moreover, seeing 
learning/teaching as a form of cooperative work is interest-
ing because, according to Schmidt [14], cooperative work 
refers to co-dependent work that has to be done by an en-
semble of people together, (either for achieving a product or 
a service), which otherwise would not be able to be 
achieved by individual persons. Cooperative work, (comp. 
to collaborative work which is positively laden [12]), refers 
to the interdependent relations that develop due to the mani-
fested practices that take place, which very often require 
some form of coordination as well, e.g., so-called coordina-
tive practices [15]. At the same time, a learning/teaching 
relation in a HE context is usually a co-dependent one: the 
teacher’s responsibility is to provide relevant knowledge in 
a course that the students can learn; at the same time, the 
students need to deliver assignments, take exams or in some 
form show that they have achieved the learning outcomes. 
In this way, such a setting can be regarded as a cooperative 
setting.  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
Finally, the paper emphasizes the use of multiple systems 
and how these are viewed as clusters of CIS, rather than 
individual systems. All in all, HE organizational entities 
viewed through the lens of cooperative work helps us in 
seeing beyond educational setting and reflecting on the 
complexity of the use of multiple virtual information spaces 
used in HE organizational entities, and on the need of coor-
dinative practices for enabling a successful cooperative 
work, i.e., a successful exchange of knowledge in teach-
ing/learning context.  
III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW: ON CIS 
This section gives an extensive overview of CIS, by de-
fining the concept, grounding it in examples, illustrating the 
specific characteristics, and explaining how the concept will 
be later used in the paper.  
A. Defining CIS 
The concept of CIS was first used in  Schmidt, and Ban-
non’s [12] work on “Taking CSCW seriously.” The authors 
used the terminology along with the definition of articula-
tion work, saying that CIS is one of the aspects supporting 
articulation work, together with workflow [12]. According 
to them, a CIS is necessary for distributed cooperative work, 
to maintain some form of ‘shared’ and locally and temporar-
ily created understanding about the objects in the CIS. Usu-
ally, such a CIS is actively created, accessed, maintained, 
manipulated, and shared at various degrees, amongst multi-
ple actors or stakeholders.  
A CIS has the aim to allow the members of a coopera-
tive ensemble to cooperate and interact without formal con-
straints, such as procedures or conventions [12]. A CIS also 
aims to bring “people and information together, through 
artifacts (…) and interpersonal communication, and they 
help ensure uniformity of information” [16].  
TABLE I.  SEVEN CIS PARAMETERS FROM BOSSEN [17] 
# 
CIS Parameter 
Explanation 
1 
degree of distribu-
tion 
physical distribution of the cooperative 
work; 
2 
the multiplicity of 
the web of signifi-
cance 
several webs of significance are includ-
ed in CIS; 
3 
degree of the need-
ed articulation work 
articulation work may vary depending 
on the character of the cooperative 
work; 
4 
multiplicity 
and 
intensity of means 
of communication 
face to face communication, but also 
other communication means available 
and/or necessary during the cooperative 
work; 
5 
web of artifacts 
all the artifacts included in the coopera-
tive work; 
6 
immaterial means of 
interaction 
habits, procedures, the structure of the 
organization, division of labor, etc. that 
decrease the need for coordination; 
7 
need for precision 
and promptness of 
interpretation, in the 
cooperative work.  
the need for precision for the available 
information; this parameter is especially 
important in time- or safe-critical situa-
tions; 
 
Moreover, CIS “indicate spaces that support distributed 
cooperative work as an alternative to procedural or work-
flow type arrangements” [18]. A CIS goes beyond a person-
al information space, where the individual producer of an 
object is also the ‘consumer’ of an object, i.e., the meaning 
that an individual attributed to an object is interpreted by the 
same individual [12].  
A CIS also includes a common developed vocabulary 
[12]. CIS are containers and carriers of information [19]. 
Finally, Bossen [17] developed and formulated seven pa-
rameters of CIS. He argued that CIS is too loosely defined 
and that the proposed parameters can be used as an analyti-
cal framework for CIS [17]. These are represented in Table 
I. 
B. Examples of CIS 
A shared database is not necessarily a CIS, following 
[12]. The objects represented in a database are “carriers of 
representations,” and not objects per se [12] if the actors do 
not have direct access to the material objects as artifacts. For 
instance, if the actors have access to a product X, or to a file 
Y, both outside of the database system, then they can build a 
common and shared understanding of how these objects 
should be represented in a database system. In other words, 
the actors can give a common interpretation of the material 
objects. Hence, a CIS embeds a coherent and interpretative 
aspect of the material objects represented in a database, 
compared to database objects that are rather “carriers of 
representations” [12].  
A clear example of a CIS given by the authors is a 
whiteboard, where several members of the cooperative en-
semble jointly scribble, modify, draw, or erase things writ-
ten on the whiteboard [12]. Each member of the cooperative 
ensemble interprets the objects on the whiteboard individu-
ally. However, the scope is to achieve a common and shared 
meaning.  
An excellent example of a CIS is when a department de-
velops its own “set of meanings for key terms” (Savage, 
1987, p. 6) in [12]. For instance, in a HE institution, the 
meaning of a seminar or laboratory assignment may be 
different based on different educational departments or 
courses. A laboratory assignment in a programming course 
means perhaps the development of a program by coding in 
an ordinary classroom environment, while laboratory as-
signment in biology or chemistry can possibly mean a form 
of experimenting in a specially dedicated lab, where specific 
tools and instruments are available. In this sense, CIS has a 
physical character. 
Other examples of CIS are documents and artifacts used 
in an organization, supporting the cooperation between the 
cooperative ensemble members [12].  
However, we have seen that lately, with the advanced 
web or software solutions available, these documents or 
artifacts can be represented virtually: virtual post-its or vir-
tual dash-boards shared between members of an organiza-
tion. Trello, Microsoft Team, Slack, or Google Drive are a 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
few examples of CIS where objects of a CIS are co-created 
by several members of the cooperative ensemble. Such a 
system should: “in addition to services facilitating the crea-
tion, modification, transmission, etc. of messages, provide 
services supporting the cross-referencing, cataloging and 
indexing of the accumulating stock of messages”, but they 
should also support the inclusion of external items [12].  
A more extreme example of CIS is the web (www), 
where some pages are produced by several entities that do 
not necessarily are tangential to each other, however, a het-
erogeneous group of consumers of the CIS access infor-
mation produced by several of them [19]. According to the 
study, this is a paradox example of CIS, which is both inter-
nally closed to the producers, however open and accessible 
for many.   
C. Characteristics of CIS 
Besides the seven parameters of CIS identified by Bossen 
[17], the literature has identified a couple of other parame-
ters of characteristics specific to CIS. We briefly illustrate 
each of those, as follows. 
1) Dialectic Nature of CIS 
Bannon and Bødker [19] argue that putting information in 
common and interpreting it was not sufficiently discussed 
[19]. Their paper argues for a dialectical nature of CIS: CIS 
is both open and closed, and they are often both portable 
and immutable, containing malleable information items 
while supporting the cooperative work”. 
2) Hybrid Information Spaces: In-between Private and 
Common 
CISs are also characterized by some sort of malleability: 
“open for some yet closure for others” [19]. Such an exam-
ple of hybrid information spaces is illustrated in [18]. These 
are framed as information spaces that are in-between private 
and common [18]. Such an example is the Personal Health 
Records (PHR) studied in MyBook and MyHealth Norwe-
gian projects [18]. PHR are considered to be hybrid infor-
mation spaces, partially because the patients have to input 
and track their personal health data, but some of this data is 
also shared with medical staff [18]. Hence, they can be 
shared across roles and boundaries [18]. This can trigger 
dilemmas along how and with whom the information is 
shared, who owns it, in which ways it is accessible and for 
whom, and how these are regulated amongst the patient and 
the medical staff [18]. The authors recommend the regional-
ization of hybrid information spaces, such that the systems 
are designed in such a way that they can both be private and 
preserve the user’s autonomy and control, but also shared 
(hybrid), with the aim of cooperative work [18].   
Nevertheless, CIS should be mediated by human media-
tors, that support both those members of the cooperative 
ensemble who create, modify, or develop (producers) the 
common information, and those that use this information 
(consumers) [19]. 
3) Scalability and Multiplicity of CIS 
One study added to Bossen’s CIS parameters, the follow-
ing ones: collaboration’s scalability and information spaces’ 
multiplicity [17]. Collaboration scalability includes the 
number of participants involved, and the phases necessary 
for achieving the collaborative work [17]. The information 
spaces’ multiplicity refers to the number of entities and 
artifacts that intersect in the collaborative work and form the 
CIS [17].  
4) Multiple Centers, Peripheries and Overlapping Areas 
Information always belongs to a place, although the place 
does not necessarily need to be geographically fixed [20]. 
Following [20], CIS is described as having both multiple 
centers and peripheries but also overlapping areas. 
5) CIS Objects Re-producing Fragmentation 
Rolland et al. conceptualizing CIS across heterogeneous 
contexts [21]. They presented the idea of CIS as malleable 
and open objects, which are achieved in practice [21].  They 
also emphasized the idea of large scale CIS reproducing 
fragmentation [21]. One of the earlier studies [22] (forth-
coming) also proves this fragmentation.  
6) Temporality of CIS 
CIS distributed across time and space is characterized by 
physical separation of cooperative members, limited access 
and control over the shared material, and more strict divi-
sion of tasks [19].  
A study investigated CIS across distributed medical teams 
in emergency, time-critical, episodic, and heterogeneous 
cooperative situations [23]. Having a shared understanding 
of these emergency cooperative settings is necessary. 
Munkvold and Ellingsen [24] talk about CIS use in a hospi-
tal ward while they introduce the temporal dimension of 
CIS, when several users are involved with their own trajec-
tories, and intersected trajectories. Moreover, Bertelsen and 
Bødker [20] problematized cooperation and CIS in massive-
ly distributed information spaces, a case on a wastewater 
plant. The authors challenge the idea of CIS that provides 
access to everything everywhere [20].  
7) Physical Aspects 
The study from [16] investigated the physical aspects of 
objects part of a physical CIS in emergencies. The CIS part 
of the emergency rooms is artifacts, including electronic 
records, equipment, or whiteboards, supporting the staff 
work [16]. However, the study stresses that the information 
available on these CIS’s is determined not only on the quali-
ty of the information, or how timely it is disposed of but 
also how easy it is for the staff to interact with it [16]. For 
instance, the study illustrated that the height and the place 
where the displays in the hospital are placed determines the 
coordination work the staff, and how much they engage 
with each other. Bossen [17] presented a similar case from a 
hospital ward. Another study that explored distributed in-
formation spaces in a hospital setting from Mexico city is 
the study presented in [25]. Specifically, the authors explore 
the physical mobility, moving beyond the desktop metaphor 
[26].  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
CIS in a shared workspace is characterized by the physi-
cal co-location of the cooperative ensemble’ members, real-
time sharing of resources, and sometimes ad-hoc co-
handling tasks [19]. However, cooperative work does not 
always take place in the same shared location: the coopera-
tive work might exceed the temporal and local boundaries 
[19]. This also puts additional requirements and changes in 
the design of a CIS. The information shared in a distributed 
CIS has to be packaged and belong to a context [19]. 
8) Communication Means in CIS 
Hjelle [27] illustrates an example of information spaces 
used in an oil and gas company. He analyzes the case 
through Bossen’s seven parameters of CIS [17]. The author 
points out that the best interaction is done through face to 
face communication [27]. The study concludes that not all 
of the seven parameters [17] are equally significant. How-
ever, many tools seem to be used to facilitate the coopera-
tion, although they are not always cooperation tools, com-
munication tools used to facilitate the cooperation when 
face to face meetings are not possible [27].  
Sometimes, information technologies used in organiza-
tional settings are discussed as communication spaces in-
stead. However, CIS and communication spaces are differ-
ent, although they might have some similarities in common 
[1][28]. While communication spaces focus very much on 
the communication takes place across distributed or non-
distributed spaces, CIS focus instead on how information is 
created, shared, maintained, and achieved. At the same time, 
CIS may include various communication spaces. 
D. CIS in This Study 
The CIS literature covers, in general, a few studies from 
hospital wards (see [14][17][21][22]), and in organizations, 
such as oil and gas companies [27], or wastewater plants 
[20]. However, many of these studies focused very much on 
the physical CIS, except for the study from [18], who fo-
cused on the hybrid and mobile information spaces. To our 
knowledge, it seems that CIS was not so far studied in HE 
institutions and that DLEs were much more often regarded 
from an educational perspective rather than a CSCW per-
spective. This study aims to bring new insights on both 
DLEs seen through the lens of CIS and CSCW literature, 
but also to the CSCW community on how DLEs can be 
regarded as CIS and the complexity of analyzing those as 
such. We continue in the next section with the method, and 
after that, we present the findings before we discuss those. 
IV. 
METHOD  
A. Participants and Setting 
We have interviewed several experts, with an area of 
expertise in pedagogics and universal design. We define 
experts as senior researchers, with an area of knowledge in 
either pedagogics or universal design and a subdomain of 
informatics, such as human-computer interaction, interac-
tion design, computer-supported cooperative work, or com-
puter-supported collaborative learning. All of the partici-
pants had several years of experience of being course in-
structors. We will use, therefore, interchangeably the no-
tions of experts, course instructors, or teachers, referring to 
the same participants.  
The interviews were performed in several stages of the 
study. In this paper, we illustrate some findings from the 
interviews conducted with the interviewees having their 
background in pedagogics (n=3). However, similar findings 
are also presented in the rest of the interviews (see [22], 
[29]).   
Finally, the interviewees were recruited through personal 
contact. The author had no relation to the participants since 
before. 
B. Data Collection and Analysis 
The interviews lasted about one hour- one hour and fif-
teen minutes each. These were transcribed verbatim by the 
author (SD). The data were analyzed in several steps, as 
recommended by [30]. Some photos were also taken during 
the interviews, on artifacts shown by the participants. These 
did not contain any personal or sensitive data.  
The analysis was done through systematic text conden-
sation [30]. 12 Excel spreadsheets were used for document-
ing all the steps throughout the process. The analysis was 
done in four steps: (step 1) the data was fully read to get a 
sense of what the data was talking about (themes: n1=6, 
prioritized themes n1=4); (step 2) identifying and categoriz-
ing meaning units (codes n1=130 for the first theme, n2=124 
for the second theme, n3=125 for the third theme, and n4=39 
for the fourth theme); (step 3) condensing the codes into 
meanings (n1=23, n2=13, n3=25, and n4=9); these subcatego-
ries were then organized in categories (n1=7); (step 4) final-
ly, during the last step, the author has synthesized the con-
densates into concepts (n1=3). The resulted concepts were: 
cross-platform use of DLE, user diversity in Higher Educa-
tion, universal design, and organizational tensions. This 
paper focuses solely on the cross-platform use of DLEs. 
However, the theme of user diversity and universal design 
were covered in [29]. 
C. Ethical Considerations 
All the participants were given detailed information about 
the study, the possibility to ask questions prior- and during 
the study, and they could withdraw at any time without 
providing any explanation and without any consequences 
for them. The participation was based on free will. All the 
participants were willing to participate in the study signed 
informed consent before taking part in the study. The study 
follows the ethical guidelines from the Norwegian Center 
for Research Data (NSD) ref. Nr: 55087). This work was 
performed on the Tjenster for Sensitive Data (TSD) facili-
ties, owned by the University of Oslo, Norway, operated 
and developed by the TSD service group at the University 
of Oslo, IT-Department (USIT) (project number: p400). 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
V. 
FINDINGS 
The participants mentioned 23 DLEs. The minimum 
number of DLEs used by the participants was 5, whereas the 
maximum was 16 out of 23. It seems that the youngest of 
the interviewee was more prone to use digital technology in 
class, together with her students. The same interviewee used 
social media platforms and considering using instant mes-
senger in her communication with students, arguing that 
these were the preferred communication channels by the 
students.   
The official publishing system was used by two out of 
three participants. However, one of the interviewees used it 
only for information related to her area of work, research, 
and publications, but not in a teaching/learning context. The 
interviewee considered the HE’s official web publishing 
system more as an administrative tool rather than being a 
dedicated tool for teaching/learning.  
Moreover, only two participants used the official exami-
nation system, whereas the third participant was aware of it, 
but did not find it appropriate to use it together with its 
course-takers. However, email and the new official DLEs 
introduced at the HE institution were used by all interview-
ees.  
Further, one of the interviewees used three simulation en-
vironments, as the leading DLE platforms, in his teaching, 
although another DLE was the official institutional plat-
form. These simulation environments were mandatory to be 
used by the students during the course. While some of the 
students were against using these external simulation tools, 
some felt motivated in using real-world scenarios in simu-
lated environments. Teaching specific and generic skills by 
using these external simulations environments and DLEs 
was the main argument for using those. However, the stu-
dents were required to make their submissions in the official 
DLEs, across the semester. But a final official examination 
at the end of the semester was required to be done in a third 
system, i.e., in the official examination system.  
Two of the interviewees were using two other digital sys-
tems each in their teaching. Only one participant used 
cloud-based storage. The same participant also used addi-
tional plug-ins in the official DLEs.  
Further, one of the participants expressed the need for a 
participatory tool and keeping track of things in a DLE. 
Therefore, she chose a publicly available database system-
like online tool for recording each years’ course partici-
pants’ entries.  
Table II gives an overview of the systems in use, as de-
scribed by the participants. Another inventory of DLEs used 
by other participants taking part in the same study was done 
in our earlier published work (see more in [22], forthcom-
ing). 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  OVERVIEW OVER THE DIGITAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
AND TOOLS 
# 
                           Participant (CI) 
             
Systems used in a  
HE Organizational Entity  
#1 
#2 
#3 
1 
Publishing system   
 
X 
X 
2 
Internally and externally used submission and 
assessment system 
X 
 
X 
3 
External quiz and input system 1  
 
 
X 
4 
External quiz and input system 2   
 
 
X 
5 
External quiz and input system 3 
 
 
X 
6 
Email 
X 
X 
X 
7 
New DLE system 
X 
X 
X 
8 
Third-party application 
 
 
X 
9 
Social media platform 1 
 
 
X 
10 
Web service for forum discussions and wikis 
 
X 
 
11 
MOOC or MOOC like platform 
 
X 
 
12 
Examination platform  
X 
 
X 
13 
Virtual game environment 1 
X 
 
 
14 
Virtual game environment 2 
X 
 
 
15 
Virtual game environment 3 
X 
 
 
16 
Learning Analytics 
X 
 
X 
17 
Specialized analysis software 1 
X 
 
 
18 
Specialized analysis software 2 
X 
 
 
19 
Specialized video analysis software 1 
 
 
X 
20 
Specialized video analysis software 2 
 
 
X 
21 
Cloud-based storage 
 
 
X 
22 
Different variants of messenger applications  
 
 
X 
23 
The third-party plugin used in the official 
DLE system 
 
 
X 
 
The official DLE was described by one of the participants 
as being an administrative tool rather than supporting learn-
ing. The system was also described as not being user-
friendly and being cumbersome; however, it was also de-
scribed as being easy to access and manipulate if one is 
familiar with such tools. At the same time, it seems to be a 
complex system to navigate, and that many of the student 
users complained about navigation issues. She also men-
tioned that non-regular students, i.e., older employees at the 
HE who are asked to use the official DLE, have a hard time 
using it. She described how the systems are nowadays de-
signed as dashboards. According to the participant, these are 
often seen by international students that lack digital skills as 
a “dump place,” where the course instructor “dumps” course 
material and information rather than as a DLE that provides 
opportunities for learning.  
“(…) for some of the students, they were not used to it, and they 
were not introduced to it in the way I would like to do it, it was just 
like a.., sort of a repository, like a "dump place," where all this 
information about the course, slides, whatever the material teach-
ers wanted to use, it was kind of thrown into that, in an organized 
way - which is good. For them, this was not a discussion platform; 
it was not a place where they could express their views or interact 
with the materials where they would say: okay, I would want it in 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
this way, or I would post my idea or view in an idea or knowledge 
in a discussion. They did not perceive technology as something 
that offers them the possibility to express, learn, engage, and be an 
active participant in this case in a learning activity. And I think it 
is an important function of the technology, to provide a platform, 
for those that either does not have a possibility or the attitude to do 
this face-to-face in plenary, for various reasons, or for those that 
are at a distance. So this is an opportunity. I think it is a missed 
opportunity if we do not present it and use it as teachers, or those 
who introduce it in the right way.” (Participant, Interview) 
Finally, one participant was pledging for digital natives 
being prone to like dynamic DLE than others, and therefore 
they might find the official web publishing system as being 
out of date. However, she was complaining that there are 
(perhaps too) many functionalities available in the official 
DLE, that there are anomalies in these functionalities, i.e., a 
chat functionality available in the system for all class, but 
not inside the groups, that the system is characterized of 
high complexity, that it can be perceived as overwhelming 
at times, that it is rich in functionalities, and has a U.S. 
based design geared towards assessment. She mentioned 
that the system requires to have a pedagogical rationale 
when planning a course to be able to make the most use of 
it. 
“It's often that the students, like the natives, they come to the 
University, first-year students and they know they will be using 
learning platform, digital learning platforms, because most of them 
have used it in high school, or even in lower grades, while students 
coming from other parts of the world, don't have this ingrained 
experience, or simply experience of using the technology in this 
way. And I think there is always a gap there that often creates 
difficulties for the other group, not because they are not good 
performers, or good learners, or interest or motivated, because 
they simply need, a different encounter- start encounter with tech-
nology.” (Participant, Interview) 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
This section presents a regionalization of DLEs units in 
categories and clusters of information spaces. Based on our 
findings, shown earlier in Table II, DLEs are re-grouped in 
this section into official systems, third-party applications, 
and specialized software applications, quiz input systems, 
virtual games environments, and social media platforms. 
The classification is made based on each DLE unit's own 
primary purpose. The reason for regionalizing DLEs in 
these categories is to illustrate that the majority of the DLEs 
in use are non-official systems, but also to showcase their 
distribution across different domains requiring a different 
set of skills for using those. After that, a discussion on 
DLEs as information spaces follows.  
A. Regionalization of the DLEs Units in Categories and 
Clusters of Information Spaces 
Information always belongs to a place, or for that matter, 
to space, as it was also proved in the illustrated examples 
[20]. In line with [20], this study also proves that infor-
mation can belong to some overlapped areas and multiple 
centers, i.e., see for instance the information distributed or 
shared through the official systems; or to peripheries, such 
as the information belonging to the quiz input systems, so-
cial media, virtual game environments, or specific special-
ized software systems that are used solely in particular 
courses. Such regionalization is needed to show the high use 
of non-official systems and the cross-use distribution 
amongst official and non-official DLEs. 
Figure 1 shows a heat-map on the regionalization of 
DLEs from Table II. The black line distinguishes between 
the official systems, i.e., the system that is official to the HE 
organizational entity, such that they are proposed, indicated, 
maintained, and secured by the HE organization itself. We 
organized the DLEs units used by the participants in six 
categories: official systems (dark green), third party applica-
tions (pink), social media (blue), quiz input systems (yel-
low), virtual games environments (orange), and specialized 
software applications (light green). 
The set of official DLEs {#1, #2, #6, #7, #12} is repre-
sented by five DLEs. However, we can observe that only 
five out of 23 DLEs in use are official systems, whereas the 
majority of the systems, precisely 18 of them, are not offi-
cial ones, i.e., neither maintained nor secured by the HE 
organization personnel. Next, we can observe that six DLEs 
used to subscribe to the third-party applications category. 
Examples of these are the use of a third-party application 
(#8), web service for forum discussions and wikis (#10), 
MOOC or MOOC like platform (#11), learning analytics 
(#16), cloud-based storage (#21), and third party plugin 
used in the official DLE system (#23). Several specialized 
software applications were used – the set represented by 
{#17, #18, #19, #20}. Virtual game environments were used 
in a number of three: the set composed of {#13, #14, #15}, 
as well as quiz input systems – the set represented by {#3, 
#4, #5}. Finally, only two social media platforms were men-
tioned as used by the participants in their students-
teaching/learning HE context, the set composed of {#9, 
#22}. 
 
 
Figure 1. Heat-map over the types of DLEs used. 
Official 
DLE’s 
Non-official 
DLE’s 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
Further, Figure 2 illustrates a heat-map over the DLEs 
handled by each of the interviewees, including their types, 
which is color-coded. It indicates a regionalization of DLEs 
units based on an individual regionalization for each of the 
participants. 
We can observe from Figure 2 that participant #3 used 
all five official systems, participant #2 used only three of 
them, whereas participant #1 used four of them. However, it 
seems that only participant #3 used social media and quiz 
input systems, and only participant #1 used virtual games 
environments. Participant #3 was also the youngest amongst 
the interviewees, which can perhaps be one of the reasons 
for being more prone to adopt DLEs. However, this is less 
important. More interesting is to look at the variation of the 
range itself, because it means that if a student takes all three 
courses, at the same time, from these three course instruc-
tors, the students will have slightly different CIS clusters for 
each of the courses (Figure 2). Such a situation may take 
place since all of the participants belonged to the same HE 
organizational entity.  
At the same time, we can observe that each course’s CIS 
is formed out of at least two DLEs units, and a maximum of 
five. This means that the student’s virtual information space 
is not solely formed out of a single DLE unit, but of at least 
two. As many as DLE units are included in the information 
space, as more fragmented, the information space becomes. 
Nevertheless, once with the fragmentation, more coordina-
tive practices are also needed: the student, as well as the 
course instructor, needs perhaps to have an account on each 
of these information spaces, to log in, to log out, to down-
load or upload course material, to share, read or write in-
formation to space, etc. This may contribute to fragmented 
information awareness [22].  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Heat-map over each of the participants’ DLEs units used. 
B. DLEs as Information Spaces   
This subsection analyzes DLEs as information spaces, 
based on the Bossen’s seven parameters [17] of CIS and the 
CIS’s characteristics (Section III). 
 The physical distribution of the cooperative work (pa-
rameter #1 in [17]) across space and time calls for the need 
of a number of DLEs, both common and hybrid information 
spaces. However, what is essential to do is not to disregard 
the amount of articulation work, which is a “supra-type of 
work” (see [12], [31]–[33]) that comes once an information 
technology or system is introduced in an organization, to 
facilitate the work. In the examples presented earlier in the 
previous sub-section, it seems that often the CI is the deci-
sion-maker on what DLEs units are to be used in the course 
as CIS. Thus, the CI is often the decision-maker of the in-
formation spaces to be used by students. In some cases, 
students also suggest some new channels of communication 
as DLEs units to be included in the course’s CIS. However, 
as the literature shows, it seems that it is very much over-
looked or underestimated the disadvantages of adopting 
specific interfaces, the decision is mostly based on intuition, 
rather than on a thorough or elaborated process [34]. Never-
theless, according to Bossen’s parameter #3 on articulation 
work, this depends on the character of cooperative work 
[17]. We argue that the amount of articulation work required 
by information spaces is given not only by the cooperative 
work but also by the number of DLEs units included in an 
information space, being it hybrid of common. 
A hybrid information space composed by DLEs units re-
fers to the information space created by both the private or 
peer group notes of a course attendant or course instructor 
and the information that is put in common in such an infor-
mation space. For instance, the CIS that participant #3 is 
using is, in fact, a cluster of DLEs units, or individual hy-
brid information spaces, such as social media platforms. A 
social media platform used both as a DLE unit and as a CIS 
is a hybrid information space, in this sense. The cluster of 
information spaces used by participant #3, together with her 
students, is hence a hybrid one.  
Further, the information spaces’ multiplicity [17] is giv-
en by the number of entities or artifacts that intersect in the 
collaborative work and form the CIS. In the illustrated ex-
amples on the cross-use of DLEs, we can say that the stu-
dents’ or course instructors’ information spaces’ multiplicity 
is given by the number of DLEs units used in a course. 
However, while this number of DLE unit types (e.g., official 
systems, third party applications, social media, etc.), varies 
between 2 and 5, for the students or course attendants taking 
courses from all the three course instructors, the number of 
DLE units in use may vary up to 23.  
Moreover, multiplicity is also given by the multiple webs 
of significances (parameter #2 in [17]) of the users: students 
and by the course instructors, each having different back-
grounds, skills, different levels in digital literacy, etc. The 
web of significance is given by the number of users (stu-
dents, CI) and the context the DLE units are used within. 
The multiplicity and intensity of the means of communica-
tion (parameter #4 in [17]) are illustrated by the majority of 
DLEs units, as many of them include some form of commu-
nication channels, especially the official systems and social 
Participant #3 
Participant #1 
Participant #2 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
media. Moreover, the web of artifacts (parameter #5 in [17]) 
distributed across different DLEs units form the students’ 
respectively, the course instructors’ information space. The 
web of artifacts is also given by all the resources provided 
by the CI, and by all assignments or submissions provided 
by the students.  
The immaterial means of interaction (parameter #6 in 
[17]) consists of all the habits, procedures, and division of 
labor shared amongst the stakeholders.  When these routines 
are well known to all of the stakeholders, the coordinative 
work will decrease [17]. However, as shown in [35], the 
lack of procedures and rules around a newly adopted 
groupware system puts particular demands on the quality 
control of the data gathered, the privacy of the organization 
and the individuals’ using the system, and it can become a 
liability to the organization, rather than an asset. Similarly, 
in the case of students that do not know how to use DLEs as 
their common or hybrid information space, the articulation 
work for making the work work will most likely increase on 
the teacher’s side. Specifically, one of the participants ex-
plained how she had to do some coordinative work in the 
form of articulation work when students with a lower digital 
literacy did not know how to use or navigate the information 
spaces, although she explained during class where the web 
of artifacts is available and how to use those. As one of the 
participants specified, “students coming from other parts of 
the world, don't have this ingrained experience, or simply 
experience of using the technology in this way.” (Partici-
pant, Interview). 
In terms of needs of precision (parameter #7 in [17]), the 
participants did not express any concern regarding time- or 
safe critical issues for the availability of information. Per-
haps the deadlines can be regarded as such, but other than 
that, there are not such critical time aspects. However, com-
pared to physical information spaces, such as a whiteboard 
during a class filled with notes co-created through discus-
sion by students and CI, that’s is dynamic, momentary, and 
transitory, in a way – it will be deleted by the end of the 
class, virtual information spaces are seemingly slightly dif-
ferent. Virtual CIS and their objects seem to have a more 
extended temporality, i.e., the course material objects are 
available online over a more extended period of time 
throughout the semester, rather than only for one hour dur-
ing the class. Moreover, virtual information spaces, such as 
DLEs units forming clusters of information spaces, seem to 
be more malleable and plastic than the physical ones: while 
they still keep their constant variable over time, they can yet 
be changed, updated, modified, deleted, and re-created. 
However, they are still present in the system. Their tempo-
rality, in this sense, can, in a way, be episodic. 
Finally, the dialectic nature of DLEs clusters forming the 
hybrid or CIS is given by the openness and closeness of the 
DLEs units. For instance, we can notice the dialectic feature 
for the DLEs used by participant #1 and #3. The findings 
show that both participants use both official systems, being 
those closed (e.g., system #7, #9) or open (e.g., system #1), 
and other external systems – they also closed (e.g., #9, #13) 
or open (e.g., #3, #4, #10). 
C. Cross-use of DLEs 
Each of the DLE units can be considered as CIS or hy-
brid information spaces, based on two conditions: 1) the 
functionalities they provide, and 2) the perspective from 
which they are analyzed (student/CI). The clusters of infor-
mation spaces, as shown in the figures (Figure 1 and 2), are 
indicated based on the data collected from the CI. However, 
for the students, the information spaces may cross different 
information spaces regions, depending on which courses 
they take, and the DLEs CI use in their teaching.  
Several studies from the existent literature showed (see, 
for example, [35]-[36]), the introduction or integration of 
information technology or information technology devices 
in various organizations with the purpose of office automa-
tion [11] challenges the respective organizations their local 
procedures, rules, habituated practices, and coordinative 
practices. Similarly, our study shows some of the challenges 
posed when un-official DLEs are used: the information 
becomes fragmented across different information spaces, the 
distribution of DLEs may cross different information spaces 
regions, for the students; the degree of articulation work 
increases with the number of DLEs in use; the multiplicity 
and intensity of the means of interactions depends on the 
type and number of DLEs used, as well as on the number of 
users;  
Finally, using such complex information spaces that are 
formed out of DLE units and clusters of DLEs give some 
freedom and flexibility to its users, but it also puts some 
responsibilities or expectations on them, such as collective 
expectations on one’s availability at all the time, every-
where, increased commitment in communication, changed 
practices and norms, or experiencing an intensified commu-
nication, similarly to the findings from [37]. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented DLEs viewed through the lens 
of CIS. The research question addressed was: what chal-
lenges do they set for the students, respectively, for the 
course instructors; how do DLE translate as CIS: what type 
of CIS are they, how are those represented, and used in a 
HE setting? Specifically, the article has focused on how 
DLEs can be designated as complex information spaces. 
DLEs are often seen, analyzed, and discussed about as edu-
cational environments. Moreover, it seems that CIS ad-
dressed in educational settings seem not commonly ex-
plored. The contribution of the paper consists of discussing 
the cross-use of DLEs from a CIS perspective, moving be-
yond looking at DLEs just through an educational perspec-
tive. This makes the contribution of the article interesting 
and relevant. As future work, it would be interesting to in-
vestigate the articulation work necessary to be performed 
when large DLEs clusters are in use, and how these affect 
the work and performance of CI and students. Moreover, 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
addressing these information spaces from a universal design 
perspective would be both interesting, relevant, and timely. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to warmly express my thanks to project part-
ners, to the participants, and especially to Klaudia Carçani 
for allocating time on discussing early drafts of this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. G. T. Healey, G. White, A. Eshghi, A. J. Reeves, and A. Light, 
“Communication Spaces,” vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 169–193, Apr. 2008, 
doi: 10.1007/s10606-007-9061-4. 
[2] 
K. Knarlag, “Nye krav til universell utforming av IKT - Universell 
utforming av læringsmiljø - Universell utforming - Universell.no,” [in 
English: New requirements to the universal design of ICT - Universal 
Design of Learning Environments, Universal Design] 10-Feb-2017. 
[3] 
Kommunal- og moderniseringsdepartementet, “Forskrift om endring i 
forskrift 
om 
universell 
utforming 
av 
informasjons- 
og 
kommunikasjonsteknologiske 
(IKT)-løsninger 
- 
Lovdata,” 
[in 
English: Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development, 
Regulations on amendments to regulations on universal design of 
information and communication technology (ICT) solutions, Law 
data] 20-Sep-2017. 
[4] 
Oxford Eng, Dictionary, “teach, v.,” Oxford University Press, 2020. 
[5] 
Oxford Eng. Dictionary, “learn, v.,” Oxford University Press, 2020. 
[6] 
Swedish Council for Higher Education, “antagning.se,” Antagning.se, 
2020. [Online]. Available from https://www.antagning.se/se/start, 
25.02.2020. 
[7] 
Kompetanse Norge, “utdanning.no,” utdanning.no, 2020. [in English: 
Competence, 
Norway]. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://utdanning.no/front, 25.02.2020. 
[8] 
“SAP” 
SAP. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.sap.com/index.html, 25.02.2020. 
[9] 
“What 
is 
SharePoint?” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://support.office.com/en-us/article/what-is-sharepoint-97b915e6-
651b-43b2-827d-fb25777f446f, 25.02.2020. 
[10] “Box” [Online]. Available from https://www.box.com/en-gb/home, 
25.02.2020. 
[11] J. Grudin, “Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: history and 
focus,” Comp., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 19–26, May 1994, doi: 
10.1109/2.291294. 
[12] K. Schmidt and L. Bannon, “Taking CSCW seriously,” CSCW, vol. 
1, no. 1, pp. 7–40, Mar. 1992, doi: 10.1007/BF00752449. 
[13] H. Jeong, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, and K. Jo, “Ten years of Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning: A meta-analysis of CSCL in 
STEM education during 2005–2014,” Educ. Res. Rev., vol. 28, p. 
100284, Nov. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.edurev.2019.100284. 
[14] K. Schmidt, “The Concept of ‘Work’ in CSCW,” CSCW, vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 341–401, Oct. 2011, doi: 10.1007/s10606-011-9146-y. 
[15] K. Schmidt, Cooperative Work and Coordinative Practices. London: 
Springer London, 2011. 
[16] P. G. Scupelli, Y. Xiao, S. R. Fussell, S. Kiesler, and M. D. Gross, 
“Supporting coordination in surgical suites: physical aspects of 
common information spaces,” in Proc. intern. conf. on Hum. fact. in 
comp. sys. - CHI ’10, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2010, p. 1777, doi: 
10.1145/1753326.1753593. 
[17] C. Bossen, “The parameters of common information spaces:: the 
heterogeneity of cooperative work at a hospital ward,” in Proc. of the 
2002 ACM conf. on CSCW ’02, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 
2002, p. 176, DOI: 10.1145/587078.587104. 
[18] P. Vassilakopoulou, M. Grisot, and M. Aanestad, “Between Personal 
and Common: the design of hybrid information spaces,” CSCW, vol. 
27, no. 3, pp. 1085–1112, Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1007/s10606-017-9304-
y. 
[19] L. Bannon and S. Bødker, “Constructing Common Information 
Spaces,” 1997, vol. ECSCW, pp. 81–96. 
[20] O. W. Bertelsen and S. Bødker, “Cooperation in massively distributed 
information space,” Bonn, Germany, 2001, vol. ECSCW, pp. 1–17, 
doi: 10.1007/0-306-48019-1. 
[21] K. H. Rolland, V. Hepsø, and E. Monteiro, “Conceptualizing 
common information spaces across heterogeneous contexts: mutable 
mobiles and side-effects of integration,” in Proc. of the 2006 20th 
anniversary conf. on CSCW ’06, Banff, Alberta, Canada, 2006, pp. 
493–500, DOI: 10.1145/1180875.1180951. 
[22] D. Saplacan, J. Herstad, and Z. Pajalic, “Use of digital learning 
environments: A study about fragmented information awareness,” 
Interact. Des. Archit. J. IDxA, forthcoming, p. 20, 2020. 
[23] Z. Zhang, A. Sarcevic, and C. Bossen, “Constructing Common 
Information Spaces across distributed emergency medical teams,” in 
Proc. ACM Conf. on CSCW and Soc. Comp. - CSCW ’17, Portland, 
Oregon, USA, 2017, pp. 934–947, DOI: 10.1145/2998181.2998328. 
[24] G. Munkvold and G. Ellingsen, “Common Information Spaces along 
the illness trajectories of chronic patients,” in ECSCW 2007, 2007, 
pp. 291–310. 
[25] V. M. González et al., “Understanding mobile work in a distributed 
information space: implications for the design of ubicomp 
technology,” in Proc. Lat. Amer. conf. on HCI  - CLIHC ’05, 
Cuernavaca, 
Mexico, 
2005, 
pp. 
52–63, 
doi: 
10.1145/1111360.1111366. 
[26] V. Bellotti and S. Bly, “Walking away from the desktop computer: 
distributed collaboration and mobility in a product design team,” in 
Proc. ACM Conf. on CSCW '96, New York, NY, USA, 1996, pp. 
209–218, doi: 10.1145/240080.240256. 
[27] T. E. Hjelle, “Information spaces in large-scale Org.,” COOP 2008 
Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Des. Coop. Syst., pp. 265–273, 2008. 
[28] A. Clement and I. Wagner, “Fragmented Exchange: disarticulation 
and the need for regionalized communication spaces,” in Proc. 4th 
Euro. Conf. on CSCW, ECSCW ’95: 10–14 Sep. 1995, Stockholm, 
Sweden, H. Marmolin, Y. Sundblad, and K. Schmidt, Eds. Dordrecht: 
Springer Netherlands, 1995, pp. 33–49. 
[29] D. Saplacan, “Situated ability:  A case from Higher Education on 
digital learning environments,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. Springer, 
2020, in press, HCII. 
[30] K. Malterud, “Systematic text condensation: a strategy for qualitative 
analysis,” Scand. J. Public Health, vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 795–805, Dec. 
2012, doi: 10.1177/1403494812465030. 
[31] L. Suchman, “Supporting articulation work,” in Computerization and 
Controversy (2Nd Ed.), R. Kling, Ed. Orlando, FL, USA: Academic 
Press, Inc., 1996, pp. 407–423. 
[32] I. Hampson and A. Junor, “Invisible work, invisible skills: interactive 
customer service as articulation work,” New Tech. Work Employ., 
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 166–181, 2005, doi: 10.1111/j.1468-
005X.2005.00151.x. 
[33] A. Strauss, “The Articulation of Project Work: An Organizational 
Process,” Sociol. Q., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 163–178, 1988. 
[34] J. Grudin, “Why CSCW applications fail: problems in the design and 
evaluation of organizational interfaces,” in Proc. ACM Conf. on 
CSCW '88, New York, NY, USA, 1988, pp. 85–93, doi: 
10.1145/62266.62273. 
[35] W. J. Orlikowski, “Learning from Notes: organizational issues in 
groupware implementation,” in Proc. ACM Conf.on CSCW '92, New 
York, NY, USA, 1992, pp. 362–369, doi: 10.1145/143457.143549. 
[36] W. J. Orlikowski, “The duality of technology: rethinking the concept 
of technology in organizations,” Organ. Sci., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 398–
427, Aug. 1992, doi: 10.1287/orsc.3.3.398. 
[37] M. Mazmanian, W. J. Orlikowski, and J. Yates, “The autonomy 
paradox: the implications of mobile email devices for knowledge 
professionals,” Org. Sci., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1337–1357, Feb. 2013, 
doi: 10.1287/orsc.1120.0806. 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

