Depth Perception for Virtual Object Displayed in Optical See-Through HMD 
 
Kazutake Uehira 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Atsugi, Japan 
e-mail: uehira@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
Masahiro Suzuki 
Tokiwa University 
Mito, Japan 
e-mail: masuzuki@tokiwa.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— This paper presents depth perception for virtual 
objects displayed with an optical see-through type head-
mounted display (HMD) when there is a real object in front of 
it. In the real world, we cannot see the object behind another 
object. However, in augmented reality using an optical see-
through type HMD, it is seen overlapping the object in front of 
it. We researched depth perception for a virtual object for this 
case. Perception of the depth of a virtual object in such a 
situation is very important to enable development of a 
technique of interaction with a virtual object. From the 
subjective test performed, we found that human vision could 
perceive the depth of a virtual object for the above case 
although there were significant differences between individuals, 
especially in short distances from the user. 
Keywords- HMD; optical see-through; virtual object; depth 
perception. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Research into augmented reality (AR), in which virtual 
objects in a real world assist our activities, has recently 
become popular. ARs that enable users to interact with a 
virtual object are attracting attention [1][2]. In many studies 
on AR, a head-mounted display (HMD) has been used. 
There are two types of HMD; video see-through and optical 
see-through. The former does not show the real world 
directly to the user, but shows it captured by the camera, and 
virtual objects are rendered in the captured image by image 
processing. On the other hand, when using an optical see-
through type, a user can see the real world directly and 
virtual objects are superimposed in the real world; therefore, 
user can see their actual hands directly. This is very 
important when a user interacts with a virtual object using 
their hands because it is natural for users interacting with 
virtual objects directly with their actual hands instead of 
using virtual hand. From this point of view, the optical see-
through type HMD is more suitable. However, a problem 
with this type occurs in that when a virtual object is 
superimposed behind a real world object, it becomes 
translucent instead of being naturally obscured. This 
unnaturalness may affect a user’s depth perception of the 
virtual object. It is important to accurately obtain the depth 
of a virtual object that a user perceives for natural 
interaction. In this study, we evaluated the effect of the 
semi-transparency of virtual objects on depth perception. 
II. 
DEPTH PERCEPTION FOR INTERACTION 
Figure 1 outlines the importance of the system acquiring 
perceived depth for users. If the depth obtained by the 
system and that perceived by the user are different as shown 
in Figure 1, the system cannot react with the virtual object 
when the user sees that his or her hand touched it. This 
prevents smooth interaction between user’s hand and virtual 
object. 
Figure 2 outlines the problem of the optical see-through 
type HMD. Figure 2 (a) shows that from the side, the virtual 
object is located farther than the user’s hand as the user 
reaches towards it. Figure 2 (b) shows the view from a 
user’s point of view and the subsequent problem of the 
optical see-through type HMD. In the real world, when an 
object is positioned behind another object, it cannot be seen 
due to occlusion by the front object. However, the virtual 
object is seen in a translucent state although it is located 
farther than the user’s hand.  
The main factor for the depth perception of an object at a 
short distance in human vision is binocular disparity; 
however, occlusion is also used as a cue of the depth. In the 
Depth of virtual object perceived by user 
Figure 1. Interaction with virtual object using actual hand. 
Depth of virtual objects obtained by system 
Figure 2. Problem of optical see-through type HMD. 
Virtual object 
(a)
Side view 
(b)
View from the user’s 
point of view 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

real world, the depth perceived from binocular disparity and 
occlusion is almost the same, however, in the case shown in 
Figure 2, these two depths contradict each other. Binocular 
disparity is expected to be the dominant factor of depth 
perception; however, the absence of full occlusion by a hand 
has a possibility of affecting depth perception. In this study, 
we conducted a subjective test about the depth perception 
for the case shown in Figure 2. 
III. 
SUBJECTIVE TEST       
Figure 3 shows the layout of the subjective test. We used 
an HMD with two 1280×720 pixel OLED displays for both 
eyes, which provides the equivalent of an 80 inch display 5 
m ahead by magnifying optics. 
Virtual objects were square white patterns. The pattern 
size was 11 cm on the virtual screen 5 m ahead, therefore if 
it is seen, for example, 1 m ahead; it will be perceived as a 
square of about 2 cm in size. We set the brightness of the 
pattern to a grayscale value of 127, of which the maximum 
is 255. The virtual object is displayed within a distance 
range of 40 to 80 cm, which is the range where people can 
manipulate things directly with their own hands. A real 
object that is white was placed 35 cm from the observer’s 
eye position. Although the virtual object is located behind it, 
it overlaps the real object.  
Five subjects, all with normal eyesight and could see 
stereoscopically, moved a thin plate-shaped marker using 
their right hand and stopped it at a position just beside the 
virtual object to indicate the depth of the virtual object 
perceived by the subject. For reference, we conducted the 
same test without the real object. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
Figure 4 shows the results of the subjective test. In both 
cases where there was an actual object or not, the perceived 
depth of the virtual object increased as the depth set based 
on binocular disparity increased. However, the differences 
of data between subjects were significant in the case where 
there was an actual object, particularly at a short distance. 
This is considered to be due to the instability of the depth 
perception of the virtual object due to the existence of the 
real object. Furthermore, the reason that this difference 
increases at a short distance seems to be due to the large 
binocular disparity at a short distance. 
The result in this study shows that some technique that 
reduces the influence of the real object for this purpose is 
needed.  
V. 
  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We researched depth perception for virtual objects 
displayed in an optical see-through type HMD when there is 
a real object in front of the virtual object. We clarified from 
the subjective test that perceived depth of the virtual object 
changed depending on binocular disparity. However, the 
depth perception in human vision became varied under the 
influence of real objects existing in front of it, and the 
difference between individuals was significant. 
In the future, we need to reduce the influence of the real 
object. To achieve this, we will try to develop a technique 
that can display only a part of the virtual object that is not 
obscured by a real object. This will improve the depth 
perception of a virtual object because it is the same in the 
real world. 
ACKNOWLEGEMENT 
This work was supported partly by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant Number 15K00289 and partly by MEXT-Supported 
Program for the Strategic Research Foundation at Private 
Universities 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Tedjokusumo, S.Z. Zhou, and S.F. Winkler Immersive 
Multiplayer Games With Tangible and Physical Interaction. 
IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics Part A-
Systems and Humans, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 147–157, 2010. 
[2] K. Kim, D. Maloney, G. Bruder, J. N. Bailenson, and G. F. 
Welch, The effects of virtual human’s spatial and behavioral 
coherencewith physical objects on social presence in AR, 
Computer Animation and Virtual World, vol. 28, pp. 3-4, 
2017.  
Virtual object 
Real object 
Marker 
HMD 
35 cm 
Figure 3. Layout in the subjective test. 
40 
40 
50 
50 
60 
60 
70 
70 
80 
80 
Perceived depth (cm) 
Figure 4. Result of subjective test 
Depth calculated from binocular disparity (cm) 
There was real object 
No real object 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

