Methods for Analyzing Millennials’ Characteristics and  
Contexts of Media Usage in Multi-Device Environments 
Mingyu Lee1, Jiyoung Kwahk1, Sung H. Han1, 
Kyudong Park2, Ju Hwan Kim2, Dawoon Jeong1
1Department of Industrial Management & Engineering 
2Department of Creative IT Engineering 
POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {mk3215s2, kjy, shan, kdpark, juankim, 
jdw0303}@postech.ac.kr 
Seokmin Oh, Gunho Chae 
User Experience Center 
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {seokmin0717.oh, gunho.chae}@samsung.com 
Abstract—It is an era of multi-device. Today's users produce 
and consume media by using various devices in various 
environments. Especially millennials have been in contact with 
digital devices likes PC, tablet, and smartphone since 
childhood, so their behaviors to produce and consume media 
by using the digital devices can be displayed diversely 
compared with other generations. Their needs on the media 
products can also be diverse. In developing process of media 
products, it is important to grasp users' media usage patterns 
and divide them into several groups that show similar 
characteristics to appropriately respond to their needs. By 
doing this, it is possible to understand the user more precisely, 
and developers or marketers can develop appropriate 
functions or strategies for each group to improve the users’ 
satisfaction. For that reason, this study is a research related to 
investigation of millennials’ behavior to produce and consume 
media by using multiple devices. It suggests a method to group 
millennials by their context of media use based on a survey of 
their media and related devices usage. The result of the study 
can be used to develop a user model or user scenario for 
product development and marketing. 
Keywords—Millennials; Multi-device experience; Media; 
User modeling; Use case. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is an era of multi-device. With the development of 
information and communication technology, various types of 
devices have been developed. Users can utilize a number of 
devices to achieve their own needs, including desktop 
computers, laptops, smartphones, tablet PC, cameras, media 
players, and TVs. Nowadays, users perform activities that 
span devices, rather than using different devices for different 
activities [1]. Even if users do the same activities, they use 
the appropriate devices according to occasion and location. 
Cisco estimates that there will be around seven internet-
connected devices per person by 2020 [2]. Due to the multi-
device environment, designers and marketers have become 
more anxious. Even if you create a service or function, they 
need to consider many devices associated with it (Figure 1). 
If internet of things (IoT), where all things are connected to 
the Internet, become more widely commercialized, there 
would be much more devices to consider. 
Designers and marketers need to take a deeper look at the 
device as well as the user. As users are able to use many 
devices, their usage patterns have become more diverse. As a 
result, users shouldn’t be viewed as a group, and it is 
necessary to divide them into several segments according to 
the patterns and purposes of use. 
Figure 1. Many devices associated with media (Photos and music) 
In particular, millennials are experts in multi-devices [3]. 
Millennials, also known as Generation Y or Net Generation 
(or Generation N), are a cohort that directly follows 
Generation X [4]. Generally, researchers define millennials 
as births from the early 1980s to the early 2000s [4]. 
According to a survey of Americans' generation and gadgets, 
millennials have more devices than previous generations, 
such as Generation X and Baby Boomer Generation (Table 
1) [5]. In addition, since they have been in contact with 
devices since childhood, they have better understands how to 
connect and use digital devices. Thus, it is expected that 
millennials show much diverse usage patterns and needs in a 
multi-device environment than other generations. Even the 
purpose of utilizing multi-devices can be different. 
It means that we require a deeper understanding of 
millennial Generation. Especially when using media, it is 
necessary to understand how millennials consume the media, 
for what purpose they use the media devices, and in which 
environment they are consuming the media. This can help 
developers to develop appropriate functions or services for 
millennial Generation. 
This study is a basic research on media usage behavior of 
millennial Generation in the multi-device environment. In 
particular, this study proposes a way to classify millennials 
271
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

into several types based on the survey on them and to derive 
where and when they use media with multiple devices. This 
study suggests an objective and quantitative analysis method 
that utilizes statistical techniques. 
TABLE I. % OF AMERICANS IN EACH GENERATION 
THAT OWN EACH DEVICE [5] 
Cell 
phone 
Desktop 
Laptop 
MP3 
player 
Tablet 
PC 
Millennials 
95% 
57% 
70% 
74% 
5% 
Generation 
X 
92% 
69% 
61% 
56% 
5% 
Younger 
Baby 
Boomers 
86% 
65% 
49% 
42% 
4% 
Older Baby 
Boomer 
84% 
64% 
43% 
26% 
3% 
Silent 
Generation 
68% 
48% 
30% 
16% 
1% 
G.I. 
Generation 
48% 
28% 
10% 
3% 
1% 
Section 3 presents the user survey on millennials’ media 
usage. Section 4 explains how to derive the user groups of 
millennials based on the user survey data. Section 5 accounts 
for how to derive the representative use cases of millennials 
for two types of media (music and photos).  
II.
EXISTING STUDIES ON CHARACTERISTICS OF 
MILLENNIALS
There were many studies that had characterized 
millennials. These studies yielded common characteristics of 
millennials compared to other generations, such as Baby 
Boomer or Generation X. According to a survey of 
millennial generations conducted at the Pew Research Center 
in 2010 and 2014, millennials had the characteristics of being 
individual, confident, self-expressive, liberal, and not afraid 
of change [6]. In addition, they valued the family and were 
less likely to identify with a particular political party [6]. 
They were identified as “digital natives”, who tried to do 
many things using digital devices [7]. Millennials in 
adulthood were detached from institutions and networked 
with friends [7]. 
Much research has been conducted on the analysis of the 
media use characteristics of millennials. These studies have 
analyzed the way they consume music or TV/video contents. 
According to these studies, millennials had the following 
characteristics: 
•
This generation streams music through technological 
devices, via the use of social media among other 
platforms [8]. 
•
To this generation, it is important habits not only to 
download music online but also to share music 
[9][10]. They express emotions, share with friends, 
and reinforce each other's relationships through 
music [9]. 
•
This generation downloads digital music. However, 
this generation purchases CDs to express the tribute 
to the artists [11]. 
•
This generation wants to listen to music instantly 
whenever and wherever [8]. 
•
This generation is a user of the online platform to 
access and share music files [11][12].  
•
This generation consumes video contents with the 
second screen devices rather than on the TV [13]. 
•
This generation is good for multitasking, and they 
consume the video contents in multitasking 
environment [13]. 
However, previous studies had analyzed the millennials 
as only one group of user and derived unique characteristics 
for whole millennials by comparing them with the other 
generations. Millennial Generation is a generation with a 
population size of about 20 years. Generally, about 25% of 
the world's population is millennials. It is difficult to 
interpret their characteristics, seeing millennials as a group. 
For a more sophisticated understanding of Millennial 
Generation, it is necessary to analyze the millennials more 
finely. 
III.
USER SURVEY
In this study, we conducted a user survey to identify the 
media usage of millennials. The purpose of this survey was 
to collect basic data for user analysis. 
TABLE II.
SUBJECTS OF THE SURVEY
Millennials 
who are 
actively 
using media 
-
Millennial Generation (the early 20s to mid 30s) 
-
Actively use music, photos, and videos 
-
Connect various electronic devices to utilize media 
 The survey was conducted on millennials (Table 2). In 
this study, we defined births from the mid-80s to early 2000s 
as Millennial Generation. However, the survey was 
conducted only for those aged 20 years or older, because it 
was judged that adolescents have limits to use media due to 
academic reasons. We expected that millennials are familiar 
dealing with digital devices and they have the highest desire 
to achieve their needs by utilizing various types of devices. 
In addition, millennials are the primary consumers of various 
media devices, so they must be considered to develop media 
devices or create marketing strategies.  
This study focused on the media usage. In particular, we 
focused on creating and consuming photos and videos and 
listening to music. Therefore, respondents who did not 
produce or consume media were preferentially excluded. 
The following items were surveyed (Table 3). First, 
demographic information of respondents was collected. Age, 
sex, occupation, and family members of the respondents. 
Next, the respondents' degree of interest in the media was 
collected. We collected that the number of times they used 
music, pictures, and videos for a day. Respondents were also 
asked to answer the question about the degree of interest in 
media devices. 
272
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 In addition, information about the media devices and 
apps in use were collected, such as the types (smartphone, 
tablet PC, TV, laptop, camera, audio, etc.), the manufacturers 
(Apple, Samsung, LG, Canon, Bose, etc.), and model names 
of the devices and apps. We also asked when, where, and for 
what purpose each device was used. Finally, we added a 
questionnaire 
item 
(short 
version 
of 
Myers-Briggs 
Personality Test) to identify the relationship between 
respondents' personality and their media usage. 
360 millennials participated in the survey, and it was 
conducted for a week. A web-based questionnaire was 
constructed for the convenience of the survey. Respondents 
were able to access the questionnaire via the web URL. For 
those who participated in the survey, were provided with 
certain rewards. 
IV.
USER CLASSIFICATION
In this study, we tried to classify media usage of 
millennials into several types. People have their own needs 
of using media. It is most ideal if you are able to provide 
customized strategies for all of them. However, this is 
technically and costly difficult. Instead, if we can group 
users with similar tendencies and derive their common 
characteristics, we can achieve a better strategic effect than 
treating all millennial users equally. 
Figure 2.  Cluster analysis to divide millennials according to common 
characteristics 
The data collected from user survey was used to divide 
user groups. The data were divided into two sets. First one 
was the data for classifying the user groups, such as the 
number of products and apps currently in use (Figure 2). The 
remaining data was used as data to determine the 
characteristics of the group. 
After 4 groups were derived, an additional data analysis 
was performed to derive the characteristics of the groups. We 
checked for differences between groups for the other 
variables, including age, gender, occupation, interest in new 
products, frequency of purchasing new products, and results 
of personality test (Figure 3). For the data analysis, analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) and cross-tabulations were used. 
ANOVA was performed for continuous variables such as age. 
If there were significant differences, post-hoc analysis was 
performed to determine which groups differed from each 
other. Cross-tabulations was performed for nominal or 
ordinal variables such as gender and occupation. Likewise, 
when there were significant differences, post-hoc analysis 
identified the groups that differed. 
Figure 3.  Statistical analysis to define characteristics of each group 
Each group was defined based on the characteristics. A 
name and an image that can represent each group was 
constructed. The proportion of each group was derived. The 
characteristics of the group were classified into demographic 
characteristics, the products in use, and the context of media 
usage (Figure 4). 
Survey items 
Descriptions 
Demographic information 
Basic demographic information such as age, sex, and occupation of the respondents 
Degree of interest in the media 
How much are the respondents interested in media and media-related products 
Products in use (Devices & Apps) 
The types, names, manufacturers, model names of the products or apps that the respondents are using 
Context of using the products 
The purpose of each product, where to use it, and when to use it 
Cognitive Style 
Psychological test for the classification of the respondents' psychological types (short MBTI) 
TABLE III.
SURVEY ITEMS
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4.  Example of classification results 
V.
USE CASE
In a multi-device environment, the types of devices can 
be vary depending on the place, time, and purpose of using 
the media. As a result, the behaviors and needs of the user 
also can be differed. In order to accurately understand the 
behaviors and needs of the user, it is necessary to know 
precisely where, when and why the user uses the media. In 
this study, we tried to derive millennials’ typical use cases of 
music and photos, based on the data that was responded to 
when, where, and for what purpose the millennials used the 
media. 
First of all, the data on location, time, and purpose of 
using media (photos and music) were collected from users 
(Table 4). "O" meant that users normally use music or photos 
at the place, at that time, and for that purpose. We used this 
data to analyze the correlation between Location, Time, and 
Purpose. If the correlation between ‘living room’ and ‘time 
to relax’ was high, we could derive that the respondents 
usually used music to relax in the living room. Also, if the 
correlation between ‘living room’ and ‘to listen’ was high, 
we could find out that they usually listened to music for their 
relaxation in the living room.  
In this way, we were able to derive the millennials’ 
typical use cases of music and photos. In addition, we added 
frequency for each use case, and we were able to identify 
how representative each use case was.  
VI.
CONCLUSION
This study was a basic research to investigate and 
classify millennials behaviors to create or consume media 
and use of media related devices. This study suggested a 
method to develop user groups of millennials and their 
context in use of media based on a survey of millennial users. 
Especially, the method was based on an objective and 
quantitative analysis that utilizes statistical techniques. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by User Experience Center 
in Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.  
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Dearman and J. S. Pierce, "It's on my other computer!: 
computing with multiple devices," In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, pp. 767-776, April, 2008. 
[2]
D. Evans, “The internet of things: How the next evolution of 
the internet is changing everything,” CISCO white paper, vol. 
1, 1-11, 2011. 
[3]
D. Lee and K. Engelman, “The Impact of Mobile on CPG 
CRM Strategy: a Kraft Canada Case Study,” International 
Journal of Mobile Marketing, vol. 7, 5-22, 2012. 
[4]
N. Howe and W. Strauss, Millennials Rising: the Next Great 
Generation. Vintage, 2009. 
[5]
K. Zickuhr, “Generations and their Gadgets,” Washington, 
DC: Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2011. 
[6]
Pew Research Center (2010). Millennials: Confident, 
Connected, Open to Change. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/ 2016.02.01 
[7]
Pew Research Center (2014). Millennials in Adulthood: 
Detached from Institutions, Networked with Friends. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/ 
2016.02.01 
[8]
P. H. Saldana, “Boomers, Millennials, and The Music 
Experience,” University Honors theses. Paper 238, 1-19, 
2016. 
[9]
J. Beekhuyzen, and L. von Hellens, “How does technology 
influence online music access and Use? A taxonomy of 
empirical studies,” ACIS 2008 Proceedings, 70, 86-96, 2008. 
[10] A. R. Brown, “Popular music cultures, media and youth 
consumption: Towards an integration of structure, culture and 
agency,” Sociology Compass, vol. 2, 388-408, 2008. 
[11] D. Bahanovich and D. Collopy, “Music experience and 
behaviour in young people,” University of Hertfordshire, 
2009. 
[12] S. J. Tepper and E. Hargittai, “Pathways to music exploration 
in a digital age,” Poetics, vol. 37, 227-249, 2009. 
[13] A. M. Gould, “Millennial Media Consumption and the Birth 
of 
the 
Anytime, 
Anywhere 
Television 
Viewing 
Experience,” Doctoral dissertation, Drexel University, 1-55, 
2014. 
Sub No. 
Media 
types 
Location 
Time 
Purpose 
Living room 
…
Office 
Time to relax 
…
Time to study 
To listen 
…
To share 
Sub01 
Music 
O 
…
X 
O 
…
X 
O 
…
O 
Sub02 
Music 
X 
…
O 
O 
…
O 
O 
…
X 
Sub03 
Music 
X 
…
O 
O 
…
O 
O 
…
X 
Sub04 
Music 
O 
…
O 
O 
…
O 
O 
…
O 
Sub05 
Music 
O 
…
O 
X 
…
X 
O 
…
X 
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
TABLE IV.
EAMPLE OF THE TATA ON LOCATION, TIME, AND PURPOSE OF USING MEDIA (PHOTOS AND MUSIC) 
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

