The Idea Generation Process for Support Tools Enhancing Pedestrian Experience 
of the Mobility Handicapped in Smart City 
Dong Yeong Jeong1, Jiyoung Kwahk1, Sung H. Han1, Joohwan Park1, Mingyu Lee1, Kyudong Park2,  
Ju Hwan Kim2, Hyeji Jang1, Dawoon Jeong1
Department of Industrial Management of Engineering1, Department of Creative IT Engineering2
Pohang University of Science and Technology 
Pohang, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {comnet924, kjy, shan, pkjhwan, mingyu.lee, kdpark, juankim, wdfokj, jdw0303}@postech.ac.kr 
Abstract— The objective of this paper is to develop ideas for 
support tools of the mobility handicapped. As the smart city is 
under 
the 
spotlight 
based 
on 
the 
information 
and 
communication technologies, development of support tools for 
the mobility handicapped has a chance to go forward in 
advanced using the technologies of the smart city. There were 
several researches to develop support tools for the mobility 
handicapped, but most of them focused mainly on the 
walkability. This paper suggests the process to develop ideas of 
the support tools to enhance holistic Pedestrian eXperience 
(PX). The process was helpful in developing ideas for support 
tools especially for the mobility handicapped in this study. The 
process consists of seven steps, and description and outcomes 
of each step will be presented. 
Keywords-Pedestrian 
Experience; 
Support 
tools; 
Idea 
generation; PX principles; The mobility handicapped 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Ramp and handrail on the sidewalk are the typical tools 
for people who have a problem on mobility. The people who 
need help on mobility are called the mobility handicapped 
[1]. The mobility handicapped can be classified by their 
duration of handicap; the temporary mobility handicapped 
and non-temporary mobility handicapped. The non-
temporary mobility handicapped includes the disabled, the 
aged, and a child [2]. The temporary mobility handicapped 
includes a pregnant woman, an injured person, and a person 
with luggage [2]. If we consider this broad definition of 
mobility challenges, it is obvious that anyone can confront 
mobility challenges at least temporarily. Therefore, mobility 
challenges should be considered as one of the most important 
parts of social welfare service now.  
So far, a variety of support tools have been developed 
based on information and communications technology (ICT) 
to help vulnerable pedestrians [3]. With the emergence of 
smart city, which means that public infrastructures are 
connected and communicate with each other based on the 
ICT, expectations on its positive benefits are escalating 
[4][5]. Everything can be digitalized through the sensors 
built in the formerly analog infrastructures. Various 
organizations can provide services to the citizen using the 
public data. Because of the rapid advance in scientific 
technology, the smart city can become an important part of 
our life. Smart city has been studied in various fields; 
“Natural resources and energy,” “buildings,” “government,” 
“economy and people,” “Transport and mobility,” and 
“livings” [4]. The last two fields are related to the mobility 
handicapped. It can be a great chance to develop effective 
and efficient support tools for the mobility handicapped 
using the public data. 
Despite the potential of smart city to provide a variety of 
support tools for the mobility handicapped, few studies were 
found that considered the problems and needs of the mobility 
handicapped systematically. Due to the lack of empathetic 
understandings of user needs, most of them focused mainly 
on walkability such as the ease and safety of walking, 
ignoring such factors as affective or social aspects of 
pedestrian experience. 
This study suggested the systematic process to develop 
idea on effective and efficient support tools for the mobility 
handicapped based on their own needs and problems. We 
borrowed the UX concept to find out the factors outside of 
ease and safety.  
UX is an experience that consists of all aspects of users’ 
interactions with a certain product or service [6]. The 
paradigm of UX is shifted to the pedestrian environment 
from the electronic devices. This paper defines the concept 
of Pedestrian eXperience (PX) as “pedestrian cognition, 
affect, behavior occurred from the interaction with a 
pedestrian passage and its’ related environment in a specific 
context.” Fig. 1 presents conceptual framework of PX. 
Figure 1. Conceptual Framework of PX 
This paper focused on the non-temporary handicapped; 
the disabled, the aged, a child. The non-temporary mobility 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

handicapped might have more problems and needs than 
temporary one. The problems and needs in the walking 
situations were considered in this paper. According to the 
Korean Ministry of Land, when the mobility handicapped 
travel, they mostly use sidewalk than the other transport 
systems [7]. Therefore, the infrastructure that is the most 
urgent to be improved is sidewalk [8]. 
In Section 2, existing studies about pedestrian experience 
and support tools are introduced with their limitation. 
Section 3 describes the overall process of the idea generation. 
The results of the complete process are also presented. In 
Section 4, the significance of the suggested process is 
explained. 
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The existing studies related to PX and support tools for 
the mobility handicapped are introduced in this section. The 
necessity of this research is understandable from the 
limitations of the existing studies. 
A.
Literatures related to Pedestrian eXperience (PX) 
Most literatures related to PX deal with pragmatic factors 
such as walkability and safety significantly rather than 
hedonic factors such as affect and sociability. Park 
considered five factors of walkability; “sense of safety,” 
“sense of security,” “comfort,” “convenience,” “visual 
interest”. He only considered visual interest as a hedonic 
factor of the pedestrian environment that is vague [9]. Lo 
suggested Portland pedestrian planning parameters [10] with 
7 factors, but he did not consider hedonic factors at all. 
Ewing suggested 9 principles, but he also focused on 
pragmatic factors with only one hedonic factor, tidiness [11]. 
Kari suggested 5 factors including social related factor 
[12]. He suggested pragmatic factors; “safety,” “comfort and 
convenience,” “functional characteristics,” and hedonic 
factors; “aesthetics,” “social characteristics”. Although he 
suggested well-balanced factors between pragmatic and 
hedonic, he did not answer what the aesthetic factor means 
sufficiently. He only considered attractiveness and visual 
condition of the environment as detailed factors of aesthetics 
that are vague. The experts of the User eXperience (UX) can 
suggest specific hedonic factors that affect PX borrowing the 
UX concept. 
B.
Literatures related to support tools for the mobility 
handicapped 
The literatures related to support tools for the mobility 
handicapped usually focus only on the walkability and safety 
using robotic system. For example, Ni et al. developed 
robotic system that guides and enables the visually impaired 
to avoid obstacle on the road [13]. Fontanelli et al. suggested 
guidance mechanism for a walking robotic assistant [14]. 
Jiang et al. also developed motion algorithms of walking-
assistant robot [15]. There were other researches that utilized 
mobile and smart devices to assist the mobility handicapped. 
Scheggi et al. developed a vibrotactile bracelet that gives 
directional cues to the aged [16]. Miller developed walking 
assistant application of smartphone that recognizes an object 
on the road and let the pedestrian know the object and its’ 
direction [17].
However, the mobility handicapped also have the 
problems in the outside of the walkability and safety. The 
hearing impaired, who does not seem to be a disabled, can be 
embarrassed when a stranger asks a passerby for directions. 
It can lead low sociability of the mobility handicapped. It is 
essential to find out what the mobility handicapped have 
problems regarding PX. Also, the researches usually have 
been focused on the visually or physically impaired or aged. 
It was relatively hard to find the researches for improving PX 
of the hearing impaired or a child. 
III.
SUGGESTION OF THE IDEA GENERATION PROCESS
This study suggests the process of generating support 
tool ideas that improve PX of the mobility handicapped. The 
key point of the process is to consider experience of the 
pedestrian. We do not only focus on the walkability, but 
considering whole experiences on the road. The process we 
suggest includes 7 steps (Figure 2). Detailed explanations of 
each step are described below. 
Figure 2. Seven steps of the idea generation process 
A.
Step 1: Classification of the mobility handicapped 
based on their walking characteristics 
The walking characteristics of the mobility handicapped 
are figured out based on the physical/cognitive/behavioral 
characteristics of them. We can classify the types of the 
mobility handicapped based on their walking characteristics, 
not the demographic factors. The results can be utilized when 
defining “who” has problems and needs in step 4. 
The literature survey was conducted to find out the 
walking characteristics of the mobility handicapped; the 
visual/hearing impaired, physically challenged person, 
mentally handicapped, the aged and child. The literature 
about physical/cognitive/behavioral characteristics of the 
mobility handicapped were also collected, and walking 
characteristics were inferred from them. Also, interview was 
conducted. 9 participants who works for the mobility 
handicapped were recruited, and they told us the walking 
characteristics of the mobility handicapped. 
We could define the types of the mobility handicapped 
based on the walking characteristics, not the demographic 
factors. The results would let us focus on the unusual 
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

walking characteristics that can leads problems and needs, 
not being restricted to a specific type of the mobility 
handicapped. The 34 pedestrian characteristics of the 
mobility handicapped were deduced from the physical, 
cognitive, and behavioral characteristics of the mobility 
handicapped (Table 1). The 34 pedestrian characteristics 
were classified into 15 categories. 
Walking characteristics could be helpful to understand 
the mobility handicapped, which make us generate contexts 
of the problems and needs easily in the step 4. Combining 
with the PX principles and pedestrian environment, the 
contexts of the problems and needs will be better specified. 
B.
Step 2: Classification of the pedestrian environment 
The spaces of the pedestrian environment were classified, 
and the related objects were arranged. Furthermore, time 
related factors were also considered to generate more various 
ideas. The results can be utilized when defining “where and 
when” the problems and needs happened in step 4. 
The literature survey was conducted to collect the 
elements of the pedestrian environment. The collected 
elements were classified through the open card sorting. The 
field observation was also conducted to supplement the lists 
of the elements of the pedestrian environment. 87 Pedestrian 
environment’s elements were arranged as 8 spaces (Table 2). 
The human/animal, weather, and time related elements 
were also considered through the brainstorming to generate 
various ideas in step 4. The mobility handicapped can have a 
variety of problems and needs depends on the weather and 
time. Also, they can have a trouble when interacting with 
other people and animals. 
TABLE I. 
THE PEDESTRIAN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MOBILITY 
HANDICAPPED
The pedestrian characteristics of the mobility handicapped 
The eye height is lower than the non-mobility handicapped
Walking speed is slower than the non-mobility handicapped 
Easy to trip and fall to the ground 
Difficult to communicate with others 
Using means of assistance for walk 
Difficult to acquire the information about surrounding envirnment 
Relying on the non-visual sensation when walking 
Having unsafe walking & crossing habit 
Difficult to use devices while walking 
Difficult to avoid approaching objects and obstacles 
Necessary to get a great deal of rest while walking 
Difficult to walk outside on rainy and snowy days 
Difficult to walk on the low accessibility environment 
Physical/Cognitive disabilities appear to the third person 
Physical/Cognitive disabilities do not appear to the third person 
TABLE II. 
CATEGORIES OF THE PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT
Categories 
Sub-categories 
Space
Exclusive pedestrian road 
Community road 
Exclusive vehicle road 
Crosswalk 
Pedestrian overpass/underpass 
(Bus/Taxi) Stop 
Subway station 
Park 
Human/Animal 
Fellow traveler 
Third party 
Crowd 
Animal 
Weather 
Spring 
Summer 
Autumn 
Winter 
Time 
Day-time 
Night-time 
C.
Step 3:Definition of the PX Principles 
The PX principles means the recommended design rules 
of every system that enhance the pedestrian experience. This 
can be the classification standard of the pedestrian’s 
problems and needs. The PX principles do not only consider 
walkability. Affects, safety, and sociability are also 
considered to improve the satisfaction of pedestrian 
experience. The results can be utilized when defining “why” 
the problems and needs happened in step 4. 
The literature survey was conducted in the UX and PX 
fields. PX includes walkability concept. The most of the PX 
literature were related to walkability. 24 UX literatures and 7
PX were collected, and three results of the previous project 
of the researcher’s organization were also utilized. Open card 
sorting was conducted to categorize principles, and 
brainstorming of UX experts was conducted to supplement 
the PX principle. 
There were 6 principles categorized as “walkability”, 6 as 
“affect”, 4 as “safety,” and 4 as “sociability”. PX principles 
can be utilized to find out overall problems and needs on 
walking experience that are not only bounded on walkability. 
The defined principles were checked if the problems and 
needs of the mobility handicapped are matched with each 
principle (Table 3).  
TABLE III. 
PX PRINCIPLES
Category 
Explanation 
Walkability
The pedestrian environment should be designed to let 
pedestrian use elements of pedestrian environment 
easily and comfortably 
Affect 
The pedestrian environment should be designed to let 
pedestrian satisfy affective desire 
Safety 
The pedestrian environment should be designed to make 
pedestrian safety from the hazard 
Sociability 
The pedestrian environment should be designed to make 
pedestrian being sociable 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Problems and needs were collected through the interview 
with 9 workers related to the mobility handicapped. From the 
interview, “friendliness” was added in the affect principle. 
D.
Step 4: Collection and Selection of the Problems and 
needs of  the mobility handicapped 
The problems and needs of the mobility handicapped are 
figured out in this step. The results of the steps 1-3 are 
utilized in this step to find out specific contexts of the 
problems and needs. 
Two major methods can be utilized in this step. First 
method is focus group interview (FGI) with the mobility 
handicapped. From step 1 to 3, we have acquired the 
characteristics of the mobility handicapped through literature 
surveys and interviews with workers related to the mobility 
handicapped such as social worker and kindergarten teacher. 
It is essential to meet the mobility handicapped directly to 
understand them deeply.  
Second method is ‘Morphological Analysis (MA)’ that 
let us to consider almost every possible context of problems 
and needs. The results of the step 1-3 is utilized in MA 
(Figure 3). Based on the two methods, problems and needs 
of the mobility handicapped on walking are figured out. 
Figure 3. Process flow diagram of Step 1-4 
E.
Step 5: Classification of form factors 
The form factors of a support tool are considered in this 
step. Possible candidates are investigated, and classified. The 
list of the form factors is utilized when considering “what” 
solves a problem in step 7. 
There are several types of products that are called “form 
factors”. Form factors can be utilized to implement functions 
such as receiving information and giving services to the 
pedestrian using ICT. 
The products in the pedestrian environments can be 
considered as form factors such as traffic lights/signs, street 
lamps. The products possessed by pedestrian also can be 
utilized to develop support tools such as smart phone, watch, 
glasses. The lists of the form factors can be collected by 
literature survey and experts’ in-depth interview. 
F.
Step 6: Classification of the function types 
The function types are considered in this step. The list of 
the function types is utilized when considering “how” to 
solve a problem in the ideation step like form factors. 
As there are several types of products, there are several 
function types. The lists of the function types can be 
constructed by the literature survey and brainstorming. 
Alarm is representative function type of the support tool. It is 
usually used when people need to be noticed. Diagnosis is 
another function type that is usually used when people want 
to know the overall condition of a system. A game can also 
be another function type, which can be used to educate 
people with fun. 
G.
Step 7: Collection and Selection of the support tool idea 
for the mobility handicapped 
The specific support tool ideas are developed in this step. 
The results of steps from 4 to 6 are utilized for the ideation 
process (Figure 4). The ideas can be constructed by the 
context of problems and needs, form factor, and function 
type. 
Figure 4. Process flow diagram of Step 4-7 
The results of the steps 4-6 can be utilized in this step 
using ‘MA’. MA can be a powerful tool to develop various 
ideas. Combination between contexts, form factors, and 
function types would lead us to consider every major 
problems and needs. 
Another ideation tools can be used in this step such as 
brainstorming and TRIZ to supplement the idea sets from 
MA. After ideation, high quality ideas should be selected 
using specific standards such as feasibility, creativity, 
effectivity using analytic hierarchy process (AHP). 
Ideas that have high relation with each other can be 
grouped to be developed in the one product. For example, 
there can be integrated recommendation service that would 
guide one to the nearest well paved park. 
IV.
DISCUSSION
The suggested systematic idea generation process 
includes MA, which can allow us to consider as many 
contexts as possible. Although user research is conducted, 
the problems and needs that the users do not recognize by 
themselves cannot be considered. MA is effective 
methodology to generate users’ potential problems and 
needs.  
This process emphasizes PX that includes not only 
pragmatic perspectives but also hedonic perspectives such as 
affect and sociability of the pedestrian. The existing studies 
in Section 2 only focused on the pragmatic perspectives, 
which is considered as more critical issues than hedonic ones. 
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

However, after UX concept had emerged in the electronic 
device field in the 21st century, affect and sociability also 
became an important part of the products and services. In 
contrast, affect and sociability of the mobility handicapped 
are rarely considered in the pedestrian environments. 
Regarding PX principle as a factor of MA, idea designer can 
think outside the box and generate creative support tool ideas. 
Design thinking refers to “a methodology used by 
designers to solve complex problems, and find desirable 
solutions for clients” [18]. The process of the design thinking 
consists of divergent and convergent thinking. The suggested 
systematic idea generation process can be a kind of design 
thinking process, which highlights divergent thinking. 
Adopting MA and emphasizing PX, Divergent thinking can 
be conducted more actively (Figure 4). Quantitative and 
qualitative improvement of the idea generation is expected 
simultaneously.  
Figure 5. Double diagram of design thinking process 
The idea generation process has not been completed yet. 
The steps 1-3 have been finished, and the step 4 is now in 
progress. The steps 5-7 are going to conducted. After 
conducting the all steps, the lists of the all problems and 
needs can be utilized as the data base, each can be a topic of 
the basic research of the mobility handicapped. Likewise, 
each support tool idea can also be utilized as a topic of the 
development research. 
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper suggested the process for generating ideas of 
support tools to enhance pedestrian experience of the 
mobility handicapped. Defining the principles that covers 
various aspects of pedestrian experience helped us explore 
support tool ideas beyond walkability. We hope the results of 
this study can contribute in making the world one step closer 
to an equitable society. It is also expected that the suggested 
process can give insights to other researchers who try to 
develop ideas of support tools in the other domains as well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea 
government (MSIP) (No. NRF-2016R1A2B2011158)  
REFERENCES
[1]
Ministry of Governmt Legislation. The mobility enhancement 
for the mobility impaired act. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.moleg.go.kr/english/korLawEng;jsessionid=BLw
xHY0ZxbDgktEncVSH3cw9F5T4TNFtdzaWD3QSiaffZ9iaQ
tbfALTmURGjG4Gf.moleg_a2_servlet_engine2?pstSeq=527
06&brdSeq=33&pageIndex=41 (accessed February 24, 2017) 
[2]
W. Kim, S. H. Lee, and S. H. Kim, “A Study on Travel 
Behavior of the Mobility Handicapped and Custom-made 
Transit Information System,” Seoul Metropolitan Research, 
9(2), pp. 105-119, 2008. 
[3]
J. A. Jang, “ICT Based Assistance Technologies for 
Vulnerable Road User’s Walkability,” The Magazine of 
Korean Society of Civil Engineers, 62(1), pp. 21-29, 2014. 
[4]
P. Neirotti, A. De Marco, A. C. Cagliano, G. Mangano, and F. 
Scorrano, “Current Trends in Smart City Initiatives: Some 
stylised facts,” Cities, 38, pp. 25-36, 2014. 
[5]
T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Smart City as Urban Innovation: 
Focusing on management,” policy, and context. Proc. of the 
5th international conference on theory and practice of 
electronic governance, ACM press, Sept. 2011, pp. 185-194. 
[6]
J. Park, and S. H. Han, “Defining user value: A case study of 
a smartphone,” International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 
43(4), pp. 274-282. 2013. 
[7]
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport, “A Study on 
the Convenience Facilities of Travel, 2015,” 2016. 
[8]
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport, “A Study on 
the Convenience Facilities of Travel, 2014,” 2015. 
[9]
S. Park, “Defining, Measuring, and Evaluating Path 
Walkability, and Testing Its Impacts on Transit Users' Mode 
Choice and Walking Distance to the Station,” Doctorial thesis, 
University of California, Berkeley, 2008. 
[10] R. H. Lo, “Walkability: what is it?,” Journal of Urbanism,  
2(2), pp. 145-166. 2009. 
[11] R. Ewing, S. Handy, R. C. Brownson, O. Clemente, and E. 
Winston, “Identifying and measuring urban design qualities 
related to walkability,” Journal of Physical Activity and 
Health, 3(s1), pp. 223-240, 2006. 
[12] S. Kari, “Pedestrian experience: Affordances and habits in 
utility walking–Case Otaniemi campus,” Master’s Thesis, 
Aalto University, 2016. 
[13] D. Ni, A. Song, L. Tian, X. Xu, and D. Chen, “A walking 
assistant robotic system for the visually impaired based on 
computer vision and tactile perception. International Journal 
of Social Robotics, 7(5), pp. 617-628, 2015. 
[14] D. Fontanelli, A. Giannitrapani, L. Palopoli, and D. 
Prattichizzo, “A passive guidance system for a robotic 
walking assistant using brakes,” IEEE 54th Annual 
Conference on Decision and Control, IEEE Press, Dec. 2015, 
pp. 829-834. 
[15] S. Y. Jiang, C. Y. Lin, K. T. Huang, and K. T. Song, “Shared 
Control Design of a Walking-Assistant Robot,” IEEE 
Transactions on Control Systems Technology, pp. 1-8, 2017. 
[16] S. Scheggi, M. Aggravi, and D. Prattichizzo, “A vibrotactile 
bracelet to improve the navigation of older adults in large and 
crowded environments,” Proc. 20th IMEKO TC4 Int. Symp. 
and 18th Int. Workshop on ADC Modelling and Testing 
Research on Electric and Electronic Measurement for the 
Economic Upturn, pp. 798-801, 2014. 
[17] A. Miller, “Walking Assistant-A Mobile Aid for the Visually-
Impaired,” Doctoral dissertation, California Polytechnic State 
University San Luis Obispo, 2014. 
[18] Creativity at Work. Design Thinking as a Strategy for 
Innovation. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.creativityatwork.com/design-thinking-strategy-
for-innovation/ (accessed February 28, 2017) 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

