Subliminal Warnings – A New Approach to Change Users' Behavior 
 
Mini Zeng 
mzeng@ju.edu 
Computer Science Department 
Jacksonville University 
Jacksonville, USA 
 
 
Feng Zhu 
fzhu@uah.edu 
Computer Science Department 
University of Alabama in Huntsville 
Huntsville, USA 
 
 
Sandra Carpenter 
carpens@uah.edu 
Psychology Department 
University of Alabama in Huntsville 
Huntsville, USA 
Abstract— People use web applications and services every day. 
They encounter many cyber-attacks in their daily lives. 
Cybersecurity warnings remind users to be cautious but often 
they are not effective because users ignore them. Existing 
warnings often compete for the limited resource – conscious 
attention. Cognitive psychology indicates that human behavior 
can be affected by non-conscious processing. The goal of this 
paper is to explore the effectiveness of subliminal warnings. We 
propose a subliminal warning design that directly suggests users 
behave cautiously. We used a pilot study to guide our design. We 
conducted a lab experiment to evaluate the subliminal warning 
strategy in the context of privacy protection. We implemented 
an integrated hardware and software environment to evaluate 
our warning design, study users' behavior, and to validate and 
verify the proper display of subliminal warning messages. Our 
experimental 
results 
showed 
that 
subliminal 
warnings 
effectively reduced identity disclosure. Warning designs based 
on cognitive psychology and human factors may better protect 
people's privacy. 
Keywords - Subliminal Messages; Non-conscious Processing; 
Warnings. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
People use web applications and services every day. They 
encounter many cyber-attacks in their daily lives (e.g., 
phishing and Domain Name System spoofing attacks). 
Websites or apps may send numerous spam emails. Many 
users have connected to legitimate websites with erroneous or 
self-signed certificates [1]. They often unnecessarily disclose 
identity information, thus putting their privacy at risk. The 
identity information may be collected, sold, and even 
maliciously used. Computer warnings protect users from 
exploits, but many people still fall into attackers' traps. 
Humans are not very good at mitigating cyber-attacks. They 
are considered the weakest component in security systems [2].  
Warnings are used as one of the last lines of defense in 
computer security and are fundamental to users' security 
interactions with technology. When people see computer 
warnings, however, most of the time, they ignore them [3]. 
Moreover, some people do not even pay attention to security 
warnings [4]. On the other hand, when individuals were asked 
about their concerns about their private information, they 
claimed that they had been careful about their personal 
information [5]. This contradiction may be explained by the 
ineffectiveness of warnings [8]. The effectiveness of warnings 
depends on the fact that they attract users' attention, 
communicate 
clearly 
about 
the risks, and 
provide 
straightforward instructions for avoiding the hazards[6].  
Researchers believe one of the fundamental problems is 
the lack of attention paid to warnings [7] So, recent warning 
designs try to grab users’ attention by discontinuing their 
primary tasks [9]. Other researchers claimed that too much 
exposure to warnings and interruptions would make users 
quickly habituate to warnings [7] and feel "warning fatigue" 
[8].   
Current warning theories and practices occur only at the 
conscious level and require attention [9]. However, 
researchers found that a great deal of information processing 
happens at noncouscious level. In addition, human behaviors 
are affected by non-conscious stimuli [10].   
We utilize the non-conscious processing ability for 
warnings instead of competing for conscious attention. The 
last 50 years of cognitive psychology research indicate that 
non-conscious processing can be nudged by human 
perception and behavior[11]. We want to evaluate the impact 
of cybersecurity warnings via non-conscious processing, 
specifically using subliminal messages. Our previous work 
showed that subliminal warnings can remind users about their 
security and privacy attitudes [12].  
In this paper, we further evaluate subliminal warnings that 
directly suggest cautious behavior. Our subliminal warning 
designs require no active attention and do not interfere with a 
user's primary task. The warning messages pop up just in time 
when the user clicks the text entry for identity information. 
These messages are only displayed for dozens of milliseconds. 
The nature of our very brief warning stimuli in non-conscious 
processing may even reduce habituation (warning fatigue) 
[13].   
We use our warnings to help people avoid unnecessary 
identity exposure and more cautiously share their personal 
information online. This is an important area because there are 
17 million identity theft victims every year in the U.S [17]. 
Unfortunately, while people are very concerned about their 
privacy, they do not protect their personal information well 
and unnecessarily expose their information online [15].  
The experiment for the subliminal warning is conducted in 
a context of a restaurant table reservation app. We developed 
an experiment environment that includes eye-tracking and a 
scene camera. The eye tracker was used to study participants' 
gaze behavior, whereas the scene camera verified the proper 
display of the warning messages. Our experiment results 
indicate that our subliminal warning messages can effectively 
reduce disclosure.     
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
A. Computer Warning Framework 
Warnings encourage safe behaviors. Researchers have been 
working on warning designs for decades. They find that users 
frequently ignore warnings and focus, instead, on their tasks 
[6]. To understand how people process warning, several 
models were developed, such as the Communication-Human 
Information Processing (C-HIP) Model [6][19], the sequential 
model [17], and the levels of performance model [18]. The C-
HIP model separates the warning process into two aspects of 
the warning (i.e., source, channel) and six stages of human 
information 
processing: 
delivery, 
attention 
switch, 
comprehension, attitudes and beliefs, motivation, and 
behavior [6]. To increase the effectiveness of warnings, 
researchers and warning designers have developed many 
approaches to attract users' attention, to communicate clearly 
about the risks, and to provide straightforward instructions for 
avoiding the hazard [22][23].  
B. Cybersecurity Warnings 
Due to the reality that the human is the weakest link of the 
cybersecurity chain, researchers have been trying to enhance 
the security of this weakest link by developing and improving 
the security warnings for decades [24]–[26]. Researchers 
found that there are two common issues of ineffective security 
warnings. One is the lack of attention [24]. The other one is 
habituation [25]. Researchers have used eye tracking, mouse 
tracking, functional magnetic resonance imaging [29], and 
galvanic skin response [27] to study user behavior. 
For the lack of attention, a critical approach is the warning 
designs with required actions, called active warnings. Such as 
forcing users to click the URL in the SSL warning [28], 
making users click through several buttons or sub-pages with 
multi-level warnings [29], and a pop-up warning with required 
buttons or links to continue current workflow [30]. These 
successful warning designs make warnings hard to ignore 
[24][34], or totally interrupt users' workflows [25][35]. But 
other researchers [19] argue that it is rational for users to 
ignore warnings because of the amount of conscious attention 
needed. Warnings can interrupt users' workflow, leading to 
"warning fatigue."  
More effective approaches were therefore developed. One 
of the common approaches includes appropriate icons, 
symbols, and physical security metaphors. For example, 
police offer symbols were widely used [33]. Firewall 
warnings were designed with a physical security metaphor 
(using a figure dressed in a prisoner's uniform, carrying a knife 
and a thief's bag) [33]. Also, an SSL warning with a red 
background and a "Stop sign officer" security metaphor [29] 
has been effective. 
To make the transition of attention switch and 
maintenance smoothly, passive warnings without forcing 
users to take actions were designed. For example, a windows 
action center sends notification massage in a "pop-up balloon" 
shows up and fades out after a few minutes [34]. A red open 
lock designed as a SSL warning indicator [31][33]. An  eye-
gaze controlled security warning is displayed when eye gaze 
moves to the hazard area and fades out when users do not need 
it [35].  
C. Subliminal Stimulation and Applications 
Contemporary research in cognitive psychology reveals 
that part of our information processing is at the conscious 
level, whereas other perception efforts may take place beneath 
a threshold that thus we are not consciously aware of (known 
as subliminal) [36]. Non-conscious level priming has not yet 
been considered an approach to improving computer 
warnings. But it has been used in other areas for years, such 
as advertising and education [40][41]. Many research has been 
done on the effect of non-conscious level priming on human 
behavior [39][42]. 
To what extent can non-conscious perception affect our 
behaviors? This has been one of the most controversial issues 
in psychology for decades. Researchers addressed this issue 
through experiments that use subliminal stimulation methods 
[40]. A subliminal stimulus is presented below a subjective 
threshold for conscious perception. Subliminal perception is 
inferred when a stimulus is demonstrated not to be 
consciously perceived while still influencing thoughts, 
feelings, actions, learning, or memory [41]. Three models 
could be applied for subliminal priming: subliminal priming 
mapping with response [42], priming by spatial attention [43] 
and priming by strategies [39].  
Studies showed that arbitrary stimulus-response mappings 
could apply to subliminal stimuli [39][47]. The stimulus-
response mapping is a strategy to generate a connection 
between a response and a stimulus. The goal of stimulus-
response mapping is to encourage a response when a stimulus 
is displayed. Stimuli presented below the threshold of 
awareness can systematically influence choice responses 
determined by the instructed stimulus–response (S–R) 
mapping. Researchers also investigated whether such stimuli 
influence a free choice between two response alternatives 
under conditions in which the choice subjectively appears to 
be internally generated and free. This is relevant for our 
research because our goal is for people to choose cautious 
rather than risky disclosure behavior. For example, the primes 
were left- and right-pointing double arrows (<< and >>). The 
choices provided were either left- and right-pointing double 
arrows or outward-pointing double arrows (< >). The 
experimental results demonstrated that apparently "free" 
choices are not immune to not consciously triggered biases 
[44]. In our research, we apply S-R mapping in subliminal 
messages and icon design.   
Subliminal messages have been used in advertising for 
decades to influence purchasing behavior. Subliminal 
advertising became notorious in 1957 through the publicity. 
James Vicary, a private market researcher tried to increase 
sales of Coca Cola and popcorn in a movie theatre by secretly 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and subliminally flashing the message "Drink Coca Cola" and 
"Eat popcorn" [37]. After that, other researchers demonstrated 
that subliminal priming of a brand name of drink positively 
affected participants' choice and their intention, the primed 
brand, but only for participants who were thirsty [40][47]. 
This led some people to claim that subliminal advertising was 
unethical [48]. It should be used only for non-profit and 
beneficial purposes, such as stopping smoking or improving 
academic performance. For example, subliminal words were 
randomly displayed in different locations on slides presented 
to students [38]and enhanced their later performance.  
In our previous work, we designed a subliminal warning 
message to remind users of their security and privacy attitudes 
based on C-HIP model. The warning was using a yellow 
background message "Privacy" to strengthen user's access to 
their own security attitudes and beliefs [12]. The approach 
emphasizes the effect of warning on attitudes and beliefs level 
of C-HIP model. In this paper, we bypass the other stages of 
C-HIP model and directly use the stimulus-response mapping 
to trigger the safe behavior.  
D. Privacy and Identity Exposure  
Personal privacy has been emphasized for decades. People 
often claim that they care about their privacy when discussing 
their privacy attitudes and concerns. However, they still 
provide sensitive information such as their income, 
investments, and home addresses on the Internet without a 
good reason [46]. People's identity disclosure behavior often 
does not match their privacy attitudes, privacy concerns, and 
actions that they claimed to take to protect their identities [47]. 
They often lack adequate information about protecting their 
identity information and tend to have a sense of personal 
immunity to common hazards [48]. 
III. 
SUBLIMINAL WARNING STRATEGY AND PILOT STUDY 
Subliminal stimuli are defined as occurring below the 
threshold of conscious awareness [49]. The threshold is 
defined by whether less than half of people can consciously 
perceive the stimuli. We conducted a set of pilot studies to 
guide us on the duration of the subliminal stimuli in our 
restaurant reservation context and how many times we should 
display the subliminal prime. The pilot study helped us choose 
the key design factors to maximize the success rate of 
presenting a warning message. We tested two types of 
subliminal stimuli - text messages and icons. The subliminal 
warnings were presented just in time. For example, after a user 
clicks the input textbox and right before disclosing 
information, a subliminal stimulus is shown. In Table 1, we 
represent the conditions tested in the pilot studies. 
Condition one tested subliminal mitigation - the message 
"Fake it" was used as a subliminal warning message. The 
message is displayed between a pre-mask image and a post-
mask image. The pre-mask was a food image (from the 
restaurant being viewed) displayed 2000ms before the 
subliminal prime. The post-mask was a food image displayed 
2000ms after the subliminal prime. The subliminal message is 
displayed five times before the identity input page. The 
message was shown again on the identity input page when a 
user clicked the address input box. Subliminal messages were 
shown for 50ms.  
Condition two tested the message "Fake it" only once for 
50ms. 
Condition three tested the effectiveness of an icon - a 
yellow triangle (pointed to the left). We used the same pre-
mask and post-mask strategy. It is displayed 5 times before an 
identity input page. The duration was set to 50ms. The icon 
appeared on the right side of the "Next" button on the identity 
input page. 
Condition four tested the same icon as condition three but 
the icon displayed at the right side of the address input 
textbox. 
We recruited 22 participants for our pilot study from 
computing science students and psychology students.  
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four 
conditions. We tested 7 participants in condition one, and 5 
participants for each other conditions. Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) approved the pilot study. 
Participants navigated through a restaurant reservation 
application that requests identity information. The subliminal 
stimuli automatically appeared in pages or when identity 
elements were requested.  
The percentage of participants who disclosed their identity 
information is shown in Table 2. From the results of the pilot 
studies, we can see that a warning design with the subliminal 
message that shows up once was more effective than other 
subliminal warning designs. This finding aligns with those of 
other research projects that focused on semantic processing – 
that short messages are one of the most effective stimuli 
[50]among all effective subliminal message forms (i.e., 
photos, words, signs, and shapes/polygons). 
Because the subliminal warnings were displayed during a 
very short period of time, a concise message is needed to 
suggest safe behavior. When an app or a website collects a 
large amount of identity information, we can suggest users to 
TABLE 1 PILOT STUDY CONDITIONS 
Condition  
Subliminal Prime 
Duration for each display 
Number of Displays  
Display 
1 
Text message “Fake it” 
50 ms 
Five Times 
At the top of Address textbox 
2 
Text Message “Fake it” 
50 ms 
Once 
At the top of Address textbox 
3 
Icon: Yellow Triangle 
50 ms 
Five Times 
At the right of “Next” button 
4 
Icon: Yellow Triangle 
50 ms 
Five Times 
At the right of Address textbox 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

"fake it" or "skip it." Warning words need to be congruent 
with users' attitudes, beliefs, motivations, and behavior. 
Research has shown that congruity between a subliminally 
presented word and a user's goal has a significant influence on 
behavior [39]. Most people want to keep their information 
private [51], so there should be congruency between the 
suggested cautious behavior and attitudes. 
More than one strategy may be used to warn users. For 
example we may suggest the user to "fake it" or "skip it." 
Considering some of the web applications set most of the 
personal information fields as required, users can not skip 
them. In this paper, we decided to present the subliminal 
warning message "fake it" with a  50 ms display duration, one 
time, above the requested identity information field.  
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
We conducted an experiment to evaluate the effectiveness 
of the subliminal warnings. We used an eye-gaze based 
verification system with an eye tracker and a scene camera 
and a post-experiment questionnaire for evaluation. 
The design of this experiment has two conditions: the 
control condition (with no warning) and the subliminal 
warning condition (with the subliminal message to "fake it”, 
display 50ms on top of the address line one). We target the 
street address for not disclosure based on an assumption that 
the street address would be more sensitive than another field 
(zip code, state, etc) for a table reservation app. We conducted 
our study to achieve the following goals. 
 
Ascertain that subliminal warnings are effective. 
 
Verify and validate that subliminal warnings can be 
displayed at the right time, right place, and for the proper 
duration.  
 
Gain an understanding of participants' identity disclosure 
behavior under the subliminal warning condition. We 
wanted to document participants' behavior (e.g., eye gaze, 
personal information disclosure) when the warning was 
shown for milliseconds. 
A. Participants 
We recruited 58 participants on campus for the 
experiment. 40 were women, and 18 were men. Their ages 
ranged from forty-eight to seventeen, with a median of twenty 
one. We list this experiment on a psychology department's 
website. We prepared a cover story for the experiment as a 
user evaluation for a restaurant reservation app. Students 
received activity points as an option toward a course 
assignment.  
B. The Hardware and Software 
Because of the short display duration of the subliminal 
message, we require high-frequency sampling rate for the eye 
tracking system. The sampling frequency of the scene camera 
was 120Hz. The sampling frequency of the eye tracker was 
250Hz. We ran all software (Eyetracking, scene camera 
recording, the restaurant scheduling application, and 
eyetracking analysis) on one machine in the first demo. The 
high rates of data sampling caused performance degradation 
(i.e., the sampling intervals were prolonged). Thus, we moved 
to two PCs that were connected via a wired LAN that was 
dedicated to the experiment. We executed eye tracking and the 
restaurant scheduling application on the SMI Server and the 
scene camera on another laptop computer to guarantee the 
performance of eye tracking sampling frequency. We also 
developed new software, which collected and analyzed eye 
tracking data and synchronized events and eye tracking. 
Figure 1 shows an integrated software environment that 
synchronized the eye tracking system, the ReserveME app, 
the scene camera, and the respective event logs.  
Based on this setting, the eye tracking system consistently 
sampled at 4ms, but the scene camera could not reach the 
speed of its specification. We sampled 1000 frames each for 6 
participants (3 in the control condition and 3 in the subliminal 
condition) in our pilot study. We generated timestamps for the 
scene camera videos. Theoretically, the scene camera samples 
at every 8.3ms (120Hz). The actual sampling rate was on 
average at 11.24ms (89Hz). Thus, we used the 11.24ms as our 
frame duration for our analysis of the scene camera videos.  
C. The Warning Design 
In the restaurant scheduling application, ReserveME, we 
implemented a subliminal warning that suggested participants 
TABLE 2 PILOT STUDY RESULT: PERCENTAGE OF PARTICIPANTS DISCLOSING PERSONAL INFORMATION 
Subliminal Prime 
Condition 
First name 
Last name 
Email 
Phone Number 
Address 
Zip code 
Message 
1 
71% 
57% 
43% 
29% 
43% 
57% 
2 
80% 
80% 
20% 
20% 
25% 
20% 
Icon 
3 
100% 
100% 
80% 
80% 
80% 
80% 
4 
100% 
100% 
100% 
80% 
100% 
100% 
 
 
Figure 1. Integrated software environment for the experiment   
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

provide a piece of fake identity information. In our 
experiment, we used "FAKE IT" as shown in Figure 2. We 
wanted to display the message just-in-time. That is, when a 
user clicked on the street address textbox and right before they 
input their information, a subliminal text message was shown. 
The subliminal message was set to display for 50ms right 
above the input textbox, where participants' eye gazes were 
most likely to be located.  
We were specifically interested in six pieces of 
information: street address, city, state, zip code, email address, 
and phone number. When zip code, phone number, and email 
address were requested, the warning message was not shown. 
(Phone number and email address were requested on the 
following page of the app.) We wanted to find the impact of 
subliminal warnings for the targeted behavior – disclosure of 
street address – as well as for disclosure of the other 
information. 
 
 
Figure 2. A subliminal warning was shown when a user mouse-clicked 
the input textbox. 
D. Procedure 
The participant signed the consent form and disclaimer 
first. The disclaimer stated that the restaurant reservation app 
was developed by a third-party software company and the 
purpose of this study is to evaluate the useability of the 
software. In the disclaimer, we informed that participants' 
information would be shared with the software company. This 
mock disclaimer was used to reduce the university 
environment bias so that the university researchers would be 
cautious with participants' information. We did not share their 
information with any third-party company. A short 
introduction to the experimental procedure was provided to 
participants. Participants were told to use the ReserveME app 
without communication with the researcher unless they had 
technical questions. A post-experiment survey was given after 
they reached the last page of the ReserveME app. The entire 
procedure for each participant took about 30 minutes. 
Durations varied somewhat for different participants because 
of eye-tracking calibration or other technical issues. Our 
university's Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved the 
experiment procedure. 
In the experiment, we did not directly record their identity 
information. We recorded whether they provided a certain 
piece of information. In our database of the restaurant 
reservation app, we coded "1" for participants who provided 
accurate information and "0" for those not provided accurate 
information. (The accuracy of the information was obtained 
from responses participants gave on the post-experiment 
survey; see below.) Their input of the identity information was 
discarded as they were typing the information, but participants 
were not aware of this during the experiment. The eye tracker 
collects the X, Y coordinates of eye fixation and movement. 
The scene camera record the change of pages and the pop-up 
and fade out of the subliminal warning. In our after-
experiment debriefing, we told participants that none of their 
actual information had been saved in the database or would be 
shared with a third party. We also told them the subliminal 
warning message was displayed on the address page and the 
real purpose of the experiment.   
E. Post-Experiment Survey 
The first part of the post-experiment survey asked 
questions about participants' experience with the ReserveME 
app.  
In the second part of the survey, we asked participants 
whether or not they provided accurate information on the 
identity entry questions in the ReserveME app. We also asked 
why they provided accurate or inaccurate information. In the 
third part of the survey, we asked whether they saw anything 
on the page on a specific spot. We provided a screenshot of 
the application page to remind them. If they reported yes, we 
asked them to describe the message they saw.   
Then, the focus of the questionnaire shifted to privacy 
attitudes in the fourth part. We asked participants to rate four 
pieces of identity elements and whether it was important to 
keep the identity elements private. We also asked about their 
concerns related to spam, identify theft, and the like. 
Last, we asked participants about their demographic 
information.  
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
A total of fifty-eight participants were in our two 
experimental conditions – thirty in the control condition and 
twenty-eight in the subliminal warning condition.  
A. The Display of the Subliminal Warnings  
Verified by the data collected by scene camera, the 
subliminal warning message was displayed in all cases in the 
subliminal condition. The average display duration of the 
warning message was 84ms, although we set the display 
duration for 50ms (see Section 4.2 for how we measured the 
durations). For twenty-seven participants, the warning 
message lasted 56ms (5 frames) to 101ms (9 frames). For one 
participant, the message lasted much longer 135ms (12 
frames). This was an unusually long display of the message. 
The long display was consistent with the event logs of 
ReserveME and eye tracking data. (The participant did not 
report seeing the message.) Therefore, the display durations of 
subliminal warning message may have variations in different 
runs.  
B. Were Participants Consciously Aware of the Warning 
Message?  
Six out of twenty-eight participants in the subliminal 
warning condition could report the subliminal warning 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

message in one way or another. Three of them recalled the 
exact action suggested, "FAKE IT;" two remembered the 
message "falsify" which was semantically correct, and the 
other one ("red boarder") seemed not to have processed the 
warning message at the semantic level. Unlike the other five, 
this participant provided accurate information for all identity 
elements.  
The average display duration of the subliminal warning 
message for this small group who recalled the warning 
message was 90ms (8 frames). Next, we ran a t-test to evaluate 
whether the mean of the number of frames displayed for this 
group was different from the rest of the participants in the 
subliminal condition. Those participants who recalled the 
subliminal warning messages were shown 8.0 frames on 
average, and those who did not recall the message were shown 
7.36 frames on average. Having the p-value of 0.333, we 
believe there was no difference between the two groups. In 
addition, we ran six one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
tests to determine whether the number of frames of the prime 
impacted its effectiveness on identity exposure of the six 
elements. None of the tests turned out to be significant.      
C. Identity Disclosure Behavior  
We analyze participants' behavior between the control and 
subliminal conditions from three aspects: (a) the number of 
participants who did not input their information; (b) the 
number of participants who faked their identity elements 
when they input; and (c) the number of participants who 
provided accurate identity information. The sums of the 
numbers in all three aspects equal the total number of 
participants. We ran the two proportion Z-tests (left-tailed) to 
determine whether participants in the subliminal warning 
condition group behaved statistically differently from the 
control group in all three aspects and for all six identity 
elements. Table 3 shows subliminal warning experiment 
results for the two experimental conditions. Probability values 
(p-values) less than 5% (bold) indicate statistically significant 
differences between the control and subliminal message 
conditions. The numbers in parentheses indicate the number 
of participants who input information. The numbers in 
parentheses indicate the odds ratios when we compare the 
control condition to the subliminal condition (i.e., reciprocals 
of the odds ratios that compared the subliminal condition to 
the control condition). 
More participants in the subliminal warning condition did 
not input their information for all six identity elements than 
those in the control condition. Note that the subliminal 
warning message was triggered by the mouse click event on 
the street address field. This indicated that participants in the 
subliminal condition wanted to input information for the first 
identity element, but they did not. Two proportion Z-tests 
show that for street address and email, participants in the 
subliminal condition behaved statistically different from the 
control group. For the address field, for example, participants 
in the subliminal condition were about 6.3 times (i.e., odds 
ratio) more likely to skip their input in the field. 
For participants who input their information, those in the 
subliminal condition were much more likely to fake their 
identity elements than those in the control condition. Except 
for the state, all other five identity elements were statistically 
different for the subliminal and control conditions. 
Participants were two to eight times (1.95 – 7.78) more likely 
to fake their identity information for the subliminal group than 
the control group.  
When we combine the first two aspects (a and b), we have 
the total effect of the subliminal warning message – the 
reduction of the real identity disclosure. For instance, thirteen 
participants provided real street address information in the 
subliminal condition compared to twenty-four of them in the 
control condition. The two proportion Z-tests show that the 
difference was statistically significant. Participants in the 
subliminal condition had a 22% chance (i.e., odds ratio) to 
provide their street address when compared to those in the 
control group. That is, those in the control group were 4.6 
times (the reciprocal of 0.22) more likely to provide their real 
street addresses than those in the subliminal condition. The 
results (Table 3) show that participants were much less likely 
to provide their real information in the subliminal condition 
for all elements except for their state information. 
 The scale of identity exposure and behavior was very 
different between the two groups, as shown in Table 3. For 
example, all except one participant did not provide the street 
address; all others typed in information in the control group. 
For the subliminal group, two persons did not type in anything 
in all four fields and went to the next page. Another three 
skipped the street address part and moved on to the following 
fields (city, state, and zip code).  
Emails and phone numbers were requested on a 
subsequent page of the ReserveME app. Participants in the 
subliminal condition, however, were still much more likely to 
not provide or to fake the information than those in the control 
condition. Thus, we have an interesting and important 
observation: even though "FAKE IT" was suggested once for 
the street address, it may have impacted the disclosure of 
identity elements after that.  
TABLE 3. SUBLIMINAL WARNING EXPERIMENT RESULTS  
 
Did not input information 
Faked information 
Exposed real information 
 
Con
-trol 
Sub-
liminal 
P-
value 
Odds 
ratio 
Con-
trol 
Sub-
liminal 
P-value 
Odds 
ratio 
Con-
trol 
Sub-
liminal 
P-value 
Odds ratio 
Address 
1 
5 
0.035 
6.30 
5 (29) 
10 (23) 
0.048 
2.78 
24 
13 
0.004 
0.22 (4.62) 
City 
0 
2 
0.068 
∞  
3 (30) 
7 (26) 
0.065 
3.00 
27 
19 
0.017 
0.23 (4.26) 
State 
0 
2 
0.068 
∞ 
3 (30) 
5 (26) 
0.192 
1.95 
27 
21 
0.065 
0.33 (3.00) 
Zip code 
0 
2 
0.068 
∞ 
3 (30) 
9 (26) 
0.019 
4.26 
27 
17 
0.004 
0.17 (5.82) 
Email 
0 
4 
0.016 
∞ 
2 (30) 
10 (24) 
0.003 
7.78 
28 
14 
<0.001 
0.07 (12.1) 
Phone 
2 
5 
0.095 
3.04 
3 (28) 
9 (23) 
0.019 
4.26 
25 
14 
0.003 
0.20 (5.00) 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

D. What the Eye Tracking Data Show  
We were interested in the eye gaze fixation and the time 
period when the subliminal warnings were shown. We 
acquired quality eye tracking data in twenty-four cases in the 
subliminal condition and did not have quality data for the 
other four due to the eye tracker's loss of the participants' eye 
gazes during the display of the subliminal message and by an 
automated system update which negatively impacted the eye-
tracking sampling rates. 
In twenty out of twenty-four cases, participants' eye gazes 
were near the subliminal warning message as shown in the 
white rectangle area (up to 50 pixels away in X or Y 
coordinates from the "FAKE IT" message) as shown in Figure 
3. This was the most reasonable place for participants' gazes 
to be located because when a participant needed to click on 
the textbox, they would look at the textbox. Therefore, we 
displayed the subliminal warning message at that location and 
at the moment of input as one of the best bets to be successful. 
Eye-tracking data confirmed that most participants were 
looking at or near that location. Figure 3 shows a participant’s 
eye gaze during the display of the subliminal warning 
message. The colored dots represent eye-gaze locations with 
4ms intervals that overlay on top of each (the lighter the color, 
the more recent the eye gaze location). 
Participants behaved differently from the rest in the 
subliminal condition in three cases. First, their eye gaze 
locations were not on or near the street address textbox. It 
seemed that they looked at the textbox and moved their mice 
over the textbox a few seconds prior. They looked elsewhere 
and then clicked on the field. Thus, they missed the warning 
message. Two of them provided real identity elements for all 
the six pieces requested. One of the participants perhaps 
noticed a message; about 80ms after the subliminal message, 
his/her eye gaze moved right to the location where the 
subliminal message was displayed and looked at the area for 
about 300ms. 
In the other case, there seemed to be a significant delay 
(about 120ms) between the time when the participant clicked 
the street address textbox and the display of the subliminal 
message. When the subliminal message was displayed, the 
participant had already been looking at the keyboard and 
typing. This participant provided real information for all 
identity elements. 
Learning from these cases, we may display the warning 
when the mouse is over the street address textbox. Such an 
approach needs to solve the issues that a user is not looking at 
the field but the mouse happens to move over or stop on the 
specific location. Further research and experiments are needed 
to improve these mechanisms. In addition, we will evaluate 
the display of the subliminal message within the input textbox 
in future experiments. 
E. How Participants Explained their Disclosure Behavior  
In the questionnaire, we asked participants why they 
provided truthful or false identity information during their 
interaction with the app. Their 72 responses were classified 
into one or more of nine categories of explanations shown in 
Table 4. We use thematic analysis for the classification of this 
qualitative data. We took the bodies of the data and then 
groups them according to similarities.  
Some participants gave explanations fitting into more than 
one category. The most frequently occurring categories (n = 
33 responses; 7 + 11 giving being truthful; 4 + 11 falsifying) 
used to explain disclosure (or non-disclosure) were related to 
the sensitivity (i.e., riskiness) or lack of sensitivity of the 
information. For example, "I feel uncomfortable sharing this 
information" or "this information is safe to give." The second 
most frequent reason for disclosure was related to 
trust/distrust of the app or the experimental context (n = 20 
responses), such as "I trust apps like this." Note that only half 
as many participants in the warning condition, compared to 
the control condition, indicated that they trusted the app/ 
experiment. Eight participants indicated that they thought the 
information was (or was not) needed by the app or 
experimenter. Four participants indicated that they disclosed 
out of habit. Another four explained that they thought the 
information was already (or readily) available to the 
researcher or app. Three participants said they falsified 
information because the app told them to "fake it." 
F. The Relationships among Behavior, Privacy Attitudes, 
Concerns, and the Subliminal Warning  
People's privacy attitudes, concerns, and other unknown 
factors may all affect their privacy disclosure behavior. 
Having the data of participants' privacy attitudes and concerns 
from the questionnaire and our experimental data, we 
 
Figure 3. A participant’s eye gaze information when a subliminal 
warning shows up 
 
TABLE 4. PARTICIPANTS’ EXPLANATIONS OF WHY THEY 
DID OR DID NOT PROVIDE THEIR PERSONAL 
INFORMATION. 
Reasons for Providing Truthful Information 
 
Control 
Sublimi
nal 
Information is not sensitive or it is not 
risky to disclose. 
7 
11 
Trust in the app or experimental 
context. 
12 
6 
Information is needed by the app or 
experiment. 
4 
2 
Information is already known. 
2 
2 
Habit. 
4 
0 
 
Reasons for Falsifying Personal Information 
 
Control 
Sublimi
nal 
Information is sensitive or risky to 
disclose. 
4 
11 
Distrust the app/experimental context. 
1 
1 
Information is not needed by the 
app/experiment. 
1 
1 
Told to “fake it.” 
0 
3 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

analyzed the relationships between these factors and 
participants' behavior.  
We created indices from the data in the following way: a) 
a disclosure index that combined participants' disclosure 
behavior by giving weights of 1 to a street address, email, and 
phone number, and weights of 0.5, 0.3, and 0.2 to zip code, 
city, and state, respectively; The weights were assigned based 
on the sensitivity of different field. (state is much less risky to 
be disclose than street address) b) an attitude index that 
combined participants' ratings of four attitude questions; c) a 
concern index that combined participants' ratings of six 
related questions; and d) dummy coded 1 for eye gaze at or 
near the subliminal message, and 2 for other cases including 
for participants in the control condition. These indices were 
used in multiple regression models for the relations between 
the predictors and the disclosure behavior.  
In the full linear regression model that included all 
variables, the eye gaze location had very strong correlations 
with experiment conditions (-0.861) and the number of frames 
of the warning message (-0.886). Due to this high collinearity, 
we ran a reduced model with just eye gaze location, 
experiment condition, or the number of frames. The models 
respective R squares were 0.338, 0.286, and 0.263. Thus, we 
used eye gaze location for the reduced linear regression model 
as shown below. 
Disclosure = β0 + β1 x1 + β2 x2 + βx x3                  
  where x1=“Eye gaze location” 
            x2=“Attitudes” 
            x3=“Concerns” 
 
 
The linear regression results are shown in Figure 4. 
Compared to the full model, the adjusted R squares for this 
reduced model increased from 0.275 to 0.298. The eye gaze 
location was a statistically significant factor in predicting 
participants' behavior, but attitudes and concerns were not 
significant factors in predicting disclosure in this context.   
VI. 
LIMITATIONS 
Like any other experimental study, our experiment has its 
limitations. First, we used a lab environment to study whether 
subliminal warnings reduce identity disclosure. We are keenly 
aware of the questions raised regarding the realism of the 
method and the generalizability of experiments. Experiments, 
however, provide the best control over factors that might 
influence disclosure. They are the most effective way to test 
our hypotheses by studying participants' behavior directly 
when warning messages are shown for dozens of 
milliseconds. They allow us to measure the duration of the 
subliminal messages and participants' eye gazes.  
Second, our ReserveME app collects identity information 
and also displays warnings. This does not seem logical in a 
real-world application, but the approach avoids further 
complication of our software and does not affect the proof of 
concept 
of 
subliminal 
warnings. 
In 
a 
commercial 
implementation, the functionality of subliminal warnings may 
be realized by operating systems or as a web browser plug-in 
(similar to the autofill function in browsers to identify form 
fields).    
Third, our experiment was run in a university lab setting. 
Often, participants trust researchers in this type of setting, thus 
challenging privacy research. People may believe that 
researchers will not put them at risk. It was the case for our 
experiment, as shown in Table 2. Given the trusting nature of 
our research participants, however, warnings that do decrease 
disclosure of private information will likely be effective in a 
lower trust real-world environment. 
Last, our participants were college students (most of them 
were between eighteen and twenty-two). Thus, our results 
might have limited generalizability. This age group, however, 
may be one of the most representative age groups who use 
apps to make reservations and purchases online. In our future 
work, we plan to study participants with more diverse 
backgrounds and age groups. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Instead of reminding users of their privacy and security 
attitudes as we did in a previous study using the word 
“privacy” [15], our primary goal and contribution of this 
research were to design a subliminal warning by suggesting 
safe behavior using stimulus–response mapping model. When 
an app or a website collects a large amount of identity 
information, we can suggest users to “fake it.” This design 
bypassed the upper stages and emphasized the last level of C-
HIP model. Cognitively more straightforward to trigger the 
safe behavior (not provide personal information). We 
conducted a pilot study and tested two categories of warnings 
(message and icon) to guide the design of the subliminal 
warning. We used eye tracking and scene camera recording to 
verify the display duration of the subliminal warning and 
users' attention during the experiment. The result of the 
experiment showed that the subliminal warning with the 
suggested response could effectively reduced disclosure of 
identity information.  
This paper proposed the basic idea by focusing on 
scientific theory and evaluations. The subliminal warnings 
 
Figure 4. Liner regression results. The relationships between behavior, 
privacy attitudes, concerns, and eye gaze locations. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

could be implemented as an application solution to motivate 
safety behavior. Part of our future work is to implement the 
application solution of the subliminal warning. We envision 
that an application implementation of subliminal warning 
could be developed as a third-party application or as a web 
browser plug-in.   
We learned several lessons and limitations of our study. 
The application of the strategy that uses mouse click events to 
trigger the warning display may not work for all types of user 
behavior. System delays might also have an impact on the 
warning effectiveness. In this experiment, we evaluated only 
one display duration. We will study the warning effectiveness 
with regard to different display durations of the subliminal 
messages. Moreover, future experiments may examine 
different warning words and their locations.   
It is also quite interesting that, in the pilot study, condition 
two obtained better results than condition one. The warning 
was presented five times in condition one, while the warning 
was only displayed once in condition two. It could be because 
of the pre-mask and post-mask in condition one. We added 
them to make sure the warning satisfies the subliminal 
threshold.  In our future work, we plan to extend the 
experimental study with multiple times displays of subliminal 
warnings, different warning words, duration, colors, and 
background of the message. We will also apply other 
statistical analyses such as the omnibus test to test different 
parameters and Bonferroni correction to mitigate family-wise 
errors.  
Our ongoing research is to develop a framework for non-
conscious security warnings. We want to discover other 
effective subliminal warning strategies. We want to 
investigate how these strategies facilitate users' memory 
access, remind them of their security and privacy attitudes, 
and motivate them to take safe actions. Another goal is to 
compare the effectiveness of the different strategies and to 
find their limitations.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Sobey, R. Biddle, P. C. van Oorschot, and A. S. Patrick, 
“Exploring user reactions to new browser cues for extended 
validation certificates,” in European Symposium on Research 
in Computer Security, 2008, pp. 411–427. 
[2] A. Wiesmann, A. Stock, M. Curphey, and R. Stirbei, “A guide 
to building secure web applications and web services,” The 
Open Web Application Security Project, 2005. http://www.i-
pi.com/Training/BSS/OWASPGuide2.0.1.pdf (accessed May 
19, 2022). 
[3] K. Krol, M. Moroz, and M. A. Sasse, “Don’t Work. Can’t 
Work? Why It’s Time to Rethink Security Warnings,” Risk and 
security of internet and systems (CRiSIS), 2012 7th 
International conference, pp. 1–8, 2012. 
[4] A. Vance, D. Eargle, J. L. Jenkins, C. B. Kirwan, and B. B. 
Anderson, “The fog of warnings: how non-essential 
notifications blur with security warnings,” in Fifteenth 
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2019), 
2019, pp. 407–420. 
[5] S. Carpenter, F. Zhu, M. Zeng, and M. Shreeves, “Expert 
sources in warnings may reduce the extent of identity 
disclosure in cyber contexts,” International Journal of Human-
-Computer Interaction, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 215–228, 2017. 
[6] M. S. Wogalter, “Communication-Human Information 
Processing(C-HIP)Model,” in Handbook of Warnings, M. 
Wogalter, Ed. Mahwah,NJ, USA, 2006, pp. 51–62. 
[7] B. Anderson, T. Vance, B. Kirwan, D. Eargle, and S. Howard, 
“Users aren’t (necessarily) lazy: using NeuroIS to explain 
habituation to security warnings,” Thirty Fifth International 
Conference on Information Systems, pp. 1–15, 2014. 
[8] D. Akhawe and A. P. Felt, “Alice in warningland: a large-scale 
field study of browser security warning effectiveness,” 
Proceedings of the 22nd USENIX Security Symposium, pp. 
257–272, 2013. 
[9] C. Bravo-Lillo, L. F. Cranor, J. Downs, and S. Komanduri, 
“Bridging the gap in computer security warnings: A mental 
model approach,” IEEE Security and Privacy, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 
18–26, 2011, doi: 10.1109/MSP.2010.198. 
[10] S. Dehaene, J. P. Changeux, L. Naccache, J. Sackur, and C. 
Sergent, “Conscious, preconscious, and subliminal processing: 
a testable taxonomy,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 10, 
no. 5, pp. 204–211, 2006, doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.03.007. 
[11] J. Kihlstrom, “The Congnitive Unconscious,” Science (1979), 
vol. 237, pp. 1445–1452, 1987. 
[12] F. Zhu, S. Carpenter, and M. Zeng, “Subliminal Warnings: 
Utilizing the High Bandwidth of Nonconscious Visual 
Perception,” in 17th International Conference PERSUASIVE, , 
Mar. 2022, pp. 255–271. 
[13] R. M. Montoya, R. S. Horton, J. L. Vevea, M. Citkowicz, and 
E. A. Lauber, “A re-examination of the mere exposure effect: 
The influence of repeated exposure on recognition, familiarity, 
and liking.,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 143, no. 5, pp. 459–
498, 2017, doi: 10.1037/bul0000085. 
[14] E. Harrell and L. Langton, “Victims of identity theft, 2014,” 
U.S. Department of Justice, no. December, p. 27, 2015. 
[15] S. Spiekermann, J. Grossklags, and B. Berendt, “E-privacy in 
2nd generation E-commerce: privacy preferences versus actual 
behavior,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM conference on 
Electronic Commerce, 2001, pp. 38–47. 
[16] V. C. Conzola and M. S. Wogalter, “A Communication – 
Human Information Processing ( C – HIP ) approach to 
warning effectiveness in the workplace,” Journal of Risk 
Research, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 309–322, 2001, doi: 
10.1080/1366987011006271. 
[17] M. Lehto and J. Miller, “Warning volume I: Fundamentals, 
design, and evaluation methodologies,” Ann Arbor MI: Fuller 
Technical Publications, vol. I, no. Warning, 1986. 
[18] M. R. Lehto, “A proposed conceptual model of human 
behavior and its implications for design of warnings.,” Percept 
Mot Skills, vol. 73, pp. 595–611, 1991. 
[19] C. Bravo-Lillo, L. F. Cranor, J. Downs, and S. Komanduri, 
“Bridging the gap in computer security warnings: A mental 
model approach,” IEEE Security and Privacy, vol. 9, no. April, 
pp. 18–26, 2011, doi: 10.1109/MSP.2010.198. 
[20] M. S. Wogalter, R. J. Sojourner, and J. W. Brelsford, 
“Comprehension and retention of safety pictorials,” 
Ergonomics, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 531–542, 1997. 
[21] D. Holender, “Semantic activation without conscious 
identification in dichotic listening, parafoveal vision, and 
visual masking: A survey and appraisal,” Behavioral and brain 
Sciences, vol. 9, no. 01, pp. 1–23, 1986. 
[22] D. H. Nguyen, A. Kobsa, and G. R. Hayes, “An empirical 
investigation of concerns of everyday tracking and recording 
technologies,” in Proceedings of the 10th International 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 2008, pp. 182–191. doi: 
10.1145/1409635.1409661. 
[23] B. Schneier, Secrets and lies: digital security in a networked 
world. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
[24] P. Sumner, P.-C. Tsai, K. Yu, and P. Nachev, “Attentional 
modulation of sensorimotor processes in the absence of 
perceptual awareness.,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, vol. 103, 
no. 27, pp. 10520–10525, 2006, doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0601974103. 
[25] A. Amran, Z. F. Zaaba, and M. K. Mahinderjit Singh, 
“Habituation effects in computer security warning,” 
Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective, vol. 27, 
no. 2, pp. 119–131, 2018. 
[26] C. Bravo-lillo and et al., “Your attention please: Designing 
security-decision UIs to make genuine risks harder to ignore,” 
in SOUPS ’13 Proceedings of the Ninth Symposium on Usable 
Privacy and Security, 2013, pp. 1–18. doi: 
10.1145/2501604.2501610. 
[27] M. R. Lehto, “Human Factors Models,” in Handbook of 
Warnings, M. S. Wogalter, Ed. Mahwah, NJ, USA: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 2006, pp. 63–88. 
[28] A. P. Felt, R. W. Reeder, H. Almuhimedi, and S. Consolvo, 
“Experimenting at scale with google chrome’s SSL warning,” 
Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human 
factors in computing systems - CHI ’14, pp. 2667–2670, 2014, 
doi: 10.1145/2556288.2557292. 
[29] J. Sunshine, S. Egelman, H. Almuhimedi, N. Atri, and L. F. 
Cranor, “Crying wolf: An empirical study of SSL warning 
effectiveness,” in 18th USENIX Security Symposium, 2009, pp. 
399–432. doi: 10.1016/S1353-4858(01)00916-3. 
[30] A. P. Felt et al., “Improving SSL warnings: Comprehension 
and adherence,” in Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems - Proceedings, Apr. 2015, vol. 2015-April, 
pp. 2893–2902. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702442. 
[31] D. Akhawe and A. P. Felt, “Alice in warningland: a large-scale 
field study of browser security warning effectiveness,” in 
Proceedings of the 22nd USENIX Security Symposium, 2013, 
pp. 257–272. 
[32] S. Egelman and S. Schechter, “The importance of being earnest 
[in security warnings],” in International Conference on 
Financial Cryptography and Data Security, 2013, pp. 52–59. 
[33] F. Raja, K. Hawkey, S. Hsu, K.-L. Wang, and K. Beznosov, “A 
brick wall, a locked door, and a bandit: a physical security 
metaphor for firewall warnings,” 2011. doi: 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2078827.2078829. 
[34] P. Domingues, L. Andrade, and M. Frade, “A Digital Forensic 
View of Windows 10 Notifications,” Forensic Sciences, vol. 2, 
no. 1, pp. 88–106, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.3390/forensicsci2010007. 
[35] M. Zeng, F. Zhu, and S. Carpenter, “Eye Gaze Based Dynamic 
Warnings,” 9th International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI), vol. i, no. c, pp. 204–
211, 2016. 
[36] E. K. Cressman, M. Y. Lam, I. M. Franks, J. T. Enns, and R. 
Chua, “Unconscious and out of control: Subliminal priming is 
insensitive to observer expectations,” Consciousness and 
Cognition, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 716–728, 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j.concog.2013.04.011. 
[37] L. Smarandescu and T. A. Shimp, “Drink coca-cola, eat 
popcorn, and choose powerade: testing the limits of subliminal 
persuasion,” Marketing Letters, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 715–726, 
2015, doi: 10.1007/s11002-014-9294-1. 
[38] R. Radel, P. Sarrazin, P. Legrain, and L. Gobancé, “Subliminal 
priming of motivational orientation in educational settings: 
Effect on academic performance moderated by mindfulness,” 
Journal of Research in Personality, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 695–
698, 2009. 
[39] E. J. Strahan, S. J. Spencer, and M. P. Zanna, “Subliminal 
priming and persuasion: Striking while the iron is hot,” Journal 
of Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 556–
568, 2002, doi: 10.1016/S0022-1031(02)00502-4. 
[40] P. M. Merikle and M. Daneman, “Psychological investigations 
of unconscious perception,” Journal of consciousness studies, 
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 5–18, 1998. 
[41] S. Kouider and S. Dehaene, “Levels of processing during non-
conscious perception: a critical review of visual masking.,” 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, vol. 362, no. 1481, pp. 
857–75, 2007, doi: 10.1098/rstb.2007.2093. 
[42] H. F. Sperdin, L. Spierer, R. Becker, C. M. Michel, and T. 
Landis, “Submillisecond unmasked subliminal visual stimuli 
evoke electrical brain responses,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 
36, no. 4, pp. 1470–1483, 2015, doi: 10.1002/hbm.22716. 
[43] H. Reuss, A. Kiesel, W. Kunde, and P. Wühr, “A cue from the 
unconscious - masked symbols prompt: Spatial anticipation,” 
Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 3, no. OCT, pp. 1–10, 2012, doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00397. 
[44] F. Schlaghecken and M. Eimer, “Masked prime stimuli can 
bias ‘free’ choices between response alternatives.,” Psychon 
Bull Rev, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 463–468, 2004, doi: 
10.3758/BF03196596. 
[45] M. Rogers and K. H. Smith, “Public perceptions of subliminal 
advertising: Why practitioners shouldn’t ignore this issue,” 
Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 10–19, 
1993. 
[46] S. Spiekermann, J. Grossklags, and B. Berendt, “E-privacy in 
2nd Generation E-Commerce: Privacy Preferences versus 
actual Behavior,” 2001. 
[47] F. Zhu, S. Carpenter, and A. Kulkarni, “Understanding Identity 
Exposure in Pervasive Computing Environments,” Pervasive 
and Mobile Computing, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 777–794, 2012. 
[48] J. R. Bettman, J. W. Payne, and R. Staelin, “Cognitive 
considerations in presenting risk information,” Learning about 
Risk–consumer and worker responses to hazard information, 
pp. 13–41, 1987. 
[49] M. Bar and I. Biederman, “Subliminal Visual Priming,” 
Psychological Science, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 464–468, 1998, doi: 
10.1111/1467-9280.00086. 
[50] R. M. Montoya, R. S. Horton, J. L. Vevea, and E. A. Lauber, 
“A Re-Examination of the Mere Exposure Effect : The 
Influence of Repeated Exposure on Recognition , Familiarity , 
and Liking,” vol. 143, no. 5, pp. 459–498, 2017. 
[51] M. S. Ackerman, L. F. Cranor, and J. Reagle, “Privacy in e-
commerce: examining user scenarios and privacy preferences,” 
in Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on Electronic 
commerce, 1999, pp. 1–8. 
 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

