A First Postural Tracking Using a Kinect v2 Sensor During an Immersive Wheelchair
Driving Simulation
Franck Pouvrasseau, Eric Monacelli, S´ebastien Charles
Laboratory of Engineering of Systems of Versailles (LISV)
University of Versailles Saint-Quentin (UVSQ)
Versailles, France
Email: franck.pouvrasseau@uvsq.lisv.fr , eric.monacelli@uvsq.lisv.fr
sebastien.charles@uvsq.lisv.fr
Abstract—Wheelchair simulators using virtual reality have been
conceived for a better understanding of the mobility problem,
and also to train people in wheelchair driving. Virtual Fauteuil
is an immersive simulator equipped with a compact motion
platform that reproduces physical effects like collisions, or being
on slopes along the roll and pitch axis. Like most of the existing
simulators, Virtual Fauteuil offers a training program, based on
the performances of the user. However, a parameter is neglected
for the performance evaluation, which is the posture of the user,
although it affects his stability. This study focus on a light, basic
and non-invasive solution for body tracking, the Kinect v2 sensor,
and its implementation in the simulator Virtual Fauteuil. The
experiment conducted in this paper consists in analyzing the
movement of the torso when the user lives a perturbation in
the simulator. This ﬁrst postural evaluation has been done with
12 participants (9 males and 3 females). They were not asked to
drive the wheelchair. The simulator was indeed programmed in
such a manner that the avatar follows by itself a straight route
composed of bumps which cause physical perturbations through
the simulator. The experiment was in two sessions. During the ﬁrst
session, the travel was not displayed on the screen, so it means
that the users lived perturbations without expecting it. During
the second session, the participant lived the same travel but this
time, with a visual immersion on a front screen. Perturbations
are measured by investigating the rotation of the trunk compared
to the rotation of the platform. Results shows that participants
were more impacted by perturbation when the simulation was
displayed on the screen. We also found that for the expermiment,
participants were immune to trunk ﬂexions, which means that the
trunk of participants were mostly straight during disturbances.
In-depth study will soon be done around the postural response
of the user and on different exercises.
Keywords–virtual reality; simulation; wheelchair training; re-
hab; postural tracking.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wheelchair users are facing mobility problems that have
different causes. Wheelchairs are a very practical solution for
disabled people to recover a signiﬁcant part of their mobility
but it still have imperfections, that discourages people with
reduced mobility. For example, wheelchairs are not adapted
to all kind of terrain. In fact, public spaces have accessibility
deﬁciencies like stairs, type of terrains, slopes etc. that make
a wheelchair travel arduous. A poorly accessible route can
expose the person to a loss of balance and in the worst situation
to a fall from his wheelchair. In order to improve the mobility
of people with reduced mobility in the broad sense, immersive
simulators using Virtual Reality have been developed [1]–[6].
Indeed, wheelchair simulators can have different functions:
First, it can raise able people awareness about mobility issues
faced by persons with disabilities. Secondly, simulators can
be an interesting tool to evaluate the accessibility and the
arduousness of a route and help person to plan their trip. It
also can help architects who conceive public infrastructures
for the conception of their urban planning which are destined
to wheelchairs accessibility. And ﬁnally, wheelchair simulators
are a really valuable way to train people in wheelchair driving.
Using an immersive simulator to train people to drive a
wheelchair have a lot of advantages. The whole environment
is conﬁgurable, which means that, for example, in the situation
of a training program for a beginner, we control the type
of exercises we want to train the user in. We also can
regulate the difﬁculty, (by adding obstacles, or making the
travel harder to achieve) so the simulator is always adapted
to the person. Another aspect make the use of wheelchair
simulators interesting. In fact, some people already experi-
enced a traumatic experience and it repels them to use their
wheelchair again. Simulators are secured. It is a comforting
and attractive experience. Finally, using a simulator enable a
monitoring of the performances of the user. Simulators can
evaluate the performance from measured values provided by
the simulator like: duration of a ﬁxed travel, distance needed
for the travel, number of collisions, etc. These functional index
of performances focus on the wheelchair and its movement
and neglect the user’s posture. This study proposes a ﬁrst
method for postural tracking during a simulation. The postural
tracking system has been implemented to the simulator Virtual
Fauteuil [7], which has been developed in the LISV (Labora-
toire d’ing´enierie des syst`emes de Versailles) - University of
Versailles Saint-Quentin.
II.
PRESENTATION OF THE SIMULATOR VIRTUAL
FAUTEUIL
Virtual Fauteuil (Figure 1) is a simulator composed of a
compact and easily transportable platform whose dimensions
are 1.20 meter by 1 meter which can host any type of
wheelchair. This platform is equipped with haptic feedback
systems which enhance the immersion and the realism of the
simulation (Figure 2):
•
4 Jack actuators, located at the 4 corners of the
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. The simulator Virtual Fauteuil
Figure 2. The two haptic feedback system of the platform. The Jack
actuators in blue, and the force-feedback rolls in orange.
platform, which are used to rotate the platform in order
to reproduce the sensations of going thought a slopes,
or having perturbations like collisions or going down
a sidewalk.
•
4 rolls on which are placed the two rear wheels of
the wheelchair. Each wheel of the wheelchair is thus
based on a roll in gear with an electric motorcycle-
encoder and a passive roller which ensures the stability
of the user. This conﬁguration allows ﬁrstly to recover
shift of the wheelchair data and thus to render the
movements of the user in the virtual environment,
and secondly, to send to the user’s force feedback for
example by simulating change of declination of the
ground and/or inertial effect
The principle of the management of the haptic devices and
the virtual environment is condensed in the ﬁgure 3.
A. Projection of the simulation
Simulations are conducted in a 3D virtual reality environ-
ment modeled on the Unity software. Thus, simulation can take
place in any environment previously implemented in Unity
or other modeling software such as Sketchup software. The
projection, however, is done on one or more white front screen
using a projector, or with a virtual reality helmet.
The projection of the simulation can be done in 3 different
conﬁgurations, a single front view, a mixed-views display,
and ﬁnally with a virtual reality headset. The mixed-views
Figure 3. Communication diagram between simulator devices and the virtual
environment
Figure 4. The 25 Joints tracked by the Kinect sensor
conﬁguration offers a front view but also a top view for the
visualisation near the ground in the front of the wheelchair.
The mixed view also contains two lateral views.
B. Integration of the Kinect v2 sensor to the simulator
In order to enable postural tracking during a simulation,
a Kinect v2 sensor has been linked to Virtual Fauteuil. The
Kinect sensor combines a RGB camera with depth sensor.
Which enable to measure the spatial position of an object
tracked, in this application: the body of the users. The SDK
of the Kinect sensor eases the implementation to a software
application such as Unity3D. As depicted on the ﬁgure 4, the
Kinect sensor can track 25 joints in the user’s body. This ﬁts
to a lot of cinematic models of the human body.
The framerate of acquisition of the Kinect sensor is up to 33.3
Hz. The reliability of the Kinect sensor has been the object of
several studies. All these studies evaluates a great reliability
[8], [9]. These experiments resulted in comparing the measures
of the Kinect with the measures of another motion capture like
for example the Nexus Vicon which is used as a reference.
The Kinect has two main uses in the simulator:
•
Online mode: It enables to check online some criteria
concerning the posture of the user. For the moment,
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 5. The virtual environment of the exercise used for the experiment
we focus on the lean of the trunk and the symmetric
distribution of the posture in the frontal plane. Indi-
cators are displayed during the simulation to instantly
tell if the sufﬁciently well positioned on the sagittal
and frontal planes.
•
Ofﬂine mode: It is possible to record the joints posi-
tion during a simulation. All the data are recorded in
a .csv ﬁle. This enable postural analysis.
III.
EXPERIMENTS
We have conducted a series of evaluations of the postural
response of users during a simulation of a simple travel.
This travel results in going forward until the ﬁnish which
is symbolised by a blue diamond placed at the end of the
way. The straight track is composed of bumps which causes
perturbation with the motion platform during the simulation as
we can see on ﬁgure 5.
The subjects have been chosen to represent a large amount
of morphologies. There was also an additional condition for
the selection of the subjects. They necessary need to be able
person, which are novice in wheelchair driving.
During these tests, the users were asked to sit on a manual
wheelchair, which were placed on the motion platform. The
protocol is done on two phases:
1)
In a ﬁrst phase, the subjects were submitted to
perturbations along the roll axis due to a chaotic
road. In this phase, the user is facing perturbations
but he does not control the avatar. The simulation
is not displayed on this phase, which means that
the users will experiments perturbations due to the
motion platform but they will not be able to prepare
themself to face these perturbations.
2)
In a second phase, the subject still does not drive
the avatar, but both feedbacks, haptic and visual, are
activated. The user is placed on the same simulated
situation but this time with a visual immersion.
12 participants have been selected for this experiment. 9 males
and 3 females. They were students whose height vary between
1m62 and 1m90 with a mean of 1m75 and their weight vary
between 45 kg and 100 kg with a mean of 70.3 kg
These ﬁrst analyzes only focus on the rotation of the torso
of the participant in order to see how it behaves during
perturbations. We focus on the sagital plane because the
perturbations also took place in the sagital plane.
At ﬁrst, since the kinect allow us to assume the trunk as splitted
in two parts because it can measure a point located at the top
of the trunk (Spine Shoulder (PSS) on the Figure 6), a point
located at the middle of the trunk ( Spine Mid (PSM) on the
Figure 6) and a point located around the hips (Spine Base
(PSB) on the Figure 6). The trunk can then be considered
in three differents parts : the lower part: the segment Dlow
between the PSB and PSM points, the upper part : the segment
Dup between the PSS and PSM points and ﬁnally the full
trunk: the segment Dfull between the PSS and PSB points.
.We measured the rotations of these 3 parts from the position
data collected during the simulation in order to see how these
three variables varies in time.
The second main study is about the comparison between the
postural reaction, in and out of the visual environment to see
if the visual immersion can have an impact on the behaviour
of the user.
The Table I. depicts the means intercorrelations amongst the 12
participants between the three angles related to the trunk: αup,
αlow and αfull. Figure 7 is an example of these three angles.
Rely on these results, we conclude that for these partipants,
who are abled people, the perturbations had very little impact
on the trunk ﬂexion, which means that the trunk was praticly
always straight.
TABLE I. THE MATRIX OF THE MEAN OF THE R COEFFICIENTS
CORRELATION BETWEEN THE 3 ANGLES RELATED TO THE
TRUNK. THE LOWER, THE UPPER AND THE FULL TRUNK.
r-coefﬁcient between:
α up
α low
α full
α up
1
0.9708
0.9882
α low
0.9708
1
0.9599
α full
0.9882
0.9599
1
IV.
RESULTS
In order to compare the difference between the postural
behaviour of the participants with and without the visual
immersion, we did, as a short analysis, a comparison of the
standard deviation of the rotation of the trunk with and without
the visual feedback. The Figure 9 depicts the oscillation of the
trunk of the participant 7 which is a representive for the others
participants. The signals compared almost have an alternative
and periodic pattern, in this, we use the standard deviation as
an indicator of the dispersion of the signal. We suggest this
hypothesis : the bigger the standard deviation is, the more the
participants was perturbated.
The results (in Table II) show that standard deviation values
are always bigger with the visual immersion and the maximum
variation is with the participant 3 who has almost doubled his
perturbation located on the trunk. We suppose that one of the
reason is that, in the ﬁrst case, the participant does not know
when the perturbations will occur, so he may unconsciously
strengthen himself to get ready, whereas, with the visual
feedback, the participant is more conﬁdent because he can
expect the arrival of perturbations.
V.
CONCLUSION
This ﬁrst experiment strengthen us in the idea that enabling
simulators dedicated to training to track the body of the user
during his simulations can lead us to a better comprehension
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE II. STANDARD DEVIATION (SD) OF α trunk FOR EACH
PARTICIPANT DURING THE NON-VISUALLY AND THE VISUALLY
IMMERSIVE SIMULATION
Standard Deviation of α
Standard Deviation of α
Participants
1st phase : No visual immersion
2nd Phase: with visual immersion
1
0,0925
0,0987
2
0,0257
0,0279
3
0,0318
0,0607
4
0,0355
0,0505
5
0,0999.
0,1047
6
0,0201
0,0263
7
0,0493
0,0778
8
0,0272
0,0378
9
0,0375
0,0381
10
0,0442
0,0546
11
0,0253
0,0341
12
0,0857
0,0972
Figure 6. Joints of the body used to calculate the angle between the trunk
and the thigh. From left to bottom right, Spine shoulder, Spine Mid, Spine
Base , and knees
Figure 7. Oscilliation of α up, α low and α full
In blue: α up
In purple: α low
In black: α full
Legend : X-axis : Time (ms) Y axis(rad)
Figure 8. Oscilliation of α full and α platform
In black: α full
In orange: α platform
Legend : X-axis : Time (ms) Y-axis(rad)
Figure 9. Oscilliation of α full with and without the visual immersion
In blue: α with visual immersion
of the postural stability of wheelchair drivers. This is not the
ﬁrst study about the postural analysis for wheelchair users,
others have been lead using different kind of sensor in contrast.
Like cushion for the seat and the back rest that measure the
pressure distribution and its variation [10], [11]. Some study
[12], [13] has also been done with motion platforms and body
tracking analysis. But to our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst study
that deal with postural analysis managed by a non-immersive
sensor and with a simulation of an immersive driving scene. .
Body tracking can highly improve the performances of most
of wheelchair simulators on several points. This can also be,
coupled to others sensors, a tool to analyse the stroke of
wheelchairs driver in the simulator like a lot a biomechanical
studies [14]–[18], but instead of ergometers, with the simula-
tors we can make the user in a realistic situation, and the use
of a simulator allow the monitoring of more variables due to
the virtual environment, and the sensors.
VI.
FUTURE WORK
This ﬁrst preliminary study fosters us in our approach. This
results is not statiscally signiﬁcant yet, but next experiments
will provide us better insights. In addition, new tests will be
newly done in order to investigate differents leads. The ﬁrst one
is to determine if following a light but weekly training program
on the simulator can improve the resistance of participants. In
fact, we will train the same twelves participants in a period of
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

2 mounth and collect their performances in order to observe
their evolution We also consider making tests with wheelchairs
users, to see if their motor deﬁciency brings on new cases, and
the simulator can help them as part of a training program.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project Virtual Fauteuil if sponsored by the region Ile
de France, in partnership with: CEREMH et EDF R&D
REFERENCES
[1]
R. A. Cooper, D. M. Spaeth, D. K. Jones, M. L. Boninger, S. G.
Fitzgerald, and S. Guo, “Comparison of virtual and real electric powered
wheelchair driving using a position sensing joystick and an isometric
joystick.” Medical engineering & physics, vol. 24, no. 10, dec 2002,
pp. 703–708.
[2]
T. ITO, M. SHINO, T. INOUE, and M. KAMATA, “Development
of a Powered Wheelchair Driving Simulator for Research and
Development Use,” Journal of Mechanical Systems for Transportation
and Logistics, vol. 2, no. 2, 2009, pp. 90–101. [Online]. Available:
http://joi.jlc.jst.go.jp/JST.JSTAGE/jmtl/2.90?from=CrossRef
[3]
N. Steyn, Y. Hamam, E. Monacelli, and K. Djouani, “Modelling
and design of an augmented reality differential drive mobility
aid in an enabled environment,” Simulation Modelling Practice
and Theory, vol. 51, feb 2015, pp. 115–134. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1569190X14001865
[4]
Y. Morere, G. Bourhis, K. Cosnuau, G. Guilmois, E. Blangy, and
E. Rumilly, “ViEW, a wheelchair simulator for driving analysis,” pp.
100–105, 2015.
[5]
G. Tao and P. S. Archambault, “Powered wheelchair simulator
development: implementing combined navigation-reaching tasks with
a 3D hand motion controller,” Journal of NeuroEngineering and
Rehabilitation, vol. 13, no. 1, jan 2016, pp. 1–13. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12984-016-0112-2
[6]
C. S. Harrison, P. M. Grant, and B. a. Conway, “Enhancement
of
a
virtual
reality
wheelchair
simulator
to
include
qualitative
and
quantitative
performance
metrics.”
Assistive
technology
:
the
ofﬁcial
journal
of
RESNA,
vol.
22,
no.
1,
2010,
pp.
20–31. [Online]. Available: http://www.researchgate.net/journal/1040-
0435 Assistive technology the ofﬁcial journal of RESNA
[7]
F. Goncalves, L. Trenoras, E. Monacelli, and A. Schmid, “Motion
adaptation on a wheelchair driving simulator,” in 2014 2nd Workshop on
Virtual and Augmented Assistive Technology, VAAT 2014; Co-located
with the 2014 Virtual Reality Conference - Proceedings, 2014, pp. 17–
22.
[8]
K. Otte, B. Kayser, S. Mansow-model, J. Verrel, F. Paul, A. U. Brandt,
and T. Schmitz-hu, “Accuracy and Reliability of the Kinect Version 2
for Clinical Measurement of Motor Function,” 2016, pp. 1–17.
[9]
H. B. F. Mentiplay, “Reliability and concurrent validity of the
Microsoft
Kinect
V2
for
assessment
of
standing
balance
and
postural
control,”
Gait
&
Posture,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2015.03.005
[10]
R. Aissaoui, M. Lacoste, and J. Dansereau, “Analysis of sliding and
pressure distribution during a repositioning of persons in a simulator
chair,” IEEE transactions on neural systems and rehabilitation engineer-
ing : a publication of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, vol. 9, no. 2, jun 2001, pp. 215–224.
[11]
R. Aissaoui, C. Boucher, D. Bourbonnais, M. Lacoste, and J. Dansereau,
“Effect of seat cushion on dynamic stability in sitting during a reach-
ing task in wheelchair users with paraplegia,” Archives of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, vol. 82, no. 2, feb 2001, pp. 274–281.
[12]
D. Kamper, M. Parnianpour, K. Barin, T. Adams, M. Linden, and
H. Hemami, “Postural stability of wheelchair users exposed to sustained
, external perturbations,” no. May, 1999.
[13]
D. Kamper, K. Barin, M. Parnianpour, S. Reger, and H. Weed, “Prelim-
inary investigation of the lateral postural stability of spinal cord-injured
individuals subjected to dynamic perturbations,” no. 1999, 2015, pp.
40–46.
[14]
S. L. Soltau, J. S. Slowik, P. S. Requejo, S. J. Mulroy, and
R. R. Neptune, “An Investigation of Bilateral Symmetry During
Manual Wheelchair Propulsion,” Frontiers in Bioengineering and
Biotechnology, vol. 3, no. June, 2015, pp. 3–8. [Online]. Available:
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fbioe.2015.00086
[15]
M. M. Rodgers, G. W. Gayle, S. F. Figoni, M. Kobayashi, J. Lieh, and
R. M. Glaser, “Biomechanics of wheelchair propulsion during fatigue,”
Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 75, no. 1, 1994,
pp. 85–93.
[16]
W. M. Richter, “The effect of seat position on manual wheelchair
propulsion biomechanics: A quasi-static model-based approach,” pp.
707–712, 2001.
[17]
O. J. Kilkens, A. J. Dallmeijer, A. V. Nene, M. W. Post, and L. H.
van der Woude, “The longitudinal relation between physical capacity
and wheelchair skill performance during inpatient rehabilitation of
people with spinal cord injury,” pp. 1575–1581, aug 2005. [Online].
Available: http://0.245.111.74
[18]
L. H. V. V. D. Woude, C. M. V. Konlngsbruggen, A. L. Kroes,
I. Kingma, C. M. V. Konlngsbruggen, A. L. Kroes, and I. Kingma,
“Effect of push handle height on net moments and forces on the
musculoskeletal system during standardized wheelchair pushing tasks,”
vol. 3646, no. October, 2017.
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

