 
 
How Do User Experience Experts Organize Their Knowledge  
of User Experience Criteria? 
 
Josefina Isabel Gil Urrutia1,2,* 
Eric Brangier1 
1Psychologie Ergonomique et Sociale de l’Expérience 
Utilisateurs (PErSEUs) 
Université de Lorraine – UFR SHS 
Metz, France 
email: josefina.gil_urrutia@allianz.fr (*)  
email: eric.brangier@univ-lorraine.fr 
Laurent Cessat2 
2Direction des Développements et de la Maintenance, 
Département Digital & Mobile 
Allianz France Solutions & Services 
Paris La Défense, France 
email: laurent.cessat_2@allianz.fr
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a study where 17 User 
Experience professionals assessed and categorized a set of User 
Experience/Human-Computer 
Interaction 
criteria. 
We 
examined how they organize their cognitions around a 
suggested set of 58 criteria based on 7 significant theoretical 
dimensions: accessibility, usability/practicality, emotions & 
motivation, persuasion, cultural factors, management of the 
experience and socio-organizational factors. We aimed to 
determine whether the experts’ cognitions would mirror these 
same theoretical considerations and, if so, to what extent. For 
this purpose, we analysed their classifications of the criteria 
during an open card-sorting task, limited to 7 groups. Results 
show a repartition of the criteria among the following 
standardized categories: (1) Utility & Usability; (2) Marketing 
Strategy; (3) Hedonism; (4) Organizational factors; (5) 
Emotional 
& 
Cognitive 
Stimulation; 
(6) 
Control 
& 
Personalization; and (7) System characteristics. We found that 
the groups created by the participants were conceptually 
rather similar throughout their categorizations and that they 
were rather close to the founding theoretical dimensions we 
had originally considered. Implications for our theoretical 
model’s architecture are discussed. 
Keywords-user experience; holistic criteria-based approach; 
card-sort; dimensions; multidimensional model. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Throughout 
history, 
ever-changing 
consumer 
requirements, economic models and technology have had a 
determining role on the evolution of the field of Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI)/User Experience (UX). This has 
resulted in different issues being addressed at given times, as 
well as in different recommendations being made. 
Consequently, we are currently confronted with an overflow 
of frameworks, approaches, concepts, recommendations -so 
called criteria- which results in an ever increasing 
complexity of our practice [17].  
It is with this in mind that we have taken upon ourselves 
to propose a holistic criteria-based approach in the field of 
HCI/UX to aid in the process of designing and/or evaluating 
user interfaces/products/services and that would encompass 
all aspects relevant for its truly holistic comprehension and 
conceptualization [6].  
However, we must now reflect upon a possible 
organization of the myriad of relevant principles. To do this, 
we opted to examine how UX professionals organize their 
cognitions regarding a proposed range of criteria.  
Considering UX as a multi-dimensional system, and 
based on the definition of UX suggested by [17], we opted 
for a selection of criteria based on 7 dimensions that we 
consider paramount in UX. These dimensions cover different 
aspects of HCI, ranging from sensory-motor factors, to 
cultural aspects, as well as cognitive, emotional and 
persuasive elements, among others. Each dimension is 
represented by a subset of criteria: 5 are based on pre-
existing sets of guidelines; the remaining 2, we created based 
on the literature. These are:  
- 
Accessibility: Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
[15]; 
- 
Usability: Bastien & Scapin ergonomic criteria [1];  
- 
Emotions and Motivation: de Vicente & Pain emotions 
& motivation detection model traits and states [2];  
- 
Persuasion: Nemery & Brangier persuasion criteria [9];  
- 
Culture: Schwartz basic human values [14];  
- 
Management of the experience: created based on the 
literature [7], [10]-[13];  
- 
And socio-organizational factors: also based on the 
available literature [4], [5]. 
Given the substantial number of criteria (58; detailed 
presentation in [6]), along with their inherent redundancies 
and interdependencies [6], [17]-[18], it seems difficult to 
mentally organize them in a coherent and relevant manner. 
Therefore, in order to determine a viable architecture for our 
suggested model, it is necessary to study how UX experts 
would mentally represent and organize said lot of criteria.  
How do UX experts organize their knowledge of UX 
criteria? Two research questions were addressed here: 
- 
On one hand: whether or not UX experts - who regularly 
use these criteria - all have the same mental organization 
of the set. 
- 
On the other hand: whether their cognitive organizations 
of the criteria are in line with that provided by the authors 
of the different theoretical criteria grids. Or, on the 
contrary, whether the organization of the criteria depends 
on other factors that need to be elucidated and 
interpreted. 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
This study aimed to determine how UX experts would 
envision, apprehend and structure the proposed set of UX 
criteria through a card-sort exercise: would the card sort 
reveal categories stable enough throughout the experts? 
Would the general classification of criteria produced by 
experts overlap itself or correspond with the original 
theoretical guidelines proposed by their original authors? and 
if so, to what extent? 
This paper therefore focuses on an experiment -which 
was part of a broader research project- where UX experts had 
to classify 58 recognized criteria in strictly 7 groups. Section 
2 presents the methodology used. Thereupon, the results will 
be summarized (in section 3) followed by their discussion (in 
section 4) and we will conclude with our future work in 
Section 5. 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Participants 
17 HCI/UX Design experts (6 women, 11 men; mean age 
44 (standard deviation (SD)=8.6)) took part in this 
experiment. 
Among 
them, 
11 
are 
specialized 
in 
Ergonomics/Cognitive Psychology, 4 in Computer Science 
and the remaining 2 in Communications and Media. 
Participants were required to have at least 10 years of 
experience in the field of HCI/UX in order to be eligible for 
this study (mean (  ̅ )=17.53; SD=6.05). 11 of them are 
academics, 4 are consultants and 2 are both. 10 have a PhD, 
and 7 have a Master’s degree. The experts received a small 
compensation for their participation. 
B. Material 
This study used the same deck of 58 cards described in 
[6], each containing the name and definition of a criterion 
from the set. A pen and extra plain 5x5cm cards were always 
at the participants’ disposal in case they wished to create (a) 
new card(s). Also, plain white 5x20cm index cards were 
made available to create the category name tags.  
The researcher who conducted the experiment used a 
camera and a recorder to document the data. 
C. Procedure 
Sessions were un-moderated and carried out individually. 
No duration limit was imposed; they lasted 10 to 20 minutes.  
Participants were presented with the card-deck. They 
were asked to do an open card-sort in strictly 7 groups 
(which corresponds to the number of theoretical sets of 
guidelines considered). They were asked to name the 
categories they had created and to explain the logic on which 
they had based their sortings. These debriefings were 
recorded and later transcribed for reference during the 
analysis and interpretation of the data.  
Participants were allowed to exclude the criteria they 
considered irrelevant and/or to create (a) new card(s) 
indicating a name and definition when considered necessary.  
III. 
RESULTS 
Following 
[3], 
we 
analysed 
each 
participant’s 
classification to create standardized categories that would 
sum up the range of classifications done by the experts. 
Furthermore, [3] automatically generated the items by 
standardized categories matrix.  
Also, with an adapted version of [8], we generated the 
global distance matrix. Using R-3.3.2 [16], we carried out a 
Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA) with Ward’s clustering 
method and a Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) based on 
Kruskal’s non-metric MDS. 
A. Standardized Categories for the Criterion Distribution  
Table 1 recaps the 18 pertinent standardized categories 
we created for the analysis of the different participants’ 
categorizations (plus the “Excluded/Irrelevant” category).  
TABLE I.  
STANDARDIZED CATEGORIES CREATED FOR THE 
ANALYSIS (GENERATED USING [3]) 
Standardized Categories 
Sorters 
who 
used 
this 
Total 
cards in 
this 
category 
Unique 
cards 
Agree
-ment 
Utility, task-system 
suitability, achieving 
the goal, efficacy 
5 
30 
21 
0.29 
Usability/Pragmatismer
gonomic criteria, 
efficiency 
12 
163 
37 
0.37 
Utility & Usability / 
Efficacy & Efficiency  
2 
43 
26 
0.83 
Hedonism, Pleasure, 
Emotions 
14 
138 
41 
0.24 
Adaptability of the 
system 
9 
90 
42 
0.24 
Organizational Factors 
9 
63 
20 
0.35 
Socio-organizational 
factors  
2 
12 
9 
0.67 
Persuasion, Incitement, 
Pervasive design 
11 
71 
28 
0.23 
Marketing Strategy/ 
Customer Relationship 
Management 
13 
88 
21 
0.32 
User Effort 
1 
6 
6 
1.00 
Personalization/ 
Customization 
4 
23 
15 
0.38 
Mastering/Control over 
the system 
3 
20 
19 
0.35 
Security/Reliability-
User’s Protection 
8 
53 
26 
0.25 
User onboarding 
4 
43 
28 
0.38 
Emotional & Cognitive 
Stimulation for self-
development 
7 
48 
24 
0.29 
Social, moral and/or 
cultural factors 
5 
21 
12 
0.35 
Technical aspects/ 
Robustness 
3 
16 
14 
0.38 
Others/Unknown 
6 
28 
23 
0.20 
Excluded/Irrelevant 
6 
15 
14 
0.18 
 
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
The agreement values found are rather low ( ̅ =0.38; 
SD=0.22). However, the occurrence of the standardized 
categories is quite high ( ̅=6.59; max=14) By instance, as 
much as 14 participants created a category conceptually-
linked to “Hedonism, Pleasure, Emotions”. So, though it 
remains questionable as to which criteria belong to which 
category, the fundamental categories underlying the 
organization seem to be of general-understanding among the 
participants.  
B. Hierarchical categorization of the 58 criteria 
Next, we performed a HCA on the overall distance 
matrix. By reading of the items by standardized categories 
matrix, we were able to interpret the resulting dendrogram, 
in order to identify and label the clusters of criteria found 
(Fig. 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dendrogram showing the 7 standardized categories retained and 
the classification of the 58 criteria 
Indeed, the categories retained are (in order of 
appearance in the dendrogram; see Fig. 1):  
1. Utility (task-system suitability, achieving the goal, 
efficacy) & Usability/Pragmatism (ergonomic criteria, 
efficiency) containing the items: Perceivable, Operable 
and Understandable from [15], Consistency, Error 
Management, Explicit Control, Significance of Codes, 
Guidance and Workload from [1], Zero Customer Effort 
from the management of the experience dimension, as 
well as Task Achievement and Task Management from 
the socio-organizational dimension;  
2. Marketing Strategy/Customer Relationship Management 
encompassing 8 of the 9 elements created for the 
management of the experience dimension, namely: 
Offer 
Segmentation, 
Competitive 
Positioning, 
Relationship Management, Acquisition-Consumption, 
Customer 
Loyalty 
and 
Recommendation, 
Multichannel/Omni-channel, Proactive Approach and 
Prospective Approach;  
3. Hedonism, Pleasure, Emotions comprising the criteria: 
Cognitive Interest, Sensory Interest, Satisfaction and 
Fantasy from [2], Stimulation and Hedonism from [14], 
and Attractiveness from [9];  
4. Organisational Factors: including 7 of the 10 elements 
created 
for 
the 
socio-organisational 
dimension 
(Communication, 
Cooperation/Collaboration, 
Role, 
Transformation-Adaptation, Sub-systems coordination, 
Context of use, Results & Impacts) and Power, from 
[14];  
5. Emotional 
& 
Cognitive 
Stimulation 
for 
self-
development: structured around two subgroups - one 
containing 
elements 
in 
relation 
to 
“persuasion, 
incitement, 
pervasive 
design” 
(Solicitation, 
Commitment, Priming and Ascendency, all from [9]), 
and the other to “self-development” (Effort, Confidence, 
Challenge from [2], Skills & Knowledge from the socio-
organisational dimension, as well as Achievement and 
Self-direction from [14]);  
6. Control & Personalization, a combination of two 
subgroups: 
“personalization/customization” 
and 
“mastering/control over the system” linked to user’s 
need and desire for self-expression and self-direction. 
The former is composed of the elements Control and 
Independence both from [2]; the latter is composed of 
Compatibility 
and 
Adaptability 
from 
[1] 
and 
Personalisation from [9]. These criteria were often 
linked to notions of Utility and/or Usability and of 
“Adaptability of the System”;  
7. And, lastly, what we chose to name “System’s 
characteristics” based on the analysis of the debriefings, 
a 
category 
including 
the 
subgroups 
“Security/Reliability-User’s Protection” (Robust from 
[15], Security from [14], as well as Credibility and 
Privacy from [9]), and “Social Factors/Values” of the 
system (Benevolence, Universalism, Conformity and 
Tradition, all taken from [14]).  
These results are very similar -as to the groupings and the 
naming of the groups- to those from our previous paper [6] 
where the participants were asked to do an open-card sort 
without a limited number categories. The results showed an 
average repartition in 7.71 groups (SD=1.65; min=5; 
max=11) and the categories retained were: 1) Utility & 
Usability; 2) Hedonism, Pleasure, Emotions; 3) Persuasion, 
Incitement, Pervasive design; 4) Emotional & Cognitive 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Stimulation 
for 
self-development; 
5) 
Marketing 
strategy/Customer 
Relationship 
Management; 
6) 
Security/Reliability-User’s protection; 7) Organizational 
factors; and 8) Social, moral and/or cultural factors.  
However, regardless of the similarity, three main findings 
are worth mentioning.  
Firstly, this exercise yielded differences in the granularity 
of the classification: depending on whether the participant 
had previously done more or less than 7 groups, they would 
often either divide one (or more) in two, or, assemble two (or 
more). For example, this was the case for participants who  
had previously created a group for “Efficacy”, another one 
for “Efficiency”, and who assembled the two in order to 
create one named “Usability/Utility/Ergonomic Criteria” (or 
vice-versa). Likewise, the same phenomenon happened with 
the categories “Organizational factors” and “Social factors” 
– though only 2 participants assembled them together and 
thus this does not reflect in the categories retained. 
Moreover, however seldom, certain participants would pick-
and-choose certain criteria in order to extract an entirely new 
category (e.g., “Marketing Strategy”, by participant n°13).  
Furthermore, compared to the groupings found in [6], 
only 3 migrators were found; while the rest remained pretty 
much the same (“migrators” being items that moved from 
one category to another):  
- 
Compatibility (ergonomic criterion; [1]) moved from 
“Utility & Usability” to the group “Control & 
Personalization”;  
- 
Achievement (cultural criterion; [14]) moved from 
“Social factors” to the “Self-development” subgroup in 
the category “Emotional & Cognitive Stimulation for 
self-development”;  
- 
And, to a certain point, Self-Direction (cultural criterion; 
[14]) that moved from the subgroup “mastering/control 
over the system” to the “self-development” subgroup – 
which are subgroups of the “Emotional & Cognitive 
Stimulation for self-development” category.  
This indicates a permeability/porosity of the frontiers and 
evidences certain variability in the interpretation of the 
criteria –like further discussed below. 
Lastly, these results highlight the variability in the 
interpretation of the criteria and of the card-groupings, with 
regard to the criteria’s attributes and their category 
affiliations. For example, the group of criteria labelled 
“Social Factors/Values” previously (in [6]) interpreted as 
characteristics of the user or of the context of use, is 
interpreted here as characteristics of/expected from the 
system (e.g., “a benevolent system”, “a traditional system”). 
C. Categories’ Relationships and Proximity 
The dendrogram (Fig. 1) revealed a close link between 
the categories (7) “System characteristics” and (6) “Control 
& Personalization” which in turn revealed a link to the 
category (5) “Emotional & Cognitive Stimulation for self-
development”. The following group to link to the 
dendrogram is the (4) “Organizational Factors”, next, the (3) 
“Hedonism, Pleasure, Emotions”, then, the (2) “Marketing 
Strategy/Customer Relationship Management”, and lastly, 
the (1) “Utility (task-system suitability, achieving the goal, 
efficacy) & Usability/Pragmatism (ergonomic criteria, 
efficiency)”.  
This structure might be due to stronger cohesiveness 
values within the last 4 categories listed above. This is 
especially true for the category “Utility & Usability” given 
the importance of its perceived distance (graphically 
represented in the tree diagram).  
D. Spatial Representation and Structure 
The MDS required a three-factor analysis in order to 
obtain significant enough results (stress=17.06%). The 
spatial representation drawn from this analysis is presented 
in a two-dimensional plot in Figure 2. 
The spatial representation and repartition of the criteria 
throughout the MDS showed a structural resemblance to that 
of our previous study [6]. Indeed, the results here allude to 
the same ternary structure with the three outermost groups 
(Utility & Usability, Organisational factors, Hedonism, 
Pleasure and Emotions; representing the functional, 
experiential and contextual pillars of UX) merging towards 
elements of technological persuasion and user stimulation. 
Additionally, by graphical reading, the same two possible 
factors justifying the structure stand out:  
- 
Along the x-axis, a first one seeming to correspond to the 
nature of the experience, ranging from the functional 
experience to the experiential experience;  
- 
The other one along the y-axis seeming to be the level the 
criterion intervenes on: the user, the system or the context 
of use. 
Further analyses are required to verify this and to identify 
the third factor. 
However, three new findings stick out. First, the system 
is more visibly represented via the category “System 
characteristics” that occupies a significant area between the 
Organizational factors and the Utility & Usability categories. 
Second, the category “Control & Personalization” seems to 
bridge “Utility & Usability” and “System characteristics” as 
well as the former and “Emotional & Cognitive Stimulation 
for self-development”. Lastly, in the same manner, the group 
“Marketing Strategy” seems to link the elements pertaining 
to organizational factors and social factors/values of the 
system to the remaining elements, serving as a sort of 
intermediary between the two. 
E. Additional Elements of Analysis 
Six participants excluded 13 unique cards from their 
sortings. Only the criterion “Challenge” was excluded by 
two participants – which has a negligible impact as to its 
perceived relevancy for our model. 
No one suggested adding any new criteria. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
This paper presents a study where UX professionals 
assessed and categorized a suggested set of UX/HCI criteria 
in order to elucidate whether the basis for their 
categorizations would overlap with the original theoretical 
dimensions considered, if so, to what extent, or whether it 
would be based on other factors that would need to be 
revealed.  
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
Figure 2.  Multi-Dimensional Scaling plot using 3 factors (stress=17.06%) showing the overall categorization among 7 standardized categories. 
Four/Five of the seven categories retained from the 
analysis indicate a relative correspondence to the initial 
theoretical dimensions. Besides from the categories “Utility 
& Usability”, “Marketing strategy/Customer Relationship 
Management” and “Organizational factors” being evidently 
analogous to the usability, management of the experience 
and socio-organizational factors dimensions, one/two more 
categories deserve further attention. Indeed, the categories 
“Hedonism, Pleasure, Emotions” and “Emotional & 
Cognitive Stimulation for self-development” are also related 
to our emotions & motivation dimension – even though a 
distinction was clearly made by the participants, who opted 
to make two separate categories. Similarly, the subgroup 
“persuasion, incitement, pervasive design”, contained within 
the 
“Emotional 
& 
Cognitive 
Stimulation 
for 
self-
development” (though it was a category in and of itself in 
[6]) is in line with yet another one of our theoretical UX 
dimensions (Persuasion). Thus, despite the rather low 
agreement values, and though not entirely in line with the 7 
dimensions considered, the participants’ resulting mean 
categorization is fundamentally quite close to our theoretical 
considerations. 
Moreover, this study shed light as to differences in the 
granularity of the classifications. This shows that various 
possible levels of categorization of the criteria can be made 
which raises questions as to what the optimal architecture for 
a holistic criteria-based model of UX would look like; 
between a high/macro-level or a low/micro-level (more 
detail-oriented) approach.  
Results also revealed the porosity/permeability of the 
frontiers between the categories as well as a considerable 
variability as to the interpretation of the criteria and of the 
groupings. Indeed, certain criteria were attributed varying 
characteristics and, depending on this, were allocated to 
varying categories – evidencing a criterion’s multiple 
possible impacts on UX as well as the systemic nature of 
UX. Other than the three migrators identified and described 
above, this was particularly the case for Schwartz’s cultural 
values [14]. Undeniably, these elements were subject to the 
most 
varying 
interpretations 
possible; 
participants 
describing/manipulating them as social/cultural factors, as 
system characteristics expected by the user, as factors of 
motivation, etc. 
The spatial representation reinforced the idea of a ternary 
structure built around the three basis of the experience 
(functional, experiential and contextual elements) merging 
towards technological persuasion and user stimulation. But 
this time the system is more markedly represented and, as 
supported by the proximity among the categories in the tree 
diagram, it is closely linked to elements of user control & 
personalization which in turn are strongly linked to 
emotional & cognitive stimulation for self-development. 
Lastly, we found that three factors underlie the 
participants’ cognitive organizations reflected through this 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
sorting exercise; one being the nature of the experience, one 
seeming to be the level the criterion intervenes on; the last 
one remains to be clarified. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Generally speaking, human-machine interactions have 
been studied within the framework of research related to 
software ergonomics, which aims at adapting the software to 
the user as it deals with information. In other words, the goal 
is to adapt the computer’s behaviour, i.e., its external 
manifestations, to the user’s cognitive functioning seeking to 
offer the most efficient, pleasant, satisfactory and least 
restrictive assistance possible. By extension, software 
ergonomics also needs to produce knowledge about how 
users work, interact and think. This knowledge includes 
many criteria that we seek to better understand and organize 
in a relevant manner in order to propose a structured model.  
When HCI experts are asked to categorize these criteria, 
it appears that: 
- 
The criteria grids are mentally reassembled in a way that 
certain criteria are stable and invariant of their category, 
while others are not, so they migrate towards other 
categories; 
- 
The criteria most stable and consistent with their category 
are those related to usability; 
- 
The criteria are subject to varying interpretations and 
they might be attributed different characteristics leading 
to categorization differences; 
- 
The standardized categories created and retained during 
the analysis of the data, are conceptually similar to a 
certain point to the initial theoretical considerations we 
chose for the suggestion of the 58 criteria; 
- 
The two main factors justifying the categorization and its 
resulting spatial representation seem to be the nature of 
the experience (functional vs. experiential), and the level 
of impact of the criterion (user, system, context of use).  
While research on UX factors and criteria is continuing, 
we think this research is necessary to summarize perception 
of UX criteria as assessed by UX experts.  
Currently, two studies are underway in which we are 
evaluating the applicability of our holistic criteria-based 
approach, in both HCI design and evaluation practices. Our 
next task will be to define a generic toolkit to organize the 
criteria so that they can be used in interface design and 
evaluation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Hervé Mémain and Yadira Colin for their 
valuable contributions to this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. M. C. Bastien and D. L. Scapin,  “Ergonomic criteria for 
the evaluation of human-computer interfaces”. (Technical 
report N° 156). Rocquencourt, France: INRIA Rocquencourt, 
1993. 
[2] A. de Vicente and H. Pain, “Informing the Detection of the 
Students’ 
Motivational 
State: 
an 
Empirical 
Study,” 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 2002. 
[3] D. Maurer. Card Sort Analysis Spreadsheet Template. 
[Online] [retrieved: November, 2016] Available from: 
http://rosenfeldmedia.com/books/card-sorting/  
[4] K. Eason, “Sociotechnical systems theory in the 21st Century: 
another half-filled glass,” Sense in Social Science: A 
collection of essays in honour of Dr. Lisl Klein, Broughton, 
United Kingdom, pp. 123-134, 2008. 
[5] R. Eskl, A. Sole, and Presses universitaires de France, 
“Automation strategies, work organisation and social 
relantionships in large companies in the tertiary sector”. 
Réseaux, 4(18), pp. 7-18, 1986.  
[6] J. I. Gil Urrutia, E. Brangier, and L. Cessat, “Is a holistic 
criteria-based approach possible in user experience?: Study of 
the classification of 58 criteria linked to UX,” In: A. Marcus, 
W. Wang (Eds.): DUXU 2017, Part I, LNCS, vol. 10288, pp. 
395-409, 2017, Springer Verlag DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
58634-2_29 
[7] P. Klaus, B. Edvardsson, and S. Maklan, “Developing a 
typology of customer experience management practice–from 
preservers to vanguards,” In 12th International Research 
Conference in Service Management, La Londe les Maures, 
France, 2012.  
[8] M. 
Rice. 
Co-occurrence 
Matrix. [Online] [retrieved: 
November, 
2016] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.informoire.com/taxonomy/co-occurrence-matrix-
announcement/ and from http://www.informoire.com/co-
occurrence-matrix/  
[9] A. Nemery and E. Brangier, “Set of Guidelines for Persuasive 
Interfaces: Organization and Validation of the Criteria,” 
Journal of Usability Studies, Vol. 9, Issue 3, pp. 105-128, 
2014. 
[10] P. Neveu and V. Alasluquetas, “White paper: Approaches, 
Routes and Customer experiences : 10 best practices of 
companies inspired by their customers,” Ginger & Different 
Factory [Online] [retrieved: June, 2016] Available from: 
http://docplayer.fr/13137085-Demarches-parcours-et-
experience-clients.html 
[11] A. Palmer, “Customer experience management: a critical 
review of an emerging idea,” Journal of Services marketing, 
24(3), 196–208, 2010. 
[12] B. J. Pine and J. H. Gilmore, “Welcome to the experience 
economy,” Harvard business review, 76, 97–105, 1998. 
[13] M. Schofield, “Applying the Kano Model to Improve UX,” 
Computers In Libraries, 36(8), 28, 2016. 
[14] S. H. Schwartz, “Basic human values : Theory, measurement, 
and applications,” Revue française de sociologie, 47(4), 929-
968, 2006. 
[15] World Wide Web Consortium Recommentation 11 December 
2008. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0.. 
[Online] 
[retrieved: 
June, 
2016] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-WCAG20-20081211/ 
Latest version available at http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 
[16] R Core Team, “R: a Language and Environment for Statistical 
Computing”, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, 
Austria, 2016, Available from: https://www.R-project.org/ 
[17] E. Brangier, M. Desmarais, A. Nemery, and S. Prom Tep, 
“Evolution of the heuristic inspection: towards an integration 
of accessibility, usability, emotion and persuasion?,” Journal 
d’Interaction Personne-Système, 4(1), pp. 69-84, 2015. 
[18] J. I. Gil Urrutia, E. Brangier, V. Senderowicz and L. Cessat, 
“Beyond “Usability and User Experience”, Towards an 
Integrative Heuristic Inspection: From Accessibility to 
Persuasiveness in the UX Evaluation,” In: T. Ahram, C. 
Falcão C. (Eds.) Advances in Usability and User Experience. 
AHFE 2017. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 
vol 607. Springer, Cham 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

