X Sign Language (xSL) Forum: Considering Deafness as a Language Rather Than 
an Impairment 
 
Zahen Malla Osman, Jérôme Dupire 
Centre d’Etude et de Recherche en Informatique et Communications 
Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers 
Paris, France 
Email: {zahen.malla_osman, dupire}@cnam.fr  
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we describe a video based, text free, 
online forum called xSL Forum. The aim of this work is to 
provide a tool for signing deaf people, allowing them to 
communicate using sign language(s). In contrast to the widely 
used, real time, video chat system, xSL Forum does not 
require people to be present at the same moment, facing their 
webcam, in order to communicate. Beyond a digital library, 
xSL Forum can be used as an asynchronous communication 
tool and thus, can be useful for variety of other applications 
such as entertainment, education, or administration.  
Keywords-Deaf; 
Internet 
forum; 
online; 
video; 
communication; interaction; sign language. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Hearing loss, as a disability, is often misunderstood by 
the hearing world.  It is often an "invisible" disability: a 
hearing aid may be the only visible indication. Furthermore, 
many hearing people do not realize that deaf people often 
have difficulty learning spoken and written languages, as the 
ability to listen to the sounds of a language is an important 
part of learning how to read and write. Indeed, in France, for 
example, an estimated 80% of deaf people are illiterate [1]. 
In our daily lives, communication, when it is not oral, is 
mainly based on the written modality: newspapers, public 
displays, and television. All of which require the ability of 
reading (Figure 1). The captioning of movies, television 
shows and news broadcasts is an important advance, but is 
not useful for all deaf people. Professional environments 
have the same characteristics, nor is the World Wide Web an 
exception to this rule: text dominates on the internet and 
people cannot reasonably be expected to navigate it 
efficiently without mastering a written language. 
A useful means of increasing the accessibility of textual 
content for deaf people is to propose a signed alternative in 
the form of a video. As far as we know, this solution is 
neither automatic nor systematic. If, technically, this is quite 
achievable, we still find very few sites that deploy this 
solution. Where it does existing, it is mostly found on 
specialized sites, initially intended for deaf people. The main 
obstacle to this alternative modality is the production cost.  
So much so that even the dedicated websites or the sites 
which include deaf people in their audience offer this signed 
alternative only for their menu options, and switch to text 
mode (read and/or write) for all or part of their content, 
including dynamic content (Figure 2). When not in a native 
sign language form, the contents of the site are translated 
into a sign language according to the capacity of the 
structure and the constraints of the production schedule and 
budget. 
Traditionally, 
websites 
have 
these 
common 
characteristics: (1) a high dynamicity of contents, and (2) an 
extensive use of text, which poses a problem for its 
appropriation by deaf users. These characteristics are also 
shared by online forums. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents 
motivations behind this work. Section III presents related 
work. Section IV describes the x Sign Language (xSL) 
Forum, including the software and hardware architecture, 
the modes of navigation and interaction, and the evaluations. 
Section V provides an outlook for future work. Section VI 
summarizes and concludes our paper. 
II. 
MOTIVATIONS 
The online forum has become a major communication 
tool in the landscape of the modern World Wide Web. It 
offers many advantages; such as allowing the participation 
of a wide community in a single conversation, whether for 
sharing information or seeking a solution; communicating 
through a forum allows people to instantly broadcast to all 
users.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a general forum intended for the deaf community 
[2] 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Asynchronous communication dispenses with the need 
to be available simultaneously in order to communicate, by 
passing the constraints of time zone difference in 
communications 
between 
international 
communities. 
Finally, the online forum is, by virtue of the persistence of 
its contents, a perennial source of data.  
Although the model of the online forum has proved its 
value and purely textual access, it is still very difficult to 
deaf users to benefit from it.  
We decided to design a tool that will give access to deaf 
people to such an online forum, without the difficulties 
posed by their lack of knowledge of written languages. 
 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Over the previous decade, the technology sector has 
proposed ideas towards facilitating communication between 
deaf and hearing people. 
Video chat systems, such as the free software ooVoo, 
Skype or Live Messenger, allow signing deaf users to 
communicate remotely, one-to-one or one-to-many, using 
their webcams. This system compensates for phone use in 
oral synchronous mode but has the same weaknesses, 
namely: (1) the need for the participants to be available at 
the same time; (2) the need to own the equipment, i.e., a 
computer equipped with a webcam; and (3) a lack of a 
permanent record of the information exchanged during the 
communication.  
From this starting point, many research projects studied 
how real-time video systems may be implemented, 
evaluated them in different contexts and looked at how it 
such a system could become a useful tool for deaf people.  
The Mak-Messenger project [4] has been deployed in the 
field of education to help deaf students learn sign language. 
This application allows for the broadcasting of messages in 
the form of signs between users using an interface similar to 
a conventional chat. This technology can be used to address 
the educational needs of deaf people.  
The Mobile American Sign Language (ASL) project [5] 
studied the limits of wireless video communications using 
mobile phones. This was done to assess the extent of the 
constraints imposed by mobile devices in terms of size and 
video quality.  
The Learning Management System (LMS) [6] uses video 
in Greek Sign Language to translate any text in a learning 
environment. This system is designed specifically for deaf 
people who want to improve the mastery of a language. It 
offers a bilingual interface (video and text) and a real-time 
video chat system. 
All of these projects use video for synchronous 
communication (in real time) between users and do not 
allow any communication in delayed time.  
Researchers at the University of Washington created a  
project for enabling American Sign Language to flourish in 
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Management (ASL-
STEM forum) [7]. This project provides a space for 
exchange, for the deaf to refine their comprehension of 
concepts used in science courses at university and provide a 
translation into American SL. 
 
Figure 2.  Example of a website with alternative videos [3] 
 
This forum offers a mixed interface, text, and video; 
which is consistent with the context of use (higher 
education). 
The ASL STEM Forum is primarily intended for the use 
of tertiary level students, which implies that the users’ 
mastery of reading and writing is high. 
This is the only project that includes asynchronous video 
communication between users. However, it is not designed 
to be general purpose, nor is it adaptable to another field of 
interest, like gardening or sports. Moreover, it is designed 
for a group that has already mastered a written language and 
wants to discuss the relationship between that and a sign 
language.  
xSL Forum is designed to fill this gap, allowing signing 
users to discuss a wide range of topics in their native 
language (sign language), without the need to engage in  
reading or writing.  
 
IV. 
XSL FORUM 
The main motivation of this work is to offer the whole 
signing community a communication tool that is usable, 
accessible, efficient, and up-to-date; one that provides the 
same easy-of-use and functionality as text-based, online 
forums. All its content has to be accessible for signing 
people, especially if they do not know a written language.  
“xSL” stands for “x Sign Language”. The “x” means that 
the tool is not linked to a particular SL (Sign Language). It 
can be used with French SL (FSL), American SL (ASL), 
British SL (BSL), etc. Thus, all signing people, without any 
consideration for nationality or location, can use it without 
any modification for its functionalities. 
Most computer applications nowadays are localized: 
they benefit from translation and some possible adjustments 
depending on the culture and the language mastered by 
potential users in a particular part of the world. 
Our approach is to consider developing an application 
originally designed for signing people. 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 3.  Recording a video (posting a message) 
No written text is presented on the pages of the forum 
and we do not ask the user to enter any kind of text when 
using the xSL forum.  
Forum access is possible even if the signing person does 
not know how to read or write. Knowledge of sign language 
(French or otherwise) is the only requirement to use this 
tool.  
The xSL forum is an asynchronous tool. Users simply 
record a message in video form (a question, for example), 
and then come back later to see the answer(s). Beyond the 
constraints mentioned earlier, this feature can become a 
major advantage in certain contexts, e.g., to compensate for 
a large time difference between two interlocutors (a French 
one and a Japanese one). 
xSL Forum can also be seen as a digital library with a 
capacity for long-term memory. Therefore, we can consider 
its use in specific contexts, such as: education (online 
courses), or administration (explanation of procedures, 
individual experiences, frequently asked questions, etc.). 
 
A. Software and Hardware Architecture 
The hardware architecture is standard for the World 
Wide Web landscape. It is a server (64bits PC with an Intel 
Xeon, 2GB of RAM and a 500 GB hard drive), on which are 
installed: an Apache server with PHP and a MySQL 
database (Figures 3 and 4). The software architecture 
consists of three principal parts: 
 
• 
Flash Media Server  
The video streams are operated by a software 
component installed on the server side, Adobe Flash 
Media Server (FMS) [8]. This software supports 
streaming and recording video streams within web 
pages on the forum. On the client side, a small 
module coded in Flash Action Script 3 ensures the 
communication with FMS. Although Flash is not 
free and make us dependant on Adobe, we chose to 
use this technology to the extent that, at the time of 
development, it was the only solution available that 
allowed us to test the client behavior, independently 
of the browser used. Furthermore, many websites 
are using this technology and many users have 
already installed the Flash plug-in on their browser. 
It is a form of standardization in the management of 
video streams. 
 
Figure 4.  Playing a video (reading a message) 
FMS is not free in its standard version, but a free 
version for developers is available. It is merely 
limited in number of simultaneous connections from 
clients. Although the inclusion of FMS in the global 
architecture was quite complex, this choice allows 
the administrator/owner of the forum to keep a hand 
on the video content, in order to manage, for 
instance, privacy and restricted access to it. It seems 
that this would not have been fully achievable if we 
had decided to use another technology such as the 
YouTube API.  
 
• 
Flux BB  
The software architecture of the website is derived 
from FluxBB [9]. It is an open source forum (GNU) 
developed in PHP, that we modified and added to. 
Common features have been preserved but all 
interfaces (GUIs) have been adapted to the 
specificities of video. The text input interface used 
for posting messages was replaced by a video 
recording interface (Figure 5). 
 
• 
FFmpeg  
This is a library for manipulating video [10], which 
offers, for example, the ability to convert videos 
from one format to another. We use FFmpeg to 
dynamically extract images from videos that are 
posted on the forum. These images are used as 
thumbnails, which will be displayed as visual tips to 
recognize the messages of different users. We 
decided to extract the 10th picture of a movie and 
use it as a thumbnail to avoid the issues encountered 
if an earlier picture was chosen (blank or black ones, 
due to the streaming process). 
 
B. Navigation and Interaction 
One of the challenges of this development task was to 
find solutions for keeping interaction fluid, including 
exploration of the site contents and ease the manipulation 
and playback of videos. Interaction is exclusively via the 
mouse; the keyboard is never required. This feature will 
make its use on mobile platforms much less restrictive (no 
need of any keyboard) and more appropriate.  
 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 5.  Video record interface 
The hierarchy of the xSL Forum consists of three levels: 
categories, discussions and messages. The home page shows 
the categories hosted within the xSL Forum. By clicking on 
the thumbnail of one of these categories, users can access 
the various discussions (Figure 6). Similarly, by clicking on 
a thumbnail for a discussion, users can view the various 
messages exchanged in this discussion (Figure 7).  
The pages on xSL forum are designed in such a way as 
to preserve simplicity while being visually pleasing and 
intuitive at the same time. Several design choices were 
implemented to meet these criteria.  
First, we systematically combine two images to describe 
a given piece of content. For example, on a category page 
(Figure 6), the "category" tab in the top-left consists of an 
icon and a thumbnail, which reflects the title of the category. 
This combination allows us to offer two formats, one static 
and one dynamic, to take into account varying levels of 
navigation expertise. When users mouse over the thumbnail, 
the corresponding explanation video is played. 
We also implemented a color code to complete the 
specificity of each level of the hierarchy of the forum: 
categories are green, topics are orange, and discussion 
messages are yellow. This encoding can also be retrieved via 
the tabs presented in the top left of the interface, which 
effectively 
completes 
the 
double 
(icon/thumbnail) 
presentation described above. These tabs allow the user to 
locate him/her-self through the existing topics and 
categories. 
 
Figure 6.  Different discussions in a category 
 
Figure 7.  A particular discussion 
• 
Playing videos (reading  messages) 
A video (from a topic or a message) is played, when 
the cursor is placed over its thumbnail. To achieve 
this, our tool calls a script that executes a JavaScript 
code into a PHP file, using AJAX asynchronous 
mechanisms. This code implements a PHP/Flash 
playback that connects with the FMS to obtain the 
requested video and broadcast it (Figure 4). 
The requested video then appears next to the 
thumbnail in a window size of 200×160 pixels 
(Figure 8). This size was considered the most 
efficient as a result of an experiment to evaluate 
different sizes of videos on a web page by deaf 
signing users. The study was conducted with seven 
deaf users. They were asked to access a webpage 
with a 15'' laptop and choose which sizes of video 
frames should be considered wide enough to 
understand the signed message.  
The available sizes ranged from 75×60 to 200×160 
pixels (Figure 9). The comprehension of the 
message was good or acceptable on the three widest 
video frames, ranging from 125×100 to 200×160 
pixels. However, all users reported that the widest 
one (200×160 pixels) was the most comfortable. If 
the user moves the cursor off the thumbnail, the 
video will stop and the window of the player will 
disappear (Figure 10).  
 
 
Figure 8.  Cursor over a thumbnail: the video appears (played) 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 9.  Different sizes of videos were used to evaluate the 
understanding and comfort of viewing. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Cursor out of thumbnails 
• 
Recording videos (posting  messages) 
Our current version allows users to create threads or 
leave messages, while the administrator controls the 
creation of new categories. If a user wishes to create 
a discussion or leave a message, he/she has to click 
on the icon on the bottom right of the screen 
(Figures 6 and 7). A new screen appears that 
implements a video recording interface (made with 
Flash Action Script 3) (Figure 5), that includes four 
features: record, stop, play, and validate. The 
recorder can record Flash videos using the webcam 
of the user’s computer, in conjunction with the FMS 
server-side module. Once the video is validated, a 
PHP script is called. FFmpeg will extract a 
thumbnail, and then the server saves the extracted 
image and video to the database (Figure 3). 
 
C. Evaluations  
Beyond the experiments outlined above, we offered the 
use of the xSL forum to several deaf people.  
Our first observation was that this type of tool (an online 
discussion forum) is not very well known by among the deaf 
community. This is consistent with our discussion in the 
introduction, where we assessed the typical form of online 
(textual) forums as having a low level of accessibility for 
this population. Therefore, their use and operation remain 
unclear.  
However, after explaining the operation and purposes, all 
those contacted expressed great enthusiasm, and considered 
the many contexts of use of the xSL Forum, its use in the 
educational context was the most frequently mentioned. 
We are about to start a formal evaluation of the xSL 
Forum. The aim is to evaluate the human-computer 
interfaces and ergonomics of the navigation and interaction. 
For this, we are preparing an experiment that consists of 
showing part of a movie to a set of deaf people and allowing 
them to discuss it remotely using the xSL Forum. We will 
prepare a variety of topics for this purpose. After a period of 
time has passed, questionnaires will be given to the users in 
order to elicit their feelings, criticisms, and suggestions 
regarding the tool.  
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
A new version of the xSL forum is under development. 
We are working on the following improvements: 
Users should be able to access their account securely, so 
we are looking into authentication tools based on face 
recognition, such as [11]. The integration of these tools will 
help us meet our initial constraints, i.e. not to have to handle 
text.  
We are also replacing FMS with the RED5 media server 
[12], a royalty free audio/video streaming engine. We are 
also considering the integration of video using HTML5 on 
the client side, but its implementation in the browser is still 
limited. This will provide a free forum independent from 
proprietary technologies; the ultimate being to provide a tool 
that is open source and royalty free.  
We are trying to integrate help videos with interactive 
icons, to be read in the same way throughout the forum 
(with the mouse over action). 
Video playback will also be improved by providing a 
“full screen” mode with control buttons (pause, play, 
timeline). These controls do not exist in the current version 
and yet they are indispensable, especially in the case of long 
videos. 
We are planning to evaluate this tool with deaf 
communities. We also intend to test it with people who 
practice Cued Speech, as it can be used in the same way as 
sign language in the xSL Forum.  
We are also planning to develop and deploy a version of 
the website for mobile platforms (phones and tablets). A 
specific application, IOS and Android, will ideally complete 
the whole set. These kinds of platforms suffers from the 
need for a real or virtual keyboard. When the keyboard is a 
physical one, it makes the device bigger; and when it is 
virtual, it poses serious constraints and ergonomics issues 
for the user. The xSL Forum is a great laboratory for 
experimenting with non-verbal interaction, based on visual 
cues, images, videos and gesture recognition. Initially linked 
to the deafness context, all the experiments and results could 
be tested and applied in a more general context, i.e. toward 
all users (hearing or deaf).  
Another important discussion has been raised: the way 
search engines deal with video indexation and the use case 
offered by the xSL Forum.  
Finally, the aim of this project is for the xSL Forum to be 
used to bring together different communities, including deaf, 
hearing-impaired, and hearing people. We, therefore, wish to 
collaborate with teams working on issues of recognition and 
automatic translation from sign language into written 
language and vice versa. This kind of collaboration would 
lead to a true bilingual access to xSL Forum and total 
accessibility.  
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
As far as we are aware, an online forum using videos as 
its main modality of communication for signing people -deaf 
or hearing- did not exist before the xSL Forum. It allows 
users to simply exchange experiences and knowledge in 
various 
fields, 
according 
to previously 
unexploited 
temporalities in video mode (asynchronous communication 
and message archiving).  
Beyond the important contribution to the deaf 
community, xSL Forum allows us to devise and propose 
non-textual interactions for situations in which text is not or 
is no longer be available. This forum can be used in contexts 
in which the modality or text is not very usable (mobile 
devices, embedded, no keyboard, etc.). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Laure Giry, Katharine Neil, 
Lubna Odeh, and all the people who accepted to give 
feedback on our study. 
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] D. Gillot, “The rights of deafs”, rapport to the French Prime 
Minister, 
1998 
(in 
French). 
See 
http://clas-
lyon.fr/spin.php?article116 [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[2] Deaf4Life forum: http://deaf4life.co.uk/ [retrieved: January, 
2015]. 
[3] Deafness forum of Australia: http://deafnessforum.org.au/ 
[retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[4] J. Ohene-Djan, R. Zimmer, J. Bassett-Corss, A. Mould, and 
B. Cosh, “Mak-Messenger and Finger-Chat, Communications 
Technonlogies to Assist in the Teaching of Signed Languages 
to the Deaf and Hearing”, Proc. of the IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 2004, pp. 
744-746, doi:10.1109/ICALT.2004.1357643.  
[5] A. Cavender, R. E. Ladner, and E. A. Riskin, “MobileASL : 
Intelligibility of sign language video as constrained by 
mobile phone technology”, Proc. of the 8th International 
ACM 
SIGACCESS 
Conference 
on 
Computers 
and 
Accessibility 
(Assets 
‘06), 
2006, 
pp. 
71-78, 
doi:10.1145/1168987.1169001. 
[6] A. S. Drigas, J. Vrettaros, and D. Kouremenos, “An e-
learning management system for the deaf people”, Proc. of 
the 4th WSEAS International Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering Data Bases (AIKED 
‘05), 2005, pp. 28:1-28:5.  
[7] A. C. Cavender, D. S. Otero, J. P. Bigham, and R. E. Ladner,  
“Asl-stem forum: enabling sign language to grow through 
online collaboration”, Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘10), 2010, pp. 
2075-2078, doi:10.1145/1753326.1753642. 
[8] Flash Media Server: http://www.adobe.com/products/flash-
media-server-family.html [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[9] Flux BB: http://fluxbb.org/ [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[10] FFmpeg: http://ffmpeg.org/ [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[11] Pam Face Authentication: https://code.google.com/p/pam-
face-authentication/ [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[12] RED5 Media Server: http://red5.org/ [retrieved: January, 
2015]. 
 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

