Interaction Patterns for Designing Visual Feedback in Secure Websites 
 
 
Jaime Muñoz-Arteaga 
Univ. Autónoma de Aguascalientes 
Av. Universidad #940. C.P. 20131 
Aguascalientes, México 
jmauaa@gmail.com 
 
Eduardo B. Fernandez  
Dept. of Comp. Science and Eng.  
Florida Atlantic University,  
Boca Raton, FL, USA  
ed@cse.fau.edu 
 
René Santaolaya  
CENIDET, Internado Palmira s/n. 
Col. Palmira C.P. 62490, Cuernavaca, 
Morelos, México 
rene@cenidet.edu.mx 
 
Abstract — In a website, it is essential to offer accessible and 
secure online services for end users. In general, usefulness and 
usability aspects are taken into account during design of 
website, but security issues normally are put aside. The 
specification of visual feedback helps the analysis and design 
of websites. This paper proposes a set of best practices of 
visual feedback for designing websites where the user task can 
be made secure and usable.  
Keywords-secure website; interaction patterns; visual 
feedback; software architectures 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Online services, such as a bank transfer or a virtual 
meeting, must be executed in a secure environment. In fact, 
user tasks are constantly exposed to threats either in a 
simple or complex online service. Here are some examples 
of threats:  
 
Guessing threat: Here the intruder tries to guess 
the password that protects the computer network in 
order to gain access to it.  
 
Spoofing threat: The goal of this attack is to usurp 
an authorized IP address and to gain access to the 
victim’s system. The IP spoofing attack is often 
called blind spoofing, and is using against 
communication services taking advantage of their 
security vulnerabilities (e.g., rsh, rlogin, and rcp 
attacks). This allows the intruder to hide the origin 
of his attack (used in Denial Service attacks). Denial 
of service attacks typically involve an attacker 
disabling or rendering inaccessible a network-based 
information resource.  
 
Scanning threat: The intruder goes about scanning 
different ports of the victim’s system to find some 
vulnerable points from where they can launch other 
attacks, (e.g., port-scan). The scanning and the 
spoofing attacks may be consider more risky, 
because usually are the preface for other attacks.  
A large variety of design techniques for specifying 
websites exist but they have limited consideration of 
security aspects [3]. In general, usefulness and usability 
aspects are taken into account during design of websites but 
security issues normally are put aside. We consider that the 
secure aspects of a website can be specified in an explicit 
manner through its Graphical User Interface (GUI) in order 
to offer the end user more secure, reliable, and 
comprehensible online services. In a GUI, it is possible to 
use some metaphors and colors to notify the end user about 
detected threats.  
 
 
Figure 1. Visual feedback levels in a website. 
A website could be considered as a kind of interactive 
system. The term visual feedback in an interactive system 
is applied to any graphic form of communication from the 
system towards the user [9]. Visual, auditory and 
kinesthetic are different kind of feedbacks that could be 
used by the system in order offer an easy, comprehensible 
and usable way to perform user tasks. Visual feedback is 
predominant in current interactive systems; it can come 
from different sources in a website. This feedback can be 
classified in three different categories as in [9]: 
information, interaction and interactivity levels (see Figure 
1). The first category of visual feedback displays the status 
and the digital content stored in the system. The interaction 
feedback 
shows 
the 
state 
of 
services 
as 
available/unavailable. Finally, the interactive feedback is 
notified immediately to the user with information related to 
the management of input and output devices used by the 
user to perform his task. Note that different feedbacks 
could be closely related, for instance a bank transfer 
requires multiple visual feedbacks with information about 
the client’s account and details of the service given to the 
user.  
Since visual feedback is predominant in current 
websites, we consider that the visual feedback could be a 
meaningful mean to provide security information and to 
improve security and productivity for a user task. This 
95
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

paper proposes a set of best practices to assist the user 
about the security features in a website using visual 
feedback. For this purpose, this article shows in section two 
a more detailed analysis of the problem. In section three, 
we propose a solution in terms of a classification of 
interaction patterns [5][6] to design the visual feedback to 
assist the users to make their tasks to be carried out 
securely. Section four describes several examples of the 
interaction design patterns proposed in previous sections. 
Before the conclusion, section five discuses some related 
work. 
II. OUTLINE OF THE PROBLEM 
A user could lose control when an online service is 
requested, for example the exchange of personal data, 
purchasing and payment of electronic products, or 
downloading files via Internet banking. Even if users 
request the services of a website, they may consider it an 
insecure system, and therefore certain actions generate 
mistrust and doubt, and even more so when the user is 
unaware of what security measures are provided by the 
websites.  
When the user interacts with a website, he expects that 
the GUI gives answers to any of his questions, such as: 
What is happening in the system?, why this object is 
displayed on the screen?, Where am I? And what I can do?. 
But how to give a user visual feedback on the security 
measures of websites?. A good feedback would allow the 
user to prevent or correct an error caused by a malicious 
attack. 
During the design and development of usability and 
security aspects for a website we need to take into account:  
 
Usability aspects are frequently treated in isolation 
of security aspects [4].  
 
Taking into account usability and security is 
considered as a tradeoff for the development team 
[1].  
 
It is necessary to use some specification techniques 
in order to deal with different abstraction levels and 
diverse perspectives [3].  
 
 In general, formal specification techniques do not 
address the issues of erroneous behavior of an 
interactive system, which may have serious 
consequences for the system and user tasks [2].  
 
The usage of security aspects is frequently 
ambiguous for the user. Therefore, the user needs 
guidance to apply such aspects.  
The next sections describe some solutions to the 
aforementioned problems.  
III. INTERACTION PATTERNS FOR DESIGNING 
VISUAL FEEDBACK  
It is quite difficult to develop the external aspect of a 
system without being immediately stuck into the inherent 
relation with the internal aspects of system. Taking into 
account the external aspect during the development of 
interactive system, it is necessary to work with the 
presentation, as well as the internal function of system. In 
addition, a reliable interactive system is not useful for a 
final user if it is not easy to use, then the security and 
usability are two significant characteristics in an interactive 
system. For example the usability flaws of identity 
management are complex, the structural part require careful 
thought and redesign of entire systems and standards to fix, 
but some of these aspects are closely related to a well-
designed UI. We point the lack of tools that help identity 
management systems’ developers to mitigate most of the 
design-challenges particularly those certainly related to the 
design process of UI’s. 
It is very important that visual feedback should be 
displayed through a well-designed user interface. For this 
goal, current work propose the use of interaction design 
patterns [5][6], they represent a solution given a recurring 
problem designing a GUI within a specific context. In 
addition, the specification of a pattern can communicate the 
experience and knowledge in a certain domain [5][7].  
A good alternative to generating a well designed of 
security feedback consists of applying interactive design 
patterns, because it is well known that a pattern represents a 
proven solution for a recurrent problem within a certain 
environment. From a computer science perspective, 
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) deals with the 
interaction between one or more users and one or more 
computers using the GUI of a program [9]. The concepts of 
traditional HCI can be used to design the interface or 
improve some interface currently available, considering 
aspects such as usability. Usability determines the ease of 
use of a specific technology, the level of effectiveness of 
the technology, and the satisfaction of the user with the 
results obtained by using a specific technology to perform 
specific tasks [9].The interaction design patterns proposed 
here are classified according to three categories of visual 
feedback offered by a website. 
Informative feedback category: Here is included all 
information to notify users about available security 
features, the correct way to use these features, detection of 
malicious attacks and the internal status of the system.  
Interaction feedback category: This category brings 
together the interaction forms useful to establish the 
navigation in the windows’ interface. In the same way are 
included the communication forms for the enable or disable 
of security features, and also, interaction forms to present 
suggestions of actions to follow when some threat is 
detected.  
Interaction feedback category: This category includes 
the interactive patterns to specify the security feedback 
needed to convey information to the end user when the 
elements of the interface are handled by means of mouse or 
keyboard. 
 
The interactive patterns of three previous categories 
form a pattern language (see Table 1); they could be 
applied to solve the security issues according to the 
linguistic nature of dialog between the user and an 
interactive system. 
 
 
96
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
TABLE 1. CLASSIFICATION OF INTERACTIVE PATTERNS 
Interaction design patterns for Secure 
Website 
 
Informative 
feedback 
Guessing login 
Accurate Information 
State of secure website 
Protection of personal data 
 
Interaction 
feedback 
Identification 
of 
secure 
websites 
Restriction of websites for 
adults 
Activation of online services 
 
Interactive 
feedback 
Contextual secure feedback. 
Secure website with icons 
Warning with input devices 
pointer 
 
The collection of interaction patterns for secure 
websites is not exhaustive, someone interested in security 
and usability aspects could update with new interaction 
patterns. One of the objective, it is to offer to designer a 
high level description of visual feedback of different 
software modules of an interactive system independent of 
any graphical environment. 
IV. APPLICATION OF INTERACTIVE PATTERNS 
This section describes in detail every category of 
interaction design patterns proposed in Table 1.  
A.  Information Feedback  
This group of interaction design patterns describes 
some solutions to display the information in a secure 
manner. Thus, the designer could offer some guidelines to 
design visualize the status of security system through 
preventive or warning messages, it is important to specify 
that user can decide whether cancel or continue an 
operation at any moment of interaction. Several component 
of a GUI could be used, for example a preventive 
messages, an action buttons and/or give some links with 
more detailed information.  
Name  
Accurate information  
Problem 
User doesn’t know if the information 
obtained from a website is secure.  
Context 
When user require private information 
provided by a website.  
Force 
Provide 
secure 
facilitates 
to 
get 
information provided by a website. 
Solution 
With the information required by user, 
display some security certificate or icons 
as part of graphical UI. 
Example 
 
 
In this example we can see the contents 
of a e-commerce website by a secure 
channel of communication. A padlock 
icon is showed within the GUI. 
Consequence 
Properly security symbols used in a 
website make feel user secure about the 
authenticity of the received information. 
 
Name  
Guessing login 
Problem 
User require a new password to access 
new services 
Context 
When a user creates a new account on a 
website. 
Usability 
Principle 
The system could help user tasks to be 
developed in a secure manner 
Solution 
If the key provided by user is vulnerable 
to attack, website should alert and advise 
the user to change the password.  
Example 
 
Visual feedback of a e-commerce website 
where the user find advises for getting 
valid keys in order to create a shopping 
list online. 
Consequence 
Give facilities for a better comprehension 
of user task 
Name  
Blocking of malicious access 
Problem 
A website displays a security message 
but they are specified in terms of internal 
97
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

operations. 
Context 
A secured website should maintain 
communication with user to set out the 
actions that the system exerts on the basis 
of their safety 
Force 
Display information explicitly to users 
about current security state of website 
Solution 
Report clearly and simply the user about 
processes running the system internally 
to maintain their security, whether 
through images, text messages or sounds 
Example 
 
The browser has blocked some facilities 
of website site in order to protect user 
task, giving information about the option 
to activate such facility,. 
Consequence 
User feels protected by the system. 
B. Interaction Feedback 
The objective of this kind of feedback is display the 
evolution of communication state between the user and 
system. This category also includes feedback to the user 
through the navigation between application windows and 
the activation of buttons and/or menus for display valid 
actions.  
Name  
Identification of secure websites. 
Problem 
User doesn’t have any information about 
the security of current website. 
Context 
Confidential websites that provide safety 
information and service online 
Force 
Notify the security provided by the site 
Solution 
Show 
clearly 
and 
non 
confusing 
information 
about 
different 
security 
mechanisms provided of current web. 
Example 
 
In this example we can see how the 
interface is notified by using a secure 
(https) protocol http. With the lock is 
notified of the secure connection using 
SSL certificates. 
Consequence 
Access to secure online services 
 
Name  
Navigation on limited areas 
Problem 
User feel insecure every time navigate 
on Internet with reduced space. 
Context 
Website where the safety information 
required offering deployed in large 
quantities and screen space is limited for 
example in mobile devices.  
Force 
Help the user to reinforce the security of 
a website 
Solution 
Allow the user to view information in 
several logical drives such as windows, 
dialog boxes, lists etc deployment., In 
order to facilitate the exploration of 
safety information either through direct 
or sequential navigation 
Example 
 
The example shows how a website helps 
the user with a dialog box, it make easy 
to identify and activate secure online 
services. 
Consequence 
Navigation is better and allows user a 
better access to the content of website.  
98
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Name  
Restriction of websites for adults 
Problem 
How does user prevent to access a 
website with inappropriate content? 
Context 
Parental control in order to avoid lose 
control of kid access of website 
Force 
User protection. 
Solution 
Use a warning message (before entering 
the site) to notify inappropriate content. 
In case of adult 
users give the 
opportunity decide whether cancel or 
continue to access website. 
Example 
 
This message informs user is trying to 
enter a website properly for adult. Note 
that the message gives the opportunity to 
enter next web page. 
Consequence 
Share the responsibilities with the system 
 
C. Interactive Feedback  
Graphical 
user 
interfaces 
of 
current 
website 
increasingly adopt a direct-manipulation style of interaction 
[8], they give the end user the illusion of directly acting on 
the objects of interest rather than indirectly accessing them 
through command buttons and data-entry widgets. Direct 
manipulation style require immediate feedback and 
contextual feedback, the management of these feedbacks 
calls for a much finer grained dialogue modeling than is 
required for conventional indirect manipulation interfaces. 
These best practices are taken into account to solve some 
security issues of website and they are encapsulated in the 
interactive design patterns.  
Name  
Secure website with icons 
Problem 
Lack of secure information about user 
actions 
Context 
When user action is affected by security 
issues 
Force 
Provide safety facilities through user 
actions. 
Solution 
Use icons and mouse pointer to describe 
the confidentiality of information or 
services online. This feedback is shown 
when the mouse pointer passes over the 
item of interest to user and could 
disappear out of icon. 
Example 
 
Here, 
the 
visual 
feedback 
provides 
information 
about 
the 
definition 
of 
password when user passes the mouse 
pointer over the icon with a key.  
Consequence 
User actions allow learning about solution 
of security issues in a website. 
 
Name  
Contextual secure feedback. 
Problem 
User doesn’t have detailed security 
information in a website 
Context 
In sensitive text or transactions that 
provide safety information to user 
Force 
Use direct interaction style to solve 
security issues. 
Solution 
Show security capsules in a website 
when the user pass the pointer over a 
meaningful text or objects of a UI.  
Example 
 
In the above example the user informed 
about preventing password theft through 
the deployment of information when the 
99
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

user passes the mouse pointer over the 
object composing UI. 
Consequence 
The user will be informed through their 
own actions on the site. 
 
V 
DISCUSSION 
In the literature of security engineering [12], several 
works have been proposed a large number of security 
patterns regrouped in catalogue [10] [11]. These catalogues 
cover several aspects of security in order to build reliable 
software, but visual feedback is not taken into account. 
Braz et al. [1] have started to take into account the usability 
with secure factors. In a similar way, current work make 
emphasis in the visual feedback as a mean at design level 
for a better understand and comprehension of security 
issues of a web site. The contribution consists of a set of 
design patterns to design usable information security 
feedback combining the concept of user interface patterns 
[6] and security patterns [10].  
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper proposed a collection of interaction patterns 
as a specification technique for designing feedback for 
secure websites with a particular emphasis on visual 
feedback. The visual feedback can come from different 
sources in a website to assure the user's task: The first 
category of visual feedback of information is the group of 
security patterns that describe in a coherent and continuous 
way the state in which the user will find the website or any 
of its internal processes required in a transaction. Visual 
feedback at the level of user interaction indicates the state 
of services as available or unavailable to him. The 
interactive visual feedback captures best practices to assure 
user actions in detail.  
Finally, several aspects could be considered as future 
work, one of them is the specification of interaction design 
patterns based on different kinds of feedback such as 
visual, auditory and kinesthetic.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was performed thanks to the support from 
Conacyt (Code Number. 21733), as well as from Promep 
project No. UAA-CA-48.  
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Christina, S. Ahmed, and M. David, Designing a Trade-off 
between Usability and Security: A Metrics Based-Model. Proc. of 
11th IFIP TC 13 Conf. on Human-Computer Interaction 
INTERACT’2007. LNCS Springer, vol. 4663, 2007, pp 114–126. 
[2] R. Robert, K. Claire Marie, K. Jhon, and B. Carolyn, Usability 
Challenges in Security and Privacy Policy-Authoring Interfaces. In: 
Proc. of 11th IFIP TC 13 Conf. on Human-Computer Interaction 
INTERACT’2007. LNCS Springer, vol. 4663, 2007, pp. 141–155. 
[3] R. Jennifer, J. Carolina, D. Paul, S. Roberto, and N. Kari, G. David, 
R. Jie, D. Paul, and R. David, Seeing Further: Extending 
Visualization as a Basis for Usable Security. Proc. of 2nd ACM 
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, SOUPS’2006 ACM 
Press, 2006, pp. 145–155 
[4] V. Roth and T. Turner, User Studies on Security: Good vs. Perfect. 
In: Proc. of ACM CHI’2007, Workshop on Security User Studies, 
2007. 
[5] B. Sergy, F. Peter, and Y. Anatoli, User Interface Design Patterns for 
Interactive Modeling. DVS-IS 2002, LNCS 2545, 2002, pp. 148-
158.  
[6] V. Martijn and H. Trćtteberg, Interaction Patterns in User Interfaces. 
Proc. Seventh Pattern Languages of Programs Conference, PLOP 
2000. 
[7] G. Erich, H. Richard, J. Ralph, and V. Johnson, Design Patterns : 
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software, Addison-Wesley 
Professional Computing, 1995.  
[8] S. Ben and P.Cathrine, Designing the User Interface: strategies for 
effective human-computer interaction, Addison-Wesley, 1987. 
Fourth edition with Catherine Plaisant as co-author 2004, ISBN 0-
321-26978-0. 
[9] D. Alan, F. Janet, A. Gregory, and B. Russell, Human-Computer 
Interaction. Prentice Hall, 2004. ISBN 0-13-046109-1 
[10] S. Marcus, F. Eduardo, H. Duane, B. Frank, and S. Peter, Security 
Patterns: integrating security and systems engineering. John Wiley 
and Sons, 2005.  
[11] M. Hafiz, A. Paul, and J. Ralph, Organizing security patterns. IEEE 
Software, vol 24, 2007, pp. 52-60.  
[12] S. Markus, Security Engineering with Patterns: Origins Theoretical 
Models, and New Applications Editorial Springer ; 2003, LNCS275, 
ISBN-10: 3540407316  
 
 
 
100
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

