Exploring a Map Survey Task’s Sensitivity to Cognitive Ability 
 
Kofi Whitney, Georgi Batinov, Les Miller, Sarah 
Nusser  
Iowa State University 
Ames, Iowa USA 
{kwhitney,batinov,lmiller,nusser}@iastate.edu 
Kathleen T. Ashenfelter 
U.S. Census Bureau 
Washington, D.C., USA 
kathleen.t.ashenfelter@census.gov
 
 
Abstract— The present work discusses an exploratory study 
aimed at understanding how users’ cognitive abilities influence 
performance and method during a series of address 
verification tasks. College students were given a paper map 
and asked to verify seven residential addresses scattered 
throughout a neighborhood. This approach, as opposed to 
using a mobile device as the verification medium, allotted 
participants more freedom with respect to address verification 
style and map interaction. The study methodology and results 
are discussed.  The key contribution of the work described in 
the paper has been the identification of map usage behaviors 
that are sensitive to visualization and perspective taking. 
Keywords-human-computer; interaction, individual 
differences; location-based; usability component. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Individual differences research in computing focuses on 
the physical, cognitive, psychological, social, and cultural 
distinctions of users in various settings. Individual 
differences have been shown to influence behavior and 
performance 
in 
desktop 
computing 
scenarios 
[4,6,10,11,12,27]. Similar findings have been presented for 
field studies using mobile devices, e.g., Nusser and Murphy 
[25] and Nusser [26] suggest that a user’s spatial-
visualization 
ability 
is 
especially 
pertinent 
to 
task 
performance.  
A pilot study was conducted to look at the role that 
cognitive ability plays on paper map usage with respect to a 
series of address verification tasks [34]. These tasks were 
modeled around those typically performed by U.S. Census 
Bureau employees. The results of the pilot study implied that 
task performance was sufficiently related to participants’ 
spatial-visualization and perspective-taking ability. Some 
interesting participant behaviors were also observed that 
seemed applicable to location-based software design. The 
favorable outcome of the pilot encouraged us to refine the 
methodology in terms of sample size, protocol, and setting. 
The study discussed in this paper is a culmination of these 
refinements. 
The goals of this study were: (1) to demonstrate that user 
performance during address verification is sensitive to 
cognitive abilities for which participants can be tested; (2) to 
collect data on address verification and map usage 
behaviors—some of which might be tied to these cognitive 
abilities; and (3) to identify behaviors that might be 
incorporated into the design of a mobile, map-based 
prototype—to be evaluated in a subsequent study. These 
findings could be relevant to a variety of applications where 
users must orient themselves with respect to their geographic 
position in order to complete a task. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Several investigators have examined strategies to 
improve the usability of map-based software. Cox [9] looked 
at very low-level user actions to identify strategies when 
working with Geographic Information Systems (GIS). 
Malczewski and Rinner [24] evaluated decision making 
based on GIS usage. Haklay and Zafiri [15] utilized GIS 
usage snapshots. In a recent study on a web-GIS system, 
Ingensand and Golay [18] found several different strategies 
and pointed out ―users performed differently depending on 
their strategy‖. Fern et al. [14] used data mining techniques 
to extract strategies from data logged during software usage. 
Individual differences have been recognized as an 
important aspect of human performance. Benyon et al. [4] 
note that individual differences help explain the variation in 
strategies among computer operators. Spatial ability has been 
found to be the most important of the individual differences 
with 
regard 
to 
predicting 
computer 
performance 
[10,11,12,33]. Spatial ability is seen as being composed of 
five subcomponents by Carroll [7] and Lohman [22]: 
visualization, speeded rotation, closure speed, closure 
flexibility, and perceptual speed. Visualization is the most 
often cited spatial ability related to computer performance 
[6,29,30,31,32,33,35]. Pak et al. [27] note that the 
importance of spatial ability depends on the task difficulty 
while Ackerman [1] suggests that task type is more critical. 
Carroll [8] suggested that spatial visualization involves 
manipulation of spatial configuration in visual short-term 
memory. Baddeley [2,3] has modeled working memory to 
include verbal (phonological loop) and visual (sketchpad) 
components. Luck [23] shows that visual memory is limited 
and that performance drops systematically when individuals 
have more than three or four items to remember. Spatial 
orientation has been distinguished from spatial visualization 
[20] and shown to influence the way that the user visualizes 
self within the geographic space defined by a map. Klatzky 
[19] discusses the distinctions between allocentric and 
egocentric spatial representations. Burgess [5], Lafon et al. 
[21], and Igloi et al. [17] suggest that these two spatial 
representations are acquired and exist in parallel, a position 
63
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

recently corroborated by electroencephalographic evidence 
in Plank et al. [28]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Screening 
Three cognitive tests were administered during the 
screening phase: spatial visualization (VZ-2) [13], visual 
memory (MV-2) [13], and perspective-taking (PT) [20]. 
Twenty-seven college students were selected to participate 
from a tested pool of over 100. The intent was to create a 
sample consisting of students with high combined scores and 
students with low combined scores.  We expected this 
partitioning to allow us to observe greater differentiation 
among participants. 
B. Materials 
Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and 
Referencing 
System 
(TIGER\Line) 
Shapefiles 
were 
combined using ESRI’s ArcGIS Desktop© to create the map. 
This map contained two layers of information: (1) a street 
layer that provided all of the streets and their respective 
labels and (2) an address layer that depicted each residential 
address as a small dot accompanied by an address number. 
The decision to provide such sparse map to the participants 
was motivated by two issues.  First, our goal was to use 
maps similar to those used by Census Bureau staff.  Second, 
the bare and abstract presentation of the map encouraged 
participants to enrich the map with detail that supported their 
actions. Address numbering and placement errors were 
deliberately added to the map to make the verification tasks 
more challenging.  
Each participant was given a clipboard with the paper 
map attached to the front side in landscape orientation and a 
randomized list of the seven target addresses attached to the 
back. A multi-colored pen was provided so that participants 
could edit the map and list with the appropriate level of 
detail. Participants were outfitted with an audio device that 
was used throughout the exercise to record think-aloud 
comments and to capture responses to an exit questionnaire. 
The questionnaire probed participants on the effects of 
setting, map design, planning, task difficulty, and previous 
knowledge/experience. 
Observers 
used 
coding 
sheets 
throughout the exercise to capture supplementary data. The 
map, list, audio recording, and coding sheets were collected 
for later analysis. Additionally, these materials were used to 
reconstruct participant routes. These routes were input into 
Google® Earth so that the individual travel distances could 
be estimated. 
 
C. Residential Area: Grid vs. Non-Grid 
The field exercise took place in the cross section of the 
residential area depicted in Figure 1. The western half is 
designated the grid section. It is made up of streets that are 
homogeneous and closely aligned with the cardinal 
directions. The three-way intersections of this area are 
exclusively 
comprised 
of 
T-junctions; 
the 
4-way 
intersections are similarly perpendicular. These features give  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this area an orthogonal, uniform structure. The resulting 
blocks are approximately rectangular in appearance.   
The eastern half of the area contains non-uniform streets 
that seldom run parallel with the cardinal directions.  The 
three-way intersections formed by these streets are Y-
junctions, rather than T-junctions. The four-way intersections 
occur at varying angles.  The large triangular medians are 
another notable feature—they are formed when three Y-
junctions interconnect.  This area is not orthogonal in nature 
and is designated the non-grid section. 
It is thought that these contrasting halves would add 
variation to the verification scenarios encountered by 
participants. 
D. Field Exercise 
The participants selected for the field exercise were 
taken, one at a time, to the residential neighborhood.  Each 
session contained one participant and one observer.  The 
exercise began at a uniform starting location, where the 
observer explained the task flow, the think-aloud protocol, 
and the possible outcomes of verification.  Each participant 
was instructed to verbalize his or her cognitive processes and 
thoughts related to the exercise.  The participant was then 
asked to complete three training scenarios on a simplified 
map containing only two streets.  At the end of the training 
session, the participant was given an answer key and 
received feedback from the observer on verbalization.  The 
participant and observer then returned to the starting 
location, where the participant received the exercise map and 
the list containing seven addresses to be verified. 
 
Figure 1.  Field exercise map given to participants (right-side 
up). 
64
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

The participant was told that each of the seven target 
addresses required one of these basic address-verification 
actions: (1) add-to-map, (2) move-on-map, (3) delete-from-
map, and (4) confirm-on-map. The grid and non-grid 
sections of the map each contained three addresses that 
required address-verification actions 1, 2, and 3 (no replace); 
the major street that divided these sections contained a single 
address requiring address-verification action 4. Participants 
were told to edit the map at their discretion; the only 
requirement was that they clearly convey the address-
verification actions chosen. After answering any final 
questions, the observer would no longer communicate with 
the participant, other than to encourage a person who had 
fallen silent or to request more detail with regard to a 
participant’s response. 
 
E. Method of Analysis and Variables Used 
The performance variables, total time, distance traveled, 
and the number of errors made, were tested against the 
cognitive 
test 
scores 
using 
pair-wise 
correlations. 
Participants’ behaviors were categorized via the analysis of 
qualitative data found in the observer coding sheets, the 
coded think-aloud transcripts, participant annotations on the 
provided maps and target address lists, and participants’ 
responses to the field exercise questionnaire. Behavioral 
variables (excluding questionnaire data) that could be 
quantified across participants were tested against the 
cognitive test scores and the performance variables.  Pair-
wise correlations and a two-tailed Welch’s t test were used 
when appropriate. The available records did not allow for 
coding of some measures, so the number of observations per 
variable can be fewer than 26.  The significant coded 
variables are described below. 
 
1) Variables Found in Transcriptions. 
 
Address error pre-detection – The number of times a 
participant recognized address errors at the start of the 
exercise; they had not yet seen the actual address. 
 
Nearest address selection – The number of times a 
participant chose their next target address based on its 
proximity to the one previously verified. 
 
Cardinal heading usage – The number of times a 
participant described their heading in terms of cardinal 
direction (north-south-east-west). This was interpreted as a 
proxy for an allocentric frame of reference. 
 
2) Variables Found in Maps/Lists. 
 
Target streets highlighted on map – True if the participant 
highlighted the street labels associated with the target 
addresses. 
 
Map verification annotations – True if the participant 
annotated target addresses on the map in excess of what 
was required to indicate a solution. 
 
List verification annotations – True if the participant 
annotated target addresses on the list in excess of what was 
required to indicate a solution. 
 
Route sequence on list – True if the participant enumerated 
each target address to indicate the route sequence. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Correlation Among Cognitive Test Scores 
Table I contains the pair-wise correlation coefficients of 
the 26 participants’ three cognitive test scores, along with the 
p-value of a test determining whether the true correlation is 
zero. The results offer moderately strong evidence of a 
correlation between spatial visualization and the two other 
cognitive tests. There is suggestive evidence that visual 
memory and perspective-taking scores may also correlate. 
TABLE I.  
COGNITIVE TEST SCORE CORRELATION. 
Cognitive Test 
Cognitive Test 
n 
r 
p 
Spatial Visualization 
Visual Memory 
26 
0.54 
0.00 
Spatial Visualization 
Perspective-taking 
26 
0.44 
0.02 
Perspective-taking 
Visual Memory 
26 
0.36 
0.07 
 
B. Correlation of Cognitive Test Scores with Performance 
Variables 
Participants took from 30 to 66 minutes to complete the 
field exercise and traveled between 1.77 and 3.02 km (1.10 
and 1.88 mi). Total time was negatively correlated with 
scores on spatial visualization (r = -0.44, p = 0.02) and 
perspective-taking (r = -0.51, p = 0.01). This indicates that 
participants with higher spatial visualization or perspective-
taking ability tended to finish the exercise faster. Distance 
traveled was negatively correlated with spatial visualization 
test scores (n = 21, r = -0.65, p = 0.00). Visual memory test 
scores showed no significant correlation to the performance 
variables.   
Clearly, there are other participant characteristics that 
could influence time, e.g., walking speed.  We didn’t 
investigate the connection between physical characteristics 
and cognition scores.  However, the fact that the total 
distance traveled by the participants was negatively 
correlated with spatial visualization leads us to believe that 
the relationship between time and cognitive abilities is more 
likely influenced by the fact that lower ability participants 
walked farther than by any physical characteristics. 
C. Cognitive Test Scores & Coded Variables 
Spatial visualization test scores are positively correlated 
with address error pre-detection (n = 21, r = 0.44, p = 0.05) 
and nearest address selection (n = 21, r = 0.45, p = 0.04).  
This indicates that participants with high spatial visualization 
ability (1) identified more map errors at the onset of the 
exercise and (2) consistently chose their next target address 
based on its proximity to the one previously verified. 
Perspective-taking test scores are positively correlated with 
address error pre-detection (n = 25, r = 0.49, p = 0.01) and 
cardinal heading usage (n = 23, r = 0.51, p = 0.01). This 
suggests that participants with higher perspective-taking 
ability (1) identified more map errors at the onset of the 
exercise and (2) were more likely to describe their heading 
from a cardinal, allocentric frame of reference (north-south-
65
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

east-west) rather than an egocentric one (forward-backward-
right-left).  
A two-tailed Welch’s t test was used to test for 
associations between the cognitive test scores and the 
variables found in the collected maps and lists (Table II). 
Spatial visualization test scores were negatively associated 
with 
map 
verification 
annotations, 
suggesting 
that 
participants with lower spatial visualization ability added 
more supporting detail to the map. Participants with lower 
perspective-taking ability exhibited similar behavior with 
regard to the target address list—as shown by the negative 
association between perspective-taking test scores and list 
verification annotations. Additionally, perspective-taking 
test scores showed negative association with target streets 
highlighted on map, indicating that participants with lower 
perspective-taking ability tended to identify the streets that 
the target addresses were on; they then highlighted the street 
labels on the map. Visual memory test scores showed a 
positive association with route sequence on list, implying 
that participants with higher visual memory tended to 
enumerate a sequential route order on their target list of 
addresses. 
TABLE II.  
ASSOCIATION OF COGNITIVE TEST SCORES WITH MAP AND  
LISTS VARIABLES (WELCH’S T TEST) 
Behavior 
Cognitive 
Test 
Y1 – Y0 
* 
 SE(Y1-Y0)* 
p 
Target streets 
highlighted on map 
Spatial 
Visualization 
-4.25 
1.54 
0.01 
Map verification 
annotations 
Perspective-
taking 
-4.45 
1.52 
0.02 
List verification 
annotations 
Perspective-
taking 
-4.31 
1.90 
0.05 
Route sequence on 
list 
Visual 
Memory 
3.29 
1.11 
0.01 
* Y1 is the mean of cognitive test scores for all who exhibited the behavior and Y0 is 
the mean of cognitive test scores for all who did not exhibit the behavior. 
D. Additional Behaviors Observed 
Behaviors that were sporadic and difficult to capture 
could not be adequately linked to cognitive test scores, 
however, they may be worthy of consideration in the follow-
up study. 
 
Participants preferred either a north-up or track-up map 
orientation and some north-up users seemed to temporarily 
switch orientations in confusing areas of the neighborhood.  
 
Participants covered addresses and map elements that were 
unrelated to their current target address.  
 
Participants used color on the maps and lists to indicate 
and differentiate their various actions and decisions. 
 
Participants 
inferred detailed 
relationships 
between 
cardinal directions and street numbering patterns, e.g., 
―even-numbered addresses are on the north on east-west 
streets and on the west on north-south streets‖. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Relation of Participant Performance to Cognitive Test 
Scores 
Our findings support the hypothesis that cognitive test 
scores are related to participant performance on a map 
survey task. Spatial visualization scores were a strong prior 
indicator of performance, being significant against distance 
traveled, total time and nearest address selection. 
Perspective-taking ability was also correlated with total time, 
nearest address selection, and address error pre-detection. 
Conversely, we did not find visual memory to be linked to 
performance metrics. Errors were not statistically relevant. 
Predictably, distance traveled and total time are 
significantly correlated; however, nearest address selection 
was not correlated with distance traveled.  This could result 
from two or more participants traveling different distances 
despite their similar nearest address selection scores.  
Another explanation may be that, in some cases, a tendency 
to choose the next target address based on distance is 
inadequate when a given route will cover multiple 
addresses—a holistic approach should be taken in this case. 
Address error pre-detection was positively correlated 
with perspective-taking scores.  One explanation is that in 
order to excel on the perspective-taking test, one must assess 
the relative placement of a target to its surroundings. This 
same ability might be applied to target addresses with respect 
to the map, allowing these participants to hone in on 
discrepancies. Furthermore, this finding, when taken together 
with the fact that perspective-taking scores are correlated 
with cardinal heading usage, suggests that people with 
higher perspective-taking ability are capable map users.  
These results provide evidence that the address 
verification task was sensitive to cognitive abilities. The 
literature further indicates that spatial visualization scores 
predict 
computer 
performance 
[6,29,30,31,32,33,35].  
Tailoring interfaces for cognitive differences appears to be a 
desirable direction in map survey software design. 
 
B. Behaviors Linked to Test Scores and Software Design 
Behaviors associated with the cognitive test scores 
provided some evidence that address verification software 
can benefit from features sensitive to the respective abilities 
of a user.  
Participants who detected target address errors on the 
map (missing addresses, for example) without physically 
examining the target location typically did so at the 
beginning of the field exercise. This practice might be 
emphasized in software through an initial planning step. 
Participants with higher perspective-taking ability tended to 
prefer describing their movement in cardinal (north-south-
east-west) terms. This finding seems to suggest that a 
software presentation that facilitates or even emphasizes the 
cardinal directions would be appropriate for users with high 
perspective-taking ability. A compass rose, for example, 
helps to fill this void.  
Modifications that were  made to the provided map and 
list should also be considered. Participants that added 
additional address verification annotations to the map had a 
lower overall spatial visualization ability; thus, textual cues 
may have served to alleviate deficiency in this ability. A 
software feature that allows custom tagging of map elements 
may benefit these users. Analogously, participants who 
added extra address verification annotations on the target list 
66
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

had a lower overall level of perspective-taking ability. This 
group may be assisted through embedded note-taking 
features or some sort of checklist. Participants who 
highlighted target streets had a lower overall level of 
perspective-taking ability than participants who did not. This 
group may also appreciate the ability to tag map elements via 
a highlighting tool. Finally, some participants added the 
order in which they verified addresses to their target list. 
They had a higher overall level of visual memory than the 
rest of the sample.  Their bookkeeping can be automated in 
software, or alternatively, they may benefit from a planning 
tool that links map areas to a sequence of target addresses. 
 
C. Observed Behaviors and Software Design 
The behavioral variables found on the maps and lists and 
cardinal 
direction 
were 
not 
statistically 
related 
to 
performance metrics but suggested enhancements to the 
software design space.  Some participants would use a pen or 
their hands to obscure addresses that they had verified.  This 
preference might be accommodated by presenting dissimilar 
levels of detail for different areas of the map; one example 
would be a ―fish-eye‖ map viewport.  Pan and zoom 
functions could be extended to allow for more freedom, also 
addressing user dispositions with regard to map detail. 
Additionally, pan and zoom ―bookmarks‖ could enable the 
retention of serendipitous map views. Color-coding can be 
employed not only to differentiate among survey actions (as 
used by participants), but also to highlight the odd or even-
numbered sides of streets and to convey relationships 
between these streets and the cardinal directions. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSTION 
Our study presents evidence that an address verification 
task, driven by a paper map, is sensitive to the cognitive 
abilities of the verifier—especially their spatial visualization 
and perspective-taking abilities. Performance and some 
behaviors were significantly associated with psychometric 
test scores, thereby improving the plausibility of a software 
design that incorporates enhancements sensitive to users’ 
cognitive abilities. The behaviors that were observed also 
suggest a number of software design considerations. While 
our tests were specific to address verification, we believe that 
several of the lessons learned in this study will be applicable 
to other areas of map-based surveys.  In particular we have 
seen that spatial ability played a role in initial planning (pre-
planning), how the participants used the map during way 
finding and how they used the map in the area around the 
target address.  Most map-based applications will involve 
one or more of these activities. 
Our future work in this area will include the 
development of a software interface that incorporates the 
enhancements previously discussed.  This software will be 
the focus of a study that will evaluate the efficacy of these 
enhancements with respect to the cognitive abilities of the 
participants.  We will also use the data collected during this 
study to develop decision models as a means of providing a 
clearer picture of how spatial abilities impact the 
participant’s work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their 
comments that led to an improved manuscript.  The work 
was supported in part by a grant from the National Science 
Foundation (0822002). 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Ackerman, ―Ability Determinants of Individual Differences in 
Skilled Performance,‖  In R. J. Sternberg and J.E. Pretz (eds). 
Cognition and Intelligence: Identifying the Mechanisms of the Mind.  
Cambridge University Press.  Cambridge, UK. 2005, pp. 142-159. 
[2] A. D. Baddeley, ―Short-term and working memory,‖ In E. Tulving & 
F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of memory,  Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 77–92. 
[3] A. D. Baddeley Working Memory, Thought, and Action. Oxford 
University Press. Oxford, England, 2007. 
[4] D. Benyon, A. Crerar, and S. Wilkinson, ―Individual differences and 
inclusive design,‖ In: Stephanidis C. (ed.) User Interfaces for All: 
Concepts, Methods and Tools, LEA, Mahwah, 2001, pp. 21-46. 
[5] N. Burgess, ―Spatial memory: how egocentric and allocentric 
combine,‖ Trends in Neurosciences, Vol. 10, No. 12, 2006,  pp. 551-
7. 
[6] F. R. Campagnoni and K. Ehrlich, ―Information retrieval using a 
hypertext-based help system,‖ Transactions on Information Systems, 
vol. 7, 1989, pp. 271–291. 
[7] J. B. Carroll, Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic 
studies, New York: Cambridge University Press. 1993. 
[8] J. B. Carroll, ―Psychometric tests as cognitive tasks: a new structure 
of intellect,‖ Princeton, N.J.: Educational Testing Service, Research 
Bulletin, 1974, 74-16. 
[9] Cox, A. ―Multimodal GIS Interfaces in Crisis Management –Usability 
Study,― 
http://www.geovista.psu.edu/publications/2005/ 
DAVE, 
2005, Accessed June 17, 2010. 
[10] N. Dahlbäck, K. Höök, and M. Sjölinder, ―Spatial Cognition in the 
Mind and in the World: The case of hypermedia navigation,‖ The 
Eighteenth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 
CogSci’96, University of California, San Diego, July 1996. 
[11] D. Egan, ―Individual differences in human-computer interaction,‖ In: 
M. Helander (ed.), Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction, 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1988, pp. 543-568. 
[12] D. E. Egan and L. M. Gomez, ―Assaying, isolating and 
accommodating individual differences in learning a complex skill,‖ In 
R. Dillon (Ed.), Individual differences in cognition, New York: 
Academic Press, 1985, pp. 173-217. 
[13] R. B. Ekstrom, J. W. French, H. H. Harman, and D. Dermen,  
―Manual for kit of factor-referenced cognitive tests,‖ Princeton, NJ: 
Educational Testing Service, 1976. 
[14] X. C. Fern, C. Komireddy, V. Grigoreanu, & M. Burnett, ―Mining 
problem-solving strategies from HCI data,‖ ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human 
Interaction, 
Vol. 
17, 
No. 
1, 
2010, 
DOI10.1145/1721831.1721834. 
[15] M. Haklay and A. Zafiri, ―Usability engineering for GIS: learning 
from a snapshot,‖   http://eprints.ucl.ac.uk/16799/1/16799.pdf, 2007,   
Accessed June 17, 2010. 
[16] C. Gibson and S. M. Nusser, 2006 Census Test Evaluation 3:  
Assessing the Role of Spatial Abilities in Address Canvassing 
Activities,  Census Bureau Report, September 1, 2006.  
[17] K. Igloi, M. Zaoui, A. Berthoz, and Laure Rondi-Reig, ―Sequential 
egocentric strategy is acquired as early as allocentric strategy: parallel 
acquisition of these two navigation strategies,‖ Hippocampus 19, 
2009,  pp. 1199–1211. 
67
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

[18] J. Ingensand and F. Golay, ―Task-oriented usability evaluation of a 
web-GIS 
for 
a 
real 
world 
community,‖ 
http:// 
www.urisa.org/files/Ingensand-Golay-Usability_evaluation.doc, 
2009,  Accessed June 17, 2010.  
[19] R. L. Klatzky, ― Allocentric and egocentric spatial representations: 
definitions, distinctions, and interconnections,‖ In C. Freksa, C. 
Habel, & K. F. Wender (Eds.), Spatial cognition - An 
interdisciplinary approach to representation and processing of spatial 
knowledge (Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 1404), 1998, pp. 
1-17. 
[20] M. Kozhevnikov, M. A. Motes, B. Rasch, and O. Blajenkova, 
―Perspective-taking vs. mental rotation transformations and how they 
predict spatial navigation performance,‖  Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, vol. 20, 2006, 397-417. 
[21] M. Lafon, M. Vidal and A. Berthoz, ― Selective influence of prior 
allocentric knowledge on the kinesthetic learning of a path,‖  
Experimental Brain Research, 194, 2009, pp. 541–552. 
[22] D. F. Lohman, ―Spatial ability and g,‖ In I. Dennis & P. Tapsfield 
(Eds.), Human Abilities: Their Nature and Measurement, Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996,  pp. 97-116. 
[23] S. J. Luck, ―Visual short-term memory,‖ In S.J. Luck and A. 
Hollingworth (eds). Visual Memory. Oxford University Press. 
Oxford, UK, 2008,  pp. 43-85. 
[24] J. Malczewski and C. Rinner, ―Exploring multicriteria decision 
strategies in GIS with linguistic quantifiers: a case study of residential 
quality evaluation,‖ Journal of Geographical Systems,  Vol. 7, no, 2, 
2005, pp. 249-268.  
[25] E. D. Murphy and S. M. Nusser, ―Evaluating user interfaces for 
accommodation of individual differences in spatial abilities and way-
finding strategies,‖  In Proceedings of the UAHCI 2003: Second 
International Conference on Universal Access In Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 4, 2003,  pp. 1005-1009. 
[26] S. M. Nusser, ―Digital capture of geographic feature data for 
surveys,‖  Proceedings of the 2005 Federal Committee on Statistical 
Methodology 
Research 
Conference. 
Available:  
http://www.fcsm.gov/05papers/Nusser_IXA.pdf.,  2005. 
[27] R. Pak, W. A. Rogers and A. D. Fisk, ―Spatial ability subfactors and 
their influences on a computer-based information search task,‖ 
Human Factors, vol. 48, 2006, pp. 154-165. 
[28] M. Plank, H. J. Müller, J. Onton, S. Makeig, and K. Gramann, 
―Human EEG correlates of spatial navigation within egocentric and 
allocentric reference frames,‖ In Hölscher et al. (Eds.), Spatial 
Cognition VII, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 6222, 2010, pp. 
191-206.  
[29] F. Seagull and N. Walker, ―The effects of hierarchy structure and 
visualization 
ability 
on computerized 
information 
retrieval,‖ 
International Journal of Human Computer Interaction, vol. 4, 1992, 
pp. 369–385. 
[30] M. Sein, L. Olfmann, R. Bostrom and S. Davis, ―Visualization ability 
as a predictor of user learning success,‖ International Journal of Man 
– Machine Studies, vol. 39, 1993, pp. 599–620. 
[31] K. M. Stanney and G. Salvendy, ―Effects of diversity in cognitive 
restructuring skills on human–computer performance,‖ Ergonomics, 
vol. 37, 1994, pp. 595–609. 
[32] K. M. Stanney and G. Salvendy, ―Information visualization: Assisting 
low spatial individuals with information access tasks through the use 
of visual mediators,‖ Ergonomics, vol. 38, 1995, pp. 1184–1198. 
[33] K. Vicente, B. C.  Hayes and R. C. Williges, ―Assaying and isolating 
individual differences in searching a hierarchical file system,‖ Human 
Factors, vol. 29, 1987, 349-359. 
[34] K. W. Whitney, G. I. Batinov, S.M. Nusser, L. L. Miller, and K. T.  
Aschenfelter, (In press) Understanding the User’s Approach to 
Location-based Field Tasks. To be presented at the 23rd International 
Conference On Computer Applications in Industry and Engineering. 
2010. 
[35] H. Zhang and G. Salvendy, ―The implications of visualization ability 
and structure preview design for web information search tasks,‖ 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 13, no. 1, 
2001, pp. 75–79.
 
 
 
68
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

