Designing for Sustainability: Challenges and Theoretical Considerations  
Discussing theoretical considerations for framing strategic sustainable design approaches
Swati Srivastava 
Design of Information Systems, Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
swatisr@ifi.uio.no 
Sumit Pandey 
Design of Information Systems, Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
sumitp@ifi.uio.no
Abstract— Product demand and high consumption have been 
traditionally viewed as traits of successful business in the mass 
market. However, the environment is under immense strain to 
sustain 
hyper-consumption 
driven 
lifestyles 
fueled 
by 
conventional mass market business strategies. Sustainable 
services have started to emerge to disrupt such business 
practices and alter consumption driven processes to reduce the 
harmful impact on the environment. However, the adoption of 
such 
services 
has 
largely 
been 
limited 
to 
a 
niche 
environmentally conscious audience. Research has argued that 
for sustainable services to have a noticeable environmental 
impact, they need to be adopted in the mass market. In this 
paper, we discuss the challenges and outline the theoretical 
design considerations needed to frame desirable value 
propositions for sustainable services intended for the mass 
market. To do this, we review literature from the fields of 
strategic design, service design and Human Computer 
Interaction (HCI) and identify conceptual overlaps with 
broader discussions on sustainability and suggest that 
sustainability can potentially find a familiar voice in design due 
to their common interest in advocating an emphasis on 
people’s needs and aspirations for a better present and future. 
Mutually, design and sustainability can discover new 
representations and opportunities for a better future beyond 
offerings designed to fuel incessant consumption of resources. 
Keywords-Sustainability; Strategic Design; Service Design; 
Mass Market; Value Propositions. 
I.  
 INTRODUCTION 
Mass-market businesses have traditionally functioned 
with a singular focus on generating profits. Consequently, 
their business strategies are carefully crafted for fast product 
absorption and long term consumer engagement with the 
brand. Product demand and high consumption have been 
traditionally viewed as traits of successful business [1]. This 
conclusion largely stems from a business perspective based 
on general desires and needs driven consumer behavior [1] 
[2]. Therefore, one of the key strategies employed by 
conventional businesses to promote their services is based 
not just on fulfillment of basic consumer needs but also 
capitalizing on the association of social status and exclusive 
ownership of the newest generation of products. Businesses 
use marketing strategies that aim to create and encourage 
consumer desires and aid higher product sales and increasing 
consumption.  
While these consumption oriented market practices offer 
purchase options with attractive buying experiences to 
improve 
a 
consumer’s 
quality 
of 
life, 
they 
have 
simultaneously become a threat to the very quality of 
consumer life that they advertise to improve. This can be 
illustrated by the purchase and short disposal cycles of smart 
phones, which are providing users with technology to 
simplify their day to day activities while negatively 
impacting the environment through harmful electronic waste 
[3]. The environment is under immense strain to sustain the 
lifestyles supported by both production and consumption of 
unsustainable products and services [3][4] and has also been 
conclusively established through research studies studying 
the adverse affects of over-consumption on the environment 
[5].  
On the other hand, there has been a rise in the efforts by a 
few companies to capitalize on the increasing awareness of 
the effects of unsustainable services on the environment and 
society and bringing sustainable services into the mass 
market. Such efforts to make existing products sustainable 
are focusing on extending the product life cycle and building 
efficient after sales services [6]. Greenphones [7], for 
instance, provides an after-sale service where enterprises and 
consumers 
sell 
and 
buy 
smartphones 
and 
tablets. 
Greenphones [7] benefits from the dynamics of this market, 
and seeks to prolong the lifetime of these devices. However, 
such products and services are still largely limited to the 
niche and/or premium market segments stemming from 
environmentally conscious consumers [1]. Consumers share 
a long relationship with certain brands and their products 
despite having an awareness of their environmentally 
damaging effects. Sustainable replacements of such products 
are either not easily available or lack the same ease of use or 
brand recognition as their mass market counterparts. The 
buying patterns of consumers in the mass market are still 
primarily driven by a product’s newness, cost, quality and 
brand [2], leading to a vicious circle of the demand and 
supply of unsustainable services [8].  
Therefore, it is becoming increasingly difficult to ignore 
unsustainable patterns of production and consumption [8] 
and a growing need for disruptive innovation through the 
introduction of sustainable products and services [9]. These 
disruptive practices can be used to explore new and 
environmentally efficient value propositions framed around 
sustainable products and services positioned as desirable 
offerings in the mass market. In this paper, we discuss the 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

challenges and outline the theoretical design considerations 
needed to create sustainable products and services and frame 
desirable value propositions. Understanding the design 
considerations for the creation of sustainable products and 
services and how it can lead to sustainable business models 
is both timely and interesting. It is timely because of the the 
growing awareness of environmentally damaging effects of 
conventional products and services and efforts to introduce 
alternative sustainable value propositions in the mass market. 
Additionally, it is interesting because of the dilemma 
between making a sustainable solution a mass-market 
phenomenon and the consumption driven ethos of the mass 
market. We outline these design considerations and build our 
theoretical framework by reviewing literature from the fields 
of sustainability, strategic design, service design and HCI. 
Further, we juxtapose concepts from these fields to present a 
multi-disciplinary perspective on designing for sustainability.  
This paper is structured as follows: Section II presents a 
condensed introduction to the key theoretical concepts that 
we use to ground our discussion followed by an overview of 
the different approaches to sustainable design in Section III. 
Section IV presents a discussion of the key design 
considerations needed for mass market sustainable design 
solutions followed by a conclusion in Section V.  
II.  
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
This section presents a condensed description of the 
theoretical framework that acts as a conceptual anchor for 
our investigation into design considerations for sustainable 
products and services. 
Sustainability 
WCED [10] has strongly stressed the need for a balanced 
developmental paradigm that advocates equal importance to 
be given to social concerns of both present and future 
generations. It proposes that:  
“Sustainable development is development that meets the 
needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs.” [10].  
Most importantly, it can be observed that the definition 
of sustainability outlined by WCED shifts the focus from 
“sustainability to save the environment” to “sustainability 
for the well being of human kind”. This, as discussed in the 
introduction, is the perspective on sustainability that we 
work towards in this paper as well. This perspective views 
(see Figure 1) sustainability as the integration of 
environmental, social and economic as the three key 
dimensions of well being [11]. The paradigm proposed by 
WCED viewed environment preservation as one of the 
considerations for achieving well being and required the 
incorporation of social as well as economic considerations 
into sustainable solution. Further, the World Congress on 
Challenges of a Changing Earth proposes that: 
 “Common to the definitions, however, is an emphasis on 
the need to consolidate features from different knowledge 
systems into practical methods and tools that can be 
practically applied to promote sustainability on a worldwide 
scale.” [12] 
Kieffer et al. [11] built on the key considerations defined 
in the World Congress and discussed the instrumental role of 
the widespread deployment of sustainable developmental 
paradigms to generate a measurable impact and proposed 
sustainability science as a potential framework to achieve the 
desired impact of this vision. With the significance of large 
scale deployment and a focus on holistic socio-economic 
sustainable innovation to support the pro-environmental 
willingness of consumers, we argue that sustainable 
entrepreneurship and sustainable design oriented towards the 
mass market can act as interdependent agents for achieving 
the holistic vision of sustainability outlined above. Further, 
we suggest that sustainability can potentially find a familiar 
voice in design due to their common interest in advocating 
an emphasis on people’s needs and aspirations for a better 
present and future. Mutually, design and sustainability can 
discover new representations and opportunities for a better 
future beyond offerings designed to fuel incessant 
consumption of resources. 
A.   Sustainable Entrepreneurship 
In businesses, an increase in product consumption is 
traditionally viewed as a reflection of profits and market 
demand while environmental concerns have largely been 
centered on meeting environmental standards of product 
manufacture and responsible disposal and little to no 
attention to the negative consequences of increased 
consumption on the environment. However, studies on hyper 
consumption are presenting opportunities for companies to 
innovate and gain a competitive edge by challenging the 
traditional ethos of consumption led profits [1][13]. This has 
propelled several entrepreneurial initiatives aiming to disrupt 
mainstream markets by focusing on environmental and social 
value creation along with economic value.  
 
 
Figure 1.    The three pillars of sustainable development 
Building 
upon 
Schumpeter’s 
[14] 
constructs 
of 
entrepreneurship 
as 
a 
process 
of 
creating 
“market 
disequilibria” through innovation [15], Hockerts and 
Wüstenhagen [13] define sustainable entrepreneurship as: 
“the 
discovery 
and 
exploitation 
of 
economic 
opportunities through the generation of market disequilibria 
that initiate the transformation of a sector towards an 
environmentally and socially more sustainable state.”  
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Sustainable 
entrepreneurship 
focuses 
on 
bridging 
environmental progress and market success by channeling 
innovative 
products 
and 
services 
[16]. 
Sustainable 
entrepreneurs operate with a profit motive as well but 
function with a framework of sustainability driven 
competitive solutions offering appealing value propositions 
to consumers. In contrast to having a sole orientation towards 
increasing 
the 
demand 
for 
products, 
sustainable 
entrepreneurship disrupts the market by shifting the 
paradigm from selling products to selling services and value 
along with manufacturing innovations for improving the eco-
efficiency of tangible offerings as well. We argue that the 
mass market presents a powerful medium for sustainable 
entrepreneurs for reaching the most consumers for large 
scale impact. In this sense, sustainable entrepreneurship can 
be the realization of sustainability-centric innovations that 
provide benefits to a larger part of society by targeting the 
mass market [16].  
B.   Sustainable Design 
Design as a discipline grew out of the industrial 
revolution in the late 19th and 20th century and has since 
been instrumental in creating aesthetically pleasing, useful 
and emotionally appealing objects. While these principles of 
good design remain relevant to this day, the rise of 
consumerism 
and 
the 
deteriorating 
effects 
on 
the 
environment is compelling designers to re-evaluate their 
offerings in terms of long term effects on the well being of 
consumers and communities. Campbell [17] argues that 
design will be fundamental to closing the gap between our 
behavior and our aspirations because of the particular 
resourcefulness that designers represent. Further, she 
suggests that: 
“ready to improvise and prototype, brave in the face of 
disorder and complexity, holistic and people-centered in 
their approach to defining problems, designers have a vital 
role to play today in making society itself more resourceful” 
[17].  
Sherwin writes about the designers training to be 
creative, challenging precedents and stereotypes and calls for 
greater involvement of designers given their inclination 
towards people centered and socio-cultural dimensions of 
sustainability [18].  
In design processes, the exploration of sustainable 
outcomes is primarily conducted using one of the following 
three approaches:  
•  
Designing for awareness and persuasion 
•  
Designing 
for 
eco-efficiency 
at 
the 
product 
manufacturing level  
•  
Designing at a systemic level  
Even though eco-efficiency at product constitution level 
is essential, it cannot function in isolation. It requires the 
support of a system that enables seamless sustainable 
practices. 
Manzini 
and 
Vezzoli 
[19] 
caution 
that 
environmental risks still remain in spite of significant 
product improvement. They argue that:  
“the practical and operational definition of this field 
(sustainable design) is outlined by two complementary 
strategies by their application in stages most agreeable to 
companies: 
eco-efficient 
system 
research 
and 
the 
development of new solutions provide an instrument to 
confront, with a sustainable approach, some important 
problems emerging in contemporary society.” [19] 
Similarly, efforts to promote reduced resource based 
lifestyles through awareness and persuasion fail to address 
the personal concerns of the individual, often driving them 
against sustainability related goals [20]. Therefore, all 
improvements in eco-efficiency and awareness seem to be 
offset by the steep increase in the volume of the products 
sold leading to a zero or even negative net effect [21]. 
Therefore, designing for sustainability requires systemic 
innovations by incorporating holistic perspectives at a 
product, service and individual level, in contrast to the 
solutions built primarily around technology or product 
innovation. In the following section, we discuss the 
sustainable design approaches mentioned above in greater 
detail by reviewing literature from strategic design, service 
design and HCI.  
III.  
SUSTAINABLE DESIGN APPROACHES 
A.   Sustainability through persuation and awareness 
Extensive studies of harmful environmental impacts of 
consumption-mediated processes have succeeded in evoking 
awareness among consumers and companies [1] [8] [22]. 
Several international initiatives promoting sustainability 
have succeeded in generating substantial awareness amongst 
people and companies but have failed to translate into 
widespread proposals and adoption of sustainable products 
and services. While people are more than willing to adopt 
pro-environment practices, several factors such as lack of 
economic and social support structures enabling/assisting the 
willingness of the people has led to the failure of to translate 
this willingness into action. Sustainability centric campaigns 
driven by persuasive sustainability [23] and lifestyle 
rationalization [20] based on proactive consumers making 
sustainable choices has cracked under the pressure of daily 
priorities, cultural aspirations of people going about their 
daily routine. The limited influence of persuasiveness in the 
issues 
of 
sustainability 
has 
been 
highlighted 
by 
Brynjarsdottir et al[23]. who frame it in terms of 
sustainability, human behavior, and the relationship between 
them. They argue that:  
“while this (awareness for pro-active action) may help 
make the problem of sustainability manageable as an 
engineering enterprise, it also makes designs susceptible to 
breakdown” [23].  
B.   Sustainability through eco-efficient market alternatives 
Recognizing the issues with awareness based solutions, 
consistent efforts in the past decade have been directed 
towards developing a sustainable market space. This intent 
has driven businesses to explore sustainable avenues 
contributing to the well being of their consumers. 
Additionally, it has created a new segment of environment-
focused businesses such as Fairphone [24][25] and Tesla 
[26] that are investing efforts in sustainable yet breakthrough 
processes. These processes perceive attaining environmental 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

sustainability and green consumption as one of the key 
performance indicators in the market. While this has initiated 
a positive trend towards a green consumption economy, 
these business models lack the appeal of unsustainable yet 
popular products in the mass market [1][5]. Every purchase 
related decision of a consumer continues to be driven 
primarily by easily quantifiable values that relate to 
fulfillment of basic needs, personal desires and buying 
power. Popular mass-market services present several 
alternatives tailored to these preferences, simplifying the 
decision to pick and choose. The purchase of these popular 
products requires minimum time and cognitive effort at the 
consumer’s end. On the other hand, consumers willing to 
buy sustainable services have to evaluate the trade off in 
quality, cost and consistent availability leading to a more 
complex decision making for an activity that is a means to 
end and not the goal itself [1][5]. Therefore, while the 
general awareness about low-carbon consumption has 
gathered adequate appreciation among consumers and has 
led to the creation of a space in the economy for green 
products, it has been limited to a niche segment of actively 
environmentally conscious and premium buyer segments [1] 
[5][27]. Csikszentmihalyi [5] in his theoretical account of 
consumption and its effects addresses this phenomenon by 
stating that: 
“consumers report that they are concerned about the 
environmental issues but they are struggling to translate 
these concerns into purchases of sustainable products”.  
In addition to a need and desire oriented market strategy, 
the pace of technology also plays a significant role in the 
creation of unsustainable product advancements. Even 
though 
consumers 
are 
aware 
of 
the 
available 
environmentally friendly alternatives, they often choose to 
participate in a race to get the newest or latest product 
instead of replacing it with an environmentally friendly one 
[16]. Furthermore, the tech savvy consumers and early 
adopters of advanced technology wish to be at the cutting 
edge by buying the latest products, leading to frequent 
product disposal. Therefore, any effective disruption in this 
space to make sustainable innovation a preferred option 
should make environment-oriented consumers feel that they 
are still empowered with the newest technology. 
C.   Sustainability through strategic design  
The pursuit of sustainable solutions is essential in 
questioning the long-established norms, processes and goals 
of mass market oriented businesses. As markets grow 
fiercely competitive, sustainability focused innovation can 
prove essential in reinventing and delivering new services to 
the consumers, driving innovation trends in the mass market 
landscape [27]. It is evident that even though the mass 
market and rapidly progressing technology are one of the 
primary propagators of over consumption, they also offer 
access to a larger consumer base and opportunities of greater 
involvement of consumers as equal stakeholders in the 
design of pro-environmental solutions utilizing new 
technological platforms. They could potentially offer the 
resources to disrupt existing unsustainable markets and value 
networks to innovative design and business models. 
Systemic design integrates persuasion and awareness with 
desirability and ease of access to sustainable and eco-
efficient service alternatives for mass market consumers. To 
effectively pursue the goal of making sustainable services 
have a greater impact on the mass market, a comprehensive 
study of the consumer’s desires and preferences and traits of 
the existing popular products is a critical necessity. Given the 
existing niche market for eco-friendly products, an 
understanding of the customer’s aspirations will play a 
pivotal role in bridging consumers’  ‘attitude-behavior’ [2] 
gap and evaluating and better positioning sustainable 
processes in the mass market.  
Building on the systemic perspectives outlined above, 
Manzini and Vezzoli [19] discuss the concept of ‘strategic 
sustainable design’, which advocates a paradigm shift aimed 
at the buying and selling of a system of products and services 
in contrast to the traditional model of buying and disposal of 
products. It simultaneously addresses customer and service 
provider needs while promoting pro-environmental practices 
of production and consumption. Some of the common 
processes and tools under strategic sustainable design are 
‘product service systems’ [11][19], ‘peer to peer services’ 
[28] and ‘product life extension through repair and second 
hand ownership’. Due to the reliance of strategic sustainable 
design on the intangibility of products and efficiency of 
services in delivering value, the nature of the roles played by 
stakeholders also differs from traditional systems. With the 
dissemination of services being pivotal, the ownership of a 
product by the consumer no longer remains constant. In 
some cases, such as second hand or shared ownership, the 
consumer also plays the part of the service provider for new 
consumers. With this state of constant flux in the nature of 
engagement of the stakeholders, strategic sustainable design 
approaches transform linear provider to consumer models 
into a mesh of participants playing the role of provider, 
consumer or facilitator based on the context and requiring a 
more intensive inter-communication system amongst the 
stakeholders. Therefore, we argue that systemic design in 
general and strategic sustainable design in particular 
provides the most promising framework for positioning 
sustainable services in the mass market. Wolfson et al. [11] 
suggest that: 
“The main incentive behind defining sustainability as a 
service enables the creation of an organized framework to 
facilitate the active implementation of sustainability. Such a 
framework should characterize the nature both of the value 
itself and of the roles played by the participants in the value 
co-creation process.”  
IV.  
IDENTIFYING DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
Although 
strategic 
sustainability 
offers 
a 
highly 
integrated approach for sustainable offerings, it also creates 
fairly complex dynamics of key stakeholders and contexts 
for simultaneously addressing economic, social and 
environmental aspects of the issues requiring design 
interventions. 
This section explores the considerations needed to 
effectively address the dynamics of strategic sustainable 
design. With respect to strategic sustainable design, these 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

theoretical constructs can be seen as four necessary facets 
that would need to be explored and addressed in order to 
design products and services for the mass market. These 
facets are: Design Thinking as a holistic approach, 
Sustainable Entrepreneurship as a mass market motivator, 
Product Service Systems as a potential space for disruptive 
innovation and User Experience as a mass market 
differentiator. 
A.   Approach: Design Thinking 
Skoldberg et al. [29] describe design thinking as the: 
“construction of the professional designer’s practice 
(practical skills and competence) and theoretical reflections 
around how to interpret and characterize this non-verbal 
competence of the designers.”  
Design thinking has found applicability in a wide variety 
of domains like social innovation [30], healthcare services 
[31], organizational strategy [32] and organizational studies 
[33]. It is also being used for enabling resourcefulness in 
user groups and actively engaging them in co-design and co-
creation activities through tailored tools and methods. We 
argue that sustainable solutions grounded in a deep 
understanding of the needs and context of the participants in 
the stakeholder network aligns with a designer’s ability to 
translate opportunities into offerings by closely working with 
users.  
Buchanan’s seminal work [34] describing professional 
designer’s thought process as an approach for solving 
‘wicked problems’ (a class of social systems problems with a 
fundamental indeterminacy without a single solution and 
where much creativity is needed to find solutions [35] and is 
one of the foundational references for design in general. 
Buchanan [34] argued against the prevalent linear design 
process of his time with specific steps of “problem 
definition” and “problem solution” and instead proposed a 
model where problem formulation and solution continuously 
feed into each other and solutions are considered as 
“working hypothesis for exploration”. This is typically 
facilitated through a co-design process where all participants 
collaboratively cycle through the process of refining the 
problem formulation and narrowing down the solution-space. 
Further, Schön [36], in his theoretical construct of ‘a 
reflective practitioner’ outlines a practice based construct of 
the design process that describes “creation and reflection 
upon the creation” as two symbiotic processes working in 
tandem to “allow constantly improved competence”. Schön 
[36] stresses that reflection on creation does not happen after 
the fact but is an integral part of the whole design work and 
hence a part of the practice.  
We argue that strategic sustainable design solutions 
should have a dual focus on identifying specific 
opportunities for interventions and innovation along with 
reflective and corrective measures that guide the design of 
future innovations. Therefore, we suggest that an approach 
for designing mass market strategic sustainable solutions 
would be best informed by a juxtaposition of the design 
frameworks outlined by Buchanan [34] and Schön [36], i.e. 
by using co-design methods and tools for framing problem 
areas and solutions and using the reflexive practice as an 
outline to guide the definition and refinement of future 
innovations. 
B.   Motivation: Sustainable Entrepreneurship 
Sustainable entrepreneurship represents a departure from 
the usual focus on large firms in earlier work on corporate 
sustainability. It builds upon the concept that new entrants 
are more likely to pursue radical change than larger firms 
and usually lead the charge in an industry’s transformation 
by creating ‘market disequilibria’ and making larger bodies 
react to raising market expectations.  
Further, it has been stressed [13] that disruptive 
innovation [37] (as opposed to incremental innovation) is an 
integral characteristic of sustainable entrepreneurship. 
‘Disruptive innovation’ describes new products or services, 
which are presented as simpler, more convenient and 
inexpensive alternatives to new or less demanding customers 
and eventually replace the established yet more complex 
competitors [37]. Hence, reach and impact play a significant 
role in qualifying an innovation as truly disruptive. For e.g., 
innovation by entrepreneurs in a social niche, without a 
strategy or intent to broaden its reach/impact would not 
qualify as disruptive innovation and hence should not be 
categorized as sustainable entrepreneurship. Additionally, 
literature points us to the fact that sustainable entrepreneurs 
are 
driven 
by 
a 
strong 
motivation 
for 
industrial 
transformation 
and 
hence 
aim 
for 
mass-market 
transformation beyond the eco-niche [13]. Since there is 
growing interest in the opportunities and the business case 
for sustainable innovation [38] and ‘green growth’ [39] it 
makes a strong case for sustainable entrepreneurship being 
treated as a motivating strategy for an approach for designing 
mass market strategic sustainable solutions. 
C.   Opportunity: Product Service Systems 
The first formal definition of Product Service Systems 
(PSS) was given by Goedkoop, et al. [40] who suggested 
that:  
“A product service-system is a system of products, 
services, 
networks 
of 
“players” 
and 
supporting 
infrastructure that continuously strives to be competitive, 
satisfy customer needs and have a lower environmental 
impact than traditional business models.”  
It builds on the management concepts of ‘servitization’ 
[41], which highlights the shift in manufacturing towards the 
inclusion of a service component in products. Baines et al. 
[42] describe the shift in emphasis advocated by PSS as a 
move towards the “sale of use” as opposed to the “sale of 
product” and outlined its key elements as:  
•  
Product: a tangible commodity manufactured to be 
sold.  
•  
Service: an activity (work) done for others with an 
economic value. 
•  
System: a collection of elements including their 
relations. 
The relations between these elements and their impact on 
each other considered collectively represents a ‘service 
ecology’ [43]. Additionally, a lot of research on PSS 
highlights 
the 
concept 
of 
‘dematerialization’ 
and 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

sustainability and the current move to a ‘dematerialized 
economy’ [19][44]. Tim Jackson,  describes this as the ‘new 
service economy’ where profitability does not depend on 
greater material consumption and production but from the 
“provision of services” that meet the essential human needs 
like communication, mobility etc.  
From the perspective of strategic sustainable design, the 
concept of sustainable product service systems and the 
market opportunity linked to them is especially interesting. 
First, Sustainable PSS pushes the concept of sustainability 
beyond environmental optimization of products and 
processes , which has been shown to be an ineffective 
strategy for long term sustainability . Second, sustainable 
PSS represents a competitive proposition that outlines a 
viable market opportunity  for sustainable entrepreneurship 
and disruptive innovation by “considering alternate socio-
technical systems (and ecologies) that can provide the 
essential end-use function, such as warmth or mobility, that 
an existing product offers” [19]. 
D.   Differentiator: User Experience 
As technology has progressed, products in general and 
interactive products in particular have matured in terms of 
their usability and effectiveness in performing tasks and 
hence users have started looking at them as more than just 
tools, but rather objects to be desired [46]. Consequently, the 
concept of user experience has been evolving over time in 
Interaction Design and HCI literature from an initial focus on 
user behaviors and traditional usability to more expansive 
notions of aesthetics, effectiveness and hedonic qualities in 
product and technology usage [46]. Hassenzahl & Tractinsky 
[46] reason that this is because focusing on products and 
services as mere tools is insufficient to capture the variety 
and engaging aspects of the actual use of technology. 
Building upon the focus on aesthetic, emotional and hedonic 
qualities required to define a user experience, Hassenzahl 
[47] describes user experience as the consideration of:  
“the pragmatic aspects of interactive products (i.e. its fit 
to behavioral goals) as well as about hedonic aspect, such as 
stimulation (i.e. personal growth, an increase of knowledge 
and skills), identification (i.e. self-expression, interaction 
with relevant others) and evocation (i.e. self-maintenance, 
memories).”  
Hassenzahl & Tractinsky [46] also argue that since user 
experience considers technology from more than a simplistic 
and limited instrumental needs perspective the design 
motivations behind it would be better informed by focusing 
on pleasure, positivity and empowerment than on ‘the 
absence of pain’ [46]. Hassenzahl [47] builds upon this 
notion by suggesting that positive experiences cannot be 
traditionally manufactured and acquired but rather needs to 
be co-created by consumers and providers together.  
Moreover, from a business value standpoint, literature 
[48], also points to the fact that the increasing 
commoditization of goods and services would lead to 
experiences emerging as key differentiators in the 
‘progression of economic value’. Pine and Gilmore [49] also 
suggest that experiences should be considered as distinct 
economic offerings, just like products or services. It follows 
that experiences should also be explicitly considered as a 
tangible and marketable outcome of a design process and not 
just an ‘amorphous goal’ [48] that is built around products or 
services and therefore can act as a viable differentiator for 
strategic sustainable solutions 
V.  
CONCLUSION 
The paper presented the challenges and outline the 
theoretical design considerations needed to frame desirable 
value propositions for sustainable services focusing on 
positioning services for adoption in the mass market. 
Building on literature from the fields of strategic design, 
service design and HCI, current theoretical discussions on 
sustainability and entrepreneurship with its key problematics 
and challenges are introduced.  
We argue that sustainability can potentially find a 
familiar voice in design due to their common interest in 
advocating an emphasis on people’s needs and aspirations 
for a better present and future. Mutually, design and 
sustainability 
can 
discover 
new 
representations 
and 
opportunities for a better future beyond offerings designed to 
fuel incessant consumption of resources. From the literature 
discussed, three primary design approaches are highlighted 
and discussed in detail: designing for awareness and 
persuasion, 
designing 
for 
eco-efficiency 
in 
product 
manufacturing and systemic design.  
We propose that systemic design in general and strategic 
sustainable design in particular provides the most promising 
framework for positioning sustainable services in the mass 
market. As a framework, it integrates persuasion and 
awareness with desirability and ease of access to sustainable 
and eco-efficient service alternatives for mass market 
consumers. Further, we have highlighted four theoretical 
considerations needed for framing design approaches within 
this framework, which are ‘design thinking’ for holistic and 
reflective problem solving, ‘sustainable entrepreneurship’ to 
identify disruptive value propositions, ‘product service 
systems’ for framing value propositions and design concepts 
as real world sustainable services and ‘user experience’ as a 
differentiator in the mass market.  
VI.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors are indebted to the Conserve and Consume 
project for and all the industry partners for their 
participation. In addition, we would like to acknowledge 
University of Oslo for their partial financial support.  
REFERENCES 
[1]  
J. N. Sheth, N. K. Sethia and S. Srinivas,  
“Mindful 
consumption: a customer-centric approach to sustainability,” Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 39, no. 1, Aug. 2010, pp. 
21–39. 
[2]  
A. A. Marylyn Carrigan,  
“The myth of the ethical consumer – do 
ethics matter in purchase behaviour?,” Journal of Consumer 
Marketing, vol. 18, no. 7, 2001, pp. 560–578. 
[3]  
X. Li, et al.,  
Smartphone Evolution and Reuse: Establishing a 
more Sustainable Model (Invited Paper). . 
[4]  
A. K. Bhuie, O. A. Ogunseitan, J.-D. M. Saphores and A. A. Shapiro, 
 
“Environmental and Economic Trade-offs in Consumer 
Electronic Products Recycling: A Case Study of Cell Phones and 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Computers,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on 
Electronics and the Environment, Washington, DC, USA, 2004, pp. 
74–79. 
[5]  
M. Csikszentmihalyi,  
“The Costs and Benefits of Consuming,” 
Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 27, no. 2, Sep. 2000, pp. 267–
272. 
[6]  
C. ©. M. I. of Technology and 1977-2015 All rights reserved, 
 
“Sustainability Through Servicizing,” MIT Sloan Management 
Review. . 
[7]  
“GreenPhones 
(In 
Norwegian).” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.greenphones.no/. [Accessed: 12-Jan-2016]. 
[8]  
D. A. L. C. Esty,  
“The Sustainability Imperative,” Harvard 
Business Review. [Online]. Available: https://hbr.org/2010/05/the-
sustainability-imperative. [Accessed: 19-Mar-2016]. 
[9]  
D. Yu and C. C. Hang,  
“A Reflective Review of Disruptive 
Innovation Theory: A Reflective Review of Disruptive Innovation 
Theory,” International Journal of Management Reviews, vol. 12, no. 
4, Dec. 2010, pp. 435–452. 
[10]   Brundtland Commission,  “Our common future: Report of the 
World Commission on Environment and Development,” UN 
Documents Gatheringa Body of Global Agreements, 1987. 
[11]   A. Wolfson, S. Mark, P. M. Martin and D. Tavor,  Sustainability 
through Service. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015. 
[12]   R. Kates, et al.,  “Sustainability science,” 2000. 
[13]   K. Hockerts and R. Wüstenhagen,  
“Greening 
Goliaths 
versus 
emerging Davids — Theorizing about the role of incumbents and new 
entrants in sustainable entrepreneurship,” Journal of Business 
Venturing, vol. 25, no. 5, Sep. 2010, pp. 481–492. 
[14]   K. Śledzik,  
“Schumpeter’s 
view 
on 
innovation 
and 
entrepreneurship,” Management Trends in Theory and Practice,(ed.) 
Stefan Hittmar, Faculty of Management Science and Informatics, 
University of Zilina & Institute of Management by University of 
Zilina, 2013. 
[15]   J. T. Eckhardt and S. A. Shane,  
“Opportunities 
and 
Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Management, vol. 29, no. 3, Jun. 2003, 
pp. 333–349. 
[16]   S. Schaltegger and M. Wagner,  
“Sustainable entrepreneurship 
and sustainability innovation: categories and interactions,” Business 
Strategy and the Environment, vol. 20, no. 4, May 2011, pp. 222–237. 
[17]   E. Campbell,  
“You know more than you think you do: design as 
resourcefulness & self-reliance,” RSA Design & Society, 2009. 
[18]   C. Sherwin,  
“Design 
and 
sustainability,” 
The 
Journal 
of 
Sustainable Product Design, vol. 4, no. 1–4, Jan. 2004, pp. 21–31. 
[19]   E. Manzini and C. Vezzoli,  “A strategic design approach to develop 
sustainable product service systems: examples taken from the 
‘environmentally friendly innovation’ Italian prize,” Journal of 
Cleaner Production, vol. 11, no. 8, Dec. 2003, pp. 851–857. 
[20]   K. Hobson,  
“Competing 
Discourses 
of 
Sustainable 
Consumption: Does the ‘Rationalisation of Lifestyles’ Make Sense?,” 
Environmental Politics, vol. 11, no. 2, Jun. 2002, pp. 95–120. 
[21]   Design for Environmental Sustainability. London: Springer London, 
2008. 
[22]   W. Young, K. Hwang, S. McDonald and C. J. Oates, 
 
“Sustainable consumption: green consumer behaviour when 
purchasing products,” Sustainable Development, vol. 18, no. 1, Jan. 
2010, pp. 20–31. 
[23]   H. Brynjarsdottir, M. H\a akansson, J. Pierce, E. Baumer, C. DiSalvo 
and P. Sengers,  “Sustainably 
Unpersuaded: 
How 
Persuasion 
Narrows Our Vision of Sustainability,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, 
NY, USA, 2012, pp. 947–956. 
[24]   M. van der Velden,  
“Re-politicising 
Participatory 
Design: 
What can we learn from Fairphone,” presented at the Ninth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Culture 
and 
Technology 
and 
Communication (CaTaC), 2014. 
[25]   T. Wernink and C. Strahl,  “Fairphone: 
Sustainability 
from 
the 
Inside-Out and Outside-In,” in Sustainable Value Chain Management, 
M. D’heur, Ed. Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 123–139. 
[26]   S. Reinecke,  
“On the Way to Sustainable Transportation,” 
Marketing Review St. Gallen, vol. 31, no. 5, Oct. 2014, pp. 84–88. 
[27]   J. Olson, P. M. Clay and P. Pinto da Silva,  
“Putting 
the 
seafood in sustainable food systems,” Marine Policy, vol. 43, Jan. 
2014, pp. 104–111. 
[28]   “What’s Mine is Yours (Botsman & Rogers, 2010),” John A. 
McArthur, Ph.D. . 
[29]   U. Johansson-Sköldberg, J. Woodilla and M. Çetinkaya,  
“Design 
Thinking: Past, Present and Possible Futures,” Creativity and 
Innovation Management, vol. 22, no. 2, Jun. 2013, pp. 121–146. 
[30]   T. Brown and J. Wyatt,  
“Design Thinking for Social Innovation,” 
Stanford Social Innovation Review, 2010. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ssireview.org/articles/entry/design_thinking_for_social_i
nnovation. [Accessed: 22-Mar-2015]. 
[31]   V. Kumar, A. K. Duncan and M. A. Breslin,  
“Innovating health 
care delivery: the design of health services,” Journal of Business 
Strategy, vol. 30, no. 2/3, 2009, pp. 13–20. 
[32]   D. Dunne and R. Martin,  “Design thinking and how it will change 
management education: An interview and discussion,” Academy of 
Management Learning & Education, vol. 5, no. 4, 2006, pp. 512–523. 
[33]   A. G. L. Romme,  
“Making a Difference: Organization as 
Design,” Organization Science, vol. 14, no. 5, Oct. 2003, pp. 558–
573. 
[34]   R. Buchanan,  
“Wicked Problems in Design Thinking,” Design 
Issues, vol. 8, no. 2, Apr. 1992, pp. 5–21. 
[35]   H. W. J. Rittel and M. M. Webber,  
“Dilemmas in a general theory 
of planning,” Policy Sciences, vol. 4, no. 2, Jun. 1973, pp. 155–169. 
[36]   D. A. Schon,  
The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals 
Think In Action, 1 edition. New York: Basic Books, 1984. 
[37]   C. 
M. 
Christensen, 
C. 
W. 
Johnson 
and 
M. 
B. 
Horn, 
 
Disrupting Class: How Disruptive Innovation Will Change the 
Way the World Learns, 1st ed. Mcgraw-Hill, 2008. 
[38]   M. B. M. S. L. Hart,  
“Global Sustainability and the Creative 
Destruction of Industries,” Sloan Management Review, vol. 41, 1999. 
[39]   B. Ki-moon and A. Gore,  “Green growth is essential to any 
stimulus,” Financial Times, 16-Feb-2009. 
[40]   M. J. Goedkoop,  
“Product service systems, ecological and 
economic basics,” Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the 
Environment, Communications Directorate, 1999. 
[41]   S. Vandermerwe and J. Rada,  
“Servitization 
of 
business: 
Adding value by adding services,” European Management Journal, 
vol. 6, no. 4, 1988, pp. 314–324. 
[42]   T. S. Baines, et al.,  
“State-of-the-art 
in 
product-service 
systems,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 
Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, vol. 221, no. 10, Oct. 
2007, pp. 1543–1552. 
[43]   A. Polaine, L. Løvlie and B. Reason,  Service Design: From Insight 
to Implementation, 1st edition. Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media, 
2013. 
[44]   R. Roy,  
“Sustainable product-service systems,” Futures, vol. 
32, no. 3–4, Apr. 2000, pp. 289–299. 
[45]   P. Glavič and R. Lukman,  “Review of sustainability terms and their 
definitions,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 15, no. 18, Dec. 
2007, pp. 1875–1885. 
[46]   C. Sanne,  
“Are we chasing our tail in the pursuit of 
sustainability?,” International Journal of Sustainable Development, 
vol. 4, no. 1, Jan. 2001, pp. 120–133. 
[47]   M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky,  
“User experience - a research 
agenda,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 25, no. 2, Mar. 
2006, pp. 91–97. 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[48]   M. Hassenzahl,  “Experiences Before Things: A Primer for the (Yet) 
Unconvinced,” in CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 2059–2068. 
[49]   B. J. P. Iij. H. Gilmore,  
“Welcome to the Experience Economy,” 
Harvard 
Business 
Review. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://hbr.org/1998/07/welcome-to-the-experience-economy. 
[Accessed: 18-Mar-2016]. 
[50]   W. J. Orlikowski and J. J. Baroudi,  
“Studying 
Information 
Technology 
in 
Organizations: 
Research 
Approaches 
and 
Assumptions,” Information Systems Research, vol. 2, no. 1, Mar. 
1991, pp. 1–28. 
 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

