UX Evaluation of a Mobile Application Prototype for Art Museum Visitors 
Pekka Isomursu*, Minna Virkkula**, Karoliina Niemelä*, Jouni Juntunen*** and Janne Kumpuoja*** 
*School of Media & Performing Arts  
**Business Department 
***Information Technology 
Oulu University of Applied Sciences,  
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: firstname.lastname@oamk.fi  
 
 
Abstract — In this paper, we discuss user experience evaluation 
of a prototype mobile application for art museum visitors. The 
application acts as a personal, virtual museum guide that 
interacts with the physical surroundings using, e.g., image 
recognition and Augmented Reality (AR). The study included 
several techniques of early User Interface (UI) design 
exploration. Our additions to the AttrakDiff method revealed a 
deeper layer of user insight that otherwise would have gone 
unnoticed. Based on our study, we have drawn several design 
implications that we believe are not only usable in further 
development of our application, but also useful to others. Some 
of our key findings were that the application should have a 
supporting role only, subordinate to the actual exhibition, and 
the role of good, versatile, and up-to-date content is crucial. 
Keywords - user experience; user evaluation methods; case 
study; user study; interaction with physical objects. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The smARTplaces project [1], co-funded by the 
European Union, aims to revolutionize the way culture and 
art can be perceived and consumed using digital technology 
and new forms of cultural mediation. In the project, we have 
developed a mobile application called smARTapp (Figure 1) 
where one can learn about the institutions, art works and 
local projects through, e.g., exclusive videos, Augmented 
Reality (AR) features, and a game called Storyworld [2]. 
In this paper, we discuss user evaluation of a new 
application, to be integrated in smARTapp. We call it Your 
Personal Art Tour (YPAT). YPAT focuses on enhancing the 
experience of a visit to an exhibition. Since YPAT is still 
under development, a lo-fi prototype that worked on a 
mobile phone and included the basic functionality with a 
rudimentary user interface (Figure 2) was used in this study.  
In the following sections, respectively, we describe 
related work, YPAT in more detail, and user experience 
(UX) evaluation setup and procedure. We then discuss the 
results in detail, and end with conclusions and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
A. User Experience 
Traditional usability evaluations mainly focus on user 
cognition and user performance when interacting with 
products or services [3]. According to ISO 9241-210:2010 
(clause 2.15), UX is defined as a person’s perceptions and 
responses resulting from the use and/or anticipated use of a 
product, system or service [4]. User experience focuses on 
lived experience. Therefore, in UX evaluation we need to 
concentrate on how the experience of a system subjectively 
feels to the user. It is associated with emotional, 
experimental, affective, hedonic, and aesthetic variables. 
Context-dependence is also an important aspect of user 
experience [5]-[7]. 
 
Figure 1.  Front page of smARTapp for iOS and Android phones [8]. 
   
   
 
Figure 2.  Screen shots of the lo-fi prototype of YPAT, used in user tests. 
Hassenzahl [9] has proposed a model of user experience 
that divides the attributes of a product into pragmatic and 
hedonic attributes. Based on this model, he has developed 
two questionnaires, AttrakDiff and AttrakDiff 2 that can be 
used to measure the user’s experience of different attributes 
in the product. AttrakDiff questionnaires use a seven-step 
Semantic Differential Scale to assess pragmatic and hedonic 
attributes as well as the attractiveness of the system under 
428
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

scrutiny. The attributes are arranged into word-pairs 
(semantic differentials) that have opposite meanings (e.g., 
confusing - clear, good - bad) [9]-[12]. 
Pragmatic quality, in this context, means clarity of 
interaction and usability of the application. Attractivity 
means aesthetic quality in general. Hedonic quality attributes 
are divided into two groups: Identity, measuring how well 
the user’s self-perception resonates with the product, and 
Stimulation, measuring perceived potential of the application 
for reaching the user’s individual goals. 
B. Mobile Museum Applications and Their Research 
Using mobile technology for enhancing museum 
experience is not a new idea per se. There are many 
applications that offer different types of support to enhance 
the experience during either a physical or a virtual museum 
visit, or in learning about art world in general. Typically, the 
art-oriented apps use image recognition technology, each 
with a particular twist. Some use AR, some even make the 
whole tour virtual. The applications vary a lot in their focus 
and technology. Our focus is in making a pleasant user 
experience for the whole “life cycle” of the museum 
experience, starting from the planning of the visit and ending 
with support for activities after the visit [13]-[15]. 
Applications like Magnus [16] try to become “Shazam of 
art”. Magnus has used, e.g., crowdsourcing to build a 
database of more than 10 million images of art. It aims to 
help prospective art buyers. Magnus shows prices from 
galleries and auctions, and exhibition histories of galleries, 
museums, etc. Smartify [17] is more geared towards 
museumgoers. It teams up with individual museums to create 
digitized versions of their collections, also adding an 
educational angle.  
Ree and Choi [18] have done user research on using 
mobile technology with museum visitors. The results were 
somewhat mixed. As the biggest challenge, they identify 
encouraging visitors to use the mobile experience. Several 
problems, such as intrusiveness, isolation, head-down effect 
and technical problems should be improved to use their 
mobile application. On the other hand, the usability and the 
degree of satisfaction of using the application were relatively 
high in their research. 
A study by Rung and Laursen [19] shows that there is a 
growing potential for using mobile applications in museums. 
However, as this is a new(ish) approach for most museum 
visitors, mobile applications must be developed as user-
friendly as possible and make a strong connection with the 
physical space. 
III. 
YOUR PERSONAL ART TOUR (YPAT) 
Using image recognition and Augmented Reality, YPAT 
is designed to enhance the experience of visiting art 
museums. In the physical space, an artwork is recognized 
with a mobile phone camera, and additional information, 
such as text, video, audio or web content, is displayed either 
in some “traditional” format or as Augmented Reality. The 
information provided can be pre-existing or created 
specifically for the app. A floor plan and a tour map help in 
navigation. Overall, YPAT aims to a personalized experience 
that resembles having a personal, live guide during the visit. 
As discussed, mobile applications that enhance the 
experience of visiting a museum or an art gallery already 
exist, even commercially. Therefore, it is of crucial 
importance that YPAT not only has the functionality but also 
has its user experience at a very high level. Building blocks 
are readily available for the development of mobile 
applications that use enhanced technologies, such as image 
recognition and Augmented Reality. Instead of re-inventing 
the wheel, with YPAT we use proven technology of 
commercial development platforms (e.g., React Native [20] 
and Vuforia [21]) that can easily be adapted to our needs. We 
can then focus our project resources better to creating a 
product with excellent user experience and usability. 
Image recognition can be done in several different ways, 
usually either in device or on some external server [22]. 
Server-side image recognition is better when there are 
thousands of reference images that need to be compared to a 
mobile camera image since the processing power of mobile 
devices is somewhat limited. In the case of YPAT the 
number of images that need to be recognized is relatively 
small, so an in-device approach was chosen. The camera 
image is compared against a point cloud that is stored in the 
device. If similarity is detected, the application returns a 
corresponding AR view - or some other pre-defined function 
- on the phone display.  
IV. 
UX EVALUATION 
A. Evaluation Setup 
In our research project, our objective was to apply the 
user centric design process and involve the users to the 
development of YPAT, our mobile application for art 
museum visitors. In a user study that we conducted, we 
focused on the UX evaluation of YPAT. During that time, 
YPAT had a rudimentary user interface (UI) and the basic 
functionality working. The aim of the user study was to gain 
knowledge on people’s behavior, interaction and how the 
users feel when using the developed application prototype in 
a museum environment. We wanted to find the best 
combination of features, content and UX. 
To create an authentic yet controllable test environment, 
we created our own “art museum”. We used a part of the art 
collection of our university as the exhibited items. The 
exhibition included drawings and photographs hung on the 
walls of a space normally dedicated to exhibit works of our 
students. We also included images of artworks projected on 
the wall, in order to see if they would be harder for YPAT to 
recognize than the physical artworks. The environment, 
although limited in size, provided all key elements needed to 
make the tests realistic. We felt that evaluating interaction 
and user perceptions in a real-world context was crucial for 
getting valid user feedback. 
We recruited in situ 31 participants (14 males and 17 
females). They included both students and staff with age 
range of 20 to 50+ years with bias towards cultural studies 
and occupations. Typically, they visited museums 2 to 5 
times in a year. The age range is quite wide, but we did not 
429
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

focus on age differences at this early stage, although we do 
indicate some such differences in the results. 
B. Procedure 
We conducted the user study with a mixed methods 
research 
design 
combining 
several 
methods, 
e.g., 
observation, a questionnaire (in 3 parts, including a modified 
AttrakDiff questionnaire), and semi-structured interview 
[15]. 
At the beginning of every user observation, a brief 
introduction was given about the YPAT application. The first 
task to the participants was to walk freely at the gallery, 
using the prototype version of YPAT (Figure 3). Participants 
used one of the two test phones where the prototype 
application had been installed. They were followed while 
they took their time to look at the artworks and test YPAT by 
themselves. We also asked them to think aloud while using 
YPAT.  
   
 
Figure 3.  Scenes from user evaluation in progress. 
After the participants had tried the application on their 
own, we would guide them to try features that they had 
possibly missed. Meanwhile, they were asked additional 
questions on the concept ideas. If at some point they got 
stuck with the UI, we first let them try to solve the problem 
by themselves, but if that did not happen, we would then 
instruct them. The study also included a semi-structured 
questionnaire that was filled in after the participants had used 
YPAT. Finally, a brief interview was run to elaborate on 
their answers to the questionnaire. In some cases, when there 
were two people tested at the same time and they knew each 
other, we let them try the app together as a pair. We noticed 
that this would spark a lively discussion on the app and its 
features, both while they were trying YPAT and during the 
final interview after they had individually filled in the 
questionnaire.  
In the questionnaire, the participants first gave 
demographic information and their prior experience in 
visiting art museums. We also asked about their phone 
model to recognize if there were any correlations between 
ease of use and the participants’ phone UI. The questionnaire 
also included a modified AttrakDiff questionnaire [15][23] 
with 15 statements related to application concept idea and a 
7-point scale for attribute pairs (Figures 4 and 5). 
As YPAT at that stage was only a lo-fi prototype with a 
rudimentary UI, we felt that the attributes for the hedonic 
quality used in AttrakDiff were rather meaningless for the 
participants at that point. It would have been hard for them to 
grasp, e.g., how stylish, premium, or professional user 
experience the final YPAT would offer. Therefore, we 
modified the AttrakDiff questionnaire by omitting the 
hedonistic attributes and only used attributes for pragmatic 
quality and appeal. 
In addition, as we had to translate the questionnaire to 
Finnish, we found that the connotative meanings of three 
attribute pairs in English overlapped with each other when 
translated to Finnish, i.e., a word in Finnish might have 
similar connotations to more than one of the English words 
and vice versa. We ended up using two attribute pairs in 
Finnish language to cover the key connotative meanings of 
three pairs in English, namely pleasant - unpleasant, 
attractive – ugly, and likeable - disagreeable. These were 
substituted with Finnish miellyttävä – epämiellyttävä and 
viehättävä – ruma. 
We also added two new attribute pairs, namely 
innovative – ordinary, and engaging – boring (in Finnish). 
We wanted to use these exact words since in the project plan 
a set goal was to develop an innovative application that 
would engage museum audiences in new ways. With the 
addition, we would get direct feedback on this goal. We 
consider engaging – boring to measure attractivity, and 
innovative - ordinary to measure pragmatic quality, although 
the latter has a hedonistic dimension as well. 
We also wanted to dive a step deeper into the quantitative 
feedback from AttrakDiff than what the original method 
allowed. After a participant had filled in the questionnaire 
s/he was asked to select 3 attribute pairs (Figure 4) that s/he 
felt most certain about and then justify the selection. This 
revealed a deeper layer of user insight that otherwise would 
have gone unnoticed. It helped us better understand the 
users’ reasoning in grading the attributes and what the most 
relevant and descriptive attributes in this case were. 
As YPAT interacts with physical pieces of art in its 
environment, we found it to be crucial that the application 
was evaluated in a gallery environment. This gave a lot of 
insight to issues related to control and performance. 
The methods and process that we used worked very well 
together. 
Data 
from 
direct 
observations 
gave 
us 
understanding how participants interacted with the lo-fi 
prototype as well as ideas on what part and features of YPAT 
the participants were interested in. From the interviews and 
open-ended questions that followed, we collected valuable 
insight and ideas for new features. We were able to exploit 
rather brief (ca. 30 minutes) user sessions to their fullest and 
gather plenty of versatile and easy-to-analyze user data that 
we could use in further development of YPAT. We can 
conclude that our methods mix and the process we followed 
worked well in real-life early phase development work.  
V. 
UX EVALUATION RESULTS 
A. Results of subjective ratings with modified AttrakDiff 
Summarizing the user answers to our modified 
AttrakDiff questionnaire, Figure 4 shows that the participants 
were most certain about the app to be simple, practical, and 
430
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

manageable (shown in darkest colors in the figure). To a 
large extent, they thought the app also to be straightforward, 
pleasant, good, and very motivating. They were least certain 
whether the app was inviting – rejecting or appealing – 
repelling. They had most diverse opinions on whether the 
app was engaging or boring. The diversity with engaging – 
boring might be due to the fact that the app was still a 
prototype. When answering, some of the users might have 
thought of the actual prototype at hand whereas others might 
have thought of the final product of which the prototype gave 
just an indication. When asked why the participants chose 
simple and practical, their reasoning was that they could 
easily begin to understand the basic functionality and content 
of the application. Also, the users said that it was easy to take 
the application into use, as well as interact and learn with it. 
The reasoning for choosing the attribute motivating was that 
the application tempted the user to find out more information 
about the works of art and their background, such as 
information on the artist and related work.   
“Innovative = I haven't seen this before,  
Predictable = I quickly learned how it works,  
Engaging = I wanted to start exercising right away.” 
In Figure 5, the darkest color shows the median answer 
for each attribute, and the lighter color shows the 90% range 
of the answers. From the figure we can see that overall, the 
participants felt rather positive about YPAT as the medians 
are mostly on the left side of the table. A notable exception is 
that the participants found the app to be more technical than 
human (although not with high certainty, as can be seen from 
Figure 4). When asked about this, the users did not 
necessarily see the app being technical as a negative thing. 
Since the app used new technology, such as AR, it simply 
gave a technical impression. 
The questionnaire ended with open questions related to 
first impressions, 
likes 
and dislikes, 
possible new 
functionality or content and, lastly, a possibility for the 
participant to add anything at all that s/he still wanted to say. 
As at this point, they had used the app, discussed it with the 
moderator, and filled in most of the questionnaire, they had 
formed a good understanding of what the goals of the app 
development were. Thus, we got excellent additional 
comments on the user experience as well as on features that 
could be added to the app. 
human
technical
simple
complicated
practical
impractical
straightforward
cumbersome
predictable
unpredictable
clearly structured
confusing
manageable
unruly
innovative
ordinary
pleasant
unpleasant
attractive
ugly
inviting
rejecting
good
bad
appealing
repelling
motivating
discouraging
engaging
boring
 
Figure 4.  Participants were most certain of the answers marked dark. 
 
Figure 5.  Median (darker) and 90% range (lighter) of the answers. 
From the user evaluation of AttrakDiff attribute pairs, we 
can conclude that, overall, the test users found the app to be 
rather pragmatic and attractive. This is a very promising 
indicator for the success of the finalized application. The 
design implications that we gathered give us a good direction 
to further development. 
B. Design implications 
To further develop YPAT, consistent themes and 
findings from the study were translated into design 
implications. The implications suggest that the following 
aspects should be considered when designing a personal 
digital art guide in the museum context:  
• 
Supporting role of the application: at the exhibition, 
physical works of art are the focus of attention. 
• 
Varying contexts of use: user journey with the 
application can start at different points and with 
different goals. 
• 
Content is king: the role of good content is crucial 
for the success of the application. 
• 
Considerations on interaction and technology: we 
found plenty of improvement ideas related to 
technology and interaction.  
Next, we discuss these design implications in more 
detail. 
1) Supporting role of the application 
Our first major finding and an important guideline for 
further design was that at the museum the users want to 
focus on the art physically around them, and not on their 
phone application. Also, the users mentioned how important 
it is that the application gives freedom to choose the objects 
that they find most interesting and study them at their own 
pace. Human museum guides are unapproachable to many as 
people tend to be shy and often wish to study the exhibition 
in peace, but still wish to get extra information. YPAT gives 
freedom to choose the objects that the user finds most 
interesting and focus on them without any hurry. 
”Simplicity and practicality are important, because I 
want to be at the museum, not on my smart phone” 
2) Varying contexts of use 
The application must take into account different contexts 
of use. The users not only wanted to use the application 
431
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

during the museum visit, but also before and after it, with 
different focus in each context.  
Before visiting an exhibition, people wanted to get to 
know the basics of the exhibition(s) and plan their own tour. 
For example, users could identify the works of art they 
would wish to see, and the app could tailor a personal tour 
accordingly. 
”I would plan my own tour”, ”I would search the object 
from the (interactive) floor plan” 
The use of the application would be most versatile during 
the visit. For example, an interactive map would show the 
location and where to go next and give more information 
about the exhibited works of art, as well as practicalities, 
such as where the amenities are located. An augmented 
audio guide would include image recognition with camera 
and a possibility to bookmark favorites for closer study after 
the visit. 
To store information for later use was considered a useful 
feature. After the museum visit, the user might wish to learn 
more about selected favorites – or just simply remember 
which works of art s/he found especially interesting. People 
were also interested in having social aspects included in the 
application. Enabling easy and fun ways for social activity 
and sharing during and especially after a visit was listed as 
an important function. Quick social sharing could happen 
during the visit, but also afterwards. After the visit the user 
could better afford a longer and deeper social engagement 
since it would not interfere with the physical experience at 
the museum. The importance of social sharing emerged 
especially with the younger (student) participants. 
One detailed idea for social sharing that emerged is e-
postcards provided by the museum, to be shared via email or 
social media. Another idea was the possibility to give 
recommendations to users with similar interests.  
Our user evaluation revealed three alternative starting 
points for the user journey with the application: 
1. 
Start by planning own tour beforehand. 
2. 
Start at the exhibition by scanning a work of art 
with the phone camera to get information. 
3. 
Start from an interactive map at the exhibition. 
Additional entry scenarios exist, such as starting by 
finding the amenities at the museum, but the above-
mentioned three starting points were the ones emerging 
strongly from the user data. The UI of YPAT should be 
designed so that access to all three is easy and intuitive. 
3) Content is king  
Without versatile content, the application, no matter how 
good its technology and usability will get, is worthless. The 
users were clearly interested in additional information about 
the works of art that especially interested them: the subject 
and characters, the artist’s own thoughts, where else can one 
see works from the same artist, etc.  
Our study also showed that the application encourages 
the user to the consumption of additional information. This is 
due to making the information readily and interestingly 
available, reducing the need for the use of web search 
engines or similar. We found this to be more important to the 
older study participants. 
Content should be hierarchical: one should easily get an 
overview and then be able to dive into details, according to 
personal interest. By content, we do not mean just data, but 
also a variety of functions that provide information to the 
user. These include interactive map and audio guidance.  
Video content that would be consumed during the 
museum visit should be kept short, a minute at the 
maximum. This finding is related to the fact that the users 
wish to focus on the physical world during their visit. When 
watching videos after the visit this time restriction does not 
apply. 
4) Considerations on interaction and technology 
As the app was still a prototype during user evaluation, it 
is natural that we found a lot of technical details that need 
improvement. For example, there needs to be indicators 
when the camera is scanning, when it recognizes an image, 
and which image seen on the display is recognized. We also 
found some straight-forward bugs, such as the app 
sometimes showing information about a wrong image. 
Some users tried to find the limits of the implemented 
technology: what happens when there are several works of 
art in camera view at the same time, how tilted can the 
viewing angle be, what if the object is only partially visible, 
etc. This gave us very valuable information for further 
development. 
In 
a 
museum 
environment, 
issues 
with 
user 
embarrassment should be considered. Users do not want the 
application to disturb others. For example, it is good to give 
the user control of audio usage and volume before showing 
videos or starting guidance and perhaps force the use of 
headphones. Also, the user should not be overloaded with 
unnecessary information, such as push notifications. 
As discussed earlier, in a museum the user prefers to 
focus on art itself and not on her phone. Using audio helps in 
getting eyes off the device.  
Interaction with the physical works of art should be smart 
and feel natural. The user needs to feel s/he is in control, not 
the application. Perhaps a bit surprising finding was that the 
application recognized the works of art even too quickly, 
already before the user had pointed the phone camera 
directly towards the object. This caused confusion. Image 
recognition (or failure of it) must be clearly indicated on the 
phone display. Using AR to point the identified object on the 
display would be good. Another issue with the camera was 
that the users changed the orientation of the phone to better 
match the dimensions of the artwork with those of the 
camera display, but our prototype was made to work only 
with portrait orientation.  
Battery consumption of the prototype was quite heavy. It 
consumed 7-10% of battery capacity during a 15-20-minute 
test period that included heavy usage of the camera. This 
needs to be taken into consideration in the coding and 
procedural structure of the final application. 
The light in an art museum is often constant, at least in 
most of its exhibition space. This makes image recognition 
much easier than, e.g., outdoors with constantly changing 
light conditions. Image recognition worked very well in our 
tests for 2D objects on the walls. However, sculptures and 
432
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

other 3D objects would be more challenging. We did not 
include handling of them in YPAT at this point. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our user evaluation confirmed that the YPAT prototype 
has potential. The feedback was generally positive even 
though the UI was rudimentary. The users were able to easily 
learn and interact with the app, and they liked the features we 
had. However, the visual appearance and elements for 
interaction need to be improved. We got a lot of ideas for 
improved and new functionality as well as simple bug fixing. 
Whatever the functionality, the application should have a 
supporting role only, subordinate to the actual exhibition. 
Besides working on the application itself, a lot of work needs 
to be done to get good quality (and interactive) content for 
the application continuously in the future. Since the content 
would change with every exhibition, tools and instructions 
should be created that make content creation and putting it 
into the system as easy as possible. This is especially true 
with special types of content, such as AR. Also, support for 
social activity and sharing especially after the visit should be 
available.  
There are especially plenty of opportunities for new 
functionality with an interactive floor plan. Adding 
gamification elements to the app is another track that came 
up in user evaluations and is worth studying closely. 
Although the prototype did not include a chatbot several test 
users said it would be an interesting feature. Also, 
recognition of 3D objects should be addressed in future 
versions of YPAT. Copyright issues may be a problem in the 
future since it would be logical for the app to use images of 
the original works of art.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We gratefully acknowledge that smARTplaces is co-
funded by the Creative Europe Programme of the European 
Union [24]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] smARTplaces 
Project 
Web 
site. 
Available 
from: 
https://smartplaces.eu/ 2020.10.14  
[2] smARTplaces Application Web site. Available from: 
https://smartplaces.eu/explore-the-new-smartplaces-app/ 
2020.10.14 
[3] ISO/IEC CD 25010.2 standard. International Standardization 
Organization (ISO). Switzerland  
[4] ISO DIS 9241-210:2010. Ergonomics of human system 
interaction - Part 210: Human-centred design for interactive 
systems 
(formerly 
known 
as 
13407). 
International 
Standardization Organization (ISO). Switzerland 
[5] E. Law, V. Roto, M. Hassenzahl, A. Vermeeren, and J. Kort, 
“Understanding, Scoping and Defining User eXperience: A 
Survey Approach,” ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’09), pp. 719-728, 2009. 
[6] N. Bevan, “Classifying and Selecting UX and Usability 
Measures,” International Workshop on Meaningful Measures: 
Valid Useful User Experience Measurement (VUUM), 
Reykjavik, Iceland pp. 13-18. E. L-C. Law, N. Bevan, G. 
Christou, M. Springett, and M. Lárusdóttir, Eds. 2008. 
[7] J. Isleifsdottir and M. Larusdottir, “Measuring the User 
Experience of a Task Oriented Software,” International 
Workshop on Meaningful Measures: Valid Useful User 
Experience Measurement (VUUM), Reykjavik, Iceland pp. 
97-102. E. L-C. Law, N. Bevan, G. Christou, M. Springett, 
and M. Lárusdóttir, Eds. IRIT, 2008. 
[8] smARTplaces Application at Google Play Store. Available 
from: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=de. 
menschortweb.smartplaces 2020.10.14 
[9] M. Hassenzahl, M. Burmester, and F. Koller, “AttrakDiff: Ein 
Fragebogen zur Messung wahrgenommener hedonischer und 
pragmatischer Qualität,” In J. Ziegler & G. Szwillus, Eds. 
Mensch & Computer. Interaktion in Bewegung, pp. 187-196, 
Stuttgart, Leipzig: B.G. Teubner, 2003. 
[10] A. Colley, M. Pakanen, S. Koskinen, K. Mikkonen, and J. 
Häkkilä, “Smart Handbag as a Wearable Public Display - 
Exploring Concepts and User Perceptions,” AH 2016, 
February 25-27, 2016, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1-8, ACM. 
ISBN 978-1-4503-3680-2/16/02 
[11] H. Väätäjä, T. Koponen, and V. Roto, “Developing Practical 
Tools for User Experience Evaluation – A Case from Mobile 
News Journalism,” ECCE 2009, Helsinki, Finland, pp. 1-8, 
ACM, 2009. 
[12] M. Hassenzahl, “The thing and I: Understanding the 
relationship between users and product,” In Funology: From 
usability to enjoyment, M.A. Blythe, K. Overbeeke, A.F. 
Monk, P.C. Wright, Eds. Kluwer, The Netherlands, pp. 31-
42,  2003. 
[13] C. Coates, “How Museums are using Augmented Reality,” 
MuseumNext. Available from:  https://www.museumnext. 
com/article/how-museums-are-using-augmented-reality/ 
2020.10.14 
[14] C. Shin et al., “Unified Context-Aware Augmented Reality 
Application Framework for User-Driven Tour Guides,” Int. 
Symposium on Ubiquitous Virtual Reality, pp. 52-55, IEEE.  
2010. 
[15] P. Isomursu, M. Virkkula, K. Niemelä, J. Juntunen, and J. 
Kumpuoja, “Modified AttrakDiff in UX Evaluation of a 
Mobile Prototype,” Int. Conference on Advanced Visual 
Interfaces (AVI '20), pp. 1-3, ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7535-1 
[16] Magnus 
Application 
Web 
site. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.magnus.net/ 2020.10.14 
[17] Smartify 
Application 
Web 
site. 
Available 
from: 
https://smartify.org/ 2020.10.14 
[18] B. Rhee and Y. Choi, “Using Mobile Technology for 
Enhancing Museum Experience: Case Studies of Museum 
Mobile Applications in S. Korea,” Int. Journal of Multimedia 
and Ubiquitous Engineering vol. 10, no. 6, (2015), pp. 39-44  
http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/ijmue.2015.10.6.05 
[19] M. H. Rung and D. Laursen, “Adding to the Experience: Use 
of Smartphone Applications by Museum Visitors,” The 
Transformative Museum Conference, Roskilde University, 
Roskilde, Denmark, ed. / Erik Kristiansen, pp. 314-324, 2012. 
[20] GitHub Web site for React Native. Available from: 
https://github.com/facebook/react-native 2020.10.14 
[21] Vuforia 
development 
Web 
site. 
Available 
from: 
https://developer.vuforia.com/ 
[22] T. Guo, “Cloud-based or On-device: An Empirical Study of 
Mobile Deep Inference,” IEEE International Conference on 
Cloud Engineering (IC2E), pp. 184-190, 2018. 
[23] Attrakdiff Web site. Available from: http://www.attrakdiff.de/ 
(ver. 10.12.2019). 2020.10.14 
[24] Home page of Creative Europe Programme of the European 
Union. Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/ 
creative-europe/ 2020.10.14 
 
433
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

