 An Emotional System for Effective and Collaborative e-Learning 
Kittanakere Lakshminarasimhamurthy Nitin, Lakshmisri Lakshmi Narayana Rao, Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman 
E-Commerce Research Labs, Education & Research, 
Infosys Technologies Ltd, 
Bangalore, India 
KL_Nitin@Infosys.com, Lakshmisri_LV@Infosys.com, Nirmal_Sivaraman@Infosys.com 
Abstract: Though e-learning is being debated to have 
some advantages over person to person teaching, the latter is 
considered to be superior with respect to the effectiveness of 
teaching. One of the reasons for this advantage of human 
expert tutors is their ability to deal with the emotional 
aspects of the learner. We introduce an emotion sensitive e-
learning model which is sensitive to both emotional aspects 
as well as the learning ability of the learner. This is a major 
difference with the other similar attempts to make effective 
e-learning systems and the preliminary analyses indicate 
considerable promise. We hope this would complement the 
effectiveness of e-learning. 
Keywords - e-learning; emotional systems; emotional e-
learning 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, e-learning is becoming an increasingly 
popular paradigm of learning. This is very evident 
especially in the corporate training arena. And it is 
expected that this paradigm would eventually become 
mainstream channel of training which would add to a 
company‟s competitive advantage [6, 16].  
The main goals of e-learning systems identified by 
different researchers are given below [24, 25]. 
 Focus on active learning 
 Accommodate various learning styles 
 Explicitly place the responsibility for learning 
with the students 
 Develop written and oral communication skills 
 Clarify the role of the teacher as facilitator and 
mentor 
 Provide better coverage of material 
 Develop 
a 
sense 
of 
self-confidence 
and 
independence in students 
 Include a teamwork experience 
 Encourage peer review 
 Develop interpersonal communication skills 
when students are geographically spread 
 Support entire educational process when students 
are spread both geographically and temporally 
 Learn to handle time management including the 
meeting of deadlines 
 
Many of the above goals themselves explain the 
advantages of e-learning systems over traditional learning 
approaches. Another advantage of e-learning systems is 
that they are scalable. The number of learners that an e-
learning system can handle with individual attention is 
much more than that can be accommodated in a 
classroom. 
However, they have some disadvantages as well. 
During person-to-person communication, more than 65% 
of the information exchange happens through nonverbal 
communication [11]. These include facial expressions, 
body posture, tone of voice etc. So, the learner gets less 
information through e-learning system than through 
person – to – person interaction. 
Personality and emotion has a role to play in 
learning. The learning styles that can be more effective 
for a learner may be different according to these aspects 
[7]. Emotions can influence a person‟s cognitive 
organization and thought process. Positive emotions play 
a crucial role in these aspects of one‟s intelligence. They 
are also instrumental in improving creativity and 
flexibility in problem solving. At the same time, negative 
emotions can produce the opposite effect on one‟s thought 
process [3]. 
 
Expert human tutors judge these factors and teach 
accordingly. This is a major difference in the style of 
learning with traditional e-learning systems and that with 
human expert tutors. Human expert tutors focus on the 
emotional component of learning also, whereas the 
traditional e-learning systems focus on learning targets 
alone [12]. This makes the human expert tutors more 
effective. But, it would be impossible for a human tutor to 
give attention to every student, if he is handling a large 
number of them. 
 
260
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

This motivates us to think about incorporating 
emotional aspects of teaching in e-learning systems to 
make it more intelligent. An intelligent e-learning system 
should be able to adapt to the knowledge, learning 
abilities and needs of each learner [26]. This would give 
them a feel of individual care which would help them in 
the learning process. 
 
Incorporating emotions in e-learning systems is not 
a very new idea. “affective e-learning systems” had been 
found in the literature since the book „Affective 
Computing‟ which was published in 1997 [15]. Many e-
learning systems have been introduced with affective 
agents and different types of emotion sensing techniques 
[2, 4, 14, 17, 20, 22, 26]. The emotion sensing techniques 
used in such models include facial expression analysis 
[13, 26, 27], voice analysis [5, 8, 26, 27], text analysis 
[18, 26], analyzing the physiological data and behavior 
[10, 19, 22], etc. Some of them require costly equipments 
for effective functioning. This is an overhead over the 
learner.  
 
The current trends in e-learning are personal 
learning environments [9, 23], self directed learning [21], 
networked learning [1], etc. But these approaches may not 
be appropriate in case of a small duration – high content 
learning as observed in corporate trainings. 
 
In this paper, we introduce the design of an emotion 
sensitive e-learning system that gives emphasis to the 
complete learning process and that is very cost effective. 
This model is made as configurable as possible to make it 
suitable for a wide range of learners and to give them a 
feel of individual attention. This is the major advantage of 
this model over the others. 
 
II. 
ARCHITECTURE 
 
In this section we will discuss the architecture of the 
emotion sensitive e-learning system. Fig. 1 shows the 
architecture of the e-Learning system. This system mainly 
consists of three major units namely the Course Delivery 
Unit, the Assessment Unit and the Report Unit. There are 
two more additional components called the Emotion 
Modulators and the Focus Analyzer which play a vital 
role in the system. The individual units will be discussed 
in the subsequent sections. 
 
A. 
System Roles 
 
The various identified system roles, which have a 
very unique role to play in the system, are: System 
Admin, Learner and Course Owner. 
1) System Admin 
 
The System Admin is responsible for managing the 
entire system. He has several responsibilities which 
include configuring the emotion assessment, emotion 
modulators, parameters for the report and time for which 
the learner can indulge in any of the emotion modulators. 
He is also responsible for choosing the number of 
questions for emotion detection and technical analysis.  
 
2) 
Learner 
 
Learner is the individual who takes up the eLearning 
by registering himself to the e-Learning system. The 
Learner can choose any of the courses provided by the 
System. The Learner is assumed to be responsible enough 
to make the best use of the system. So, the learner is 
provided with the flexibility to configure the system to a 
certain extent which includes the following: 
He has the freedom to override the system‟s 
suggestion and choosing the course delivery style of 
his/her choice. 
He also has the flexibility to choose the emotion 
modulators; the time is however fixed by the System 
Admin. 
He can skip to the next granule after completing the 
current questionnaire. 
He is as well free to turn off the emotion 
modulators. 
 
3) 
Course Owner 
 
Every individual course will be designed and 
developed by the respective Course Owner who is 
responsible 
for 
configuring 
the 
system 
.His 
responsibilities includes providing the different granules 
as per the different styles, deciding the format of each 
granule, providing with a Technical Question bank and 
also the necessary emotional plugins 
 
B. Course Delivery Unit 
 
This unit comprises of several course offerings in 
different learning styles. The course offering focuses 
mainly on two learning aspects namely: Emotional State, 
Technical Understanding and Grasping Power. 
 
The Emotional Plugins are designed to tune the 
learning style to the current emotional state of the learner. 
The system concentrates on broadly three emotional states 
of the learner which are judged by the Emotion Sensing 
module of the Assessment Unit: Happy, Neutral, and Sad. 
261
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure 1. The architecture 
 
The Technical Tuning module focuses on the 
technical understanding and the grasping power of the 
learner. The same is evaluated by the Technical Analysis 
module of the Assessment unit which is categorized into 
the following: Slow, Medium, and Fast. 
 
Every learner is provided with a different style of 
course delivery which is specially tuned to his/her 
technical understanding and emotional state as described 
above. The learning style for a course is categorized into 
the following Emotional and technical modes: 
 
a. Emotional Modes 
 
We have three emotional modes that are categorized 
namely Emotional Mode 1, Emotional Mode 2 and 
Emotional Mode 3. Emotional Mode 1 is for a happy and 
excited listener, Emotional Mode 2 is for a listener with a 
neutral state of mind and Emotional Mode 3 is for a 
listener who is in a sad state of mind. 
 
To explain the impact of these emotional modes on 
the learner, let us discuss each of these modes one at a 
time. 
Let us consider the learner to be in emotional Mode 
1(happy and excited state). In this case, the reason behind 
the happiness and excitement of the learner could be the 
learning satisfaction. At the same time, the reason could 
also be something totally external that has no relevance 
from the current learning that he is undergoing. The 
former reason will definitely be conducive for learning; 
however the latter will be a distraction. 
 
To confirm the same, after every granule, the learner 
score is examined. If the learner is scoring less and if his 
emotion is detected to be “happy”, in that case, the system 
concludes that the learner is distracted. Suitable emotional 
plugins and Emotion modulators are inserted which will 
aim at getting the learner‟s emotion to “neutral”. 
Emotional Plugins and modulators are explained in the 
further sections. 
On the contrary, if he scores well, we conclude that 
he is happy about the learning process and not distracted.  
 
Similarly, when the learner is in Emotional Mode 
3(sad state), he is again not in a favorable mode to learn 
since sadness may distract him and reduce his 
learnability. Appropriate emotional plugins and emotion 
modulators are provided again to get him back to neutral 
state of mind. 
 
Hence, the system considers Emotional Mode 2 as 
the most encouraging mode for learning, since here the 
262
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

learner is neither happy nor sad. There will not be 
distractions for learning from the emotional point of view. 
 
b. Technical Modes 
 
We have three technical modes that are categorized 
namely Technical Mode 1, Technical Mode 2 and 
Technical Mode 3. Technical Mode 1 is slow and 
encouraging paced flow of the course delivery, Technical 
Mode 2 is medium paced flow of the course delivery and 
Technical Mode 3 is fast and challenging paced flow of 
the course delivery. 
 
Any learning style provided to a learner will be a 
blend of the above mentioned emotional and technical 
modes resulting in a 3 X 3 combination. The Course 
Delivery Unit is externally assisted by an additional 
Emotion modulator (apart from the Emotional Plugins) at 
regular intervals which helps the learner in better focusing 
at regular intervals.   
 
1) Emotional Plugins 
 
The emotional plugins are a set of objects which the 
system suggests to be plugged-in to the technical tuning 
module depending on the emotional state of the learner. 
These plugins help in modulating the mood of the learner 
enhancing the effectiveness of the learning process, to 
name a few of these plugins; we have Animation and 
graphics, Cartoons, Pictures and others. 
 
The distinctive feature of the system is that it 
suggests the preferred configuration of the emotional 
plugins but however it provides the optimum flexibility to 
the learner to turn-on or turn-off or tune any of the 
plugins of his/her choice. Each of these plugins is 
suggested at regular intervals by the system, as per the 
current emotional state. For an instance, a learner with a 
sad state will be suggested with more of animations, 
pictures etc. The appearance of the system could also be 
changed to generate a better look and feel by providing 
different themes to the learner. Similarly other plugins 
can also be tuned accordingly.  
 
 
Figure 2. Emotional plugins 
2) Technical Tuning Module 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Technical tuning module 
 
Technical Tuning module concentrates on the actual 
course delivery. In order to enhance the effectiveness of 
the learning process, every course is dealt at a granular 
level. A granule is the smallest unit within which the 
mode switching is possible. To support the different 
technical modes (as discussed in 2.1), the tutor provides 3 
different offerings for each granule corresponding to the 3 
different technical modes which could be in any of the 
desired formats like a video/audio recording, a text-write 
up etc. 
 
The system enables the learner to repeat the granule 
any number of times. The learner is not allowed to skip to 
the next granule without completing the questionnaire for 
that granule. This is to ensure that the learner gets a better 
clarity on each of the granules. 
 
The first granule of the course begins with a medium 
paced course offering.  After each granule, the assessment 
unit interacts with the learner and assesses the level of the 
learner‟s grasping power. Based on its outcome the 
system gives a suggestion to the learner to opt to a more 
suitable technical mode. Here again the system provides 
the flexibility to the user to continue/switch the 
same/different mode of his/her choice. As described in 
Section 2.1.1, the emotional plugins are interleaved with 
the granule offering to cater to his emotional needs as 
well.  
 
The technical tuning for every granule is realized in 
terms of the various technical illustrations, demos, 
assignments, hands-on, depth of the each concept dealt 
etc. In case of slow paced mode the learner is supplied 
with elaborate illustrations, more demos and given more 
time on solving the assignments. On the contrary less 
emphasis is given on illustrations, assignments and the 
like in the fast paced mode.  
 
C. 
Assessment Unit 
 
The assessment Unit comprises of the following 
modules: Emotion Sensing Module and Technical 
Analysis Module 
Emotional Plugins 
SAD 
NEUTRAL 
HAPPY 
Technical Tuning Module 
 
SLOW 
MEDIUM 
FAST 
263
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

The emotion Sensing and technical Analysis 
modules gauge the learning capabilities and emotional 
state of the learner. Though these function as two separate 
modules internally, they are interleaved together into a 
single unit. 
 
This unit presents a questionnaire comprising of 
questions that are intended to analyze the technical as 
well as the emotional state of the learner. This exercise is 
repeated at the end of every granule. The outcome of this 
process is fed into the Course Delivery Unit which 
suggests the style of the next granule. At the same time 
the result is forwarded to the Reporting Unit (Explained 
in the subsequent sections). 
 
1) 
Technical Analysis Module 
 
This module chooses the technical part of the 
questionnaire from a repository. The questions are 
categorized on the basis of their complexity into the 
following three types: Simple, Medium and Complex. 
 
The system fires a medium complexity question to 
the learner. The complexity of the next question is 
dependent on the answer provided by the learner. The 
system gives a complex question if the medium 
complexity question is answered right while it throws a 
simple question if the learner answers it wrong. This cycle 
continues until a definite number of questions are posed 
to the learner. At the end of this exercise the system 
suggests the technical mode that the learner could choose 
in order to have an effective learning. This is done by 
analyzing which category (simple, medium or complex) 
of questions did the learner answer the most number of 
times. 
 
The system gives appreciation to the learner based 
on the outcome of the technical questionnaire. It also 
appreciates the learner whenever he/she outsmarts the 
virtual classmate (virtual class mate is explained in the 
subsequent sections).  
 
Figure 4. Selection of questions in technical analysis module 
2) 
Emotion Sensing Module 
 
This module is responsible for choosing the part of 
the questionnaire from a repository for detecting the 
current emotional state of the learner. The system 
categorizes a learner‟s emotional state into the following: 
Happy, Neutral, and Sad. 
 
The questionnaire to categorize the emotional state 
of the learner depends on many factors like the learner‟s 
culture, ethnicity, the languages that he is comfortable 
with, the education level of his parents etc. Verified and 
cross verified questionnaires are made that would help us 
to categorize the emotional state of different types of 
learners to happy, neutral or sad. This is done with the 
help of a psychologist. Most of the times this 
questionnaire would be an indirect way of asking the 
learner what emotional state is he in. The details are 
obtained from the learner when he registers to the system. 
Based on this data, the questions are selected from the 
suitable repository and merged with the technical 
questions selected by the technical analysis module.  
The current emotional state of the learner is 
predicted based on the outcome of these questions. 
 
D. 
Reporting Unit 
 
The Reporting unit is responsible for providing the 
final report to the learner. This report consists of the 
following parameters which are configurable by the 
System Admin. The System Admin can choose to turn 
on/off any of the following parameters based on the 
requirement: The latest score of every granule, the time 
taken to solve the questionnaire, the duration the learner 
invests on the Emotion Modulators, the outcome of the 
Focus Analyzer component (which is discussed later), the 
number of times and the granules in which the learner has 
out merited the classmate. 
  
E. 
Emotion Modulators 
 
This component is designed with an intention of 
responding and reacting to the learner emotionally. It 
comprises 
of 
various 
constructive 
entertainment 
fragments. These modulators could be chosen by the 
learner at the end of every granule. The System Admin 
should configure the time for which these modulators can 
be played by the learner.  
 
        The idea behind the emotion modulators is to give 
assistance to the learners in achieving a continued focus 
on the learning process. They are basically intended to 
bring back the learner to a mood which is conducive for 
264
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

learning. These are to be seen as a help for the learner to 
bring back his emotional state to the desired one. 
However these modulators need not necessarily assure the 
change in the emotional state of the learner.  
 
The emotion modulator unit reads the emotion that 
is detected from the Emotion Assessment Unit. This helps 
the emotion modulator unit to understand whether the 
current emotion of the learner corresponds to happy, sad 
or neutral. 
The emotion modulators are categorized based on 
the current emotion of the learner. The categories include 
Focus Emotion modulators and Cheerful Emotion 
modulators. The former ones are intended for learners 
with a happy emotion and are yet not performing well in 
the technical modules and the latter ones are aimed at 
learners whose current emotion is “sad”.  
The emotion modulators supported by the system are: 
Music, games, videos and write ups. A list of these 
modulators is maintained in the database and the 
collection is shown to the user. The user may select the 
one of his choice and soon after the selection the selected 
modulator is played. However, the time for which the 
modulator is played, is restricted. 
The Learner is however free to turn off the emotion 
modulators if he/she is not interested. 
 
 Also, providing these different emotion modulators 
is not an overhead on the course author since it is taken 
care by the system. 
 
F. 
Focus Analyzer 
 
This component periodically examines the presence 
and the focus of the learner towards learning. This ensures 
both the physical and mental presence of the learner. This 
is achieved in an effortless fashion by sending frequent 
alert messages to the learner. Alert messages could be in 
the form of simple technical/informal questions. An 
explicit response from the learner‟s end ensures his/her 
presence.  
 
The time at which these alert messages have to be 
sent out is configured by the System Admin suitably. The 
outcome of this whole process is recorded regularly by 
the Reporting Unit. 
 
 
 
 
G. 
Virtual Classmates 
 
This is to build a collaborative environment for the 
learner for an effective learning. This is intended to 
motivate the learner. The learner is always provided with 
a feel of virtual classmate to get a typical classroom 
feeling. The scores of the learner after individual granules 
are compared with the virtual classmate and the learner 
will be suitably appreciated if he/she excels. The system 
is also configurable to arrange for a quiz with the 
classmate and the winner will be decided based on the 
time taken to respond. The System Admin can configure 
the number of classmates and also has a hold on turning 
on/off the whole of this feature. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have described an emotion 
sensitive e-learning model which is sensitive to both 
emotional aspects as well as the learning ability of the 
learner. The model is designed to be configurable to a 
good extent in order to make it suitable for a wide range 
of users. In future this model can be extended by adding 
more emotion sensing methods like facial expression 
analysis, click stream analysis, voice analysis etc to 
confirm the emotion sensed through the survey method. 
There are many more challenges in this area like 
customizing the course delivery according to the 
personality of the learner, reducing the overhead on the 
course owner in course preparation, more dynamism in 
mode switching etc.  
IV. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We thank Sh. Subrahmanya SV and Dr. Sakthi 
Balan Muthiah for reviewing this paper, their valuable 
comments and for their constant encouragement. 
 
V. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. D. Malayeri and J. Abdollahi, New designing of E-
Learning 
systems 
with 
using 
network 
learning, 
url: 
http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1003/1003.3097.pdf, 
last 
accessed date:  01 – Feb – 2011  
[2] C. M. Chen, Intelligent web-based learning system with 
personalized learning path guidance, Computers & Education, 
51, 2 (2008), pp. 787 – 814  
 
[3] C. M. Jones and I. M. Jonsson, Automatic Recognition of 
Affective Cues in the Speech of Car Drivers to Allow 
Appropriate Responses, Proceedings of OZCHI 2005, Canberra, 
Australia, pp. 21 – 25  
 
265
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

[4] E. Chang and C. Ma, Implicit speech recognition: making 
speech a first class object on computers. In Proceedings of the 
2nd International Conference on Human Language Technology 
Research. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2002, pp. 349-352  
[5] E. Reategui, E. Boff, and J. A. Campbell, Personalization in 
an interactive learning environment through a virtual character, 
Computers & Education, 51, 2 (2008), pp. 530-544. 
 
[6] H. Walker, Collaborative learning: A working paper. March 
19, 
1997. 
URL: 
http://www.math.grin.edu/~walker/coll-
learning/index.html, last accessed date: 27-jan-11 
 
[7] I. P. Goldstein and M. L. Miller, AI based Personal Learning 
Environments: Directions for Long Term Research, MIT, AI 
Laboratory, 1976 
[8] J. Anttonen and V. Surakka, Emotions and Heart Rate while 
Sitting on a Chair, Proceedings of CHI 2005, ACM Press 
(2005), pp. 491-499 
 
[9] J. Du, Q. Zheng, H. Li, and W. Yuan, 2005, The Research of 
Mining Association Rules Between Personality and Behavior of 
Learner under Web-Based Learning Environment, ICWL, pp. 
406 – 417 
[10] J. P. C. Butz, S. Hua, and B. R. Maguire, A web-based 
bayesian intelligent tutoring system for computer programming. 
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference 
on Web Intelligence, 2004, pp. 77-97 
 
[11] M. B. Ammar, A. M. Alimi, M. Neji, and G. Gouardères, 
Agent-based 
Collaborative 
Affective 
E-learning 
System. 
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Immersive 
Telecommunications, 2007, Session: Immersive system design, 
Article no 2  
 
[12] M. L. Knapp, Nonverbal Communication in Human 
Interaction (2nd Edition), Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., New 
York, 1978  
 
[13] M. R. Lepper, and R. W. Chabay, (1988), Socializing the 
Intelligent Tutor: Bringing Empathy to Computer Tutors, in 
learning issues for intelligent tutoring systems, Springer Verlag, 
New York, pp. 242 – 257 
 
[14] N. G. Aghaee, S. Fatahi, and T. I. Ören, Agents with 
Personality 
and 
Emotional 
Filters 
for 
an 
E-learning 
Environment, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Spring 
simulation 
multiconference, 2008, Session: 2008 poster track, article no:5 
 
[15] N. Roger, A framework for affective intelligent tutoring 
systems, Proceedings of ITHET2006 (2006) 
 
 
[16] R. Dagada, Where have all the Trainers Gone? E-learning 
Strategies and Tools in the Corporate Training Environment, 
Proceedings of SAICSIT 2004, pp. 194 – 203 
 
[17] R. Kaiser and K. Oertel, Emotions in HCI – An Affective 
E-Learning System. Proceedings of the HCSNet workshop on 
Use of vision in human-computer interaction - Volume 56, 
2006, pp. 105 – 106  
 
[18] R. McArthur, Uncovering deep user context from blogs, 
Proceedings of the second workshop on Analytics for noisy 
unstructured text data, 2008, pp. 47-54  
 
[19] R. W. Picard, Affective Computing. The MIT Press, 
(1997), Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 
[20] S. Chaffar and C. Frasson, Using an Emotional Intelligent 
Agent to Improve the Learner‟s Performance, In Social and 
emotional intelligence in learning Environments workshop, 7th 
International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring System, Brazil, 
2004, pp. 37-43 
 
[21] S. D‟Mello, A. Graesser and R. W. Picard, Toward an 
Affect- Sensitive AutoTutor. IEEE Intelligent Systems, volume 
22 issue 44, 2007, pp. 53 - 61 
[22] S. Kerka, Applying Adult Learning Theory: Self-directed 
Learningand Transformational Learning in the Classroom, 
ResearchDigest 
no. 
3, 
2005, 
url: 
http://www.calpro-
online.org/pubs.asp, Last accessed date: 01 – Feb – 2011    
 
[23] S. Klein and V.  Zimmermann, Open Learning 
Environments for Personalised Learning, Learning Technologies 
conference 
2009, 
case 
studies, 
url: 
http://www.learningtechnologies.com.au/index.cfm?action=pape
rs, Last accessed date: 01 – Feb – 2011   
 
[24] T. Christner, 2003. A classroom of one (book). Library 
Journal, 128(1): 130 
[25] U. Wolz, G. Karlsson, J. Palme et al, Computer-mediated 
communication in collaborative educational settings, The 
supplemental proceedings of the conference on Integrating 
technology into computer science education: working group 
reports and supplemental proceedings, pp. 51 – 68 
 
[26] X. Mao and Z. Li, Implementing Emotion-Based User- 
Aware E-Learning, Proceedings of the 27th international 
conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing 
systems, 2009, pp. 3787-3792 
[27] Z. Zeng, M. Pantic, G. I. Roisman and T. S. Huang, A 
Survey of Affect Recognition Methods: Audio, Visual and 
Spontaneous Expressions, IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, volume 31, issue 1, 2009, 
pp. 39 - 58 
 
266
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

