Fear, Feedback, Familiarity… How are These Connected?
– Can familiarity as a design concept applied to digital feedback reduce fear?
Diana Saplacan, Jo Herstad
Department of Informatics
University of Oslo, UiO,
Oslo, Norway
email: {diana.saplacan, jo.herstad}@ifi.uio.no
Abstract—This paper is a reflective paper discussing fear, and
the emotions associated with it, felt by the elderly while using
modern technologies. The pattern of fear emerged from our
initial research activities. The preliminary results presented
here are part of the pre-study phase within the Multimodal
Elderly Care Systems (MECS) project, which focuses on the
design of a safety alarm robot for the elderly. Here, we
explored various design issues that elderly encounter in their
daily interaction with various modern technologies. One of the
explored issues is digital feedback, the subject of this paper.
The aim of our exploration was to look at what potential design
implications that digital feedback may have on the elderly’s
interactions with these technologies, such as triggering the
feeling of fear when using them, and what we could learn from
those when designing a robot safety alarm. Finally, we propose
familiarity as a central design concept for designing feedback.
Keywords-fear;
digital
feedback;
elderly;
modern
technologies; familiarity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we chose to address the feeling of fear, and
the emotions associated with it, felt by the elderly while
using
modern
technologies,
such
as
smartphones and
computers. More specifically, we chose to use here the term
fear as an umbrella term for derivatives emotions, such as
angst, anxiety, concern, doubt, dread, unease, uneasiness,
worry, aversion, fright, phobia, presentiment [1]. We
exemplify this through situations experienced by them, in
their
daily
lives’
interactions
with
these
modern
technologies. Specifically, we focus on situations where the
users do not understand how to perceive the digital feedback
received. This may hinder them to understand correctly these
technologies, as well as discouraging them to use those. We
discuss situations where the feedback provided is improper,
and where there is not provided any feedback at all, e.g.,
lack of feedback.
The preliminary results presented here are part of the pre-
study phase within the Multimodal Elderly Care Systems
(MECS) project, which focuses on the design of a safety
alarm robot for the elderly. We explored elderly’s interaction
with various modern technologies in their daily lives, such as
smartphones and computers. The aim of our exploration is
twofold. On one hand, we look at what potential design
implications that digital feedback may have on the elderly’s
interactions with these technologies, such as triggering the
emotion of fear. We do this by bringing empirical evidence
from our fieldwork. And, on the other hand, we look at what
we could learn from those when designing a safety alarm
robot. There, we propose familiarity as a central design
concept when designing digital feedback.
But why should one focus on the phenomena of
feedback? Introducing modern technologies in the homes of
the elderly, such as robots, requires close scrutiny of the
design of current technologies used by them. Understanding
what issues the elderly experience in their daily lives with
these technologies will help us to develop our understanding
prior to designing new ones, such as a safety alarm robot.
Further, various societal challenges, such as the aging of the
workforce, as shown by [2][3], invoke consequences within
the healthcare field. As for Norway, by 2050, there will be an
increase of 21% in the elderly population [4]. Furthermore,
the active working force will not be able to tackle the
healthcare needs imposed by this increase (ibid p. 20), and
yet among the action plans taken at the European Union’s
level, regarding this societal challenge, is the digitalization of
health through the use of Information Communication
Technologies (ICT’s), so-called eHealth [5]. Moreover,
several studies address directly or indirectly the issue of the
digital divide between users with ICT literacy and those with
reduced ICT literacy. Elderly are often included in the group
of users with reduced ICT literacy as shown in [6]–[9]. Yet,
all of the above yield at how important it is to rethink how
we design new modern technologies, including digital
feedback, for the elderly as the target users.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes briefly the case. Section III introduced the central
concepts used in this paper, feedback, fear, and familiarity,
by looking at what others have done. Section IV provides a
description of the methodology used. Section V presents
preliminary results from the MECS project, whereas Section
VI discusses those, and proposes familiarity as an essential
design concept to be considered when designing digital
feedback for modern technologies. Finally, Section VII
presents the conclusion, a summary of the paper and future
work.
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II.
CASE DESCRIPTION
Multimodal Elderly Care Systems project [10] focuses
on
exploring
ways
of
developing
in-motion
digital
technologies,
such
as
a
safety-alarm
robot,
for
the
independently living elderly (≥65 years). Among our project 
collaborators is Kampen Omsorg Pluss [11], an organization
providing accommodation facilities for the independent
living elderly. It has 91 apartments, where the residents can
rent them on their own, or together with their partner. The
building also has a reception, where the staff is available
24/7, in case of emergencies, or otherwise they arrange the
social, cultural and another type of events for them. In
addition, the facilities have a library, a restaurant publicly
open, a gym, and an open area where usually the residents
would have coffee every evening at 5 PM, presentations,
and performances. As a part of our MECS pre-study, we
have conducted three group interviews (n=3), and several
individual interviews (n=6, only three included in this work,
out of which 1 is a pilot-interview). These research activities
are related to the use of modern technology. We present
some partial results in this paper.
III.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we present three central concepts used in
this paper: digital feedback, fear, as a feeling triggered by
the use of modern technology, and familiarity, proposed as a
possible design concept solution in preventing fear of new
digital technologies.
A.
On Digital Feedback
The term feedback was initially used within control
theory and cybernetics [12] and was described as “the
circularity of action” between “the parts of a dynamic
system” (p. 53). Later, the same term was used within
learning theory, as a form of improving the learning of the
students, or the teaching quality. In this case, the feedback
could refer to a dialogical one, between humans, or between
humans but mediated by systems (e.g., learning platforms),
or between humans and systems, as in human-computer
interaction (HCI) (e.g., getting direct feedback from the
systems). [13] showed five clusters of characteristics of
feedback from learning theories, such as descriptive, task-
related characteristics, time-related, affective and emotional,
as well as characteristics related to its effects on learners (p.
5). Here, we are interested in the affective and emotional
characteristics. Further, according to [14] in [15], within the
HCI field, “feedback refers to a system’s response to users’
action”. Users are here also the learners of the system they
interact with. [16] showed that feedback is important when
errors should be minimized (p. 688-689). Within affective
computing, defined as “computing that relates to, arises
from, or influences emotions” [17, p. 1], feedback is
represented as bio- or multimodal feedback. Bio-feedback is
related to the improvement process, over time, of health and
performance
[18],
where
one
gets
information
(e.g.,
feedback) on this process. Multimodal feedback refers to the
representation of feedback through visuals, audio, haptic, or
video forms etc., and it is often discussed in relation to
design for vulnerable groups [19]–[21]. This type of
feedback is often discussed as a part of affective computing.
Sometimes, feedback becomes affective by design through
its multimodality, whereas in other cases it becomes
affective as a result of how the user experiences it. In this
paper, we look at how visual feedback becomes affective
feedback,
when
the
users,
here
the
elderly,
do
not
understand it. As an effect of the visual feedback received in
their interaction with the modern technology, they start
having feelings of fear when using it. The term is used here
as an umbrella term for the feelings associated with it. In the
next subsection, we explain it further.
B.
On Fear
Within the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI),
one of the areas dealing with the notion of fear is affective
computing. [17] classified fear as one of the basic emotions
(p. 540, fig. 3), among the eight: joy, acceptance, surprise,
sadness,
disgust,
anger,
anticipation,
and
fear.
Etymologically, fear can be “the emotion of pain or
uneasiness caused by the sense of impending danger, or by
the prospect of some possible evil.” [22]. Among its
synonyms are angst, anxiety, concern, doubt, dread, unease,
uneasiness, worry, aversion, fright, phobia, presentiment
[1].
Multiple studies on learning show that individuals, being
young or old, fear to deal with modern technologies. This
occurs either due to their lack of motivation or interest, a
high threshold between the knowledge possessed and the
challenge at hand, or due to the health condition of the
individuals. In [23] it was identified that obstacles in the
learning process affect their interest in learning. Here, if the
individuals’ motivation is sufficiently strong, they will
eventually learn the technologies, whereas if it is lacking,
there is a lower chance for learning to deal with those. [24]
shows that emotional factors affect elderly’s technology
acceptance in their homes, and a technology shall fulfill
their “functional, emotional, and social needs” (p. 711,
emphasis
added). [25]
emphasizes
the
importance
of
motivation, that will determine the elderly people use
modern technology, such as smartphones, computers, or
robots. To this, the author adds: the importance of the
elderly’s health condition, in terms of mood and depression;
self-efficacy
and
coping
when
dealing
with
different
situations, i.e., the elderly shall feel they have a locus of
control
over
their
environment
(here
the
digital
environment);
and
the
importance
of
wellbeing
and
happiness (positive computing), a subfield of affective
computing, which deals with “the design and development
of technology to support psychological wellbeing and
human potential.” [26, p. 2]. However, in this study, we do
not deal with modeling of fear as explained in other
psychological or medical studies [27], [28], neither with
specific ranges of it as in [29]. Can then digital feedback
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

motivate or demotivate the elderly to use the modern
technologies?
We
describe,
in
the
next
subsection,
familiarity, a concept that we propose as central when
designing for the elderly users.
C.
On familiarity
Familiarity is often described as “a state” that feels
“friendly or intimate, a friendly interaction; close friendship,
intimacy” [22]. The concept is borrowed by several
researchers from Heidegger’s Being and Time [30, p. 405]
(354), which describes it as “[knowing] its way about” (p.
405
(354)).
[31]
argues
that
familiarity
consists
of
“dispositions to respond to situations in appropriate ways”
(p. 117). Later, [32] has used this concept to explain that
familiarity
with
technology
“has
been
found
to
be
something important – if not crucial – in the general
relationship that people have with it and their attitudes
towards it”. Now, this becomes even more essential for the
elderly’s relationship with technology, as they might not
have had the same opportunities of experiencing it during
their “development years” (p. 464). The study presented by
[16]
was
conducted
with
50
people
with
different
backgrounds and showed that “familiarity is the key” when
learning to deal with digital technologies, being “a form of
understanding”, of “getting involved” with the technology,
without requiring an extra effort when “doing things” (p.
468-469). Similarly, [33] have used this concept in their
study of older adults learning to use computers. The
authors’ advise that one should aim for “human-centered
design” (compare to “user-centered-” and “technology-
centered design”), where the design of technologies shall
“aim to build on the prior skills, self-perceptions and
aspirations of older people as competent individuals” (p.
29). In the same way, [34] describes familiarity as the
“engagement, understanding, and an intimate or close
relationship between the [humans] and the technology” (p.
89). Here, the authors propose implicitly to look at positive
computing as salutogenesis, as a way of focusing on the
factors that contribute to well-being and health, rather than
“treating” or “fixing” a disability, incapability or weakness
(p. 91).
IV.
METHODOLOGY
According to [35], interpretive research is afforded
through “language, consciousness and shared meanings” (p.
2). Boland (1985) in (ibid) says that “the philosophical base
of
interpretive
research
is
hermeneutics
and
phenomenology”. Further, we follow one of Ricoeur’s
thesis [36], that hermeneutics builds upon phenomenology
(p. 85). We interpret the textual data that
using
a
hermeneutical approach. We explain the data gathering- and
data analysis methods as it follows.
A.
Data gathering
During our pre-study phase, we were particularly
interested in the participant’s own understanding of the
concept of robots, and other modern technologies such as
smartphones and tablets, as well as their experiences with
those. We have conducted multiple research activities,
gathering data through various research methods, including
three
semi-structured
group
interviews,
a
pilot
semi-
structured
interview,
and
individual
semi-structured
interviews. The details are shown in Table I below.
TABLE 1. OVERVIEW PARTICIPANTS
Research activity
Number of
participants
Gender
distribution
3 group interviews
15
8 females, 7 males
Pilot interview
1
Female
Individual
interviews
2
Female
Total
18
The participants are elderly (≥65 years), part of the 
MECS
project,
recruited
through
MECS’
partner
organization. Some of the participants participated in
multiple research activities, whereas some did not. The
participants
have
different
backgrounds
and
present
different levels of interest in modern technologies. No
family members were interviewed.
The interviews covered
multiple types of modern
technologies. The same interview guide was used for the
first and second group interview. A pilot interview guide
was then developed, and together with the initial group
interview guide, served later as a base for the third group
interview. These were later used as a base for the individual
interviews.
Complementary to these, we have attended informal
meetings with the elderly at the Kampen Omsorg Pluss’
facilities, and other relevant presentations, in order to
familiarize
ourselves
with
the
environment
and
the
residents, e.g., the elderly. However, for this contribution,
we do not cover all the themes and pattern found in our
material. We focused instead on the pattern explored in this
paper, digital feedback and fear.
B.
Ethics
This study is part of the MECS-project. MECS is
complying with the ethical guidelines from the Norwegian
Center for Research Data (reference number: 50689). The
participants
were
recruited
through
MECS’s
partner
organization. They were given information about the study,
prior the study started, through a formal presentation. Prior
starting the research activities, the information was given
again, and the participants chose to participate on a
voluntary basis after reading the informed consent. They
were informed that they can withdraw at any time, without
any consequences for them. The data is stored on TSD
(Services for Sensitive Data) at University of Oslo, Norway.
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C.
Data analysis
Our data analysis can be structured into two types: (1)
through the researchers’ positionality, and (2) through a
thorough analysis following several stages of filtering. Both
are described below.
(1) Positionality of the researchers and data analysis.
The researchers are considered here non-detached from
the data gathered during the research activities, such that
their positionality influence at some degree the results [37].
For instance, there were considered here researchers’ first
impressions on the data gathered on how elderly understand
robots and their experiences with various technologies.
These types of first impressions would result in post
research activity notes that were immediate to the field
activity. [38] calls this method headnotes as [39], which,
according to the author, describe “experiences, impressions,
encounters, and evaluations that are continuously present in
[the] memory” (p. 32). In the same way, in MECS, the
researchers would either discuss the perceived outcomes of
the activity, immediate to it or write down those in the form
of reflections. These would be later used in (2).
(2) The second type of analysis is a thorough one, that
follows several stages.
According to
[40], “analysis is less a
matter of
something emerging from the data, of simply finding what
is there; it is more fundamental a process of creating what is
there by constantly thinking about the import of previously
recorded events and meanings" (p. 168). In this way, the
process of analysis started already while being in the field,
as a form of doing some preliminary work [37, p. 134], as
described in (1). This has been followed by a multiple stage
analysis process, where the data went through some
analytical filters. We illustrate the process of data analysis
as a three-tier process, as shown in Figure 1.
The first tier embeds the research activities (annotated as
RA):
group
interviews,
pilot-interview,
and
individual
interviews. The filled-in rounded squares, at the end of each
RA, represent the headnotes, or preliminary-work did right
after each activity in the form of discussions and reflections,
as explained in (1). The second-tier is described as open-
coding. Here, the raw data became textual data, in the form
of transcribed interviews, notes, or interview summaries.
Several of the researchers involved in MECS project has
analyzed hermeneutically the data, on their own, and created
codes through open coding, by reading the material “line-by-
line to identify and formulate all ideas, themes, or issues they
suggest, no matter how varied and disparate" [40, p. 143].
This resulted in a variety of scattered patterns, on one hand,
due to our variation in research activities, and on the other
hand, due to researchers’ own research interests that had
some influence on the research activities and their outcome.
For instance, the researchers analyzed the data on their own,
and thereafter share the analysis both through documents and
orally, during a formal analysis meeting. However, this is
valid for the first two group interviews, whereas the rest
were analyzed independently by the main author of this
paper. Noticing that feedback and fear were present patterns
in the data, but also due to own interest, the main author of
this paper chose to go through the data again, but also to
analyze further the next research activities. Some of the
researchers were either not part of the next research
activities, or other research areas to focus on, therefore we
cannot claim an inter-rater reliability of the study. However,
following [38], validity, in this case, is not of "a particular
concern",
as
the
study
focuses
on
gathering
user-
requirements for the safety-alarm robot. Therefore, one
would need first to get insights into the participants'
understanding of modern technologies before creating the
safety alarm robot (ibid, p. 212). In addition, some relations
were developed between the RA, in an iterative way, based
on the findings from previous activities. This is not shown in
Figure 1, but a concrete such example is the understanding of
what a robot is. The elderly understood the concept of a
robot, either as something they have seen on TV’s, such as a
humanoid robot, or semi-autonomous vacuum cleaners and
lawnmower – this is what a robot is for them. For limiting
our scope, we do not cover these relations here, although we
are aware of those. In the third tier of the analysis process,
the main author of this paper went again through the whole
research material collected, for partially merging the data
collected in order to get a holistic view of it, and partially,
with the purpose of a second filtering and re-coding. In the
end, based on the recurrent pattern available, fear has been
selected to be discussed in this paper. In Figure 2, we show
the details of each of the tiers.
RA1
RA2
RAn
1st tier
…
Open
coding
Open
coding
Open
coding
Re-coding and creation of a pool
of recurrent patterns
2
nd tier
3
rd tier
Pattern
selection
Figure 1. Data Analysis Process
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF FEEDBACK AND FEAR
We illustrate in the next paragraphs two types of
situations from our research: technology providing improper
feedback where the user (here the elderly) does not know
how to proceed, and the technology not providing any
feedback at all, e.g., lack of feedback. We showcase each of
these through real-life situations experienced by the elderly
in their daily interaction with modern technologies, i.e.,
stories from the elderly.
A.
Situation 1: Providing improper feedback
“SMS shows full. Do I need to buy a new phone?” - One
of the participants tells about her experience with the mobile
phone and the feedback of SMS - full blinking icon. She
would tell that she is not able to store any new photos
received from her children or grandchildren. The participant
feared that she had to buy a new phone and losing the
photos because of the feedback is shown by the phone.
Regarding the design issue here, we can look at how the
elderly may perceive the digital feedback gotten from the
technology.
“I couldn’t start it—but it was so much more.. among
others, the screen.. disappeared and so..” - Another
participant explains her experience with a semi-autonomous
vacuum cleaner which can be controlled by an app. During a
power outage, the app controlling the domestic robot
stopped working. The participant got a message that the app
“cannot connect to the cloud services”.
“Where is the ‘No’ option when updating software?” -
Another situation described by one of the participants is
related to the feedback received when a software shall be
updated. The participant explained that she is tired of
getting constant updates, and points out that an exit option
does not exist. She would get either the option ‘Now’ or
‘Later’, but not a ‘No’ option. She contacted the company
providing the operating system via a handwritten letter and
asked about this option. To her surprise, got called up by the
customer service, and got offered help on how to deal with
the two options available, ‘Now’ and ‘Later’, but the
company had no regard in planning to introduce a No-
option. The participant explained that she knew how to deal
with the updates, but what she wanted was that the feedback
should embed a ‘No’-option alternative. Regarding this
design issue, this has to do with the continuous update of
software and the point of view of the elderly on these
“never-ending” updates. This example illustrates a situation
where feedback messages do not provide enough options.
“It was just standing still there. Or when I pressed on it
there it says something about cloud-service. It didn’t do
anything, but I thought you will come tomorrow” - Another
participant explains a situation with controlling a semi-
autonomous vacuum cleaner through an app, which did not
provide sufficient feedback. Using the wording “cloud-
services” can confuse a user not-knowing what it means.
The user, in this case, relied on the researchers help to come
along the next days.
B.
Situation 2: The software does not provide any
feedback at all, e.g., lack of feedback
“You were terribly afraid of doing something wrong” -
In one of our interviews sessions, one participant describes
that when she learns using new technologies, she is so afraid
of doing something wrong. A concrete example is that the
technology, being it smartphone or tablet, does not provide
any feedback on how to “get back to basics”: “so you were
very afraid that .. I did not feel I could come back to the
base. But I was afraid to do something wrong.”
By this, the participant means that the applications are
built in such a way, that one is expected to have that
intuitive knowledge, but for new learners, it can be difficult
to understand how to navigate within an app, and one can
easily “get stuck”. She explained about her experience when
using a streaming TV-channel app and its search function:
“I think now I will do this… Huuuu (exhales heavy) and I do
not get it.. and there are many of you who have explained to
me. (laughs) But it goes so fast!”.
1st tier
Data collection

Group interviews

Pilot-interview

Interviews

Headnotes – summaries, reflections, own notes
post research activities
2
nd tier
Open coding
Step 1: read through each transcription/participant
and write down notes (on paper).
Step 2: organize the notes (relevant) in a table
Step 3: read through the whole document again and
mark with colors the themes
Step 4: gather the identified themes.
Step 5: write down other reflections and eventually
connect with previous observations
3
rd tier
Pattern
selection
Fear
Pool of
recurrent
patterns

Fear

Learning

Robots

Functionality

Feeback

Size

...

Figure 2. Data Analysis Process – Detailed View
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

“I have an example absolutely horrible. I had to print
something on 3 pages.. and the printer goes fine.. and it
prints and it prints and it prints. I cannot afford it. In the
end, I had a lot of printed files..” - Another participant
explains an experience with a printing machine, where no
feedback was provided at all. She had to call an organization
that provides IT services for the elderly users, in order to be
able to stop the machine. Another participant agreeing on
the story, says: “It can get so difficult when one does not
understand [what’s happening].”
VI.
DISCUSSION: FEEDBACK AND FAMILIARITY
In this section, we unpack the pattern of fear emerged
from our data, based on its derivatives, e.g., associated
emotions. The pattern is unpacked with regard to digital
feedback, and how it is experienced by the elderly. We
assigned this based on our phenomenological interpretation
and understanding of what has been communicated. This is
strictly our phenomenological interpretation, and we are
aware that other interpretations are possible. But first, we
typecast the situations described to the corresponding
derivative of the emotion of fear, as shown in Table II.
We can observe from concrete situations presented in the
previous section and typecast in Table 1 above how
feedback, from digital technologies, being it improper, or
lacking completely, may generate at some degree the
emotion of fear, or feelings associated with it. This is due to
either not knowing what happened, or how to proceed
further.
[42, p. 75] propose familiarity as a design aspect in order
to enhance the usability of the digital technology, pointing
out that “usability alone does not guarantee that the
technology will be used (Hirsch, Forlizzi et. al 2000)” (p.
86). Even in our study, the aspect of usability was indicated,
but feeling unsafe (aka feeling fear) is still an indicator of
using or not the technology. For instance, one of the
participants points out on his concrete experiences with new
digital technologies: “As soon as I feel unsafe regarding the
technology, I put it aside.”’; “First, I do not need it to.. go
[meaning learning it] in deep.. and secondly, I am afraid…
I feel unsafe, yes..”
Hence, here we could identify two aspects: on one hand
the aspect of familiarity through the feeling of safety, and
functionality, the value provided by the technology in itself.
But concrete experiences have to be complemented by
the allocation of the ‘appropriate resources’ if one should
follow the zone of proximal development (ZPD) theory on
learning [43]. What if the only ‘appropriate resources’ might
be the technology in itself, or as [31, p. 431] puts it: “~The
medium is the message.”? Specifically, in our case, digital
feedback can be considered as a carrier of design concepts,
such as familiarity. As we show in our findings, feedback
might be either improper or lacking completely. This also
implies
that
the
elderly’s
concrete
experiences
with
technologies are not supported through design. But how can
familiarity be applied to in practice to digital feedback? We
discuss further both situations described in Section VI
Preliminary Results.
A.
Familiarity with a design concept for situation 1) –
providing improper feedback
First, a solution for providing proper feedback is, for
instance, through clear messages, avoiding the use of single
modalities of feedback representations, such as the blinking
icon for showing the status of full messages. Although, there
are situations when this type of feedback is supported by a
text informing the user about “full messages”, it does not
guide the user on how to proceed further. One solution is to
decrease the gap, e.g., the zone of proximal development,
between what the user knows, and what has to be achieved,
i.e., deleting messages, by providing proper feedback.
Specifically, we mean by proper feedback, descriptive and
relevant feedback: this can simply be done through a text
that points out how to proceed further, as for instance: “SMS
full. You need to delete some of your SMS before you can
receive new ones.”; or by including more step-by-step
guidelines: “SMS full. You can solve this by 1. Go to your
SMS messages. 2. Click long on one of the SMS from the
list. 3. Mark the checkbox of those SMS you wish to delete.
4. Select delete.” In this way, we decrease the gap between
what is not familiar to the user, and what it is.
Second, one can provide proper feedback, by avoiding
the use of technical terminologies, such as “it cannot
connect to the cloud-services”. Many of the elderly do not
know what a “cloud-service” is. Using such technical
terminology discourages them from using the technology.
Instead, one could build upon the concept of familiarity,
starting from the assumption that one does not know what
the “cloud service” is. This can be done either through
simple visualization or animations or through further
explanations in plain English. Second, this type of feedback
can be supported by additional alternatives, showing step-
by-step how one could connect to the service: “Have you
Situation
Typecast
The emotion of fear and its
derivatives
Situation 1
Not
providing
proper feedback
Concern (here for
buying a new phone),
doubt (from getting a
black screen), unease,
uneasiness and
presentiment when the
technology provides
improper feedback
Situation 2
Not
providing
any feedback at
all
Angst, anxiety, concern
unease, uneasiness,
fright, phobia, worry –
when there is lack of
feedback
TABLE II TYPECAST SITUATIONS – AND FEAR
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

checked out your internet connection – is your router turned
on? Go to..”, without assuming that the users know how to
get around, giving them step-by-step feedback on how to
proceed further.
Third, in the case of not providing enough alternatives
example, one can provide proper feedback through giving
more explanations on why one has to proceed in a certain
way, e.g., such as updating the software when the “No”-
option is not available. Another way of doing it is through
actually making these updates invisible to the user. In that
case, the interaction should be robust enough, so the user
does not end up in not getting any feedback at all, as
described in Situation 2), which is also discussed next.
B.
Familiarity with a design concept for situation 2)- not
providing feedback at all, e.g., lack of feedback
One can provide proper feedback before the breakdown
situation, when the user gets stuck, by indicating the user
where it is, or by preventing such a situation and offering
feedback in time. This can be done by building upon the
familiarity of the user – what does the user might not know,
and how can the design prevent breakdown situations? This
way of enhancing the user experience in its interaction with
modern technologies is sometimes referred as feed-forward
[40][41]. This approach relates to showing the way forward
on how the user shall proceed, prior an event occurred as an
effect of the user’s interaction with the modern technology.
In the next paragraphs, we provide a few examples.
First, a solution example is used for instance in Android
Operating Systems, when it is required in a text field, an
input from the user. Some designs allow so-called hints,
which
are
non-editable
texts
that
are
shown
in
the
background of a text field, indicating the user what to enter
in the respective field. This way of providing feedback to
the user counteracts eventual deviations in the user’s
interaction with the technology, prior to the interaction
occurring.
Second, another example is shown by autofill functions,
for instance, in a web-browser, where the text fields are
filled in with information, based on historical data – name,
email addresses, home address, zip code, phone number etc.
that have been used as input on that respective computer.
Third, a similar example is also the auto-complete input
function, that learns based on the user’s past inputs.
The second and third examples of built-in feedback are
examples, on supporting the user interaction with the
technology, on the go. As the technology learns more about
its user, it can also give appropriate feedback for that
specific user. Appropriate feedback is based in this case on
elements that are already familiar to the user.
These type of approaches are also often discussed in
literature of universal design, as simple and intuitive use,
and as perceptible information (see principles 3 and 4 in
[46]–[48]).
C.
Some final reflections and wrap-up
One
study,
[49]
shows
that
feedback
increases
performance
encourages
reflection
“by
increasing
knowledge and awareness of behaviors and their impact”,
and has motivational consequences (p. 63). In this way,
feedback, not only encourages what [50] calls ‘reflection on
action’ on “evaluating [own] past behavior”, but also
‘reflection-in-action’, “the analysis of behavior as it occurs”
[49]. One should take into account feedback’s properties
such as: the technology, the content, timing, modality,
duration, frequency, presentation, user experience [49], as
well as spatiality between the user and the technology in
itself, which is important when interacting with robots, as
reported by [15]. Could then it be so that if the technology
embeds a better design of feedback (compare to improper,
or lacking completely as shown in this study), would
eventually contribute to the learning experience of the user
(e.g. elderly)? We argue that if users such as elderly would
be provided with enough and proper feedback, with respect
to the properties enumerated earlier, the zone of proximal
development will provide the user with sufficient resources
for the learner, in such way that the learner will feel safer to
use the technology. In its turn, this will contribute to the
familiarity of the user with the technology, reducing the
threshold between the user’s prior knowledge and the
challenge at hand.
VII.
CONCLUSION AN D FUTURE WORK
In
this
paper,
we
have
presented:
what
affective
implications the design of digital feedback in modern
technologies may have on the elderly users while they use
those, such as triggering the emotion of fear; and proposed
familiarity as a central design concept to be considered when
designing for the elderly users. We started the paper by
introducing the reader to three central concepts: digital
feedback, fear and the emotions associated with it, and
familiarity. Digital feedback is presented here as visual
feedback received by the elderly in their interaction with the
modern technologies. We argued that feedback can be
affective by its design, through multimodality, or become
affective as a result of how it is experienced by the users,
here the elderly. We exemplified this through the use of the
umbrella term for fear and the feelings associated with it,
e.g., derivatives, such as angst, anxiety, concern, doubt,
dread, unease, uneasiness, worry, aversion, fright, phobia,
presentiment [1]. After presenting our methodology, as an
interpretative phenomenological one, the methods used and
our analysis, we showcased this through empirical data.
Thereafter, we discussed theoretically familiarity as a design
concept that should be considered when designing feedback
in modern technologies. We argue that having familiarity in
mind when designing new technologies, can bridge the gap
between the elderly’s zone of proximal development and the
challenge at hand while learning new technologies. Yet,
specifically, we encourage to consider feedback as the
carrier of the familiarity design concept, which would
support the elderly’s learning process of interacting with new
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

modern technologies. However, we do not address here the
issue of cognitive impairments, or representations of visual
feedback through other visual ways (e.g. animations). We
propose this be further investigated through concepts such as
universal design. Specifically, we intend to explore this
further through focusing on the principle five of universal
design, namely tolerance for error, and build further upon it.
Based on our theoretical findings, we hope, in the future, to
contribute to the design of modern technologies that will
encompass the patterns explored here. Based on our reported
work so far in the MECS project, we plan to build further
upon familiarity design concept while designing the safety
alarm robot for the elderly. More concrete, in a second phase
of the project, we introduced semi-autonomous vacuum
cleaners robots in the home of the elderly, in order to learn
more about their daily interaction with a robot. The partial
results presented here, as well as the second phase of the
project, are part of the MECS project phase where we get
insights on the elderly’s understanding of robots and welfare
technologies, as well as of the gathering requirements phase.
We plan to continue our work in this sense, in order to get a
deeper understanding of the pattern explored here.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was part of the MECS project funded by the
Norwegian Research Council IKTPluss Program (Grant
agreement no: 247697). We would like to thank our project
funders, partners, especially to Kampen Omsorg Pluss, the
project manager, Jim Tørresen, colleagues (Trenton Schulz
and Rebekka Soma, as well as to the Robotics and Intelligent
Systems Group at UiO), and to students involved in this
project (Magnus Søyland, Vegard Dønnem Søyseth).
REFERENCES
[1]
Dictionary.com,
“Thesaurus.com
|
Meanings,
and
Definitions of Words at Thesaurus.com,” Thesaurus.com,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.thesaurus.com/,
http://www.thesaurus.com/. [Retrieved: November 2017].
[2]
Eurostat, “Population structure and aging - Statistics
Explained,” Population structure and aging, 20-Jul-2017.
[Online]. Available: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Population_structure_and_ageing.
[Retrieved: November 2017].
[3]
SSB, “Next million reached set to be the fastest,” ssb.no,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ssb.no/en/befolkning/statistikker/folkfram/aar/2
016-06-21. [Retrieved: November 2017].
[4]
J. Ramm, “Health and care. Use of services among the
elderly,”
ssb.no,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ssb.no/en/helse/artikler-og-publikasjoner/eldres-
bruk-av-helse-og-omsorgstjenester.
[Retrieved:
January
2018].
[5]
European Commision, “eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020:
Innovative healthcare for the 21st century,” Digital Single
Market,
07-Dec-2012.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ehealth-
action-plan-2012-2020-innovative-healthcare-21st-century.
[Retrieved: January, 2018].
[6]
J. A. Delello and R. R. McWhorter, “Reducing the Digital
Divide: Connecting Older Adults to iPad Technology,” J.
Appl. Gerontol., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 3–28, Jan. 2017.
[7]
Y.-H. Wu, S. Damnée, H. Kerhervé, C. Ware, and A.-S.
Rigaud, “Bridging the digital divide in older adults: a study
from an initiative to inform older adults about new
technologies,” Clin. Interv. Aging, vol. 10, pp. 193–201,
Jan. 2015.
[8]
T. Halbach and T. Schulz, “MobileSage - A Prototype
Based
Case
Study
for
Delivering
Context-Aware,
Personalized, On-Demand Help Content,” presented at the
CENTRIC 2013, The Sixth International Conference on
Advances
in
Human-oriented
and
Personalized
Mechanisms,
Technologies,
and
Services,
2014,
vol.
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, 7,
nos. 1–2, pp. 267–278.
[9]
M. Anerson and A. Perrin, “1. Technology use among
seniors,” Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech,
[Online]:
http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/05/17/technology-use-
among-seniors/, [Retrieved: January 2018].
[10]
“MECS,” Multimodal Elderly Care Systems (MECS), About
the
project,
17-Oct-2016.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.mn.uio.no/ifi/english/research/groups/robin/rese
arch-projects/mecs/. [Retrieved: January 2018].
[11]
KO+,
“Kampen
Omsorg+ -
KirkensBymisjon,” 2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.bymisjon.no/Virksomheter/Kampen-omsorg/.
[Accessed: 24-Mar-2017].
[12]
W. R. Ashby, An Introduction to Cybernetics. London,
U.K.: Chapman & Hall LTD, 1957.
[13]
M. Thurlings, M. Vermeulen, T. Bastiaens, and S. Stijnen,
“Understanding feedback: A learning theory perspective,”
Educ. Res. Rev., vol. 9, no. Supplement C, pp. 1–15, Jun.
2013.
[14]
B. Shneiderman, Designing the User Interface: Strategies
for Effective Human-computer Interaction. Boston, MA,
USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.,
1986.
[15]
D. Saplacan and J. Herstad, “A Quadratic Anthropocentric
Perspective
on
Feedback
-
Using
Proxemics
as
a
Framework,” in Lynn Hall; Tom Flint; Suzy O’Hara & Phil
Turner (ed.), Proceedings of the 31st International BCS
Human
Computer
Interaction
Conference
(HCI
2017).
British Computer Society (BCS). 1. Sunderland,
U.K., 03-Jul-2017.
[16]
C.
Lewis
and
D.
A.
Norman,
“Human-computer
Interaction,” R. M. Baecker, J. Grudin, W. A. S. Buxton,
and S. Greenberg, Eds. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1995, pp. 686–697.
[17]
R. W. Picard, “Affective Computing in M.I.T Media
Laboratory
Perceptual
Computing
Section
Technical
Report,” MIT Media Laboratory, Perceptual Computing,
Cambridge, MA 02139, Technical Report 321, 1995.
[18]
L. Chittaro and R. Sioni, “Affective computing vs. affective
placebo: Study of a biofeedback-controlled game for
relaxation training,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol. 72, no.
8–9, pp. 663–673, Aug. 2014.
[19]
Akshita, H. Alagarai Sampath, B. Indurkhya, E. Lee, and Y.
Bae, “Towards Multimodal Affective Feedback: Interaction
Between Visual and Haptic Modalities,” in Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 2043–
2052.
[20]
M. Kächele et al., “On Annotation and Evaluation of Multi-
modal Corpora in Affective Human-Computer Interaction,”
in Multimodal Analyses enabling Artificial Agents in
Human-Machine Interaction, 2014, pp. 35–44.
[21]
M. Schels, M. Kächele, M. Glodek, D. Hrabal, S. Walter,
and F. Schwenker, “Using unlabeled data to improve
classification
of
emotional
states
in
human-computer
interaction,” J. Multimodal User Interfaces, vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 5–16, Mar. 2014.
[22]
OED, “fear, n.1,” Oxford English Dictionary Online.
Oxford University Press, [Retrieved: January 2018]
[23]
G. Boulton-Lewis, “Education and Learning for the Elderly:
Why, How, What,” Educational Gerontology. pp. 228–231,
2010.
[24]
M. Díaz, J. Saez-Pons, M. Heerink, and C. Angulo,
“Emotional factors in robot-based assistive services for
elderly at home,” in 2013 IEEE RO-MAN, 2013, pp. 711–
716.
[25]
J. Gallego-Perez, M. Lohse, and V. Evers, “Robots to
motivate elderly people: Present and future challenges,” in
2013 IEEE RO-MAN, 2013, pp. 685–690.
[26]
R. A. Calvo and D. Peters, Positive Computing: Technology
for Well-Being and Human Potential. The MIT Press, 2014.
[27]
J. Lethem, P. D. Slade, J. D. G. Troup, and G. Bentley,
“Outline of a fear-avoidance model of exaggerated pain
perception—I,” Behav. Res. Ther., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 401–
408, Jan. 1983.
[28]
J. J. L. M. Boselie and J. W. S. Vlaeyen, “Broadening the
fear-avoidance model of chronic pain?,” Scand. J. Pain, vol.
17, pp. 176–177, Oct. 2017.
[29]
P. J. Lang and L. M. McTeague, “The anxiety disorder
spectrum,” Anxiety Stress Coping, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 5–25,
Jan. 2009.
[30]
M. Heidegger, Being and time. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell
Publishers Ltd, 1967.
[31]
H.
Dreyfus,
Being-in-the-world:
A
Commentary
on
Heidegger’s Being and Time, Division I. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1991.
[32]
G. Van de Walle, P. Turner, and E. Davenport, “A study of
familiarity,” in Human-Computer Interaction-INTERACT,
2003, vol. 3, pp. 463–70.
[33]
P. Turner and G. van de Walle, “Familiarity as a basis for
universal design,” Gerontechnology, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 150–
159, Jan. 2006.
[34]
J. Herstad and H. Holone, “Making Sense of Co-creative
Tangibles
Through
the
Concept
of
Familiarity,”
in
Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design, New
York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 89–98.
[35]
M.
Myers
D.,
“Qualitative
Research
in
Information
Systems,” MISQ Discovery, 1997.
[36]
P. Ricoeur, “Phenomenology and Hermeneutics,” Noûs, vol.
9, no. 1, pp. 85–102, 1975.
[37]
M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing Ethnographies. SAGE
Publications, Inc., 2007.
[38]
G. Verne, “‘The winners are those who have used the old
paper form’. On citizens and automated public services,”
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2015.
[39]
S. Ottenberg, “Thirty Years of Fieldnotes: Changing
Relationships to the text,” in The Making of Anthropology,
R. Sanjek, Cornell University Press, 1990, pp. 139–160.
[40]
R. M. Emerson, R. I. Fretz, and L. L. Shaw, “Processing
Fieldnotes: Coding and Memoing (Chapter 6),” in Writing
Ethnographic Fieldnotes, Chicago, and London: University
of Chicago Press, 1995, pp. 142–168.
[41]
J. Lazar, J. H. Feng, and H. Hochheiser, Research Methods
In Human-Computer Interaction. West Sussex, United
Kingdom: Jon Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2010.
[42]
S. G. Joshi and H. Bråthen, “Supporting new interactions
with
past
experiences anchored
in
materials,” IADIS
International
Journal
on
Computer
Science
and
Information Systems, vol. 2, 11 vols. pp. 74–89, 2016.
[43]
B.
Nardi
and
J.
Harris,
“Strangers
and
Friends:
Collaborative Play in World of Warcraft,” in Proceedings of
the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, New York, NY, USA, 2006,
pp. 149–158.
[44]
G. Freitag, M. Tränkner, and M. Wacker, “Enhanced Feed-
forward
for
a
User
Aware
Multi-touch
Device,”
in
Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design, New
York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 578–586.
[45]
M. B. Alonso, J. Stienstra, and R. Dijkstra, “Brush and
Learn: Transforming Tooth Brushing Behavior Through
Interactive
Materiality,
a
Design
Exploration,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
8th
International
Conference
on
Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction, New York,
NY, USA, 2013, pp. 113–120.
[46]
Centre
for
Excellence
in
Universal
Design,
“The
7
Principles | Centre for Excellence in Universal Design,”
2014. [Online]. Available: http://universaldesign.ie/What-
is-Universal-Design/The-7-Principles/.[Retrieved: January,
2018].
[47]
North Carolina State University, “Guidelines for Use of the
Principles of Universal Design.” NCSU, revised 2002-1999.
[48]
“Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/.
[Retrieved: January, 2018].
[49]
S. Hermsen, J. Frost, R. J. Renes, and P. Kerkhof, “Using
feedback through digital technology to disrupt and change
habitual behavior: A critical review of current literature,”
Comput. Hum. Behav., vol. 57, pp. 61–74, Apr. 2016.
[50]
D. A. Schön, The reflective practitioner: how professionals
think in action. New York: Basic Books, 1983.
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

