Introduction and Evaluation of an Alternative Training Approach as Indicator of 
Performance Improvement in Martial Arts with the Help of Kinematic Motion 
Analysis Using Motion Capture 
Leonie Laskowitz 
Technical University Würzburg-Schweinfurt  
Leonie.Laskowitz@thws.de 
Würzburg, Germany  
Nicholas Müller 
Technical University Würzburg-Schweinfurt  
Nicholas.Müller@thws.de 
Würzburg, Germany  
 
 
Abstract— There are numerous areas in which we can 
optimize ourselves and our lives in a wide variety of ways. 
One area is sports, where coaches, athletes and sports 
scientists are working on their training methods and still 
researching innovative methods that will bring lasting 
success. This study focuses on kinematic motion analysis 
using 
motion 
capture 
(MoCap), 
a 
technology 
for 
implementing human motion in a virtual environment. The 
goal is to introduce a training approach in the combat sport 
of Muay Thai that will promote performance improvement 
in athletes. The study deals with three different training 
approaches and two different assessment methods. For this, 
15 participants took part in the study and trained three 
Muay Thai techniques: straight punch, front kick and 
roundhouse kick. The study shows that a training approach 
should be individualized to enhance athlete performance. In 
any case, technologies help generate high-quality data sets 
that 
provide 
detailed 
insight 
into 
nuances 
in 
the 
incorrectness of a movement. In addition to fairness and 
objectivity, visual feedback promotes internalization and 
contributes to self-based observational learning. Especially 
for highly complex movements, motion capture supports 
athletes' performance growth. 
Keywords 
– 
Technique 
improvements; 
performance 
enhancement; training approach; kinematic motion analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The original need for motion capture arose in the 
animation and film industry, where human walking was to 
be realistically imitated. Today, motion capture systems 
are used in biomechanics to perform various gait analyses 
for medical purposes. Not only medicine but also sports 
are interested in this deeper understanding of diverse 
movements. Injury prevention, performance enhancement, 
technique improvement, and objective assessments are 
driving numerous coaches, judges, and athletes to embrace 
this new way of motion capture. Future scenarios range 
from new training approaches to risk reduction during and 
after rehabilitation, to virtual reality implementations for 
remote analysis. Reliable analytics, provided by different 
vendors in various forms, are indispensable. Too few 
feedback methods yet use cutting-edge technologies, 
though these can lead to greater effectiveness and 
efficiency. It is a matter of adopting and establishing new 
practices in the training environment. To help learners 
improve and alert them to errors, constant feedback is 
crucial. Current methods used by coaches to evaluate 
athletes' performance are neither efficient nor adapted to 
technological advances in certain sports. For the most part, 
videos of each team member or student must be analyzed 
individually to provide feedback [1]. Especially in martial 
arts, precision, speed, and coordination are crucial. As 
Muay-Thai is a part of martial art, there are many 
difficulties by analyzing the movement of the students 
compared to other sports, as described in the following: 
With the naked eye of a coach, the fast, dynamic 
movement sequences can hardly be reliably and accurately 
detected, tracked, and measured. In addition, most of the 
time a grandmaster has to control several students at the 
same time. It is a great challenge to give each student the 
same attention and thus to improve their performance 
rapidly and sustainably. The aim of this study is to find out 
how the intervention of an alternative training approach 
using 
motion 
capture 
affects 
the 
performance 
improvement of young beginners in martial arts in order to 
draw conclusions about the most predestined methodology 
with the highest learning effect.  
    The paper is divided into five sections, beginning with a 
short introduction to the topic. Thereupon, the research 
question is pursued, which results from the problem 
definition of the initial situation. While first the hardware 
used and then the associated motion capture software are 
explained in more detail, the thesis then focuses on the 
theoretical construct. In the third section, the methodology 
of the study is discussed in chronological order according 
to its development. The results are summarized in the 
fourth section. Finally, the fifth section demonstrates how 
the research question is answered and the potential of 
motion capture technology in the field of sports science in 
the future. 
II. 
RELATED WORK & THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS 
 
   In the following section, the theoretical foundations of the  
   study are described in more detail. In addition to a 
theoretical 
   construct, similar reference studies are mentioned. 
 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. Theoretical construct 
    The final model relied upon in the study is shown in 
Figure 1. The arrows illustrate the dependent relationships. 
The submodels from past research are marked with 
numbers and can thus be assigned to authors and related 
studies. Component 5 has been newly added as it serves as 
a basis for future research. In the following, the theoretical 
sub-models are explained in more detail and the 
boundaries of previous studies in future science are 
concretized. 
 
Figure 1. Theoretical construct: [1] = (Grontman et al., 2020), [2] = 
(Anderson & Campbell, 2015), [3] = (Čoh & Milovan, 2004), (Vít et al., 
2016) [4] =(Chan et al., 2011), (Le Naour et al., 2019) 
 
Motion capture in sports counteracts the subjective 
evaluation in the judging panel and still inaccurate 
measurement methods. Therefore, an algorithm was 
developed by a research group to analyze the patterns of 
correct intersection of the recorded MoCap data by 
comparing Euclidean distances and the recorded trajectories 
of the amateurs with the baseline model of the professional 
athlete Model 1. For this purpose, the techniques of sword 
fencing, a historically European martial art, were examined. 
The study analyzed only a few marker positions and 
neglected execution speeds. Furthermore, closely spaced 
markers were still omitted [2].  
Providing feedback when learning new motor skills is 
essential in sports. Different methods can be used to address 
different senses, such as auditory, olfactory, gustatory, 
visual, and tactile perception. The results of a more recent 
study suggest that the combination of simultaneous self-
observation and real-time expert modeling has a positive 
effect on accelerating learning.  The acceleration of skill 
acquisition in rowing was investigated. Self-observation was 
implemented through live video transmission, while expert 
movement was previously recorded and transmitted in real 
time. The rowers saw themselves in real time and a slightly 
delayed image of their execution as soon as it differed from 
the expert modeling [3] [4]. 
Studies show that performance is dependent on the 
learning method. It is assumed that optimized learning 
conditions can lead to a faster increase in performance, but 
this does not apply to situations that are different from the 
learning situation. The methods must be chosen depending 
on the biological age, the level of knowledge about the 
techniques and the motor experience of the athletes. It is 
recommended to focus first on the causes of the wrong 
movements rather than on the consequences. Faulty 
conception of technique execution, insufficient motor skills, 
and close morphological constitution of athletes' bodies are 
the causes of incorrect movement execution in most cases [5] 
[6]. 
Specifically in martial arts training, there are set teaching 
methods. After the instructor demonstrates the techniques 
and the student observes, the movements are imitated and 
repeated. This is followed by verbal extrinsic feedback by 
the instructor. One study examined the difference between 
extrinsic feedback in the form of a video and verbal 
feedback. The researchers concluded that learners are more 
critical of their own technique execution when they see it on 
a video [7]. 
Meanwhile, different technologies can support feedback 
to improve motor skills. Researchers are investigating 
training systems based on motion capture and virtual reality. 
They developed a prototype that implements a student's 
imitation of a virtual expert's movements. Results showed 
that the simulation was a successful training methodology 
because the student's movements, animated in VR, were 
captured and analyzed in real time while the virtual 
instructor could point out errors to them [4] [8]. 
Another study compared the benefits of diverse types of 
visual feedback to improve movement execution in 
gymnastics. 
Additionally, 
subjective 
(compared 
to 
quantitative) measurement methods were used. The 
subjective assessment was in the form of a battle court, while 
the quantitative measurement method consisted of time 
series analyses. Four different 3D visualizations were 
contrasted. Learners made the best progress using the 3D 
feedback, which compared the expert’s execution with the 
learners. Finally, correlational analyses confirmed that 
subjective judgments by the referee cannot be predicted or 
justified by objective measurements [9]. 
 
III. 
METHODS 
The study references diverse approaches from past 
research and combines diverse measurement methods with 
different training approaches to identify the most 
predestined learning methodology in the martial art of Muay 
Thai. In the theoretical construct, this is placed in the middle 
[5] of the reference studies (Figure 1). 
A. Setup 
The study used the OptiTrack system from NaturalPoint, 
which is one of the world's largest suppliers in the motion 
capture field. The experiments took place in a motion 
capture lab equipped with 28 OptiTrack PrimeX 13s to 
capture the movements of the trainer and students in real 
time. At the same time, a virtual figure representing the 
trainer or the students was animated on a 2.04 m x 3.63 m 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

monitor. The study was conducted in the MoCap laboratory 
at the Technical University in Würzburg (THWS).  The 
real-time analysis and recording software Motive:Body was 
used in conjunction with the OptiTrack motion system. 
Together with the Blender software, the movements could 
be recorded, measured and analyzed. 
The software as well as the high-speed tracking cameras 
are used in the fields of film, gaming, sports and 
biomechanics. An optical motion capture system based on 
infrared markers uses multiple cameras equipped with 
infrared diodes (IR LEDs) whose infrared light is reflected 
by the markers. Using multiple 2D images, the 3D position 
of the markers can be calculated and determined within the 
space. The OptiTrack systems have a measurement or 
position error of less than 0.2 mm. In small measuring 
ranges even only 0.1 mm or less. During tracking, rotation 
errors of less than 0.5° also occur. The accuracy is 
maintained by regular self-calibrations throughout the 
entire service life.  
Primex 13 cameras are also particularly suitable for 
motion capture applications characterized by higher speeds, 
accelerations or jerky movements, as they have a higher 
frame rate and therefore higher resolution, lower latencies 
and a longer focal length.  
The resolution affects the minimum distance between 
markers and the minimum size of markers defined at a 
certain distance from the cameras. Each actor wears the 
Motion Capture Suit during motion tracking, which is 
antimicrobial, stretchy and breathable, so they are 
comfortable enough to wear even during longer shoots. The 
suit can be worn over everyday clothing and fits snugly to 
the body when worn. Components included shoes, a full 
body suit, gloves and a hat. Attached to the entire suit are 
X-base markers from OptiTrack. They are embedded in a 
Velcro base and have a spherical structure with an outer 
diameter of 14 mm. 
B. Participants 
• 15 healthy participants took part in the study. The 
fifteen subjects were divided into 5 females and 10 
males with an age range of 20-31. The average 
height of the subjects was 1.77 m (1.50-1.95 m) 
with an average weight of 75 kg (50-115 kg). In 
each group, there was one participant who had 
previous martial arts experience (<5 y), whereas in 
group 2 there were two experienced participants, 
one of whom had even done martial arts for over 5 
years. Nearly all subjects reported regular exercise, 
no known mobility impairments, or other health 
problems that could affect their mobility. They were 
familiarized with the study objectives and mode of 
implementation before the experiment and signed 
written informed consent to participate in the study. 
The groups were randomly selected, with the first 
two groups performing the techniques in the 
laboratory twice at four-month intervals and the 
third group performing the techniques five times at 
four-week intervals. 
• They were instructed and evaluated by a multiple 
world (WKA) and European (MTBD) champion in 
Muay Thai and kickboxing. As a black belt holder 
who himself has been training the Far Eastern 
martial arts daily since the age of 3, he teaches 
many students in all disciplines in his own fighting 
schools. Together with the trainer, the three Muay 
Thai techniques were selected and the most 
important sub-steps of a single execution were 
discussed, which were later analyzed in more detail. 
Prior to the study, he was recorded in the MoCap 
laboratory, first 2D via video and then 3D via 
motion capture during the technique execution. 
Before the 15 students were divided into three 
groups of five, they received a joint training session 
with the sensei, during which an initial introduction 
of the three Muay Thai techniques was given. The 
professional Muay Thai trainer supervised the 
subjects during the first sessions of the three groups 
to be available to answer questions about technique 
and technique execution. In addition, the sensei 
evaluated 
the 
participants 
individually 
via 
evaluation matrix. For this purpose, a video of the 
participants at the beginning and at the end of the 
study was sent to him. The aim of this measurement 
method is to be able to draw a comparison between 
the observation of a professional athlete and trainer 
with the quantitative analysis (angle measurement). 
• No subject was motor impaired and all were able to 
perform the techniques. The focus is on the correct 
execution of the techniques, performance progress, 
and knowledge transfer under different training 
conditions.  
C. Measurements 
The first group trained with a demonstration video 
showing the three techniques Straight Punch, Front Kick 
and Roundhouse Kick, demonstrated by the sensei (shown 
in Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. Demonstration video of the sensei 
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

After importing the trainer data from the motion capture 
recordings into Blender, the second group used this software 
to track the techniques in 3D. The amateurs were thus 
provided with a virtual training environment that simulates a 
real trainer but works even when no real sensei can be 
present. The third group trained at home with the 2D video 
and every four weeks in the lab. After each session, the 
subjects' movements were analyzed in detail. For this 
purpose, the angles of the joints were evaluated for each 
partial technique, and then the angles between the bones 
were measured. After the evaluation, the subject's data was 
compared with the trainer's data to identify incorrect 
executions. The Blender software was ideal for showing the 
students their errors as well as demonstrating the differences 
between the trainer and the individual performance. 
Figure 3 demonstrates the deviation of the angles between 
the trainer and the amateur in Blender. 
 
 
Figure 3. Demonstration of the deviation of the angles between trainer and 
amateur 
It was also possible to show the path of the movement of 
the sensei to compare to the students as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4. Path of the movement shown in Blender 
 
Overall, two different evaluation methods were used to 
analyze the angles, but both are based on the 
consideration of the deviation of the angles between 
student and trainer. Thus, both evaluation approaches 
follow the same approach. 
 In the first evaluation method, the ideal of the coach is 
determined via rotation angles and compared with the 
athletes. In the second evaluation method, a simplified 
model is used for validation. This is based on the 2D 
angles between individual bones and limbs as shown in 
Figure 3 (thigh, lower leg, shoulder, etc). 
In the following section "Results" we will talk about 
improvements and deteriorations of the individual groups 
and athletes. The improvements are always evaluated 
relative to the ideal in both evaluation methods. The ideal 
always describes the execution of the coach and its angle 
between individual body parts or change of angles during 
a movement. An improvement of 10 %, for example, 
means that the athlete has come 10 % closer to the ideal 
execution of the sensei.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
 
The first evaluation methodology shows that one subject 
from each group improved in straight punch from the first to 
the last training session. One subject from group 2 has the 
greatest improvement in performance. Most of the students 
have deteriorated after the training, some to a lesser extent 
and some to a slightly greater extent. This can be caused by 
two reasons. First, it is very challenging to communicate 
which joint needs to be adjusted and how to achieve the 
ideal, even though the feedback was supported by visual 
images in Blender. However, once understanding was 
present in the student, another hurdle arose. The technical 
implementation is very complex for martial arts amateurs in 
this short training period. The Straight Punch represents the 
most straightforward technique of all three Muay Thai 
techniques, so the subjects were already extremely confident 
in their intuitive execution. This is another assumption why 
performance on this movement could not be significantly 
increased by any training methodology. One outlier, who 
already had experience from another martial art, could be 
enticed to perform the technique in the way he knew. 
Just under half of the subjects (approximately 46.67%) 
improved their execution of the front kick over the training 
period. In Group 1 and 2, three amateurs each improved, 
whereas in Group 3 only one did and one student showed 
almost no change. The training methods used with group 1 
and 2 showed successful results and a strong tendency to 
improve. Especially group 1, who trained with a video of the 
trainer, 
showed 
improvements 
up 
to 
40% 
while 
deteriorations were in the range below 10%. Similarly to 
group 2, which in addition to the video could view the 
execution of the trainer in 360°, improvements up to almost 
50% and deteriorations below 15% were measured in this 
group. 
Results that differed greatly from the previous techniques 
were found for the last and most challenging technique. The 
roundhouse kick, which was an unknown technique for all 
amateurs, is the most complicated of all three Muay Thai 
techniques due to its 360° rotation. Nevertheless, almost all 
students from group 3 improved, whereas the first two 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

groups did not improve significantly. In fact, these two 
groups showed the greatest drop in performance on the 
roundhouse kick. This indicates that the novel training 
method that was used regularly by group 3 produced the 
greatest success with complex techniques. The regular 
training at home with video combined with the training in 
the lab resulted in 80% of Group 3 improving. Using 
Blender, which visually placed the students next to the 
trainers and vividly communicated the nature of the 
rotational deficits, increased performance throughout the 
training period despite the challenging implementation. 
Students from Group 3 were intrinsically motivated to excel, 
especially with this difficult technique. 
The results of the second evaluation methodology for the 
Straight Punch show that 13 out of 15 participants improved 
while the other two students deteriorated by approximately 
2% and 5%. The subjects from Group 3 show the largest 
increases in performance.  
The demonstration, which memorably visualized the 
deviation between student and trainer, was used regularly 
with group 3 and resulted in all students from group 3 
achieving a deviation below 10% after training. The subjects 
from group 1 and 2 who improved achieved a low deviation 
of no more than 10%. Group 3, on the other hand, achieved 
improvements above 16%, while two other participants 
increased their performance by approximately 10%. 
 
Figure 5. Statistic for the Straight Punch in three different categories 
 
Figure 5 shows exemplarily for the Straight-Punch three 
different categories, namely the average improvement of 
the 5 participants, the highest improvement in one group 
and the average deviation from the ideal at the end of the 
training sessions. It can be clearly seen that group 3 
achieves the best results. The average improvement is 
more than double that of group 1 and group 2. The 
absolute best improvement is also highest in group 3. 
Lastly, it should be noted that the final result (average 
deviation at the end) for group 3 is also almost half of the 
other two groups. Thus, group 3 is significantly closer to 
the ideal at the end than the other two groups - at least in 
this case shown for the Straight Punch. 
Fewer students improved on front kicks than on straight 
punches. 10 out of 15 athletes were able to improve their 
performance, of which most from Group 1, three 
participants from Group 2 and also three students from 
Group 3 improved. The three subjects from group 3 
showed the smallest deviations of max. 6% after the 
training.  Analogous to the straight punches, the front 
kicks are shown divided into the three categories in Figure 
6. It can be seen that group 1 has improved slightly more 
on average, while in the other two categories group 3 
achieves the best results. 
 
Figure 6. Statistic for the Front Kick in three different categories 
 
When comparing their own execution with the trainer, the 
simple 2D video may have helped more than the 360° view 
of the trainer, which is why more students from the first 
group improved than from the second group. There is less 
improvement in front kicks than straight punches in group 2. 
In the Roundhouse Kick, 10 out of 15 students improved, 
of which 50% overall came from the first two groups. 50% 
of the performance increases come from group 3. It can be 
seen that group 3 was able to improve particularly strongly, 
which can be seen from the relative deviations before and 
after training. These are just under 7% for as many as four 
students. In Group 1, 40% increased their performance, but 
slightly. The technique contains complex movement 
sequences and is characterized by its expressive dynamics. 
The video that Group 1 received for training could not be 
played in slow motion. The trainer's technique could not be 
inspected as explicitly as by group 2, which received 
additional support in the form of the 360° view of the 
trainer. This may have resulted in more participants from 
Group 2 improving than from group 1, although both groups 
showed small improvements on average. For group 1 it was 
a maximum of 3.9% and for group 2 even only a maximum 
of 3.27%.  
Improvement
Greatest Improvement
Deviation at the end
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Improvement or Deviation in %
Categories
 Group 1
 Group 2
 Group 3
Improvement
Greatest Improvement
Deviation at the end
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Improvement or Deviation in %
Categories
 Group 1
 Group 2
 Group 3
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The results of the Roundhouse-Kick are shown in Figure 
7. Group 3 got the best results in every single category. 
Especially in the average improvement, where Group 1 and 
Group 2 have almost no deviation while Group 3 reached 
more than 10 %. 
 
 
Figure 7. Statistic for the Roundhouse-Kick in three different categories 
 
As with the first evaluation methodology, the second 
evaluation methodology also confirms that the training 
method using motion capture and Blender helps to increase 
the performance of amateurs, especially in complex motion 
sequences. The results showed that the trainer's assessment 
was mostly consistent with the assessment that emerged 
from the two measurement methods.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The aim of the study was to find out how the intervention 
of an alternative training approach using motion capture 
affects the performance improvement of young beginners in 
martial arts in order to draw conclusions about the most 
predestined methodology with the highest learning effect. 
This objective was achieved by analyzing three different 
training methods and evaluating them in two different ways. 
These implied the first training method, in which the 
participants of group 1 trained with a video demonstration of 
the trainer. The second training method of group 2 used in 
addition to the video the software Blender, which 
demonstrated the technique execution of the trainer in a 
360° view. The third and final training method used by 
group 3 used the motion capture system and Blender 
software. Various measurement tools were used to provide 
feedback to the students in different ways. Both evaluation 
methods in combination were relevant to ensure appropriate 
analysis. The evaluation was first done qualitatively by the 
instructor, who assessed each technique using relevant 
criteria. This assessment was compared with the quantitative 
results. For the simplest technique, the Straight Punch, only 
20% were able to improve, which was due to the 
complicated implementation and challenging teaching of the 
joint adjustments. The results of the evaluations of the Front 
Kick, on the other hand, showed that it was the training 
methods of the first two groups that produced positive 
changes in performance and that they were particularly well 
suited for this Muay Thai technique. The more demanding a 
technique was, the more likely the newly introduced training 
methodology applied to the third group produced the 
greatest success. The qualitative assessment by the trainer 
and the quantitative analyses show three crucial changes in 
performance: 
(1) All three groups significantly worsened in straight 
punches during the first evaluation methodology but 
significantly improved in straight punches during the second 
evaluation methodology. 
(2) In front kicks, the training methods applied to group 1 
and 2 showed successful results and a strong tendency to 
improve, shown by evaluation methodology 1.  
(3) Both evaluation methods confirmed that group 3 
achieved the strongest improvements in the roundhouse 
kick. 
 
This leads to the conclusion that a training approach 
supported by motion capture and blender leads to a 
successful increase in performance, especially in dynamic 
and complex movement sequences. 
The Motion Capture method achieved the highest learning 
effect with the most demanding martial arts techniques and 
is considered the most predestined methodology for these. 
In order to promote sustainable performance increases, 
individualized training supported by technology is a 
prerequisite. This allows reliable, accurate data to be 
determined 
and 
communicated 
to 
athletes 
in 
a 
comprehensible manner. In addition, this type of kinematic 
motion analysis promotes fairness and objectivity of 
evaluation in a competition. This is not intended to replace 
professional evaluation by a coach, but to complement it. 
In the future, this training setup can be extended with 
virtual reality to ensure location-independent training. 
Furthermore, this allows the implementation of diverse 
training environments and scenarios that can provide 
different frameworks at low cost and low effort, depending 
on the use case. This also exceeds the limitations of a 
traditional training room today. Furthermore, the use of AI 
can enable even more precise (early) detection of details in 
(faulty) execution, thus promoting and expanding injury 
prevention and performance enhancement. These methods 
can be transferred or directly applied to other sports in future 
research. 
 
 
Improvement
Greatest Improvement
Deviation at the end
Improvement
Greatest Improvement
Deviation at the end
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Improvement or Deviation in %
Categories
 Group 1
 Group 2
 Group 3
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A special thanks goes to the THWS for providing the 
mocap room and the experimental setup. Furthermore to the 
trainer P. Ulsamer for teaching the students. Finally, a great 
thanks goes to the participants who regularly participated in 
this study and were willing to learn and improve a new 
martial art. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Cunha, V. Carvalho, F. Soares, “Real-Time Data Movements 
Acquisition of Taekwondo Athletes: First Insights. Springer 
International Publishing.”, 2019. 
[2] A. Grontman, M. Śmiertka, M. Trybała, Ł. Horyza, K. Koczan, 
M. Marzec, “Analysis of sword fencing training evaluation 
possibilities using Motion Capture techniques.”, IEEE 15th 
International Conference of System of Systems Engineering 
(SoSE), 325-330, 2020. 
[3] R. Anderson and M. J. Campbell, “Accelerating skill acquisition 
in rowing using self-based observational learning and expert 
modelling during performance, International Journal of Sports 
Science & Coaching, 10, 425-37., 2015. 
[4] A. Lamošová and O. Kyselovičová, “The Effect of Different 
Types of Feedback on Learning of Aerobic Gymnastics 
Elements”, Applied Sciences, 12:8066, 2022. 
[5] M. Čoh and B. Milovan, “Motor learning in sport”, Facta Univ 
Phys Educ Sport, 2, 2004. 
[6] T. Bompa, “Periodization, Theory and Methodology of Training”, 
Champaign IL: Human Kinetics, P.O. Box 5076, 1999. 
[7] M. Vít, Z. Reguli, J. Cihounkova, “Extrinsic feedback in martial 
arts training”, Revista de Artes Marciales Asiáticas, 11(2s), 82, 
2016. 
[8] J. C. P. Chan, H. Leung, J. K. T. Tang, T.Komura, “A Virtual 
Reality 
Dance 
Training 
System 
Using 
Motion 
Capture 
Technology”, IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 4(2), 
187–195, 2011. 
[9] T. Le Naour, C. Ré, J.-P. Bresciani, “Application to the roundoff 
movement in gymnastics”, Human Movement Science, 66, 564–
577, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

