Serious Games Evaluation Using Eye-tracking and Affective Computing Techniques
Case Study of OSH Training Course
Iwona Grabska-Gradzi´nska1 and Jan K. Argasi´nski2
Department of Games Technology
Jagiellonian University
Krak´ow, Poland
Email: iwona.grabska@uj.edu.pl1, jan.argasinski@uj.edu.pl2
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to provide theoretical and
empirical assumptions of framework for evaluation of serious
games. When it comes to games, whose main purpose is to
train and educate, the category of “fun” is often overlooked,
while the category of “education” is interpretated as “teaching
how to win the game” instead of “teaching the right decision-
making practice”. However, in our opinion “fun” is crucial for
the success of the whole educational process. “Fun”, being a kind
of user experience is a sum of player’s affects and engagement,
and only the properly constructed gameplay can ensure didactic
success. In our considerations, we propose pattern and DPE
– based (Design, Play, Experience) model for describing and
designing games enhanced by eye-tracking methods for analysis
of the player’s decision-making process and affective computing
techniques of evaluating player’s engagement. A preliminary case
study of simple Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) training
game is presented. The ultimate goal is to construct additional –
affective – patterns that will ensure designer’s way to fully satisfy
player’s experience in a serious play that will lead him to acquire
the essential skills, from the training point of view.
Keywords–Serious games design, Education process, Decision-
making, OSH training, Evaluation methods, Eye-tracking system,
Affective computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The aim of this study is to provide insight into serious games
evaluation methods using eye-tracking and affective computing
techniques.
A. Motivation
The contributed model was used to test Polish academic
web browser based on OSH game entitled “Janek w opałach”
(”Johnny in Distress”). We believe that it is possible to
examine reception of any videogame (particularly serious) by
using proper framework and tools, which provide helpful,
physiological metrics of player’s concentration, perception and
commitment (immersion) in the presented game world. The
project is now in the course of implementation at Jagiellonian
University’s Department of Games Technology. The ﬁrst ob-
tained results encourage further research.
In Section I, the problem is presented and key concepts
are described. Section II is devoted to presentation of state
of the art in the discipline of affective computing. Section
III is dedicated to considerate methodology of performed
investigation. The last Section shows preliminary results of
the conducted study.
B. Serious Games
In the book “Serious Games”, the authors D. Michael
and S. Chen state: “A serious game is a game in which
education (in its various form) is the primary goal rather than
entertainment” [10]. The most important fact about the serious
games is that pursuing “serious” purposes (most often – as in
the quoted deﬁnition – educational, but also therapeutic and
others) they remain all the time games – so belong to the
ﬁeld of pleasurable activities. Numerous studies point to the
fact, that the entertainment factor – fun – has a very positive
impact on the participants’ attitude to exercise, but also on
the ‘breaking’ cognitive barriers to educational or therapeutic
processes [2][3][4][5]. In this way, serious games are not
only edutainment (the knowledge given in an attractive form),
but represent something qualitatively different, an alternative
form of interaction, which use brings important beneﬁts to the
user. Regardless their unique properties, serious games remain
games. That means general rules governing their design and
creation remain similar as in the case of “normal” games,
designed for entertainment purposes only.
C. Games and Game Systems
In fact there is no good deﬁnition of game or game sys-
tem. For every possible characterization, there could be a
counterexample provided. In the context of affective serious
games the important thing is that they are systems that have
mechanics. They can be deﬁned after M. Sicart as “methods
invoked by agents to interact with game states” [9] or mention
Bjork’s and Holopainen’s component framework for game
systems that contains components such as “boundary” (Rules,
Modes, Goals), “holistic” (Game Instance, Game Session, Play
Session, Extra-Game Activities), “temporal” (Actions, Events,
Closures, End Conditions, Evaluation Functions), and “struc-
tural” (Interface, Game Elements, Players, Game Facilitator,
Game Time). The elements of this system provide the player
with opportunity to interact with the game, overcome given
obstacles and achieve goals are mechanics. Mechanics regulate
gameplay and therefore are crucial elements of the whole
system. Operating mechanics is also the main, distinctive
source of players “fun”.
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

D. Patterns in Game Design
Patterns are recurring themes that occur through the game’s
mechanics. Authors of the book “Patterns in Game Design”
[1] perceive them as “a language for talking about gameplay”
where “each pattern describes a part of the interaction possible
in games, and together with other patterns they describe
the possible gameplay in the game”. In this framework, the
provided patterns are presented through their consequences,
relations and references to the gameplay. Combining different
mechanics is expected to lead to the formation of emergent
entireness
E. Serious Games Design
A popular way to represent the educational objectives is
Bloom’s Taxonomy. It locates the results of teaching in three
areas: cognitive, psychomotoric and affective. A common way
to analyze games is an MDA (Mechanics, Dynamics, Aes-
thetics) framework that takes into account Mechanics, Design
and Aesthetic features of the entertainment systems. We would
like to use its expansion – DPE (Design, Play, Experience)
point of view (see [11] for more information). The basic
element in the process of designing serious game is already
discussed in “fun” category, as a factor characteristic of the
games, yet critical to the educational or therapeutic processes.
In paper, we would like to present an approach to design and
evaluate affective video games that allow the player to capture
(create metrics) the “fun” category for the design improvement
iterations purposes.
F. Affective Patterns
The ultimate goal of work is to propose the inclusion of
the concept of patterns to DPE framework and a tool for
describing mechanics responsible for the “fun” factor in the
games. Affective patterns would be “building blocks” from
which emotional interactions with the user can be built in
order to increase his/her involvement and ultimately control
motivation and achieve educational and therapeutic effects.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Evaluation of games using data obtained from various
sensors and trackers is very fast growing area of computer
science.
A. Affective Computing
In her paradigm-establishing book, Rosalind Picard states
that “affective computing is the study and development of
systems and devices that can recognize, interpret, process and
simulate human affects” [7]. The author of the mentioned
book believes that including emotional factors in information
processing systems can signiﬁcantly enrich their capabilities.
This can occur wherever important factors are correlated with
human-computer interaction or decision making.
Within presentation the main focus are systems that recog-
nize emotions and – to some extent – are able to react to them
for the needs of creation of serious games and simulations.
Intriguing and extensive subject of systems built to emulate
“possession” of emotion is not the subject of our interest.
In order to build affective systems, the ﬁrst thing to do
would be to deﬁne affective states. This is not an easy task,
but only the proper model of emotions will give possibility
to set difference between emotional states, which is a crucial
operation. Classiﬁcation scheme needs to be developed that
uses speciﬁc features form input signals to recognize user
emotions.
The research involves use of biosensors (wearables) and
specially treated data obtained from standard controllers (like
high-resolution mouse, gamepad or motion cameras). The pos-
sibilities also include using features such as facial/gesture/pose
recognition, speech/voice processing and many others. The
need for theory becomes obvious after collecting any prelim-
inary data. In common literature there is a multitude of pro-
posals (i.e. theories by James-Lange, Canon-Bard, Schachter-
Singer, etc.). Among numerous available options the James-
Lange based appraisal theory by Jesse Prinz [7] was chosen.
This bottom-up concept stating that basic bodily reaction is
(rather) result of non- cognitive processes allows for sensible
amount of intentionality in somatic feedback theory.
B. Eye-tracking
Eye-tracking is more and more often used in games, espe-
cially as a controlling device, but also as a researcher’s tool
for game analysis. Eye-tracker as an evaluation tool was also
used in discussed inquiries to investigate the visual search
patterns and heat maps describing the main area of interest
on the screen [12][13]. Examinations were conducted with
use of eye-tracking device to analyze search tasks [14] and
measure information acquisition in educational game [18].
Due to their close relation to attentional mechanisms, eye-
tracking examination can be used while analyzing the cognitive
processes such as language comprehension, memory, mental
imagery and decision making [16], especially for decisions
based on the choice among a countable set of alternatives
III.
METHODOLOGY
The main element that must be taken into consideration
while designing a (serious) game is mechanics.
A. Pattern framework and DPE
In the study, they have already been considered (after Sicart,
see: [9]) as elements that player can interact with in order to
change state of the system, as such mechanics are main game-
shaping elements. First thing to do when analyzing “Janek
w opałach” would be to extract main design patterns that
govern the play. It can be done through application of Bjork’s
and Holopainen’s aforementioned framework (see: [1]). The
most obvious selection includes patterns such as: Awatars,
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Buttons, Clues, Collecting, Controllers, Delayed Effects, Early
Elimination, Exploration, Direct Information, Indirect Informa-
tion, Extra-Game Information, Game State, Overview, Guard,
Helpers, Irreversible Actions, Rescue and Survive. Conducted
inquiry also showed presence of some misused patterns, such
as: Tension, Identiﬁcation, Illusion of Inﬂuence, Emotional
Immersion, Consistent Reality Logic. The detailed description
of patterns and their relations and consequences is presented
in [1].
Reconstructed gameplay overview can be interpreted in
relation to DPE (Design, Play, Experience) model. It focuses
on user experience seen as individual player’s game story,
with accompanying affects and resulting engagement. These
phenomena are associated with designer’s practice (prepared
story, mechanics, user interface) and particular course of play
(resulting in storytelling, dynamics – “mechanics in motion”
and interactivity). When the components are duly assembled,
the result can be overall experience of “fun” (see Figure 1).
Figure 1: Design, Play, Experience model.
B. Biosensors
In the conducted preliminary experiments, various biosen-
sor platforms such as: Empatica E4 (Developed in the Af-
fective Computing Lab at MIT), e-Health Sensor Platform
(Arduino/Raspberry-Pi shield developed by Cooking Hacks)
and Microsoft Band 2 (popular ﬁtness tracker) armed with
custom made software, were used. In the paper, the results
obtained with MSB2 are presented. As it is unspecialized
equipment for everyday use and the long-term goal of research
is to create a solution that allows obtaining feedback loop by
the end users with their own equipment. Collected information
were about GSR (Galvanic Skin Response) and HR (Heart
Rate).
C. Eye-tracking
The approach presented in this paper is based on the
dependence between the gaze direction immediately before
making decision and player’s strategy. Researchers agree [17],
that users have a tendency to shift their attention more towards
alternatives they subjectively perceive as being attractive and
thus consider to choose. In the case of serious game, the choice
is not as obvious as in the multiple-choice tasks, but every time
the decision is connected with the hint visible on the screen.
Efﬁciency of the training can be measured using category of
decision made on the base of elements of the game connected
to the two game patterns featured in [1] (p. 141): “direct
information pattern” (DIP) and “indirect information pattern”
(IIP - see Figure 2). The ﬁrst pattern is connected with
gathering information about the game state from the elements
connected to the game interface and game control elements.
The second means collecting knowledge while interacting with
others in the game and speculate using deductive or inductive
reasoning. Decisions made in the game on the basis of DIP are
useless in the real word situation, because of the lack of game
interface indicators in the real emergency situation. Decision
made on the basis of IIP shows player skills and knowledge
translatable to the real
The goal of the paper is to show the repeatable eye move-
ment schemas and correlate them with the cognitive process of
making choices and making decisions to investigate efﬁciency
of the training.
Figure 2: Game scene with indicated DIP (red line) and IIP (blue line).
Figure 3: Emergency exit sign used in the game.
From the long list of decision-making situations the one
was chosen by researchers and presented below: problem of
perception of emergency signs (presented in Figure 3) in
decision-making process. The reasons making this example
representative to the general problem of serious games are:
•
The game situation is relevant to the real world problem:
way choosing to escape the building,
262
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

•
the problem is crucial from the OSH point of view and
represents the core of the training,
•
there are two types of hints visible in the screen during
the decision making process: one connected with pattern
“direct information” and the second connected with
“indirect information”,
•
the scene of the game during the process of decision
making is immovable, so both gaze plot and heat maps
are available.
IV.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS
The research was based on the serious game, based on
Occupational Safety and Health (OSH).
A. Case study
In this case aim of the player is to ﬁnd the way out of
the burning campus building. The game has been used at
Jagiellonian University, as a part of the OSH training course for
students and staff since 2008. The game view is in isometric
perspective. The game is rather an ordinary representation of
the “adventure game” genre with no time pressure or arcade
skills required. The main task of the player is to navigate the
areas and safety regulations related to decision-making.
Data was collected from 30 voluntary participants (students
of the Jagiellonian University) during the sessions of gameplay.
The used equipment was: The Eye Tribe (speciﬁcation in [15])
– for eye tracking and Microsoft Band 2 for bio-signals (GSR,
HR). After ﬁnishing the game (usually after 10-15 minutes),
the participants were asked to ﬁll custom made questionnaires
with two one-dimensional axis (Was experience “unpleasant –
neutral – pleasant” and “boring – neutral – fascinating”). The
questionnaire also included the “cloud” text with emotional
keywords, where participants could mark expressions describ-
ing their feelings about the game (i.e. sadness, joy, rage, fear...).
B. Results
Both the eye tracking and affective preliminary data seem
to suggest the grouping pattern which can be a base to make
the general picture of “Janek w opałach” as a serious game.
Although the presentation of the full result will need to be
conﬁrmed in additional studies.
In the category of “decision-making” there was one problem
taken into consideration: choice of the direction to get out of
the building. There were two types of hints, each connected
with one game pattern. For OSH training, the essential part
is the decision made on the basis of “indirect information
pattern”.
The results were unexpected and worrying. This educational
game does not teach users to pay attention to emergency signs
during the evacuation from ﬁre, as there are very attention-
grabbing yellow arrows showing possible movement on the
stage (elements of Heads Up Display, not the scenery) and
they were the only noticeable tips. In 90 percent cases, the
players chose the one of the top-left yellow arrow. No one
gave a single look to emergency signs.
In the category of “fun”, the general attitude to the game was
taken into consideration. The second problem was that game
was generally considered very dull. In participants’ reports,
most of them marked “neutral” on “pleasant-unpleasant” axis
and “neutral” to “boring” on “arousal” axis. Greater part of
respondents did not choose any keywords from the “affective
cloud” or chose “irritation”. It can be observed on averaged
graphs showing trends in changes in GSR and HR (see Figure 4
and Figure 5).Note: there are no markers of concrete values or
precise timeline on graphs on purpose – the core interest were
changes in tendencies, attaching to speciﬁc numbers obtained
with device of such low precision, as MSB2 can be delusive
and lead to false conclusions.
Figure 4: Averaged tendencies in changes in HR.
Figure 5: Averaged tendencies in changes in GSR.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We belive that above results should be taken into consider-
ation while preparing “Janek w opałach 2.0”.
The authors would like to emphasize that presented tests are
work in progress but we are conﬁdent that the combination of
263
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

affective computing techniques and eye-tracking is a promising
direction of research on the evaluation of serious games.
Another step is to prepare and conduct further study with more
accurate custom-made sensors and dedicated application that
will allow to examine gameplay variants.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Bjork and J. Holopainen, Patterns in Game Design, Charles Rivers
Media, Boston, USA, 2004.
[2]
J. Cannon-Bowers and C. Bowers, Serious Game Design and Devel-
opment: Technologies for Training and Learning, Information Science
Reference, New York, USA, 2010.
[3]
E. Hudlicka, “Affective Computing for Game Design” in Proceedings
of the 4th Intl. North American Conference on Intelligent Games and
Simulation (GAMEONNA), McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 2008
[4]
E. Hudlicka, “To feel or not to feel: The role of affect in human
computer interaction” in International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 59, 2003, pp. 1-32.
[5]
D. Michael and S. Chen, Serious Games: Games that Educate, Train
and Inform, Thomson Course Technology, Boston, USA, 2006.
[6]
C. Pelachaud (ed.), Emotion-Oriented Systems, John Wiley and Sons
Inc., Haboken, USA, 2012.
[7]
R. Picard, Affective Computing, MIT Press, Cambridge, USA, 1997.
[8]
J. Prinz, Gut Reactions. A Perceptual Theory of Emotion, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, 2003.
[9]
M. Sicart, “Deﬁning Game Mechanics” in Game Studies 8, 2008.
[http://gamestudies.org/0802/articles/sicart]
[10]
G. Yannakakis and A. Paiva, “Emotions in games” in R. Calvo, S.
D’Mello, J. Gratch, and A. Kappas, (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of
Affective Computing, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2014, pp.
459–471.
[11]
E. Ferdig, Handbook of Research on Electronic Gaming in Education,
Information Science Reference, New York, USA, 2009.
[12]
S. Almeida, Augmenting Video Game Development with Eye Movement
Analysis, Universidade de Aveiro 2009.
[13]
K. Kiili, A. Koivisto, E. Finn, and H. Ketamo,“Measuring user experi-
ence in tablet based educational game” in P. Felicia (ed.), Proceedings
of the 6th European Conference on Games-Based Learning, ECGBL
2012, Cork, Ireland, 4-5 October 2012, pp. 242-249.
[14]
A. T. Duchowski, “A breadth-ﬁrst survey of eye-tracking applications”
in Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput 34(4), 2002, pp. 455-470.
[15]
D. Knoepﬂe, J. Wang and C. F. Camerer, “Studying Learning in Games
Using Eye-Tracking” in Journal of the European Economic Association
7, JEEA, 2009, pp. 388–398.
[16]
D. C. Richardson and M. J. Spivey, Eye-Tracking: Characteristics and
Methods, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2008.
[17]
M. A. Lindner et al., “Tracking the decision making process in
multiple-choice assessment: Evidence from eye movements” in Applied
Cognitive Psychology 28(5), 2014, pp. 738–752.
[18]
https://theeyetribe.com/ [retrived: 01.2017]
264
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

