An Architectural Model for Designing Multicultural Learning Objects 
 
Jaime Muñoz-Arteaga 
Univ. Autónoma de Aguascalientes 
Av. Universidad 940 
Aguascalientes, México 
 jmauaa@gmail.com 
Jean Vanderdonckt,  
Juan Manuel González Calleros 
UCL, Belgian Lab. of HCI 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium 
jean.vanderdonckt@uclouvain.be, 
juan.m.gonzalez@uclouvain.be 
 
Michael Orey 
University of Georgia,  
Athens, GA, USA 
 mikeorey@uga.edu 
 
Abstract—Learning objects are considered as educational 
resources that can be employed in technology support 
learning. They are a digital pieces of knowledge to put 
together in order to form courses on line. Considering cultural 
aspects is possible to reuse them in different context for a 
large diversity of community of users. Nevertheless, the design 
and development of graphical user interface for this kind of 
objects 
become 
more 
complex 
since 
the 
multiples 
representations and the large diversity of resources. This 
work proposes the use of architectural models to try to 
mitigate the design of user interfaces for multicultural 
learning objects.  
Keywords-multicultural 
context; 
learning 
object; 
Presentation-Abstraction-Control; 
architectural 
pattern; 
usability 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays a large number of universities are producing 
their courses in terms of learning objects and saving these 
objects in their own repositories, these repositories in 
general support several local queries with different criteria 
thanks to the information in the metadata of every object. 
Such repositories have the goal of opening access to a wide 
variety of materials to anyone around the globe [6].  
Today, educational content can be easily distributed 
worldwide via the internet. While this is easy to do, it is 
apparent that in all of these materials there is both 
intentional educational content and unintentional cultural 
content. Some talk about bias in learning materials, but this 
tends to be pejorative. We prefer to say that culture is in 
whatever you create. Whenever you create educative 
content, you put a bit of yourself into the content. This part 
is often a representation of your own culture and even if 
you deliver that content in your classroom where you are 
intimately familiar with your students, there are parts of 
that content that are difficult for all of your students to 
understand that have nothing to do with the educational 
content. 
Learning objects are considered as educational 
resources that can be employed in technology support 
learning. They are digital pieces of knowledge to put 
together in order to be part of courses on line. A traditional 
learning object is composed of five components such as: 
objective, theoretical knowledge, evaluation, practical 
knowledge and a metadata [3][6]. A traditional learning 
object can be enrichment through the clearly identification 
of cultural factors such traditions, best practices and 
customs (see Figure 1). These cultural aspects are taken 
into account since they could help to learn in a more 
familiar manner to the members of a society. Then, a 
Multicultural Learning Object (MLO) could be used for 
different cultures and the learners could better understand 
in his/her own educational terms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Components of a multicultural learning object.  
Monocultural perspectives hamper learning in a 
number of ways. Students are not exposed to or do not 
engage with different forms of knowledge or realities. 
Students are not encouraged to learn about or engage with a 
diverse group of people. As a consequence, there is no 
conception of alternative ways of thinking and acting, 
hindering imagination and criticism, with the potential to 
promote arrogance, insensitivity, providing a fertile ground 
for prejudice. Multiculturalism puts forward the existence 
of multiple (multi) cultures as opposed to one (mono) 
particular culture within an educational system and society 
at large. As a countermovement to the established 
educational system, it attacks a constructed reality that is 
often referred to as ethnocentrism or monoculturalism. This 
is essentially to change the conceptualization of culture, 
moving from unitary to pluralistic perspectives [2] [7].  
In the e-learning literature, there are several theories 
that support multicultural education, but only a few 
contributions  propose to build multicultural learning object 
to deal with the complexity of instructional design for 
MLO [2] [12]. This work proposes an architectural model 
to design and develop multicultural learning objects in an 
effective manner. For this goal, section two gives an outline 
of problem; next section presents our proposal in terms of a 
conceptual model in order give some solutions. Section 
Objective
Theory
Evaluation
Activities
metadata
Cultural Aspects 
Customs 
 
 
Traditions 
Best practices 
 
249
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

four shows the design of a course with multicultural 
learning object as a case study in order to prove the current 
proposal. Finally, section five describes a series of related 
works.  
II.  OUTLINE OF THE PROBLEM  
A multicultural learning object always pursue the idea 
of reusable interactive components, it is necessary a good 
quality of graphical user interfaces for different contexts, so 
a MLO could be delivered for an initial population but also 
to as many groups with another culture. In this sense the 
production of MLO’s become complex, it is necessary 
several amounts of educative resources and a big 
multidisciplinary 
team 
with 
different 
competences. 
However, this responsibility is left to the analytical and 
creative decisions of developers even if this task is not easy 
to carry out. 
This work identifies the following difficulties for the 
production of multicultural learning objects:  
 
A major evolution of instructional design for a 
massive production of multicultural learning objects 
is necessary.  
 
It lacks of specification techniques enable to support 
interactive digital educative content taken into 
account multicultural context. 
 
It is necessary identify some new criteria to evaluate 
the quality of multicultural learning objects.  
 
It lacks a methodology to develop MLO’s where the 
requirements of different stakeholders are taken into 
account.  
 
Multicultural learning objects require a high 
interactivity, reusability and usability. In particular 
the treatment of visual feedback requires of several 
abstraction levels.  
Next sections describe some solutions to the 
aforementioned problems.  
III.  ARCHITECTURAL MODEL 
The design and development of multicultural learning 
objects requires in particular a big effort in the specification 
of the graphical user interface in order to support a large 
diversity of users. According to Shneiderman [1], the user 
interface is the specification of the look and feel of an 
interactive application. The production of a multicultural 
learning object is similar of an interactive application 
where the user requirements and cultural context are 
important in particular in the development of graphical user 
interface. The design of a graphical user interface includes 
the determination of which interactive components are 
displayed to the user and the functions that let to interact 
with these components in order to support user task. 
We can assume that the creation of educative material 
in the form of multicultural learning objects might be 
strongly influenced by culture, such as, what people value, 
how they learn, solve problems, put in practice and so 
forth. Then, all multicultural learning object need to be 
translated, localized, and adapted in profound ways to suit 
the needs and preferences of learners in other cultures. 
Localization 
addresses 
obvious 
visual 
and 
textual 
differences found in other cultures, such as widgets, icons, 
menu items, symbols, and so forth [15]. Amiel and Orey 
[7] presented an illustrative example for develop a simple 
multicultural learning object from an applied mathematics 
curriculum, that demonstrates that demonstrates the process 
of computing the area of a home in the United States for the 
purpose of estimating how much carpet should be 
purchased. In particular the GUI of this object requires to 
be modified in order to be used in Brazil to estimate how 
many boxes of ceramic tile would be needed. While the 
computational algorithms are the same, the measurement 
units used in the two countries are different (square yards 
versus square meters) and the actual floor coverings are 
also different since in Brazil, carpet is not common, while 
tile is. Another example is the use of addition operation 
which could be used in exercises, simulation and evaluation 
sections of a multicultural learning object. The GUI could 
be modified in function of cultural context, in Italy we 
could talk about adding pizzas, hamburgers could be used 
in the United States, and the typical tacos could be used in 
Mexico. 
 
Figure 2. Multicultural learning object model based on the PAC model. 
In order to specify the interactive nature of a 
multicultural learning object, we propose to use the 
architectural 
model 
PAC 
(Presentation-Abstraction-
Control) proposed by Coutaz [14]. The different modules 
of this architectural model could contain the components of 
a MLO (see Figure 2): the concept to learn, theoretical 
knowledge, objective, activities and evaluation, all are 
specified under cultural aspects. The separation of concerns 
of cultural context, content and graphical user interfaces 
could be described by the PAC model. The Abstraction 
could encapsulate the academic content of a MLO, the 
Presentation module displays the content with cultures, 
traditions and customs. This is presented in functions of 
user interactions and requests send to the Control module. 
Actually, the presentation module specifies the look and 
feel of the graphical user interface of a multicultural 
learning object. Then, the graphical user interface could be 
separated from the academic content (Abstraction) given 
different representations in functions of user requirements. 
Control
Get Objective
Get Theory
Get Activities
Get Evaluation
Abstraction
Content under
cultural context
Presentation
-User Interaction 
-Visual Feedback
250
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

It is well known that users could learn of different 
manner and, in general, different learning styles should be 
proposed [16]. In addition, we consider here that cultural 
aspects (traditions, best practices and customs) could help 
to learn in a more familiar manner, all the members of a 
society. A PAC agent could represent a particular 
perspective. The different perspectives require their own 
resources and their own graphical user interface. In 
additions, the reusability and maintainability could be 
feasible using PAC agents without affecting the other 
properties such as portability and access.  
Nowadays, it is possible that several mentors create 
educative content in different part of a country or world. 
Internet allows us to find, create easily different good 
quality of educative contents and deliver them to a large 
number of societies. A learning object could be created in 
different locations and in different languages need to be re-
built or localized in order to satisfy the requirements of 
each location. Every new MLO specified under PAC model 
could be integrated simply in a hierarchical structure of 
PAC agents, each consisting of a triad of presentation, 
abstraction and control parts. This helps to structure a 
course where the agents (or triads) can communicate with 
each other only through the control part of each triad.  
IV. CASE STUDY 
Mexico is recognized as a country with a rich culture 
and a large diversity of traditions; one of the reach 
traditions is the celebration of day of the dead. This case 
study shows the specification of a multicultural learning 
object of day of the dead in Mexico. For this purpose, we 
present the case study in two sub sections; the first one 
describes the architectural model at design level and the 
second sub-section at implementation level. 
A. Design level  
The celebration of day of the dead are echoed in cities 
and villages throughout Mexico. As each locality offers 
distinctive traditions and a unique flavor bound to fascinate 
the curious traveler, a visit to any Mexican cemetery would 
be a worthwhile addition to the itinerary of anyone touring 
the country this time of year [5].  
A design of a multicultural learning of the day of the 
dead requires put clear that this tradition is marked 
throughout all Mexico by a plethora of intriguing customs 
that vary widely according to the ethnic roots of each 
region. Common to all, however, are colorful adornments 
and lively reunions at family burial plots, the preparation of 
special foods, offerings laid out for the departed on 
commemorative altars and religious rites. In general, at 
elementary school, Mexican students are required to study 
about their tradition; they could select the multicultural 
learning object. Consequently, there are a set of MLO’s 
which represents different versions of celebrations of day 
of the dead in Mexico. This set of MLO’s complies with 
the online course structured by a hierarchy of PAC agents, 
where the users could select and learn the different manners 
to celebrate this tradition coming from different regions of 
Mexico, as follow:  
 
 
Figure 3. Multicultural learning objects related to the celebration of day of the dead in México. 
251
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Abstraction
+DayOfDead
+Metadata
+SetDayOfDead()
+GetDayOfDead()
Control
+InteractiondayOfDead
+SendMsg()
+receiveMsg()
+GetObjective()
+GetTheory()
+GetActivities()
+GetEvaluation()
Presentation
+Update()
+Open()
+Close()
+Zoom()
+Move()
+Print()
 
North of México region.- Halloween is a tradition 
usually celebrated in Mexico in particular in the border 
states with the United States of America. Some typical 
Halloween activities include customs and attending 
costume parties, ghost tours, and watching horror films. 
bonfires, visiting haunted attractions telling ghost stories or 
other frightening tales.  
Center of México region.- Most México guidebooks 
make special mention of day of the dead tradtitions 
celebrated in the center of Mexico, in particular in the 
Janitzio Island, familes celebrate the day of dead with 
dishes, music and night candlelight vigils in the cemeteries. 
South of México region.- Some altars with some 
pictures, dishes and meals appreciated in life by the dead, 
These altars in honnor to dead of familie with several 
dishes and flowers are installed in the houses at south of 
Mexico.  
Center-Occident of México region.- The people of 
region centre occident remember this day with Mexican 
revolution style with several representations of skeleton. 
One of the skeleton is the Catrina representig a woman who 
was member the high society. Also the mexican revolution 
skeletons are considedered to wear by the people during the 
day of dead in Center-Occident of Mexico. 
Yucatán península region.- The people of Peninsula of 
Yucatan celebrate the day of dead with traditions of Maya 
culture incorporating certain pre-Hispanic customs into 
Christian practices. 
The Presentation-Abstraction-Control pattern [13][14] is 
an architecture that separates the concerns of an application 
into a hierarchy of cooperating components, each of which 
are comprised of a Presentation, Abstraction, and Control. 
The PAC pattern seeks to decompose an application into a 
hierarchy of abstractions, and to achieve a consistent 
framework for constructing user interfaces at any level of 
abstraction within the application.  
Figure 3 shows the hierarchical structure of PAC agents 
where the top and intermediate-level-agents describe 
respectively the learning object repository and the main 
window of course on line. Note that every bottom-level 
agent describes a specific perspective of celebration of the 
day of the dead in Mexico. For example, this celebration of 
the people from Yucatan Peninsula is based on the Maya’s 
customs. 
B. Implementation level 
Concerning to the implementation of multicultural 
learning objects under the PAC model specified in previous 
section, it is possible to describe it using the UML notation, 
as follow:  
 
Figure 4. Class diagram of MLO’s related to the celebration day of the 
dead in México 
According the UML diagram of Figure 4, the 
maintenance of the course on line about the celebration of 
day of the dead is feasible, since the designer of the 
different regions of Mexico they could update in an 
independent manner the content of their MLO’s. In 
addition, they could be saved in the repository of this same 
course on line. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Elements of a multicultural learning object of Yucatan Peninsula 
according to a PAC agent. 
Analyzing the components of a MLO of Yucatan 
Peninsula (see Figure 5), it is important to identify that a 
model has their own resources, where the information and 
metadata of day of the dead are saved as attributes of class 
Abstraction. This information is accessible by the functions 
of class Control, such as: GetTheory(), GetActivities(), 
GetObjective(), GetEvaluation(). The results could be 
displayed in the different interactive components of the 
graphical user interfaces encapsulated in the Presentation 
class. 
Repository
+MLOS'sRepository
+sendMsg()
+receiveMsg()
CourseOnLine
+viewPACids
+DayOfDead
+sendMsg()
+receiveMsg()
+openView()
+CloseView()
CenterOfMex
+DayOfDead
+Metadata
+GetObjective()
+GetTheory()
+GetActivities()
+GetEvaluation()
+SendMsg()
+RecevieMsg()
+Open()
+Close()
SouthOfMex
+DayOfDead
+Metadata
+GetObjective()
+GetTheory()
+GetActivities()
+GetEvaluation()
+SendMsg()
+ReceiveMsg()
+Open()
+Close()
NorthOfMex
+DayOfDead
+Metadata
+GetObjective()
+GetTheory()
+GetActivities()
+GetEvaluation()
+SendMsg()
+ReceiveMsg()
+Open()
+Close()
YucatanPeninsula
+DayOfDead
+Metadata
+GetObjective()
+GetTheory()
+GetActivities()
+GetEvaluation()
+SendMsg()
+ReceiveMsg()
+Open()
+Close()
CenterOccidentMex
+DayOfDead
+Metatadata
+GetObjective()
+GetTheroy()
+GetActivities()
+GetEvaluation()
+SendMsg()
+RereiveMsg()
+Open()
+Close()
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multicultural Learning Object of Yucatan Peninsula 
CourseOnLine 
252
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

V. 
RELATED WORK 
In the literature of e-learning and human computer 
interaction, some works have proposed for analysis and 
development of MLO: Agada has considered the 
multicultural education as an emerging paradigm [8], 
Oshlyansky et al. have précised the difference between 
cultural aspect from usability aspect for the graphical user 
interfaces at analysis stage [10], Goméz et al. have 
presented a development of mathematic courses in terms of 
MLO’s [12]. 
PAC architectural model differs from MVC (Model-
View-Controller) [4], in that within each triad, it 
completely separate the presentation (view in MVC) and 
the abstraction (model in MVC), this provides the option to 
assign capsule of information to learn which can give the 
user experience to learn important perspectives and 
concepts throughout the graphical user interface of a 
multicultural learning object. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
The design of multicultural learning objects for giving 
solution to software problems is considered as a complex 
task which is usually left as a programming activity. This 
work purposed an architectural model to design and 
develop multicultural learning objects in an effective 
manner. We propose an architectural model based on the 
design pattern ¨PAC (Presentation-Abstraction-Control). 
[13], the set of PAC agents represent the diversity of 
perspectives, traditions and costumes that could help in a 
more familiar manner to final user, all this information is 
accessed and shown throughout the graphical user interface 
of a multicultural learning object. 
Finally, it is important to say, that the adaptability, the 
evaluation and the massive production of multicultural 
learning objects are research topics to be considered like 
future work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Ben and P. Cathrine, Designing the User Interface: strategies for 
effective human-computer interaction, Addison-Wesley, 1987. 
Fourth edition with Catherine Plaisant as co-author 2004, ISBN 0-
321-26978-0.  
[2] O. Micheal, A. Tel, M. Jaime, R. Rafael, and S. Rene. Much Ado 
About Culture. Proceedings of World Conference on Educational 
Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications, 2010, pp. 4026-
4033. 
[3] M. Jaime, A. Francisco, and C. Ma. Elena, ―Tecnología de Objetos 
de Aprendizaje‖, Universidad Autónoma de Aguascalientes, 2007, 
pp 423, ISBN: 970-728-065-4,  
[4] B. Steve, Applications Programming in Smalltalk-80 (TM): How to 
use Model-View-Controller (MVC). 1987, [Online] Available at: 
http://st-www.cs.illinois.edu/users/smarch/st-docs/mvc.html 
[Accessed 22 December 2010].  
[5] C. Araceli and C. Louis, México de mis amores, Oceano, 2010. 
[6] W. David, A. Connecting learning objects to instructional design 
theory: A definition, a metaphor, and a taxonomy. Wiley, 2000 
[7] A. Tel, S. Josh, and O. Micheal. (2009). Four Strategies for 
Designing 
Instruction 
For 
Diverse 
Cultures. 
Educational 
Technology, 49(11), 4-14.  
[8] J. Agada, Multicultural education and the emerging paradigm: An 
essay in cultural epistemology. The Urban Review, vol. 30, 1998, pp 
77-95.  
[9] G. Erick, H. Richard, J. Ralph, and V. John, Design Patterns : 
elements of reusable object-oriented software, Addison-Wesley, 
1995.  
[10] O. Lidia, T. Harol, and C. Paul, Breaking Affordance: culture as 
context. Proc. Human-Computer Interaction, ACM, NordiChi 2004, 
pp. 81-84 
[11]  H. Geert, ―Culture's Consequences, Comparing Values, Behaviors, 
Institutions, and Organizations‖, Across Nations Thousand Oaks 
CA: Sage Publications, 2001. 
[12] G. Laura, M. Carmen, G. Alma Rosa, and B. Edgard, Multicultural 
Learning Objects for Mathematic, Proc. Laclo 2010, Brasil, 2010, 
pp. 489-498.  
[13] C. Joëlle,. PAC-ing the Architecture of Your User Interface. 4th 
Eurographics Workshop on Design, DSV-IS’97, Springer Verlag, 
1997, pp. 15–32.  
[14] B. Frank, M. Regine, H. Rohnert, S. Peter, and S. Michael, Pattern-
Oriented Software Architecture, John Wiley and Sons, vol. 1, 1996, 
pp. 145–168, ISBN 0-471-95869-7.  
[15] M. Aaron and W. Emilie, Crosscurrents: cultural dimensions and 
global web user-interface design. Interactions, Vol 7, 2000, pp. 32-
46 
[16] K. David, Experiential learning: experience as the source of learning 
and development. Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall, 1984. 
 
 
 
253
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

