Mood Adaptive Display Coloring - Utilizing Modern Machine Learning Techniques
and Intelligent Coloring to Inﬂuence the Mood of PC Users
Lukas Brodschelm, Felix Gr¨aber, Daniel Hieber and Marc Hermann
Dept. of Computer Science
Aalen University
Aalen, Germany
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@hs-aalen.de
Abstract—Humans are able to recognize a wide range of colors
and interpret them in many different ways. Besides obvious
effects like highlight and beautiﬁcation, these colors can inﬂuence
the emotional state of humans in a signiﬁcant way. While this is
no new information and color psychology is a heavily discussed
topic in the psychological area, few research has been conducted
in the human computer interaction area of this topic. Heavily
relying on color in user interfaces of any kind the emotional
aspect is often ignored and unwritten rules are applied. The
gaming ﬁeld provides many examples for such rules with red
explosives and blue mana. Breaking with this trend, we present
a novel mood adaptive display coloring approach. Utilizing
psychological studies and state of the art machine learning
technologies an intelligent coloring system is implemented. It is
able to directly inﬂuence the emotion of human users, combating
negative emotions and supporting positive feelings. Further a
completely functional prototype is implemented. While fully
working, there is much work left to reﬁne and improve the project
in this heavily neglected area.
Keywords—Advanced
Human
Computer
Interaction;
Mood
Adapting Coloring; Adaptive Display Coloring; Color Psychology;
Emotion Recognition.
I. INTRODUCTION
Colors have been an important part of Human Computer In-
teraction (HCI) since the introduction of multi color displays.
Nowadays, it is impossible to imagine software without them,
the old default black and white is only used as a stylistic
instrument. Even hardware is often produced with ambient
lighting as a selling point. Colors are used as an important part
of designs for Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) in software
like games, operating systems (OS) and business applications,
helping players to get the required overview or leading workers
through complex procedures with intelligent coloring.
However, the possibilities of colors do not end with high-
lighting certain things and improving the quality of life
therefore, they can also be used to directly affect the user.
Understanding the inﬂuence of color on the human user, clever
coloring can increase the performance of a worker or calm him
down during a difﬁcult period. Such techniques can not only
boost the productivity and improve emotional state, they can
also have a beneﬁcial effect on the health of users.
Color psychology is a highly disputed topic and the opinions
heavily diverge about the facts and scientiﬁc evidence. How-
ever, thanks to this popularity of the topic much research is
conducted in this area, allowing a solid foundation for further
research in the HCI environment.
Using state of the art technologies, like facial recognition
systems or intelligent devices such as smart watches, the
mood of a user can already be recognized and measured quite
precisely. The resulting information can be used to classify
the emotions and start processes to reinforcing or combating
these.
In this work, we introduce a novel approach to interact with
users through decent adaptive coloring, providing emotional
support and the best conditions to successfully master their
current task. This is achieved through Mood Adaptive Display
Coloring (MAD-Coloring), a framework to change the color of
the display while exposing a generic API for clients to control
the color according to the mood of the user. Further two simple
clients will be implemented. While one of them provides a
minimal boilerplate for further implementations, the second
one utilizes state of the art machine learning techniques to
recognize mood changes and provide the best suited coloring
solution for the detected mood state.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II provides background information for a better understanding
of the work and introducing required secondary research.
Section III describes the general concept of MAD-Coloring,
while Section IV explains the currently implemented state of
MAD-Coloring. Section V provides an overview of related
works. Finally Section VI concludes the paper and lists further
research options.
II. BACKGROUND
This section outlines the elementary information about color
psychology and display coloring frameworks, as well as face
recognition basics and a survey about the emotional effect of
color, conducted during this work.
A. Color Theory and Psychology
While color is often accepted as an omnipresent thing with-
out further questioning, it is actually a well deﬁned construct
which can be described accurately with its three components:
hue, saturation and brightness. The emotional effect of color is
closely linked to all three of those, therefore an adjustment of
one of its values can lead to a completely different emotional
reaction. This means e.g., a green with high brightness and
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

saturation has a different emotional effect than a green with
the same hue and saturation but low brightness.
Even though color psychology is highly disputed down to its
fundamental theories, it is possible to elaborate some general
statements which are used in this work. While many animals
only see different shades of grey and some can even see
with infrared or ultraviolet vision, humans have settled in the
middle with a complex color perception. This has lead to the
development of a society where colors play an important role
in the day to day life, religion, work and freetime. Most people
have a favorite color, and every kid, regardless of their origin,
knows the red cross, star or moon provides them with help if
needed.
While most humans see color the same way, it has quite
different meanings for them. The context in which a color is
experienced and from whom is fundamental for its interpreta-
tion. Age is an important factor, as studies prove, that children
have different associations with certain colors than adults or
elder people. Gender can also play a decisive role [1][2][3].
Elliot and Maier laid the theoretical base for contextual
color psychology with their work in 2012 [1], highlighting
six key properties of the psychological impacts of color:
• There might be psychological relevant associations with
a color.
• Presentation colors might inﬂuence psychological opera-
tions, including but not limited to basic impulses such as
attraction and avoidance.
• Associations with colors might trigger affective, cognitive
or behavioral reactions. This happens subconscious or
without intention.
• Color meanings and associations are inﬂuenced by both
trained and inherited behavior.
• The relation between color perception and association is
bidirectional. color perception has an impact on psycho-
logical processes and psychological processes have an
impact on the way color is perceived.
• The psychological effect of color heavily depends on the
context. The context is so important, that the inﬂuence
of the same color might result in opposite effects for
different contexts.
Those core statements are used by other research (e.g., [2]) in
the ﬁeld of color psychology and should be considered when
targeting a psychological effect utilizing colors.
Li [3] gives a detailed overview over the preferences and
effects with different groups of people in a medical context,
more precisely during hospital stays. Children prefer brightly
saturated colors and overall very colorful environments. These
provide distraction from the tense situation and a calming
effect, connected to the coloring, could be proven. Adults on
the other hand tend to favor clean, cool colors like white, blue
and grey. They associate these with a professional environment
and thus a higher chance of a successfully treatment. There
is also a connected calming effect. However, the effect is
achieved through the impression of a professional environ-
ment, that evokes the feeling of a qualiﬁed treatment when
seeking medical care. It is therefore only partially connected
to the color and already an effect of the original feeling emitted
by the color: professionalism. The author further states, that
elder people tend to prefer warmer colors, although not as
bright and less saturated than children. These colors help them
to relax and effectively reduce anxiety. The professional, cool
colors like white or grey even provide a negative effect on
elders and sometimes children. This originates from the partly
occurring associated with anxiety, loneliness and fear. The
phenomenon is known in the color psychology as white scare.
Focusing on the target-context oriented effect of color,
Maier et al. outline how the psychological impact of a color
changes with the task domain [4]. Stated are the ﬁndings
of different studies which point out that colors provide a
performance enhancing effect in physical competitions. An
example for this can be found in sports, where teams wearing
red tricots win more games than those wearing any other hue.
However, when it comes to an intellectual target-context the
color red seems to have no, or even a negative effect, on the
performance.
B. Emotion Recognition
Facial and Image Recognition is currently one of the most
popular ﬁelds of machine learning. Elementary face detection
is not a technical challenge anymore and a camera input can
be analysed in realtime, with only a few dozen lines of code
(e.g., [5]).
The popularity of such use cases provides us with the base
for emotion recognition through feature detection in the mimic
of peoples faces. Combining this technology with display
coloring frameworks allows us to design systems which are
capable of autonomously detecting emotions and correctly
using different color overlays to improve and reinforce them.
Several models have been trained with a fairly high accuracy
to detect emotion from images. These models focus on a
combination of facial features to detect the emotional state
behind pictures of faces. The model of Yang et al. [6] relies
on the extraction of the mouth and eyes, achieve successful
detection rates of up to 93% for certain emotions and a mean
of 87%.
As emotions have a broad impact on the users behavior the
detection is not only limited to image recognition. For a precise
detection of emotions multiple sources of information can be
used. Ghosh et al. suggests an approach to determine emotion
based on speech recognition [7]. By combining multiple ways
of emotion recognition detection accuracy can be improved
even further. However, a background software with recording
capabilities is rather problematic from a privacy point of
view. Therefore, the improved recognition accuracy does not
outweigh the privacy violation.
Other possibilities to increase the accuracy and therefore
the value of automatic emotion detection could be provided
by smart wearables like smart watches or ﬁtness trackers.
Measurements like the pulse could then be used to determine
the stress level and provide other valuable insights. However,
as the prototype should be as lean as possible this approach
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I. EMOTIONAL CONNECTION TO COLORS SURVERY,
RESPONDENTS = 522, VALUES IN %
Color
Ca
V
Sa
Co
M
St
H
red
3,79
14,86
13,38
7,32
9,37
35,20
8,45
orange
8,24
19,41
18,09
6,02
3,02
16,94
13,49
yellow
3,53
21,15
7,21
8,95
3,78
14,31
17,53
green
22,09
18,34
15,44
15,49
2,27
2,96
24,72
blue
25,23
9,64
16,32
28,74
7,55
4,77
14,25
violet
11,37
3,35
11,32
5,34
11,48
5,76
6,56
grey
11,11
0,40
5,44
13,08
27,49
3,95
2,27
black
12,81
2,68
10,29
13,43
29,61
6,74
4,41
pink
1,83
10,17
2,50
1,72
5,44
9,38
8,32
is not further considered in this work. The required multi ma-
chine solution with means of communication between devices
would cause a too excessive codebase for the aspired simple
prototype.
C. Emotional Effects of Colors - a Survey
As our excessive study of related research projects and
studies could not provide a common interpretation of the
concrete connection between emotions and colors, a simple
survey was conducted. This survey however is only used
to generate a default proﬁle for the prototype, it is not
scientiﬁcally representative. In the survey 522 people were
asked to think of a color if confronted with an emotion.
Multiple answers were allowed, this should allow the detection
of patterns, e.g., all warm colors are connected with emotion
X. The emotions which could be chosen in the survey were
(Ca)lm, (V)italising, (Sa)fety, (Co)ncentrated, (M)elancholy,
(St)ressed and (H)appieness. The possible answers consisted
of colors which can easily be displayed on a display and
provide strong contrasts to each other, allowing a meaningful
implementation.
The surveys ﬁndings match well with the general statements
from Rider [2]. While warmer colors (orange, yellow) have an
arousing effect, cooler colors (blue, green) have a relaxing,
calming effect. Rider further mentions the wide spread of
possible emotions connected to green depending on brightness,
saturation and context. As we only asked for the hue the sub-
jects could not differentiate between different types of green.
Therefore, green is strongly connected with most positive
emotions, which, however, most likely refer to different types
of green.
The survey results also concur with the ﬁndings of Kido [8],
reinforcing the calming effect of green and blue. The deafening
effect of red, determined by Kido, also matches the very strong
association with stress by our survey.
The strong association of orange with safety, which cannot
be found in other studies or surveys, most likely is caused by
a bias of our survey. The poll was conducted on a group of
people from the same community, where orange is a frequent
and positively interpreted color, which could explain this
behavior.
User Client
Face Recognition
Coloring Service
...
Interface
User Profiles
Figure 1. MAD-Coloring modular architecture concept.
D. Display Overlays
Display overlays are no new research topic and many reﬁned
products are available. In the gaming area they are omnipresent
with the most popular example being steams ingame-overlay,
other popular examples being the Nvidia Geforce Experience
overlay, the Discord overlay or Overwolf. However, these are
all limited to the gaming use cases and only Overwolf allows
great modiﬁcation freedom.
Other overlays with more modiﬁcation freedome include
OnTopReplica, Hudkit and pqiv. The pqiv image viewer is
able to display transparent pictures and can easily be placed
on top of other windows. Due to its implementation in Python,
cross platform capabilities are provided. Missing click through
support however requires extensive extension work to create
a functional non blocking overlay.
OnTopReplica, a C# project, supports the display of selected
windows on top of others on Windows systems. While it
supports click through and adjustable opacity, it is limited to
Windows and requires an additional overlay-window. This not
only decreases the compatible systems but also increases the
overhead signiﬁcantly.
Hudkit is a C based framework with an exposed JavaScript-
API [9]. The framework supports all Linux X-desktops and
some OS X systems. It’s main HTML page can be modiﬁed
like Overwolf overlays using HTML and JavaScript. The
page can then receive new input via established APIs like
Websocket or WebGL and change the display accordingly.
Multiple monitors and click through events are supported by
default. Providing a powerful small footprint framework.
III. SOLUTION CONCEPT
This section provides insights in the architecture and con-
cept for the MAD-Coloring prototype. The modular architec-
ture approach is shown in Fig. 1.
The architecture is separated in 3 sections. The coloring
service, the clients accessing and controlling the coloring and
the interface, enabling communications between the clients
and the display coloring.
The display coloring has to be able to project a color
adjustable overlay on top of all connected monitors. To fully
leverage the psychological effects the overlay must not be
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

limited to gamma or brightness adjustments but must be able to
display any color. The display must not reduce the productivity
and therefore has to enable all actions which are possible
without an overlay, e.g., right/left clicking or text selection.
Further, the vision quality and readability of displayed content
must not be reduced any further than necessary. This will
be compared against the light constraints coming with night
lights, e.g., reduced contrast and slightly changed colors. The
coloring service further gets supplied with at least one user
proﬁle ﬁle. This allows users to adjust the color optimally for
themselves and maximize the effect of MAD-Coloring.
The communication between clients and coloring should be
kept as simple as possible to ﬁt into the modular approach.
This should enable easy access to the coloring service for
new clients as well as the replacement of the Coloring imple-
mentation itself, e.g., if required by a change of the OS. To
achieve this a simple interface should be created, supplying all
required functionality for the coloring and client programms.
New implementations could then simply use this interface and
would be able to be used with the old clients/Coloring. This
further enables the exchange of the communication framework
with changes to only the interface itself. Clients and color-
ing would not be affected and could be used without any
changes. The underlying communication framework should
be chosen OS speciﬁc and use existing infrastructure rather
than implementing something new. Therefore, reducing the
implementation effort, requirements and overhead caused by
MAD-Coloring.
Due to the interface, client programms can be created with
minimal restrictions. For the prototype two client applications
are planed. A manual user client, allowing the selection of
moods by the user via text input, and a face recognition
background service, detecting the mood via a webcam and
changing the display coloring accordingly.
Thanks to the highly adjustable user proﬁles, changes or
ﬁne tuning of the color mapping in the implementation are
always possible with little to none programming experience.
This allows interested psychologists, therapists and doctors to
use the MAD-Coloring on their own. Enabling them to adjust
the system according to their own knowledge and research in
the area of color psychology, highly tailored to their target
group needs. Further, users trying the prototype on their own
can adjust their proﬁle as they most see ﬁt, according to their
own preferences.
IV. MAD-COLORING
This section gives insight in the implemented MAD-
Coloring prototype for Linux systems, as well as the created
simple user client and emotion detection client.
A. Interface
The interface is build on top of the D-Bus, as it represents
the default solution for inter-process communication of most
Linux desktop environments and therefore already is available
on the system. This removes the need to install new software
frameworks, perfectly ﬁtting into the low overhead architecture
of the solution concept.
The interface itself is separated into two parts. The main
(top level) interface, providing simple python functions and
a bottom level interface consisting of a D-Bus service and a
corresponding client.
To ease the use of the interface, and allow easy inter-
changeability of the underlying system, the the top level
interface has been implemented which only exposes the core
functionality to client developers. It can be considered as a
wrapper around the bottom level interface, providing the two
required functionalities to implement new clients or a coloring
service. These is a getter function, which is awaiting a new
mood, and a setter function, to set the mood. Clients make use
of the setter to specify the mood, while the coloring service
uses the getter to detect mood changes originating from the
clients.
While the top level interface is rather simple, the bottom-
line D-Bus communication is more extensive. The D-Bus
service speciﬁed by it exposes an interface with three methods
on the D-Bus session bus. However, only one of the three
methods is currently used in the top level interface, a setter for
the mood. The other methods provide a getter for the currently
active color code and the possibility to change the user proﬁle
on the ﬂy, providing a boilerplate for coming extensions. For
the top level interface setter function a connection to the
exposed D-Bus interface is opened and the provided bottom
level interface setter method is used to send the color change
via the D-Bus.
It is up to the client if the communication is done via
interface provided in this work or directly via the D-Bus. On
the one hand the baseline D-Bus service provides a richer
API and might be used with any programming language or
due to some universal command line interface tools. On the
other hand however using the Python interface instead is less
complex and allows an easy exchange of the underlying D-
Bus framework, which might be required due to the change
of the OS. Requiring only the getter and setter pair at the top
level interface allows an easy exchange of the base interface,
as the new framework must only realize this two functions.
When sticking to Linux Desktops the D-Bus provides more
extensive functionality and grants the exchange of the pro-
gramming language, but the provided python interface grants
interchangeability of OS and base interface. Choosing the
right interface is up to the developer and should be decided
individually according to the needs of the implementation.
B. User Proﬁles
The proﬁles are implemented as .conf ﬁles. Using this well
known and easy to use standard allows the modiﬁcation of
these ﬁles without any knowledge of programming. This is
important, as for now the prototype provides no GUI to edit
the user proﬁles and the users have to edit their proﬁles with
a text editor on their own.
In the scope of the prototype, a default conﬁguration is
provided. The emotions and their respective coloring are
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Interface
Coloring Service
User Profile
Default Profile
hudkit
color server
Figure 2. MAD-Coloring color service.
according to the survey in Section II. If the user wants to
change the color of an emotion she can either change the
default proﬁle or create a new user proﬁle. Following an
override approach, the coloring service will always check the
speciﬁc user proﬁle ﬁrst, if the emotion is not included the
service will fallback to the default proﬁle. This makes it quite
comfortable to specify some custom mood/color pairs, while
keeping default settings for most.
It is also possible to deﬁne new emotion/color pairs in
the user proﬁles, wich are not deﬁned in the default proﬁle.
However, in order to be used by the clients the emotions have
to be added to their codebase as well.
C. Coloring-Service
For the coloring service a combination between a modiﬁed
version of hudkit, introduced in Section II, and a self-made
Python Color server is being used (Fig. 2).
Hudkit handles the display coloring. The color server
provides the color services interface and control unit. This
is achieved by implementing the earlier introduced Python
interface and accessing the user proﬁles. Utilizing the Python
interface, the server listens to changes of the mood send by a
client. If a mood change is detected the server resolves the
color according to the used proﬁle. First the user speciﬁc
conﬁguration is read, if no entry for the speciﬁc mood is found
the default conﬁg is read.
After resolving the color, the server sends a signal with the
determined color to the hudkit webserver. Should a mood not
be deﬁned in the conﬁguration ﬁles, the color server defaults to
black with low saturation and displays an error. With this error
handling a missing emotion does not lead to further problems
durring the runtime, but clearly signals the user that a problem
with the used client has ocurred. This error color will not be
interpreted as an emotion by the user, as black is not used by
the default conﬁguration and we highly discourage the usage
of black as it is mostly related to negativ emotions (cf. Table I).
To counter possible negative emotions associated with black,
the low saturation and higher brightness creates a grey overlay
Figure 3. Face detection symbol image - feature highlighting.
in the Hudkit server. This can be interpreted by users as boring,
but will not trigger negative emotions.
D. Clients
The prototype includes two clients. A simple user client
and a intelligent emotion detection client. The simple client
provides a basic GUI to enter the current emotion and change
the display coloring accordingly. It is implemented in Python
and directly accesses the D-Bus instead of the Python wrapper
interface.
The second client is an emotion recognition client, detecting
the current emotional state of the user via image processing
of a webcam feed. As a foundation the work of Rovai was
used, creating a face recognition system utilizing a webcam
with Python and OpenCV [5].
However, the ﬁnal implementation differs fundamentally,
as the client was extended to enable emotion recognition
and connected to the Python interface to communicate with
the coloring service. Further, a multi face detection was
implemented, preventing a ﬂickering color change if two or
more faces are detected. As a result the client will not send
emotional changes to the coloring service, until only one face
is left in its ﬁeld of view. A simpliﬁed version of the used
feature detection can be found in Fig. 3. The eyes are clearly
detected in white and the mouth in green. This allows the
usage of the features in the neural network to determine the
mood.
V. CASE STUDY
Our current team solely consists of researchers from the IT
domain, we have not yet consulted any psychological/medical
experts. Thus we conducted a technical case study instead of
a psychological evaluation of our prototype. The study was
conducted on a Lenovo ThinkPad with 14GB RAM, an AMD
onboard graphic chip, using a GNU/Linux operating system
with a gnome X.Org desktop. During the test runs checks
regarding usability impairments were conducted.
To pre-empt ethical concerns without the approval of
an ethic-committee our test user simply controlled MAD-
Coloring and rated possible concerns regarding the readability
and usability of the desktop with activated MAD-Coloring.
However, he was not exposed to the software for longer
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. MAD-Coloring in effect for moods A) neutral B) mad C) bored.
periods. The face recognition was triggered with prepared
photos instead of live images of the test user.
As a scenario a computer science student with no prior
experience of MAD-Coloring was instructed to start the MAD
coloring client and conduct a manual color change via the
simple user client. Afterwards the face recognition client had
to be started. He was supplied with a computer which had a
preinstalled MAD-Coloring service and the madservice’s linux
manual page.
The user was able to activate the service, change the color
and start the face recognition client in less than a minute.
All color changes and emotion detections worked without any
problems. The user did not experience any problems regarding
reduced readability, yet the usability in color sensitive applica-
tions like image editing was highly impaired because of MAD-
Coloring’s color overlay. However, this was an expected side
effect as mentioned in our solution concept (cf. Section III).
The effect of MAD-Coloring for some emotions can be seen
in Fig. 4.
Following, we suggest a method for measuring the effects
of MAD-Coloring in coming evalutions, which still needs to
be reviewed by psychological experts. Since MAD-Coloring
is designed to be used in daily routines and any kind of test
scenario might cause indifferences, we strongly recommend to
evaluate MAD-Coloring integrated in the daily life of subjects.
To quantify MAD-Coloring, we introduce the concept of an
mood diary where subjects record their emotional condition,
and whether they are able to concentrate for work or not.
The subjects might write this mood diary for a reasonable
period (2-4 weeks). Afterwards, based on these diaries, basic
emotional proﬁles can be created for all subjects.
In the second phase we recommend to split up the sub-
jects into three groups. Group A will be working with our
MAD-Coloring and the preconﬁgured color proﬁle (based on
scientiﬁc work from the color psychology domain and our own
survey). Group B is working with MAD-Coloring as well, but
with ”anti”-colors, which have been associated to be negative
according to a speciﬁc mood (e.g., red if the subject is already
mad). Group C is the control group, which continues working
without any inﬂuence from MAD-Coloring. This phase should
be conducted over a larger time period (2-4 months or longer),
as most likely some time is required to get used to the color
changes. Especially at the beginning these changes could have
a negative impact on the subjects.
By comparing the deltas of the three groups the essential
effects of MAD-Coloring can be determined and whether the
effect depends on speciﬁc colors or just generally on shifting
these. Afterwards further evaluations can be planned targeted
on the existing data.
VI. RELATED RESEARCH
While the idea of color psychology is not new, there is to
our best knowledge no closely related research in the HCI
context. However, some other research topics in the context
can be viewed as relevant.
A. Blue Light Filtering
At the ﬁrst sight blue light ﬁltering software seems to differ
quite signiﬁcantly from our solution, but the fundamental ideas
are quite similar. Both software solutions modify the color
shade of the display to obtain effects on the human user.
However, blue light ﬁltering is based on different medical ef-
fects (cf. [10]) and in most cases it is implemented completely
different than MAD-Coloring.
While MAD-Coloring is based on the psychological effect
of colors and the emotions triggered by colors, the idea of
blue light ﬁltering, as described in [11] is based on physical
and bio-chemical effects [12]. They determine that blue light
emitted by screens contains more energy than any other color.
Further, it is more exhaustive for the human eye than other
colors. In addition to the physical aspects blue light suppresses
the production of the sleeping hormone melatonin which can
cause sleeplessness.
As aforementioned, blue ﬁltering software is often imple-
mented completely different than our solution. Its common
among blue ﬁlters to adjustments the alpha channel to suppress
parts of the blue light. The resource costs for this approach
can be expected to be less than those for overlay based
ﬁlters. This is due by the fact, that the graphics card is not
required to compute a translucent overlay in. However, for
our MAD-Coloring system an alpha shift approach does not
ﬁt the requirements since the software needs to display tints
in various colors.
B. Colors and Trust in Userinterface Design
Hawlitschek et al. [13] thematize the inﬂuence of colors
on the trustworthiness of user interfaces. They analyzed the
moods and meanings associated to different colors via an
experiment.
In this experiment, the probands had to pass a ﬁnance based
trust experiment. The were provided with GUIs in different
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

hues and small amount of money was handed to each proband.
Then, by transfering money to other probands, they where able
to increase the value of their sum by trading between each
other. The experiment tried to determine if the color of their
GUI had a impact on the trust they have in the other probands.
However, they where not able to gain meaningful results from
this experiment.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the novel MAD-Coloring framework was
presented. Respecting the basics of color psychology a small
footprint prototype was implemented, providing a transparent,
color adjustable overlay for Linux X-desktop systems. Further,
two clients were implemented, ready to be use with MAD-
Coloring. A simple input client, allowing the manual change
of the display color and an emotion recognition client, de-
tecting the users current emotional state via a webcam and
adjusting the display color accordingly. Also a Python-API
was implemented, easing the creation and integration of new
clients.
MAD-Coloring, in combination with this clients, is capable
to display a decent, transparent overlay over multiple desktops
according to the users current emotion. It can therefore be used
by everyone, from people wanting to improve their experi-
ence on PCs to therapists working with color psychological
approaches with their patients.
While fully functional, further work is required to reﬁne
and improve the system. On the one hand, medical studies are
required to evaluate the psychological impact of the system
and therefore conﬁrming its usefulness. Following this further
studies are required to ﬁnd optimal color proﬁles to maximize
the effect. On the other hand, some technical improvements
can be conducted. The coloring service, heavily relying on
Hudkit can be further slimed down, reduce the performance
footprint to a minimum. Further, the support of more desktop
environments could be realized. Finally more clients should be
implemented, allowing more speciﬁc use cases and optimal
support for more kinds if needs. These clients could also
use smart devices like watches or ﬁtness tracers, allowing the
integration of blood pressure into the emotion recognition.
REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Elliot and M. A. Maier, “Color-in-context theory,” in Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology.
Elsevier, 2012, pp. 61–125.
[2] R. M. Rider, “Color psychology and graphic design applications.”
Liberty University, 2010.
[3] C. Li and H. Shi, “Medical space oriented color psychology perception
model,” Applied Mechanics and Materials, vol. 587-589, pp. 461–467,
07 2014.
[4] M. A. Maier, A. J. Elliot, and R. A. Barton, “Color in achievement
contexts in humans,” in Handbook of Color Psychology, A. J. Elliot,
M. D. Fairchild, and A. Franklin, Eds.
Cambridge University Press,
pp. 568–584.
[5] M.
Rovai,
“Real-time
face
recognition:
An
end-to-end
project,”
2018,
last
visited:
2021.06.14.
[Online].
Avail-
able: https://towardsdatascience.com/real-time-face-recognition-an-end-
to-end-project-b738bb0f7348
[6] D. Yang, A. Alsadoon, P. Prasad, A. Singh, and A. Elchouemi, “An
emotion recognition model based on facial recognition in virtual learning
environment,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 125, pp. 2 – 10, 2018,
the 6th International Conference on Smart Computing and Communica-
tions.
[7] S. Ghosh, E. Laksana, L.-P. Morency, and S. Scherer, “Representation
Learning for Speech Emotion Recognition,” Interspeech 2016, pp. 3603–
3607, Sep. 2016.
[8] M. Kido, “Bio-psychological effects of color,” Journal of International
Society of Life Information Science, vol. 18, pp. 254–268, 2000.
[9] (2021) The hudkit-projekt github page. Last visited: 2021.06.14.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/anko/hudkit
[10] (2020, jul) Harvard health letter - blue light has a dark side. Last visited:
2021.06.14. [Online]. Available: https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-
healthy/blue-light-has-a-dark-side
[11] S. Mitropoulos, V. Tsiantos, A. Americanos, I. Sianoudis, and A. Sk-
ouroliakou, “Blue light reducing software applications for mobile phone
screens: measurement of spectral characteristics and biological parame-
ters.” in RAP 2019 Conference Proceedings. Sievert Association, 2020,
pp. 220–224.
[12] R. Sutherland, “What is in a color? the unique human health effects of
blue light,” in Envirionmental Healt Perspectives volume 118.
News
Focus, 2010, pp. 23–27.
[13] F. Hawlitschek, L.-E. Jansen, E. Lux, T. Teubner, and C. Weinhardt,
“Colors and trust: The inﬂuence of user interface design on trust and
reciprocity,” in 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS).
IEEE, jan 2016, pp. 590–599.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

