 
 
Design of Interfaces for People with Blindness 
Designing the Complete Learning Environment for Braille Users Studying Mathematics 
 
Yvonne Eriksson 
School of Innovation, Design and Engineering, division of 
Information Design  
Mälardalen university 
Eskilstuna, Sweden 
email: yvonne.eriksson@mdh.se 
Björn Westling 
School of Innovation, Design and Engineering, division of 
Information Design 
Mälardalen university / Swedish Agency for Accessible 
Media 
Eskilstuna, Sweden / Malmö, Sweden 
email: bjorn.westling@mtm.se
 
 
Abstract—Digital platforms are not automatically accessible 
for people with blindness, it must be designed for 
multimodality, both regarding the architecture and the 
interface. With the point of departure in the Nine Laws of 
Cognition we focus on complex content such as mathematics 
and how it could be accessible for Braille readers. The aim of 
this paper is to highlight and to discuss what is required from 
digital platforms to support mathematic Braille. The situation 
for Braille users learning mathematics is not at all very 
satisfactory. 
When 
using 
the 
ASCIIMath 
format 
(a 
mathematical markup language) in digital reading and 
writing, Braille users practice a format not in use by teachers 
or sighted peers. What we are aiming at here, is to identify the 
functionality and the technical infrastructure needed to make 
the design of a truly usable learning environment possible. 
Keywords; EPUB3; ASCIIMath; Braille digital platforms.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The digitalization of society makes it possible to design 
computer interfaces accessible for people with blindness and 
low vision. Digital platforms are not automatically accessible 
for people with blindness and low vision, it must be designed 
for multimodality, both regarding the architecture and the 
interface. In this paper, we will focus on complex content 
such as mathematics and how it could be accessible for 
Braille readers. Not by simplifying the complexity but to 
make it accessible. The aim of this paper is to highlight and 
to discuss what is required from digital platforms to support 
mathematic Braille.  
When it comes to e-books a technological shift is 
ongoing. A pilot study was initiated by the Swedish Agency 
for Accessible Media, MTM (MTM = Myndigheten för 
tillgängliga medier), in which EPUB 3 (EPUB = electronic 
publication) was introduced for users with blindness. EPUB 
3 is an e-book file format and a technical standard for 
production and consumption of digital books, and for other 
various publications. It is not specifically aimed for users 
with print impairments, but with the ambition to be 
accessible for all users [1]. The EPUB 3.2 specification 
states that “EPUB 3 defines a distribution and interchange 
format for digital publications and documents. The EPUB 
format provides a means of representing, packaging, and 
encoding structured and semantically enhanced Web 
content—including HTML [HyperText Markup Language], 
CSS [Cascading Style Sheets], SVG [Scalable Vector 
Graphics] and other resources—for distribution in a single-
file container” [2].  
A. Complex content for Braille users  
Braille consists of a cell containing six dots that could be 
combined in 64 different ways. Even though Braille has 
specific combinations of dots representing the various letters 
in the alphabet, and though the Braille cell combinations are 
not based on letter sign similarities but on other principles, 
Braille needs to be considered as a unique writing system 
with its own writing principles. Braille is used for various 
kinds of notations, text, phonetics, music, mathematics, and 
science. With the use of certain Braille patterns as 
composition signs, it is possible to vary the meaning of the 
following braille cells, and thus creating a very large number 
of character representations in Braille. An example is given 
in Figure 1 showing how letters are discriminated from 
numbers.  
 
Figure 1.  Braille letters with the special composition sign for numbers 
change meaning to numbers.  
However, this ability of Braille in representing various 
notations is not in itself enough to make it possible accessing 
complex content in digital form, such as mathematics.  
Complex could be defined as something consisting of 
many different and connected parts. Mathematics is complex 
and denoting or involving numbers or quantities containing 
both a real and an imaginary part. The notation systems for 
mathematics are also complex and in more advanced 
mathematics many kinds of expressions exist built on known 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
and unknown variables. Expressions are often notated in 
print in a two-dimensional form, e.g., fractions and square 
roots. For a Braille reader, all this will be presented in a 
linear form as shown in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2.  Mathematics in Braille is mainly linear, here an example of a 
complex fraction in Swedish Braille. 
The principles for how to represent mathematics in 
Braille (Braille standards) vary considerably between 
languages and countries. In Swedish Braille, a mathematical 
expression may be written within a regular text, whereas in 
an English text special Braille signs are needed indicating 
that the content is mathematical. In Figure 3 this difference is 
shown with a simple mathematical example.  
 
Figure 3.  The Nemeth code for mathematics uses “switch indicators” for 
when the user should interpret Braille signs as mathematics – here marked 
in grey. In Swedish Braille no such indicators are used. 
B. From Library for the blind to Agency of Accessible 
Media  
In 1980 the library of the Swedish Association of the 
Visually Impaired was reorganized, becoming the core of the 
then founded Swedish Library for Talking Books and 
Braille, a governmental agency. The mission for the Swedish 
Library for Talking Books and Braille was to make already 
existing, published books and music notations accessible for 
Braille readers and readers of talking books. The content 
ranged from fiction, poetry, popular science to books for 
children, but also course literature for students at 
universities. The target group were people with blindness or 
low vision. That group expanded over the years to include 
people with different kinds of reding disabilities, such as 
dyslexia, cognitive disabilities, diseases causing spasms, and 
other problems when reading printed books. The disability 
could be permanent or temporary. Because of the expanded 
target group and the variety of media due to the 
digitalization, the Swedish Library for Talking Books and 
Braille, made a shift in their focus and became the Swedish 
Agency for Accessible Media (MTM) in 2013. MTM 
produces and distributes literature and magazines in 
accessible formats for people with reading disabilities and 
actively participates in the development of accessible media.  
A simplified definition of media is literature and 
magazines made by MTM. Accessibility of these media 
includes talking books, Braille books, e-textbooks, literature 
in sign language, tactile picture books, Braille calendars, the 
easy-to-read news magazine 8 sidor (8 pages), and easy-to-
read books. The ability to make media accessible rests on 
theories about our senses, how they work individually and in 
combination. The interest for how different senses work and 
in which way a loss of one sense affects an individual has a 
long history. Much of the research regarding blindness has 
focused on the relation between vision and touch [3] [4]. 
What kind of information could be replaced by touch when 
someone has lost their eyesight? Research has been in 
relation to Braille reading, and tactile pictures, but also on 
spatial understanding and blindness [5] [6]. A study from 
1965 contains both an extensive literature review on reading 
of talking books and a study that compared sighted students 
with students with blindness in relation to what they have 
comprehend of the content [7]. This study is representative 
for research from the first decades of the use of talking 
books, since the focus for the early studies was not on 
comparing Braille reading and talking books, but on making 
comparisons between sighted and non-sighted reading 
talking books. Talking books were introduced during the 
1930s, e.g., in 1934 by the National Library Service at the 
Library of Congress, and in 1935 by the Royal National 
Institute for Blind (RNIB), and further developed during the 
following decades. The first talking book was recorded on 
disc and was played on special designed turn tables and it 
was not until tape recorder were developed in 1950s it was 
spread to a larger audience with blindness. To begin with, 
there was an over-reliance on its ability to replace Braille. 
This could partly be explained by the enthusiasm for the 
technology and partly by a simplified production of talking 
books compared to Braille. The Braille books were manually 
copied by people that had knowledge in Braille while 
recording talking books could be made by anyone that had 
some reading aloud skills. The development in technology 
and reading devices for recorded books has been striking 
from tape recorder to cassette recorder, to Walkman, MP3 (a 
coding format for digital audio), Daisy players (Daisy = 
digital accessible information system) and smartphones. The 
development of accessible Braille has followed the same 
noticeable development, with refreshable Braille displays for 
computers, Braille printers, and refreshable Braille displays 
to use in combination with smart phones. However, later 
discussions have brought up the necessity of access to the 
written language for people with blindness, the necessity of 
access to Braille. Both for learning outcome and for 
democratic reasons literacy is important. 
In section II, the cognitive processes in relation to 
accessing platforms that support problem solving in 
mathematics are explored. In section III, multimodality is 
discussed, and in section IV, the focus is on usability and 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
technical development, the challenges and what ought to be 
developed to improve the usability for Braille readers 
studying mathematics. In section V, we suggest further 
research and development in order to progress in the creation 
of a complete, flexible, and usable learning environment for 
Braille users learning mathematics. 
II. 
COGNITIVE PROCESSES  
The cognitive psychologist Barbara Tversky presents The 
Nine Laws of Cognition in her book, Mind in Motion: How 
Action Shapes Thought (2019). These laws serve as a basis 
for discussion in this book, combined with socio-cultural 
perspectives. The laws are as follows:  
 
1. There are no benefits without costs.  
2. Action molds perception.  
3. Feeling comes first.  
4. The mind can override perception.  
5. Cognition mirrors perception.  
6. Spatial thinking is the foundation of abstract 
thought.  
7. The mind fills in missing information.  
8. When thought overflows the mind, the mind 
puts it into the world.  
9. We organize stuff in the world the way we 
organize stuff in our minds. 
 
These laws illustrate how the mind gets involved as we 
navigate the world and interpret our environment. Even 
though our mind and senses are dependent on physiological 
conditions, the way we think, the emotional condition we are 
in and how we organize ‘stuff’ in our mind are also highly 
dependent on the cultural traditions that we belong to, as 
well as on our living conditions. It is a relationship between 
cognitive aspects and a socio-cultural perspective, which is a 
combination of culture, cultural traditions, socio-economic 
conditions, and societal aspects. These aspects need to be 
taken into consideration when designing for people with 
blindness and low vision.  
A. There are no benefits without costs  
The lack of one sense will causes challenges for a person, 
to make something accessible does mean that some effort is 
needed. To make a platform or a software accessible for a 
Braille reader means it could be usable with a Braille display 
or by synthetic speech. Synthetic speech will require more 
strain on working memory than using the Braille display. 
Since a Braille display only show one row at the time it does 
not give the same overview as screen display.  
B. Action molds perception  
Perception is not something that comes to us, we need to 
be active to perceive the environment. To be able to perceive 
the Braille letters motion is needed, one must move the 
fingertips on a display or a printed sheet to recognize the 
letters. However, how the movement goes and how many 
fingers that are involved, if both hands are used or not, 
depends on the individual [8]. The same goes for audio 
information, one can hear a sound, voice, or noise, but to 
perceive the content or identify what is causing the noise we 
must listen actively.  
C. Feeling come first  
If we are not motivated to read, learn, or do something, 
we do not gain either understanding or knowledge. The 
feeling is often affected by what supports or hinders the use 
of a platform or a software. By designing for accessibility 
there is chance that the user feels addressed and by that 
motivated to take the effort to use the platform.  
D. Mind can override the perception  
Seeing is something we learn, and we continually learn to 
do it [9]. When we have something in front of us, it could be 
an object or a view, we do not always look at what we see 
since memory overrides perception. For a person with 
blindness, it is not always that they perceive what they touch 
or hear, since they are occupied by previous experience that 
works as a grid between them and the environment. We 
experience the world from our own bodies, that involves 
previous experience and memory that are involved in all 
perception.  
E. Cognition mirrors perception  
What we see, touch, and hear, influences our mental 
images, and our mental images influences the perception of 
the environment [10]. Like sighted people, blind people learn 
to touch and hear continually. It is a way to learn about the 
environment, or as Tversky [11] puts it: “Mental spatial 
frameworks can be used to store and organize ideas, any kind 
of idea…” She argues that spatial mental frameworks can 
organize ideas, and mental image is not necessarily created 
in relation to pictures, it could as well be created from words 
[11].  
F. Spatial thinking is the foundation of abstract thought  
Much of our thinking is ordered in space and time, we 
think of the future or the past, where we have put things and 
how to organize our desk or files in the computer. Spatial 
thinking is also a part of spatial awareness. Spatiality could 
be discussed on both micro and macro level. On micro level 
we could discuss various phenomena, such as design of a 
text, a computer interface or Braille book. Spatial thinking 
includes logic, something that could be communicated. 
Platforms and interfaces aiming to support people with 
blindness need to have a spatial and hierarchical structure 
that follow the logic of the content and the intended use.  
G. When thought overflows the mind, the mind puts it into 
the world  
Like sighted people, blind people need to take notes, or 
jotting in textbooks to remember important parts. Printed 
Braille books do not allow jotting in the book, the notes need 
to be made separate as text or voice memos. A possibility to 
integrate jotting and the writing of exercises within a 
teaching material, creating an interactive textbook, should be 
possible within an EPUB 3 publication, but is not commonly 
spread yet. For the time being, exercises are made in parallel, 
e.g., as MS Word documents.  
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
H. We organize stuff in the world the way we organize stuff 
in our minds  
In early 2000s Lev Manovich [12] argued that for an 
interactive multimedia program to be interactive, the user 
needs to go into the head of the programmer, that is to 
understand his or her logic. This is still the case in many 
situations, but most of us has been trained in how to find out 
the logic of the designer of a program. To make complex 
content accessible such as mathematics and science for 
people with blindness, a user involvement is necessary.  
III. 
MULTIMODALITY  
The term modality could be defined either as a sense or 
as a medium such as text, picture, or sound. Often when we 
talk about multimodality, we include both definitions, since a 
multimodal process involves the use of various senses when 
we are watching a movie or read a book that includes text 
and pictures. However, a single media can involve a 
multimodal process, we read about an environment and 
imagine how it looks like, or we read about a specific sound 
and hear it inside the head. To design for multimodal 
experience among people with blindness, and low vision, it 
is necessary to have knowledge in how tactile perception 
works, how audio input can support activities, and the 
principles for Braille reading.  
We perceive and understand our surroundings through 
our senses. Many researchers believe that the ability to 
interpret the impressions we get through our senses are 
innate, others that we through experience learn to interpret 
the various sensory impressions we get through sight, 
hearing, feeling, taste, and smell [5]. There is also an 
extensive discussion as to whether our senses conflict with 
each other or interact, and if so how. Too much input from 
different modalities can lead to cognitive load [13]. An 
individual who is either congenitally blind or that later 
acquires an injury, will not obviously develop the other 
senses to compensate for the missing. Instead, it can work 
the opposite way. It is therefore important to stimulate and 
activate, for example, a child with blindness so that he or she 
really utilizes touch, smell, and hearing.  
The orientation system is fundamental to the others 
which are: the visual, the auditory, the haptic and the taste-
smell system. The basic orientation system interacts with the 
other systems and constitutes a frame of reference for these 
[14]. It can be assumed that people with blindness become 
better at interpreting tactile information than sighted. Not 
because there is a special one sensitivity, but because you 
concentrate and practice in a different way than sight needs 
to do. The tactile perception is very limited. We can only feel 
one small area at a time, the sense of touch does not function 
as seeing where one can get an overview of a large area at 
the same time. What can be perceived by touch is what we 
are in direct contact with.  
Auditory input, such as read out text or synthetic speech, 
is common for people with blindness, and function as a 
support or supplement to Braille. However, when studying 
mathematics, a combination of braille and audio is necessary 
since it requires too much cognitive load to use audio only.  
IV. 
USABILITY AND TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENT  
During 2021 MTM is performing a shift to EPUB 3 as 
the overall production format for various media types, 
leaving DTBook (DTBook = Digital Talking Book), a Daisy 
XML production format (XML = Extensible Markup 
Language). Daisy is an international standard designed to be 
a complete audio substitute for print material and is 
specifically designed for use by people with blindness, low 
vision, and dyslexia. Based on the MP3 and XML formats, 
the Daisy format has advanced features in addition to those 
of a traditional talking book. MTM is furthermore planning 
to use EPUB 3 as distribution format for talking books (with 
text and recorded sound). The present distribution format is 
called Daisy 2.02. This change has been prepared and 
expected for many years and is a part of a global shift in 
electronic publishing and in accessible publishing for 
persons with print disabilities.  
Driving forces in the development of industry standards 
for accessibility, in both mainstream publishing and in 
specialist accessible publishing by organizations for people 
with a print disability, has been the Daisy Consortium [15], 
the International Digital Publishing Forum (IDPF) [16], the 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) [17], and others. This 
technological shift will lead to accessibility improvements 
for Braille readers. To be noted here, and of importance, is 
the use of standard internet technologies in EPUB 3, such as 
HTML5 and CSS3.  
EPUB 3 publications will in most cases have built in 
accessibility features, such as:  
• 
Being readable with assistive technologies.  
• 
Having text that fits all screen sizes.  
• 
Having adjustable text (font, color, font size and line 
spacing).  
• 
Being navigable by chapter, section, page, sentence 
and more.  
A. Pilot study of EPUB 3  
But accessibility does not come by itself, to prepare for 
the coming shift to EPUB 3 as a consumer format at MTM a 
pilot project was performed in 2018. The overall purpose 
was to “create increased usability for customers at MTM and 
SPSM (The National Agency for Special Needs Education 
and Schools) by the transition to a more modern consumer 
format for various digital products which today are delivered 
in the Textview format [a local e-book format] and in the 
Daisy 
2.02-format”. The 
pilot 
project produced 
a 
requirements document for a usable digital reading 
experience by Braille users, based on a survey with 7 Braille 
users and 10 teachers/counsellors working with visually 
impaired. A thorough study of current recommendations and 
best practices in accessible digital publishing was carried out 
and a first draft of production guidelines was created. These 
guidelines are today in active use. A production process for 
creating valid and accessible EPUB 3 files was established. 
A sample book for testing purposes was created, as well as a 
set of feature tests based on the gathered requirements. 
Testing was performed with Braille users [18].  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
The need to fulfill certain prerequisites before 
introducing EPUB 3 as a distribution/consumer format were 
observed, including the following:  
• 
EPUB 3 reader software and screen readers must 
function well together. This means, e.g., that 
keyboard shortcuts are coordinated and does not 
have competing functions in the reader software and 
in the screen reader respectively. Information must 
be sent to the refreshable braille display and to the 
speech synthesis equally.  
• 
Access to original pagination/page numbering when 
available to enhance navigability.  
• 
Skippability or escapability, i.e. the possibility to 
escape from certain content such as tables, and to 
continue to read the main content.  
Concerning mathematics in EPUB 3, the pilot study 
stated that, since the EPUB 3 specification allows the 
embedding 
of 
mathematical 
markup 
with MathML 
(Mathematical Markup Language), it is very likely the best 
choice to handle mathematics in digital master files. The 
need for development of support for the Swedish language 
for MathML was therefore highlighted, both for output in 
braille and in speech synthesis.   
B. Usability challenges for Braille users learning 
mathematics  
The Swedish Braille Authority is the official language 
caring authority for Swedish Braille under the auspices of 
MTM. It has been noted and expressed by the Swedish 
Braille Authority, that teaching material and teaching 
methods for students learning mathematics using Braille 
have a large potential to be improved.  
The current learning materials produced by SPSM and 
MTM for Braille users contain mathematic content in the 
ASCIIMath format. This is a practical and useful choice by 
the agencies since the Braille users may by themselves write 
mathematical expressions in the ASCIIMath format using a 
normal computer keyboard.  
The situation for Braille users learning mathematics is 
not at all satisfactory though. When using the ASCIIMath 
format in digital reading and writing, Braille users practice a 
format not in use by teachers or sighted peers. This means 
that Braille users cannot present their exercises in a format 
that teachers and peers are familiar with.  
Braille users may also get paper Braille teaching 
materials from SPSM and from MTM. The Braille standard 
for writing mathematics on paper is very much different 
from reading and writing digitally in the ASCIIMath format. 
We can see here that Braille users need to be acquainted with 
several alternative mathematical formats, which is not 
expected from their sighted peers – their cognitive load is 
hence comparatively heavier.  
The possibility to use Braille as input, to write 
mathematical expressions by using a Braille keyboard, is not 
present. Neither is the possibility to choose the paper Braille 
standard for mathematics as output format, nor speech input 
or output for Swedish.  
The choice to produce mathematic content in the 
ASCIIMath format seems to have been the least bad choice, 
meaning that it has provided the Braille user with some 
functionality, but not at all satisfactory in usability. What we 
now imagine is that the technical development has created a 
possibility to go beyond present and earlier technical 
barriers.  
Current testing in 2021 at MTM has used MathJax 
software embedded in the EPUB 3 book to render 
mathematical expressions. The MathJax project is an open-
source software product that provides support for 
mathematical markup directly in HTML source code, such as 
LaTeX (a document preparation system), MathML, and 
ASCIIMath markup. As output MathJax may produce 
HTML and CSS, SVG, or MathML. The MathJax software 
seems to be in the forefront in current technology for 
producing or rendering mathematics.  
V. 
DISCUSSION  
The vision is a complete, flexible, and usable learning 
environment for Braille users learning mathematics by 
providing all complementary input and output possibilities 
that are relevant for Braille users, for the individual to 
choose from.  
The result from the EPUB 3 pilot study indicated that the 
readers would benefit from the multimodal input where 
Braille 
and 
synthetic 
speech 
could 
be 
combined 
simultaneously. Since the EPUB 3 presupposes a text to be 
well-structured in markup, it supports a spatial and 
hierarchical structure that follow the logic of the content and 
the intended use. That reduces the cognitive load which 
influences the way people learn [13]. For people with 
blindness this is important, as they are limited to senses 
(touch and hearing) that do not allow an overview of the 
material they are reading.  
The EPUB 3 format supports spatial thinking [11] since it 
offers the possibility for good navigation in the book, 
enabled by a strict hierarchical structure in markup. 
Navigation in relation to page numbers is not guaranteed 
though, it depends on page numbers being present in the 
source material and if the EPUB reader software has the 
functionality to render page numbers. The possibility to skip 
parts in a text such as figure and tables is enabled through 
supporting markup.  
The ability to make use of the various parts of a flexible 
learning environment, such as Braille keyboard, speech, 
ASCIIMath and MathML (with regular keyboard) enhances 
multimodality. Since multimodal processes are involved in 
learning situations it is important that people with blindness 
have access to several modalities. Such flexibility will 
motivate the Braille reader since it gives a feeling of freedom 
[11]. 
The various output modes required for a flexible learning 
environment are similar but have more variants: refreshable 
Braille devices, speech, Braille embossers, ASCIIMath, 
MathML, and SVG for images. The ability to emboss 
mathematical content in paper Braille is an important feature 
for Braille users, just as printing is for print users.  
Image output (e.g., the SVG format) is crucial for Braille 
users, e.g., when delivering exercise assignments to sighted 
teachers. The possibility to send images with mathematical 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
content to refreshable Braille devices that can reproduce 
images and graphs in a tactile mode, such as the Graphiti 
from Orbit research, would enable Braille users yet another 
way to interact and explore mathematical content. That will 
support the ability to get spatial overview and support spatial 
thinking since it is the foundation of abstract thoughts [11]. 
The future complete, flexible, and usable learning 
environment would rely on the EPUB 3 format and on 
current technology for producing and rendering mathematics, 
most notably the MathJax software. The development of the 
software should preferably be made with consideration to 
multimodality and the cognitive aspects that are presented in 
the Nine Laws of Cognition. We have identified what is 
needed for people with blindness to have access to complex 
content in Braille: 
• 
The possibility to write in Braille, to input Braille – 
note that there are fundamental differences in how 
Braille standards for mathematics are constructed in 
various languages and countries. 
• 
Conversion 
between 
Braille 
and 
MathML/ASCIIMath/LaTeX needs to be developed.  
• 
The possibility to output Braille to various devices 
including embossers. 
• 
Conversion between MathML/ASCIIMath/LaTeX 
and Braille needs to be developed and/or adapted to 
various languages, such as Swedish.  
• 
An individual choice in input and output settings.  
• 
Software that can display mathematics visually using 
MathJax and HTML5, both within and outside the 
EPUB 3 context. 
• 
Software that can display mathematic content 
written by Braille users. 
• 
Interaction with refreshable Braille devices that are 
able to produce images and graphs, such as the 
Graphiti, an interactive tactile graphics display from 
Orbit research.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
The conclusion is that more knowledge is needed when 
designing the interfaces for a future learning environment for 
Braille users learning mathematics. What we are aiming at, is 
to identify the functionality and the technical infrastructure 
needed to make the design of a truly usable learning 
environment possible. Central is the possibility to use Braille 
as input and output mode, to switch freely between the 
available input and output modes, and the possibility to make 
these choices individually. Crucial for the motivation in 
Braille users to learn mathematics is an interface that is 
designed with regard to cognitive aspects and taking 
available modalities into consideration, that is touch and 
hearing.  
A. Future research  
The Swedish Braille Authority has identified the need of 
performing several investigations or knowledge overviews in 
preparation of the creation and design of a more complete, 
flexible, and usable learning environment for Braille users 
learning mathematics:  
• 
A 
knowledge 
overview 
of 
teaching 
materials/resources and methods for sighted learners 
in mathematics. What are the various teaching 
materials/resources and methods? Which of them 
works, and which does not work, for Braille users? 
Why does certain teaching materials/resources and 
methods work well?  
• 
A knowledge overview of the learning situation in 
various countries for students learning mathematics 
using Braille.  
REFERENCES 
[1] The 
World 
Wide 
Web 
Consortium 
(W3C). 
EPUB 
Accessibility 
1.1: 
Conformance 
and 
Discoverability 
Requirements for EPUB Publications. [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.w3.org/TR/epub-a11y-11/ 2021.07.01 
[2] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). EPUB 3.2: Final 
Community Group Specification 08 May 2019. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.w3.org/publishing/epub3/epub-
spec.html 2021.07.01 
[3] D. Katz, The world of touch,, L.E. Kreuger, Ed. A 
Psychology Press Book, Hillday, New Jersey: Routledge, 
1989. 
[4] Y. Eriksson, Tactile Pictures. Pictorial representations for the 
blind 1784–1940. Diss. Acta Universitas Gothoburgensis, 
1998. 
[5] J. M. Kennedy, Drawing and the Blind. Pictures to Touch. 
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993. 
[6] S. Millar, Space and Sense. Oxford: Routledge, 2008. 
[7] F. J. Crowley, A Comparison of the Listening Ability of Blind 
Students and the Listening Ability of Sighted Students in the 
Intermediate Grades. Bronx: Fordham University, 1965. 
[8] Y. Eriksson and K. Fellenius, Interaction between Braille and 
tactile pictures for a deeper understanding. Terra Haptica. 
Tactile picture, Cognition, Education, 2014, pp 55–65. 
[9] Y. Eriksson, Bildens tysta budskap. Interaktion mellan bild 
och text [The silent message of the image. Interaction 
between image and text]. Lund: Studentlitteratur, 2017. 
[10] N. Mirzoeff, How to See the World. UK: Pelican Books, 
2015. 
[11] B. Tversky, Mind In Motion, How Action Shapes Thought. 
New York: Basic Books, 2019. 
[12] L. Manovich, The Language of New Media, Cam. Mass.: 
MIT Press, 2001. 
[13] G. Cooper, Research into cognitive load theory and 
instructional design at UNSW. In: Retrieved October 22 
(1998), p. 2003.  
[14] J. J. Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1979. 
[15] The 
DAISY 
Consortium. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://daisy.org/ 2021.07.01 
[16] International Digital Publishing Forum. [Online]. Available 
from: http://idpf.org/ 2021.07.01 
[17] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.w3.org/ 2021.07.01 
[18] From Textview to EPUB 3 – a Swedish pilot project for the 
introduction of EPUB 3 as consumer format at MTM and 
SPSM, final report, Stockholm: MTM, 2018.  
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

