Instruments for Collective Design in a Professional Context: 
Digital Format or New Processes ? 
 
Samia Ben Rajeb, Pierre Leclercq 
LUCID, University of Liège 
Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: {samia.benrajeb, pierre.leclercq} @ ulg.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract—This article reports on different collective practices 
and their instruments observed in the context of professional 
design activities. Based on interviews and in situ observations 
of customs in six architecture, engineering, and design 
agencies, it shows the diversity of typologies of collective 
activity, identifies the main factors of collaboration, and 
concludes on the needs for the instrumentation of professional 
practice. Is it a matter of building higher and higher 
performance digital formats for a shared modeling of the 
project or to lean instead towards the creation of new processes 
of group management and remote work by several people? 
From the results of this observation of collective practices in 
design, this article allows one to highlight the real needs of the 
agencies and to help their teamwork. These needs consist of: 1) 
facilitating reflection, 2) managing changing dynamics, 3) 
allowing the reflective exploration by several persons between 
space and time, and finally 4) guaranteeing a common 
progressive and exploratory strategy between actors whose 
expertise and commitment differ within the same process.   
 
Keywords-collaborative 
design; 
professional 
practice; 
observations; tools and processes. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Faced with competition, tight deadlines for delivery, and 
qualitative and regulatory demands, which are increasingly 
complicated and difficult, the architectural and design 
agencies 
are 
innovating 
concerning 
interdisciplinary 
approaches, associating different skills that are necessary for 
the realization of the project [1][2]. Nowadays, the designer 
does not work alone on a project but with other experts, 
bringing 
together 
architects, 
engineers, 
designers, 
sociologists, economists, etc. The process has thus become 
collective, reuniting different skills which must be applied 
starting with the first phases of the project design. 
Several researchers are indeed interested in group design 
and have proposed tools to facilitate the sharing of 
communication [3][4]. Since the development of the Internet, 
new technologies have been conceived, stemming from the 
CSCW (Computer-Supported Cooperative Work) scientific 
field to support group work [5]. 
Called groupware, these tools are used today to guarantee 
the coordination, to manage the tasks and to enable the 
cooperation between several actors separated geographically. 
But most of them only partially meet the specific needs of 
the agencies and their design processes whose synchronous 
sharing of annotations, graphic interactions, and information 
management is essential [6]. This sharing is even more 
indispensable in daily activity because of qualitative 
requirements and increasingly coercive regulations. In 
addition, most of these agencies are faced with strong 
competition and tighter and tighter deadlines even though 
their activities involve different skills due to design, 
architecture, engineering, ecology, ergonometry, sociology, 
etc. 
This is why it seems essential to clarify the specificities 
of the real activity of design in agencies, in terms of tools as 
well as work methods, before even beginning to compare the 
computer support and/or solving the problems that can be 
linked to it. This choice is based on the working hypothesis 
where the project considers design as a unique and 
complicated activity gathering together different viewpoints 
and having to answer to several choices, problems and 
constraints linked to the project. Our study is based on an 
analytic approach inspired by the methodological approach 
of “action research” [7], which consists in going into the 
field in order to get directly into a real industrial context to 
observe and study some work tools and procedures. 
This article presents in sections II, III, and IV, the latest 
developments and the question of research that are the 
framework of our study and the methodology on which it is 
based. Section V follows by exposing different real practices 
in architectural, engineering and design agencies, which 
present the particularity of leaning on a collective, 
multidisciplinary, and multi-sites activity. Their practices, 
procedures and tools are put forward in section VI, so as to 
point out, through the diversity of observed collective 
situations, the collaborative operations put into practice, as 
well as the different co-spaces that make up their work 
environment. 
II.  
LATEST DEVELOPMENTS AND RESEARCH 
QUESTIONS 
Collective activity has been the object of many research 
projects. It is usually compared to individual activity [8] and 
may take several forms depending on the field in which it is 
examined. To define the different forms of collective 
activity, some researchers have distinguished between them 
according to the objectives sought by the protagonists of the 
project and the specificity of the tools used to work in groups 
[9][10]. Other researchers have highlighted the influence of 
the number of actors and their hierarchical relations in their 
activities [2][5][11][12]. Others have shown that collective 
activities change according to the task, the kind of exchange, 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and the tools used by the actors to work together 
[13][14][15]. Others have specified the collective activity 
according to the time reference and the space of exchange, 
and they have even proposed a classification of the tools, 
which allows them to support this work in groups 
(groupware) via the time/space matrix first set up by 
Johansen [16] and then repeated by Ellis, Gibbs and Rein 
[17], and Gaver [18]. Other researchers have also proposed 
other kinds of classification of groupware according to their 
objectives in the conception: cooperation, coordination or 
communication [19]. 
Faced with this abundance of classifications of collective 
activities and their tools, our beginning premise is to focus 
our research neither on the comparison of performances of 
computer-assisted design nor on the solution to their 
problems. The primary aim of our study is to clarify the 
collective design activities set up in the agencies by simply 
relating their specificities and their real needs without 
preconceptions or the imposition of any tool or group-work 
method. 
III. RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
This work fits partially in the frame of the program 
“Creation: actors, objects and contexts”. Called CoCreA and 
financed by the National Agency for Research in France, this 
project groups 3 research laboratories in different fields 
(Limsi-CNRS, Map-Maacc and LUCID-ULg). Its objective 
is the development of new understanding of creative 
collaboration in architecture, examining the customs, their 
tools for sharing, as well as the implications in the actual 
design activities [20]. This study framework has enabled us 
to investigate the professional context on which our research 
question is based, examining the actual collective design 
activities and their need for assistance. 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
For the study of collective design activities, several 
protocols have been set up. According to Ericsson and 
Simon [21], two complimentary trends of intervention and 
analysis are to be distinguished between: 
• 
The “retrospective protocols,” which concern the 
study of projects regardless of the situation in which 
they evolve; 
• 
and the “concurrent protocols,” which take an 
interest in the analysis of the real activity, taking into 
account the particularity of the designers, their tasks, 
and the environment in which they work and 
collaborate. 
Our study joins more with the second trend and is more 
particularly based on the “action research” methodological 
approach, whose first objective is to examine the practices in 
their actual context, and group together action and reflection, 
theory and practice, with the participation of individuals and 
their communities [22]. Based on ethnographical studies and 
faced with the complexity of collective design activity, we 
have chosen this approach because, according to Brydon-
Miller et al. [7], it is better suited to specify the action and 
the know-how of the experts in their context: between actors, 
social hierarchy, the urgency of the reports, regulations, 
procedures to be respected, deadlines to meet, diversities of 
situations in which the objects to be designed evolve and 
their protagonists, etc.. 
In order to build up a specific knowledge of this activity, 
we have been thus based on on-site observations and 
interviews. This data involves several agencies having a 
collective design activity and meeting the same criteria: they 
are multi-disciplinary, multi-site and/or work with other 
design agencies, and declare that they have set up real 
collaborative practices in their activity (architecture, 
engineering, or design agencies).  
We have been able to accumulate observations and 
interviews from different meetings of operators working in 
the agencies. We have then organized our analytic basis on 5 
themes: 
• 
The way the agency functions: the methods and 
habits of the agency, the different sectors that it deals 
with, the operators that it brings together depending 
on their expertise, competencies, and knowledge in 
the project; 
• 
the kinds of collaboration and the characteristics of 
the collective activities: the face-to-face or remote 
collaborative practices of the agency, inter-agency 
collaboration or collaboration with external actors 
(sub-contractors, consultants, general companies, 
etc.), the kinds of meetings that they set up, etc.; 
• 
the tools and procedures of exchange and their roles 
in the collaboration and in the design process: in this 
case we mainly based our research on the cases of 
remote collaboration highlighting the kind of project 
concerned, the tools used, the procedures and 
methods chosen or adopted to work together 
remotely, as well as the consequences these practices 
have on the design methods; 
• 
the exchange methods and principally, the graphic 
representation: the role of the graphic representation 
as object between the collaborators, the tools used to 
share, the annotation and/or modification of these 
representations, etc.; 
• 
the expectations and perspectives: the problems that 
designers raise during their remote collaborative 
activities 
and 
their 
suggestions 
for 
ideal 
instrumentation in order to efficiently aid the face-
to-face or remote collaboration in design activities. 
These corpus have thus enabled us to identify, on one 
hand, the different cognitive operations put into play and, on 
the other hand, to highlight some procedures, methods and 
tools set up in these practices. Our objective is to identify the 
means and modes of collaboration used by the designers in 
the preliminary phases of the project. 
V. ANALYSIS COMPARED OF THE COLLECTIVE ACTIVITIES 
IN AGENCIES 
Our observations and interviews were used to construct a 
chart of collective activities observed in the 6 following 
agencies: the AIA agency (between Paris, Nantes and Lyon), 
ORA-ITO (interviews of project leaders in Paris), Mikado 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Architecture (Lille), Art & Build (observations in the main 
agency in Brussels), Architecture Studio (Paris), and Gehry 
Partners (at Gehry Technologies in Paris). This corpus, in its 
diversity, enabled us to highlight several kinds of collective 
activity, methods and tools used to be able to work with 
several persons. The kinds which are shown are based 
principally on the dichotomy Space/Time as set up by 
Johansen [16] in the field of CSCW; see table 1. We observe 
several recurring tools, such as face-to-face meetings, or by 
telephone, videoconference, e-mails, post-its, internal 
network exchanges, electronic plan boxes, etc. 
TABLE I.  
SYNTHESIS OF GROUPWARE USED IN AGENCIES FOR 
GROUPWORK [16] 
 
 
Nevertheless, differences in the practices have also been 
observed. These differences also depend on the project and 
the degree of complexity that is involved. They show a range 
of kinds of collective activities and a diversity of solutions, 
sometimes pre-existent and often put in place by diverse 
procedures or by diversion of tools. Some of these tools and 
procedures are the same in all of the agencies such as the 
mail or the establishment of a graphic chart. But particular 
cases are also highlighted by the specific activity of each 
agency. We synthesize, in the following section, the 
principal diversions which are set up to respond to, as well as 
possible, the constraints of distance and/or the differences of 
the teams that have to work together in the context of project 
design. 
A. The case of AIA 
In the context of Design/Construction cooperation, the 
agency has had to use a system of computer screen sharing to 
manage their regular inter-agency meetings. In the observed 
situation, this tool is coupled with a telephone, hooked up to 
a speaker, to speak over the distance. The collaborators can 
thus see, at the same time, the same image, all the while 
having the possibility to point to spaces (via the cursor) and 
share some annotations (realized as well as possible via a 
mouse). The collaborators can consider, comment or 
annotate the documents shared by one of the two designers. 
The latter assumes the role of “chairperson” because he is the 
only one to decide which space can be shared and used by all 
players (see VI.C : as We-space) or kept in hidden notes as 
private space (I-space). 
To manage the diversity of actors in the same project and 
their possible replacements, AIA has set up a procedure 
involving the updating of a “thematic notebook”. This 
“thematic notebook” serves as a point of reference to 
everyone joining the group on the way. It is a sort of project 
logbook which enables everyone to understand different 
decisions taken in the course of the project, its evolution, and 
references. Ranking the data to be taken into account and 
essentially serving the construction of a common ground, it 
shows the work done during the conception, and makes the 
choices of the team and the architects’ organizational 
schemes explicit in relation to the project. It also regroups 
technical notes, and the minutes of the meetings which can 
also serve as a support for the contracting authority. 
B. The case of ORA-ITO 
Under the direction of Ora-ito, the agency makes people 
with different skills intervene: industrial designers, graphic 
designers, architects, etc. It also works very closely with 
several industrialists for the manufacturing of the products, 
integrating even the packaging and the shops which expose 
them. In spite of the multi-disciplinary activity involving 
several protagonists found on different sites, this agency has 
clearly expressed its lack of interest for remote collaboration 
activities. “If we need to work together, it is enough to gather 
everyone around a table” declares one of the project-leaders 
of the agency. 
C. MIKADO Architecture 
To be able to devise a complicated cooperation with tight 
deadlines, the Mikado agency is associated with other 
external agencies (one in Paris and the other in London). In 
this particular situation the actors do not have the 
opportunity to get together often enough to work together on 
the project. They have thus chosen an online game of virtual 
reality (like Second life®). Each of the actors invented an 
avatar to create a model shared online for their project in this 
virtual space that they manipulate together over a distance. 
Each time a problem comes up, they get in contact by 
telephone, then they get connected, each one via his 
computer, to work together, directly on the shared virtual 
model. These actors have had to face many difficulties 
because the 3D model manipulating tools offered by the 
game remain too limited and basic to assume efficient oral 
and graphical exchanges in real time. 
D. ART & BUILD  
In the framework of designing a collective living project 
which is close to one of branch offices of the head office Art 
& Build, the two sites use a new system to share graphic 
annotations in real time, called Collaborative Digital Studio 
[23]. Developed in the LUCID Laboratory of the University 
of Liège, this system has been loaned to the enterprise to 
support their activity of inter-agency remote design. In 
contrast with the experience of Mikado, Art & Build is 
satisfied with the use of this new communication and remote 
collaboration system. At any time of the day, they can call, 
get connected at a distance and work together in real time on 
the graphic documents that they have just produced. In this 
way they can better coordinate. Nevertheless, the observation 
of their use also shows that the actors do not make use of this 
system as much as supposed, because, in fact, the system has 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

not changed the frequency of the trips made by the 
collaborators between one site of the agency and the other. 
Rather it enables other kinds of meetings that are more 
spontaneous and shorter. According to the users, this is not 
due to bad understanding or appropriation of the system, but 
rather to a habit which is not yet part of their daily routine: 
“We know that the system was there, but we forget to use it 
each time that we have to communicate or work with the 
other agency: the reflex is to take the train and go there 
directly…” 
E. Architecture Studio 
The particularity of this agency is that the designers have 
different nationalities with different architectural cultures. To 
manage this kind of situation, all of the project teams must 
accept the suggestions from the others and adapt to the 
multicultural differences in the name of the project. In this 
context, the agency is also faced with language and 
reference-synchronization problems, and the knowledge of 
the others. To try to eliminate the effects of hierarchy and to 
let everyone express themselves as they please, the agency 
has set up a procedure based on the codification of shared 
drawings according to their colors. In this way four kinds of 
drawings have been defined and codified: 1/the red drawing 
for all of the existing data that is important to keep in mind 
for the project design: it cannot be modified, nor questioned 
by the designers; it represents the only fixed and certified 
element in the project; 2/ the green drawing contains the 
remainder of the elements that compose the project such as 
the walls, the closets, the opening, etc.; 3/ the black drawing 
is for the elements that concern the existing plan except those 
already put in the red drawing; 4/ the blue drawing which 
transcribes all the annotations and information about 
constraints to be integrated in the project design. According 
to the designers, even the traces left by the scratches of a 
razorblade on the tracing paper are important because they 
give an idea of the history of the project. This way, all the 
drawings represent the basis of the design of the model and 
are the result of collective decisions managed by this kind of 
procedure. 
As the agency also works in collaboration with other 
branch offices in different time zones, it has had to invent a 
system to share digital annotations in real time. It had set up 
a system diverted from shared screen projection that it threw 
together as well as possible with the tools. 
F. Gehry Partners 
Working with non-standard shapes for the technical 
design and the construction of the Louis Vuitton Foundation 
pavilion, the Gehry Partners agency uses programs originally 
developed for the aeronautic sector [24]. In this context, the 
team in Los Angeles and the team in Paris have given 
themselves 2 distinct roles in the design process: the former 
mostly takes care of the formal and functional aspects of the 
project, the latter focuses more specifically on the technical 
aspects and the structural calculations of the building. The 
first 3D model was made by the Los Angeles team. It serves 
as a digital model so that the head architect, F.O Gehry, can 
refine and transform his project according to choices related 
to his own pertinences. Then the team in Paris takes back the 
first model, extracts the geometry and builds a new model 
with defined and shared parameters in which they insert their 
choices for the structure and the technical calculations of the 
building. This second model was developed from the 
moments of collaboration in the presence of the different 
engineers and architects from Paris who work with other 
design and calculation tools before integrating their decisions 
in the model with the shared parameters. This model is then 
approved by the chief coordinator, who is also in Paris, and 
then put in the 3D model with the shared parameters. It is not 
only visible by the whole team in Paris, but also accessible 
and consultable in Los Angeles. The head agency can also 
survey the evolution of the technical model at any time and 
distance. From the first transformation or modification of the 
building, the head of the project can decide to back up or to 
transform the model so that it suits him. The shared program 
of the 3D model serves more to validate choices, to evaluate 
them in relation to decisions inserted in the model by other 
people, and to coordinate the team work rather than a 
collaborative design, to the management of the negotiation 
and the questioning by consensus of the project. 
VI. DIVERSITY OF COLLECTIVE SITUATIONS VS. NEED FOR 
ADEQUATE TOOLS: BETWEEN TOOLS AND PROCEDURES 
The following observations enable the identification of 
the principal concepts documenting the question of remote 
collaboration in an actual situation of architectural design, 
including: 
• 
The 
kinds 
of 
collective 
activities: 
between 
collaboration and cooperation, 
• 
the 
collective 
operations: 
between 
design, 
collaboration and tools, 
• 
the work co-spaces: I-space, We-space, and Space-
between. 
These 
observations 
highlight 
the 
need 
for 
the 
construction of common referential operatives faced with the 
diversity of each of these ideas as well as the part played by 
negotiation, evaluation and the questioning by consensus in 
the process of collective design. Is this need better 
orchestrated by digital supports which are more and more 
reliable for shared establishment of a project model, or by 
setting up of new group management practices and work 
done by several people? 
A. Diversity of the shape of collective activities 
To respond to the complexity of a project, several regular 
or spontaneous meetings are organized. Some concern the 
organization of the agency and its branch offices, others, deal 
more specifically with the project. Regular meetings are 
essential for the organization of the group and its 
coordination. They enable the collective decision-making 
and choices concerning the project and to synchronize each 
one’s tasks in the design process. These meetings give 
control, coordination and steering of the collective design 
activity. They tend to reduce misunderstandings and build 
the shared group consciousness, which is necessary in any 
collaborative situation.  
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

However, to respond rapidly to some constraints of the 
project, the designers also resort to spontaneous meetings. 
These meetings usually take place in co-presence, with face-
to-face discussion about certain aspects not mentioned in the 
formal meetings. Meetings are also held over distances via 
videoconference systems, screen-sharing or diversion of a 
group of tools (for example on-line virtual reality games 
used by Mikado). These meetings generally try to respond to 
an immediate need to deal with questions in common. They 
mark the milestones of the project: (1) moments when the 
designers collaborate, think and make decisions, by 
negotiation and consensus about choices which concern 
either the project or the organization of the group, and (2) 
moments when each one focuses on their own tasks for the 
same shared objective. This passage from a moment of 
collaboration to a moment of cooperation implies, on one 
hand, dynamics of learning (which tend to gradually cross 
during the exchanges [25]), and missions to share and divide 
between different actors, but also communication tools in 
common. On the other hand, the complementarity of the 
moments when the designers cooperate and other moments 
when they collaborate, just as the passages from one to 
another are important to manage during collective activities 
(see figure 1). 
When they cooperate, the designers do not need to see 
each other, each one doing his task then waiting for the 
validation (or not) from the coordinator. When they 
collaborate, the designers synchronize their knowledge 
(cognitive synchronization) and try to build a mutual 
consciousness of their activities, tasks and contexts to 
respond jointly to the project needs [26]. Nevertheless, this 
mutual consciousness implies a sharing of knowledge related 
to the context of the project design and to the tasks of the 
actors through a cognitive as well as temporal-operational 
[27] synchronization.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Collective design process  
It is important that the tools take into account these 
passages between the different kinds of collective activities 
in the design. In fact, the actors need to structure their 
activity and their tasks according to the project needs and its 
level of complexity. Some parameters, as important as the 
cognitive synchronization or the need to put together a 
common referential operative, are only partially managed by 
the groupware currently used in the agencies. This is why the 
coordinators have such a dominating place in the process. 
Also, to partially meet these needs, the designers are often 
obliged to divert a group of tools or call on production 
groupware which often proves to be not adapted to the 
preliminary design phases. 
B. Diversity of collective operations 
Based on observations of these different collective design 
activities, our analysis, based on the field of applied 
architecturology [28], have shown that specific cognitive 
operations are put into play. Some operations are linked to 
the design itself of the project, others are linked to 
collaboration strategies and the work done together and 
others are specifically linked to the appropriation and use of 
the tool which is used to work together. If we focus only on 
the operations linked to collective activity, we enumerate 
several categories [29]: pooling, interpretation, discussion / 
evaluation / reconsideration, automation / cooperation, 
validation, conflict solving, decision / prescription, building 
group work strategy / coordination. Putting these operations 
into play is transmitted through speech as well as by 
drawing, regardless of the kinds of collective activities in 
which they intervene: regular or spontaneous meetings, 
taking place face-to-face or over a distance, simultaneously 
or not. 
During these meetings, the actors share graphical 
representations which can have three roles: that of mediation, 
of 
translation 
and/or 
representation 
[9]. 
These 
representations are considered either as a “closed” 
intermediary object, which cannot be argued with or 
modified, or as an “open” object, which can be discussed and 
questioned during the meetings. This intermediate object is 
transformed and evolves between the moments of 
collaboration and the moments of cooperation. The shift 
from 
one 
moment 
to 
another 
demands 
that 
the 
representations must be at least standardized, adjustable and 
multipurpose in order to be understood by the other 
collaborators. It is in this way that the collective operations 
such as: pooling, interpretation, discussion / questioning the 
decision / instructions are primordial in the choice of tools or 
procedures to be set up for collaborating. Different examples 
coming from our observations can be cited: 
• 
Pooling has been enabled by the codification of the 
colors in the activity of Architecture Studio, thus 
backing up the representation between collaborators 
by sharing open intermediary objects; 
• 
the interpretation has been enabled by sharing a 3D 
model fixed between remote Gehry collaborators, 
thus 
supporting 
the 
translation 
between 
the 
collaborators by the sharing of closed intermediary 
objects; 
• 
the discussion / questioning has been enabled by the 
sharing of a 3D model built via virtual space 
between remote collaborators of MIKADO, thus 
supporting the mediation by the sharing of open 
intermediary objects; 
• 
the decision / instructions have been enabled by a 
thematic notebook set up by the AIA, thus 
supporting 
the 
representation 
between 
the 
collaborators 
through 
the 
sharing 
of 
closed 
intermediary objects. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Diversity of working co-spaces 
The idea of space is decisive in collective design 
activities [30]. In the case of cooperative activity, it is easier 
to work at a distance than in the case of collaborative activity 
where the sharing of space and the context of the work in 
real time proves to be more necessary. This shared work 
space is perhaps not physical, in rooms or in offices: it can 
also concern hybrid spaces, bringing together at the same 
time virtual and physical environments. This hybrid space 
implies the setting up of intermediary work spaces that are 
short-lived and that are created according to the needs of the 
designers and their negotiation strategies. 
We suggest, in figure 2, to distinguish three kinds of 
intermediary space composing the joint work environment 
[31]: the I-space (representing the personal work space), the 
We-space (representing the shared work space) and the 
Space-Between (representing the work space built between 
designers separated from the group). 
 
 
Figure 2.  I-Space, We-Space and Space-between 
as intermediary work spaces. 
The role assigned by the designers to this or that space 
can change according to the objectives, needs, choices 
related to the negotiation process and the arguments between 
the actors. The relation between the individual and the 
situation in which he evolves is emphasized - cognition 
situated [32] – by the relation that the actor has with his 
space, his tools and the other actors who surround him in a 
remote collaborative environment. If, for strategic reasons, a 
designer decides not to discuss a solution with the 
collaborator in the same office, the shared document 
becomes a private space, or a Space-between. 
Thus it is important that the intermediary tool offers this 
flexibility between the intermediary spaces. In fact, the 
designers need to structure their information and their 
display interface, to be able to navigate easily from one 
document to another and to create work methods that are 
adapted to their situation. All these parameters are only 
partially managed by the screen sharing system (as that 
which 
is 
used 
at 
AIA 
to 
respond 
to 
support 
design/construction 
collaboration) 
as 
it 
imposes 
the 
designation of a “chairperson” who is the only one who can 
make manipulations on his screen. The collaborators, being 
only observers, can just annotate the documents and point to 
certain zones of the work, only if the chairperson enables 
them to. Thus, this tool adds value to the individuality of the 
designer/chairperson at the expense of equal sharing between 
collaborators. This even has an influence on the negotiation 
process, evaluation, and questioning by consensus between 
the collaborators. In fact, when the actors get together for a 
meeting (from a distance or face-to-face), each one arrives 
with his/her solutions, points of view, and references (I-
Space) that he shows to his collaborators. He/she evokes 
them during the meeting (We-Space), according to the 
themes that have already been defined either by the 
circulation of the agenda, or just simply by a demand (formal 
or not) generally provoked by the project director about a 
particular problem. The agenda is a classic procedure but is 
necessary to guarantee the mutual awareness of each one’s 
tasks and the evolution of their role in the process. During 
these meetings, according to the project or objectives, 
negotiations take place between the actors to defend their 
choices or their own objectives. This exchange of viewpoints 
is a part of the construction of new shared knowledge to 
result in a compromise between the actors and their common 
objective. The different propositions generated are often 
followed by opinions and arguments from one group and 
another to justify them or to put forward others. Taking 
different forms – analytical, comparative or analogic [33] – 
these evaluations take place at key moments in the design 
making it possible to develop an iterative process of 
collaboration and to introduce the next subject to deal with. 
They are dictated by permanent research of compromise, 
where three categories of interaction are revealed [26]: 
• 
Interactions dedicated to the collaborative design 
process of the architectural object – linked to an 
awareness activity (orientation of the building, its 
dimensions, the site and the functionality, etc.); 
• 
interactions dedicated to the situation of the 
collaboration – linked to social awareness (definition 
of the design context, work procedures, sharing 
methods, communication tools, etc.); 
• 
interactions dedicated to the actors – linked to action 
awareness (knowledge of the actors, experience, 
competence, 
logical 
actions, 
roles, 
tasks, 
organization, coordination, etc.). 
Most of the existing tools manage one or another of the 
operations used in negotiation, evaluation, or questioning by 
consensus without real assistance enabling them to be linked. 
Let’s take the example of the Chantier.com tool [34] set up 
by AIA to present an entry point on the Internet to exchange 
documents between different project actors. The uploading 
and downloading of the files are the principal function 
defining this space. However, the accumulation of this data 
and certain versions can lead to confusion because, in the 
observed version, there is no real hierarchy between the data 
except for their listing and their date of insertion in the site. 
They also create complications through a lack of coherence 
between the tools and the way teams function. Just like this 
example, most of the groupware currently used in the 
agencies, only partially enable synchrony between the actors 
collaborating 
from 
a 
distance, 
increasing 
the 
misunderstanding between them and decreasing their 
interactions. Nevertheless, taking charge of the heterogeneity 
between the actors, their specialties, and their references can 
be managed by procedures and, sometimes, imposed by 
norms. The procedures are often unique to the group of 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

designers according to their tasks, their pertinences, 
preferences, knowledge or personal experience. When they 
are imposed according to the norms, they must also allow for 
some gradual evolution of the collaborative process to not 
restrict the group. The organization of the data to be treated 
in a hierarchy, by the actors, during the project is also 
necessary to manage the negotiation and evolution process 
during the collaborations. Deciding on the level of priority of 
one point of view or another enables one to consider each 
criterion in the design and to decide to reject, or to suspend 
the incompatibility of others.  
VII. 
CONCLUSION. 
This report on practices has allowed us to qualify the 
context in which different groupwares, group support and 
strategy are integrated and set up by the agencies in order to 
aim for better management of knowledge and more efficient 
and productive interaction. It is clear that there are no 
methods or tools that are perfectly adapted to the context, 
especially in the case of synchronous and remote 
collaboration. The research attempts that develop specific 
tools for collective activity are not yet compatible with the 
constraints and the reality of the practice in the agency. 
These discrepancies can be explained because the tools are 
often developed for other activity sectors without really 
focusing on the specificities of each of them. And in the case 
where they claim to be adapted to a particular design 
activity, they are only adapted to the advanced phases of the 
process where the choices concerning the project have been 
previously defined by the group of actors. 
This way, we can conclude by listing the need of 
agencies to go from tools that are thrown together towards 
the construction of strategies and procedures which enable: 
• 
The management of the processes of negotiation, 
evaluation, calling into question the first phases of 
design: the objective being to encourage reflection; 
• 
to take into account the multiplication of exchange 
places and the passage between them (I-Space, We-
Space, Space-Between): the objective being to 
manage a dynamic in motion; 
• 
to enable the diversity of representations and their 
transformations from one format to another: the 
objective being to enable reflexive exploration; 
• 
to assure the synchrony between actors collaborating 
remotely, as well as the passage between moments 
of 
collaboration 
and 
moments 
of 
necessary 
cooperation in the current activities of the agencies: 
the objective being to allow a strategy that evolves, 
explores, and is flexible implying the object to be 
planned, the group and the tool.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Farel, “Conception d'un bâtiment : l'organisation d'un travail 
collectif,” Concevoir, Inventer, Créer, L'Harmattan, Paris, pp. 51-63, 
1995. 
[2] 
L.L. Bucciarelli, “Between thought and object in engineering design, 
” Design Studies, vol. 3. 23, pp. 219-231, 2002. 
[3] 
W.J. Mitchell, “Challenges and opportunities for remote collaborative 
design,” Collaborative design and learning: Competence building for 
innovation, International series on technology policy and innovation, 
Praeger, Conn, Westport, pp. 5-12, 2004. 
[4] 
M.L. Maher, M. Paulini, and P. Murty, “Scaling up: From individual 
design to collaborative design to collective design,” Proceedings of 
Design Computing and Cognition‘10, Stuttgart, 2010. 
[5] 
J. Grudin, “Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: History and 
Focus,” Journal, IEEE Computer, 27 (5), pp. 19-26, 1994. 
[6] 
S. Ben Rajeb, “Modélisation de la collaboration distante dans les 
pratiques de conception architecturale : Caractérisation des opérations 
cognitives en conception collaborative instrumentée,”  PhD thesis in 
Architecture, ENSA Paris-la-Villette, 2012. 
[7] 
M. Brydon-Miller, D. Greenwood, and P. Maguire, Why action 
research? Action Research, vol.1. 1, pp. 9-28, 2003.  
[8] 
L. Karsenty and B. Pavard, “Différents niveaux d’analyse du contexte 
dans l’étude ergonomique du travail collectif,” Réseaux, vol. 85, pp. 
73-99, 1997. 
[9] 
A. Jeantet, “Les objets intermédiaires dans la conception. Eléments 
pour une sociologie des processus de conception,” Sociologie du 
travail, vol. 3, pp. 291-316, 1998. 
[10] B. Maggi, (1996). “La régulation du processus d’action de travail,” 
Traité d’ergonomie, Octarès, Toulouse, pp. 637-662, 1996. 
[11] P.A. Gloor, Swarm Creativity: Competitive Advantage through 
Collaborative Innovation Networks, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
2006. 
[12] D. Fay and M. Frese, “Self-starting behavior at work: Toward a 
theory of personal initiative,” Motivational psychology of human 
development: Developing motivation and motivating development, 
Elservier, Amsterdam, pp. 307-337, 2000. 
[13] B. David, “IHM pour les collecticiels,” Réseaux et Systèmes 
Réparties (RSR-CP), vol. 13, Hermes Science, pp. 169-206, 2001. 
[14] Y. E. Kalay, “Architecture's New Media. Principles, Theories, and 
Methods 
of 
Computer-Aided 
Design,” 
The 
MIT 
Press 
: 
Communication, MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 83-198, 2004. 
[15] A. M. Maier, “A grid-based assessment method of communication in 
engineering design,” PhD thesis, Department of Engineering, Selwyn 
College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 2007. 
[16] S. Johansen, “Statistical analysis of cointegrating vectors,” Journal of 
Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 12, pp. 231-254, 1988. 
[17] C. A. Ellis, S. J. Gibbs, and G. Rein, “Groupware: some issues and 
experiences,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 1. 34, pp. 39-58, 
1991. 
[18] W.W. Gaver, “The affordances of media spaces for collaboration,” 
Proceedings of CSCW'92, ACM, New York, PP. 17-24, 1992. 
[19] M. Favier, F. Coat, J. C. Couron, and J. Trahand, Le travail en groupe 
à l’âge des réseaux,  Collection : Gestion, Série : Production et 
techniques quantitatives appliquées à la gestion, Economica, Paris, 
ISBN: 2717837671 - 9782717837674,  1998.  
[20] F. Darses, A. Mayeur, S. Ben Rajeb, C. Lecourtois, F. Guéna, S. 
Safin, and P. Leclecrq, Rapport final, Lot 2.4, Livrable projet ANR 
CoCréA, 2011, unpublished. 
[21] K. A. Ericsson and H. A. Simon, Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports 
as Data, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1993. 
[22] P. Reason and H. Bradbury, Handbook of action research: 
Participative inquiry and practice, Sage Publications, London, 2001. 
[23] J. M. Burkhardt, F. Détienne, L. Moutsingua-Mpaga, L. Perron, S. 
Safin, and P. Leclercq, “Multimodal collaborative activity among 
architectural designers using an augmented desktop at distance or in 
collocation,” Proceedings of ECCE'08, the 15th European conference 
on Cognitive ergonomics: the ergonomics of cool interaction, ACM, 
New York, 2008, ISBN/EAN : 978-1-60558-399-0. 
[24] A. de Boissieu, F. Guéna, and C. Lecourtois, “Modélisation 
paramétrique partagée : Le cas de l’utilisation de Digital Project lors 
de la conception du Pavillon de la Fondation LouisVuitton pour la 
Création (Gehry Partners) sous l’angle des opérations de découpage,” 
Actes du Scan'10 : Espaces collaboratifs, Marseille, 2010. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[25] A. Hatchuel, “Apprentissages collectives et activités de conception,” 
Revue Française de Gestion, vol. 99, pp. 109-120, 1994. 
[26] J. M. Carroll, D. C. Neale, P. L. Isenhour, M. B. Rosson, and D. S. 
McCrickard, “Notification and awareness: synchronizing task-
oriented collaborative activity,”, International Journal Of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 58, pp. 605-632, 2003. 
[27] F. Darses, F. Détienne, and W. Visser, “Les activités de conception et 
leur assistance,” Ergonomie, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, 
pp. 545-563, 2004. 
[28] P. Boudon, P. Deshayes, F. Pousin, and F. Schatz, Enseigner la 
conception architecturale : cours d’architecturologie, Editions de la 
Villette, Paris, 2000. 
[29] S. 
Ben 
Rajeb, 
“Conception 
collaborative 
distante 
: 
étude 
architecturologique pour la caractérisationdes opérations cognitives,” 
Interfaces numériques, vol. 2. 3, Lavoisier, 2013. 
[30] L. Suchman, “Constituting shared workplaces,” Cognition and 
communication at work, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 
35-60, 1996. 
[31] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “Using Spatial Augmented Reality in 
Synchronous Collaborative Design,” Lecture Notes in Computer 
Sciences, Springer, vol. 8091, pp. 6-15, 2013 
[32] N. Bonnardel, “Activités de conception et créativité : de l’analyse des 
facteurs cognitifs à l’assistance aux activités de conception créatives,” 
Le travail humain, Presses Universitaires de France, vol. 72, 2009, 
http://www.cairn.info/article.php. 
[33] G. Martin, F. Détienne, and E. Lavigne, “Confrontation of viewpoints 
in a concurrent engineering process,” Integrating design and 
manufacturing in mechanical engineering, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, London, pp. 3-10, 2002. 
[34] Wapp 6: conject group. DOC 6: Piloter les informations de vos 
projets de construction. [Online – last access date : January, 2015]. 
http://www.wapp6.com/doc6.php. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

