Developing user-centered video game concepts for language learning  
 
Yorick Poels, Jan-Henk Annema, Bieke Zaman 
Centre for User Experience Research (CUO) 
K.U.Leuven / IBBT Future Health Department 
Leuven, Belgium 
{yorick.poels, janhenk.annema, 
bieke.zaman}@soc.kuleuven.be 
Frederik Cornillie 
Interdisciplinary Research on Technology, Education & 
Communication (iTec) 
K.U.Leuven / IBBT Future Health Department 
Kortrijk, Belgium 
frederik.cornillie@kuleuven-kortrijk.be
 
 
Abstract — This paper will report on an ongoing project which 
aims to develop video games for language learning through a 
user-centered and evidence-based approach. Therefore, co-
design sessions were held with adolescents between 14 and 16 
years old, in order to gain insight into their preferences for 
educational games for language learning. During these 
sessions, 11 concepts for video games were developed. We 
noticed a divide between the concepts for games that were 
oriented towards formal language learning (e.g. exercises on 
vocabulary) and video games that were centered around 
communication with other players or in-game characters.  
Keywords - co-design, user-centered, games, language learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, video games are no longer designed solely for 
entertainment purposes. The resurged interest in serious 
games shows that many areas can benefit from the engaging 
experience that video games offer. For instance, video games 
have been designed to help people in various therapeutic 
contexts [8, 27], as well as for explicitly educational 
purposes [21, 22, 26]. In the field of Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning (CALL), games have been developed 
specifically for language instruction [12, 13, 20], and have, 
to a more limited extent and much more recently, been 
subjected to empirical research [4, 14, 18, 24]. 
One reason why games may be particularly suited for 
language learning is that many aspects of video games, for 
instance problem/puzzle solving and scoring, are also present 
in language learning [16]. 
On a broader level, language fulfills a meaningful role in 
games so that players have to use it as a resource to advance 
in the game, which resembles the way language is used in 
functional approaches to language teaching [7, 17]. For 
instance, in many games language plays an important role in 
the interaction between the user and the game, e.g. through 
game scripts and in-game dialogues, and players need to 
comprehend and/or use language in order to approach goals 
which are meaningful for them. Also, with the recent rise of 
massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs), language is 
a crucial means of communication between players of 
different linguistic and cultural backgrounds, who need to 
communicate effectively in order to achieve collaborative 
goals [25]. 
It may be argued that precisely because of this apparently 
natural link between games in which dialogue, narrative and 
communication play a significant role and the currently 
predominant pedagogical focus on functional approaches to 
language instruction, little research has been devoted to 
mini-games. Mini-games are small, self-contained games 
which usually take a short amount of time to complete and 
which focus on a specific topic [6]. Mini-games are 
ubiquitous, and have been developed for several purposes, 
such as for education [6], to offer distraction, [15, 23] and as 
part of regular video games, for  example, small puzzles or 
simple sports mini-games that are embedded in the Final 
Fantasy RPG series [23]. In contrast to video games that 
have traditionally been developed for personal computers 
and gaming consoles, mini-games can also be found on 
mobile phones and the web.  
Due to their relatively limited size and complexity, mini-
games are less expensive, which is an advantage considering 
the limited budgets of serious games. Furthermore, mini-
games can be easily reused in other contexts. This might 
make them particularly suitable for formal language 
instruction, especially for explicit vocabulary and grammar 
training, which often feature short and repetitive exercises.  
However, little is yet known about how language learners 
might respond to such games, apart from the fact that 
learners from a difficult socio-cultural background seem to 
prefer them over fully immersive games [10]. 
If it were not challenging enough to design full video 
games for foreign language instruction that are both effective 
in terms of language acquisition and at the same time are 
motivating [17], designing mini-games explicitly for foreign 
language teaching is probably even more of an ordeal. It is 
conceivable that from the perspective of a learner/player, 
certainly if (s)he plays voluntarily, gaming is an end in itself 
rather than a vehicle to learn a language [11]. Hence, 
language learning exercises should not merely be disguised 
as a game, but integrated as part of a game that is fun to play. 
As a result, it is mainly whether the learner perceives an 
educational (mini-)game as a game that determines it will be 
used as such, not what teachers or instructional designers 
intend to do with it. Primarily, players should want to play 
the game for pleasure instead of for other reasons.  
However, what is needed to create a language learning 
game that delivers a foremost fun and engaging experience 
remains unclear. For the design of educational mini-games, 
this is complicated by the fact that in mini-games the focus is 
on language as a formal system, which might be less 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

motivating than when the focus is on language as 
communication. This underlines the need for a user-centered 
approach in designing such games. 
Therefore, in the study reported in this paper, we set out 
to examine what it is that makes a game for language 
learning engaging and something the learners want to play 
for the sake of fun alone. The study specifically focused on 
second language learning for adolescents and the needs of 
these learners concerning fun and engaging educational 
games for language learning. 
Discovering needs of the learner: co-design 
To design an engaging game experience, it is essential to 
understand the needs of the people who will play the game 
in the future. Sanders [19] describes three perspectives from 
which a person’s experience can be explored.  
The first perspective is to listen to what people say and 
think by using methods from the market research field such 
as questionnaires, focus groups and interviews. However, by 
only listening to what people say, important information is 
missed. People often forget essential details when 
explaining their day to day business to others and do not 
know what information is important for the design process 
[9]. 
The second perspective is to look at what people do. 
Different methods from the user-centered design field can 
be used to observe what people do and use. This way, more 
insight can be gained into the details of what people do, how 
they do it, and, for instance, how their environment restricts 
them in what they do [9]. 
However, to create a game that is truly engaging, it is 
necessary to also understand what people know, feel, and 
what they dream of. This information is hard to uncover as 
it may not readily be expressed in words, or cannot be 
observed as it might, for instance, be about latent needs. 
One way for researchers and designers to get insight into 
these aspects of experience, Sanders [19] argues, is to have 
people expressing their thoughts, feelings, and dreams by 
making artifacts (see Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  Sanders: “Ways we can learn from people” [19] 
 
One way to do this is through co-design sessions in 
which users create things together with designers and 
researchers. By exploring ideas and concepts together and by 
making and evaluating artifacts, users communicate directly 
with the designers and researchers.  The artifacts that are 
made can be considered low fidelity prototypes of the future 
application. Co-design is a method to gain insight into the 
participants’’ ideas and point of views on certain topics, 
language learning in games for instance, through the use of a 
creative process. The results should not be regarded as 
finished designs. Nonetheless, for social scientists and 
human computer interaction researchers, co-design can be a 
real valuable asset in discovering the needs of end-users. 
In order to gain as much as possible from co-design it 
has been found that creating multiple prototypes is more 
effective than creating a single prototype.  A study by Dow 
et al. [5] showed that when it comes to the design outcomes, 
exploration, sharing, and group rapport, creating multiple 
prototypes was the better option. 
 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Participants 
A total of fourteen adolescents participated in the study. Two 
sessions were held. One session in the forenoon, which 
consisted of eight participants, and one afternoon session, in 
which 6 adolescents participated. All participants were 
between 14 and 16 years of age, only one of the fourteen 
participants was a girl. Twelve of the participants were in 
general secondary education (called ASO in Belgium), while 
two participants were from the technical secondary education 
(TSO). The participants were recruited through online 
forums, electronic newsletters, paper flyers and posters.  
The eight participants of the first session played on 
average 41 minutes a day. Two of these participants stated 
that they never played videogames, while four played games 
more than one hour a day. The six participants of the second 
session played on average 1 hour 35 minutes. Two of the six 
participants played three to four hours a day, while the others 
played more on weekend days. 
B. Procedure 
Two sessions were held; each session lasted approximately 
three hours. Each session consisted of an introduction 
round, a group discussion, a game design round, and a 
concluding group discussion. This procedure was selected to 
follow the typical cognitive process of creativity as closely 
as possible. This process is typically divided into four or 
five different stages [1, 2, 3].  
1) Introductory round) 
Using a slideshow presentation the topic at hand and the co-
design methodology were explained briefly to the 
participants. Then, examples from previous co-design 
sessions were presented. These examples were taken from 
domains other than language learning, in order to prevent 
possible biasing the creative thinking of the participants. 
The introduction took around 15 minutes. 
 
2) Group discussion 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

After the introduction the participants were split into two 
groups consisting of three or four participants. Two 
researchers joined each group and started a short moderated 
group discussion, in which current language learning 
practices, both formal and informal, as well as their general 
experience with learning through games were addressed. 
This group discussion was intended as a ‘sensitizing 
activity’, which is a typical first stage in a creative process. 
This group discussion lasted 20 minutes. 
3) Game design round 
Each group was asked to come up with three game concepts 
and created low fidelity paper prototypes of these concepts 
using the available materials (see Figure 2). The participants 
got one hour to create the three prototypes. The prototypes 
by no means had to be complete designs.  
No explicit instructions were given whether the 
participants had to create mini games or regular video games. 
We did not want to limit the participants to only develop 
mini games, in order to provide them with an opportunity to 
think freely about games for language learning. However, 
when a group of participants had come up with two concepts 
that were clearly regular video games instead of mini-games, 
the researchers stimulated the participants to make their third 
design a mini game.   
When looking at the different stages of the creative 
process [19], this round resembled the third stage, 
inspiration. In this stage, possible solutions or new insights 
typically occur. The second stage, incubation, was not 
present in our study due to practical concerns, as the 
sessions were scheduled on one day.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Creating a video game prototype 
4) Group discussion / interview 
After the game design round, the two groups of participants 
were asked to present their prototypes to each other and the 
researchers (see Figure 3). The participants in the other 
group could ask questions, comment on the prototypes, and 
had to pick the best design in their opinion. The researchers 
asked questions to clarify the design choices. After both 
groups had presented their prototypes, a group discussion 
was started that revolved around a number of pre-defined 
topics such as user-oriented and personal goals within the 
game, the role of the teacher, context and the use of the 
video game. 
The group discussion can be seen as an activity that 
represents the final stage, transformation, in a creative 
process [2]. An evaluation takes place during the 
transformation stage, to decide whether an idea is valuable. 
The ideas are elaborated upon to validate and communicate 
them with the rest of the group. This discussion took about 
an hour. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Prototype presentation and group discussion 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The created game concepts were varied and demonstrated a 
range of elaborateness. Some concepts were original, whilst 
other concepts adhered more to generally known game 
concepts or game genres.  In general, two major categories 
could be discerned. On the one hand, games that were 
focused on formal learning, the principle of language 
learning with, for example, vocabulary exercises. On the 
other hand, game concepts were created that used language 
as a means of communication. In the following two sections, 
we will give an overview of these two categories. 
A. Games for formal language learning 
Three of the game designs that were created, were aimed 
towards formal language learning. These games shared the 
following characteristics: focus on vocabulary, immediate 
feedback, limited time requirement, and little or no narrative. 
These characteristics will be outlined based on one of the 
game prototypes that was developed, the cannon-versus-
monsters game (see Figure 4). In this game, the player has to 
translate a word as quick as possible in order to prevent 
monsters, descending on a narrow path, to reach the player. 
The number of bullets a player receives depends on the 
length of the assigned word. For instance, a four letter word 
that is correctly translated gives the player four bullets to 
eliminate the approaching monsters (see Figure 4). The 
difficulty level gradually rises with each stage, offering the 
player more challenging words to translate, but also offering 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

more bullets and useful power-ups (any item that temporarily 
gives a character new abilities, new powers, or a statistical 
bonus).  
As said above, three of the game concepts focused on 
vocabulary. In the cannon-versus-monsters game, for 
instance, the goal is to survive as long as possible by 
correctly translating words. In the other two game concepts, 
vocabulary also is the main language learning topic, as 
players have to translate words, recognize words or associate 
them with other words. 
Feedback in the cannons-versus-monsters game is 
provided immediately to the player. Every time the player 
fails to translate a word, the monsters come closer to the 
player’s home, eventually destroying it when the monsters 
come near enough. Thus, it is obvious that it is crucial that as 
many words as possible are translated correctly. When the 
player fails to translate a word, the consequences are 
instantly visible as the monsters further approach the 
onscreen character of the player. In the other two game 
concepts focusing on vocabulary, players also instantly lose 
a live or turn when making a mistake.  
The cannon-versus-monster game revolves around the 
relatively simple goal of keeping the monster away. By 
translating words correctly ammunition is earned that can be 
used to shoot the monsters. No further narrative or plot was 
provided as context for the game. This characteristic was 
shared by the other two game concepts that focused on 
vocabulary. These games had a very limited, if not, non-
existent story line. 
Finally, as the cannon-versus-monsters game concept and 
the other two game concepts focusing on vocabulary were 
relatively simple and short games, they did not require a lot 
of time to complete. Thus, these games could easily be 
played in situations where little time is available. Participants 
commented in the group discussion that because of this, the 
games could be used at school as part of language learning 
classes. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Drawing of the cannon-versus-monsters game concept  
 
B. Games and language as communication 
Six of the games concepts could be characterized by their 
focus on language as a means to communicate in the game. 
Players needed to communicate to progress through the 
game. When compared to the three game concepts that 
focused on vocabulary, these concepts were more complex 
and contained an elaborate narrative, provided less 
immediate feedback, and were more time consuming. These 
characteristics will be discussed by looking at one of these 
six games concepts, an adventure game, in more detail.  
In this adventure game, the player has to get from Paris, 
France, to Los Angeles, USA, to visit his sick mother. To 
achieve this, the player has to communicate with other game 
characters or other non-player characters. Thus, language is 
the means to get to the end goal. Through dialogues and 
creative use of language (e.g. asking for a lift, lure opponents 
into traps, persuasion, deceiving, …), the game character  
progresses through the game.  
The game concepts that focus on communication were 
more elaborate that the game concepts that focused on 
vocabulary. While the vocabulary game concepts contained 
no or very little narrative, whereas the narrative was very 
important, and much richer, in the games focusing on 
communication.   
A consequence of the focus on communication and the 
related, more elaborate, narrative is that the feedback is less 
immediate than in the games that focus on vocabulary. While 
in the cannon-versus-monsters game, the player immediately 
receives bullets to keep the monsters away, or sees the 
monsters approaching further after each mistake, the 
progress in the games focusing on communication is less 
immediately visible. Although the end goal is clear, the 
player only slowly approaches this goal; the rewards lie on a 
higher level. 
Finally, compared to the games focusing on vocabulary, 
the game concepts with a focus on communication are 
relatively complex and therefore required more time to play. 
The player has to have a period of uninterrupted time 
available to play. This would make these games, according 
to our participants in the group discussion, more suited for 
playing at home.  
  
 
Figure 5.  Free roaming game 
 
C. General characteristics   
Based on the game concept prototypes, we could discern a 
number of general characteristics for the games developed 
by our participants. Four of the eleven games had a 
multiplayer mode. In a number of games, this feature was 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

not explicitly mentioned, and was open for interpretation. Six 
of the games incorporated a social component, like the 
ability to share high scores with friends, and communicate 
via voice chat. 
The choice of the platform (computer, console, mobile) 
was not specified for most game concepts. Some games were 
thought to be more suited for a specific platform than others, 
with game concepts ranging from a traditional mini-game on 
a desktop computer, to an augmented reality game on a 
mobile phone. 
Concerning reward mechanisms, different concepts were 
developed by the participants. This ranged from simple 
scoring systems, e.g. traditional high scores, to more 
complex rewarding mechanisms, where the player could gain 
experience points on different levels.  
D. Context – instruction – in game feedback 
The context where one could play a game differed also 
between the various games. Three games were found to be 
more suitable by the participants for home and school usage. 
One game they would rather like to play in a home context. 
For the majority of game concepts, the participants did not 
define the ideal playing context.  
The participants also indicated that in-game feedback 
mechanisms were of certain importance. They found it 
important that there is a kind of feedback present in games, 
for example when the player is stuck. Feedback mechanisms 
varied from a built-in translator to an in-game character that 
aided the player as an interpreter for foreign languages. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This study indicated that there is a divide in games for 
language learning. On the one hand, our participants 
developed games for formal language learning that 
resembled the definition of a mini-game [6]. On the other 
hand, we discerned games that focused on language as 
communication. Nevertheless, we were surprised to see that 
none of the games focusing on formal language learning 
dealt with grammar.  
As we already pointed out, some games were more 
focused on learning vocabulary, formal learning, while the 
other games were based around communication. This finding 
is not necessarily a disadvantage for the design of 
educational games for language learning, but confirms that 
games could be used as a medium to create a need for the 
language learner to accomplish objectives that lie outside the 
language itself.  We could use the game concepts that were 
developed to identify these needs and incorporate them in an 
additional layer around the games.  
Our study posed a number of limitations. First, there was 
the sample that consisted mostly of adolescents of the same 
school level (general secondary education). As our study had 
no intention to generalize these results to a larger population 
(all school levels), the limited sample did not pose a threat 
for the explorative nature of our study. The participants were 
mainly male adolescents. We suspect that they were more 
prone to react to our message. We did, however, spread the 
recruitment message via numerous channels, online as well 
as offline (posters and flyers in schools, public library) in 
order to prevent overrepresentation of certain groups 
(hardcore gamers, tech savvy boys). However, there still was 
more reaction from adolescents from the ASO, and also 
more from boys.  
Second, we noticed that the participants created games or 
game concepts that, sometimes, resembled existing games. 
This could point in different directions, namely that our 
participants had played a lot of commercial titles and were 
influenced by these concepts, or that they had little 
imagination and therefore copied existing games. Future 
research could link the participants' gaming history and 
preexisting preferences to the creation of game concepts in 
co-design sessions. 
And finally, from a game design point of view, co-design 
is not an ideal method for developing fully finished games. 
Co-design is a method for researchers to gain insight into the 
participants’ needs and experiences concerning language 
learning in games.  Nonetheless, for social scientists or 
human computer interaction researcher, co-design can be a 
valuable asset in discovering the needs of end-users, through 
a creative process. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In sum, the results of this co-design study revealed 
insights into game concepts for the design of video games 
for language learning, from a user centered design 
perspective. These insights can be interesting for the 
development of language learning games.  
We noticed a divide between the concepts for mini-
games, that were oriented towards formal language learning 
(e.g. exercises on vocabulary) and video games that were 
based around communication with others (players or in-game 
characters). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was conducted as part of the IBBT-MiGaMe 
project. The work was supported by K.U.Leuven and funded 
by the IBBT (Interdisciplinary institute for BroadBand 
Technology), a research institute founded by the Flemish 
Government in 2004. 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Boden, M.A. Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. Routledge, 
New York, NY, 10001, 2003. 
2. 
Bullinger, H.-J., Müller-Spahn, F., and Rössler, A. Encouraging 
Creativity - Support of Mental Processes by Virtual Experience. 
Virtual Reality World, (1996). 
3. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of 
Discovery and Invention. Harper Perennial, 1997. 
4. 
deHaan, J., Reed, W.M., and Kuwada, K. The effect of interactivity 
with a music video game on second language vocabulary 
recall.(Report): An article from: Language, Learning & Technology. 
University of Hawaii, National Foreign Language Resource Center, 
2010. 
5. 
Dow, S., Fortuna, J., Schwartz, D., Altringer, B., Schwartz, D., and 
Klemmer, S. Prototyping dynamics: sharing multiple designs 
improves exploration, group rapport, and results. Proceedings of the 
2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
ACM (2011), 2807-2816. 
6. 
Frazer, A., Argles, D., and Wills, G. Assessing The Usefulness Of 
Mini-games As Educational Resources. ALT-C 2007: Beyond 
Control, (2007). 
7. 
García-Carbonell, A., Rising, B., Montero, B., and Watts, F. 
Simulation/gaming and the acquisition of communicative 
competence in another language. Simul. Gaming 32, 4 (2001), 481-
491. 
8. 
Griffiths. M. The therapeutic use of videogames in childhood and 
adolescence. Clinical child psychology and psychiatry 8, 4 (2003), 
547. 
9. 
Hackos, J.A. and Redish, J.C. User and Task Analysis for Interface 
Design. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998. 
10. 
Herselman, M.E. The application of educational computer games in 
English second language teaching. 1999. 
11. 
Hubbard, P. Evaluating Computer Games for Language Learning. 
Simulation & Gaming 22, 2 (1991), 220 -223. 
12. 
Hubbard, P. Interactive Participatory Dramas for Language Learning. 
Simulation & Gaming 33, 2 (2002), 210 -216. 
13. 
Johnson, W.L. Serious Use of a Serious Game for Language 
Learning. Proceeding of the 2007 conference on Artificial 
Intelligence in Education: Building Technology Rich Learning 
Contexts That Work, IOS Press (2007), 67–74. 
14. 
Miller, M. and Hegelheimer, V. The SIMs meet ESL. Incorporating 
authentic computer simulation games into the language classroom. 
Interactive Technology and Smart Education 3, 4 (2006), 311–328. 
15. 
Miniclip. Miniclip Games - Play Free Games. 2011. 
http://www.miniclip.com/games. 
16. 
Prensky, M. Digital game-based learning. Comput. Entertain. 1, 1 
(2003), 21-21. 
17. 
Purushotma, R., Thorne, S.L., and Wheatley, J. 10 Key Principles for 
Designing Video Games for Foreign Language Learning - een knol 
van Ravi Purushotma. 2008. http://knol.google.com/k/10-key-
principles-for-designing-video-games-for-foreign-language-
learning#. 
18. 
Ranalli, J. Learning English with The Sims: exploiting authentic 
computer simulation games for L2 learning. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning 21, 5 (2008), 441-455. 
19. 
Sanders, E.B.N. From user-centered to participatory design 
approaches. Design and the social sciences: making connections 2, 
(2002), 1. 
20. 
Sanders, R.H. and Sanders, A.F. History of an AI spy game: Spion. 
In Thirty years of computer assisted language instruction. CALICO, 
1995, 114-127. 
21. 
Serious Games Interactive. Global Conflicts: Palestine. Gamers 
Gate, Manifesto Games & Macgamestore, 2007. 
22. 
Spongelab Interactive. Genomics Digital Lab - History of biology. 
Spongelab Interactive, 2009. 
23. 
Square Enix. FINAL FANTASY. 2011. 
24. 
Sykes, J.M. A dynamic approach to social interaction: Synthetic 
immersive environments & Spanish pragmatics. 2008. 
http://purl.umn.edu/91603. 
25. 
Thorne, S.L., Black, R.W., and Sykes, J.M. Second Language Use, 
Socialization, and Learning in Internet Interest Communities and 
Online Gaming. The Modern Language Journal 93, (2009), 802-821. 
26. 
United Nations World Food Programme. Food Force: The First 
Humanitarian Video Game. World Food Programme, 2005. 
27. 
Vanden Abeele, V., Geurts, L., Husson, J., Windey, F. , Annema, J. , 
Verstraete, M. & Desmet, S. Designing Slow Fun! Physical Therapy 
Games to Remedy the Negative Consequences of Spasticity. 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Fun and Games, 
ACM Press (2010). 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

