Enabling Sensemaking for Intelligence Analysis in a Multi-user, Multimodal
Cognitive and Immersive Environment
Shannon Briggs1, Matt Peveler2, Jaimie Drozdal2
Chelsea Sun2, Lilit Balagyozyan, 
Communications1, Computer Science2, CISL3
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Troy NY USA 12180
Email: briggs3@rpi.edu, email: pevelm@rpi.edu,
email: drozdj3@rpi.edu, email:  sunc4@rpi.edu, email:
balagl@rpi.edu 
Hui Su2
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Laboratory
Yorktown Heights NY USA 10598
email: huisuibmres@us.ibm.com
Abstract— This  research  proposes  a  user  interface
design  for  a  collaborative,  multimodal,  multi-user
cognitive  and  immersive  environment  for  intelligence
analysis, informed by sensemaking theory and scenario-
based design. We have created a prototype software in a
cognitive and immersive environment, which is designed
to facilitate the structured brainstorming process. Part
of  our  research  goal  is  to  determine  whether  this
environment will better enable sensemaking compared
to traditional pen and paper tools.
Keywords-  HCI;  immersive  environment;  intelligence
analysis;
 
sensemaking;
 
scenario-based
 
design;
multimodal interaction
I. INTRODUCTION
 The intelligence community needs software which can
help  them  to  make  sense  of  the  information  they  are
receiving through their work as analysts. The research in
this paper addresses an important aspect of how technology
and the ever-increasing availability of massive amounts of
data [1]  impact the national security domain, specifically
how  intelligence  analysts  are  challenged  when  sorting
through  information,  gathering  evidence,  and  proposing
hypotheses.  According  to  Hutchins  et.  al,  "currently
available technology is not always effective in helping the
analyst  assimilate  the  huge  amount  of  information  that
needs to be synthesized." [1]  
 Previous software for intelligence analysis has been
discarded because of two major factors: the barrier of use of
the software is too high, or the software does not meet the
needs of the analyst. Our research takes a different approach
to conceptualizing and designing software for analysts. We
are  developing  software  that  will  support  analysts’
sensemaking  by  integrating  educational  and  training
materials that are already used by analysts in their own
domain, such as those described by Beebe and Pherson [2]
or Hall and Citrenbaum [3]. We believe that this will create
a more accessible interface and will provide affordances that
are already familiar to the user base. Providing analysts with
a tool that provides a similar interface has proven to have
some success with analysts as users, as has been discussed
by Smallman [4]. Our team is focusing on the structured
analytic  technique  of  brainstorming  and  how  we  can
leverage the cognitive process to create a digital tool. 
 Through the lens of scenario-based design, we integrate
the intended users’ cognitive processes into the development
of our software; to do this, we will  adopt cognitive tools,
such  as  the  brainstorming  tool,  and  techniques  already
utilized by intelligence analysts [2], to create a cognitive
and immersive environment that supports multiple users and
multimodal  interactions  in  a  way  that  is  useful  for
intelligence analysis. By leveraging the capabilities of the
cognitive and immersive room, we are aiming to reduce
cognitive load inherent in intelligence analysis. The specific
research questions formulated for this stage of our research
are:  1.)  How  can  we  leverage  brainstorming  tools  to
expedite the foraging process as described by Pirolli and
Card [5], and 2.) How can we utilize multimodal, multi-
participant input to address cognitive load ? Our application
of structured  analytic  techniques (which can be seen in
Figure 2) is a new approach to the development of digital
tools and software for intelligence analysis. 
 This  paper  will  review  historical  trends  among
capabilities in previously released software and will suggest
an application of sensemaking theory, participatory design,
and scenario-based design to strengthen development of our
software’s capabilities. The framework for our research is
based on the intelligence analysis sensemaking process (see
Figure 1) as explained by Pirroli and Card [5]. Thorough
integration of the respective iterative loops of foraging for
information and sensemaking will also inform how a user
interface  and  the  system  tools  should  support  the
intelligence process. 
We propose that our software should be informed by
direct  feedback  from  analysts,  scenario-based  designs
derived from existing structured analytic techniques, and
associated resources that are currently used by intelligence
analysts for training purposes, such as the tradecraft primer
created  by  the  CIA  [6].  This  is  a  novel  approach  to
conceiving and designing software for intelligence analysis,
as most existing software does not draw from the structured
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

analytic techniques that we propose to build as a digital
system. For future work, we will conduct user studies to
determine the digital tool’s utility and usability, as well as
more in-depth studies to examine if it successfully enables
the sensemaking process.
In Section 2 of this paper, we discuss previous literature
in the following fields: state of the art of software developed
for  intelligence  analysis,  literature  in  sensemaking,  user
modelling,  scenario-based  design,  and  previous  work  in
electronic brainstorming tools. In Section 3 of this paper we
discuss our software and how we implemented user centered
features  informed by our  research.  In  our final  section,
Section 4, we discuss limitations of our research, future
work, and our conclusions.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
This section covers literature discussing state of the art 
technologies for intelligence analysis, sensemaking theories,
user modelling, and scenario-based design.
A. State of the Art
Wright  et  al.  [7] introduce  Sandbox,  which  is  the
successor to the analysis tool nSpace. Their paper explains
human information interaction capabilities, such as ‘put this
there’  cognition,  automatic  process  model  templates,
gestures  for fluid expression of thought,  assertions with
evidence, and scalability metrics. The authors use cognitive
task analysis to identify a number of techniques used by
analysts. The authors take note of the use of Post-its by
analysts in order to organize and sort ideas. The authors
translated this into a feature called MindManager, which
employed  concept  map strategies to allow diagrammatic
visual  representations.  The  activities  the  software  is
designed to support are visual thinking and working with
evidence. They designed the software to be flexible to adapt
to different  types  of  analysts  and  analytical  styles.  The
software also incorporates a source attribution and context
function. Another interesting feature is that the software can
provide automatic evidence fitted to templates of analytic
framework.
 Pioch and Everett [8] describe the Polestar intelligence
analysis toolkit, which is one of the earliest software suites
designed  for  intelligence  analysis.  Polestar  included  a
snippet view of texts, where users could highlight and drag
text to the portfolio view for later analysis. This portfolio
view also records metadata about the text. Polestar also
included a way to start knowledge structuring, such as a
wall of facts similar to the sticky-note exercise taught in
intelligence  analysis  classes.  This  software  included  a
timeline  feature,  to  allow  analysts  a  way  to  visualize
relationships in data. Polestar included an argument  tree
editor,  allowing  analysts  to  structure  and  formulate
hypotheses  in  a  visual  fashion.  The  dependency  viewer
allowed users to trace back where a document or object was
found in the dependency network.
 Eccles et al. [9] explore part of intelligence analyst'
process  of  using  narration  to  make  sense  of  events  of
interest and how the authors, themselves, use a software
system  called GeoTime to map geo-temporal  events for
easier access. The authors discuss the major features of
GeoTime: the space-time pattern finding system, the theory
behind which is that it relieves the analyst from effort of
searching for common patterns and events. The second part
of the system relies on visual annotations, which takes the
visual information and appends relevant information. The
final part of the software is a text editor that allows analysts
to  make  relevant  comments  on  the  found  information.
GeoTime  uses  a  collaborative  environment  but  also
emphasizes  a  data-aware  object,  where  annotations  are
embedded in time and space, so these become a new piece
of  information  connected  to  the  found  information.
GeoTime is also interested in allowing analysts to work on a
meso-level, such as behavioral trends, events, and plots,
rather than an individual unit.
 Keel [10] introduces E-Wall, which is a visual analytic
environment design to support remote sensemaking. It is
designed around object focused thinking, where information
is represented as an object, and users construct semantic
relations between them. The E-wall layout is designed to
allow users to collaborate while working on information and
to allow users to manipulate data in object-like chunks. The
E-Wall  uses  two  computational  agents  to  manage
information flow, and infers relationships among data types,
and another that evaluates databases and suggests data to the
user. The E-Wall allows users to navigate large amounts of
data  independently  and  minimizes  the  need  for  verbal
interaction.  Our  research  anticipates  that  communication
between  users  is  an  important  part  of  the  collaborative
process and therefore our tool integrates deliberate periods
of interaction among users to collaborate on theories.
Rooney et al. [11] discuss INVISQUE (an abbreviation
of INteractive VIsual Search and QUery Environment), a
tool that allows searching, automated clustering of data,
automated entity extraction, and manual manipulation of
data on an infinite canvas. Users can initiate a search to look
for articles related to a topic or create clusters of their own.
The authors here discuss the way that users would group
documents in a way that had semantic meaning to them, that
the software would not have been able to infer and then
group.  The  authors  use  Pirolli  and  Card's  sensemaking
model,  along  with  Klein's  Data/Frame  extension.  The
software we are developing has superficial similarities to
INVISQUE, however we propose a more structured method
that  is  aligned  with  the  formalized  structured  analytic
technique of brainstorming to encourage analysts to develop
topic ideas and clusters before they seek for more data. This
should allow for users to experience a more focused search
for data during the foraging process.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 Jigsaw  is  another  piece  of  software  designed  for
intelligence  analysis.   Gorg  et  al.  [12] discuss the
capabilities  of  the  software  in  their  article.  Jigsaw  is
designed to support the sensemaking activities surrounding
collecting and organizing textual information by intelligence
analysts.  The  Jigsaw  system  is  designed  to  provide
visualization for different  perspectives on information in
documents and it supports evidence marshalling through a
Shoe Box view. The earliest version of the software focused
heavily on visual representation of relationships between
entities but did not provide any kind of text analysis. One of
the  major  findings  of  creating  this  software  was  that
software functions cannot replace the reading of reports.
Repeated careful reading of selected texts tended to be the
preferred method to understand the information in texts. As
a  result,  the  Jigsaw  system  incorporated  the  ability  to
summarize and cluster similar important text information.
From there, the software used packages such as GATE,
LingPipe, the OpenCalais system, and the Illinois Named
Entity Trigger, to import data from documents. 
 Murdock and Roth [13] use the lens of Pirroli and
Card's  sensemaking  theory  to  examine  a  map-based
prototype  system  called  Basic  Ordnance  Observation
Management  System  (BOOMS),  developed  at  the  Penn
State GeoVISTA center. The aim of the paper is to explore
how visuo-spatial contexts and maps contribute toward the
intelligence analysis understanding of the events in their
field. The authors focus on the capabilities of the software
and  how  it  offers  users  context  to  understand  details
concerning specific events within a one-year time period.
The  authors  use  sensemaking  to  model  the  technical
concerns that must be addressed for technology that is used
for  gathering  information.  The  mapping  software  is
interactive and includes a structured top down navigation
system. The aim of the software is to be able to provide
insight for operational and policy decision makers through
pattern finding abilities in the software.
Petersen et al. [14] discuss the software CrimeFighter, an
analysis  tool  designed  for  criminal  investigators.  The
authors introduce the concept of applying sensemaking to
counter terrorism and criminal networks, and a software tool
called CrimeFighter Investigator. The challenges outlined in
the  article  concerning  criminal  investigation  are  also
relatively  similar  to  challenges  in  intelligence  analysis.
Several  specific  elements  are  information  volume,
information  complexity,  and  information  sharing.   The
authors discuss the capabilities of the software, and how
they support the investigation process. The authors describe
how the history function helps to allow for revisiting and
revising  the  information  in  the  software  for  further
consideration.  The  software  also  has  some  prediction
features possible, which are supported by social network
analysis, decision making, and hypothesis making. The tool
also has a storytelling feature, which allows for the grouping
of elements of the investigation on the timeline that seem
related to the analyst.
Chung et al. [15] discuss VisPorter, a collaborative text
analytics  tool  aimed  toward  allowing  sensemaking  in  a
collaborative environment. The software is meant for multi-
user engagement  and the designers  focused  on different
elements such as haptic touch, lighting, and to explore how
people  forage  for  information  to  share  hypotheses.  The
VisPorter  software  includes  the  Foraging  tool,  which
contains the document viewer and the concept map viewer,
and  the  Synthesis  tool,  which  allow  users  to  share
information  found  individually  with  the  foraging  tools.
Some of the features included in this software was gesture-
based interaction, with an example of someone with a small
display flipping a document off the left side of their device,
and having it be shared and dropped on the right side of a
synced large display. Our brainstorming software is situated
in an immersive  environment  that  also uses multimodal
input on an immersive display that allows multiple users to
collaborate, but our software recognizes users’ body frames
and allows users to interact with the system  using only
physical gestures. We anticipate this should allow users to
spend more cognitive energy on analysis than on interacting
with the system.
 Benjamin et al. [16] describe the capabilities of an
analytic software tool called DIGEST. Its main capabilities
are extracting data from text, such as sentiments, social
influence, and information flow structures; the tool also has
exploratory data analytics, and finally it uses the stored
results to create various knowledge products. After the data
collection  and  processing  stage,  where  analysts  can
configure the tool to collect data on specific topics, the tool
develops a template for information reporting. Finally, the
analyst can populate the template with the information the
tool has collected. The analyst can choose what information
they want included, as well as add any of their own insights
to the product. 
While several features of our software have been present
in the software discussed above, the underlying concept for
all of our features is to enable human collaboration during
sensemaking;  by  applying  the  intended  users’  domain
knowledge to our software development we hope to achieve
create a cognitively more accessible product. The process
that  we  are  proposing  of  retrospectively  consulting  and
integrating educational materials into the software design is
novel for this problem. This novelty is partly due to the fact
that the users’ requirements as intelligence analysts might
be too rigorous for a generic brainstorming software to be
useful;  to  address  this  special  user  need,  we  are
implementing  the  structured  brainstorming  process
developed by intelligence analysts. The specific process for
this  tool  is  a  structured  analytic  technique  called
brainstorming,  where  a  group  of  analysts  record  salient
pieces of data on sticky notes and creates topic groups from
these  notes.  Our  software  design  is  using  a  blended
approach of interviews and integration of source material
from the intelligence analysis domain.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Sensemaking theory
Sensemaking  theory  is  well  represented  in  human-
computer interaction studies on user interface design for
intelligence analysis [5][7]–[9][11][13][14][17]–[22]. Pirolli
and Card introduce the concept of the sensemaking process
in intelligence analysis as a cognitive schema operating on
expert level behavior [5]. Given this assumption, the authors
also  prelude  their  article  with  the  understanding  that
expertise and experience will form a series of behavioral
patterns  that  will  inform  how  the  intelligence  analysts
behave.
Figure  1 The  sensemaking  process  and  leverage  points  for  analyst
technology as identified through cognitive task analysis [5].
The  authors  state  that  analysts  would  restructure
incoming information to fit previously built organizational
formats,  to  aid  in  planning,  evaluation,  and  reasoning.
Pirolli and Card posit that the intelligence process can be
divided into two loops: 1) the foraging loop, where analysts
seek out and sort information, and 2) the sensemaking loop,
where analysts pinpoint the best evidence, and building a
mental model from the evidence. Our digital tool is intended
to facilitate this process, more  specifically,  the foraging
loop.
C. User modelling 
We  have  studied  structured  analytic  techniques  in
educational  materials  that  were  created  for  use  in  the
intelligence analysis field. These techniques include but are
not limited to: brainstorming, what-if analysis, and multiple
scenario  generation  [6].  We  are  transforming  these
techniques into digital tools for our cognitive immersive
environment. Currently, while there are many digital tools
and software that have been created for the intelligence
analysis domain, few of these tools use structured analytic
techniques  in  their  design  or  operation,  or  they  fail  to
account for the user in system designs [23]. Gotz et al. [24]
detail  the  intelligence  analysis  process,  conducted  an
experiment  concerning  intelligence  analysis,  behavioral
modeling, and user interface implications. Based on their
findings, the authors argue for a flexibility in computer tools
available to analysts, as analysts have a varied method of
collecting  and  recording  information.  One  of  their  final
conclusions  is  user  interface  design  should  have  some
amount  of user  centered  design  and modelling,  because
analysts create information models when none are present,
and  they  expressed  appreciation  when  the  models  were
available  [24].  Perhaps  the  most  well-known  structured
analytic tool that has been transformed into a digital tool is
the Analysis of Competing Hypothesis tool, initially created
by Richard Heuer [25]. 
Figure  2 Pirolli and Card's sensemaking model with structured analytic
techniques superimposed
One challenge in successfully creating a digital tool for
intelligence analysis is identifying the specific information
demands of the operations analysts  use to support their
work. We consult intelligence analysis training materials,
manuals, and final products, such as briefs, to understand
the steps taken by analysts when conducting intelligence
analysis. 
As  structured  brainstorming  is  a  standard  structured
analytic  technique  in  the  sensemaking  process,  we  are
developing  a  digital  tool  in  a  cognitive  and  immersive
environment for brainstorming in the intelligence analysis
domain. We aim to create an environment that will facilitate
sensemaking  during  the  brainstorming  process,  and
therefore it is imperative that we understand how analysts
identify important evidence, discuss ideas, and how they
interact with each other as a team in order to identify how to
proceed with analysis. As mentioned above, our research
team  conducted  several  pen  and  paper  brainstorming
sessions and observed brainstorming sessions conducted in
an intelligence analysis class at a local university, using
direct feedback from analysts and integrating material from
the domain. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The  structured  brainstorming  process  is  explained  in
Beebe  and  Pherson’s  2014 book, “Cases  in  intelligence
analysis” [2]. The process begins with a group of analysts
reading a document individually and then recording pieces
of evidence they find most salient on sticky notes. After a
predetermined amount of time, the recording portion of the
brainstorming process ends, and the group puts their sticky
notes up on a wall or other surface. After the notes are put
up,  the  group  members  rearrange  the  notes  into  topic
groups,  initially  with  no  discussion.  Lastly,  the  group
discusses the emerging topics to determine which are most
relevant to their project. We have created a user model off
of this process using the principles of scenario-based design,
which  are  discussed  below  section  D.   Scenario  based
design.
 The  practice  of  examining  users’  work  routines  to
construct a model of how software should be developed for
the user base is known as scenario-based design [26]. There
are  established  benefits  of  scenario  based-design,  as  it
examines  and  seeks  to  model  the  real-world  processes
undergone by the users.  The core concept is to examine
how  people  use  technology  and  then  to  more  deeply
examine how technology impacts or shapes their activities.
Another  feature of scenario based design is applying user
scenarios for interface and technology design in order to
mold the technology to the users' needs and situation [26]. 
The  scenario-based  design  process  is  intended  to
examine  the  potential  stakeholders,  as  well  as  develop
claims about the current practices of the potential users,
which will inform how user scenarios are developed. Once
the  user  analysis  is  developed,  it  is  utilized  in  design
analysis.  Design  analysis  focuses  on  user  activities,
information design, and interaction scenarios. These are all
developed, further shaped, and informed by information on
the projected user and their needs and use of the software.
Usability  claims  and  analysis  are  also  reiterated  during
design analysis. Then, a prototype is prepared, where more
specific  usability  specifications  are  developed  and
programmed.  The  process  of  reshaping  the  software  to
reflect user needs is re-iterated as necessary. However, the
process that we are proposing of retrospectively consulting
and  integrating  educational  materials  into  the  software
design  is novel  for  developing  software  for  intelligence
analysis.
E. Electronic brainstorming tools
Electronic  sticky notes  are  not  uncommon  in  digital
brainstorming literature. Previous works have looked at the
use of sticky note tools in group and collaborative settings
[27] and in remotely mediated group work, as well as, how
sticky  notes  can  be  used  to  define  affinity  groups  in
collaborative work [28]. Jensen et al. [29] compare the use
of traditional analog sticky notes to a digital sticky-notes
tool,  and  concludes  that  the  digital  sticky  notes  were
superior in terms of increased note interaction, clustering,
and labelling. Existing digital sticky note tools can be found
in examples such as Discusys [28], ECOPack [30], Padlet
[31], and Quickies [32].
More closely aligned to the focus of our research, a
sticky-notes brainstorming tool known as RAMPARTS has
been  designed  for criminal investigations. The study by
Wozniak  et  al.  [33]  found  that  “...RAMPARTS  spatial
awareness decreased task completion time when compared
to a paper-based system, without any adverse effect on task
completion  time  compared  to  a  tabletop,  and  without
increasing  perceived  cognitive  workload”  [33].
Investigating task completion time and spatial awareness
aspects will be important to consider for future user testing
with our own software, in order to determine if our digital
tool will be able to enable sensemaking during intelligence
analysis. 
III. IMPLEMENTING USER CENTERED FEATURES
This  project  seeks  to  extend  existing  research  by
incorporating  scenario-based  designs  into  the  software
interface, as informed by sensemaking theory. We are using
a  blended  approach  of  including  direct  feedback  from
former analysts at a local university, as well as cognitive
analytic techniques created by the domain experts [2][3].
Intelligence  analysis  classes  are  available  in  some
universities, and they often teach techniques that widely
used in the intelligence domain.  We conducted several of
our own pen-and-paper brainstorming sessions and observed
an intelligence analysis class at a local university to better
understand the methods used in the field of intelligence
analysis. These sessions further motivated the behavior and
capabilities of our software.  
In order to enable sensemaking for analysts, we have
taken the pen-and-paper brainstorming exercise as described
by  Beebe  and  Pherson  [2]  and  implemented  it  into  an
immersive, digital tool that can be used collaboratively in a
multi-user context. The research  project  will incorporate
feedback from analysts, both through direct feedback and
user studies, and is currently informed by documents from
the  training  and  educational  literature  that  has  been
produced by the intelligence field. The goal of integrating
training  and  educational  materials  into  the  software
capabilities and interactions is to make the tool accessible to
a majority of the users, as they will have had previous
exposure  to  these  materials  in  their  domain  experience.
Furthermore, it is important for our tool to support human
interactions individually and as a group, and enable fluid
manipulation of the users' ideas as sticky notes to reduce
cognitive effort and bias.
We  use the  Pirolli  and Card  sensemaking  notational
model (Figure 1) to develop the structure and behavior of
our  software.  This  model  depicts  the  cognitive  tasks
completed  by  intelligence  analysts,  and  it  includes  a
foraging phase and a sensemaking phase. The brainstorming
tool is informed by the foraging phase from Pirolli and
Card’s model to allow analysts to search, discover, and filter
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

information during the  shoebox  phase.  The  tool  is also
derived from structured analytic techniques already in use
by intelligence analysts. Our hypothesis is that the software
should be informed by cognitive processes that intelligence
analysts undergo during the intelligence process, as well as
the cognitive analytic tools currently used by intelligence
analysts. It  is imperative to leverage these techniques to
create  a  useful  and  usable  cognitive,  immersive
environment. 
 The sticky notes brainstorming tool is situated in a
cognitive  immersive  environment  in  the  Cognitive
Immersive  Systems  Lab  (CISL).  This  environment  is
comprised of a 360-degree panoramic display that stands at
14  feet  tall.  The  brainstorming  tool  is  comprised  of  a
personal view and a global view to accommodate individual
and group brainstorming. We have integrated verbal and
gestural commands into the software that equate with the
actions in the analog brainstorming exercise, and we have
enabled a personal view and a global view (see Figure 4).
We believe informing the software with techniques already
familiar to the user will create a more usable interface [4],
and will enable sensemaking during the analysis process. 
Digital  sticky  notes  are  created  and  edited  on  the
personal view with a personal device, such as a laptop or a
tablet. Then, the personal view is synced to a web server,
allowing notes to transfer to the global view. The personal
view includes an area to create new notes that are only
shown  within  the  personal  view,  an  uncategorized  area
where notes can be sent to the blank space on the global
view,  and  an  area  that  reflects  all  of  the  other  created
categories and notes of the session. Our personal view (see
Figure 3) is accessed through a web browser, allowing it to
work on a wide variety of devices. Users can send notes
from the personal view to the global view by tapping on a
note and then tapping into the uncategorized area.  
Figure 3 Personal view of sticky notes brainstorming tool.
Once notes are on the shared screen, users can discuss
with each other and interact with the global and personal
views (see Figure 3) to create categories from their ideas. 
The  cognitive  and  immersive  system  is  equipped  to
handle  gestural  commands  and  verbal  commands,  either
separately or in tandem for multimodal interactions. The
technologies that enable multi-user input are Kinects [34],
which  are  used  to  detect  body  frames  and  spatial
information. This information allows users to make gestural
commands as input to the system. Lapel microphones allow
multiple users to give verbal commands to the system. The
system output is projected via five projectors onto the 360-
degree screen. The system can also speak to users through a
synthesized voice. This environment creates an immersive
and interactive workspace for analysis. 
In  order  to  support  a  cognitive  and  immersive
environment, we enabled verbal and gestural commands for
the user to interact  with the global view of the system.
Verbal  commands relayed  through  the lapel  microphone
currently consist of: 1) Create note, 2) Edit note, 3) Delete
note, 4) Move note, 5) Create category, 6) Rename category,
7) Add note to category. Gestural commands are recognized
by the Kinect sensors [34]. The gestures recognized by the
global view in the brainstorming environment are pointing
to select a note, grasping with a hand to pick up a note, and
releasing a hand to drop a note elsewhere on the screen. 
Additionally, the system is able to handle a multimodal
approach of input allowing a combination of verbal and
gestures to make up a command, such as a user pointing at a
note and  saying,  “Delete  that  note.”  These  technologies
enable multimodal interactions which we hypothesize will
help reduce the cognitive load of analysts, which has been
documented  in  previous  work  through  interviews  with
analysts and experiments involving intelligence analysts [1]
[33][35]–[37]. 
Figure 4 User interaction with point/select system in brainstorming tool.
The  interactions  between  the  global  view  and  the
personal view are designed to be faithful to the structured
analytic  brainstorming  process,  and  to  match  the
sensemaking process outlined by Pirolli and Card. Analysts
create notes solitarily before they share the notes with the
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

group, and then spend time discussing the shared notes as a
group. To facilitate collaboration, our technology allows
multiple users to interact with the global view at the same
time.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has introduced our sticky notes brainstorming
tool,  as  informed  by  cognitive  tools  from  intelligence
analysis, which is aiming to better enable sensemaking for
analysts. The underpinnings for our research are brought in
from sensemaking theory, scenario-based design, and user
modelling research on intelligence analysis, and considers
prior research in electronic sticky notes.  Our prototype tool,
situated in CISL, is comprised of a personal view accessible
on personal devices, and a global view that is projected onto
a  screen  viewable  by  all  users.  We  have  integrated
multimodal input for the system through gestural and verbal
commands.
We have found that designing software for intelligence
analysis has presented a number of challenges, which has
informed  the  limitations  of  our  current  research.  The
accessibility of the intended user is generally less than other
user groups, as by nature of their work they cannot divulge
sensitive  information.  Similarly,  accessibility of accurate
and relevant source material to inform the design of the
software  has  been  challenging  for  the  reason  discussed
above. On a more technical note, the range of input we are
enabling in a multimodal environment is in a conceptual
phase, and we are designing and carrying out user studies to
understand the potential impact on users.
For future work, we will conduct user studies to examine
the usability and utility of the brainstorming tool. We use
Pirolli and Card’s sensemaking theory and notational model
[5]  to  understand  how  their  representation  of  how  the
cognitive tasks of intelligence analysis might be supported
by  the  brainstorming  tool  in  our  cognitive  immersive
environment. Our tool will be used to run mock intelligence
exercises to determine if it can produce results that will be
considered useful to an analyst. Failure or success will be
determined by how many unique ideas are generated during
the  brainstorming  session,  the  quality  of  the  ideas,  the
length  of  the  session,  how  many  topic  clusters  are
generated,  and  the  perceived  quality  of  the  discussion.
Based on future user studies with our tool, we can identify
modifications to create a more usable product for the user
base.  If  the  software  is  more  usable  with  these
modifications, and returns useful information, then we can
determine that including educational and training materials
is a necessary step in designing the software. Our first user
study will compare the actions and interactions between
groups using traditional pen and paper tools compared to
our digital  brainstorming tool. The subject  pool will  be
college students. We will do multiple rounds of studies and
will improve the tool capabilities and user interface after
each  round.  A  future  user  study  will  include  former
intelligence analysts as subjects in order to give us domain
specific feedback for the tool. 
Our  prototype  of  a  digital  brainstorming  tool  is
motivated by a scenario-based design, as well as, existing
intelligence analysis resources and materials Future work
includes creating more personalized experiences for users,
developing and researching new gestures and multimodal
interactions,  and  extending  the  tool  to  other  structured
analytic techniques (see Figure 2).
REFERENCES
[1]
S. G. Hutchins, P. Pirolli, and S. Card, “Use of Critical
Analysis Method to Conduct a Cognitive Task Analysis of
Intelligence Analysts,” Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 47, no. 3, pp.
478–482, Oct. 2003.
[2]
S. M. Beebe  and R. H. Pherson,  Cases  in Intelligence
Analysis:  Structured  Analytic Techniques in Action. CQ
Press, 2014.
[3]
W. M. Hall and G. Citrenbaum, Intelligence analysis: How
to think in complex environments: how to think in complex
environments. ABC-CLIO, 2009.
[4]
N.  W.  Warner,  C.  A.  P.  Smith,  and  M.  P.  Letsky,
Macrocognition  in  Teams:  Theories  and  Methodologies.
CRC Press, 2017.
[5]
P.  Pirolli  and  S.  Card,  “Sensemaking  processes  of
intelligence  analysts  and  possible  leverage  points  as
identified through cognitive task analysis,” in Proceedings
of  the  2005  International  Conference  on  Intelligence
Analysis, McLean, Virginia, 2005, vol. 6.
[6]
“A Tradecraft Primer: Structured Analytic Techniques for
Improving Intelligence Analysis.” American Psychological
Association, 2009.
[7]
W. Wright, D. Schroh, P. Proulx, A. Skaburskis, and B.
Cort, “The Sandbox for Analysis: Concepts and Methods,”
in  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2006,
pp. 801–810.
[8]
N. J. Pioch and J. O. Everett, “POLESTAR: collaborative
knowledge  management  and  sensemaking  tools  for
intelligence  analysts,”  in  Proceedings of  the  15th ACM
international  conference  on  Information  and  knowledge
management, 2006, pp. 513–521.
[9]
R. Eccles, T. Kapler, R. Harper, and W. Wright, “Stories in
GeoTime,” Information Visualization; Thousand Oaks, vol.
7, no. 1, pp. 3–17, Spring 2008.
[10]
P. E. Keel, “EWall: A Visual Analytics Environment for
Collaborative  Sense-making,”  Information  Visualization,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 48–63, Mar. 2007.
[11]
C. Rooney, S. Attfield, B. L. W. Wong, and S. Choudhury,
“INVISQUE  as  a  Tool  for  Intelligence  Analysis:  The
Construction  of  Explanatory  Narratives,”  International
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 30, no. 9, pp.
703–717, Sep. 2014.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[12]
C. Görg, Z. Liu, N. Parekh, K. Singhal, and J. Stasko,
“Jigsaw meets Blue Iguanodon - The VAST 2007 Contest,”
in  In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology, 2007.
[13]
M. J. Murdock, R. E. Roth, and N. V. Maziekas, “The Basic
Ordnance  Observational  Management  System:  geovisual
exploration and analysis  of improvised  explosive  device
incidents,”  Journal of Maps, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 120–124,
2012.
[14]
R. R. Petersen and U. K. Wiil, “CrimeFighter Investigator:
Integrating  synthesis  and  sense-making  for  criminal
network investigation,” Security Informatics, vol. 2, no. 1,
p. 10, 2013.
[15]
H.  Chung,  C.  North,  J.  Z.  Self,  S.  Chu,  and F. Quek,
“VisPorter: facilitating information sharing for collaborative
sensemaking  on  multiple  displays,”
 Personal  and
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1169–1186, 2014.
[16]
P.  Benjamin,  K.  Madanagopal,  M.  Erraguntla,  and  D.
Corlette, “Distributed Information Gathering, Exploration
and Sensemaking Toolkit (DIGEST),” in  Proceedings on
the  International  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence
(ICAI); Athens, Athens, United States, Athens, 2016, pp.
449–455.
[17]
C.  Baber,  S.  Attfield,  G.  Conway,  C.  Rooney,  and  N.
Kodagoda, “Collaborative sense-making during simulated
Intelligence Analysis Exercises,”  International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 86, pp. 94–108, Feb. 2016.
[18]
Y. a Kang and J. Stasko, “Characterizing the intelligence
analysis process: Informing visual analytics design through
a longitudinal field study,” in  2011 IEEE Conference on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), 2011, pp.
21–30.
[19]
P. E. Lehner, L. Adelman, B. A. Cheikes, and M. J. Brown,
“Confirmation  Bias  in  Complex  Analyses,”
 IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A:
Systems and Humans, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 584–592, May
2008.
[20]
J.  Paik  and  P.  Pirolli,  “ACT-R  models  of  information
foraging in geospatial intelligence tasks,”  Computational
and Mathematical Organization Theory, vol. 21, no. 3, pp.
274–295, 2015.
[21]
G. Park and C. A. Ntuen, “A cognitive model for human
terrain information processing,” in IIE Annual Conference.
Proceedings, 2011, p. 1.
[22]
B.  Tomaszewski  and  A.  M.  MacEachren,  “Geovisual
analytics  to  support  crisis  management:  Information
foraging  for  geo-historical  context,”
 Information
Visualization, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 339–359, 2012.
[23]
M.  K.  Dhami,  “A  Survey  of  Intelligence  Analysts’
Perceptions  of  Analytic  Tools,”  in  2017  European
Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference (EISIC),
2017, pp. 131–134.
[24]
D. Gotz, M. X. Zhou, and Z. Wen, “A study of information
gathering and result processing in intelligence analysis,” in
IUI 2006 Workshop on IUI for Intelligence Analysis, 2006,
p. 6.
[25]
R.  J.  Heuer,
 Psychology  of  intelligence  analysis.
Washington,  D.C.: Center for  the Study of Intelligence,
Central Intelligence Agency, 1999.
[26]
M.  B.  Rosson  and  J.  M.  Carroll,  Human  Computer
Interaction
 
Handbook:
 
Fundamentals,
 
Evolving
Technologies, and Emerging Applications, Third Edition.
CRC Press, 2012.
[27]
C. C. Dornburg, S. M. Stevens, S. M. L. Hendrickson, and
G.  S.  Davidson,  “Improving  Extreme-Scale  Problem
Solving: Assessing Electronic Brainstorming Effectiveness
in an Industrial Setting,” Hum Factors, vol. 51, no. 4, pp.
519–527, Aug. 2009.
[28]
W.  Widjaja,  K.  Yoshii,  K.  Haga,  and  M.  Takahashi,
“Discusys:  Multiple  User  Real-time  Digital  Sticky-note
Affinity-diagram  Brainstorming  System,”
 Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 22, pp. 113–122, Jan. 2013.
[29]
M. M. Jensen, S.-K. Thiel, E. Hoggan,  and S. Bødker,
“Physical  Versus  Digital  Sticky  Notes  in  Collaborative
Ideation,”  Comput Supported Coop Work, pp. 1–37, May
2018.
[30]
S. Majd, A. Marie-Hélène, M. Véronique, M. Claude, and
V.  David,  “Integration  of  brainstorming  platform  in  a
system of information systems,” in Proceedings of the 8th
International  Conference  on  Management  of  Digital
EcoSystems, 2016, pp. 166–173.
[31]
“Padlet is the easiest way to create and collaborate in the
world,”  Padlet.  [Online].  Available:  https://padlet.com/.
[Accessed: 23-Dec-2018].
[32]
P. Mistry and P. Maes, “Augmenting Sticky Notes as an I/O
Interface,”  in  Universal  Access  in  Human-Computer
Interaction.  Intelligent  and  Ubiquitous  Interaction
Environments, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 547–
556.
[33]
P. Wozniak, N. Goyal, P. Kucharski, L. Lischke, S. Mayer,
and M. Fjeld, “RAMPARTS: Supporting Sensemaking with
Spatially-Aware  Mobile Interactions,”  in  Proceedings of
the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp. 2447–2460.
[34]
R. Zhao, K. Wang, R. Divekar, R. Rouhani, H. Su, and Q.
Ji,  “An  Immersive  System  with  Multi-Modal  Human-
Computer Interaction,” in  2018 13th IEEE International
Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG
2018), Xi’an, 2018, pp. 517–524.
[35]
F.  L.  Greitzer  and  R.  E.  Hohimer,  “Modeling  Human
Behavior  to  Anticipate  Insider  Attacks,”  Journal  of
Strategic Security, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 25–48, Jun. 2011.
[36]
B.  M.  Moon  and  R.  R.  Hoffman,  “How  Might
‘Transformational’ Technologies and Concepts be Barriers
to Sensemaking in Intelligence Analysis?,” p. 12.
[37]
A. Toniolo  et al., “Supporting Reasoning with Different
Types  of  Evidence  in  Intelligence  Analysis,”  in
Proceedings  of  the  2015  International  Conference  on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC,
2015, pp. 781–789.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

