Educational Playability  
Analyzing Player Experiences in Educational Video Games 
 
Amer Ibrahim, Francisco Luis Gutiérrez Vela, José Luis González Sánchez, Natalia Padilla Zea 
Dept. of Software Engineering  
University of Granada 
Granada, Spain 
(ameribrahim, fgutierr, joseluisgs, npadilla)@ugr.es 
 
 
Abstract—Educational video games constitute some of the main 
edutainment applications currently on the market. However, 
the development of video games as educational tools is very 
difficult due to their multidisciplinary nature (fun and 
education). Player Experience is a good measure of the level of 
fun and education presented to players and determines, to 
some extent, the success of an educational video game. This 
paper examines the importance of the role of Player 
Experience in motivating and enhancing the concept of 
learning through play, and highlights the role of Educational 
Playability attributes as suitable and effective tools to analyze 
and measure the experience obtained by a player during a 
game. The paper also discusses the role of a balanced 
Educational Video Game that provides a good level of 
motivation and engagement in order to improve player 
experience.  
Keywords- Playability; Player Experience; Educational Video 
Game. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Videogames are complex environments that offer the 
kind of entertainment and challenges that appeal to a 
growing number of people. The objective of videogames is 
to engage players in a fun activity which provides distraction 
from their daily lives, and which captures their attention for 
hours. We define Educational Video Games (EVG) as video 
games with special characteristics to teach, build and 
strengthen skills while the player has fun. Their focus on 
motivation, curiosity, emotion, socialization, entertainment 
and education distinguishes them from other types of video 
games. Play is fun, and information that is learned in an 
enjoyable way is less likely to be forgotten [23]. A very 
important aspect of the success of an EVG is how much it 
motivates players, as motivation guides learning activities 
during playing time. The inclusion of educational content 
often leads to a loss of the game's entertainment value, which 
decreases its efficiency as an educational tool [33].  
In this paper, we examine the problem that many EVGs 
do not provide motivation to play, and thus do not improve 
the Player Experience PX (user experience in a video game). 
However, do all EVGs demonstrate this problem? Where 
exactly does the problem lie? How can we detect it? What 
does player motivation depend on? How can we determine 
whether a game provides the necessary level of fun and 
motivation?  
We believe this last question depends largely on the 
property of playability, which assesses and measures 
indirectly how much fun the game is and how much it 
attracts and captivates the player. To assess the level of 
playability, we must analyze the experience obtained by a 
player in an EVG. However, is the current structure of 
playability in video games sufficient to analyze the PX in 
EVGs? Is it necessary to qualify this structure? In this paper 
we answer these questions using a theoretical approach.  
We aim to present educational playability (playability in 
EVGs) as a synthesis of all the playability studies analyzed 
throughout this work, and analyze the PX in order to obtain a 
measure of the fun and education experienced by a player 
with an EVG. 
 The subject of this paper overlaps many current topics in 
the games world, such as: User Experience, Video Game, 
Education and Human Computer Interaction. 
Following this introduction, in Section 2, we discuss 
some studies of EVGs, present the characteristics of EVGs, 
and analyze the attributes of a balanced EVG. In Section 3 
we present an analysis of the PX, a definition of Educational 
Playability, the attributes and facets which characterize and 
measure PX in EVGs, and define the correlation between 
playability attributes. Finally, we present our conclusions in 
Section 4, followed by our references. 
II. 
EDUCATIONAL VIDEO GAMES 
Many researchers have discussed the use of video games 
as useful educational tools to improve learning and 
performance. This is due to the many benefits video games 
have with regard to the attention and motivation of players, 
leading to greater academic success, better cognitive skills, 
and improved concentration. Entertainment is used in 
combination with education in order to create a motivating 
and successful environment for learning. [1] [24].  
Gee [9] emphasizes the use of games as a medium to 
promote 
experiential 
learning. 
Gee 
discusses 
the 
opportunities that video games provide for simultaneous 
learning, by presenting three components for active learning: 
“experiencing the world in new ways, forming new 
affiliations, and preparation for future learning”. He asserts 
that video games teach very effectively through an 
environment that is demanding yet attractive, and that they 
326
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

help keep a player positively engaged and motivated to 
continue learning.  The concept of the EVG has a long 
history [19][34]; several attempts have been made to 
incorporate 
education 
into 
video 
games, 
such 
as 
Edutainment, Serious Games and Commercial off-the-shelf 
(COTS) [8][26], which effectively created games as a 
teaching tool specifically in the domain of computer science .  
Nowadays, there are many EVGs. However, are all 
EVGs successful and do they always keep the player 
motivated to play? Good EVGs hook their users and 
maintain higher levels of motivation for longer. Robertson 
[25] highlights the value of educational games in promoting 
traditional literacy skills, including narrative structure and 
creativity, while providing significant benefits in terms of 
motivation, team work and self esteem. Moreover, the 
positive experience felt from self-initiated activities can lead 
to a greater sense of self-efficacy, which in turn increases a 
student's motivation to learn.  
A. Characterization of Educational Video Games 
EVGs are a combination of playing and learning, 
however, it can be difficult to give a precise definition of an 
EVG since there are many kinds, all very different from one 
another (simulator, social game, etc.). Not only is it 
necessary to identify the features that make EVGs different 
from other videogames, but a structure capable of achieving 
the objectives of EVGs is also required.  There are several 
works in the literature that incorporate new features for 
building playful and attractive EVGs. Many researchers find 
that motivation to play is a very important feature of EVGs, 
based on game rules, goals, and rewards. They argue that 
competence, autonomy, and relatedness are factors that 
affect motivation [5]. Dicky and Waraich [6][30] mainly 
focus on the game narrative. They believe that a narrative 
context that promotes “challenge, fantasy, and curiosity” and 
provides feedback for players is one that promotes intrinsic 
motivation to play. Other works provide the social aspects of 
EVGs by developing skills and encouraging collaboration, 
cooperation 
and 
communication, 
so 
that 
players 
communicate with each other and work together to achieve 
common objectives. Bailey [2] suggests communication may 
be built or reinforced by video games through their capacity 
to offer a more social approach to learning and collaboration. 
Malone and Lepper [19] identify four key characteristics 
which make an EVG enjoyable: challenge, curiosity, control 
and fantasy Thiagarajan [28] also presents the following 
characteristics: conflict, control, closure, contrivance and 
competency. Jenkins [14], identifies several characteristics of 
successful educational games such as: EVGs are made to fit 
specific learning contexts; successful EVGs supplement 
classroom teaching rather than replace it; using play as 
learning strategy; every element of the game design is 
meaningful; success is social, rather than individual; the 
game must be fun. Gee [10] proposes seven features of the 
videogame design that are important for effective learning: 
Interactivity, 
Customization, 
Strong 
identities, 
Well-
sequenced problems, A pleasant level of frustration, A cycle 
of expertise, ‘Deep’ and ‘fair’. 
 Based on the above works, we here highlight the main 
characteristics that should be included in EVGs: 
• 
Accelerate 
learning 
times 
and 
focus 
on 
reinforcement of players’ skills and experience.  
• 
Increase player motivational levels by using 
accurate, richly detailed, predictable content.  
• 
Increase players’ retention levels. 
• 
Make players feel that they are part of a creative and 
dynamic community. 
• 
Give players great scope for personalization 
according to learning style and preferences.  
• 
Present suitable and effective content for players of 
all levels.  
• 
EVG is an active virtual world, which provides an 
active support system and feedback and reacts to 
players’ 
actions 
in 
a 
consistent, 
immediate, 
challenging and exciting way. 
• 
Use 
collaborative 
learning 
and 
improve 
collaboration and interactivity among players.  
• 
Transmit different stimuli to activate and engage 
players during playing time. 
These characteristics represent the important role that EVGs 
play as interactive tools to motivate, teach and entertain 
players. Games that do not captivate and engage players will 
not motivate them to play, meaning that their time will not be 
utilized effectively. 
B. Balanced EVGs 
Balancing fun and engagement with educational content 
and learning is one of the most important challenges that 
EVG designers face. “We want the game, as much as 
possible, to be time spent learning”, “You have to take both 
engagement and learning into account” [36]. Thus, an EVG 
is controlled by its success as a tool to teach and entertain. 
The success of an EVG is related to a number of factors that 
balance the playful content and educational content.  
One kind of content should not be given more importance 
than the other, since both form the structure of the EVG and 
ensure its success or failure. Law [17] indicates that one of 
the problems of current EVGs is the poor balance between 
playful and educational activities, or between challenges and 
ability. Moreover, the lack of sound instructional models, 
based on pedagogical standards and didactical methods, is 
seen as the common weakness of most EVGs, leading to a 
separation of learning from playing. The imbalance between 
EVG components may lead to the failure of an EVG to 
achieve its objectives.  Other reasons for the failure of EVGs 
can be identified as: uninteresting content, the fact that 
presented contents are not appropriate for the prior skill and 
knowledge level of players, and game elements and game 
contents are unrelated. 
In this work, present new factors which characterize the 
relationship between EVG components, based on the 
characteristics previously mentioned: 
1) Interdependency: The success of an EVG depends on 
the relationship between educational content and playful 
content, and how these contents are presented without either 
one dominating at different stages It also depends on 
327
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

keeping players interested and motivated to play. 
Morenoger notes that the different designs found in this 
field have aims that seem to be biased towards either fun or 
educational content [21]. The proposed content must 
support the achievement of the game objectives, which 
means 
that 
EVG 
success 
is 
constrained 
by 
the 
interdependence 
and 
integrity 
between 
playful 
and 
educational components during all game steps, as well as 
the continuity of the game story and the compliance of game 
contents in terms of the visualization and achievement of 
goals. Prensky states that effective educational game design 
must achieve a balance between fun and educational values 
[23]. 
2) Continuity and consistency: Keeping the Learning-
Fun Relationship balanced during all game steps in a way 
that engages players. EVGs that are not engaging can 
negatively affect players as their time will not be utilized 
effectively. We therefore emphasize that an EVG must 
contain different goals and objectives (playful and 
educational) throughout the different levels, and well-
structured and carefully-chosen content during the design 
step of the game environment. It is necessary to provide 
appropriate 
content 
for 
the 
predetermined 
learning 
objectives and player skills. “The best way to learn is when 
the learner is having fun at the same time. Having fun gives 
your kid motivation to keep on practicing, which is the only 
way to learn skills” [37]. 
3) Completely New: In addition to the previous factors, 
the EVG content should be renewed each time the player 
plays (i.e., use different ways to present the EVG contents), 
the game must keep the player immersed and provide new 
knowledge, experience, etc. This, along with a good, 
realistic presentation of game content, means that the player 
loses his or her sense of time and place. Mavis Beacon [38] 
provides typing tests with different kinds of presentation 
(graphics, sounds, etc.) throughout the game in order to 
capture a player’s attention and encourage him or her to 
pass the tests. 
These factors indicate that to develop a playable EVG 
and improve the overall PX it is important to understand the 
changes that have occurred in the video game structure due 
to the merging of educational and fun components. Due to its 
effect on the learning progress, we need to characterize PX 
in EVGs in order to know which elements of the video game 
are helping or hindering its success. 
III. 
PLAYABILITY: A MEASURE OF A PLAYER EXPERIENCE 
IN EDUCATIONAL VIDEO GAMES 
Above, we have mentioned the different aspects of EVGs 
(hedonics, motivation and the narrative structure) which help 
to improve PX by teaching higher order thinking skills such 
as strategic thinking, interpretative analysis, problem solving, 
plan formulation and execution, adaptation to rapid change, 
and offer opportunities for players to cooperate within the 
game and within the larger community through websites and 
online forums [26]. 
However, measuring experiential dimensions such as fun, 
motivation and emotion is more elusive than measuring 
traditional performance metrics such as time spent playing, 
or number of tasks completed in each step. “It is difficult to 
obtain knowledge about what players did when playing the 
game, and how meeting different game design elements 
affected their experience of interacting with the game” [29]. 
Thus, to measure the PX, we propose the use of playability 
attributes and properties that allow us to measure whether a 
player is having fun playing an EVG based on the pragmatic 
and hedonic properties. Playability attributes characterize PX 
by analyzing all aspects of player behavior and feelings 
when he or she is playing,  An adequate value of playability 
allows the player to have a more positive game experience, 
resulting in a greater predisposition to assimilate the 
educational and playful concepts underlying the game 
dynamics. Accordingly, we need to define the PX and 
identify the playability attributes and properties in the EVG 
context to ensure an optimal PX.  
The Player Experience PX is a simulation of User 
Experience UX in software application used to perform daily 
tasks. UX is defined as how a person feels when interacting 
with a system in terms of ease of use, perception of the value 
of the system, utility, and efficiency in performing tasks etc 
[27]. PX may be much more extensive than the UX; PX 
helps to improve the player interface design, the level of 
challenges, the pace, game mechanics and game story. We 
can say that PX extends the UX in EVGs, where UX is 
focused more on the subjective part of the interaction process 
and goes beyond the traditional study of skills and cognitive 
processes of users and their rational behavior when 
interacting with computers [18].  
The term PX, based on definitions of user experience 
[18], refers to “all aspects related to the player that are 
affected by and interact with the playing environment”. 
These aspects represent the different features of the 
interaction process, such as: sensation, feelings, emotional 
response, assessment, user satisfaction and the experience 
obtained throughout the entire playing time [13]. A player 
experiences these aspects positively in a videogame with 
good playability, where the playability attributes and 
properties are measures of PX. Canossa [3] emphasizes the 
emotion and narrative aspects of the game in the  design of a 
UX. Canossa describes how specific game environments and 
certain game features can offer players personal styles of 
play. To analyze the quality of a video game we must discuss 
the non-functional values, which define specific properties of 
game and affect its quality [12]. Playability has been studied 
from different perspectives and with different objectives 
without consensus on its definition or the elements that 
characterize it. In this context, Playability is a term used in 
the design and analysis of video games that describes the 
quality of a video game in terms of its rules, mechanics, 
goals, and design. It refers to all experiences that a player 
may feel when interacting with a video game system. 
Playability is affected by the quality of the storyline, 
responsiveness, pace, control, intensity of interaction, 
intricacy, and strategy, as well as the degree of realism and 
the quality of graphics and sound [32][35].  
There are few studies focused on defining Playability 
formally, the exceptions being the work of Fabricator and 
Järvien[7][15]. However, these do not specifically refer to 
328
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Playability attributes or the properties which characterize it. 
Järvinen has defined playability as an evaluation tool which 
consists 
of 
four 
components: 
functional, 
structural, 
audiovisual, and social playability [15]. Fabricatore has 
defined playability in action games as the possibility of 
understanding and controlling gameplay [7].  
Playability has been defined as “the instantiation of the 
general concept of usability when applied to videogames and 
it is determined by the possibility of understanding or 
controlling the gameplay” [7]. This may be interpreted as 
supporting a separation of playability and usability if we 
consider that playability is related only to video games, 
“capability to provide enjoyment for a player over an 
extended period of time” [16]. Thus Playability is based on 
Usability but, in the context of video games, it goes much 
further. Furthermore, Playability in video games is not 
limited to the degree of fun or entertainment experienced 
when playing a game; it also extends the UX characteristics 
with player dimensions using a broad set of characteristics 
such as motivation, pleasure, curiosity, emotion, and social 
influences that contribute significantly to user satisfaction 
with the product  
A. Educational Playability 
The main concepts studied in works that focus on 
playability experiences are: flow [4], immersion [22], 
emotions [20], and fun [31]. Are these aspects sufficient to 
characterize playability in EVGs? EVGs are composed of 
two dimensions: educational and playful. Thus, Playability in 
EVGs is not limited to playful objectives but must take into 
account educational objectives, such as learning while 
having fun, improving the abilities of students to solve 
complex problems, reinforcing players' skills and improving 
player experience.  
EVG must maintain fun as a subjective concept and 
include educational goals. Thus, Educational Playability in 
EVGs is an extension of playability in videogames. We 
propose the definition of playability in EVGs to be “the set 
of properties that describe the PX in the gaming 
environment, whose main goal is to provide fun and learning 
in a playable and learnable context during the entire playing 
time”. Educational Playability describes how to make an 
EVG playable and learnable at the same time, and it includes 
two aspects: learning to play and playing to learn. Thus, it 
contains new characteristics related to the educational 
component. 
Characterizing 
Educational 
Playability 
(i.e., 
the 
playability of the playful and educational contents in EVGs) 
requires a specific study related to the different aspects of an 
EVG (analyzing several EVGs and their characteristics). 
Moreover, characterizing Educational Playability can result 
in improved player motivation and satisfaction, the 
establishment of rules of engagement, the introduction of 
educational content that is implicit and relevant to the 
narrative story line, improved quality of educational content, 
the provision of interactive feedback and an emphasis on the 
correctness, accuracy and reality of educational content.  
To characterize Educational Playability we have used a 
tested and verified characterization proposed by González 
Sánchez [11][12] to achieve the new changes in the 
playability structure. We have therefore identified and 
qualified new attributes and properties which are suitable for 
defining playability in EVGs.  
Fig. 1 shows the educational playability attributes divided 
into educational attributes (the newly proposed attributes) 
and playful attributes. 
B. Educational Playability Attributes 
We will now discuss in more detail the new playability 
attributes for characterizing the educational component of 
PX (educational attributes), taking into account the 
educational aspects proposed in this paper. We have already 
mentioned the effects of the educational content on all other 
playability attributes (playful attributes), and have presented 
some of the possible ways that each attribute can be 
measured. Thus, Educational Playability is characterized by: 
1) Satisfaction: The gratification or pleasure derived 
from playing a complete video game or some aspect of it. 
Satisfaction is an attribute with a high degree of 
subjectivity. Not only is it difficult to measure, but it also 
influences player preferences. Satisfaction is linked to the 
degree of balance and harmony in the game. This is defined 
by the following properties: Game Fun, Contents 
Disappointment and Attractiveness. A high degree of each 
one of these properties will lead to an increase in player 
satisfaction.  
We can measure this attibute by the percentage of game 
objectives discovered and achieved during the playing time 
and by the percentage of useful playing time (amount of 
time a player feels pleasure while playing ). 
2) Learnability: The player’s capacity to understand and 
master the game system and mechanics (objectives, rules, 
how to interact with the video game, etc). It has the 
following properties: Game Knowledge, Player Skill, Game 
Difficulty, Player Frustration, Speed of Learning and 
Discovery Techniques. A high level of player knowledge 
and skills will reduce the degree of learning, and a high 
level of difficulty and frustration will directly decrease the 
playability of the game. However, rapid presentation of 
game concepts and the ability to discover these concepts 
will positively affect the degree of learning. This attribute 
introduces learning to play, but playing to learn is also a 
very important characteristic of EVGs. EVGs involve a 
complex learning process, and the importance of this means 
that we have added a new attribute related to educational 
aspects of the video game.  
To measure Learnability we can use player performance 
and the playing time, which are related to mastering the 
game controls and mechnics. 
3) Effectiveness: The resources necessary to offer 
players a new experience (fun and learning) while they 
achieve the game’s various objectives and reach the final 
goal. To ensure enjoyment and hide the educational 
component in EVGs in a homogeneous way, we must 
include elements from a playful point of view. This will 
reduce the effectiveness of the educational process and it 
may seem that time is being wasted in playing, but we are in 
fact increasing the motivation to learn. Effectiveness has the 
329
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

following properties: Game Completion and the Structuring 
of Game Resources. An EVG is more effective if the 
percentage of Completion and Structuring is high.  
To measure this attribute we can use the percentage of 
unachieved objectives, and also analyze the gap between the 
prior knowledge of the player and the knowledge presented 
by the challenges in the game. 
4) Immersion: The capacity of the EVG contents to be 
believable, such that the player becomes directly involved in 
the virtual game world. At an educational level, this 
property is used to measure the ability of an EVG to present 
the educational aspects implicitly. It has the following 
properties: Conscious Awareness, Absorption in game, 
Game Realism, Control Dexterity and Socio-Cultural 
Proximity with the game. We can keep a player immersed 
while playing by focusing on a high degree of these 
properties.  
This attribute can be measured by the playing time, time 
per challenges, the level of player awareness, and the quality 
of the actions performed.   
5) Motivation: The set of game characteristics that 
prompt a player to perform specific actions and continue 
undertaking them until they are completed. At an 
educational level, motivation to play indirectly produces 
positive motivation to learn. It can be defined by: 
Encouragement Techniques, Curiosity about the game, 
Player Self-Improvement and Diversity of game resources. 
These properties evaluate the player’s perseverance to 
overcome the game challenges.  
Motivation can be measured using the educational level 
obtained during the game, the time and number of attempts 
a player makes in order to overcome a game challenge, and  
the objectives achieved. 
6) Emotion: This refers to the player’s involuntary 
impulses in response to the EVG stimuli that induce feelings 
or a chain reaction of automatic behaviors. The educational 
content in EVGs may provoke rejection by the player, 
which reduces the motivation for the player to explore the 
game and thus achieve the educational goals. Emotion 
contains the following properties: Player Reaction, Game 
Conduct and Sensory Appeal for game elements. These 
properties are able to generate a set of emotions in the 
player during the playing time which are very difficult to 
achieve in the real world.  
We can measure this attribute by analyzing the pleasure 
gained, and by studying the emotional reaction and 
educational development of the player when facing and 
overcoming the different challenges.      
7) Socialization: The set of game attributes, elements 
and resources that promote the social dimension of the game 
experience in a group scenario. From an educational 
perspective, socialization is the ability to support students 
learning from one another. Socialization relates to the 
following properties: Social Perception, Group Awareness, 
Personal Implication, the Sharing of Social Resources, 
Communication Techniques and Interaction Rules of the 
game. We can use these properties to present new 
challenges that help players become immersed in the virtual 
game world and feel satisfied with the game dynamic, and 
that help create collective emotions among players. Thus 
each player is self-stimulated and is encouraged by other 
players to face and overcome the proposed game challenges. 
The Socialization attribute can be measured through an 
analysis of the social elements, rules, effects, mechanisms, 
and the percentage of objectives that have been achieved in 
a group situation.  
The preceding attributes of Educational Playability are 
used to measure playful aspects, although they have been 
adapted to the special case of EVGs. The following two 
attributes are used specifically for measuring aspects of 
learning and its relationship to the playing process. 
8) Supportability: we define this as the ability of EVGs 
to engage and teach players correctly, and encourage them 
to continue learning and achieve the learning objectives 
causing playability as motivational element. We propose the 
following properties to characterize Supportability: 
a) Embedded learning: This is the capacity of the game 
to implicitly introduce the educational content and 
encourage players to learn it while playing. This property 
aims to ensure that the level of pleasure and fun is 
unaffected by the educational content.  
b) Interdependence: This refers to the relation 
(interdependence) between educational content and the 
game elements, and is related to game activities, challenges 
and game objects that represent the objectives presented to a 
player during the game.  
c) Integrity: 
The 
game 
must 
ensure 
that 
the 
relationship between playful and educational content is well 
managed, so that new elements presented for both contents 
are compatible with each other. Integrity gives players an 
idea of the learning process and how they can achieve the 
presented game content.  
d) Challenges: Refers to the different levels of 
difficulty and complexity of challenges, and how to suit 
these to learners’ skills, as well as how to relate these 
challenges to the presented content, so that flow experience 
is possible. A game with a high degree of complexity may 
cause the player to lose interest.  
330
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 1.  Educational playability Attributes. 
e) Interaction: This refers to the ability of the game to 
increase players’ motivation to learn by encouraging them 
to interact with the educational content through quizzes and 
multimedia, stimulating them to practice skills, demonstrate 
their knowledge, discover information, and reinforce 
learning. 
This attribute can be measured by determining the 
development of player knowledge and the percentage of 
educational elements provided in the game, and by 
analyzing the percentage of educational goals achieved.  
9) Educability: We define this attribute as: the 
educational characteristics of video games that support the 
user´s ability to be aware, understand and master learning 
goals. We propose the following properties to characterize 
Educability: 
a) Learning goal: the degree to which the educational 
content teaches and increases player skills, and the ability to 
use these skills. This property must motivate the learner to 
achieve the goals and learning experiences. Thus, an EVG 
that does not improve player knowledge does not teach 
players. 
b) Feedback: 
Games 
must 
present 
appropriate 
educative feedback that improves the behavior, experience, 
and performance of players based on their progress and 
whether their decisions have positive or negative effects. 
This property aims to help players to be aware of and to 
achieve the educational content in the shortest possible time.  
c) Error prevention: EVGs should ensure that a user's 
skills develop correctly, never allowing a player to use 
incorrect information during the learning process or when 
trying to solve tasks.  Error prevention is defined by the 
degree to which the educational elements help players avoid 
making errors and achieve the content correctly. This 
increases 
a 
player’s 
efficiency 
and 
increases 
the 
achievement of educational goals. It also reduces the level 
of frustration and encourages players to play by making the 
game more acceptable to them.  
d) Recoverability: The degree to which the EVG 
allows players to check the correctness of the content 
provided 
knowledge 
and 
change 
incorrectly 
and 
unintentionally acquired knowledge and skills. Players 
frequently choose incorrect options or actions and are likely 
to find themselves with incorrect knowledge in an error state 
from which they must recover.  
e) Understanding: The degree to which the player is 
able to understand the game goals, determine the 
educational content in the game environment during playing 
time, and understand the difficulties at each game level. 
Understanding helps to define the user profile and 
determine the required feedback.  
f) Adaptation: Games must be able to bridge the gap 
between a player´s prior knowledge and that which is 
presented at different game levels, encourage the player to 
use this knowledge to pass each level, and enhance the 
player experience in order to achieve the EVG´s objectives. 
the improvement of user experience and the success a player 
has at each game level will enable the player to more 
effectively achieve the target goals.  
331
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

g) Accuracy: The degree to which correct and real 
content helps players to focus on the content provided and 
obtain new knowledge from the virtual world. 
To measure this attribute we can use the amount of 
assistance (e.g., hints and tutorials) provided throughout the 
game and analyze player actions, performance and skills 
based on the knowledge gained during the game. 
C. Correlation among Playability Attributes  
In this section we examine the correlation among 
educational playability attributes. For example, if an attribute 
has a positive value, it will generate a positive experience in 
all other attributes. This is due to the fact that the attributes 
are focused within the experience. Thus, the model we 
present characterizes the player's experience. By studying 
and analyzing each attribute, the relationship between 
attributes and the effects that attributes have on one another 
can be clarified. 
1) Satisfaction: This is an indicator of the improvement 
in player skills and knowledge, indicating the degree to 
which a player is immersed in the learning and playing 
process. Satisfaction is related to how well game convinces 
the player to learn the content presented during the game, 
and his or her ability to control and master this content. If a 
player has high level of satisfaction this indicates that he or 
she does not find the educational content difficult to 
achieve. 
2) Learnability: A low level of learnability means the 
player finds the game mechanics and game rules easy 
master. The player therefore plays with high level of 
satisfaction and is motivated to overcome the game 
challenges, discover the game objectives and interact with 
educational content. 
3) Effectiveness: An EVG has a high level of 
effectiveness if the player has discovered and achieved a 
high number of playful and educational goals, which means 
the player is satisfied playing a game. It also indicates that 
the game has provided the learning mechanism correctly in 
the virtual game world, meaning that a player requires only 
a low level of educational support to be able to master the 
dynamics of the learning process. 
4) Immersion: An EVG with a high degree of 
immersion means that the player is easily captivated by the 
virtual game world, increasing the success of the game and 
enhancing a player’s ability to discover and achieve the 
educational goals.  It also stimulates players to interact with, 
and thus understand, most of the game content. 
5) Motivation: A high level of motivation encourages 
players to discover new objectives presented in the game. 
This has an important effect on enriching a player’s skills 
and knowledge, and indicates how well the game manages 
the relationship between different elements of the game. A 
high level of motivation also refers to effective mechanisms 
for supporting players to face and overcome game 
challenges, and helps to introduce the educational content 
during the game without players becoming frustrated 
(embedded learning). 
6) Emotion: A high level of emotion provides players 
with 
different 
sensations 
(e.g., 
pleasure, 
boredom, 
frustration, challenge) that lead them to interact with 
different game elements. This interaction keeps maintains a 
player´s motivation to achieve the game objectives. If an 
EVG has a high level of emotion the player feels more 
immersed in the virtual world, which helps to introduce the 
educational content implicitly 
and 
provides 
greater 
encouragement, motivating the player to overcome a 
particular educational challenge. 
7) Socialization: An EVG with a high level of 
socialization in a multiplayer environment contains many 
different educational playability attributes such as:  increase 
the player’s ability to achieve the game goals, increase 
motivation to play and interact with different game 
elements, help to discover the educational content implicitly 
presented, reduce the need for game feedback, decrease the 
probability of recoverability, and facilitate a player’s 
mastering of the learning process. 
8) Supportability: A high level of supportability means 
that the EVG has managed the balance between educational 
elements and playful elements perfectly.  These elements 
transmit different types of emotions that guide player 
interaction with the game.   It also encourages players to 
achieve the educational objectives by motivating them to 
perform specific actions in the virtual game world and 
helping them to complete as much of the game as possible. 
High supportability involves a high level of socialization, 
because an EVG increases collaboration and interaction 
among players when it helps them to achieve the game 
goals. 
9) Educability: A low level of Educability relates to 
minimal effort required by players in order to understand the 
educational content. This means that the game controls, 
mechanics and rules are clear enough that the player can 
master them easily, thus ensuring a high level of 
satisfaction. A low level of Educability helps players to 
discover the different game resources, and thus increases the 
effectiveness of the game. It also helps players to control all 
characteristics of the virtual world, increasing player 
immersion and motivation.  This is due to the fact that 
players do not need to learn how to play and thus have more 
confidence to face game challenges.  The level of 
Socialization will be high if the required level of Educability 
is low in a multiplayer game, because the player does not 
need to learn the dynamics of a multiplayer game.   
D. Revolution, A Case Study of Educational Attributes  
In this section our intention is to analyze the video game 
on American history “Revolution” [39], by using the 
educational playability attributes proposed in this paper. 
However, the limitation of this work means we will analyze 
the game at the educational level using only the educational 
attributes (Supportability, Educability) “Fig.1”.  
Revolution is a multi-player game about the American 
Revolution. The game was designed to teach 18th century 
social and historical events of the USA, with players taking 
roles as farmers, slaves, politicians or merchants living in the 
colonial town of Williamsburg.    
332
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

1) Supportability: “Revolution” the American history is 
one of the most captivating educational video games 
currently on the market. At each level the game presents 
wonderful graphics, music and narration. The game 
storyline draws students in, and players do not consciously 
realize that they are learning a great deal about American 
history and what colonial life was like in the 1700s.  
Revolution uses the relationship between EVG contents 
to captivate players.  As previously mentioned, at each level 
it presents different elements of the playful content 
(narrative, graphics, sound and visual effects) along with the 
historical content (Educational Content).  
There is a high level of interaction in “Revolution”, 
whereby every interaction with a character includes an 
impressive graphical representation of that person in cartoon 
form. Players have the opportunity to interact with characters 
by choosing responses at the bottom of the screen. 
2) Educational: “Revolution” incorporates the historical 
content into the game play in an embedded way in order to 
encourage better retention of the information. Whenever 
players click on an object, they are provided with important 
historical information and facts.  
“Revolution” 
includes 
important 
historic 
terms 
representing facts that students should learn about American 
history. The game encourages students to click on these 
terms, read the definitions and “collect” these “smart words”. 
In this way, it ensures the quality of the learning process. 
“Revolution” helps players to master and understand the 
historical content by producing a catalog of accessible, fun to 
play titles that give players some sense of the actual history 
of a given period, not the myths that have developed around 
them.   
Revolution provides players with an experience of 
history that includes passionate rhetoric and heroic battle, but 
also economic frustration, political indifference, and the 
mundane affairs of everyday life. 
Revolution does not directly support Recoverability and 
error prevention, but does so indirectly through feedback and 
the information presented to players during the game. 
Revolution does not adapt the presented content to a player´s 
skills; it presents a series of easily understood actions and 
events relating to the social, economic, and political aspects 
of daily life. 
E. Educational Playability Facets 
Educational video game and playability analysis is 
complex enough to warrant being examined from different 
perspectives. Facets of Playability in video games have been 
proposed in order to facilitate the analyzing process [11]. 
Each facet allows the identification of the different attributes 
and properties of playability that are affected by the different 
elements of the video game architecture. This means it is 
possible to manage the process of analysis by taking into 
account the different video game elements presented in the 
game. 
Playability facets offer different ways of analyzing the 
playability among the various elements of an EVG. They 
offer the possibility of interactive level analysis (user 
interface, menus, and controls), intrinsic analysis (rules, 
goals, challenges, rewards) or hedonic analysis (emotional, 
cultural factors). Furthermore, the facets act as a logical 
subdivision of global playability into more specific 
playabilities, which together identify the global playability of 
a videogame. The proposed set of facets is related to video 
game elements (game core, game engine, and game 
interface), and ensures the following video game aspects: 
aesthetic, interactivity, and social. 
If we consider playability at the educational facet of an 
EVG, our analysis will show the main purpose of the game 
to be educational, with all incorporated elements designed to 
promote learning. Grouping all educational aspects logically 
in one facet helps to facilitate the analysis of the educational 
values presented, and thus facilitate the analysis and design 
of EVGs.  
The overall Educational Playability of a game comes 
from the value of each attribute in the different playability 
facets presented. It should be adequate enough that a player's 
experiences and feelings when playing are the best possible 
and the most appropriate to the nature of the game. It is 
therefore necessary to qualify the facets so that they include 
the educational attributes of playability affecting the 
educational component of the PX. The Facets of Educational 
Playability are: 
1) Intrinsic Playability: This is the playability inherent 
in the nature of the videogame itself and how it is presented 
to the player. It is related to the rules, objectives, pace and 
game mechanics.  
2) Mechanical Playability: This is related to the quality 
of the videogame as a software system. This facet 
emphasizes features such as the fluidity of the scenes, the 
correct lighting, sound, graphics, movements, behavior of 
the game characters and environment.  
3) Interactive Playability: We distinguish two types of 
interactive playability: educative and playful. Playful is 
associated with the user interface design, the mechanisms of 
content presentation and control systems. Educative is 
related to the supporting mechanism and managing the 
presentation of educational content.  
4) Artistic Playability: This facet relates to the quality of 
the artistic and aesthetic rendering of the game elements. It 
is related to the graphic and visual quality, sound effects, 
story and narrative form and the environment created by all 
these elements within the game.  
5) Educative playability: This is related to the quality of 
the educational content that is presented in the game and 
how to execute it. This facet relates to educational content 
properties such as correctness and suitability to the EVG 
objectives, player profile, game  reality, and accuracy. 
6) Intrapersonal Playability or Personal Playability: 
This refers to the individual outlook, perceptions and 
feelings that the videogame produces in each player and as 
such has a high subjective value.  
7) Interpersonal Playability or Social Playability: This 
refers to the feelings and perceptions of users, and the group 
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

awareness that arises when a game is played in a group 
context, be it in a competitive, cooperative or collaborative 
way. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
EVGs are a pervasive cultural phenomenon. The 
inclusion of computer games within formal learning is a 
necessity and should be commonplace.  
In this paper, we have analyzed the characteristics that 
make an EVG useful, in order to analyze its level of 
effectiveness. We have also demonstrated how we believe 
the success of an EVG can be assured, based on the Balance, 
Player Experience and Educational Playability, and drawing 
on our experience in this field to discuss these three points. 
We have presented the balance between the educational 
elements and fun elements as one of the most important 
aspects of an EVG to affect the PX, and have analyzed what 
this balance should be. We have also examined the vital role 
that PX has in video game development, discussing its 
importance in building successful and effective EVGs. To 
measure the PX we have used Educational Playability 
attributes and properties (playability in EVGs). Accordingly, 
we have defined a set of helpful attributes and properties of 
Educational Playability that can be used to better understand 
and analyze the EVG structure. 
To facilitate the analysis of Playability, and to guarantee 
a high level of quality in Educational Playability and 
improve the PX we have intuitively and explicitly identified 
the Facets of Playability. These facets can serve as basis for 
understanding and designing new and better PX in video 
games. They are also helpful in identifying the elements 
needed to achieve good overall Educational Playability in 
EVGs by studying every property in each attribute.  
We are currently working to present a catalogue of 
Design Patterns that includes as many common EVG 
problems as possible, and propose a new way of 
benchmarking the efficiency of design patterns by analyzing 
the role of these patterns to improve and strengthen the PX. 
We are also working to propose mechanisms for evaluating 
the PX in EVGs based on the evaluation of Playability. 
Accordingly, we will be working on specific heuristics and 
evaluation tools for the field of EVGs. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is financed by the Ministry of Education and 
Science, Spain, as part of DESACO Project (TIN2008-
06596-C02-2) and the F.P.U Program 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Aldrich, Simulations and the future of learning. An 
innovative and perhaps revolutionary approach to e-learning. 
San Francisco, Pfeiffer, 2004. 
[2] C. Bailey, E. Pearson, S. Gkatzidou, and S. Green, “Using 
Video Games to Develop Social, Collaborative and 
Communication 
Skills,” 
Proc. 
World 
Conference 
on 
Educational 
Multimedia, 
Hypermedia 
and 
Telecommunications, 
Chesapeake, 
VA: 
AACE, 
2006, 
pp.1154-1161.  
[3] A. Canossa, and A. Drachen, ”Play-Personas: Behaviours and 
Belief Systems in User-Centred Game Design,” proc. of 
Human-Computer Interaction INTERACT, Springer, 2009, 
pp.510-523, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-03658-3_55. 
[4] B. Cowley, D. Charles, M. Black, and R. Hickey, “Toward an 
understanding of flow in video games”. Computers in 
Entertainment, vol 6, 2, 2008, doi:10.1145/1371216.1371223. 
[5] G. Denis, and P. Jouvelot, “Motivation-driven educational 
game design: applying best practices to music education,” 
Proc. ACM SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in 
computer entertainment technolog. ACM Press, 2005 
[6] M.D. Dickey, “Ninja Looting for instructional design: The 
design challenges of creating a game based learning 
environment,” Proc SIGGRAPH’06, ACM, 2005. 
[7] C. Fabricatore, M. Nussbaum, and R. Rosas, “Playability in 
Video Games: A Qualitative Design Model,” HUMAN-
COMPUTER INTERACTION, vol 17, 2002, pp. 311–368. 
[8] K. Facer, T. Rudd,  R. Sandford, and M. Ulicsak, “Teaching 
with games: Using commercial off-the-shelf games in formal 
education,” 
2006, 
Bristol: 
Futurelab, 
doi: 
http://www2.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/project_re
ports/teaching_with_games/TWG_report.pdf.   
[9] J.P. Gee, “What video games have to teach us about learning 
and literacy,” ACM Computers in Entertainment, vol 1,1, 
2003, pp. 20-20. 
[10] J.P. Gee, Are Video Games Good for Learning? Keynote 
address at Curriculum Corporation 13th National Conference,  
2006. 
[11] J.L. González Sánchez, Playability and Video Games. 
Analysis and Design of User Experience on Interactive and 
Entertainment Systems (Jugabilidad y Videojuegos. Análisis 
y Diseño de la Experiencia del Jugador en Sistemas 
Interactivos de Ocio Electrónico), Ed. Académica Española, 
Lambert Academic Publishing GmbH & Co KG, 2011. 
[12] J.L. González Sánchez, N. Padilla Zea, and F.L. Gutiérrez 
Vela, “From Usability to Playability: Introduction to Player- 
Centred Video Game Development Process,” Proc Human-
Computer Interaction International (HCII), Springer, 2009, 
pp.65-74, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-02806-9_9 
[13] J.L. González Sánchez, R.M. Gil Iranzo, and F.L. Gutiérrez 
Vela, “Enriching Evaluation in Video Games”, proc 
INTERACT 
2011, 
Springer, 
2011, 
pp.519-522, 
doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-23768-3_72. 
[14] H. Jenkins, From serious games to serious gaming. Message 
posted 
to 
Confessions 
of 
an 
Aca-Fan, 
2007, 
doi: 
http://henryjenkins.org/2007/11/from_serious_games_to_seri
ous_1.html.  
[15] A. Järvinen, S. Heliö, and F. Mäyrä, Communication and 
Community in Digital Entertainment Services. Prestudy 
Research Report. Evaluation, University of Tampere 
Hypermedia Laboratory, 2002. 
[16] J. Kücklich, “Play and Playability as Key Concepts in New 
Media 
Studies,” 
Citeseer, 
2004, 
pp. 
1-44, 
doi:10.1.1.94.4169&rep=rep1&type=pdf. 
[17] E. Law,  M. Kickmeier-Rust, D. Albert, and A. Holzinger, 
“Challenges in the development and evaluation of immersive 
digital educational games,” Proc 4th Symposium of the 
Workgroup Human-Computer Interaction and Usability, 
Springer, 2009, pp. 19-30. 
[18] E.Law, V. Rohto, M. Hassenzahl, A. Vermeeren, and J. Kort, 
“Understanding, Scoping and Defining User Experience: A 
Survey Approach,” Proc Human Factors in Computing 
Systems CHI’09, ACM, 2008.  
[19] T.W. Malone, and M.R. Lepper, “Making learning fun: A 
taxonomy of intrinsic motivations for learning,” In Aptitude, 
Learning and Instruction III: Cognitive and Affective Process 
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Analyses, R.E. Snow and M.J. Farr, Eds. Hillsdale, N.J.: 
Erlbaum, 1987. 
[20] R.L. Mandryk, M.S. Atkins, and K.M. Inkpen, “A continuous 
and objective evaluation of emotional experience with 
interactive play environments,” Proc SIGCHI conference on 
Human Factors in computing systems, ACM, 2006, pp.1027-
1036. 
[21] P. Morenoger, D. Burgos, I. Martínez-Ortiz, J.L. Sierra and 
B.F. Manjón, “Educational game design for online 
education,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol 24, 6, 2008, 
pp. 2530-2540., doi:10.1016/j.chb.2008.03.012 
[22] L. Nacke, and C.A. Lindley, “Flow and immersion in 
firstperson shooters: measuring the player's gameplay 
experience,” proc Conference on Future Play: Research, Play, 
Share, ACM, 2008, pp. 81-88. 
[23] M.Prensky, Digital Game-based Learning (1 ed.). Two Penn 
Plaza, New York, NY 10121: McGraw Hill, 2001. 
[24] M. Prensky, Digital game-based learning, 2003, ACM Portal, 
1(1). 
[25] J. Robertson and C. Howells, “Computer Game Design: 
Opportunities for Successful Learning,” Computers & 
Education., 
vol 
50, 
2, 
2008, 
pp.559 
– 
578, 
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2007.09.020 
[26] D. W. Shaffer, K. Squire, R. Halverson, and J. P. Gee, Video 
games and the future of learning. Phi Delta Kappan, 2005, 
87(2), 104-111. 
[27] ISO FDIS 9241-210, Ergonomics of human system 
interaction - Part 210: Human-centered design for interactive 
systems, International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 
2010.  
[28] S., Thiagarajan, Ask Thiagi. Thiagi Game Letter, 1998, 1(4), 
6. 
[29] A. Tychsen, “Crafting user experience via game metrics 
analysis,” Proc Workshop paper, NORDICHI 2008. 
[30] A. Waraich, “Using narrative as a motivating device to teach 
binary arithmetic and logic gates,” Proc SIGCSE Conference 
on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science 
Education, ACM, 2004. 
[31] G. Yannakakis, and J. Hallam, “Towards Optimizing 
Entertainment in Computers Games,” Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, 
 
vol 
21, 
2007, 
pp. 
933-97,  
doi:10.1080/08839510701527580 
[32] A. Ibrahim, F.L. Gutiérrez, J.L. González Sánchez, and N. 
Padilla Zea,  “Playability Design Pattern in Educational Video 
Game,” Proc  the 5th European Conference on Games Based 
Learning (ECGBL), October 2011. 
[33] Y. Li, “To Play Words Based on Video Identifying,” Proc 
Second International Workshop on Education Technology and 
Computer Science, IEEE , pp.597-599, 2010.  
[34] F. Bellotti, R. Berta, A. De Gloria, and L. Primavera. 
“Enhancing the educational value of video games,” Computer 
in Entertain, vol 7, 2, 2009, doi: 10.1145/1541895.1541903 
[35] A. Ibrahim, F.L. Gutiérrez, J.L. González Sánchez, and N. 
Padilla Zea, “Playability Design pattern in educational video 
game,” In Student Usability in Educational Software and 
Games: Improving Experiences, C.S. González, Eds.  
Hershey: IGI Global. In press. 
[36] K. Ash, Balancing Fun and Learning in Educational Games, 
http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/DigitalEducation/2011/08/bal
ancing_fun_and_learning_in.html. (accessed on 26/11/11). 
[37] The 
Good 
and 
Bad 
Effects 
of 
Video 
Games, 
http://www.raisesmartkid.com/3-to-6-years-old/4-articles/34-the-
good-and-bad-effects-of-video-games .  (accessed on 26/11/11).  
[38] Mavis Beacon, http://www.mavisbeacon.com. (accessed on 
26/11/11). 
[39] The 
Education 
Arcade, 
http://www.educationarcade.org/node/357. 
(accessed 
on 
26/11/11).
 
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

