Usability Analysis of Children's iPad Electronic Picture books 
 
Pei-shiuan Tsai 
Department of Early Childhood Education 
Taipei Municipal University of Education 
Taipei, Taiwan 
email: peishian@gmail.com 
 
Manlai You 
Graduate School of Design 
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology 
Yunlin, Taiwan 
email: youm@yuntech.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—The main purpose of the research is to understand 
the current situation of design and development of iPad 
electronic picture books and analyze the usability. The 
researcher used the ranking lists search and browsing in the 
Apple Store for browsing various electronic picture books in 
great number. In the final stage, we screened out six different 
models to be used in iPad electronic picture books and 
conducted the analyses of usability. We selected by purposive 
sampling 15 adults (including eight teachers and seven mothers) 
and six six-year-old children (3 boys and 3 girls) who had 
experiences of using iPad. The subjects at first browsed six 
electronic picture books. Then 15 adults filled out the 
questionnaires, six children were interviewed and their 
operations were observed to understand their preferences and 
the uses of the products. The research found that the 
commonalities of the design of iPad electronic picture books a) 
dominated by page style; b) focused on linear development; c) 
most of interactive designs of story contents are clicking the 
objects on the screen; d) provided different languages and 
audio versions; e) most of them adopted the design of limited 
animation in which they used zoom-in and zoom-out and 
diversion 
techniques 
to 
show 
animations. 
The 
recommendations for future publishers and designers were: a) 
increase the interactions of story content; b) increase 
traditional Chinese subtitles and voice; c) integrate picture 
book platforms. 
Keywords- Usability; e-Picture Book; iPad Picture book 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 3C products such as tablet PC, iPad, smart phone 
and e-book reader are unknowing invade our daily life. For 
the new-generation of children, the time and opportunities 
for reading paper books hence become less and less while 
the time spending on 3C products are more and more. 
Therefore, the contents provided by those tools become a 
focus point of concern. The new reading equipments not 
necessarily enable the children to love learning and reading, 
but undeniably, equipped by e-book reader and combined 
with multimedia elements, the reading contents have 
provided a different reading experience. When the iPad 
launched in May 2010, it was reported to be one of the most 
popular electronic devices [1][2]. iPad, combined a touch 
screen and multimedia, provides an experience of more 
intuitive operation than web pages and CD versions. The 
main purpose of the research is to understand the current 
situation of design and development of iPad electronic 
picture books and analyze their usability. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Electronic Book 
The Chinese term “electronic book” is directly translated 
from English. In literature, Van Dam mentioned electronic 
books for the first time. In a broad sense, it means the media 
that stores and transmits the characters and pictures 
information through electronic channel [3]. Barker [4] 
argued that the electronic book was used to describe new 
type of books that was different from traditional paper books. 
But like paper books, they were composed of pages. The 
difference was that each page of an electronic book was 
designed and dynamic electronic information. Electronic 
book could be considered an aggregation of multi-pages, 
responsive and lively multi-media (includes information of 
characters, picture or voice). A picture book is an art form 
that combines visual and verbal narratives in a book format. 
A true picture book tells the story both with words and 
pictures. Electronic picture book (or e-Picture book, EPB) is 
to present picture books in the electronic form including CD-
ROM, WWW. The applied multi-media elements include 
characters, pictures, animations, voice, sound effects and 
music. It mainly operates through mouse and keyboard in 
user control (interactive operation pattern). The manipulation 
of mouse includes drag and click whereas the manipulation 
of the keyboard I include character enter and key enter. The 
source of story materials includes adaptation and creation. 
The E-book in the research means iPad e-Picture books. 
B. Usability 
Schneiderman 
[5] 
emphasizes 
consistency 
and 
predictability in interface design that provides for a high 
level of user control. Usability means that the people who 
use the product can do so quickly and easily to accomplish 
their own tasks. This definition rests on four points: (1) 
Usability means focusing on users; (2) people use products 
to be productive; (3) are busy people trying to accomplish 
tasks; and (4) users decide when a product is easy to use [6]. 
Lazar [7] highlights ease-of-use as an equally important 
usability consideration he also advocates for a balanced 
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

approach to Web design that allows for the appropriate use 
of media elements such as graphics, plug-ins, and animation. 
Usability is the quality of attribute that assesses how easy 
user interfaces are to use. The word "usability" also refers to 
methods for improving ease-of-use during the design process. 
Usability is defined by five quality components: (1) 
Learnability: How easy is it for users to accomplish basic 
tasks the first time they encounter the design? (2) Efficiency: 
Once users have learned the design, how quickly can they 
perform tasks? (3) Memorability: When the users return to 
the design after a period of not using it, how easily can they 
reestablish proficiency? (4) Errors: How many errors do 
users make, how severe are these errors, and how easily can 
they recover from the errors? (5) Satisfaction: How pleasant 
is it to use the design? [8] 
In conclusion, usability includes considerations such as: 
(1) Who are the users, what do they know, and what can they 
learn? (2) What do users want or need to do?  (3) What is the 
general background of the users? (4) What is the context in 
which the user is working? (5) What has to be left on the 
machine? Usability is the ease of use and learnability of a 
human-made object. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Procedure 
1. In January 1 to January 31, 2011, the researchers searched 
for electronic picture books in the Books category of 
Apple App Store, and found 65 production companies 
publishing electronic picture books for iPad in total. 
According to the overall design, 6 more distinctive 
electronic picture books were chosen by the researchers 
for further questionnaire, interviews and observation.  
2. The iPad 2 (Wi-Fi only) with 64GB memory and iOS 4.3 
was selected for the study. 
3. A questionnaire survey of five-point Likert items (1: 
strongly disagree, 2: disagree, 3: neither agree nor 
disagree, 4: agree, 5: strongly agree) and interviews were 
performed to adult users. The content of the questionnaire 
mainly included overall design, easy operation, story 
animation design, text design, and voice design. The 
interviews 
mainly 
involved 
questions 
about 
the 
operations of electronic picture books from different 
websites, and finding out the reasons of users’ satisfaction 
or dissatisfaction.  
4. Observations of child users’ operations and interviews 
with those users were made. The researchers observed 
child users’ behaviors in the operation process, and 
interviewed them about the issues they had encountered 
in their operations. 
B. Study Subjects 
1. 15 adults who had not used the iPad before (4 elementary 
school teachers, 4 kindergarten teachers and 7 mothers 
who had at least one child) randomly browsed the 6 
electronic picture books, then filled out the questionnaire. 
8 of the adults had master’s degrees, and 7 had bachelor’s 
degrees. Every subject took about 1 hour to finish the 
process.  
2. 6 children who had not used the iPad before (six 6-year-
old, half were boys and half were girls) randomly 
browsed the 6 electronic picture books, and were 
observed and interviewed by the researchers. Every time 
after finishing one electronic picture book, each child was 
asked if the rest was needed, and took rests when 
necessary. Every subject took about 1-1.5 hours to finish 
the process.  
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
The results of the questionnaire and interviews are 
summed up as follows: 
A. Overall Design 
Although the styles of the six electronic picture books 
were different, users all had pretty good satisfaction to them. 
The scores the picture books got on the questionnaires filled 
by the adults were all 4.1 and above. The children liked the 
picture books as well. For example, C3 said “I hope Father 
and Mother will buy them for me, I like every one of them.”, 
C5 said “It would be great if our textbooks were this 
interesting.” 
B. Operation Design 
The user can operate the flip function of electronic 
picture books. The picture books that had left and right arrow 
marks on the screen were instantly understood by users. 
Children needed the researchers’ reminding to roll over 
pages, but had no difficulties on operation either. Also, they 
became more skilled in operating auto and manual play, and 
text / voice switch, after they encountered them twice. Child 
users said that it was really convenient to click with fingers. 
“Snow White - 3D Pop-up Book” had the most different 
design among the six electronic picture books, but could as 
well be smoothly operated with hints given. The recording 
function provided by some of the picture books was very 
fresh to the subjects. For example, the child C2 said “It is fun 
that you can record the story you read.” 
C. Text Design 
For the children in Taiwan, Chinese is their native 
language. Electronic picture books that were presented only 
in English were still difficult for the subjects. Adult subjects 
applauded that electronic picture books provided versions of 
multiple languages for operators. For example, the teacher 
T4 said “Take Little Snail as an example. It provides many 
different text languages so that more people in the world can 
browse it. That is what present multimedia design can do.” 
Only most adult subjects thought that the traditional Chinese 
version should be modified for Taiwan’s readers. 
D. Illustration Design 
The six electronic picture books have different styles and 
each subject has his own preference. As a whole, the average 
scores of adult questionnaires were over 3.9. “I love all of 
them, but ‘The Three Little Pigs’ is the one I love most 
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

because the pig in the book can move; ‘Snow White’ is also 
very special and I have never seen such book.” 
E. Voice Design 
Text and voice is mutually collocated that most of the 
adult subjects for the part of the Chinese voice proposed that 
it be appropriate to find native Taiwanese for dubbing to 
avoid the interference from an accent in listening. The adult 
subjects affirmed that the English text was helpful to the 
non-English speaking readers for the enhancement in 
learning English, but proposed to add the Chinese that more 
Taiwanese audience could participate in. 
F. Animation Design 
Most of the electronic picture books on the current iPad 
are presented without or with limited animation. The limited 
animation is dominated with the movement of leading 
characters or part of objects, or zoom-in and out and 
movement of camera shots. The child subjects showed high 
interest in the dynamic performance. When the researcher 
hinted that some figures or objects in the frame can be 
clicked with fingers. For children, it is a very new try and 
they will try to click to see if there is any reaction. 
As a whole, there are two primary common points in the 
six electronic picture books: 1) single-line development of  
the story; 2) the contents of the story lacks of interactions 
that both adult and child users indicated that they wish to 
read more electronic picture books if they have a chance 
because there are many differences comparing to reading 
physical books. 
 
V. 
SUGGESTIONS 
This research evaluated the operation and uses of six 
selected electronic picture books and gave following 
suggestions for the reactions from the subjects. It is hoped 
that in future, more selected picture books and subjects could 
be used for the usability evaluation that will prompt more 
concrete contributions to the designs of electronic picture 
books.  
A. Enhance the interaction of the story 
Given the fact that many picture books were adapted 
from printing picture books in which the story is developed 
in single-line, the interaction of story contents is limited. The 
advantages of multi-media are that it could facilitate the 
increase of interaction. In the future, we could bring the 
characteristics into full play by increasing double-line or 
even multi-line developments of the story and the design of 
interaction with the contents of the story to enhance the 
interaction between readers and story contents. 
B. Increase Traditional Chinese Subtitles and Voice 
At the present time, only a few developers provide 
traditional subtitles and voice in their electronic picture 
books including Rye Studio 、 Apple Style 、 RYBooks 
Studio. Many other excellent electronic picture books choose 
English as their only or primary language. But they can just 
add traditional Chinese subtitles and voice to meet the 
requirement from readers in Taiwan. So we suggest that the 
developers cooperate with foreign developers in adding 
traditional Chinese subtitles and voice for the readers in 
Taiwan that more children have a chance to read the rich 
contents of electronic picture books. 
C. Integrate Picture book Platforms 
Although there is classification of books in Apple App 
Store, searching for specific electronic picture books is a 
time-consuming job. Therefore, we suggest that create a 
classification for the electronic picture books or design a 
browser search interface exclusively for the children.  
In summary, from the angle of emotional interaction, 
operation interaction, cognition interaction and community 
interaction, the design of existing electronic picture books 
could strengthen the cognition interaction and community 
interaction that the visitors could interact with the contents of 
electronic picture books through the characteristics of multi-
media factors that are different from the printing books. Also, 
it could have meaningful community interactions with other 
readers through the linking of Internet. With the creativity 
and innovation of interactive technology, more and more 
excellent iPad picture book worthy of researchers continue to 
invest in research. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Anderson, iPad: The savior of digital publishing. Journal 
of Internet Law, 2011, 14(10), pp.15–20. 
[2] O. Murray and N. Olcese, Teaching and learning with iPads, 
reading or not? TechTrends, 2011, 55(5), pp.42–48. 
[3] Lwan-Syin. Lwo, Electronic books and the new 
communication era. Instructional technology and media, 1995, 
21, pp.13-16. (Chinese) 
[4] P. Barker, Electronic books and libraries of the future, The 
Electronic Library, 1992, 10(3), pp.139-149. 
[5] B. Schneiderman, Leonardo’s laptop: Human needs and the 
new computing technologies. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 
2002. 
[6] J. S. Dumas and J. C. Redish, A practical guide to usability 
testing. Portland, OR: Intellectual books, 1999. 
[7] J. Lazar, Web usability: A user-centered design approach. 
Boston: Pearson Education, Inc., 2006. 
[8] J. Nielsen , Usability 101: Introduction to Usability, 2003, 
Retrieved December 20, 2008 from 
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20030825.html 
 
 
271
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.   THE BASIC INFORMATION OF THE SIX ELECTRONIC PICTUREBOOKS 
Story 
Name 
The Little 
Snail 
One Pizza, 
One Penny 
Just Grandma 
and Me 
Bedtime  
Monster 
The Three 
Little Pigs 
Snow White - 
3D Pop-up 
Book 
Publisher 
Rye Studio 
Apple Tree & 
Guru Bear 
Oceanhouse 
Media 
Siena 
Entertainment, 
LLC 
Nosy Crow 
lee hee suck 
Illustration 
Design 
2D 
2D 
2D 
2D 
3D 
3D 
Language 
(Text) 
English, 
Traditional 
Chinese, 
Simplified 
Chinese, 
Japanese, 
French, 
German, 
Spanish 
English, 
Traditional 
Chinese, 
Simplified 
Chinese 
English 
English 
Spanish 
English 
English 
Language 
(Voice) 
English, 
Chinese, 
Japanese, 
French, 
German, 
Spanish 
English, 
Chinese 
English 
English 
Spanish 
English 
English 
Sleeping 
Mode (voice 
only)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Record   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flip Mode 
1.Auto 
2.Manual (click 
on last/next 
page button to 
turn) 
1. Auto 
2.Manual (click 
on bottom 
left/right corner 
to turn) 
1. Auto 
2. Manual (roll 
over the page 
to turn) 
1. Auto 
2.Manual (click 
on last/next 
page button to 
turn) 
1. Auto 
2.Manual (click 
on last/next 
page button to 
turn) 
1. Auto 
2.Manual (click 
on last/next 
page button to 
turn) 
Page Index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bookmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating 
Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Story Scenes 
Content 
Clicking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simple 
Animation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extended 
Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
272
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. The Little Snail 
 
Figure 2. One Pizza, One Penny 
Figure 3. Just Grandma and Me 
 
Figure 4. Bedtime Monster  
Figure 5. The Little Snail 
 
Figure 6. Snow White - 3D Pop-up Book 
 
 
 
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

