The Characteristics and Application of Anthropomorphic Interface:  
A Design Spectrum   
 
Nooralisa Mohd Tuah1, Gary B Wills2 
Electronic and Computer Science 
University of Southampton 
Southampton, United Kingdom 
Email: N.Mohd-Tuah@southampton.ac.uk1, 
gbw@ecs.southampton.ac.uk2 
Ashok Ranchhod  
Winchester School of Arts 
University of Southampton 
Winchester, United Kingdom 
Email:A.Ranchhod@southampton.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— 
This 
study 
discusses 
several 
designs 
of 
anthropomorphic 
computing 
to 
obtain 
a 
greater 
understanding of the use of anthropomorphism in the design 
of digital interfaces. It includes the use of avatars, interface 
agents, hybrid characters, and robots. This extends the links 
between anthropomorphism and animism in computing 
applications. As a result, a degree of anthropomorphism is 
proposed 
to 
ease 
the 
process 
of 
classifying 
the 
anthropomorphism when designing human and computer 
interactions. The use of anthropomorphic characters enables 
designers to develop more significant interactions between 
individuals in helping to promote a long-term relationship. In 
order to strengthen the interactions, a set of anthropomorphic 
characteristics is proposed to be emphasized in the design 
development. In addition, the directions for anthropomorphic 
designs are also discussed.  
Keywords-Human Computer Interaction; Interface Design; 
Anthropomorphism.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As the growth of more social mobile applications increases, 
hence, simulating a more interactive communication in a virtual 
environment becomes possible. In this approach, a human-like 
representation is used in the interface [4]-[6].  The human-like 
interface which is also known as anthropomorphism, helps users 
to get familiar with the functions, services or facilities embedded 
in an application. The design of human-like representation is also 
useful when applied to various games in areas such as health and 
education. Many potential applications can benefit from this type 
of interface design. Most studies in anthropomorphic interfaces, 
such as [2]-[14], focused more on usability, acceptance and users’ 
preferences in several software or application contexts. 
Noticeably, anthropomorphic interfaces are preferable as 
compared to interfaces without anthropomorphic character 
[6][12]. However, the preferences are not conclusive. The 
experimental setting, application environment and the design 
itself, play an important role in shaping the users’ preferences. 
Therefore, the diversity in anthropomorphic design and 
application has led to further explorations of this study. The 
designs range from a simple smiley face to a combination of 
human form with other objects or in abstract form. Different 
forms of anthropomorphic designs have led to a certain extent of 
confusion, particularly in determining the users’ preferred type of 
anthropomorphic interfaces rather than mainly examining the 
differences between anthropomorphic and non-anthropomorphic 
interfaces. Therefore, the type of anthropomorphic interfaces 
indicates that human qualities and characteristics will be applied 
to a certain degree in anthropomorphic designs. The exertion of 
this study will explore the anthropomorphic form of designs and 
applications. At the end, an anthropomorphism spectrum is 
developed to indicate how different aspects of anthropomorphism 
can be utilised in the human-computer interaction. This study 
outlines the following; In Section 1, the anthropomorphic 
interface is briefly explained, particularly in the context of human-
computer interaction. In Section 2, the type of anthropomorphism 
in designs is discussed. In Section 3, the characteristics of 
anthropomorphism are described in detail, and in Section 4, the 
possible applications of anthropomorphism are explained with 
several examples.  With the characteristics of anthropomorphism 
in mind, the anthropomorphism spectrum will represent the 
fundamental 
guidelines 
for 
designing 
anthropomorphic 
applications for human and computer interfaces. 
II. 
ANTHROPOMORPHIC COMPUTING INTERFACES 
Over the last decade, the application of anthropomorphism has 
been developed in various areas such as in education [1], 
healthcare [2], and e-commerce [3]. The evolvement has 
diversified the designs in accordance to the purpose of 
application. Anthropomorphism is defined by the use of an object 
that imitates human qualities and features within an inanimate 
object [4]. Złotowski [5] further extended anthropomorphism as 
the designation of human life to a non-living object through 
designs. Anthropomorphism in designs allows designers to create 
tools that help users to comprehend the representation perspective 
without any difficulty [6]. For example, a human agent 
representation helps in online shopping, assists users in paying 
bills, becomes an online help desk, and acts as a personal tutor as 
well as other different characters and roles. The human agent is 
sometimes represented in different design forms such as a 
paperclip, any animal oriented design or even a simple car. The 
designs 
evolve 
according 
to 
the 
anthropomorphism 
characteristics.  
In 
consolidating 
the 
anthropomorphic 
designs, 
anthropomorphism is also associated with the definition of 
animism to a certain degree of design [1][4]. Animism also gives 
human qualities and essences to non-human objects [7][8]. Haber 
[7] described animism as “the attribution of life to a non-living 
object”. Animism refers to a design of things that make them 
seem alive and pleasurable to interact with. However, the previous 
398
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

discussions of animism normally involved a psychological 
perspective, for example in [7][8], where people relate the object 
used in their religious practices such as a cult-statue or cult tools. 
The design of animism can exist in the form of human, animal, 
insect, plant or a combination of all mentioned. The term 
‘animism’ is minimally utilised in computing applications. A 
study by Schmitz [4] associated animism with as a life-likeness 
design concepts in designing a usable and tangible interface. 
Schmitz referred it to a robot or humanoid design in relation to the 
animism concept. Another study by Kallery and Psillos [1] 
referred to animism and anthropomorphism as other types of 
personification. They discussed the use of animism and 
anthropomorphic objects from a learning perspective among 
young students with different ages. They found that animism and 
anthropomorphism help in attracting the young students’ attention 
towards cognitive development. According to Kallery and Psillos, 
animism and anthropomorphism have to be installed with emotion 
and expression. Notably, anthropomorphism and animism are 
rooted from the same fundamental description, however, their 
usage in computing interface designs is inconsistent, depending 
on the domain in which the user interfaces are designed. 
Anthropomorphic computing refers to a representation of human 
with a large number of human-like features, and the design varied 
through the use of face, part or whole body. For example, in the 
Simpsons, a stylised human character is used, while in Monster 
Inc., a different utilisation of animal character was manipulated in 
the story. In animism, the degree of human form is decreased but 
the attribution of life remains the same. The design could be a mix 
of human form with others. Therefore, it becomes more abstract 
and hybrid such as those games characters in Angry Birds, 
Mickey Mouse, Pac-Man and others.  
TABLE 1. DESCRIPTION OF ANTHROPOMORPHISM & ANIMISM 
Anthropomorphism 
J. Złotowski [5] 
Designation of human life to the 
non-living object through designs. 
M. Schmitz  [4] 
The use of an object that imitates 
human qualities and features 
within an inanimate object. 
E. Perry and J. Donath 
[33] 
A description of an abstract of the 
humanoid depiction of a person. 
Animism 
F. Haber [7] 
The attribution of life to a non-
living object. 
M. Kallery and D. Psillos 
[1] 
A type of personification. 
L. A. Brown and W. H. 
Walker [8] 
It provides a non-human object 
with 
human 
qualities 
and 
essences. 
The association of human-like representation within human-
computer interactions evolves in many ways. One of the human or 
animal character personalisations is applied commonly in a virtual 
world or in games environment known as an avatar. It enables the 
mix of human or animal features. Avatar is described as a form of 
human representation to signify the users’ character in the virtual 
environment [9][32]. The application of avatar can be customised 
based on users’ preferences and specific role [9][29]. Besides, the 
avatar is designed to encourage a better social interaction 
[11][29][32]. In most studies, such as [3][10][11], the avatar was 
designed with real human depiction.  
The human representation is also known as Embodied Agent 
or Embodied Conversational Agent (ECA). ECA is an interface 
agent that provides users with help and direction within the 
application [19][20][24]. It can be a smart assistant and also a 
companion agent. It can also be designed in various forms such as 
real human, animal, non-figurative character, simulation of faces, 
and others. Usually, ECA is coded with a scripted answer to 
provide a standard level of confidence within the interaction. 
Either avatar or ECA, both are commonly applied with specific 
roles and purposes. It is noticed that the Avatar and ECA design 
could exist in between anthropomorphism and animism at some 
degree of human qualities and likeliness. Table 1 summarises the 
description of anthropomorphism and animism.  
Nonetheless, anthropomorphism and animism are also used in 
designing tangible interfaces [1][4] such as mechanical devices 
that imitate a human or a robot, as well as intangible products 
such as vases, and dolls. Therefore, there is a range of possible 
characters that can be used in computing which makes enough 
sense to formulate a scale ranging from almost human to 
inanimate in interface designs. 
III. 
DESIGN OF ANTHROPOMORPHISM 
A. The Degree of Anthropomorphism 
At this point, to systemise the spectrum of anthropomorphism 
and animism, one may classify the types involved as illustrated in 
Table 1 and visualise the degree of anthropomorphism as shown 
in Figure 1. The degree of anthropomorphism is indirectly 
affected by animism. A recent study by Złotowski, [5] explained 
the dimension of anthropomorphism in human-robot interaction 
(HRI), particularly in categorising the level of humanness in 
anthropomorphism into uniquely human (UH) or human nature 
(HN). Złotowski looked into the elements of humanness such as 
curiosity, friendliness, and sociability (HN). Subsequently, if it 
comes with politeness, humility, and organisational elements, then 
it is uniquely human (UH). The degree of anthropomorphism 
shows a collection of human-lifelikeness at a different stage of 
design. This design is shaped from computer interfaces to tangible 
interfaces 
and 
from 
anthropomorphism 
(highly 
human-
lifelikeness) to animism (lesser human-lifelikeness). With this 
scale, users’ preferences can be cultivated on various application 
domains with different setting.  
Developing a scale for anthropomorphism helps in designing 
a more preferable and acceptable application. At different points 
of the scale, the interpretation will not be the same and will 
influence the users’ preferences. Catrambone et al. [10] and 
Power et al. [14] used various degrees of anthropomorphism in 
comparing different characters in the same application. They [10] 
developed three different anthropomorphic characters ranging 
from human, cartoons, and iconic to observe how users perceived 
those designs in terms of intelligence, friendliness, pleasantness, 
and attractiveness. Meanwhile, the study by Power et al. [14] used 
two different anthropomorphic characters, lifelike and iconic, to 
validate their framework on how these two characters could affect 
users’ performance during the interaction. This study further 
expanded the defined characters in [10][14] into a scale of human-
likeness and its relation towards animism and anthropomorphism. 
Other studies did not mention specifically or measure in particular 
which degree of anthropomorphism is preferred by the users.  
399
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Nevertheless, the position of human voice and text in the 
degree of anthropomorphism and animism is debatable. It is like 
listening to a radio or reading a book, the communication or 
message and the sense of being together may create the same 
context by having an anthropomorphic interface. With several 
tones of human voice, it offers a different perception towards 
anthropomorphic interface. This indicates that voice and text can 
be part of anthropomorphism or animism. However, the 
arguments are not strong because voice and text are only used to 
strengthen the effect of human-like presentation. Gong [21] and 
Lee [23] in their study showed that human voice is important in 
designing a preferable and trustworthy anthropomorphism. In a 
recent study by Schmitz [31], wave sound was used to identify 
which emotion, expression or effect resulted from it. The 
expression is projected using human faces.  
Another study conducted by Murano and Holt [12], 
differentiated the effect of anthropomorphic interface towards 
users’ preferences using only anthropomorphic interface on its 
own, anthropomorphic interface with text and anthropomorphic 
interface with voice. Murano & Holt found that the addition of 
voice significantly affected the users’ preferences. Again, it shows 
that the voice plays an important role in deploying a credible 
anthropomorphic character. For text features, apart from being an 
experimental controlled condition [6][12], the text plays an 
important role in supporting a clear voice as well as conveying a 
clear information. It shows that the voice and text elements are not 
independently designed to evaluate the human characteristics at a 
certain degree of anthropomorphism, but it is rather important as 
part of the interface for better effects. Therefore, the human-
likeness form is translated into a design scale ranging from 
anthropomorphism to animism, as shown in Figure 1.  
TABLE 2. TYPES OF ANTHROPOMORPHISM 
Types of 
Anthropomorphism 
Description 
1) AVATAR 
Highly human life-likeness form. 
2) INTERFACE 
AGENT / 
SOFTWARE 
AGENT 
An agent with various forms of 
design and could be at a higher, 
middle or lower attribution of life. 
3) HYBRID 
CHARACTER 
A combination of human form and 
abstract character at a lower 
attribution of life. 
4) ROBOTIC 
A mechanical device designed in a 
physical form. 
5) PRODUCT 
ANIMATE 
Any physical product that uses a 
human in its design.  
Table 2 explains each design scale of anthropomorphism. 
Hence, mapping the anthropomorphism and animism to the 
degree of human-likeness may strengthen the interaction designs. 
Looking into a better interaction and relationship with 
anthropomorphic characters, it is important to determine the 
characteristics and elements of the anthropomorphic designs. It 
makes the designs look more persuasive and engaging. 
 
 
Figure 1. Degree of Anthropomorphism  
 
400
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Anthropomorphic Characteristics 
The characteristics of anthropomorphism define the strength 
of the design. Questions have been raised about the realism of 
anthropomorphism and how anthropomorphism can have a better 
persuasive effect on human-computer interaction. The application 
of anthropomorphism as interface element has considerably 
shown a convincing social response and social presence to the 
users [5][16][20]. Social response elicits psychological and 
cognitive processes, in which the users apply and accept the social 
rules when interacting with the computer [16][21]. One aspect of 
social responses is perceived through non-verbal behaviours such 
as eye contact, facial expression, gesture and posture [22]. 
Anthropomorphism with a close-up facial shows the most affected 
interfaces. Facial expression [21] and flattery effect [23] could 
also exhibit persuasiveness through the interface. However, a 
better match between facial expression, voice over and flattery 
effect may bring a more persuasive interface. Besides, the 
anthropomorphic facial expression is also displayed in respond to 
its emotional state [5].  
Power et al. [14], Prada and Paiva [20] and Forlizzi [24] 
indicated that an intelligence aspect also yielded a persuasive 
element on the anthropomorphic interface. They found that 
human-like interfaces were perceived to be more intelligent than 
other anthropomorphic interfaces. The intelligence aspect can be 
seen through the way anthropomorphic interface gave its feedback 
or responses. Meanwhile, social presence is about the users’ 
perception and feeling in perceiving the sense of being connected 
with others in the virtual world [20][25]. A social presence can be 
interpreted by demographic (gender, ethnicity, age) and physical 
appearance (attractiveness). The demographic factors play an 
important role based on the application’s purpose and 
functionality. Gender consideration was found to be more 
significantly affected by female users than male users in choosing 
which anthropomorphic interface types they prefer to interact 
more [24][26]. Female users prefer to talk to an agent that is more 
human-like and within the same gender. However, a different 
result was obtained by Qiu and Benbasat [3] and Cowell and 
Stanney [22], in which no significant differences were found in 
terms of gender preferences. Thus, gender preferences either of 
the same gender or the opposite are not conclusive and suggesting 
towards a specific domain of study that may improve its impact. 
Other than gender preferences, ethnicity of anthropomorphism 
also showed that users prefer to interact with anthropomorphic 
interfaces that matches their ethnicity [3], [22][26]. Among the 
experimental ethnicity are Caucasian, African American, Asian 
and Oriental group. In Qiu and Benbasat [3], female users were 
significantly affected by the same ethnicity interfaces than male 
users. However, Angeli and Khan [26] argued that designing an 
interface agent with an ethnocentric approach will limit the 
application or interface acceptance in general. Ethnic similarity 
helps the users to build up their confidence because interacting 
with the same ethnic background provides more comfort and 
support during the interaction. Age and facial attractiveness of 
anthropomorphic interface are other preferred characteristics. 
Previous research showed that users prefer a young interface 
agent [22] with attractive interfaces [3][26] because the interface 
was perceived as more convincing and content. Measuring young 
or old is easy however, facial attractiveness is subjective and it is 
very challenging to be measured.  
The characteristics of anthropomorphism are not conclusive. 
There is a need for further verification on each of the discussed 
characteristics. However, suggesting a set of characteristics 
consisting of social response and social presence may strengthen 
the design effects of anthropomorphism. Therefore, it will bring a 
more persuasive application that one may interact. 
IV. 
ANTHROPOMORPHIC APPLICATION 
The degree of anthropomorphic and its characteristics can be 
applied in several applications. One that can be further explored is 
gamification – the implementation of game designs, elements, and 
mechanics into a non-gaming application, facility, and product 
[27]. There is a plausible employment of anthropomorphism in 
gamification and it can be seen through the utilisation of avatar 
[27]-[30]. Through the use of avatar, the anthropomorphism 
becomes the users’ identification that can be personalised based 
on points and levels [28][29] as well as part of the application or 
game storyline [30]. It is foreseen that gamification can be a 
motivation factor towards users’ engagement [27][29], and 
anthropomorphism is part of it. However, in gamification, other 
than the avatar, little consideration has been paid to other degree 
of anthropomorphism.  
Besides, the disaggregation of anthropomorphism into a 
certain human-likeness scale is beneficial, if it is implemented for 
a specific purpose. For example, it can be applied to e-learning 
environment, in which different students may have different 
preferences on the degree of anthropomorphism that can be 
presented as their personal identifiers. Another example would be 
the health care context, in which patients may have distinctive 
propensities on the degree of anthropomorphism that is 
convincing enough for them to interact, or in the e-commerce 
application, on the degree of anthropomorphism that should be 
applied for the customer service characters and other related 
applications. However, the application of anthropomorphism is 
not limited to these areas only. It could also be extended into 
social media applications or in text-based communication such as 
Twitter, Messenger, and WhatsApp.  
Therefore, the application of anthropomorphism at various 
scales of human-likeness may extensively enable its role in the 
human-computer interaction 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Anthropomorphism in the human-computer interaction is not 
just a tool to facilitate users in completing their tasks. 
Anthropomorphism is beyond just an interaction, which involves 
designing an anthropomorphic interface varying from simple 
abstract character to full human body imitation. This variation 
leads to further classification on which anthropomorphism should 
be used, thus, nurturing anthropomorphism in a specific context of 
design. This helps the designer to understand the reasons why 
anthropomorphism is used. One of the reasons is for better 
engagement, interaction, and relationship within the application. 
The persuasive elements such as how anthropomorphic computing 
gives response physically and emotionally, and/or how the 
anthropomorphic interface delivers the sense of being there during 
the interaction were discussed to suggest a set of elements that 
should be implemented when designing an anthropomorphic 
interface. This paper indicates a way forward in the use of 
anthropomorphic elements in the interface design, taking into 
account a range of possibilities based on the scale that has been 
proposed. In reality, this scale would be useful, depending on the 
demographic of the users. For instance, younger children may 
prefer more animistic or object/human type interfaces, while older 
people may prefer avatars of some sort. Further study should 
401
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

focus on the design development or framework development by 
considering 
the 
degree 
and 
the 
characteristics 
of 
anthropomorphism into a specific application.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Kallery, and D. Psillos, “Anthropomorphism and Animism in 
Early Years Science : Why Teachers Use”. Research in Science 
Education 34 (1991), 2004, pp. 291–311.  
[2] 
C. Lisetti, R. Amini, U. Yasavur, and N. Rishe, “I Can Help You 
Change ! An Empathic Virtual Agent Delivers Behavior”, Journal 
ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS) - 
Special Issue on Informatics for Smart Health and Wellbeing, 4(4), 
2013, pp. 1–28. 
[3] 
L. Qiu, and I. Benbasat, “A study of demographic embodiments of 
product 
recommendation 
agents 
in 
electronic 
commerce”. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 68(10), 2010, pp. 
669–688. 
[4] 
M. Schmitz, “Concepts for life-like interactive objects”. Proceedings 
of the Fifth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and 
Embodied Interaction, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 157–
164. 
[5] 
J. Złotowski, E. Strasser, and C. Bartneck, “Dimensions of 
anthropomorphism: from humanness to human-likeness”. In 
Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 66–73. 
[6] 
N.M. Tuah, N. Jamil, D.S Ajor, “An investigation of user interface 
feedback in learning a photography technique”. In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on User Science and Engineering (i-
USEr), Shah Alam, Selangor, 2011, pp. 64-68. 
[7] 
F. Haber, “Animism, Relatedness, Life: Post-Western Perspectives”. 
Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 19(03), 2009, pp. 418. 
[8] 
L. A. Brown, and W. H. Walker, “Prologue: Archaeology, Animism 
and Non-Human Agents”. Journal of Archaeological Method and 
Theory, 15(4), 2008, pp. 297–299.  
[9] 
W. L. Cheong, Y. Jung, and Y. Theng, “Avatar : A Virtual Face for 
the Elderly”. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on 
Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry (VRCAI 
’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 491–498. 
[10] R. Catrambone, J. Stasko, and J. Xiao, “Anthropomorphic Agents as 
a User Interface Paradigm : Experimental Findings and a Framework 
for Research”. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the 
Cognitive Science Society, 2002, pp. 166–172. 
[11] Y. Hsu, “Affective Interfaces of Embodied Conversational Agents”. 
International Journal of Affective Engineering, 12(2), 2012, pp. 71–
78. 
[12] P. Murano, A. Gee, and P. O. Holt, “Evaluation of an 
anthropomorphic user interface in a travel reservation context and 
affordances”. Journal of Computing. 3, (8). 2011. 
[13] R. W. Picard, A. Wexelblat, and C. I. Nass, “Future Interfaces: 
Social and Emotional”. In CHI'02 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, USA, 2002, pp. 698–699. 
[14] G. Power, G. Wills, and W. Hall, “User Perception of 
Anthropomorphic Characters with Varying Levels of Interaction”. 
People and Computers XVI - Memorable Yet Invisible, 2002, pp. 
37–51. 
[15] P. Murano, “Why anthropomorphic user interface feedback can be 
effective and preferred by users”. In Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on enterprise Information Systems, 
Miami, USA, 2005. 
[16] C. Nass, and Y. Moon, “Machines and Mindlessness: Social 
Responses to Computers”. Journal of Social Issues, 56(1), 2000, pp. 
81–103. 
[17] D. Benyon, and O. Mival, “Scenarios for companions”. Lecture 
Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Spinger Heidelberg, 7407, 2013, pp. 
79–96. 
[18] S. Payr, “Virtual Butlers and Real People : Styles and Practices in 
Long-Term Use of a Companion, Who Is Tina ?”. Lecture Notes in 
Artificial Intelligence, Springer Heidelberg, 7407, 2013, pp. 134–
178. 
[19] M. Cavazza, and C. E. Vargas, “How Was Your Day ? A Companion 
ECA”. Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Autonomous 
Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2010), 1(1), 2010, pp. 
1629–1630. 
[20] A. Peirera, R. Prada, and A. Paiva, “Improving Social Presence in 
Human-Agent Interaction”. Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14), 
ACM, Toronto, Canada, 2014, pp. 1449–1458. 
[21] L. Gong, “How social is social responses to computers? The function 
of the degree of anthropomorphism in computer representations”. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 24(4), 2008, pp. 1494–1509. 
[22] A. J. Cowell, and K. M. Stanney, “Manipulation of non-verbal 
interaction style and demographic embodiment to increase 
anthropomorphic computer character credibility”. International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 62(2), 2005, pp. 281–306. 
[23] E. J. Lee, “The more humanlike, the better? How speech type and 
users’ cognitive style affect social responses to computers”. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 2010, pp. 665–672. 
[24] J. Forlizzi, J. Zimmerman, V. Mancuso, and S. Kwak, “How 
Interface Agents Affect Interaction Between Humans and 
Computers”. In Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on Designing 
Pleasurable Products and Interfaces. ACM, New York, NY, USA 
2007, pp. 209–221. 
[25] K. L. Nowak, and F. Biocca, “The Effect of the Agency and 
Anthropomorphism on Users’ Sense of Telepresence, Copresence, 
and 
Social 
Presence 
in 
Virtual 
Environments”. 
Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 12(5), 2003, pp. 481–494. 
[26] A. De Angeli, and R. Khan, “Mapping the Demographics of Virtual 
Humans”. In Proceedings of the 21st British HCI Group Annual 
Conference on People and Computers: HCI…but Not as We Know 
It, BCS-HCI ’07. British Computer Society, London, 2 September 
2007, pp. 149–152. 
[27] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, and H. Sarsa, “Does Gamification Work? A 
Literature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamification”. 47th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 
Waikoloa, HI, 2014, pp. 3025–3034. 
[28] I. Kuramoto, T. Ishibashi, K. Yamamoto, and Y. Tsujino, “Stand up, 
heroes!: Gamification for standing people on crowded public 
transportation”. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8013 LNCS, 
2013, pp. 538–547. 
[29] K. Otake, R. Sumita, M. Oka, Y. Shinozawa, T. Uetake, and A. 
Sakurai, “A Proposal of a Support System for Motivation 
Improvement Using Gamification”. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 8531 LNCS, 2014, pp. 571–580. 
[30] G. Barata, S. Gama, M. J. Fonseca, D. Gonçalves, and J. Jorge, 
“Improving student creativity with gamification and virtual worlds”. 
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Gameful 
Design, Research, and Applications - Gamification, ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 95–98. 
[31] M. Schmitz, C. O. F. Benedict, and Mert Akbal. “Expressing 
Emotions With Synthetic Affect Bursts”. In Proceedings of the 2015 
Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (CHI 
PLAY '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 91-95. 
[32] J. Morie, and G. Verhulsdonck, “Body/persona/action!: Emerging 
non-anthropomorphic communication and interaction in virtual 
worlds”. Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology, ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 365–372. 
[33] E. Perry and J. Donath. “Anthropomorphic visualization: a new 
approach for depicting participants in online spaces.” In CHI '04 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 
EA '04). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2004, pp.1115-1118.
 
402
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

