Workflow Representations for Human and Artificial Agent Collaborations 
 
Georg Weichhart 
Flexible Production Systems, PROFACTOR GmbH  
Cognitive Robotics and Shop Floors, Pro2Future GmbH 
Steyr, Austria 
email: georg.weichhart@Pro2Future.at 
Andreas Pichler, Christian Wögerer 
Robotic and Assistive Systems 
PROFACTOR GmbH 
Steyr, Austria 
email: Givenname.Surname@PROFACTOR.at
 
 
Abstract— In this initial research, we are taking a look at 
process representation and process modelling approaches for 
collaborative robotics. We take a system-of-systems view and 
apply work stemming from business process management, 
workflow systems to enable interoperable workflows. Initial 
requirements and research needs are identified for planning,  
executing 
interoperable 
process 
models, 
which 
are 
representing tasks shared among multiple human and artificial 
systems.   
Keywords- 
Collaborative 
Robotics; 
Enterprise 
Interoperability; 
Process 
Modelling; 
Business 
Process 
Management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the past, production companies have been focusing on 
optimizing with the goal to increase efficiency and 
effectiveness. Modern paradigms like the S^3 (Sensing, 
Smart, Sustainable) Enterprise [1] envision a networked, 
flexible production system capable of quick adaptation to 
evolving situations and changing customer demands. This 
paradigm is suitable for increasing production in Europe, due 
to the need for late customization of products while still 
having limited transport times.  
The sensing part of the S^3 Enterprise paradigm implies 
the capability of hardware devices, machines to transmit 
information about themselves and the surrounding they are 
aware of. This is needed to be able to react to changes. The 
smart part implies that intelligent algorithms are in place 
across the enterprise, being able to either make information 
available to decision makers, or make decisions on their own 
rule set. Flexibility often comes at the cost of complexity. 
Still, decision are to be taken fast. The sustainability part 
implies evolution and the need of continuous adaptation to 
heterogeneous factors. Where one important factor here is 
the customer demand. 
Collaborative robotics is one technical approach that 
conceptually fits into the S^3 Enterprise worldview. Such 
production systems are highly adaptive, equipped with a 
number of sensors, and are driven by highly intelligent 
algorithms. From an interoperability point of view, a 
unifying model is needed that allows both systems (worker 
agent, robotic agent) to map their own (mental) models to the 
unifying one. The unifying level is needed, due to the 
(obvious) different requirements of the systems, which 
inhibit integrated approaches. Research in interoperability is 
concerned with the infrastructure needed that allows lose 
coupled systems. Here, the systems are the humans and the 
robots. Both remain independent but need a common 
understanding. 
The remaining parts of this paper are structured as 
follows. In Section 2, we make research questions explicit. 
Two exemplary existing business process modelling and 
execution languages are used to exemplify the modelling of 
complex human robot interactions. These are presented in 
Section 3. We conclude this work in Section 4.    
 
II. 
MODELS OF COLLABORATIVE PROCESSES 
A unifying model supports loose coupling of independent 
systems. This increases flexibility as systems might change 
without influencing others. A unifying level has to provide 
all features that are needed for the systems’ interactions.  
To be able to connect independent systems through a 
unifying level, it must be possible to translate or map system 
internal models to the common one. The complexity of the 
overall system increases, and more effort is needed to reach 
interoperability than to reach integration through a single 
model. 
To understand the requirements for interoperable process 
models we want to answer the following two questions. 
What is the overall goal for the model? What are scenarios / 
functions that need to be covered to reach that goal? 
 
A. Goals of Process Models for Human Robot 
Collaboration 
As the two considered systems (humans, robots) are 
active, these are referred to as agents in the following [2]. 
The term agent signifies that the systems have some sort of 
intelligence allowing the agents to act autonomous. Agents 
have control over their actions, allowing the execution of 
tasks concurrently. 
A unifying model has to be useable for the execution 
phase and for the planning phase of process. It must support 
interaction and synchronization of human and artificial 
agents during planning, execution of the common process.  
 
Execution Phase: The execution of process steps 
may be implemented by humans, or artificial agents, or 
both. This affects the readability, understandability and 
usability of the model. Execution of process steps needs 
to be synchronized across concurrently acting actors.   
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Planning Phase: Manual design of process 
segments as well as automated (re-)planning needs to be 
possible to support changes and adaptation.   
 
In situations requiring ad hoc adaptation, the phases 
might be dynamically switched. This implies that re-
planning has to respect partially executed plans. At any time 
the unifying character, allowing the systems to interact, 
needs to be intact. Workers for example, need to understand 
the workflow executed by the robot. 
B. Degree of Collaboration 
To understand detailed requirements for situations where 
systems interact, we analyze human robot interaction with 
respect to the synchronization of work between human and 
artificial agents [3]: 
 
 
Binary interaction (Start / Stop): Simple interaction 
(like pressing start / stop) of the worker with the 
robot. 
The 
activities 
of 
both 
agents 
are 
synchronized through a simple task where the 
worker uses control buttons. The robot is passive in 
the sense of obeying the command without further 
interaction. 
 
Coexistence interaction: This is a situation, where 
both agents operate next to each other but have no 
shared tasks or pieces of work. Hardly any 
synchronization is required. Both agents must make 
sure to not interfere with the other agent’s work. 
Some sort of collision detection and avoidance is 
required. 
 
Assistance interaction: Robot is assisting the 
human.  The robot serves without following 
individual goals, obeying commands of the user. 
Synchronization between the two agents takes place 
through the transmission of commands from the 
human to the robot, with limited feedback by the 
robot. 
 
Cooperation interaction: This describes a situation 
where human and robotic agents, share a work-
piece. The synchronization of both agents takes 
place through the location of the work. Both agents 
need to be aware where and when the respective 
other agent works on a part of the work piece. The 
agents must not perform any steps that interfere 
with the other's work. This requires some 
understanding about the other agent’s currently 
executed and immediate next tasks.  
 
Collaborative interaction: Here, human and robotic 
agents share a task. The synchronization of both 
agents is not limited to a work-piece, but activities 
are synchronized. Timing and location, where the 
tasks are executed, are of importance. Also, the 
upcoming activities of the collaborator. Both (the 
human and the robot) need a detailed understanding 
of the activities including their timing.  
 
III. 
PROCESS DESIGN APPROACHES 
In the following, we take a look at different approaches 
which fall into two categories. Task centric approaches 
considered are for example Business Process Management 
Notation (BPMN), and ARIS [4], communication oriented 
approaches are for example Subject-oriented Business 
Process Management (S-BPM) [5], and Agent-oriented 
Business Process Management (ABPM) [6]. 
  
A. S-BPM 
S-BPM (Subject-oriented Business Process Management) 
is a process approach, used for manual design of processes, 
which are executed by humans. Recently extensions have 
been researched to mix human and artificial agents [7,8].  
 S-BPM allows to model two aspects, the subject-
interaction, and the subject behavior. Subject Interaction 
Diagrams (SID) show the message flows between subjects. 
Subject Behavior Diagrams (SBD) show the individual 
control flow of a single subject. These two diagrams are on 
two different levels of abstraction. Subjects may be 
interpreted as roles of agents that prescribe the behavior of 
that role in a wider process context.  
Figure 1 shows a S-BPM process. On top, a subject 
interaction diagram is presented. The grey boxes are 
“Collaborator” represent subjects. A subject is similar to a 
role in a process. It shows the interface where information 
objects are exchanged, between the subjects. The second part 
of Figure 1. shows two subjects next to each other, and their 
internal behavior. Three types of activities are possible: (1) 
Act (yellow; marked with F), (2) Receive Business Object 
(green; marked with R), (3) Send Business Object (red; 
marked with S). One start activity is marked with a “play” 
triangle; multiple stop activities marked with square.  
A formal implementation of S-BPM exists [4, 9] based 
on Abstract State Machines [10]. Part of that formalization is 
given in listing 1 below. 
 
Listing 1.: ASM Implementation for verification & 
automated execution [9]  
 
 
The ASM-based Listing 1 is interpreted as follows: 
Every subject is in a particular state (SID_State). A transition 
from one state to the next happens when the execution of a 
service is finished. Service here includes the three activities 
(send, receive, act). The rule PERFORM is executed until 
the predicate Completed confirms the service has been 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

completed. The next edge to be followed for the next state, is 
selected by the selectEdge  function. 
To conclude, S-BPM has both, a human read-able 
representation, and a formal representation. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a process model for human robot collaboration [11]. 
B. BPMN 
The Business Process Management Notation (BPMN) is 
the de-facto standard for representation of processes in the 
business world [12]. Version 2.0 has been accepted as ISO 
standard. BPMN 2.0 includes support execution of BPMN 
process models, and a serialization standard has been added 
[13]. Some execution engines support the simulation of 
processes.  
Agents’ roles may be modelled as pools, and lanes within 
a pool (see Figure 2). Message flows are used to synchronize 
tasks in different lanes. This allows the implicit definition 
and usage of message exchange protocols as standard 
interfaces between certain “roles”. In contrast to S-BPM, this 
is not explicit in a separate model. 
Swimlanes are used to separate different entities working 
on a process. The yellow diamonds indicate “or” gateways; 
Green round symbols are start events, where for the robot 
this is a message based event. Messages sent around are 
modelled explicitly on the same level. Red circles are stop 
events. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of a process model for human robot assistance. 
However, BPMN is a large, and feature-rich modeling 
language. Unfortunately, this feature richness provides 
problems in practical environments. Most users do not know 
the exact definition, and usage of all concepts, model 
constructs [12]. All existing execution engines execute only a 
limited set of concepts. The automated translation from a 
modelled process to an executable one is at least 
cumbersome, and dependent on the actual used engine [13]. 
These problems partially stem from a missing formal 
semantics, and a missing formal execution environment [14]. 
For BPMN, we may conclude that while it is well known 
standard, it is only of limited suitability for communicating 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the processes to robots. However, an execution environment 
might take a subset of the BPMN standard, and use that 
subset to communicate to humans, and robots. Yet, no prior 
work exists helping in selecting required modelling 
constructs.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Given the increase of flexibility required for getting 
production back to Europe, the number of work 
environments with human robot collaboration is expected to 
rise.  
Current research focuses on the interaction part of robots 
with humans in linear, simple processes. However, in the 
near future, the complexity of processes is expected to rise. 
This implies the need for communication of these processes 
to the humans as well as to the robots.  
In this initial work, we have analyzed two approaches to 
business process modelling and execution. For each, we have 
provided a brief description with respect to its suitability to 
communicate a complex process to both, the human and the 
robot.  
We will continue this research in the near future, in order 
to understand the contributions of process models in flexible 
and interoperable production environments. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research, described in this paper, has been partially 
funded by the European Union and the state of Upper 
Austria within the strategic economic and research program 
“Innovative Upper Austria 2020” and the projects "Smart 
Factory Lab" and "DigiManu". 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Weichhart, A. Molina, D. Chen, L. Whitman, & F. Vernadat, 
“Challenges and Current Developments for Sensing”, Smart and 
Sustainable Enterprise Systems Computers in Industry, vol. 79, pp. 
34-46, 2016.  
[2] G. 
Weichhart, 
W. 
Guédria, 
and 
Y. 
Naudet, 
"Supporting 
Interoperability in Complex Adaptive Enterprise Systems: A Domain 
Specific Language Approach,"  Data and Knowledge Engineering, 
vol. 105, pp. 90-106, 2016. 
[3] A. Pichler, S. C. Akkaladevi, M. Ikeda, M. Hofmann, M. Plasch, C. 
Wögerer, and G. Fritz, “Towards shared autonomy for robotic tasks 
in Manufacturing”, Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 11, pp. 72-82, 2017. 
[4] IDS Scheer AG, „Handbuch zur ARIS-Methode“, Saarbrücken, 2000. 
[5] A. Fleischmann, W. Schmidt, C. Stary, S. Obermeier, and E. Börger, 
“Subject-Oriented Business Process Management”, Springer, 2012. 
[6] A. Fleischmann, U. Kannengiesser, W. Schmidt and C. Stary, 
“Subject-Oriented Modeling and Execution of Multi-Agent Business 
Processes”, 
Intelligent 
Agent 
Technology, 
The 
2013 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on, 2013. 
[7] M. Neubauer, and C. Stary, (Eds.) “S-BPM in the Production 
Industry” Springer International Publishing, 2017 
[8] M. Neubauer, F. Krenn, D. Majoe, and C. Stary, “Subject-orientation 
as design language for integration across organisational control 
layers”, International Journal of Production Research, vol. 55, pp. 
3644-3656, 2017 
[9] H. Lerchner, and C. Stary, “An Open S-BPM Runtime Environment 
based on Abstract State Machines”, in IEEE 16th Conference on 
Business Informatics, pp. 54-61, 2014 
[10] E. Börger and R. Stärk, “Abstract State Machine - A Method for High 
Level System Design and Analysis”, Springer Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2003. 
[11] G. 
Weichhart, 
“Representing 
Processes 
of 
Human 
Robot 
Collaboration”, 
S-BPM-ONE 
Workshop 
Proceedings, 
CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings, 2018 (to appear).  
[12] M. Chinosi, and A. Trombetta, “BPMN: An introduction to the 
standard”, Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 34, pp. 124 – 134, 
2012. 
[13] M. Geiger, S. Harrer, J. Lenhard, and G. Wirtz, “BPMN 2.0: The 
state of support and implementation”, Future Generation Computer 
Systems, vol. 80, pp. 250 – 262, 2018. 
[14] P. Wohed, W. M. van der Aalst, M. Dumas, A. H. ter Hofstede, and 
N. Russell, “On the Suitability of BPMN for Business Process 
Modelling”. Proceedings 4th International Conference on Business 
Process Management, Springer, vol. 4102, pp. 161-176, 2006. 
 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

