Egg Surface Inspection Using Infrared Transmitted Light Images 
Hisayoshi Ito 
Oky Dicky Ardiansyah Prima 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Iwate, Japan 
e-mail: {hito, prima}@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Factories that mass-produce boiled eggs do not use 
eggs with minute surface irregularities as out-of-spec eggs in 
order to reduce the risk of damage during transportation. The 
inspection is performed visually by human workers to check for 
abnormalities, but this is a heavy burden on the workers 
because of the number of eggs they handle. In this study, a 
method to detect minute irregularities in eggshells using 
transmitted infrared light was attempted. By using an infrared 
camera to capture images of infrared light transmitted into the 
egg, we were able to detect areas where the shell was locally 
thicker. In the future, we plan to try deep learning to detect 
irregularities distributed on the sides near parallel to the optical 
axis of the camera by matching the three-dimensional shape of 
the shell measured by a 3D scanner with the transmitted 
infrared light image. 
Keywords-boiled eggs; surface inspection; infrared light; 
protrusions; image processing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, boiled eggs are produced and shipped in large 
quantities daily as a food product. In addition to preventing 
eggs from being damaged during transportation, the surface of 
boiled eggs as a product must be free of blemishes and stains 
to maintain their good appearance as a product. For example, 
if the surface of the shell has a different color than the rest of 
the shell, it is out-of-spec as having stains. Similarly, any 
unevenness on the surface of the shell that exceeds the 
standard is called “Zara” (which means roughness) and is 
considered out-of-spec. Figure 1 shows the uneven surface of 
an egg, which has many protrusions. These out-of-spec eggs 
are removed before boiling and used as raw materials for other 
egg products. Thus, the quality inspection of eggs for the 
production of boiled eggs requires a more detailed inspection 
of the surface texture, unlike the inspection for cracks and 
stains on the shell, which is conducted to guarantee food 
safety. 
Thus, in producing boiled eggs, it is necessary to remove 
off-spec eggs before processing them according to the 
established standards. Currently, workers visually inspect the 
eggs to remove out-of-spec. However, in a certain boiled egg 
production plant, the process is not as thorough as it should be. 
A certain boiled egg factory produces 150,000 boiled eggs per 
day, and a larger number of them must be inspected in advance. 
This is a heavy burden for even the most experienced workers. 
In addition, the temperature and humidity inside the boiling 
egg factory are high due to the handling of boiling water, and 
the workers are fatigued when they work in clean clothing. As 
described above, the high workload, including environmental 
aspects, may affect the accuracy of the inspection. In response 
to the above issues, we believe that if the detecting and 
removing process could be automated, it would not only 
improve the efficiency of boiled egg production but also solve 
the problems caused by the shortage of human resources. 
This study focuses on the inspection of egg surface 
irregularities and aims to develop a method to automate the 
process of removing out-of-spec. Specifically, we propose a 
method to inspect the surface of the shell from an image of the 
egg taken by infrared transmitted light and to detect out-of-
spec eggs when the number of irregularities exceeds a 
standard. 
The rest of this study is organized as follows: Section II 
describes the existing methods for egg quality inspection; 
Section III describes the egg surface inspection method used 
in this study; Section IV describes the relationship between 
the image features obtained by the proposed method and the 
egg surface features. Section V summarizes this study and 
discusses prospects. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Visual inspection has been used in the egg inspection 
process. The main purpose of this method is to assure the 
quality of food products by checking whether there are any 
abnormalities on the surface or inside. However, the accuracy 
of this method, which relies on human skill, depends on the 
skill and fatigue of the inspector and the environment of the 
inspection site. Therefore, attempts have been made to 
automate the inspection process and sort out eggs that do not 
meet a certain level of quality. 
 
Figure 1.  Protrusions on the egg surface. 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A typical inspection method is candling. The method of 
checking freshness by shining light on eggs and using the 
color of the yolk inside as a guide [1] has been used for many 
years. Liu et al. [2] developed a method to inspect freshness 
by measuring the spectrum of light transmitted through the 
interior of the egg. They used the ultraviolet and visible 
(UV/VIS 200–800 nm) spectrum as the light source. On the 
other hand, De Katelaere et al. [3] proposed a method for 
detecting cracks on the surface using the analysis of frequency 
response by acoustic measurement when the shell is subjected 
to mechanical impact. For inspecting surface conditions, 
Wang et al. [4] used the surface image of the eggshell to detect 
black spots, and Wang et al. [5] examined a neural network to 
detect contamination. 
These previous studies aimed to ensure the safety of eggs 
as food by detecting blood or meat spots inside or by 
inspecting relatively large cracks or stains on the surface. On 
the other hand, eggs that have passed these inspections are 
received at the plant where boiled eggs are produced, and it is 
required to detect even finer irregularities. This is because the 
protrusions on the surface of the shell are easily affected by 
vibration during transportation, and there is a high risk of 
cracking. To reduce the risk of product breakage, only eggs 
with smooth surfaces should be used as material. Furthermore, 
eggs with even a slight lack of smoothness in appearance will 
be shunned by consumers because of their poor appearance. 
There are no existing studies aimed at detecting the fine 
texture of eggs that meet these conditions. 
III. 
METHODS 
In this study, we focus on the wide application of near-
infrared light to food analysis, based on various sample 
presentation techniques [6]. In addition to reflection, Near-
Infrared Ray (NIR) absorbed and transmitted from the sample 
may be used to detect the internal state of the eggshell. Here, 
we attempt to analyze the surface shape of the shell by 
photographing the NIR transmitted through the egg. 
A.  Image Acquisition 
The device for NIR imaging in this study is shown in 
Figure 2. As shown on the right side of the figure, the NIR 
light source is under the stage where the eggs are placed, and 
the NIR light transmitted from the light source through the 
eggs is captured by a camera mounted directly above the stage. 
Near-infrared LEDs with a wavelength of 840 nm were used 
as light sources. The eggs were photographed in two ways: 
face up or face down. Therefore, the image acquired in this 
case was always centered directly above or below the egg, 
with the sides of the egg at the periphery. 
Figure 3 and Figure 4 show examples of images captured 
by this device. The brightness of each pixel is determined by 
the thickness of the eggshell, not by the egg's internal structure. 
High brightness areas indicate that the shell is relatively thin, 
while low brightness areas indicate that the shell is thicker 
than the surrounding area. 
Figure 3 shows an image of a good surface quality egg 
with an even texture. Although there are differences in 
brightness and darkness, the brightness is within a certain 
range. On the other hand, Figure 4 is an image of the surface 
of a substandard egg with deep irregularities. There are some 
darker areas in the image, as indicated by circles. Those areas 
are where the shell is thicker, indicating the appearance of 
protrusions on the surface. 
B. Thresholding 
Areas with large changes in shell thickness are deeply 
uneven and have a coarse texture. Using this feature, the size 
of the area occupied by areas with large changes in brightness 
can be used as a criterion for judging whether an egg is out-
of-spec or not. 
The acquired NIR image is binarized with predefined 
threshold 𝐿, and then shrunk and expanded to remove noise, 
leaving blobs. Figure 5 shows the resulting blobs 
 
 
Figure 2.  The device for NIR imaging. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

superimposed on the original image. In this figure, the blobs 
are drawn as yellow areas. 
C. Blob Detection 
As shown in Figure 5, the blobs remained in the low-
lightness areas annotated in Figure 4, indicating that this 
process correctly detects out-of-spec eggs. On the other hand, 
a large blob remains on the left side. This is because the 
amount of transmitted light was low when the image was 
taken and the overall image was dark, which resulted in the 
blob being below the threshold value 𝐿. To judge out-of-spec 
eggs, we define a blob whose area is between 𝑆!"# and 𝑆!$% 
as a protrusive blob and judge an egg to be out-of-spec when 
the number of protrusive blobs exceeds the reference value. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
In this study, 10 eggs with good shells and 30 out-of-spec 
eggs were prepared, and NIR images were taken from above 
and below for each. As a result, 20 images were obtained for 
eggs suitable for producing boiled eggs, and 40 images were 
obtained for eggs unsuitable for producing boiled eggs. The 
processing of these images with the proposed method did not 
stably extract protrusive blobs for all images under the same 
threshold value 𝐿. This may be because the thickness of the 
shell differs from egg to egg and the amount of transmitted 
light varied. On the other hand, false positives of protrusive 
blobs were rarely observed for good eggs. 
Figure 6 shows the change in the distribution of blobs as 
the threshold is varied. The same NIR image is used as the 
source for binarization in each column, and in each row, 
images are binarized with thresholds L=0.333, L=0.352, and 
L=0.376, respectively. These threshold values represent 
relative amounts when the highest brightness is set to 1. All of 
these eggs are out-of-spec, and the NIR images contain local 
dark spots. This figure shows that the percentage of shadow 
remaining as blobs varies greatly from egg to egg, and that 
defining the threshold as a constant does not give good overall 
results. 
As a general trend, blobs distributed in the center of the 
image were more appropriately detected. This may be because 
the sides of the shell are inclined to the image plane and 
occupy a small area in the image, making it difficult to detect 
their characteristics. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we developed a method for detecting  
 
  
Figure 5.  The result after image processing imposes the original. 
  
 
Figure 3. Captured NIR Image of an egg with a good shell. 
Figure 4. Captured NIR image of a substandard egg. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

irregularities on the surface of eggshells using transmitted 
infrared light. By analyzing the shape of the eggshell 
transmitted by near-infrared light, we were able to detect local 
thickness variations. In the future, we will try to match the 
NIR image with the three-dimensional shape of the shell 
acquired by a 3D scanner to deal with variations in the 
thickness of the entire shell and to detect protrusions near the 
sides of the shell. In addition, we will investigate more stable 
detection methods, including a solution that uses deep 
learning to estimate the three-dimensional shape of the shell 
from the infrared transmitted light images. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was done in collaboration with Iwate Eggdelica 
Co., Ltd. and the Faculty of Software and Information Science, 
Iwate Prefectural University. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. L. Parker, S. S. Gossman, and W. A. Lippincott,  “Studies 
on egg quality: I: Introductory note on variations in yolk color,” 
Poultry Science, vol. 5, no.3, pp. 131-145., February 1926. 
[2] Y. Liu, Y. Ying, A. Ouyang, and Y. Li, “Measurement of 
internal quality in chicken eggs using visible transmittance 
spectroscopy technology,” Food Control, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 18-
22, January 2007., doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2005.07.011. 
[3] B. De Ketelaere, P. Coucke, and J. De Baerdemaeker, 
“Eggshell Crack Detection based on Acoustic Resonance 
Frequency Analysis,” Journal of Agricultural Engineering 
Research, vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 157-163, June 2000, doi: 
10.1006/jaer.2000.0542. 
[4] C. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Wu, J. Li, Z. Chunjiang and R. Liu, 
“Research on the Evaluation Method of Eggshell Dark Spots 
Based on Machine Vision,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 160116-
160125, 2020, DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3020260. 
[5] X. Wang, X. Yue, H. Li, and L. Meng,  “A high-efficiency 
dirty-egg detection system based on YOLOv4 and TensorRT,” 
2021 International Conference on Advanced Mechatronic 
Systems 
(ICAMechS), 
pp. 
75-80, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICAMechS54019.2021.9661509. 
[6] B. G. Osborne, “Near-Infrared Spectroscopy in Food Analysis,” 
Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry: applications, theory 
and 
instrumentation, 
pp. 
1-14, 
2006, 
doi: 
10.1002/9780470027318.a1018. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. 
Distribution of blobs with different thresholds in processed NIR images of out-of-spec eggs. 
 
L = 0.333 
L = 0.352 
L = 0.376 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

