Shape Modeling: From Linear Anthropometry to 
Surface Model 
 
Ameersing Luximon 
Institute of Textiles and Clothing  
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hong Kong 
tcshyam@polyu.edu.hk 
Huang Chao 
Institute of Textiles and Clothing  
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hong Kong 
huang.chao@connect.polyu.hk 
 
 
Abstract— Due to technological innovations, there is a shift 
from linear anthropometric measures to surface model. This is 
essential since body surface information is needed in medical, 
archaeological, forensic and many other disciplines. As a 
result, there is a need to shift from linear anthropometry tables 
to surface anthropometry databases. This study provides a 
general modelling technique, to convert linear anthropometry 
to complex surface anthropometry using recursive regression 
equations technique (RRET) and scaling technique. In order to 
build the model, scanned data of a 3D body part for a selected 
population is needed. After scanning, the parts are aligned 
along a reference axis before extracting cross-sections 
perpendicular to the reference axis. Using the cross sections, a 
‘standard’ part is computed based on an averaging method. 
The ‘standard’ part provides the shape information of a given 
population and thus it can be stored in a database for shape 
prediction. Using the recursive regression equations technique, 
regression equations are constructed based on selected 
anthropometric measures of each cross section. During 3D part 
shape prediction, only few anthropometric measures are used 
and the anthropometric measures of all the other cross sections 
are predicted recursively using the equations developed from 
RRET. Eventually, the predicted measures are used to scale 
the ‘standard’ part in order to generate a predicted 3D shape 
of the selected part. Previous studies published by our team on 
foot shape modelling have given accurate results of about 
2mm. Thus, depending on different applications, this technique 
can be applied to generate 3D shape from anthropometry and 
can 
be 
applied 
to 
reconstructive 
surgery, 
forensic, 
anthropology, design, psychology and other fields. 
Keywords-anthropometric; surface antropometry; recursive 
regression equation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
According to the World Health Organization [1], 
anthropometry, a method to assess the size, proportions and 
compositions of the human body using simple equipments, is 
universally applicable, inexpensive and non-invasive. 
Anthropometry, even though dating back to Renaissance [2], 
emerged in the nineteenth century largely by German 
investigators in the physical anthropology discipline, while 
they needed to study the quantitative description of the 
human body reliably [3, 4]. The basic anthropometric 
techniques were developed during that time and they are still 
used today [3]. The different anthropometric measures are 
represented in percentile values in anthropometric tables [2, 
5] and since the values are statistical values, they cannot be 
combined to create a single human body [6]. The 
anthropometric percentage values are generally used to 
compare different populations and to design for a given 
population. Anthropometric data has been widely used in 
fields ranging from engineering to arts. It has been used in 
equipment 
and 
workplace 
design 
[6, 
7], 
forensic 
investigation [8, 9], growth and nutrition evaluation [4, 10], 
medicine [11-13], archaeology and cultural studies [14-16], 
and sports science and fitness evaluation [17-19]. 
Anthropometric studies have been widely carried out 
because of its non-invasiveness [1], inexpensiveness [4], 
simplicity [1], portability [20] and reliability [21]. 
Furthermore, as the anthropometric dimensions vary among 
different groups of population, anthropometric tables have 
been developed based on age, race, region, and occupation 
[2]. Even though, there are many studies on anthropometry, 
most of the tables have only linear anthropometric data. 
Since surface geometry is required in many applications, 
more research is required to enhance the existing data on 
linear anthropometry. 
 
Surface anthropometry describe the size and shape as 
well as the 3D surface geometry of the human body [22]. It 
is possible to combine surface scan data and internal 
measurements [23], thus anthropometric techniques can be 
used to find the size, shape and proportion of the external as 
well as internal structures of the body. Thus in this modern 
world, data collected from Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI), Computed Tomography (CT) or Computed Aided 
Tomography (CAT), sound, optical (laser or structured light) 
or any scanning devices can be used to create surface 
anthropometry of the external as well as the internal 
structures of the body. Since surface anthropometry provides 
information on the complex surfaces of the human parts, in 
addition to the common linear anthropometry measures, it 
can be used for many applications such as planning and 
assessment of facial surgery, design and manufacture of 
implants and prostheses, facial reconstruction in forensic 
applications, 
archaeology, 
psychology, 
genetics, 
and 
420
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

comparative and evolutionary anatomy [24]. In addition, 
there are growing uses of synthesize 3D digital animated 
images of human models in science fiction movies and 3D 
digital dummies for equipment testing [25]. Although 
surface anthropometry seems to be very useful, it has several 
disadvantages. Surface scanning equipment is relatively 
expensive and is not widely available. It is relatively difficult 
to operate and require special skilled technicians to capture 
the dynamic and complex body shape. Furthermore, the data 
obtained from the scanning equipment requires additional 
processing and statistical data analyses are not trivial 
resulting in only few large-scale studies. Still, surface 
anthropometry is very useful for different applications and 
there is a need to simplify the method to acquire surface 
anthropometry, reduce the cost of equipments and develop 
surface anthropometry databases. In this study, a method to 
predict accurately the surface anthropometry by using 
simple, reliable and non-invasive linear anthropometry 
measurement techniques are proposed. As a result, the use of 
expensive surface scanning devices is minimized to model 
building and simple cost effective linear anthropometry 
measures can be used for surface anthropometry prediction.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Flowchart of the prediction model. 
 
3D Scanning 
 
Alignment 
 
Sectioning and 
Sampling 
 
Sampled data 
‘True’ 
part shape 
 
Data 
preprocessing 
Accuracy 
check 
Acceptable 
Not 
Acceptable 
Model 
Generation 
‘standard’ 
part 
Parameterization 
Recursive regression 
equations 
Model 
Validation 
Predicted parameters  
 ‘Seed’ section  
Parameters of ‘seed’ 
section 
Scaling of ‘standard’ part  
Prediction part  
Prediction accuracy 
421
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Surface anthropometry prediction involves spline curve 
and surface fitting [26], recursive regression equations [27, 
28] and scaling techniques [27]. Luximon and Goonetilleke 
[28] have used the RRET technique and proportional scaling 
to predict the feet of Hong Kong Chinese to an accuracy of 
less than 2.5 mm, while using only four anthropometric 
parameters and a ‘standard’ foot. Since RRET and scaling 
techniques seems to provide an accurate method for shape 
prediction, in this study, a general prediction model with 
several variations is provided so that more body parts can be 
predicted using this simple method. The flow chart for the 
development and validation of the prediction model is shown 
in Figure 1. The main parts are data pre-processing, model 
generation and model validation. Data pre-processing 
includes scanning, and alignment and sampling. Model 
generation includes creation of a standard shape, section 
parametization, and generation of regression equations 
between the parameters. Validation includes checking of 
accuracy based on a different data set. These are discussed in 
details in the following sections. 
II. 
DATA PRE-PROCESSING 
A. 3D scanning  
For 3D scanning, any type of scanner to capture the 
external shape of the body (Figure 2) or any specific part can 
be used. Since a general method to build the prediction 
model has been proposed, some changes may be required to 
adopt for specific parts. It is assumed that Ns number of 
participants is used for the model development. In this 
formulation, left and right sides of the parts are not 
distinguished, but during the formation of a specific part, the 
differences between left and right sides can be included as in 
Luximon and Goonetilleke [28]. For the ith participant the 
scanned part has Pi number of points. The points are pik 
(where i = 1,...,Ns; k = 1,...,Pi). The coordinates of the point 
pik is (xik, yik, zik). 
 
Figure 2.  Laser scanned data 
B. Alignment and sampling 
Since all the scanned part might not be aligned in the 
same reference axis, all the parts have to be aligned on a 
consistent axis. The axis of alignment can be based on some 
anthropometric landmarks, commonly used axis or based on 
mathematical and statistical methods (such as principle 
component methods). For example, for the case of the human 
foot, heel centre line is commonly used [27-29]. For the arm, 
leg and body principal component can be used. For head 
data, eye location can be used for alignment. After 
alignment, the coordinates of point apik is (axik, ayik, azik) as 
shown in figure 3. The part is aligned to have the axis with 
the highest variation along the Z-axis. 
 
Once the part has been aligned, cross sections are 
extracted perpendicular to the Z-axis, called the ‘main’ axis. 
The length of the aligned part along the main axis is Li 
(where i = 1,...,Ns). Cross-sections perpendicular to the main 
axis at δj (where j = 1,...,Nsec) of Li are extracted, where Nsec 
is the total number of cross-sections extracted (Figure 4). δj 
is monotonically increasing with j. The separation between 
the sampled cross sections need not be uniform, but it has to 
be consistent between the different participants. The 
extracted sections are Sij (where i = 1,...,Ns; j = 1,..., Nsec) and 
the z-value for the sections are given by (1). Then, for each 
section, a fixed number of points are extracted using 
different sampling methods [28]. The number of points for 
section Sij is sNj. For participant I, the number of points is 
same. The points after sampling are spijk , where i = 1,...,Ns; j 
= 1,..., Nsec; j = 1,..., sNj.  
 
szij  = δj * Li  
 
 
(1) 
 
 
Figure 3.  Alignment method 
422
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 4.  Sectioning and sampling 
III. 
MODEL GENERATION 
A. ‘Standard part’ 
Some of the part shape data can be used to generate the 
model, while other shape data can be used for model 
validation [28]. Assuming that the "standard" part is 
generated using part shape data of Nm subjects where Nm < 
Ns. The coordinates of the point used to generate the standard 
part are (sxijk, syijk, syijk) where where i = 1,...,Nm; j = 1,..., Nsec; 
j = 1,..., sNj. The ‘Standard’ part is the representation of the 
given part for a given population. There can be several 
methods to generate the ‘standard’ part, based on different 
statistical methods such as geometric mean, arithmetic mean, 
mode, median, etc. Equations (2), (3), and (4) show the x, y, 
and z coordinates of the ‘standard’ part when arithmetic 
mean is used. The standard foot shape has Nsec number of 
sections. 
 
B. Parametization 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
(3) 
  
 
(4) 
 
The ‘standard’ part represents the shape of a given 
population and it can be stored in a database. While the 
‘standard’ part is being developed, parameters can be 
extracted from the cross sections of the aligned part.  
Each cross section can be parameterized using several 
anthropometric variables [27]. Figure 5 shows some of the 
parameters that can be used, such as maximum y deviation 
(H+), minimum y deviation (H-), maximum x deviation (W+), 
minimum x deviation (W-), height (H), width (W) and radius 
(Rθ) at θ degrees and circumference (C). The number of 
parameterization will determine the accuracy and complexity 
of the model. Furthermore, anthropometric studies are 
needed to determine the importance of the different 
parameters. Goonetilleke et al. [30] and Luximon and 
Goonetilleke [31] have used principle component and factor 
analysis to find the relative importance of different foot 
related parameters. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Anthropoemtric parametization 
C. Reccursive regression equation 
The purpose of the recursive regression equation is to 
find the relationship of the anthropometric dimensions of all 
the sections of the part given the anthropometric dimension 
of one section. For example, one regression equation is build 
from anthropometric measure height (H) at section i and 
height at section j. The R2 values are also recorded. If we 
have Na anthropometric measures and Nsec sections, we can 
generate Na x (Nsec - 1) equations if we consider consecutive 
sections. Using these regressions equations, knowledge of 
one set of values for Na anthropometric measures (‘seed 
section), we will be able to predict all the Na x Nsec 
anthropometric measure values. There are a number of ways 
to find the best ‘seed’ section and build the regression 
equations. Luximon and Goonetilleke [28] developed linear 
regression equations between the anthropometric measures 
of adjacent sections. The best ‘seed’ section was found by 
using different ‘seed’ section to predict the anthropometric 
measures and choosing section that provided the highest 
correlation between the original set of anthropometric 
measures. For complex models Na x (Nsec -1) x (Nsec -2) 
equations may be needed. This problem can be solved using 
travelling salesman method [32]. 
423
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
MODEL VALIDATION 
The model can be validated using 3D scanned data of a 
different set of Nv participants where Nv < Ns and Nv + Nm = 
Ns. The model validation involves measurement or extraction 
of parameters of the ‘seed’ section, prediction of parameters 
of all the section based on the ‘seed’ section, scaling of the 
‘standard’ part. Once the shape is predicted, the prediction 
error can be calculated when we compare it with the original 
data.  
Once we have the predicted parameters of the sections, 
the standard part has to be scaled. There can be different 
scaling methods based on the different parameters. Luximon 
and Goonetilleke [28] have discussed proportional scaling. If 
the parameters are orthogonal (such as width and height) 
then the sections can be scaled independently (figure 6). 
However, if the parameters are not orthogonal different 
scaling methods need to be developed. After scaling the 
predicted shape has coordinates (pxij, pyij, pzij). 
For participant i the original shape after alignment has 
coordinates (axik, ayik, azik) where k = 1,...,Pi. The coordinates 
of the predicted foot is (pxij, pyij, pzij) where i = 1,...,Nm; j = 
1,..., Nsec; j = 1,..., sNj. The error is computed based on the 
shortest distance from the predicted foot to the real foot [33]. 
Different statistics can easily be calculated to compare 
prediction accuracy. Error plots are also useful to show the 
error distribution at different regions [28]. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Scaling 
 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Anthropometric measures are widely used and due to 
recent advances, there are many types of equipment (3D 
scanners) to capture surface anthropometry. However, 3D 
scanners are relatively expensive and are available at few 
labs. It requires qualified personnel to operate and provides 
huge number of data points that are sometime difficult to 
manage. On the other hand, linear anthropometrics have 
existed for centuries and it is relatively very easy to measure 
linear anthropometric dimensions. For instance, if we want 
to buy custom-made shoes through the internet, it is much 
easier to provide few anthropometric measures (such as 
length, width, height, heel width, etc) than to scan the foot 
and provide thousands of points on the surface of the foot. 
As a result, methods need to be developed to capture the 
advantages of linear anthropometry as well as surface 
anthropometry. In this study, a general model was proposed 
to 
generate 
surface 
anthropometry 
from 
linear 
anthropometry and standard shape. The standard shape can 
be stored in databases based on age, sex, race and gender. 
When there is a need to reproduce a 3D shape of a part, 
there is no need to scan the part. Instead, few anthropometric 
measures of the part can be used to modify the standard to 
create accurate 3D shape of a part without the need for 
expensive scanning. The method has been validated for foot 
modelling [27, 28] and thus it can be applied to other parts 
of the body. The model can be modified for specific 
applications. Results from past studies [28] have shown that 
recursive regression equations technique (RRET) is a useful 
technique. The technique has been used for foot shape 
prediction.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As there are more and more technological innovations, 
there is a shift from linear anthropometric measures to 
surface anthropometric data in order to satisfy the ever-
changing needs of the society. People are constantly looking 
for comfortable and ‘proper’ fitting wearable that not only 
match the linear anthropometric dimensions but also 
accommodate the complex surface of the body. In addition, 
more 
surface 
information 
is 
needed 
in 
medical, 
archaeological and forensic disciplines. As a result, the linear 
anthropometric table even though useful is not able to satisfy 
with the current needs. Thus, in order to have accurate 
information on body dimensions, surface anthropometry 
database has to be developed. Since data for linear 
anthropometric is widely available based on age, race, 
region, and occupation and methods to capture linear 
anthropometry are non-invasive, inexpensive, simple, 
portable and reliable, it is wise to use linear anthropometry to 
generate surface anthropometry. This study provided a 
general modelling technique, to convert linear anthropometry 
to the complex surface anthropometry. Simple recursive 
regression equations technique and scaling technique were 
used to build the prediction model. Model building involved 
data collection, alignment, cross sectioning, point sampling, 
averaging and regression equations development. Once the 
model has been built, given few anthropometric measures, 
the ‘standard’ part can be scaled to generate a predicted 3D 
shape. Studies in foot modelling have shown that this 
method can predict the foot shape accurately (≈ 2 mm) using 
only 4 parameters [27, 28] including length, width, height 
and curvature. The accuracy of the predicted shape will 
generally be better if many anthropometric measures are 
used. The model parameters can be adjusted to obtain the 
required accuracy depending on different applications.  
Future plan for this study includes modelling different 
body parts at based on different accuracy level and 
424
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

improvement of this technique by including selected 
sections. The application of this study is in reconstructive 
surgery, forensic, anthropology, design, psychology, and 
other fields involving digital human models.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by RGC General Research 
Fund (B-Q26V). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
WHO, 
 
Physical 
Status: 
The 
Use 
and 
Interpretation 
of 
Anthropometry, 
Technical 
Report 
No 
854, 
World 
Health 
Organization, Geneva, 1995. 
[2] 
S. Pheasant, Bodyspace: Anthropometry, ergonomics, and the design 
of work, London: Taylor and Francis, 1996. 
[3] 
A. R. Tilley and Henry Dreyfuss Associates, The measure of man and 
woman: human factors in design, New York: John Wiley and sons, 
2002. 
[4] 
F. E. Johnston, “Anthropometry,” in The Cambridge encyclopaedia of 
human growth and development, S. J. Ulijaszek, F. E. Johnston and 
M. A. Preece, Eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998, 
pp. 26-27. 
[5] 
M. H. Al-Haboubi, “Statistics for a composite distribution in 
anthropometric studies,” Ergonomics, 40, 1997, pp. 189-198. 
[6] 
W. E. Woodson and D. W. Conover, Human engineering guide for 
equipment designers (2nd ed.), California: University of California 
Press Berkeley, 1964. 
[7] 
K. Gielo-Perczak, “The golden section as a harmonizing feature of 
human dimensions and workplace design,” Theoretical Issues in 
Ergonomics Science, 2, 2001, pp. 336-351.  
[8] 
A. Ozaslan, M. Y. Iscan, I. Ozaslan, H. Tugcu, and S. Koc, 
“Estimation of stature from body parts,” Forensic Science 
International, 132, 2003, pp. 40-45 
[9] 
M. Henneberg, E. Simpson, and C. Stephan, “Human face in 
biological anthropology: Craniometry, evolution and forensic 
identification,” in The human face: measurement and meaning, M. 
Katsikitis, Ed. Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003, pp. 29-
48. 
[10] K. R. Fontaine, G. Gadbury, S. B. Heymsfield, J. Kral, J. B. Albu, 
and D. Allison, “Quantitative prediction of body diameter in severely 
obese individuals,” Ergonomics, 45, 2002, pp. 49-60. 
[11] O. Giampietro, E. Virgone, L. Carneglia, E. Griesi, D. Calvi, and E. 
Matteucci, “Anthropometric indices of school children and familiar 
risk factors,” Preventive Medicine, 35, 2002, pp. 492-498. 
[12] N. N. Prasad and D. V. R. Reddy, “Lip-Nose complex 
anthropometry,” International Journal of Cosmetic Surgery and 
Aesthetic Dermatology, 4, 2002, pp. 155-159. 
[13] R. Z. Stolzenberg-Solomon, P. Pietinen, P. R. Taylor, J. Virtamo, and 
D. 
Albanes, 
“A 
prospective 
study 
of 
medical 
conditions, 
anthropometry, physical activity, and pancreatic cancer in male 
smokers (Finland),” Cancer Causes and Control, 13, 2002, pp. 417-
426. 
[14] B. Bogin and R. Keep, “Eight thousand years of economic and 
political history in Latin America revealed by anthropometry,” 
Annals of Human Biology, 26, 1999, pp. 333-351.  
[15] R. Floud, “The dimensions of inequality: Height and weight variation 
in Britain, 1700-2000,” Contemporary British History, 16, 2002, pp. 
13-26. 
[16] T. K. Oommen, “Race, religion, and caste: Anthropological and 
sociological perspectives,” Comparative Sociology, 1, 2002, pp. 115-
126 
[17] T. Reilly, J. Bangsbo, and A. Franks, “Anthropometric and 
physiological predispositions for elite soccer,” Journal of Sports 
Sciences, 18, pp. 669-683. 
[18] P. Tothill and A. D. Stewart, “Estimation of thigh muscle and adipose 
tissue 
volume 
using 
magnetic 
resonance 
imaging 
and 
anthropometry,” Journal of Sports Sciences, 20, 2002, pp. 563-576. 
[19] M. Westerstahl, M. Barnekow-Bergkvist, G. Hedberg, and E. 
Jansson, “Secular trends in body dimensions and physical fitness 
among adolescents in Sweden from 1974 to 1995,” Scandinavian 
Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports, 13, 2003, pp. 128-137. 
[20] C. M. Worthman, “Recumbent anthropometry,” in The Cambridge 
encyclopaedia of human growth and development, S. J. Ulijaszek, F. 
E. Johnston and M. A. Preece, Eds. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998, pp. 29. 
[21] S. Ulijaszek, “Measurement error,” in The Cambridge encyclopaedia 
of human growth and development, S.J. Ulijaszek, F.E. Johnston and 
M.A. Preece, Eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998, pp. 
28. 
[22] P. R. M. Jones and M. Rioux, “Three-dimensional surface 
anthropometry: Applications to the human body,” Optics and Lasers 
in Engineering, 28, 1997, pp. 89-117. 
[23] V. A. Deason, “Anthropometry: The human dimension,” Optics and 
Lasers in Engineering, 28, 1997, pp. 83-88. 
[24] A. D. Linney, J. Campos, and R. Richards, “Non-contact 
anthropometry 
using 
projected 
laser 
line 
distortion: 
Three 
dimensional graphic visualization and applications,” Optics and 
Lasers in Engineering, 28, 1997, pp. 137-155. 
[25] D. B. Chaffin  Digital human modeling for vehicle and workplace 
design, Warrendale, PA: Society of Automotive Engineers, 2001. 
[26] B. K. Choi, Surface modeling for CAD/CAM: Advances in industrial 
engineering, Vol. 11, (Amsterdam: Elsevier). 1991. 
[27] A. Luximon, Foot shape evaluation for footwear fitting, Unpublished 
PhD thesis, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong 
Kong, 2001. 
[28] A. Luximon and R. S. Goonetilleke, 2003, “Foot shape modeling,” 
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society, 46(2), 2004, pp. 304-315. 
[29] R. S. Goonetilleke and A. Luximon, “Foot flare and foot axis,” 
Human Factors, 41, 1999, pp. 596-607. 
[30] R. S. Goonetilleke, C-F. Ho, and R. H. Y. So, “Foot anthropometry in 
Hong Kong,” Proc of the ASEAN 97 Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia: ASEAN, 1997, 81-88.  
[31] A. Luximon and R. S. Goonetilleke, Dimensions for footwear fitting, 
Proc of the International Ergonomics Association 2003 conference, 
Seoul, Korea, 2003, (CD-ROM). 
[32] G. Gregory and P. P. Abraham The traveling salesman problem and 
its variations, Boston : Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. 
[33] Luximon, R. S. Goonetilleke, and K. L. Tsui, “Foot landmarking for 
footwear customization,” Ergonomics, 46, 2003, pp. 364-383. 
 
 
 
 
425
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

