Assessing the Willingness of Elder Users in Using Virtual and Augmented Reality 
Technologies 
 
Zoe Anastasiadou 
Visual Media Computing Lab 
Department of Multimedia and Graphic Arts 
Cyprus University of Technology 
Limassol, Cyprus 
Email: Zx.anastasiadou@edu.cut.ac.cy 
Andreas Lanitis 
Visual Media Computing Lab 
Department of Multimedia and Graphic Arts 
Cyprus University of Technology 
Limassol, Cyprus 
Email: Andreas.lanitis@cut.ac.cy
 
 
Abstract— Emerging technologies in the form of Virtual (VR) 
and Augmented Reality (AR) can play an important role in 
improving the lives of the elderly and as such efforts in 
designing elderly-friendly applications are of paramount 
importance. However, despite the importance of this topic, 
issues related to the attitudes of elder users towards new 
technologies are not thoroughly investigated in the literature. 
With our work, we aim to analyze issues related to the 
willingness of older people to use emerging technologies, 
determine 
the 
difficulties 
faced, 
and 
define 
design 
requirements that will make emerging technologies more 
accessible to elder users. Our investigation involves a three-
stage hierarchical structure where in each step the participants 
are exposed to more technologically intensive interaction styles. 
Our study revealed, that elder people are willing to use 
advanced technologies in the form of Augmented and Virtual 
Reality provided that the issues of useful functionality, 
usability, and neat design are met. The results of this study are 
important for designers and developers of VR/AR applications 
for the elderly, who need to address the issues indicated by the 
target group, to allow them to regularly use such applications 
in their everyday life. 
Keywords-Virtual Reality; Augmented Reality; Elderly; 
Interface Design; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The use of emerging technologies by the elder people is 
becoming increasingly important, especially in periods of 
social isolation caused either by external factors (i.e., a 
pandemic) or by internal factors associated with reduced 
mobility in the elderly. Through the use of emerging 
technologies, the elderly could be offered a way to reduce 
the side-effects caused by social distancing [1]. Also, AR can 
be used for assistive technology applications [2]. However, 
despite the importance of this topic, issues related to the 
attitudes of elder users towards new technologies and their 
intention to use such technologies are not thoroughly 
investigated in the literature.  
Elder people experience a decline in many characteristics 
that may prevent them from using effectively emerging 
technologies like Virtual (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) 
that rely on the activation of numerous senses. Indicatively 
elder people may face a) reduced mobility, due to arthritis, 
less muscle strength, and Parkinson, [3] b) reduced eyesight 
due to several age-related eye diseases such as cataract, 
macular degeneration, presbyopia, etc., [4] c) hearing loss 
that is usually accompanied with inability to perceive high 
frequencies or low volume sounds [5] and d) cognitive 
declines such as dementia [6].  
The aim of our work is to determine, the factors that 
facilitate the use of emerging technologies by elder users, in 
order to empower the use of such technologies by the elderly 
through the design of VR / AR applications that suit the 
needs of elder users. The ultimate aim of this effort is to 
develop contemporary emerging technology applications that 
provide high levels of user experience to elderly users. 
Towards this end, we run a series of evaluations to determine 
the factors that influence the use of emerging technologies 
by older users. The design of the experiment is based on a 
three-stage hierarchical structure where in each step the 
participants are exposed to more technologically intensive 
interaction styles. Initially, at Stage 1 of the experiment, the 
general issues related to the use of the basic technology in 
conjunction the use of a common smartphone medical dose 
management application are explored. This experiment is 
mainly aimed at confirming the findings of other studies [7], 
i.e., to define the most important features that motivate users 
to utilize technological solutions provided by standard 
smartphone applications. During Stage 2 of the evaluation, 
we investigate the reactions of older people towards the use 
of more specialized application that goes beyond the 
standard use of a smartphone through the need to engage in a 
more technologically demanding interaction using the 
smartphone camera, like in the case of augmented reality 
applications. Stage 3 of the experiments involves the 
exposure of volunteers from the target group to using a 
Virtual Reality application with a dedicated VR headset. 
This experiment exposes the volunteers to new ways of 
interacting with 3D environments, enabling the derivation of 
conclusions related to the reactions/concerns of the target 
group towards using emerging technologies in the form of 
Virtual Reality.  
Our study revealed, that elder people are willing to use 
advanced technologies in the form of AR and VR, provided 
that the requirements of useful functionality, usability and 
design are met. The results of this study are important for 
designers and developers of VR/AR applications for the 
elderly, who need to address the issues indicated by the 
target group, to allow them to use regularly such 
applications. In the remainder of the paper, we present a 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

literature review on the topics of VR and AR applications for 
the elderly, followed by a description of the experimental 
evaluation. In Section IV a discussion, plans for future work 
and concluding comments are presented. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Technology has the potential to enhance the lives of older 
adults by improving their safety, security, and self-
confidence in everyday life. However, too often older adults’ 
abilities and limitations are not reflected in the design of 
current and future technologies. Although older adults 
experience specific limitations as they age, the word old does 
not necessarily identify people who are disabled or sick. 
Many people over the age of 65 are reportedly in good health 
[8]. There is a generally supported view of the interest of 
keeping older adults in sync with the latest technological 
developments. As well as joining with family and friends, 
technology can support older adults in improving social 
support [9], increasing access to medical knowledge [10], 
enabling them to engage as citizens in decision-making 
processes, and allow them to keep fit using dedicated fitness 
apps [11]. In many studies, the importance of using new 
technologies by elderly is considered. 
Levy et al., [12] investigate how virtual reality related to 
serious games can be used to handle the pathological phobia 
of falling. Specifically, the fear of falling is the continuing 
fear of falling that cannot be explained by physical 
examination. In their experiment, 16 participants were 
randomly selected from either a treatment group or a waiting 
list, and the duration of the virtual reality therapy with 
serious games consisted of 12 weekly sessions. The mean 
age for the treatment group was 72 years and for the control 
group was 69 years. Participants’ ratings of fear of falling 
were improved after treatment, leading to a significant 
difference between the two groups. As they mention, serious 
games-based virtual reality exposure therapy can be used to 
treat the fear of falling, though further studies are needed to 
confirm its effectiveness and determine its underlying 
mechanism.  
Optale et al., [13] tested the efficacy of a program of VR 
Memory Training (VRMT) in improving the cognitive 
functioning of elderly adults with memory impairment. For 
the experiment, they assigned 36 elderly residents of a rest 
care facility with middle age the 80 years old. The 
experimental group experienced six months of VR Memory 
Training that involved auditory stimulation and VR activities 
in path finding while the control group experienced 
equivalent face-to-face training sessions using music 
therapy. The results indicate that the participants who 
received 
the 
VR 
Memory 
Training 
presented 
an 
improvement of general cognitive functioning and oral 
memory after the initial training period. The greatest results 
were observed in long-term memory, in keeping with the 
cognitive abilities stimulated by the auditory session of the 
VR Memory Training. The improvements in executive 
function capabilities, in contrast, were small and did not 
perform corrections for the reduced depression scores of the 
experimental group participants.  
Lera et al., [14] rely on a human robot interaction 
architecture called MYRA, to build a system for elderly 
support and medical dose control that includes augmented 
reality to improve the interaction with the robot. Through 
their prototype, it is possible for the users to follow simple 
medical guidelines related to everyday pill dose, based on 
help provided once a pillbox is presented to the robot or to a 
camera. As they mention the elderly has the interaction with 
the robot and the pillbox and with the use of AR, the task 
could be complete. To the other side, somebody can control 
the robot and offer real-time assistance to the elderly, using 
the camera speakers and phone mounted onboard. The 
research concluded that the use of AR had indeed positive 
impacts on the users.  
Peleg-Adler et al., 11] empirically investigate the 
feasibility of AR technology for older adults. In particular, 
they tested how older adults interact and use AR for a path 
plan task, considering the deficits and the constraints to their 
performance as compared to young adults. Both older and 
younger participants made a route plan task using both a see-
through handheld AR application and a regular (non-AR) 
phone application. The estimated task completion time, error 
rate, device movements, and subjective impressions were 
recorded. These measures were used to evaluate the 
performance, learning, and user experience of participants 
when using an AR interface. Forty-four participants were 
selected from two age groups. The first group consisted of 22 
community-dwelling, healthy adults over the age of 65, and 
the second group consisted of 22 younger people of the age 
of 25–40 mostly students from a large research-intensive 
university. It is important to mention that both groups 
reported daily use of a mobile device, with the younger 
group reporting a higher level of the smartphone experience. 
According to the results, older adults performed slower than 
younger adults in both interfaces. This is expected, as it is 
well known that perceptual and cognitive skills decline over 
age. This indicates that the effect of AR was similar for both 
age groups; the group’s gains in speed and losses inaccuracy 
were of the same magnitude when using the AR in 
comparison to the non-AR application. This shows that 
although AR was unfamiliar to the older participants, their 
performance differences (compared to the non-AR) were 
similar to the younger adults. Thus, it suggests that AR 
impacts the performance of older adults in a similar way it 
impacts the younger population.  
Gao et al., [15] mention that virtual reality technology is 
a tool that can provide effective treatment for the elderly by 
applying non-immersive virtual reality to the hallway or 
immersing a patient in a realistic environment, such as a city 
or park with a head-mounted display or inside a CAVE. In 
this way physical and occupational therapy sessions can be 
improved, thereby increasing the chance of successful 
adaptation to the real world. An example of an experiment 
was when participants found that exercising on a stationary 
bike with VR that immersed them in nature was much more 
enjoyable than traditional cycling without VR. Since VR was 
an interesting activity for older adults, this could lead to 
better compliance with a rehabilitation program, which in 
turn can lead to better outcomes for patients’ health. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
The aim of the evaluation is to investigate if the elderly 
are interested and willing to use AR and VR technologies, 
and what are the factors that will facilitate the regular use of 
AR and VR technologies by elder users. Our motivation for 
this research is to give some really useful tools that will 
benefit the elderly during periods of social isolation. The 
design of the experiment is based on a three-stage 
hierarchical structure where in each step the participants are 
exposed to more technologically intensive interaction styles. 
Stage 1 of the evaluation, concerns a collection and analysis 
of user reviews in relation to a health-related application that 
is popular among elder users. Through the specific 
application that they use in their daily life, the real needs that 
arise from the reviews are defined. Stage 2 of the evaluation 
that was carried out based on the use of a custom-made 
pharmaceutical management application, the goal was to 
expose users to a more technological demanding interface 
that requires the use of the camera as a means of obtaining 
comprehensive information about different medicines. Stage 
3 of the evaluation involves the use a Virtual Reality 
application using a dedicated VR headset. Since this 
experiment involves the use of VR equipment for the first 
time for the majority of the users, the experiment included 
the necessary steps of introducing this type of technology to 
the volunteers. A more detailed description of the 
experiments carried out is described hereunder. 
A. Stage 1: User evaluation of a Smartphone application 
a) Aim: The aim of this study is to determine the most 
important design-related factors that motivate the target 
group to use a basic form of technological application in the 
form of a smartphone application. For the experiment, the 
free commercial application Pill Reminder and Medication 
Tracker by Medisafe [16] have been selected for evaluation. 
The application helps users to receive their medicines 
correctly so that they don’t miss doses or receive double 
dosing by accident. To achieve the goal of this study a large 
number of user reviews are analyzed, in an effort to deduct 
conclusions related to the most important issues that attract 
users towards using this particular application.  
b) Experimental Set-up: For the analysis of the results, 
1000 user reviews were collected using the software Appbot 
that allows the collection of user reviews for an application 
and automatically categorizes customer feedback by theme 
with topics and tags. Among the reviews collected 166 
reviews were not used in the analysis because they did not 
contain any information related to the parameters under 
investigation. All reviews were divided into the negative 
reviews (104 reviews rated with 1-2 stars indicating 
dissatisfied users) and positive reviews (654 reviews rated 
with 4-5 stars indicating satisfied users). In addition, user 
reviews were divided into the ones where users declared that 
they have a medical condition (116 users) and the ones 
where users do not state that they have a medical condition. 
Although, we did not have any data on the age of the users, it 
is reasonable to assume that most users who indicated a 
medical condition involve older people who are receiving 
medication due to some medical condition. 
c) Results: User review analysis was carried out by 
initially filtering the reviews based on keyword analysis 
followed by content-based analysis in order to classify the 
reviews into the ones referring to functionality, usability, 
interface design, cost, number of existing users and user 
reviews (see Fig.1). Overall functionality, usability and 
interface design are determined as the most important factors 
for users, whereas issues like cost, number of existing users 
and user reviews do not seem to be important issues in all 
user reviews considered.  
d) Discussion: The results indicate that to attract users to 
use an application the most important factors are the actual 
usefulness of the application (functionality), the usability, 
and the interface design. Also, there was no noticeable 
difference in these observations between the groups of 
people with or without health issues. 
B.  Stage 2: Evaluation of a pilot application that requires 
camera-based interaction 
a) Aim: The experiment in Stage 1 reconfirmed the need 
to provide functionality and usability to attract the target 
population to using an application. In Stage 2, we explore 
the reactions of elder people towards the use of applications 
with a more technologically enhanced interaction style. 
More specifically, the aim of this experiment is to 
investigate the reaction of the target group in relation to a 
new technology and whether they are willing to use such 
technologies. More specifically the application under 
evaluation offers more advance capabilities than a simple 
smartphone application since it incorporates the use of the 
camera and audio-visual feedback.  
b) Description: This experiment is based on the 
Easypharm application (see Fig.2), an application designed 
by Anastasiadou [17] as a means of providing an easy to use 
 
Fig. 1. Top: Results of all user reviews and the users with a medical 
condition, Bottom: Results of user reviews of dissatisfied users who rated 
the application with 1 or 2 stars and satisfied users who rated the application 
with 4 or 5 stars. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and universally acceptable application for managing 
medicine administration. Among other features, the 
Easypharm application aims to help the user, who may have 
reduced vision, by directly identifying, by scanning a QR 
code, the necessary information that is available on 
medicine packages.  
c) Experimental Set-up: Fifteen adults (6 male, 9 female) 
aged 50-70 years (mean 57 years) participated in the 
experiment. The selection of the target group was done 
based on the typical target group expected to use 
pharmaceutical 
applications. 
Each 
volunteer 
who 
participated in the experiments was an experienced 
smartphone user who received a pharmaceutical treatment at 
some stage in his/her life. Both aforementioned factors are 
important to safeguard that participants could evaluate 
objectively the pharmaceutical management application. All 
volunteers were asked to complete a series of actions in 
relation to specific tasks. Through the process, results were 
obtained through observation of the actions of the 
participants while they were completing the preset tasks. At 
the end of the process, the participants completed a 
questionnaire that contained 11 questions (see Table I) and 
attended an interview where they were asked to answer 
questions related to their experience.  
d) Results: According to the results, 33% of users would 
like to use the application in their daily lives. In relation to 
the usefulness of the application only 7% of users disagreed 
with the question stating that the application is designed to 
meet the needs of users. Based on the results of question 11 
it is derived that the most important factors that make users 
use the application are the functionality, usability, and  
interface design of the application. In contrast, volunteers 
did not consider the cost of an application or the user’s 
reviews as an important factor in selecting the application. 
With the above data we conclude that the target group that 
was evaluated is willing and would be interested to learn 
more and use on daily basis more advanced applications. As 
part of the analysis of the results, the fifteen volunteers were 
divided into two groups where the first group (with six 
volunteers) contains the ones who had a severe medical 
problem and had to use a pharmaceutical management 
application whereas the second group contains the 
volunteers with no serious medical problems. A comparison 
of the responses of volunteers between the two groups 
indicates no significant differences between the responses 
from each group were detected. 
e) Discussion: Through the monitoring during the 
evaluation, it was observed that most users were able to 
complete the script process. Only a small section of users 
was unable to locate some buttons on the screen. It was 
obvious that people over the age of 65 are less familiar with 
new applications and need more time to adapt to new 
interfaces. When assessing the application, participants tried 
to adapt directly to the application environment to quickly 
identify the commands they were asked, although it was not 
 
Fig. 2. Interface design of Easypharm application. 
 
TABLE I. INDICATIVE QUESTIONS USED DURING THE 
EVALUATION 
 
 
A* 
N* 
D* 
Q1. The overall response to the application was 
satisfactory. 
33% 
60% 
7% 
Q2. It was difficult to read the characters on the 
screen. 
- 
13% 
87% 
Q3. The application information organization was 
clear. 
33% 
60% 
7% 
Q4. The text in the application was readable. 
33% 
53% 
14% 
Q5. It was easy to remember the information 
displayed on the screen. 
33% 
60% 
7% 
Q6. Implementing actions in the application was 
complex. 
7% 
7% 
86% 
Q7. The application was designed to compete 
with the needs of users 
33% 
60% 
7% 
Q8. I was able to quickly complete the tasks and 
scripts using the application. 
33% 
53% 
14% 
Q9. The information contained in the application 
is clear. 
33% 
60% 
7% 
Q10. I would like to use the application in my 
everyday life. 
33% 
53% 
14% 
Q11. Which parameters will make you use this 
type of app: functionality, usability, design, cost, 
existing users, and reviews. 
- 
- 
- 
*A=Agree, N= Neutral, D = Disagree 
 
easy for everyone.In conclusion, it was observed that users 
are willing to use a more technologically intensive 
application as long as the factors of functionality, usability, 
and interface design are covered.  
C. Stage 3: valuation of the use of a virtual reality 
application by the elderly 
a) Aim: The results of the experiments in Stage 1 and 2 
show that if a target population is presented with an 
application with useful functionality and friendly interface, 
they are willing to use the application, even if the 
application demands more dedicated interaction styles. The 
experiment in Stage 3 aims to investigate whether these 
observations are still valid for a completely new type of 
applications, in the form of Virtual Reality. More 
specifically, the aim of the experiment was to test the 
reactions of elderly towards the use of a virtual reality 
application.   
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

b) Experimental Set-up: Ten participants aged between 
50 to 70 years participated in the experiment (see Fig.3) 
which was completed using an Oculus Go running the 
application ”First Aid Training” [18]. For the purposes of 
the experiment, users were asked to complete a series of 
operations in order to obtain results related to the reactions 
of the volunteers towards the use of a virtual reality 
application.During the process, volunteers completed a pre-
experiment questionnaire that contained questions about 
their attitude towards Virtual Reality. To get acquainted 
with using a virtual reality interface, all volunteers had the 
chance to use for a few minutes a game that required them 
to move in a virtual space and interact with virtual objects. 
During the actual experiment users used the ”First Aid 
Training” application according to the voice instructions 
given to them by the experiment administrator, and finally 
they were asked to answer a post-experiment questionnaire. 
Initially the instructions were given so that for any reason 
the user felt unwell to stop the process immediately. 
Furthermore, in order to prevent possible accidents, the 
evaluation was done with the users sitting.  
c) Results: Participants were 50% women and 50% men 
with a mean age of 62 years. 50% of the participants were 
suffering from some disease while only 30% had used 
virtual reality applications again. The experiment was 
performed to get an inside of the factors that prevent 
members of the target group to use advanced technology. It 
was found that a large percentage of the participants used 
virtual reality for the first time and yet would like to practice 
using it to learn about health issues. Users’ responses before 
and after (see Table II) using the virtual reality app indicate 
that several users have changed their view on whether 
virtual reality is useful for seniors after they used the VR 
application. Before running the experiment only 20% 
considered that VR can be useful for older people but this 
rate increased to 50% after the exposure to the VR 
application (see questions B5 and C8 in Table II). A 
percentage of 30% initially disagreed on whether is it useful 
to use virtual reality to practice on health issues, while after 
the use of the VR application, this figure dropped to 10% 
(see questions B4 and C7 in Table II). Finally, users were 
asked to answer what kind of applications they would be 
interested in using virtual reality applications and the most 
popular answers were around social platforms, relaxing, 
news, and education. These results show that initially, users 
out of ignorance were negative towards using such 
technologies in everyday life, but after they had the chance 
to be introduced to VR technology it was evident that they 
are willing to incorporate VR in their everyday activities. It 
was also noticed that the cost of virtual reality equipment is 
an issue that concerns them so that they can make daily use 
of the application, while they seem to be quite satisfied with 
the interface design as 70% would not like a change in the 
interaction style.  
 
Fig. 3. Picture captured during the interaction with the virtual reality 
environment and the use of Oculus Go VR Headset. 
 
TABLE II. MAIN QUESTIONS FROM THE QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
Before using virtual reality 
A*  
N*  
D* 
B1. I believe that VR applications are intended 
for entertainment. 
90%  
-  
10% 
B2. I believe that using VR can improve my 
daily life. 
30%  
10%  
60% 
B3. I believe that I can integrate the use of VR 
in my daily routine. 
10%  
10%  
80% 
B4. I would like to use the VR to practice on 
health issues. 
60%  
10%  
30% 
B5. I think the VR is useful for older people. 
20%  
40% 
40% 
After using virtual reality 
A*  
N*  
D* 
C1. It was easy for me to navigate the VR area. 
60%  
30%  
 10% 
C2. My experience with the VR was enjoyable. 
90%  
10%  
- 
C3. I believe that I have learned about the 
resuscitation position. 
60%  
30%  
10% 
C4. The experience in the VR makes me dizzy. 
40%  
10%  
50% 
C5. I had a hard time figuring out what to do. 
60%  
10%  
30% 
C6. I managed to complete the process. 
90%  
-  
10% 
C7. I would like to use the VR to practice 
on health issues. 
70%  
20%  
10% 
C8. I think the VR is useful for older people. 
50%  
30%  
20% 
*A=Agree, N= Neutral, D = Disagree 
 
d) Conclusion: Based on the results from the 
experiment, we concluded that before getting exposed to the 
VR application, the target group believed, due to ignorance, 
that VR was mainly for fun. After using the application, 
they thought it was useful for their own needs and they see 
the possibilities it offers to them. Also, users indicate that 
they are willing to use such technologies and although it 
was new for them did not find particular difficulties in using 
the application with the interface. A new parameter that was 
included in Experiment 3 and did not exist in the other 
experiments, was the cost as a high-quality VR experience 
requires the purchase of equipment to use virtual reality and 
this could be an obstacle for the elderly, in adopting this 
technology. Given the possibility of using cardboard-based 
VR systems, the issue of cost can be partially addressed. 
Finally, it was observed that functionality is a main factor 
that attracts users to use VR applications, so particular 
emphasis should be placed on the development of useful 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

applications. The limitations of our experiments are the 
small sample of users who participated in the experiments 
that was mainly attributed to the difficulty of attracting 
volunteers during the pandemic. Due to the same reason, it 
was not possible to use the same group of volunteers for all 
phases of the experiment. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
A three-stage experimental evaluation aiming to 
investigate if the elderly use advanced technologies, if they 
are interested and willing to use them, and lastly the factors 
that influence users in terms of using new technology for 
their daily lives was presented. Also, the aim was to increase 
the accessibility of emerging technologies and user 
satisfaction. Based on the results, we conclude that older 
people are not put off by the prospect of using more 
technologically advanced technologies as long as the 
requirements of functionality, usability and design are met.  
On top of that, in the case of the need of using dedicated 
equipment, the issue of the cost is also introduced as an 
important factor. Furthermore, in the case of new 
technologies, it is important to provide training, as this will 
allow elder people to realize the full; potential offered by 
emerging technologies. Covering these needs of the users, 
then they can use VR and AR applications on a daily basis 
with satisfaction. Also in this case, functionality and 
usability are the key points that the user needs to meet his 
needs. In addition, with a specific audience, the desire to use 
such technologies and learn more information on how to 
integrate them into their daily lives has been observed. 
Results indicate the main factors to be considered for 
developing successful VR/AR applications. These results 
will be utilized for fulfilling our goal of designing VR and 
AR applications to support the elderly during periods of 
social isolation.  
This research, aims to study more generally the use of 
technologies in the elderly to see the rationale behind the use 
of technologies and not as targeted as the above examples. 
An additional goal is to study how really useful and 
beneficial it is to use such technologies in the elderly so that 
they do not have any hesitation to use them in real life. 
Based on the outcome of our experiments, in the future we 
plan to develop a virtual reality application where it will 
create in the user the feeling of joy and nostalgia at the same 
time, in a way that is deemed to raise interest among older 
users. Also, in the future we plan to run evaluation 
experiments with more users in order to reinforce the validity 
to the results. According to the needs of the users, we will try 
to create new applications and implicate the target audience 
at each stage of the design in order to make sure that we 
meet their requirements and needs. The implication of 
members from the target group in the design process will 
guarantee that the requirements of functionality and usability 
will be met. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Tomaka, S. Thompson, and R. Palacios, “The relation of 
social isolation, loneliness, and social support to disease 
outcomes among the elderly.” Journal of aging and health, 
18(3), pp. 359-384, 2006. 
[2] M. P. Cazorla, L. M. Sanju´an, M. V Fiel and J. L. H. Calvet, 
“Accessibility and Augmented Reality into Heritage Site 
Interpretation.” ACHI: The Sixth International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2013. 
[3] R. Wichert and H. Klausing, “Ambient Assisted Living: 6. 
AALKongress”, Berlin, Germany, January pp. 22.-23., 
Springer Science Business Media, 2013. 
[4] C. Zavlanou and A. Lanitis, “An age simulated virtual 
environment for improving elderly wellbeing.” In XIV 
Mediterranean Conference on Medical and Biological 
Engineering and Computing 2016, pp. 891-896. Springer, 
Cham, 2016. 
[5] V. G. Payne and L. D. Isaacs, “Human motor development: A 
lifespan approach.” ,Routledge, 2017. 
[6] C. M. Borelli, D. Grennan, and C. C. Muth, “Causes of 
Memory Loss in Elderly Persons.” Jama, 323(5), pp. 486-486, 
2020. 
[7] S. Carmien and A. G. Manzanares, “Elders using 
smartphones–a set of research based heuristic guidelines for 
designers.” In International conference on universal access in 
human-computer interaction pp. 26- 37. Springer, Cham, 
2014. 
[8] W. A. Rogers, A. J. Stronge and A. D. Fisk,”Technology and 
aging.” Reviews of human factors and ergonomics, 1(1), pp. 
130-171, 2005.  
[9] R. I. Garcia-Betances, V. Jim´enez-Mixco, M. T. Arredondo 
and M. F. Cabrera-Umpi´errez, “Using virtual reality for 
cognitive training of the elderly.” American Journal of 
Alzheimer’s Disease Other Dementias®, 30(1), pp. 49-54, 
2015.  
[10] F. Kamieth et al. “Exploring the potential of virtual reality for 
the elderly and people with disabilities.” INTECH Open 
Access Publisher, 2010. 
[11] R. Peleg-Adler, J. Lanir, and M. Korman, “The effects of 
aging on the use of handheld augmented reality in a route 
planning task.” Computers in Human Behavior, 81, pp. 52-62, 
2018. 
[12] F. Levy et al. “Fear of falling: efficacy of virtual reality 
associated 
with 
serious 
games 
in 
elderly 
people.” 
Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment, 12, p. 877, 2016. 
[13] G. Optale et al. “Controlling memory impairment in elderly 
adults using virtual reality memory training: a randomized 
controlled pilot study.” Neurorehabilitation and neural repair, 
24(4), pp. 348-357, 2010 
[14] F. J. Lera, V. Rodrıguez, C. Rodrıguez, and V. Matellan, 
“Augmented reality in robotic assistance for the elderly.” In 
International Technology Robotics Applications, pp. 3-11, 
Springer, Cham, 2014. 
[15] Z. Gao, J. E. Lee, D. J. McDonough, and C. Albers, ”Virtual 
reality exercise as a coping strategy for health and wellness 
promotion in older adults during the COVID-19 pandemic.”, 
2020.  
[16] Medisafe, 
2021, 
“Medisafe.” 
URL: 
https://www.medisafeapp.com/ [retrieved: May, 2021]. 
[17] Z. Anastasiadou, “Development of interactive application for 
understanding information in medicinal packaging.” Cyprus 
University of Technology, 2016, unpublished. 
[18] Dual Good Health Limited, 2019, “DualGood.” URL: 
https://www.dualgoodhealth.com/healthcare [retrieved: May, 
2021]. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

