The COSMO@Home Application – Iterative Development and Implementation of 
the Learning Goals 
 
Marie Sjölinder, Olov Ståhl, Erik Einebrant, László 
Sall Vesselényi, Niels Stor Swinkels 
RISE 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: marie.sjolinder@ri.se, olov.stahl@ri.se, 
erik.einebrant@ri.se, laszlo.sall.vesselenyi@ri.se, 
niels.stor.swinkels@ri.se 
 
Anas Abdelrazeq, Samira Khodaei Dolouei, Kathrin 
Hohlbaum 
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
e-mail: Anas.Abdelrazeq@ima.rwth-aachen.de, 
samira.khodaei@ima.rwth-aachen.de, 
Kathrin.Hohlbaum@ima.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
 
Barbara Weyn, Marjolein Verly, Sam Geuens, Jessia 
Nijs, Marlies Treunen 
KU Leuven, UZ Leuven 
Leuven, Belgium 
e-mail: barbara.weyn@kuleuven.be, 
marjolein.verly@kuleuven.be, sam.geuens@uzleuven.be, 
jessica.nijs@uzleuven.be, marlies.treunen@kuleuven.be 
Sanne Nauts, Privender Saini, Ozgur Tasar, Annerieke 
Heuvelink 
Philips 
Eindhoven, Netherlands 
e-mail: sanne.nauts@philips.com, 
privender.saini@philips.com, ozgur.tasar@philips.com, 
annerieke.heuvelink@philips.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—This work describes the design journey in the 
development of an edutainment application for children. The 
aim of the application was to prepare children for an MRI scan. 
The COSMO@Home mobile application is based on a number 
of learning goals that are conveyed by a set of mini-games aimed 
at teaching and preparing children for the magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scanning procedure. Each mini-game addresses 
one or more of the learning goals identified by the project as 
being important to prepare children for the procedure. The 
learning goals were: 1) Learn about the MRI procedure, 2) 
Familiarization with MRI sounds, 3) Familiarization with the 
size of the MRI scanner, 4) Practice the timings, 5) Practice lying 
still, 6) Learn about accessories such as earplugs and head coil, 
and 7) Understand that metal is not allowed in the MRI room. 
During the iterative development, initial tests to explore the 
general concept were conducted with children without a 
planned MRI scan and outside the hospital. In a second phase, 
more complete versions of the prototype were tested with 
children at the hospital. During the last phase, the application 
was tested in a real context with children in their homes. The 
main outcome of the iterative development and the testing was 
an application that, overall, seemed to convey the learning goals. 
However, the tests also revealed challenges in addressing the 
most important learning goal of lying still. 
Keywords-design 
for 
children; 
educational 
software; 
gamification; game design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This work describes the design journey in the development 
of an edutainment application for children. The aim of the 
application was to prepare children for an MRI scan. The 
COSMO@Home mobile application is based on a number of 
learning goals that aim to teach and prepare children for the 
MRI scanning procedure. The application consists of a 
number of mini-games that provide the child with general 
information about the MRI procedure and about the MRI 
scanner. In the mini-games, the child receives information 
about what is allowed and not allowed during the procedure 
and is also able to practice some of the important things to 
remember. Each mini-game addresses one or several learning 
goals that were identified, in expert workshops, as being 
important to prepare children for the procedure. The learning 
goals were: 1) Learn about the MRI procedure, 2) 
Familiarization with MRI sounds, 3) Familiarization with the 
size of the MRI scanner, 4) Practice the timings, 5) Practice 
lying still, 6) Learn about accessories, such as earplugs and 
head coil, and 7) Understand that metal is not allowed in the 
MRI room. 
The aim of this paper is to describe the design journey of 
developing a set of mini-games that successfully contribute to 
children achieving the learning goals. Design targeting 
children is briefly described in Section 2, and the developed 
application is presented in Section 3. Sections 4, 5 and 6 
present the user tests that were conducted in the different 
stages of the iterative development. The paper ends with a 
discussion and conclusions (Section 7) about the design 
process towards incorporating the learning goals in the mini-
games and in the application. 
II. 
DESIGNING FOR CHILDREN 
Researchers have argued that games are a unique way to 
engage and motivate people in learning and education [1][2]. 
There are several advantages of using games for learning. 
Because a game can be used to model parts of the real world, 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

it makes it possible for people to play around with and visit an 
abstract reality of a real-life setting or place, but in a simplified 
form [3]. A significant motivation for using educational 
games in learning is the engagement and joy they bring to the 
user [4]. As in learning, games also use typical techniques that 
can be found in educational psychology. Techniques such as 
rewards, feedback, and encouragement to collaborate are 
common practices for teachers as well as typical elements of 
a game. What gamification adds to learning is, according to 
Kapp [3], another layer of interest that both engages and 
motivates the player to learn. 
Applications aiming at educating and preparing children 
require consideration of several design aspects. When 
designing educational games, both motivation to use and 
achievement of intended learning goals are important aspects. 
Guidelines regarding games, educational games, and child–
computer interaction are all well-documented areas [5]-[9]. 
Winn [6] stated that the intended learning goals should be 
central and clearly set before the development of a game is 
started. Setting these goals can then help the designer 
throughout the development phase as they provide a practical 
way of measuring the intended learning outcome. Clear goals 
and rules within the game are important for the player, and 
they are also important for creating motivation [9]. If the 
player does not know what to do or if the goals of the game 
are unclear, it creates frustration and becomes unmotivating. 
Feedback is another important tool for learning through 
games and it can optimize learning by directly giving the 
player tips and tricks with respect to the performance and 
actions within the game [9]. Rewards are typical components 
of games and are a good way of encouraging and motivating 
the player [4][7][10]. 
With respect to instructions, it has been suggested that in-
app tutorials should be avoided, since there is a tendency for 
children to not read or remember instructions given in this 
way. A better solution is to provide guidance through which 
the user can be active [7]. Further, Chiasson and Gutwin [10] 
suggest that the interface should be intuitive enough to be 
used without instructions, or that child users are given 
guidance until the intended task is understood [10]. An 
alternative to written text and instructions is graphical 
metaphors and interfaces in which minimal use of text is 
required, especially for the youngest users. Giving 
instructions in speech with corresponding pictures and 
animations can also help the users to both remember and 
understand the instructions [10]. 
In the process of selecting hardware, Chiasson and 
Gutwin [10] found that touchscreen devices rather than 
computers are better and more appropriate tools for children. 
Yet while touchscreen devices are a good choice for child 
users, there are limitations to the interaction in terms of the 
child’s motor skills. 
Based on existing design recommendations and on 
adaptations towards the specific context, the application in 
the project was developed in an iterative way. 
III. 
THE COSMO@HOME APPLICATION 
A novel preparation protocol called COSMO has been 
developed to help enable successful MR scans to be conducted 
on children without the use of sedation. COSMO is designed 
to achieve MRI examinations with awake children as young 
as four years of age in a time- and resource-efficient manner 
without lengthy preparation procedures or repeated hospital 
visits. The children are prepared by immersing them in an 
imaginative, child-friendly and engaging story, which is told 
and performed by trained hospital staff. The aim of the 
COSMO@Home project is to scale up the COSMO protocol 
by creating a digital COSMO tool that can be used by children 
and parents to prepare for the scanning sessions at home. Such 
a tool will limit the need for dedicated staff members and, as 
such, is far more scalable and cost-effective than the current 
approach. 
The application consists of a framework or a starting page 
where different mini-games and other functionalities can be 
accessed. The app is built around a space theme, and the 
players are told they need to train to become an astronaut who 
can fly to space in a rocket. As part of their training, they will 
need to complete space missions, which means they need to 
build a rocket and fly it to a distant planet. When they return 
to Earth, they need to start training for their next space 
mission. This training is carried out by playing mini-games. 
Each mini-game is designed to teach the player something 
about the MRI procedure. The idea is that while training to 
become an astronaut, they will at the same time learn different 
aspects of MRI.  
The starting page or the “home page” of the application is 
the space campus from which six mini-games can be reached 
(Figure 1). The app includes four 3D games: the Memory 
game, the Metal game, the Scanning game and the Balance 
game, and two augmented reality (AR, a real-world 
environment that has been enhanced by computer-generated 
perceptual information) games: the AR Comparison game and 
the AR Scaling game. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The space campus with game and activity buildings. 
The user can collect rocket parts in each game, and when 
all games have been completed one time, the player has 
gathered all the rocket parts and can go to the launchpad and 
put together a rocket. When this has been done, the player sets 
off for space. During the space journey, there is a space game 
in which the player can collect stars. After the space game, the 
player reaches a planet and meets an alien. The player hands 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

over a gift to the alien, and in return gets a mystery item that 
can be scanned once back at the space campus. There are five 
space missions that the player needs to complete in order to 
become a full-fledged astronaut, and in each one they will visit 
a different planet and meet a different alien. After completing 
these five missions, it is possible to continue playing and fly 
to space, but when doing so the existing planets will be 
revisited. The training and space mission loop is illustrated by 
Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The game play loop, consisting of mini-games and space 
missions. 
Space campus and buddy character: The space campus, 
or “Home page,” consists of a number of buildings. Each 
building represents an activity or mini-game that the player 
can engage in. When the player clicks on a building, the 
camera zooms in and the application then switches to a view 
from inside the building, where the game or activity starts. The 
player is accompanied by their buddy character, Ollie. Ollie 
speaks to the children via voiceover audio, explaining to them 
all they need to know about their training to become an 
astronaut and giving them feedback and encouragement when 
they are playing games or participating in other activities. 
Ollie is a fully animated 3D character, and the children will 
see him move around in the scenes, making various kinds of 
gestures such as waving, pointing, and cheering 
Memory game: The aim of the Memory game is to 
convey knowledge about the sound of the MRI scanner. The 
player sees a board with a number of cards. When they click 
on a card, it opens and plays an MRI sound and provides an 
animation of that sound. The goal for the player is to find cards 
with matching sounds, which are then removed from the board 
until the entire board is eventually cleared. The number of the 
cards increases with each higher level. 
Metal game: The aim of the Metal game is to teach the 
player that metal objects are not allowed in the MRI room. In 
the game, a set of objects are moving around and the player 
should remove (click on) the ones that are made of metal. 
While the game is running, the player sees Ollie walking 
slowly towards the MRI room, and the goal is to remove all 
metal objects before he gets there. If Ollie reaches the MRI 
room before all the metal objects have been removed, the 
round fails and the player needs to try again. At each level, the 
number of objects and the speed of Ollie and the moving 
objects increase. 
Scanning game: The aim of the Scanning game is to 
increase the player’s understanding of the MRI procedure and 
of the duration of a scan session, which can be long. The 
player places “mystery objects” in the scanner and waits for 
them to be scanned. While scanning, the player can see a scan 
image being revealed, and once the scan is complete, they 
need to guess the true identity of the mystery object. The game 
uses scanned images of real fruits, and afterwards, the player 
is presented with a selection of fruits and they need to identify 
the one that matches the MRI image. 
Balance game: The aims of the Balance game are to 
increase understanding of the MRI procedure, and learn about 
accessories (different types of coils), as well as to provide 
information about the need to lie still and to practice lying still. 
The child selects a coil and then Ollie’s scan starts. During the 
scan, the player needs to hold the phone still; otherwise, the 
phone starts to vibrate and the scan image starts becoming 
distorted. After the scan, the resulting scan image is added to 
the adventure journal, where the player can look at it again 
later. 
AR Comparison game: The aim of the AR Comparison 
game is to help children understand the size of an MRI scanner 
by asking them to guess which of two visible objects (an MRI 
scanner and a random object) is bigger. AR technology is used 
to make the objects appear in 3D in the physical room. The 
AR tracking is based on a marker that needs to be placed on a 
flat surface, for example a table. The child can then scan the 
marker and the game starts. There are several rounds of 
comparing the MRI scanner to objects such as a cake, a house 
or even fantastical objects such as a T-Rex. The objects appear 
from a magical hat that needs to be pressed. The child receives 
stars after completing each comparison. 
AR Scaling game: The aim of the AR Scaling game is to 
help children understand the size of an MRI scanner. 
Additionally, an extended learning goal is introduced in order 
to allow the discovery of different parts of the MRI scanner. 
The AR technology is used in order to make the MRI scanner 
appear in full 3D size in the room. After placing the marker 
on the floor, the MRI scanner appears in a small size. With 
plus and minus buttons, the children can increase or decrease 
the size of the MRI scanner. Once the right size is found, the 
game proceeds to the extended learning goal, where the 
children have to discover different question marks on the MRI 
scanner and also can collect stickers. 
During development of the prototype, feedback was 
gathered iteratively in the different stages through 
participatory observation of professionals and through 
questionnaires. In the first phase, the concept of a few mini-
games was tested with 15 children (6 in Sweden and 9 in 
Germany) outside the hospital. In the second phase, a more 
mature version was tested with 17 children at the University 
Hospitals Leuven, although still under supervision of the 
investigators. In the third phase, the application was tested 
with 13 children using the application independently at home. 
In total, 45 children participated in the tests during the iterative 
development of the application. The different phases are 
shown in Table 1. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT USER TESTS 
Location 
Date 
Aim 
Participants 
Initial tests – concept and functionalities 
RISE 
Sweden 
August - 
September 
2019 
Get a first 
impression of how 
the app was 
perceived by 
children of 
different ages. 
6 children, 
3-15 years 
old 
RWTH, 
Germany 
October 
2019 
Feedback on first 
mini-games and 
on the use of AR. 
9 children, 
6-9 years 
old 
Tests at the hospital 
KU 
Leuven, 
Belgium 
November 
2019 
Feedback on 
improved version 
of the prototype 
with further 
features. How the 
learning goals 
were conveyed. 
9 children, 
4-10 years 
old 
KU 
Leuven, 
Belgium 
April/May 
2020 
Feedback on 
improved version 
of the prototype, 
entire app with all 
the mini-games 
and the reward 
system. How the 
learning goals 
were conveyed. 
8 children, 
4-9 years 
old 
Tests in the home environment 
KU 
Leuven, 
Belgium 
October - 
November 
2020 
Practical aspects 
related to home 
usage, feasibility, 
and inclusion in 
hospital 
workflow. 
13 children, 
5-11 years 
old 
 
IV. 
INITIAL TESTS – CONCEPT AND FUNCTIONALITIES 
The first phase of the development was supported by 
initial tests with users. These tests were conducted in Sweden 
and Germany with children that were not associated with a 
hospital. The aim of these tests was to get a first impression of 
how the app was perceived by children of different ages, and 
also to get feedback on the mini-games and the concept. 
A. First Feedback on the Concept  
The first test was conducted at RISE in Gothenburg, 
Sweden in August and September 2019. This first version of 
the app consisted of two mini-games: the Memory game and 
the Metal game. The aim of this study was to get a first 
impression of how the app was perceived. Regarding the 
youngest children, the goal was to get feedback about to what 
extent they understood the concept. For the older children, the 
aim was to get an initial understanding of how to motivate this 
user group. Six children in a wide age range between three and 
fifteen years old participated in this study. An introduction 
was given about the MRI testing, the app, and the purpose of 
the test. After that, the participants tried the app and played 
the games. Questions were asked about what they liked about 
the app and about what they did not like about the app. 
Observations of usage were made by the test leader in regard 
to engagement, understanding of the concept, and navigation, 
as well as in relation to the learning goals. 
Result: The overall idea of an app with mini-games 
seemed to work well, as did the space theme. The 
metaphorical connection between preparing for MRI scans 
and preparing for space travels felt meaningful to the 
children. However, the oldest children felt that the app as a 
whole was somewhat too childish for their age. It was not 
obvious to the youngest children that it was possible to access 
the mini-games by clicking on the buildings. However, when 
they had received instructions about this, navigating into and 
back out of the buildings was no problem. The gameplay 
purpose of the mini-games (i.e., collecting rocket parts) was 
very unclear without visiting the launchpad as a first step. The 
younger children did not pay attention to the entire MRI 
movie, which was something that the older children did do. 
The older children also felt that the most important part was 
when the child in the movie was shown as happy or at least 
undisturbed during the MRI scan. Experiencing someone 
else’s positive experience of the procedure was encouraging. 
All of the children figured out how to play the memory 
game. The learning goal of becoming familiar with the 
sounds of the MRI scanner, in the Memory game, was very 
clear to the children. For the younger children, it was not clear 
to the children which sounds were related to the MRI 
scanning procedure. The game concept of the Metal game 
was unclear to the children, and the learning goal (to not bring 
metal objects into the MRI scanner) was also somewhat 
unclear. It was not clear which items a player should or 
should not press. However, most of the items seemed to be 
recognized. The children expressed that the narration did not 
emphasize well enough that metal was completely prohibited 
from being taken into the MRI room. However, when asked 
specifically, the children had a good idea of what they could 
and could not bring into the room from among the things the 
children were wearing at the time. During the user tests, it 
became clear that it was more challenging than anticipated to 
achieve a strong connection between the different games and 
the learning goals. As a result, one mini-game (a Tetris-
inspired game) was removed/replaced. Finally, these tests 
also explored the use of VR for applications targeting small 
children. Insights gained during the tests resulted in a change 
from the use of VR to AR due to difficulties for small 
children to wear the VR equipment. 
B. Feedback on the Mini-games and on the Use of AR 
The second test during this first stage was conducted by 
RWTH Aachen University in Germany in October 2019. In 
this version, an additional mini-game (the Scanning game) 
had been included and one AR game (the Scaling game). The 
aim of this test was to get feedback on the improved version 
with more mini-games, and to test a new AR mini-game. 
Initial feedback regarding on-boarding (getting into the game) 
and narrative (spoken information and voiceover) was also 
gathered. Nine children between the ages of six and nine 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

participated in this test. After an introduction, the children 
played all of the mini-games by themselves and the test leader 
only intervened when necessary. During and after each mini-
game, the child was asked questions about what they thought 
about 
the 
game 
(fun/boring, 
fast/slow, 
easy/hard, 
childish/mature), and about what they liked and did not like. 
They were also asked about what was hard and easy to 
understand, and if they had understood the purpose of the 
game. During the sessions, observations were made regarding 
whether the app seemed engaging and whether the concept of 
the space campus was understood. The test leader also tried to 
get an understanding about to what extent the children gained 
knowledge based on the learning goals. 
Result: Almost all of the children were excited about the 
game as a whole and thought it would be helpful for children 
to understand what an MRI is. They liked the space scenario, 
but the connection between MRI and space was still not 
always clear. Almost all of children knew what a magnet was 
afterwards, and they could recall what not to take to an MRI. 
The children also recalled that an MRI is “noisy and takes 
pictures”. Afterwards they also could tell that they learned not 
to move, and to lie still during the scan. The environment 
seemed easy to navigate, but the connection between each 
building and the game that was accessed by clicking on it was 
not clear. The children thought it was fun to watch the video, 
and they were able to answer the questions in the video (for 
example, “Can you hear the noises?”). 
All the children easily got familiar with the Memory game, 
and it was easy to get started. The increasing degree of 
difficulty in the levels seemed to be good, but younger 
children needed some guidance. After a while, when they had 
got the gist of it, they did not care about the sounds. The 
children knew intuitively what to do in the Metal game; they 
easily found all the objects and were able to transfer this 
knowledge to reality (the instructor asked them if they, for 
example, could bring a watch or bracelet to the MRI, and all 
of the participants were able to say “NO” and explain why). 
For small children, it was difficult to know if certain objects 
were made out of metal or not. The aim of the Scanning game 
was understood, but it needed further explanation. The 
participants found it nice that there was something in the box 
(but all of them thought at first that it was a rocket part). With 
respect to the AR Scaling game, for the youngest children it 
was difficult to navigate using the phone. Some of them 
dropped the phone multiple times in excitement. The game 
was difficult, and the children needed a lot of explanation and 
support. However, some of the older children found it exciting 
to walk through the machine. Afterwards, children were able 
to “walk the size” of an MRI scanner within the room.  
V. 
TESTS WITH CHILDREN AT THE HOSPITAL 
In this phase of the development, tests were conducted 
with children at the University Hospitals in Leuven. In these 
tests, the aim was to get feedback on improved versions of the 
prototype, including new features. At the end of this phase, the 
entire application, with all the mini-games and the reward 
system, was tested. In these studies, it was also examined how 
the learning goals were conveyed. 
A. First Test at the Hospital 
The first test at the University Hospitals in Leuven, 
Belgium took place in November 2019. The aim of this test 
was to gain feedback on the improved and extended version 
of the prototype, which consisted of five mini-games clearly 
connected to the learning goals. The mini-games included in 
this version of the prototype were: the Memory game, the 
Metal game, the Scanning game, the Balance game and the 
AR Scaling game. This version also had a coherent narrative 
from playing the mini-games to getting rewards and 
completing the game. This test included a first approach 
towards investigating to what extent the learning goals were 
conveyed. This test was built up around a number of modules, 
depending on how much time the child could spend on the 
test. Nine children between the ages of four and ten 
participated in this test. The tests were conducted in the 
waiting room at the hospital in Leuven. After playing the 
game, the children were asked general questions about the 
game and the character and after that more specific questions 
about the mini-game(s) they had played. These questions were 
conducted to find out what they thought about the game and 
if they understood how to play it. The children were also asked 
if they understood the purpose of the mini-game(s) and about 
what they learned from each game. Observations were made 
regarding to what extent the children understood the concept 
and managed to navigate in the app, and to what extent they 
seemed to understand the learning goals. 
Result: Overall, the children really liked the character 
Ollie, the game appearance as a whole, and the flying-to-space 
narrative. The navigation also seemed to work well, but it was 
still not clear that there were games in the buildings. Once the 
observers showed how to click on a building, the concept was 
understood. The goal of collecting rocket parts and building 
the rocket was not directly clear to all the children in the test. 
The older children seemed to understand the learning goals; 
however, it seemed that they gained most of their knowledge 
from the introduction movie even though several of the 
children found it too long. The younger children liked the 
application, but it was not clear that they understood the 
learning goals and they needed parental supervision. During 
this test, it also became clear that there were challenges 
regarding the most important learning goal (lying still). 
According to the health care professionals it was not practiced 
enough.  
The Memory game and Metal game were the two most 
popular games. However, even though the sounds of the 
Memory game were more important to recognize than the 
images on the cards, the children often used the images, 
instead of the sounds, to find a matching pair. The Metal game 
was managed well by most of the children, and they seemed 
to understand the metal concept. The learning goal 
(understanding that a scan takes time) in the Scanning game 
was addressed by the fact that the child had to wait for an 
image. Some of the children in the test left this game since 
they thought the waiting was boring. With respect to the AR 
Scaling game, there were challenges; namely, that the actual 
size of the scanner became too large, which made the game 
difficult to play without parental support and a large physical 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

space. Due to this, it was not clear if the learning goal of 
understanding the size of the MRI scanner was achieved.  
B. Test of Complete Version at the Hospital 
The next test in this phase was also conducted at the 
University Hospitals in Leuven, Belgium during April and 
May 2020. The aim of this test was to gain feedback on the 
improved version of the prototype, which consisted of a 
complete app with all the mini-games (Memory game, Metal 
game, Scanning game, Balance game, AR Comparison game 
and AR Scaling game) and the reward system. In this version, 
improvements had been made related to the size of the MRI 
scanner in the scaling game, and a tutorial had been added for 
first-time usage to provide a better understanding of what it 
was possible to do. This test was conducted using a tablet 
instead of a smartphone. 
The feedback covered both usage and how well the 
learning goals were conveyed. Eight children between the 
ages of four and nine years of age participated in the test. All 
tests took place at the University Hospitals Leuven, either in 
the patient’s room or in the waiting rooms of the children’s 
hospital. In this test, the application was tested using a tablet. 
After an introduction with general questions, the children 
played through the mini-games, and it was also made sure that 
they played through the AR games. After they had played the 
mini-games, they were asked to put together the rocket and 
answer questions about the rocket and the space flight. 
Finally, the children were asked questions about the learning 
goals, and they also completed a questionnaire with questions 
about the character, the environment, and about which games 
they liked/disliked the most and about which games were the 
easiest/most difficult. During the session, notes were taken 
about what was easy/hard and about what seemed fun and 
motivating or boring. 
Result: All games/game world looked good on the tablet 
and seemed to be easier to play on a tablet than on a phone. 
However, small children found the tablet heavy to hold. Most 
kids loved to play the game and liked to complete at least one 
round. Apart from some minor issues, the game world and 
navigating in the game world worked well, even for smaller 
children, and Ollie, the character, seemed to be a well-liked 
figure. The introduction movie was only possible to test with 
a few children due to a technical issue. However, it seemed to 
be liked and to convey the learning goals and it was educative. 
The Memory game was very well liked and worked well. 
Even if it mainly was the images that were used for the pairing, 
it still conveyed the loud sound of an MRI scanner. In the 
Metal game, it was still a bit difficult for small children to 
differentiate which objects were made out of metal, and they 
often found them randomly. The Scanning game was a very 
well-liked game. The only thing that needed to be improved 
was the narratives, which needed to explain the waiting time 
better, and also to convey a stronger connection to the fact that 
it takes some time to scan an object or a person in an MRI 
scanner. The Balance game, which had the aim of showing the 
procedure and emphasizing the importance of lying still, was 
found to need some improvements. Better instructions were 
needed to explain the concept and better feedback was 
required on moving vs. holding the device still to be able to 
succeed. The AR Comparison game concept seemed to be 
liked a lot by some children, while others did not like it, which 
was probably due to issues with the technology. In this version 
of the application, the size of the MRI scanner was better and 
easier to handle. However, with younger children, assistance 
was needed to hold the phone still for the tracking. It was also 
difficult for younger children to grasp the concept of 
bigger/smaller objects, especially if they had not seen an 
actual MRI scanner before. At this stage, more testing was 
needed to understand if the learning goal was actually 
conveyed. For the AR Scaling game, the size of the MRI 
scanner was much better. However, the need for really large 
areas in which to play the game limits the usability. The game 
had potential, but the AR concept of the size of the MRI 
scanner was not always understood by young children. 
The answers about what they thought of the games were 
few in numbers and varied from child to child, but the most-
liked games were the Memory game, the Balance game and 
the Comparison game, and the most boring game was the 
Scaling game. The Metal game was considered to be the 
easiest game, and the Scaling game the hardest one, as shown 
in Table 2. 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS FROM THE QUESTIONNAIRE, IN WHICH ONE GAME 
COULD BE SELECTED IN EACH CATEGORY 
 
Most 
liked 
Most 
boring  
Easiest  
game 
Hardest 
game 
Memory  
2 
1 
0 
0 
Metal 
1 
1 
3 
1 
Scanning 
1 
1 
1 
0 
Balance 
2 
0 
1 
1 
Comparison 
2 
0 
2 
1 
Scaling 
0 
5 
1 
5 
 
VI. 
USER TESTS IN THE HOME ENVIRONMENT 
The aim of the last study during the iterative development 
of the application was to test the complete application with 
home usage and workflow around the usage. This test was also 
a pilot study for a forthcoming clinical trial. The study, which 
was approved by the ethical committee, was managed by 
University Hospitals Leuven in Belgium between September 
and December 2020. The usage of the app took place in the 
children’s homes, and thirteen children between the ages of 
five and eleven participated in the study. Nine of them had had 
at least one MRI before and four of them did not have any 
experience with MRI procedures. One week before the start 
of test, the parents were contacted. A start package was sent 
to their homes at least four days before the scan. The package 
contained an introduction folder, a smartphone with installed 
app, a marker for the AR games and an informed consent 
form. At the time of the scan, the children answered questions 
about which game they liked/disliked the most and which 
game they thought was the easiest/most difficult. The children 
also answered questions about general likeability of the app 
and about their desire to play the app again, and both children 
and parents also answered questions about anxiety related to 
the scanning procedure. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Results: The answers about what they thought of the 
games were, in this test as well, few in numbers and varied 
from child to child. However, they were in line with the results 
from the previous test, with the most-liked games being the 
Memory game, the Balance game, and the AR Comparison 
game. With respect to the most boring game, answers were 
spread out between all the games. In this test, the Memory 
game and the Scanning game were considered to be the easiest 
games, and the Metal game the hardest one, as shown in Table 
3. Again, it is important to point out that the answers were few 
and spread throughout the different games, and also that the 
aim of these questions was just to identify if any of the games 
were too difficult and/or too boring to be included in the app. 
In general, all the games seemed to work well, but the 
Memory game seemed to be really liked and easy to play, and 
the Metal game and the Scaling game might need further 
adjustments. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS FROM THE QUESTIONNAIRE, IN WHICH ONE GAME 
COULD BE SELECTED IN EACH CATEGORY 
 
Most 
liked 
Most 
boring  
Easiest  
game 
Hardest 
game 
Memory  
3 
2 
3 
2 
Metal 
1 
1 
2 
4 
Scanning 
1 
2 
3 
1 
Balance 
2 
2 
2 
1 
Comparison 
2 
2 
1 
2 
Scaling 
0 
2 
0 
2 
 
In the question in which the children rated the overall 
likeability of the app on a scale ranging from 0-10, the average 
was m=7.69. A further measurement on how well the app was 
liked was the question about the desire to play the app again. 
On this scale (0-10), the average was m=6.77, which is quite 
in line with the extent to which the participants liked the app. 
After the app usage but before the scanning procedure on the 
day of the scan, both children and parents were asked (0-10 
VAS scale) about their anxiety related to the scanning 
procedure. The reported anxiety for children dropped, 
compared with a baseline, from 2 to 1 (mean anxiety). For the 
parents, the reported mean anxiety dropped, compared to a 
baseline, from 5 to 3. This is a positive trend, indicating that 
after app usage the children were less anxious on the day of 
their scan. The observations made on the scanning day also 
showed that the children had fewer questions and that they 
were much better prepared. Only in a very small group of 
children was additional training needed. With respect to the 
learning goals and the need for additional training, the most 
important learning goal to address further was the lying still 
goal. All other aspects seemed to be sufficiently addressed at 
home and needed no additional training in the hospital. With 
respect to the entire context in terms of home usage and 
workflow, the app could be used at home without the 
supervision of a researcher and it worked well within the 
clinical workflow. However, further testing is of course 
required to draw definitive conclusions. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In one of the tests at the hospital, the app was used on a 
tablet. All the games and the game world looked good on the 
tablet and seemed to be easier to play on a tablet than on a 
phone. However, small children found the tablet heavy to 
hold, which is line with Chiasson and Gutwin [10], suggesting 
that while touchscreen devices are a good choice for child 
users, there are limitations to the interaction in terms of the 
child’s motor skills. During the development of the 
application, important motivational features and rewards were 
included in the application [4][7][10]. These were used for 
general motivation to increase the learning [3]. Since very 
young children were a part of the target group, instructions 
were mainly based on graphics and spoken explanations 
according to previous work and/or guidelines [10]. What was 
noted in the tests was that even though the aim of the spoken 
explanations was to keep them short and simple, in some cases 
they had to be further shortened to enable getting the message 
through to the youngest children as well. It has been suggested 
that in-app tutorials should be avoided, since there is a 
tendency for children to not read or remember instructions 
given in this way [7]. The tests that were conducted during 
this development showed the opposite. Since the application 
consisted of a quite complex path through the environment, 
with games, rocket parts, building a rocket and going to space, 
a tutorial describing this path had to be added. This was 
especially needed for the younger age groups, which might 
not already have the game literacy that older children might 
have. 
With respect to the learning goals of learning about the 
procedure and learning about accessories such as earplugs 
and head coil, the introduction movie and the Balance game 
were aimed at conveying these learning goals. In the tests, it 
was shown that the children gained much of their knowledge 
from the introduction movie. However, it was also shown that 
the older children, to a greater extent than the younger ones, 
finished watching the entire movie. The learning goal of 
understanding that metal is not allowed in the MRI room was 
addressed in the Metal game. One insight during the tests was 
that it was, to some extent, difficult to understand what the 
objects represented and to differentiate between metal and 
non-metal objects, especially for the youngest children. The 
learning goal of practicing the timings was addressed in the 
Scanning game and in the Balance game. The challenge 
regarding the design in this case was to both convey the 
concepts of a long period of time and waiting, and at the same 
to create a game that is not boring. The aim of the Memory 
game was familiarization with MRI sounds. This game was 
very well liked and easy to play. It might have been the case 
that the pairing was mostly done using the images instead of 
the sounds. However, the game still contributed to making the 
MRI sounds more familiar. The learning goal of 
familiarization with the size of the MRI scanner was addressed 
by the AR Comparison game and the AR Scaling game. Using 
an AR technique with paper-printed markers could to some 
extent be complicated, especially for young children. Both 
physical and digital interaction with “walking around” a large 
object could also be a challenge, as in the case with the Scaling 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

game. This game requires both a large physical space and 
quite demanding interaction. In general, the tests showed that 
AR gaming is still quite difficult for young children as it 
requires a lot of additional knowledge, the ability to hold the 
phone still while pressing buttons, and the attention capacity 
needed to look at the phone while moving around. It could be 
advisable to further develop AR games for children in more 
cooperative ways that allow playing with a parent or older 
sibling. Despite these challenges, at the end of the 
development process, the understanding of the size of the MRI 
scanner seemed to be understood by most of the children. 
Finally, the learning goal of practicing lying still was 
addressed by the Balance game, where the child was supposed 
to keep the device still during the scan procedure. Based on 
feedback from nurses at the hospital, this was the most 
important learning goal, but the task in the game too weakly 
resembled actually lying still in a real context. As a result of 
this, one further AR game, the Box game, was developed. The 
aim of this game is to train children to keep their heads lying 
still during an MRI scan. This game consists of a physical box 
asset that enables the children to experience being in a head 
coil. The game requires some set-up before the gameplay, 
which is why it is advised in the beginning to get help from a 
parent. During the gameplay, the child navigates through a 
narrow canyon with a rocket. The head movement of the child 
is tracked and the less the child moves their head, the faster 
the rocket flies and reaches the goal. Additionally, there are 
phases in which the children are allowed to move their head, 
indicated visually with clouds and auditive sounds. While they 
can’t move their heads, the MRI sound is loud and the rocket 
flies through the canyon. This new, lying still, game has been 
included in the latest version of the application and will be 
tested with children in the forthcoming tests. 
In general, most of the learning goals that were set up 
seemed to be conveyed successfully by the application in 
these smaller tests that were conducted as a part of the 
development. The learning goals and the effect of using the 
application will be further evaluated in a forthcoming larger 
clinical study. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was conducted within the COSMO@Home 
project that is funded by EIT Health. The authors would like 
to thank all the participants in the tests, and all the employees 
at University Hospitals Leuven who contributed to the work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Kelle, R. Klemke, and M. Specht, “Design patterns for learning 
games,” Int J Technol Enhanc Learn, vol. 3, pp. 555-569, 2011, DOI: 
10.1504/IJTEL.2011.045452.ß 
[2] 
A. Amory, “Game object model version II: A theoretical framework 
for educational game development,” Educ Technol Res Dev; vol. 55, 
pp. 51-77, 2007, DOI: 10.1007/s11423-006-9001-x 
[3] 
K. Kapp, The Gamification of Learning and Instruction. Pfeiffer, 2012. 
[4] 
A. Abdul Jabbar, and P. Felicia, “Gameplay Engagement and Learning 
in Game-Based Learning: A Systematic Review,” Rev Educ Res, vol. 
85, pp. 740-779, 2015, DOI: 10.3102/0034654315577210 
[5] 
W. Wolfgang, M. Barret, and D. Görlich, “Design, Dynamics, 
Experience (DDE): An Advancement of the MDA Framework for 
Game Design,”, in Game Dynamics, pp. 27-45, Springer, 2017, DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-319-53088-8_3. 
[6] 
B. Winn, “The Design, Play, and Experience Framework,” in 
Handbook of Research on Effective Electronic Gaming in Education, 
pp. 1010-1024, 2009, DOI: 10.4018/978-1-59904-808-6. 
[7] 
N. Soni, A. Aloba, K. S. Morga, and P. J. Wisniewski, “A framework 
of touchscreen interaction design recommendations for children 
(TIDRC): Characterizing the gap between research evidence and 
design practice,” Proc 18th ACM Int Conf Interact Des Child IDC 
2019, pp. 419-431, 2019. DOI: 10.1145/3311927.3323149. 
[8] 
H. Gelderblom, and P. Kotzé, “Designing technology for young 
children: What we can learn from theories of cognitive development,” 
ACM 
Int 
Conf 
Proceeding 
Ser, 
pp. 
66-75, 
2008 
DOI: 
10.1145/1456659.1456668. 
[9] 
S. B. Linek, “As you like it: What media psychology can tell us about 
educational game design, in Handbook of Reseach on Improving 
Learning and Motivation through Educational Games, pp. 606-632, 
2011, IGI Global. 
[10] S. Chiasson, and C. Gutwin, Design Principles for Children’s 
Technology, Interfaces 7, 28, 2005. 
 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

