 
Publicly Displayed Interactive Installations: Where Do They Work Best? 
 
Rune B. Rosseland, G. Snorre Berge and Alma L. Culén 
Department of Informatics, Group for Design of Information Systems 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
runebro@ifi.uio.no, gsberge@ifi.uio.no, almira@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we discuss user experience (UX) with 
an interactive installation that we have developed in order to 
study its relation to physical space where the installation is 
used. The installation utilizes Kinect motion sensor to provide 
movement based, single or multi user, interactions with 
graphical and sound interfaces. The installation was tested in 
various settings, including private interactions in the lab, and 
public space interactions in a library and a museum. Our 
findings show that for an open, explorative kind of interactions 
such as ours, spaces where one is expected to explore, e.g., a 
Maker Faire or a museum, provide for the longest and most 
pleasurable interactions with the installation.  
Keywords— interactive installations; play; public space; user 
experience; Kinect. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The field of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) can be 
viewed through the lens of three different paradigms: human 
factors, classical cognitivist, and the phenomenological, 
situated paradigm, see Harrison, Tatar and Sengers’ work 
[1]. It is the latter that is of interest for us. It emphasizes a 
range of more abstract and fuzzy factors that affect HCI, 
including dynamic use contexts, socially situated action, 
non-task oriented computing, emotions, etc.  [1].  "It focuses 
on the experiential quality of interaction, primarily the 
situated nature of meaning and meaning creation"  [1, p. 1].    
This paradigm seeks to produce ’thick’, qualitative, 
subjective, and situated knowledge rather than objective and 
generalized design rules and models. "The epistemological 
stance brought to this site is generally hermeneutic, not 
analytic, and focuses on developing holistic, reflective 
understanding while staying open to the possibility of 
simultaneous, conflicting interpretation" [1, p. 13]. 
In particular, user experience, as a field emerging within 
the phenomenological paradigm, is relatively new and still 
lacking in theoretical work; see Obrist et al. [2]. Some 
researchers argue for the use of measurement models and 
structural models to develop a theoretical understanding of 
causal aspects of user experience, which can be used to 
inform design. Others argue for a more holistic approach, 
where studies of real, situated use are used as the basis for 
the development of theories. We think this division is 
artificial. 
Both 
approaches 
are 
important 
for 
an 
understanding of UX, and should be applied selectively 
depending on the specific design context. We try to combine 
the use of theoretical models of user experience with a 
holistic and open-ended exploration in the wild.  
To this end, we have decided to use the increasing 
interest in public space interactions. Examples of human-
technology interactions in public spaces include interactive 
displays such as large touch based information boards, 
mobile systems enabling projection in public spaces, tangible 
interfaces, interactive art and interactive public media. The 
interaction between a human and the system then becomes 
public and visible to others who happen to be in the same 
space. This creates enormous possibilities for interaction and 
user experience design, yet it is also challenging. One of the 
challenges we address here is how people feel when exposed 
to others while trying to interact with the system, see Fig. 1. 
Many feel silly when making funny gestures in order to 
interact with or control the system. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Interacting with a nervous robot in the hallway of the school 
may be intimidating while others observe. 
Koppel, Bailly, Muller, and Walter [3] discuss large 
screens in public spaces in relation to three known major 
problems: noticing the display, developing motivation for 
interaction and designing for parallel or collaborative 
interaction. Their paper looks into configurations of the 
screen area into flat, concave and hexagonal screens and 
how these configurations influence users behavior, see Fig. 
2. The conclusion they reach is that configurations influence 
users’ behavior: “Flat created the highest honeypot effect, 
triggered individuals to position themselves at the 
extremities of the display, triggered groups to divide and 
occupy multiple screens, and fostered social learning. 
Hexagonal allowed strangers to comfortably play on 
adjacent screens.  Concave created the lowest amount of 
simultaneously interacting people, and caused groups to 
split into actors and audience”, [3, p.  9].       
In this paper, instead of screen configurations in a public 
space, we consider how the kind of public space influences 
interactions between people and a system.   
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 2.  Diverse screen configurations lead to different behaviors, [3]. 
In Section II, we discuss enjoyment, pleasure, play and 
games. In Section III, we present our methodology, the 
inspiration for the exhibit, the design concept and the final 
set up of the exhibit. Users’ behavior while interacting with 
the system in different public spaces is presented in Section 
IV. Finally, in Section V, we discuss our findings, and, in 
Section VI, concluding remarks and future work. 
II. 
ENJOYMENT: PLEASURE, FUN AND PLAY 
By using enjoyment as an overall category, Blythe and 
Hassenzahl discuss the semantics of pleasure and fun [4]. 
Enjoyment can be thought of as an experience fleeting 
somewhere between distraction and absorption, where, on 
one end, fun represents distraction, and pleasure represent 
the absorption side of the scale. In short, fun is described as 
the counterpart to seriousness. As a distraction, it represents 
a spontaneous escape from the tasks and worries of everyday 
life. The self, the hedonic ‘be-goals’ of UX, does not matter 
in this short-lived break from reality, but fun still satisfies an 
important psychological need.  
Pleasure is found on the opposite end of the enjoyment 
scale, taking on the role of absorption. It represents a deeper, 
longer lasting, more meaningful experience. Here, the 
connection to people’s inner self is made through immersion 
and devotion to an activity. Elements of challenge, 
progression, and demand for absolute concentration can be 
present, and thereby overlaps with Csikszentmihaly’s 
concept of flow; see [5] and [6].  
Play is another fuzzy term to corner, as illustrated quite 
well by Sutton-Smith who has dedicated a whole book to this 
topic: “We all play occasionally, and we all know what 
playing feels like. But when it comes to making theoretical 
statements about what play is, we fall into silliness. There is 
little agreement among us, and much ambiguity”, [6, p. 1]. 
Although the term play represents a myriad of 
experiences, it has been broadly described as a "free 
movement within a more rigid structure" [7]. 
Some of the most influential work on play is done by the 
French sociologist Caillois. He divides play into four forms 
and two types of play [8]. The four forms of play are 
competition, chance, simulation and vertigo, and the two 
types of play are free play and formal play [9].  
Playful behaviour is described as an oscillation between 
exploration and engagement [10]. Playful behaviour starts 
with exploration, and play occurs when the unfamiliar 
becomes familiar [11]. When the familiar gets boring, the 
focus returns to exploration. In this context, the goal of 
exploring is described as “what can this object do?” and the 
goal of play is described as “what can I do with this object?”. 
In relation to our installation, we chose exploration, but 
in retrospect saw that many of our users would have 
benefited from having more explicit elements of game. It is 
possible, as a future work, to change the installation so that 
users can make explicit choices in terms of more playful or 
more gameful experiences, according to what gives them a 
more enjoyable experience. 
III. 
THE INTERACTIVE EXIBIT  
Our installation focuses on the pleasurable experience 
for its own sake. It does not solve a problem, nor does it 
aspire to help people reach meaningful life-goals, though it 
is designed in such a way that it may be, with minor effort, 
turned into an exercise installation or a game. Our aim was 
to design an installation that allowed us to observe and 
evaluate user enjoyment and behaviour in both public 
(library and museum) and private (lab) contexts.  
A. The methodology used 
Grounded theory is an inductive research methodology 
well suited for interpretive research [12, p. 283]. In contrast 
to the positivist approach of hypothesis development and 
testing, where the tests are conducted to prove or disprove a 
predefined hypothesis, grounded theory starts with empirical 
observations and data, and tries to develop theories from 
this basis. 
By grounding our theory development in 
observations and data gathered from the use of the 
installation, we attempted to gain some insights into the 
constitution of enjoyable user experiences and how those 
experiences are affected by the specific use context and 
space. 
B. What inspired the installation  
The motion detection was a starting point. An important 
initial part of the project development was a few months 
dedicated to exploration of what other similar projects have 
achieved with installations involving the Kinect sensor or 
related technologies and concepts. This included scouring the 
web for videos, tutorials, project description, tools, and 
examples. A great starting point to look for such resources is 
the Creative Applications website [13], which is a digital art 
blog, focusing on “...projects, tools and platforms relevant to 
the intersection of art, media and technology”. The most 
influential pieces for the present work were the V Motion 
Project, based on creating music through motion; and the 
Firewall installation, based on manipulating the speed and 
volume of music by touching a stretched sheet connected to 
sensors. In addition, we were inspired by calligraphic 
movements, martial arts, and different dance styles.  
C. Physical set up of the installation  
In all locations, the installation was exhibited in the setup 
as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 3, and in the actual space 
in Fig. 4. Each of the locations had, at least, an area of four 
by four meters in front of the Kinect sensors. The installation 
consisted of: 
 
A long and narrow table placed by a wall. 
 
Two Kinect sensors mounted on the table on top of 
each other. 
 
One Shake ‘n’ Sense device [14], fastened to one of 
the sensors to eliminate interference. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
A wall-mounted screen, either a flat screen TV or a 
canvas lit by a projector. 
 
Two amplified speakers placed on the table on each 
side of the screen. 
 
Two Mac laptops placed outside of the installation 
area, one running the audio and the other the visual 
system. 
The final installation consisted of two completely 
separate systems, one controlling the audio and one 
controlling the visual display. This separation was made to 
keep the systems as stateless as possible. By stateless we 
mean that the systems did not keep or store any information 
on previous states or actions. This means that the systems 
reacted only to what a user was presently doing, and was not 
based on what has been done earlier by this user or any other 
user. The systems were tuned to work together and appeared 
for the user as a single installation. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Diagram representing the physical setup of the installation. 
 
Figure 4.  Actual setup of the installation in the museum during the 
Maker Faire, with interaction area marked on the floor. 
When a user, or several users, walked into the range of 
the sensors, the system automatically calibrated them and 
started tracking their movement and playing the sound track.  
The main way a user could start interacting with the 
installation was by extending an arm away from their body. 
More specifically, a horizontal hand movement away from 
the chest would trigger the system and start the calibration 
processes, engaging both audio and visuals. The distance for 
this horizontal hand movement was set to 25 cm. 
IV. 
THE SPACE AND THE USER BEHAVIOUR  
The first public test of our installation, apart from one 
exhibit in the lab open to general audience, was at the 
Science Library at the University of Oslo. The library 
actively encourages students to develop different kinds of 
systems and technologies to be used in the library. We were 
invited to set up our installation in the foyer on the ground 
floor of the library building for three consecutive days. This 
provided a good opportunity for us to observe how people 
reacted to and interacted with our installation in a real 
public setting; see Fig. 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  The installation in use in the Science Library at the University 
of Oslo. 
At the library, two researchers were present to observe 
and take notes. In order to ensure that notes would be 
comparable, a simple coding system was designed. Seven 
different pieces of information were recorded for each user 
engagement: something to identify a person or a group by; 
start- and end- times; single user or a group; if they actively 
engaged with the installation or just passively observed; 
body language; facial expression; and finally, notes. Body 
language was categorised into: shy, curious, engaged, 
uninhibited, frustrated, self-conscious, indifferent, joyful, 
and sceptical. Facial expressions were recorded as 
emoticons. 
The observations were done over a three-day period, in 
two different locations within the library. The first two days, 
the installation was placed in the foyer of the library, in the 
vicinity of the cafe. This was the most trafficked area in the 
library. The third day, it was moved to a more quiet area. 
The set up was as follows: 
 
Duration of observation: 7 hours 49 minutes over 
three days (2h + 2h 36m + 3h 13m). 
 
People observed: more than 52 (52 interaction 
sessions, some of them involving groups). 
 
Active: 35 (if a group, all participants took an active 
role) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Passive: 17 (if at least one member of a group was 
just observing) 
 
Age: mainly from 17-40 years old, a few in forties, 
fifties or sixties. 
The granularity of our time-registrations were not fine 
enough to draw any certain conclusions regarding time 
spent with the installation, other than that hardly anyone 
spent more than three minutes. However, when comparing 
time spent to whether the person was alone or in a group, we 
saw that people who were in a group spent more than twice 
as long (1.2 minutes in average) than a person who 
interacted with the installation alone (0.5 minute in 
average).  
Perhaps in contrast to the usual absence of music in the 
library, people soon learned that whenever the music 
started, there were people interacting with the installation. 
This allowed them to look up whenever the installation was 
in use, thereby slowly building an understanding of how it 
worked. This also allowed them to build both curiosity and 
courage to try the installation for themselves. We saw 
several examples of people coming up to investigate after 
having observed others interacting with it for a while. There 
were also examples of single persons and groups of people 
who were hanging around in the background, queuing when 
others were interacting with the installation. As soon as the 
people using the installation left, they would walk up and 
give it a try. This worked like a honeypot effect, a positive 
feedback loop, where use attracted attention and instigated 
more use. However, the installation was unable to keep 
people’s interest for more than a minute or two, which 
meant that there would have to be a constant stream of 
people to keep the installation in continuous use. When the 
installation was allowed to go into standby mode, people 
quickly returned their attention to whatever they were 
otherwise doing. 
In terms of level of engagement, those people who 
explored the installation together with others seemed to get 
more out of it than those that were alone. They would talk to 
each other and explore cooperatively, discovering more 
functionality than those that were alone. There were also 
several examples of people who had been interacting with 
the installation earlier came back with friends. 
Verbal reactions were usually immediate and short, 
perhaps also because the observers were hidden, looking 
just like everyone else, so people were more or less talking 
either to themselves or to their friends: 
“Awesome! Motion sensor, cool!” – Man X 
“Shit! Wow!” – Girl A  
“Very cool!” – Man Y 
“Pretty cool!” – Man Z  
There were also more reflective statements:  
“It responds to my movement.” – Man W  
After exploring for a minute, one man, of about 60 years 
old, exclaimed: “One could stand here all day, fooling 
around!” – Man P.  
Many participants have thus explicitly mentioned the 
word cool. Coolness of technological objects may be an 
important factor for their consequent acceptance; see [15]. 
The second public test took place at the Norwegian 
Science Museum, during the Mini Maker Faire in Oslo; see 
Fig. 4 and Fig. 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Interacting with the system at the Norwegian Science Museum. 
Doing the same coding as for the library, we found the 
following: 
 
Duration of observation: 42 minutes, one day.  
 
People observed: 33. 
 
Active: all 
 
Age: from about one year old to somewhere in the 
sixties. 
Average interaction time was over 2 minutes. 
V. 
DISCUSSION OF THE GENERAL FINDINGS 
In this section, we will discuss how the user experiences 
appeared to be affected by the different public contexts the 
installation was tested in.  
The audience at the library included mostly students, 
faculty, and other staff. They were there because they had 
some business there, either going to or from a lecture or the 
library, hanging out with friends, studying, eating lunch, and 
so on.  
At the museum, on the other hand, there was a greater 
mix of people, ranging from toddlers to grandparents, but 
with an overweight of children in the pre- and primary 
school ages. They mostly arrived in groups, with family 
members or friends, and were there to experience, learn, and 
enjoy themselves. 
The physical spaces our installation was exhibited in 
were quite different. The two locations at the library were 
exposed and crowded, particularly the first one. This meant 
that anyone interacting with the installation would draw 
attention from not only the immediate surroundings, but 
also from galleries on the floors above. The sound would 
naturally draw attention from the surroundings, and given 
the open layout of the building, it was allowed to disperse 
throughout the building. Furthermore, as we accidentally 
discovered when the installation was run without sound 
output, people did not take notice of the installation at all 
when it did not produce any sound. This may be explained 
by the term display blindness; people have become so used 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
to all kinds of public displays and advertising that they can 
selectively ignore them. Interaction blindness refers to the 
fact that it is difficult for people to understand whether a 
given display is interactive. Houben and Weichel [16] have 
described how display blindness and interaction blindness 
can be overcome by use of curiosity objects, e.g., objects 
that are designed to draw attention by sparking interest and 
curiosity. Although not intended specifically as a curiosity 
object, the sound certainly worked as one, effectively 
drawing attention to the installation whenever it was 
triggered. 
The space we were assigned at the museum was partly 
confined, making it close to impossible for others to observe 
the installation, or the people interacting with it, from afar. 
This seemed to give participants a sense of privacy and 
allowed them to let themselves get more carried away than 
at the library. Also, our preparation of the installation space 
with chairs for onlookers to sit on along the sides was very 
beneficial. It allowed the ones who did not want to try the 
installation to sit down and relax, but still be able to 
communicate and take part in the experience with their 
friends who were interacting with the installation. Several 
onlookers also eventually got up and tried the installation 
after having grown curious by watching others. 
A very central concern for many people seem to be a 
reluctance to appear conspicuous or out of the ordinary in 
public spaces. Breaking social rules and norms is a big deal. 
As Roto et al. [17] pointed out, “UX is rooted in a social 
and cultural context” . 
Most of our interviewees at the prototype evaluations in 
the lab readily admitted that they would restrain their 
involvement with the installation in a public setting, if they 
would be willing to interact with it at all. The most central 
reason they gave for this was the fear of breaking social 
rules and norms, and of “behaving like an idiot”, as one 
participant put it. It was their fear of being perceived by 
others as doing something people do not normally do in 
public that would keep them from getting too involved. 
There were also comments to the opposite effect, indicating 
that breaking social rules and norms can be liberating and 
empowering. However, the prevailing notion was that social 
rules and norms would have a dampening effect on people’s 
level of involvement with such an installation in public 
settings. 
This concern seemed particularly evident at the library. 
The openness of the location and the number of people in 
the surrounding area seemed to make people self-conscious 
and vulnerable when they triggered the installation, 
particularly if they were alone. At the museum, there was 
clearly more headroom for expansive and expressive 
behavior. Many of the permanent museum exhibitions are 
designed for interaction and exploration, and the wide 
variety of strange projects taking part in the Maker Faire 
clearly made people less concerned about how their 
behavior would be perceived by others, as this behavior was 
expected in this context. Nevertheless, there were examples 
at both locations of people showing an interest in the 
installation but being too shy to dare to try it for themselves. 
But by having the opportunity to watch others interact with 
it and build an understanding of how it worked, the shyness 
was often overcome by curiosity, resulting in them engaging 
with the installation after having observed for a while. 
Next, we present the general findings from the 
evaluation sessions and public tests of our installation. 
Through the analysis of our evaluation sessions in the 
private lab context, we located many statements indicating 
an enjoyable experience. In this section, we want to look at 
aspects of the participants experiences related to the 
concepts encompassed by the term ‘enjoyment’, as 
discussed in Section 2. 
A. Fun 
The installation in itself was described by most as ‘fun’. 
Blythe and Hassenzahl defined fun as a short-lived 
distraction from everyday life [16], coinciding well with the 
way the word is used in describing the experience by the 
participants. But, what exactly was fun about the 
installation? The participants answers points first and 
foremost to the exploration of the installation and its 
functionality, then secondly, the immediate responses the 
installation gave to movement, and the sensory aesthetic 
experiences they resulted in. 
Pleasure was never mentioned directly by the 
participants, but several interviewed participants described 
an experience of ‘flow’ [18] when they were interacting 
with the exhibit, which can be linked to pleasure [4]. These 
experiences were described in terms of being ‘lost’, 
mesmerized, having a mental break and entering a relaxed 
‘kind of mode’, and the majority of the participants agreed 
on this being an essential part of their experience. It’s worth 
noting that some of the participants pointed out, both 
explicitly 
and 
implicitly, 
that 
this 
flow-like 
state 
disappeared over time as the participants ran out of elements 
of the installation to explore. 
B. Play  
Several of the participants described the installation and 
the experience as playful. Their descriptions indicated that 
they placed the experience more in line with the definition 
of free play, rather than formal play (game). 
The playfulness the installation facilitated for was 
deemed as very important, and the participants linked it 
strongly to the exploration part and the open-endedness of 
experience, but also to the lack of control. The openness of 
the installation was described as an advantage, in the way 
that it encouraged interpretation and exploration. The lack 
of control was described as not important by one participant, 
as the point is not to steer something, but to play with the 
system and get responses from it, which resulted in a ‘good 
feeling’. In relation to the concepts of goals, rules, and 
competitive elements of play, even the self-proclaimed 
‘competition-focused’ participants acknowledged that those 
concepts were not the point of this installation.  
In the playful behavior, there is an oscillation between 
exploration and play, where exploration is triggered by 
boredom [10], [11], [19] and play is triggered by learning or 
discovery [20]. We found multiple instances of this in the 
way participants described their explorative behavior, which 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
strongly resembles the process of playful behavior, 
emphasizing the strong relation between playing and 
exploring: “It is just exploring, really. Until you feel you 
master (the installation) a bit, then it’s really exciting and 
makes you want to continue. You never know if you have 
explored everything and that’s positive, you never reach an 
end.” 
C. Aesthetics  
In terms of aesthetics, both the audio and the visuals 
were described as fascinating, atmospheric, different, 
beautiful and soothing. The participants thought the 
combination of the two fit well together and resulted in a 
coherent expression and created a good ambiance. It was 
also pointed out in a positive manner that the expression 
was kept to an abstract nature. That way it became easier to 
accept the audiovisual expression, in comparison to trying to 
depict or simulate something concrete. 
D. Exploration  
As stated earlier, exploration was the activity and 
experience deemed the most important successful aspect of 
the installation. Several of the participants expressed bluntly 
that exploration is the installation. The exploration was 
fuelled by the responses given by the installation and their 
abstract, mysterious, unknown nature. Or, to put in other 
words, the immediate responses to movement and actions, 
combined with lack of explanation, made the participants 
curious and eager to investigate. Their descriptions also 
highlighted one of the common characteristics of the human 
brain, namely the constant search for patterns and 
connections, which was described as an essential part of the 
process of exploring. 
E. Discovery, learning and understanding  
On some aspects of the experience, the participants were 
quite divided in their opinions. One of these aspects was the 
lack of explanation, or guidance, in the user interface of the 
installation. The majority of participants highlighted the 
absence of explanations as something positive. It was seen 
as a catalyst for, and a component of, exploration. However, 
two of the participants found it confusing, frustrating and 
incomprehensible.  
One of the participants, who favored minimal 
explanations, pointed out that an installation such as ours 
would not be suitable for people who are not interested in 
exploring. 
The discovering and learning were described as closely 
related to exploration. For example, one participant 
described discovery as a direct result of the exploration. 
The process of understanding was the challenging part 
of the installation. When exploration led to discoveries and 
understanding, the participants had a sense of progress and 
achievement, giving them motivation to continue to explore. 
However, the lack of ‘new things’ to discover and explore 
eventually led to boredom and loss of interest. 
Some users considered the lack of progression and 
control as negative aspects of the installation.  
F. Progression  
Progression was an aspect of enjoyable user experience 
that was originally overlooked by us in the design process, 
but which surfaced through the evaluation of the prototype 
as the most important missing aspect of the participants’ 
experience. As mentioned earlier, Blythe and Hassenzahl 
link the concept of pleasure to the concept of flow, but they 
also argue that pleasure can in fact be thought of in terms of 
progression [4]. In retrospect, this actually comes across as 
self evident, when comparing our findings to the 
overlapping definitions of flow and pleasure, as a longer 
lasting, more meaningful and immersed experience devoted 
to an activity. 
The participants wanted more depth to the experience. 
They wanted more to explore, and gradually increasing 
variation and difficulty. When they felt they had exhausted 
their possibilities for exploration, they became bored, and 
this coincided with the earlier mentioned loss of flow state. 
G. Control  
The second most sought after aspect was control, and on 
this topic the participants of the prototype evaluation was 
close to unanimous. They expressed frustration over not 
getting the expected responses from the system, and this put 
limitations on what they could do. It prevented them from 
being creative and expressing themselves through the 
installation, both in terms of visual and audio expression, 
and this was emphasized as important to them. Some 
acknowledged that they attained a certain degree of control, 
but it was expressed that the threshold for gaining this 
control should be much lower in order to make the 
installation accessible to more people. 
The lack of control linked very strongly to the absence 
of mastery, and on this point the feedback from one of the 
users was quite direct: “[The installation] lacks possibility 
for mastery.” And another user on the same topic: “I don’t 
think I would master it more if I used it for another 20 
minutes.” 
The only positive feeling described that related to 
mastery was through exploring and discovering, but even 
then,  this process was described as fumbling. 
The lack of control highlights the relation between the 
second- and third- paradigms of HCI, and between usability 
and user experience. In our phenomenological approach, the 
focus was on enjoyable user experiences, and not so much 
on usability and ease of use on a specific level. Also, the 
explorative and abstract nature of the installation meant that 
it was difficult to define specific usability criteria for it. 
This is not to say that control was not a focus in our 
design, but the lack of precision in the tracking data from 
the Kinects, and our experiential focus led us to design a 
system that did not need very specific and precise controls. 
Nevertheless, our findings clearly show that lack of control 
detracts from the experience. This is in line with the fact 
that good usability is a prerequisite but not a guarantee for 
good user experiences. It also underlines the importance of 
both second- and third- paradigm HCI approaches for the 
overall user experience; neither approach is complete on its 
own, but must be combined selectively according to the 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
specific design context in order to make the user experience 
as enjoyable as possible.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION OF THE FINDINGS RELATED TO SPACE 
We now focus on presenting the space related findings 
specifically.  
In terms of time spent by participants interacting with 
the installation of the two locations, we see the time spent at 
the museum was significantly higher. At the library, no one 
spent more than three minutes with the installation, 41% 
spent less than one minute and 72% of the observed spent 
two minutes or less. At the museum, the time spent with the 
installation is spread much more evenly across the intervals 
noted: 59% spent two minutes or more interacting, and 
some people seen outside the time frame of observations 
were exceeding the intervals noted significantly.  
Looking at the distribution of facial expressions 
observed in the two different contexts (Fig. 7 and Fig. 8), 
expressions of a positive nature are the predominant ones in 
both settings, but at the museum as many as 86% were 
smiling and even though 5% were noted as indifferent, 95% 
of the observed were deemed positive.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Body language and facial expression distributions at the library. 
 
Figure 8.  Body language and facial expression distribution at the museum. 
Comparing the observations of body language between 
the contexts, a high degree of curiosity is observed in both 
settings, with 47% recorded as displaying a body language 
suggesting curiosity in the library setting, while 37% were 
recorded at the museum. The most striking difference 
between the library and the museum contexts was the high 
percentage of joyfulness (27%) and the low percentage of 
shyness (4%) of the museum setting, contrasting the low 
degree of joyfulness (3%) and high degree of self-
consciousness (15%) and shyness (5%) (combined 20%) 
seen at the library. The reason for combining self-
consciousness and shyness is that they are very similar 
traits. Seen in retrospect, separating these terms into two 
coding categories might have been unnecessary, considering 
their similarities and the fallibility of observation.  
During our prototype evaluations, testers consistently 
underlined that they would be less likely to interact with the 
installation on the street or in the shopping center than if 
they encountered it at a destination like a museum or a 
gallery. One of the participants expressed this as follows: 
“It would be a lot more socially acceptable in a museum to 
interact with it. I would say my experience would have been 
much better in a context like that. If the installation were set 
up in Karl Johan [note: central shopping street in Oslo] I 
wouldn’t have stopped to check it out, also because I’m 
going somewhere”.  
Applying this thinking to the library and museum, we 
see that the foyer of the library is a place which one passes 
through on the way. The museum is a destination in itself. 
The library foyer is thus more similar to a ‘street’ setting, in 
that the installation is unexpected and disrupts passers-by. 
At the museum, on the other hand, visitors expect to explore 
and have an experience. If we also take into account the fact 
that people spent considerably longer time interacting with 
the installation at the museum (Fig. 8) than in the library, 
this might support the notion that the museum / Maker Faire 
setting was a better-suited context for the intended use of 
the installation, namely facilitating for spending time 
exploring. An interesting observation is that the amount of 
people marked as being fascinated by the exhibit varies 
significantly between the two observation places. At the 
library, 41% were recorded as fascinated, in contrast to only 
9% in the museum context. This might suggest that 
fascination was expected in the context of the museum, 
while unexpected in the context of the library. 
If we look at the distribution of the differences observed 
in the body language (and especially the differences 
between 
joyfulness 
and 
the 
combination 
of 
self-
consciousness and shyness observed in the two contexts), it 
seems that the library context was perceived as a less 
comfortable one. We attribute this to the ‘deviant’ nature of 
the interactions from what is the norm at the library. Waving 
their arms in mid-air makes participants of the installation 
stand out and calls attention to them from people situated 
nearby who are not aware of what the participants are doing, 
thus making many participants uncomfortable. This 
situation was predicted by some participants of the private 
evaluation sessions. They said it was important for them to 
make their actions understandable to onlookers, if they were 
to engage with such an installation in a public space. 
These suggested effects of breaking social rules and 
norms and disruption (or surprise) indicated, especially by 
the observations in the library, are not necessarily to be 
considered negative. We may consider the installation, as it 
worked at the time, better suited for the museum / Maker 
Faire context, but through alterations to the installation 
based on feedback from the evaluation sessions, we imagine 
we could have facilitated a better user experience at the 
library as well. This could be to make the ‘tools’ or controls 
more obvious to help the shy/self-conscious but curious 
understand the basic workings before they reach the stage of 
giving 
up, 
preventing 
potential 
frustration 
and 
embarrassment. To help avoid the perception of ‘unnatural’ 
behavior to onlookers, we could make the connection 
between participants and their screen presence much clearer, 
hopefully making it more obvious to the onlookers what the 
participants were doing. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have designed and implemented an audiovisual 
interactive installation for the purposes of exploring playful 
and pleasurable interactions in public spaces.  
For the purposes of this paper, we explored the 
differences in user behaviors in two distinct public setting: at 
the university library and in the science museum, during a 
Maker Faire.  
The results show that the context in which the exhibit is 
installed and used strongly influences user’s behavior. 
Exploration, discovery and learning in public space need to 
be supported properly. The museum is the context suitable 
for such endeavor and participants have used longer time to 
interact with the exhibit, have shown much less frustration, 
were less concerned with on-lookers, and showed clear signs 
of pleasure, e.g., smiling. However, in the museum setting, it 
was harder to fascinate the users of the exhibit. The visitor’s 
expectations in this regard are high. People in the library are 
there on other accounts and thus are harder to engage, more 
shy but easier to solicit a “wow” effect from.  
Our evaluation of the installation was qualitative, and it 
was analyzed through applying grounded theory techniques, 
such as coding. The analysis gave us valuable insights, also 
highlighting some weaknesses of the installation in terms of, 
for example, the lack of control and progression during 
interaction. 
We envision several possibilities for future work based 
on the installation, such as modifying it into a game. 
Furthermore, some important concepts from UX theory may 
be studied through interaction with the installation, such as 
immediacy of understanding and affordance, and how they 
are influenced by the fact that several people may interact 
with the installation simultaneously.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Harrison, D. Tatar, and P. Sengers, “The three paradigms 
of HCI,” in Alt. Chi. Session at the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems San Jose, California, 
USA, 2007, pp. 1–18. 
[2] M. Obrist, V. Roto, A. Vermeeren, K. Väänänen-Vainio-
Mattila, E. L.-C. Law, and K. Kuutti, “In search of theoretical 
foundations for UX research and practice,” in CHI ’12 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 1979–1984. 
[3] M. T. Koppel, G. Bailly, J. Müller, and R. Walter, “Chained 
displays: configurations of public displays can be used to 
influence actor-, audience-, and passer-by behavior,” in 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 2012, pp. 317–326. 
[4] M. Blythe and M. Hassenzahl, “The semantics of fun: 
differentiating enjoyable eeperiences,” in Funology, M. A. 
Blythe, K. Overbeeke, A. F. Monk, and P. C. Wright, Eds. 
Springer Netherlands, 2005, pp. 91–100. 
[5] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: the psychology of optimal 
experience. New York, N.Y.: HarperPerennial, 1991. 
[6] B. Sutton-Smith, The ambiguity of play. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1997. 
[7] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, Rules of play: game design 
fundamentals. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003. 
[8] R. Caillois, Man, Play, and Games. University of Illinois 
Press, 2001. 
[9] B. Costello and E. Edmonds, “A tool for characterizing the 
experience of play,” in Proceedings of the Sixth Australasian 
Conference on Interactive Entertainment, New York, NY, 
USA, 2009, pp. 2:1–2:10. 
[10] B. Costello and E. Edmonds, “A study in play, pleasure and 
interaction design,” in Proceedings of the 2007 conference on 
Designing pleasurable products and interfaces, New York, 
NY, USA, 2007, pp. 76–91. 
[11] J. N. Lieberman, Playfulness: its relationship to imagination 
and creativity. New York: Academic Press, 1977. 
[12] D. J. Lazar, D. J. H. Feng, and D. H. Hochheiser, Research 
methods in human-computer interaction. John Wiley & Sons, 
2010. 
[13] “CreativeApplications.Net | Apps That Inspire...” [Online]. 
Available: http://www.creativeapplications.net/. [Accessed: 
30-Jan-2014]. 
[14] A. Maimone and H. Fuchs, “Reducing interference between 
multiple structured light depth sensors using motion,” in 2012 
IEEE Virtual Reality Short Papers and Posters (VRW), 2012, 
pp. 51–54. 
[15] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “Situated techno-cools: factors 
that contribute to making technology cool and the study case 
of iPad in education,” PsycNology Journal, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 
117–139, 2012. 
[16] S. Houben and C. Weichel, “Overcoming interaction 
blindness through curiosity objects,” in CHI ’13 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 1539–1544. 
[17] V. Roto, E. Law, A. Vermeeren, and J. Hoonhout, “User 
experience white paper - bringing clarity to the concept of 
user experience,” presented at the Dagstuhl Seminar on User 
Experience - 2010, 2011. 
[18] “Go 
With 
The 
Flow.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/4.09/czik_pr.html. 
[Accessed: 30-Jan-2014]. 
[19] B. M. Costello and E. A. Edmonds, “Directed and emergent 
play,” in Proceedings of the seventh ACM conference on 
Creativity and cognition, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 
107–116.  
[20]  A. L. Culén, T. Bratteteig, S. Pandey, and S. Srivastava, “The 
Child-to-Child (C2C) Method: Participatory Design for, with 
and by Children in a Children’s Museum,” IJWI, vol. 11, no. 
2, pp. 92–113, 2013. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

