First results of Studying Human Robot Interaction in the Wild —
The Hobbit Robot Tested by Older Adults at Home
Markus Vincze∗, Daniel Wolf∗, Markus Bajones∗, Astrid Weiss∗, Markus Suchi∗, David Fischinger∗†
and J¨urgen Pripﬂ‡, Christoph Gisinger‡
∗Automation and Control Institute, Vision for Robotics Group, Technische Universit¨at Wien, Austria
{markus.vincze, daniel.m.wolf, markus.bajones, astrid.weiss, markus.suchi}@tuwien.ac.at
†david.fischinger@gmail.com
‡Akademie der Altersforschung am Haus der Barmherzigkeit, Austria
{juergen.pripfl, christoph.gisinger}@altersforschung.ac.at
Abstract—Falls are the primary cause for older adults that make
it necessary to move to a care facility. One option is to wear
a mobile device, with the limitation that it needs to be worn
any time while a fall happens one time a year. Together with
care professionals we worked on a mobile robotics solution that
does not only discover falls, but is pro-active to avoid falls in the
ﬁrst place. Old people rapidly realized that a robot picking up
objects from the ﬂoor is a great help. While tests in a laboratory
setting showed the usefulness of this function, we needed to
send the robot out into the user’s home to learn about the real
challenges when approaching a realistic use case scenario. We
present results stressing Human-Robot Interaction from a study
where users tested the robot in their homes in three countries.
Findings indicate that the pick-up function is highly valued, even
if the robot costs go up considerably as opposed to a mobile robot
without arm.
Keywords–assistive robot, mobile manipulator robots
I.
INTRODUCTION
Falls are the primary cause for older adults that make
it necessary to move to a care facility. Together with care
professionals we worked on a mobile robotics solution that
does not only discover falls but is pro-active to avoid falls in
the ﬁrst place. The result is the Hobbit robot, which provides
a set of functions to the user with a multi-modal user interface
to realize easy to use Human Robot Interaction (HRI).
While there are many service robots targeting the applica-
tion of an extended video phone, there are only a few robots
including an arm to interact with the environment. The top end
robot with similar functionality as Hobbit is Care-o-bot [1],
which was used in the SRS [2] and Accompany [3] projects
to study user interaction for bringing water and other help
functions in care facilities [4]. This robot is too large to operate
in homes while several of the other robots such as Giraff [5]
are not autonomous and need to be remotely operated.
The main novelty of of the Hobbit robot was to bring a
service robot into user’s homes, that can do more than as
an extended video phone that is operated by a remote user
including the navigational capacity. The proposed Hobbit robot
provided the following functions to the user. (1) Maintaining
the user’s self-efﬁcacy is addressed with exercising cognitive
and physical skills without so explicitly ad-dressing the target
goal of self-efﬁcacy (social connectedness and ﬁtness func-
tions). (2) Increasing the perceived user’s safety is addressed
by managing and keeping safe at home (emergency detection,
grasping from ﬂoor, transport objects, safety check, calling the
robot, pa-trolling). And (3) addressing the user’s well-being to
maintain a positive affect (entertainment functions). A unique
setting of the Hobbit study was, that users were free to select
any of the functions at any time. We summarize results related
to HRI and what technical realizations proved to be useful or
need improvement.
The paper is structured as follows. We proceed with a
closer look and comparison to other present ongoing work
and then, Section II describe the Hobbit robot in more detail
and in Section III the functionality that has been implemented
and that it provided to the users. Section IV summarizes the
user trials, how they were conducted and what was measured.
And Section V summarizes and discusses the results and ﬁrst
ﬁndings.
A. Related Work
Ideally robot helpers for older adults should investigate the
feasibility of providing robotic assistance with Activities of
Daily Living (ADL) and the extended assistance functions for
Instrumental ADL (IADL). Typical functions of ADL/IADL
are dressing, food preparation, eating, cleaning, and rehabili-
tation or direct physical exercise activities. Hobbit did not set
out to address these needs, since all these capabilities are yet
beyond present robot capabilities. What can be achieved relates
to the maintaining and safety of the home, ﬁtness functions,
and creating positive effect with socializing functions. Another
aspect is where these robots are studied. There are only very
few studies that go beyond trials in care facilities and study
longer durations, e.g. [6] and a recent survey in [7]. In the
following, we highlight recent developments.
Today most of the other service robot projects further
advance the state of the art of one speciﬁc functionality. For
example, in GrowMeUp [8] the user’s habits, preferences, and
routines are studied using multiple sensors on the robot and
the environment. The robot is a reduced PAL platform without
arms from Pal Robotics [9]. As we have seen in our user
experiences, relying on an external sensor network may be
feasible in specially designed homes but is not welcomed by
users at home and requires substantial installations and the
related costs.
The EU project EnrichMe [10] also studies the use of
touch screen and an augmented user interface as a follow
up of the Companionable project with Robosoft and their
Kampai robot. Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) functions are
used by introducing Radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID)
chips into objects, something long in talk but that did not
yet materialize since it requires a retroﬁtting of items and the
similar issues regarding installations at home. The research
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

prototype Kompai is not certiﬁed for autonomous use with
persons.
Another recently started project is Mario [11]. It addresses
loneliness, isolation and dementia in older persons through
multi-faceted interventions delivered by service robots using
AAL sensor installations. The partners will use near state of
the art robotic platforms based on the Robosoft robot that is
”ﬂexible, modular friendly, low cost and close to market ready
in order to realize ﬁeld contributions in the immediate future”.
A speciﬁc feature is to allow for application development for
the robot to augment its functions.
The big step forward in these projects is that the robot
should be at least partially autonomous in the user’s home.
So far robots have been operated remotely or only for very
few tasks in a home during limited time of user trials, for
example in projects such as SRS, Giraff++, and RobotEra.
It was pointed out by coordinators of these projects that the
autonomous navigation capability as developed within Hobbit
will be of great use also in these projects and beyond.
In summary, user requirements as created in Hobbit already
pinpoint the primary user needs. In view of this, we will in
the next sections present what we would improve over the
Hobbit concept. Experience has shown and our user studies
have conﬁrmed that a modular approach with customizable
features would most suitably satisfy the heterogeneous group
of elderly who could beneﬁt from the use of Hobbit robot in
their homes. We present next the robot itself in more detail
and then enumerate the functionality that we provided for the
user trials at home.
II.
THE COMPONENTS OF THE HOBBIT ROBOT
The second prototype (PT2) of the robot platform used for
the home trials has differential drive kinematics, a ﬂoor-parallel
depth camera, a head with screens as eyes and an RGB-D
camera (ASUS Xtion mounted at a height of 120 cm above
ground), a touch screen in front of the torso, and an arm with a
gripper. The platform implements some of the lessons learned
from a previous study with an older versions of the Hobbit
robot [12]. The height of the Hobbit robot is now 125 cm and it
has a width of maximum 56 cm at the point where the shoulder
of the arm sticks slightly out beyond the robot.
The development of the system aimed to keep hardware
costs as low as possible. The intention was to study if it is
feasible to provide good functionality at home even with lower
cost components to come closer to the target of introducing
a robot into user homes. The hardware components sum up
to EUR 16.000,-, Figure 1 presents the Hobbit robot and its
components. Autonomous navigation was based on a virtual
laser scan. The robot was operated via a Multi-Modal User In-
terface (MMUI) which consisted of a Graphical User Interface
(GUI) with touch, Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), Text
to Speech (TTS) and Gesture Recognition Interface (GRI).
It provided entertainment (radio, music, audio-books, games,
ﬁtness function), reminders, video phone service, control of
a manipulator, access to an AAL environment (e.g. call but-
tons), and emergency call features. The robot’s functionalities
included automatic emergency detection (e.g. patrolling and
detecting persons lying on the ﬂoor), handling emergencies
(communication with relatives), and supportive fall prevention
measures (transporting small items, picking up objects from
Figure 1. The Hobbit robot and its components.
the ﬂoor, searching for objects the robot had been taught by
the user).
III.
THE FUNCTIONS PROVIDED BY THE HOBBIT ROBOT
In one of the ﬁrst studies of its kind, a low-cost mobile
social service robot with an arm that was intended to interact
fully autonomously [13] over weeks was deployed in seniors’
private homes, to support them with tasks and make them feel
safe. Our study thus marks a major step in evaluating robotic
systems under real-life conditions [14].
The selection of functions that have been implemented on
the robot have been extracted from multiple interaction with
users, secondary users or relatives and professional care givers.
We conducted ﬁrst home trials with an autonomous robot
with the aim to ﬁnd out what users want. Here, a lot more
work is needed and recently started projects will expand our
understanding. Part of this work was that we conducted two
iterations of user studies and collected user requirements in
[15]. These requirements give a clear picture of what older
adults would want at present from a robot helper at home.
Conclusions are drawn from workshops with older adults
that created a longer list of requirements, which have then
been ranked in studies and questionnaires, and correlated with
technical feasibility given the present state of the art in service
robotics. We used ﬁrst user trials and lessons learned to verify
the ranked requirements [16].
Before reviewing the robot system concept, let us shortly
summarize the user requirements and relate them to other
studies or care robots. The clear requirements formulated
within the Hobbit project still hold. The main services that
a home robot should provide to aid older adults target the
following needs:
•
Maintain the users efﬁcacy level: this includes func-
tions for keeping active such as
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

◦
Social connectedness including telephone, In-
ternet access to alternative ways of commu-
nication, such as a video call or to access
weather, news and other information.
◦
Physical and cognitive ﬁtness including physi-
cal exercises that have been considered on top
of the initial description of work. This includes
games and playing music or video, and a
function that has been surprisingly welcome
by users to play the favorite radio station.
•
Increase the perceived safety of user:
◦
A main aspect is already the physical presence
of the robot and its care functions such as
seeking the user and user interaction during
the patrolling function.
◦
Multi-modal interaction capabilities and sev-
eral ways to trigger an emergency call.
◦
Pick-up of known and unknown objects from
the ﬂoor which turned out be an essential as-
pect. The normal skepticism towards the robot
went away after seeing the robot picking up an
object from the ﬂoor.
◦
The robot provided an additional safety check
to the user, making her/him aware of hazards
at home while proposing solutions or options
to assist.
◦
Calling the robot for help: the use of call
buttons is an effective means to call the robot
for any task at any time.
•
Functions for the user’s wellbeing: here we summarize
services that are nice to have and will actually assist to
accept the platform and keep it in use. In the Hobbit
idea we had drawn out many of these functions as
elements to make the user feel good, and possibly even
create a bonding to the robot such that it is trusted and
used and the previous two aspects are reached to an
even better degree. Examples of these functions are:
◦
A ﬁrst personalization of the robot that is exe-
cuted in the initialization phase. Additionally,
the robot and basic guidelines for operating it
are introduced.
◦
Learning and ﬁnding objects is a welcome
feature for the users and regarded as a great
commodity.
◦
An important functionality that extends the
functionalities provided in Hobbit is the pick-
up from high locations. Grasping objects from
places high up that cannot easily be reached
will be investigated in EU project Ramcip,
though robot costs are expected to be con-
siderable higher. In Hobbit we regard this
functionality as a future module and a possible
extension of the basic robot platform.
◦
Entertainment ranging from games over music
to surprising the user with the speciﬁc aim to
increase user acceptance.
◦
Reward functionality is a means to enhance the
user binding with the hypothesis to improve
the acceptance by the user.
In summary, the Hobbit robot provides a rich repertoire of
functions, where several are novel and have been tested with
users or at home for the ﬁrst time.
IV.
DESIGN AND METHODS OF THE USER TRIALS
We conducted user trials in Austria (seven end-users), in
Greece (four end-users) and in Sweden (seven end-users). The
trials with a total of 18 primary users (PU) and 16 secondary
users (SU) were carried out in the homes of the users with
the robot interacting autonomously for three weeks with the
user. All trials took place in private homes of single-living
senior adults and lasted for a total of 371 days Assessment by
means of qualitative interviews and questionnaires took place
at four stages of each trial: pre-trial, mid-term, end of trial, and
post-trial (i.e. one week after the trial had ended). Results of
the qualitative interviews as well as perceived safety measured
by the Falls Efﬁcacy Scale (FES) [17] are reported here.
Out of 18 users 16 (14 female) were included for statistical
analysis as two participants had to be excluded because of
missing data). The mean age was 80 years, ranging from 75
to 89 years. Qualitative data was organized using NVivo (QSR
International). Quantitative data was analyzed using SPSS by
means of descriptive statistics and non-parametric methods
(Friedman ranking-test).
A multi-method approach was applied for the evaluation
of the three quality criteria usability, acceptance (including the
Mutual Care concept [18]), and afford-ability. The evaluation
followed a detailed evaluation plan with updates according
to the inputs of the project reviewers, as well as the results
of pilot user tests in their own ﬂats. Results were gained
from questionnaires, interviews, cultural probing with the
participants before, during and after the trials, and continuous
logging of all interaction data on the Hobbit robot.
V.
FINDINGS FROM THE STUDY WITH OLDER ADULTS
USERS
As the data analysis is not yet ﬁnished we present ﬁrst
results and structure these into the aspects regarding the robot
usage (usability, acceptance, afford-ability) and issues related
to the robot hardware, software and development.
A. Results regarding Overall Robot Usage
The most important results of the user trials related to the
three main quality criteria were:
•
Usability: given there are no technical problems, Hob-
bit is easy to use and intuitive to handle. Different
input modalities and ﬂexibility was helpful for PUs.
Utility of Hobbit’s functions was however perceived
to be lacking, often due to technical failures.
•
Acceptance was ambivalent among users. The attitude
towards a robot did not change signiﬁcantly, and
observed changes were of a negative kind. PT2 also
failed to provide a signiﬁcant feeling of safety and
inﬂuence users’ self-efﬁcacy. Emotional attachment
weakened over the course of the trials, possibly indi-
cating the unfulﬁlled expectations of users and a sort
of weariness from the trial procedure. What is more,
reciprocity was not given for PUs, which shows that
the Mutual Care approach needs some reﬁnement to
become effective.
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

•
Afford-ability: From the experiences with PT2 in the
trials, afford-ability (at a price of Euro 16,000.-) is
not given for most users. Still, a reliably functioning
version of Hobbit featuring a head, an arm, pick-up
and learning functionality would be attractive for PUs.
From the qualitative data we extract how the different
robot functions have been evaluated by the users. They highly
appreciated the functions picking up objects from the ﬂoor,
transporting things, detecting emergencies, delivering ﬁtness
and giving reminders. Concerning usability (also see above),
they stated that the prototype was intuitive to handle but
that errors in the actions of the robot led to frustration. The
pick-up function, for example, was fully operational only for
about 18% of the 371 days. And, if available, only about one
out of ten attempts was successful. Furthermore, processing
speed of the whole system was criticized as being too slow.
Neither voice commands nor gestures worked satisfactorily,
which is why the touch screen ultimately was used most. In
summary, usability was negatively inﬂuenced by a lack of
robustness. Quantitative data indicates that the perceived safety
as measured by the FES did not change in the course of the
trial (p = 0.265).
Furthermore, the concept of Mutual Care (MuC), developed
to increase acceptance and use of Hobbit by older users, was
found to have no effect. The reason for these unexpected
results is, with high probability, to be found in the technical
malfunctions of main features like learn object or bring object,
many false positive fall detections as well as unreliability of
most of the other commands. As reliability is a prerequisite
for user acceptance, this result suggests that acceptance of
a reliably working Hobbit would have been probably much
higher and that a such a robot would also better have met
the expectations of the users. Thus, a technically improved,
highly reliable and cheaper version of Hobbit still has a high
potential of becoming a useful and accepted tool in assisting
senior adults at home.
B. Results regarding Technical Improvements towards Future
Home Robots
While Hobbit already improved over other robots in terms
of size - it is considerable smaller both in width and height
than Care-o-bot - it is still too large. Robot height was found
to be linked to the main use of the robot. Users would like
the robot to be about as tall as when they are sitting. We
closely reached this but a maximum height of 120 cm was
found to be most appropriate. Robot width is constrained by
the homes of older adults where space is typically limited.
Hence, the platform should be smaller and has ideally not
more than a diameter of 40 cm. At present this would cause
considerable technical difﬁculties to integrate arms, batteries
and drives but technology is getting close to this goal. And
for reasons of easy navigation it is recommendable to give
the robot cylindrical shape which renders rotating behaviors
easier. Also in several cases doorways are as small as 65 cm
and traversal will then be easier if not feasible. Finally, the
robot arm should be completely inside the footprint of the
platform when the arm is in home position, so it cannot collide
with the environment when Hobbit is moving or rotating. A
remaining issue are threshold. 25 mm have been found often
and we used ramps to overcome these obstacles. It would be
advantageous to ﬁnd a simple wheeled solution to overcome
smaller thresholds without any adaptations of the environment.
Example solutions to cover thresholds are depicted in Figure
2.
Figure 2. Docking station (black) and the robot wrapped in plastic for
temperature tests.
Hobbit’s battery live was sufﬁcient and lasted for more than
eight hours of operation time. This is fully sufﬁcient, since
users will be tired of using the robot after a few hours and the
robot can go and recharge. In terms of safety the robot should
never be on a lower battery level, to make sure that a longer
search for the user in their home when patrolling or in case of
an emergency is supplied with sufﬁcient power of the entire
robot system. However, the battery status was not transparent
for the user and ideally the robot would show the estimated
remaining duration of operation.
A practical issue is a small docking station and reliable
markers to assure highly robust docking. Figure 3 shows
the docking station standing in front of the wall for best
discernibility. However, due to space limits in homes it should
merge as close as possible into the wall and it would be
good to be able to place it freely. The procedure used to
dock onto the charging station is designed for high ﬁdelity 2D
range ﬁnder sensor like lasers. Therefore, the shortcomings
of the RGB-D (limited resolution, large stand-off distance)
sensors apply negatively to docking as well. In addition to
this, docking requires close-range maneuvering to the charging
station, which due to the blind-spot of the depth stream of the
RGB-D sensors means that the actual docking is done using
dead-reckoning instead of more accurate localization methods.
Again, a laser could solve this problem. Nevertheless, using
imaging algorithms to visually detect the charging station or a
distinct visual pattern above the charging station in the RGB
stream of the sensors could also be used to make docking more
robust by providing more accurate localization information
when close to the docking station and would be the more cost
effective solution.
Figure 3. Docking station (black) and the robot wrapped in plastic for
temperature tests.
Another practical issues is a way to stop the robot at any
time. In addition to the On/Off hardware button, there should
also be a cancel hardware button/switch that would allow the
user to cancel immediately whatever activity the robot is doing
at any given moment remotely and without having to approach
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the robot. Currently, the only way the user can stop an activity
is by pressing the back arrow button or kick the bumper which
stops the movement, but not the running script, or turn the key
of the robot which causes a complete shut-down. All of the
above actions are difﬁcult for an elderly person to perform
while the robot is moving.
At night users would want Hobbit to be silent and dark,
there should be no (bright) lights while Hobbit is in the
charging station. The LEDs at the On/Off switches of Hobbit
and the touch screen, the LEDs at the charging station and
the Hobbit eyes (displays) are too bright at night when the
user wants to sleep. Finally, let us investigate more closely
improvements related to the active robot head, which turned
out to be of great value but has scope for improvements.
Figure 4. The upper body of Hobbit and its functionalities.
The upper body turns out to be an essential component of
the robot presentation. It serves as main unit to the feeling
of the presence of the robot. Figure 4 shows the upper body
and head in more detail. The main functionality of the active
head was to increase the ﬁeld of few of the RGB-D sensor
in the head and to cover with one camera functions such as
obstacle detection, human detection and gesture recognition,
and detecting and grasping objects from the ﬂoor. The head
was designed and produced by Blue Danube Robotics [19]. It
was enormously beneﬁcial to test several head versions which
lead to clear beneﬁts of an active head. These beneﬁts include
•
Indicating robot attention to the user: the head di-
rection naturally indicates where the robot places its
attention. Users intuitively grasped that the robot is
attending to them or not. This makes it extremely
efﬁcient as there is no need to present to the user in
another way that the robot is busy, for example, with
messages on the touch screen or spoken word.
•
Extending the robot’s viewing directions: the moving
head allows using the camera for object search in all
directions. This was used in initial search tests, where
ﬁxed robot locations and views have been used. This
should be even more exploited in the future and is a
powerful means to extend the operational capability
of the robot without adding new hardware. One could
think of it as upgrading the robot continuously with
new perceptual functionalities given the same hard-
ware.
•
Obstacle detection for safe navigation: Moving the
head to a looking down position allowed to reduce
the blind area of the sensor and to cover a larger part
of the ﬂoor. Different inclination angles were tested at
the beginning in order to improve the visibility zone,
also limiting obstructions caused by the tablet.
The active head has proven to be very useful in all these
aspects. A limiting technical factor is the ﬁeld of view of
present RGB-D cameras. Typically the view is limited to
45◦−60◦ horizontal ﬁeld of view and a maximum of 45◦ of
vertical ﬁeld of view. While the pan-tilt ability of the neck
enlarges this ability, the ﬁeld of view for a ﬁrst search is
restricted.
The ﬁeld of view of the Kinect or Asus sensor is 57◦
horizontally and 43◦ vertically. This limited ﬁeld of view of
RGBD sensors is not restricted to the Kinect but basically
to all RGBD sensors available at present. Also the new
Kinect, though operating on another principle, Time of Flight
(TOF), has about the same ﬁeld of view. Other alternatives
have similar characteristics, e.g. the ARGOS 3D - P100
sensor of Bluetechnix with rather limited resolution of only
160x120, or the Sentis ToF M100 OEM plus camera that
is made to ﬁt into customer products. Another option is the
Intel(R) RealSense(TM) 3D Camera (Front F200) Depth Intel
RealSense F200/VF0800, yet gain with a similar ﬁeld of view.
The present sensor situation is even more restricted, since
neither PrimeSense nor ASUS Kinect sensor are commercially
available any longer.
With the tasks of viewing both the ﬂoor, obstacles, onto
tables for object detection, and forward to detect persons and
recognize gestures or activities, the proposed set-up is still
viable, and can be improved by the addition of other sensors
to increase safety. A slightly changed design with a dark face
may better hide the dark holes from the camera. One way
to augment the ﬁeld of view is to include a wide ﬁeld of
view camera into the head. The human visual system covers
about 180◦ horizontally. This would be of particular interest
for locating the user. The head would still rotate to ﬁxate the
user, or try several ﬁxations, until the user has been reliably
detected. Again, the capability to have a gaze direction and
indicate to the user where the robot attends at present comes
in handy and will create the expected bonding as shown in the
trials.
First work in this direction is ongoing, e.g. [20], [21].
However, there are no systems yet that would reliably and
repeatedly ﬁxate the user in an open home setting. Further-
more, only in a few works an adaptive approach to the user
has been attempted and then the distance estimate was used
from a laser to the single person legs in a given setting [22].
Finally, there are several practical issues that help in the
design and trial phase of a home robot. It is useful to make
the robot and its functionality remotely accessible via a secure
Internet connection. This allows engineers to check on the
platform and encountered problems without physically moving
to the trial site. If issues with the hardware need to be resolved,
a hull that can be easily unmounted saves a lot of effort. And
there is a trade-off between simple hardware and more complex
software. For example, we did not use any ultra sonic (US)
sensors, which had the effect that we had to make sure that
glass surfaces do not cover the full range of the height of the
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

robot. Wooden frames typically produce sufﬁcient signal in the
RGB-D cameras to present no hazard. On the other hand, a
few US sensors may improve the situation and may also aid
in a simple check before driving backwards.
At the end, and mixing with experience from other projects,
it is not sufﬁcient to detect the ﬂoor alone for driving forward
safely. While we did not encounter any dangerous situation
when navigating with Hobbit, redundant perception of drivable
ﬂoor is essential to assure robot safety in front of downward
steps. Hole detectors based on infrared sensors and as a third
measure a means to block access to certain areas in the
navigation tool are advisable complimentary measures.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The paper presented Hobbit - a robot developed and built to
enable older people to feel safe and stay longer in their homes
by using new information technology including smart envi-
ronments (Ambient Assisted Living - AAL). The main goal of
the robot is to provide a feeling of safety and being supported
while maintaining or increasing the user’s feeling of self-
efﬁcacy (one’s own ability to complete tasks). Consequently,
the functionalities focus on emergency detection (mobile vision
and AAL, regular patrolling), handling emergencies (calm-
ing dialogues, communication with relatives) as well as fall
prevention measures (keeping ﬂoors clutter-free, transporting
items, staying active, ﬁtness, and reminders). Moreover, high
usability, user acceptance as well as a reasonable level of
afford-ability are required to achieve a sustainable success of
the robot.
We presented ﬁrst results of a longer study of the robot
in the wild, in the homes of 18 older adults. The study
lasted for three weeks each, with another speciﬁc highlight
of the study, that the robot was fully autonomous. Users could
freely select what they wanted to do with the robot. While
certain functionalities such as grasping objects from the ﬂoor
and searching for objects did not provide sufﬁcient reliability,
other functions such as navigation, docking, entertainment,
reminders, and the ﬁtness function proved to be useful. Users
saw the great potential of such a robot and very highly
evaluated the capability to pick up something from the ﬂoor
and to transport and ﬁnd objects.
Regarding the effectiveness of HRI, the main ﬁnding is that
an active head is a very helpful way to convey information
about the robot and to facilitate human robot interaction itself.
The active camera in the head does not only prove to be useful
for obstacle detection and increasing the workspace, it turned
out one of the most important means for HRI as it conveys in
a very intuitive way the status of the robot. It was immediately
obvious to users, that a robot looking down is busy while
a robot looking up and then turning the head towards the
user using head and torso detection is the trigger to start an
interaction. In conclusion, the usage of active heads should
achieve even more attention. Future work also considers to
increase the head panning range to an owl, which would make
it possible to also look behind the robot in case it needs to
reverse. An issue of importance when space is narrow in user
homes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has received funding from the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme under grant
agreement No. 288146 and funding from the Austrian Science
Foundation under grant ALOOF. Thanks to Andreas Bley of
Metralabs to show the robot docking station.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Care-o-bot,” https://www.care-o-bot.de.
[2]
“Srs project,” http://srs-project.eu.
[3]
“Accompany project,” http://www.accompanyproject.eu.
[4]
F. Amirabdollahian, S. Bedaf, R. Bormann, H. Draper, V. Evers, G. J.
Gelderblom, C. Gutierrez Ruiz, D. Hewson, N. Hu, I. Iacono et al.,
“Accompany: Acceptable robotics companions for ageing yearsmulti-
dimensional aspects of human-system interactions,” in Human System
Interaction (HSI), 2013 The 6th International Conference on.
IEEE,
2013, pp. 570–577.
[5]
“Giraff+ project,” http://www.giraffplus.eu.
[6]
J. Sung, H. I. Christensen, and R. E. Grinter, “Robots in the wild:
understanding long-term use,” in Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2009
4th ACM/IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 45–52.
[7]
I. Leite, C. Martinho, and A. Paiva, “Social robots for long-term
interaction: a survey,” International Journal of Social Robotics, vol. 5,
no. 2, 2013, pp. 291–308.
[8]
“Growmeup project,” http://www.growmeup.eu.
[9]
“Pal robotics,” http://pal-robotics.com.
[10]
“Enrichme project,” http://www.enrichme.eu.
[11]
“Marios project,” http://www.mario-project.eu.
[12]
D. Fischinger, P. Einramhof, K. Papoutsakis, W. Wohlkinger, P. Mayer,
P. Panek, S. Hofmann, T. Koertner, A. Weiss, A. Argyros et al., “Hobbit,
a care robot supporting independent living at home: First prototype and
lessons learned,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 75, 2016, pp.
60–78.
[13]
J. M. Beer, C.-A. Smarr, T. L. Chen, A. Prakash, T. L. Mitzner,
C. C. Kemp, and W. A. Rogers, “The domesticated robot: design
guidelines for assisting older adults to age in place,” in Proceedings
of the seventh annual ACM/IEEE international conference on Human-
Robot Interaction.
ACM, 2012, pp. 335–342.
[14]
A. Weiss, J. Beer, T. Shibata, and M. Vincze, “Socially assistive robots
for the aging population: are we trapped in stereotypes?” in Proceedings
of the 2014 ACM/IEEE international conference on Human-robot
interaction.
ACM, 2014, pp. 497–498.
[15]
L. Lammer, A. Huber, A. Weiss, and M. Vincze, “Mutual care: How
older adults react when they should help their care robot,” in AISB2014:
Proceedings of the 3rd international symposium on new frontiers in
human–robot interaction, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[16]
J. Pripﬂ, T. K¨ortner, D. Batko-Klein, D. Hebesberger, M. Weninger,
C. Gisinger, S. Frennert, H. Eftring, M. Antona, I. Adami, A. Weiss,
M. Bajones, and M. Vincze, “Results of a real world trial with a mobile
social service robot for older adults,” in Extended proceedings of HRI,
2016.
[17]
L. Yardley, N. Beyer, K. Hauer, G. Kempen, C. Piot-Ziegler, and
C. Todd, “Development and initial validation of the falls efﬁcacy scale-
international (fes-i),” Age and ageing, vol. 34, no. 6, 2005, pp. 614–619.
[18]
A. Huber, L. Lammer, A. Weiss, and M. Vincze, “Designing adaptive
roles for socially assistive robots: a new method to reduce technological
determinism and role stereotypes,” Journal of Human-Robot Interaction,
vol. 3, no. 2, 2014, pp. 100–115.
[19]
“Blue danube robotics,” www.bluedanuberobotics.at.
[20]
B. Pierce, T. Kuratate, C. Vogl, and G. Cheng, “mask-bot 2i: An active
customisable robotic head with interchangeable face,” in Humanoid
Robots (Humanoids), 2012 12th IEEE-RAS International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 520–525.
[21]
D. Das, M. Rashed, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Kuno et al., “Supporting human–
robot interaction based on the level of visual focus of attention,” Human-
Machine Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 45, no. 6, 2015, pp. 664–
675.
[22]
R. Mead and M. J. Mataric, “Robots have needs too: People adapt
their proxemic preferences to improve autonomous robot recognition
of human social signals,” New Frontiers in Human-Robot Interaction,
2015, p. 100.
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

