Designing a Feeding Support System for Infants using IoT 
Kyudong Park1, Jiyoung Kwahk2, Sung H. Han2
Department of Creative IT Engineering1
Department of Industrial and Management Engineering2
POSTECH 
Pohang, South Korea 
Email: {kdpark, kjy, shan }@postech.ac.kr 
Abstract— The main goal of this on-going research is to design 
a feeding support system based on technologies with Internet 
of Things (IoT). For that reason, we conducted user 
observation and in-depth interview with three parents for 
developing the system based on better understanding of users. 
We found two pain points, which are the measurement of 
temperature and quantity of feeding milk, in current feeding 
behavior. Thus, designed 
prototype 
can 
measure the 
temperature and record the quantity of feeding automatically 
with sensors. The prototype consists of sensor client, 
representation client, and server. Sensor client obtains feeding 
amount and time information and sends them to the server via 
the internet. The server statistically analyzes the dataset and 
gives useful information about the baby. Representation client 
visualizes the stored data effectively and gets an alarm setting 
for feeding time. The next step of the research is to perform a 
user study to evaluate user experience and establish a strategy 
for analyzing data with machine learning approaches. 
Keywords-UX design; Feeding system for infants; Internet of 
Things 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, technologies based on Internet of Things (IoT) 
have got a roaring attention of academic as well as the 
industrial field. Kevin Ashton proposed the first concept of 
IoT in forms of Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) in 
1999 [1]. The ultimate objective of IoT is to construct more 
comfortable 
and 
convenient 
environment 
through 
exchanging the information seamlessly between objects [2]. 
Nowadays, IoT technologies are composed of 1) device for 
detecting and sensing an object, 2) network for connecting to 
the internet, and 3) platform for knowledge management 
considering semantics. These were mainly developed as 
separate technologies, but now, interdisciplinary approaches, 
such as human-computer interaction (HCI), ergonomics, 
cognitive science, and data science are vibrantly discussed 
and studied. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the 
design process. Section 3 demonstrates the needs of users. 
Section 4 contains a detailed explanation of the proposed 
prototype. Section 5 draws conclusions and future work. 
II.
DESIGN PROCESS
In this project, we adopted human-centered design 
(HCD) process for developing a product based on better 
understanding of users. There are five main activities in 
HCD process according to the ISO 13407 standard as shown 
in Figure 1 [3]. We focused “understand and specify the 
context of use” and “specify the user requirements” activities 
to find users’ needs. Based on the needs, the prototype was 
designed, but it is still under development. After producing 
design solutions, an evaluation will be performed with users. 
Figure 1. The human-centered design cycle [3]
III.
NEEDS FINDING
A. Understand and specify the context of use 
The topic with formula milk feeding has been steadily 
studied worldwide and regarded as important because it is 
directly related to the infant health [4][5]. In this study, we 
conducted user observation and in-depth interview with three 
parents to find needs.  
Most feedings with formula milk use a baby bottle. Thus, 
parents and babysitter have to pay particular attention to air 
penetration into the bottle (causing diarrhea), and internal 
washing and disinfection of the bottle. Furthermore, when 
parents make a formula milk, they first boil tap water and 
pour the exact amount of water into the bottle. In this process, 
more than 70 degree Celsius water is necessary because of 
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the sterilization of Cronobacter Sakazakii, which can cause 
bacteremia and meningitis with the use of powdered infant 
formula [6]. Then, add the right number of scoops to the 
bottle, give the bottle a good shake until all the powder has 
dissolved, and leave it to cool naturally. They have to test the 
temperature by tipping a little milk to the inside of their wrist. 
It should feel just warm, not hot. After feeding, they have to 
check the quantity of feeding and write it down in a 
notebook or mobile application by hand. 
B. Specify the user requirements 
We found two pain points in current feeding behavior. 
First is the measurement of temperature. Appropriate feeding 
temperature is 37 degree Celsius, but skin sensation using 
wrist is limited to measure the suitable temperature: 
“If I give my son a slightly hotter milk powder than 
normal, he will have loose bowels” 
Second is the measurement and record of the quantity of 
feeding milk. This is an essential process because weight, 
height, and quantity of feeding are important factors to check 
the infant’s health. However, it could be a very tiresome to 
measure the quantity by the gradation on the bottle, and write 
the value in the note or mobile application: 
“I have to remember the amount of milk powder in the 
bottle when I start feeding. After finishing, I subtract the 
remaining amount. Then, I write it down in my note.” 
Thus, we propose a product that can measure the 
temperature and record the quantity of feeding automatically. 
IV.
PROPOSED PROTOTYPE
The proposed system consists of sensor client, 
representation client, and server (Figure 2). Sensor client will 
obtain data including feeding amount and time, and send it to 
the server using a network. Data will be collected to the 
server and processed. The server will statistically analyze the 
dataset, and give useful information about the baby. 
Representation client, such as mobile application, will 
visualize the stored data, and get an alarm setting for feeding 
time and private data including baby’s weight and height. 
A. Sensor client 
Sensor client has a form of the cup holder that user can 
put the feeding bottle on. There are sensors for measuring the 
weight and temperature located at the bottom of the holder. 
For measuring the weight of the bottle with powder milk, we 
use an amplifier (HX711) and load cell, which creates an 
electrical 
signal 
from 
measured 
force. 
Contactless 
temperature sensor using infrared light (MLX90614) is 
installed in the client. The main advantages of contactless 
approach are 1) measurement time is short, and 2) the sensor 
has a long life because it is not contaminated from the object.  
We also adopt Arduino UNO board for receiving data 
from the sensor and transmitting the data to the server. 
Arduino UNO is a microcontroller board based on the 
ATmega328. And it has a small size and easy-to-use 
hardware and programming language based on Java so that it 
is efficient in satisfying users’ changeable requirements. 
Internet connection will be supported by Wi-Fi shield (ESP-
8266). 
B. Representation client 
Representation client performs visualization function that 
gives an effective way to communicate with processed data 
from the server through visual imagery in forms of mobile 
application. As shown in Figure 3, users can check feeding 
amount, time, and patterns of feeding behavior. Also, users 
can enter the weight and height of their baby for more 
detailed analysis and can set the timer for periodic alarm. 
Figure 3. The prototype of representation client
C. Server 
The server connects with sensor client and representation 
client by storing and transmitting feeding data. Basically, 
time (feeding start event and feeding finish event) and 
quantity of milk (at feeding start and at feeding finish) will 
be stored on the server. After collecting dataset from users, 
the server will be able to infer meaningful information about 
infants, such as feeding pattern, desired feeding time, the 
Figure 2. The overall structure of the proposed system 
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

age-appropriate amount of formula milk, etc., by machine 
learning techniques. 
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this study, feeding support system for infants is 
proposed with IoT concept. Through the observation and the 
interview, we found two pain points; measurement of proper 
temperature and record of the amount of feeding milk. 
Considering them, the prototype is designed using IoT.  
Further studies need to be carried out in order to evaluate 
its usability and user experience by a user study. More than 
20 users including parents having a baby, as well as staffs in 
a postnatal care center will be recruited for testing our 
product and service. Participants will be asked to use our 
product to feeding with formula milk in terms of longitudinal 
study at least 2 weeks. Also, diary study would be adopted to 
capture user experience (UX) in daily context. 
Further research should be undertaken to analyze the data 
collected from the server. Recently, novel services 
combining IT and healthcare, such as MI band by Xiaomi 
have been released. Mi band can detect and track how many 
steps users have walked and how much users have slept. It 
means Xiaomi now collects walk and sleep data of millions 
of users, and the data is key to create added value. In the 
same vein, collected dataset from our proposed service is 
also very important in perspective of business and research. 
In the academia, deriving meaningful insights from the 
healthcare-related data has been studied [7]-[9]. Marlin et al. 
[7] developed a probabilistic clustering model for finding 
patterns from physiologic time series data contained in e-
health care records. Keogh et al. [8] detected abnormal signal 
from the time-series data in medical datasets. We could 
apply these approaches to develop an algorithm detecting 
meaning events from the feeding dataset. 
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Ashton,  “That ‘internet of things’ thing,” RFiD Journal, 
vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 97-114, 2009. 
[2]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A 
survey,” Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787-2805, 
2010. 
[3]
M. Maguire, “Methods to support human-centred design,” 
International journal of human-computer studies, vol. 55, no. 
4, pp. 587-634, 2001. 
[4]
P. Ziegler, R. Briefel, N. Clusen, and B. Devaney, “Feeding 
Infants and Toddlers Study (FITS): development of the FITS 
survey in comparison to other dietary survey methods,” 
Journal of the American Dietetic Association, vol. 106, no. 1, 
pp. 12.e1-12.e50, 2006. 
[5]
R. J. Schanler, R. J. Shulman, and C. Lau, “Feeding strategies 
for premature infants: beneficial outcomes of feeding fortified 
human milk versus preterm formula,” Pediatrics, vol. 103, no. 
6, pp. 1150-1157, 1999. 
[6]
K. K. Lai, “Enterobacter sakazakii infections among neonates, 
infants, children, and adults: case reports and a review of the 
literature,” Medicine, vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 113-122, 2001. 
[7]
B. M. Marlin, D. C. Kale, R. G. Khemani, and R. C. Wetzel, 
“Unsupervised pattern discovery in electronic health care data 
using probabilistic clustering models,” In Proceedings of the 
2nd 
ACM 
SIGHIT 
International 
Health 
Informatics 
Symposium, ACM, pp. 389-398, 2012. 
[8]
E. Keogh, J. Lin, A. W. Fu, and H. VanHerle, “Finding 
unusual medical time-series subsequences: Algorithms and 
applications,” IEEE Transactions on Information Technology 
in Biomedicine, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 429-439, 2006. 
[9]
S. J. Roberts, “Extreme value statistics for novelty detection 
in biomedical data processing,” IEE Proceedings-Science, 
Measurement and Technology, vol. 147, no. 6, pp. 363-367, 
2000.
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

