Rendering Method of 2-Dimensional Vibration Presentation
for Improving Fidelity of Haptic Texture
Junya Kurogi
Faculty of Engineering, Kumamoto University
2-39-1, Kurokami, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, Japan
Email: kurogi@saga-lab.org
Satoshi Saga
Faculty of Advanced Science and Technology,
Kumamoto University,
2-39-1,Kurokami, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, Japan
Email: saga@saga-lab.org
Abstract—In recent years, touchscreens have been used all over
the world, however, most of them are without realistic haptic
feedback. Some of them have feedback, but most of them have
vibration direction limited to one direction. Here we propose
a novel rendering method for direction-controlled 2-dimensional
vibration display to present texture information. In this paper,
we proposed a dimension-controlled rendering method of texture
information that enables vibration control in the X and Y-axis
precisely by using lateral force. Further, to improve the ﬁdelity
for large-scaled texture, we proposed to combine image features
information of the textures. We held an experiment to evaluate
the ﬁdelity of the proposed method. The result shows that the
proposed method can present randomized textures and large
periodic textures more precisely than the conventional method.
Keywords–Haptic Rendering; Vibrotactile display.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, touchscreens have been used all over the
world due to the spread of smartphones and the like, however
many of them do not have realistic vibrotactile feedback.
At the research level, several haptic devices using a liquid
crystal panel have been developed. For example, Chubb et al.
developed a haptic device employing friction change induced
by squeeze ﬁlm effect[1], and Konyo et al. proposed vibration
frequency control and virtual pointer [2]. Wang et al. devel-
oped a sliding system using shear force [3]. These vibration
stimuli realize high reproducibility, though, the direction of the
vibration is limited to one-dimension. This is because it has
been found that receptors transmitting vibrational stimulus in
the skin cannot discriminate the direction of vibration[4]. For
this reason, the direction of vibration has not been regarded
as much importance in the tactile research so far, and most of
them have employed one-dimensional vibration.
However, there is some distribution of the receptors in
the skin. Thus, the input signals from multiple receptors may
induce discrimination of multi-dimensional vibration. In this
paper, we propose a rendering method to reproduce biaxial
acceleration information through our lateral-force-displaying
device using X–axis and Y-axis vibration information. We
report the results of experiments on the reproducibility of
tactile sensation by comparing the conventional method and
proposed one. We propose a novel rendering method to display
multi-dimensional vibration. Further, to improve the ﬁdelity for
large-scaled texture, we proposed to combine image features
information of the textures. We held an experiment to evaluate
the ﬁdelity of the proposed method. The result suggests that the
proposed method can present randomized textures and periodic
textures more precisely than the conventional method.
II.
PRESENTATION OF TACTILE TEXTURE
INFORMATION USING VIBRATION
Many researchers are considering methods of presenting
tactile texture information using vibration information from
various viewpoints [5], [6]. Romano et al. proposed a method
for recording texture on a tablet by recording acceleration,
position, and contact force overtime when touching a texture
with a dedicated tool [7]. Saga et al. proposed a simpler
recording/playing method by omitting the measurement of
pressure and using a compensation method when reproducing
vibration [8]. They reproduce the sense of direct touch by
recording vibration information with ﬁngers and reproducing
the recorded information by using the shearing force presen-
tation device.
III.
METHODS
We extend the method of Saga et al. and propose a method
to accurately record the vibration information on the X and Y
axes and reproduce it on our device.
A. Recording phase
The triaxial acceleration sensor (ADXL - 335) is ﬁxed
to the ﬁnger with tape and the acceleration information is
recorded from several textures. Since Saga et al. recorded
acceleration information by the audio input, it was recorded
as one-dimensional data. In this research, to accurately ac-
quire three-dimensional data, acceleration information was
processed by a microcontroller, Arduino, which packs three-
axis information as one packet and transmitted to a PC using
serial communication. On the PC, packed vibration informa-
tion was unpacked and recorded by the Processing application.
The acceleration is sampled at 1 kHz. To accurately present
the recorded vibration direction and reproduce faithful vibra-
tions, using correct vibrations which are suitable for the user ’
s movement direction is essential. Therefore, when recording
vibration information, we stored vibration separately not in
one direction but two directions, X and Y-axis. This makes it
possible to more accurately reproduce vibrations not only for
textures that give similar vibrations regardless of the direction
in which the ﬁngers are moved but also for textures with
signiﬁcantly different vibrations depending on the direction in
which the ﬁngers are moved.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Display phase
Reproduction of vibration is carried out by using pre-
recorded vibrations in two directions and a shearing force
presenting device. In the presentation phase, vibration patterns
are generated by using the vibration information of these two
directions.
The compensation method used by Saga et al. resampled
the acceleration by using the ratio of the moving speed of the
ﬁnger during recording and playing. In our proposed method,
we use a new compensation method extended the method of
Saga et al. in this experiment. The compensation method is
described below.
First, information to be recorded and reproduced is deﬁned
(The superscript D =X,Yrepresents the direction of movement,
r and p represent the phase of record or play).
aD
r (tr) =
(aD
rx
aD
ry
)
(1)
The tr shows the elapsed time in the recording phase. The
ﬁnger position Xp during playing phase is obtained, and the
ﬁnger movement speed is derived from the following value.
Xp(tp) =
(
xp
yp
)
(2)
At this time, the moving speed of the ﬁnger during playing
phase ( ˙xp) is calculated using the moving distance in unit time
∆T.
˙xp = ∆Xp(tp)
∆T
=
( ∆xp
∆T
∆yp
∆T
)
(3)
Because the elapsed time between frames during recording
and playing phase should be the same, the presented vibration
is calculated using the ratio of recording speed ˙xr and playing
speed ˙xp.
aD
p (tpn+1)
=
arD(tpn + |˙xp(tpn)|
|˙xr(tpn)| ∆T)
(4)
In this experiment, the moving speed in the recording
phase, ˙xr =
5 cm/s. In the playing phase, the vibration is
presented using the aD
p (tpn+1) (Eq. 5), which is a linear joint of
aX andaY . As shown in Figure 1, depending on the movement
direction, switch the acceleration information. If the movement
vector of the user’s ﬁnger is (α, β), the presented acceleration
ap(tpn+1) is obtained using the following formula
ap(tpn+1) =

α
√
α2 +β 2
aX
r (tpn+1)+

β
√
α2 +β 2
aY
r (tpn+1)
(5)
Figure 1. Presentation method of vibration according to the movement
direction of the ﬁnger
IV.
SUPERPOSITION INFORMATION OF IMAGE FEATURES
The proposed method has a problem that tactile repro-
ducibility decreases for a texture having a certain spatial
frequency (e.g., tiled-ﬂoor). Hence the ﬁdelity of the texture
decreases. We considered that the problem is caused by the pe-
riodicity and continuity of the presented vibration. Therefore,
we propose to combine another rendering method to resolve
this problem by employing image information.
A. Recording of image features
To solve the problem in displaying larger periodic textures,
we propose a vibration presentation method using image
features. The parameters of feature points, such as size and
angle, are considered to represent some texture information.
Therefore, our method extracts the information contained in
the texture image, processes it into a one-dimensional form
that can be used for augmenting vibration. The procedure of
presenting the actual vibration information and image infor-
mation by augmentation is shown below. OpenCV is used for
image processing. The procedure is described below;
1)
Acquire features from texture images using AKAZE
2)
Extract the size information representing the diameter
of the important region around the feature
3)
Obtains one-dimensional information by averaging
information in each of the x-axis and y-axis directions
and then normalizing
4)
Augment the size information corresponding to the
display position on the vibration information and
presented
As large periodic textures, we used a self-made texture of
a tile pattern made of polylactic acid (PLA). Figure 2 shows
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

　　
Figure 2. (left)self-made texture：(right)image future
　　　
Figure 3. Image features extracted from self-made tile texture
the result of the extraction of image features from the image
of the self-made texture.
Image features can also be acquired for textures with other
certain spatial frequencies in the same way, and by superimpos-
ing image features corresponding to ﬁnger positions on texture
vibration information, it is effective for textures with low
tactile reproducibility vibration is presented. Figure 3 shows
one-dimensional image features extracted from a self-made tile
texture (e0(x)). Further, to avoid the diminishing of vibration
at no feature area, we also prepared normalized features after
applying a logarithmic function to the image features (e1(x)).
Figure 4 shows a normalized image features(e1(x)).
B. Presentation of vibration information using image feature
The presented vibration is calculated by the following
equation. ax, ay is the presentation vibration on the x-axis
and y-axis, and e is the size information of the image feature
to be superimposed.
a(x,y) = axe(x)+aye(y)
(6)
By using this presentation method, it is possible to empha-
size and present only the characteristic parts of the texture.
Figure 5 shows the vibration information before the image
feature is augmented, and Figure 6 shows the vibration infor-
mation after the image feature is augmented. Figure 7 shows
the vibration information after the augmentation of e1(x).
V.
EXPERIMENT
A. Experiment preparation
We used 10 textures for an experiment. The textures are the
following; soft artiﬁcial grass1 which is close to natural grass,
artiﬁcial grass2 which is harder than natural grass, stiff carpet1,
Figure 4. Image features with logarithmic function
Figure 5. The vibration information before the image feature is superimposed
soft carpet2, self-made tiled texture, 40 coarse sandpaper, three
types of placemats with different feels, and punched plastic
plates. Figure 8 shows the image of the texture used in the
experiment.
Participants were 6 healthy men aged 22 to 24. During this
experiment, they wear eye masks to block visual information
and headphones to block external sounds. They were all right-
handed, and they used their right index ﬁngers for rubbing
movement.
B. Experiment procedure
We compared several rendering methods of vibration for
each texture. 5 stages Likert scale were used for evaluation.
1)
Ask the subject to touch the sample texture placed on
the weighing scale and train them so that the pressing
force to be kept about 50 gf for 5 minutes
2)
Have they touch the real texture for 10 seconds to
learn the tactile sensation
3)
Ask them to touch the texture presented on the
display for 10 seconds and evaluate it in ﬁve steps
how much the texture have ﬁdelity
4)
Change the presentation method and have it evaluated
in the same way as steps 2 and 3.
5)
Only when the texture to be displayed was a large
periodic texture, a method of augmenting image
features is also used, and the user is asked to select
whis is the better method for ﬁdelity, e0(x) ore1(x)
6)
After completing steps 2 to 5 for all ten types of
textures, we ﬁnished the experiment.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 6. The vibration information after the image feature is superimposed
Figure 7. the vibration information after the image feature to which the
logarithmic function is applied is superimposed
To eliminate the inﬂuence of the order effect, experiments are
conducted by changing the order of presenting patterns for
each subject.
VI.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Reality of virtual texture
The results of reality evaluation of the virtual texture are
shown in Figure 9.
The proposed two-dimensional vibration rendering method
was evaluated higher than the one-dimensional vibration pre-
sentation in artiﬁcial grass 2, carpet 2, placemat 1, and
placemat 2 (Figure 9). However, as a result of Tukey ’s
test, no signiﬁcant difference was obtained for textures other
than artiﬁcial grass 2. We consider the reasons as follows.
Among the textures that were highly evaluated for the two-
dimensional vibration presentation, the following textures,
artiﬁcial turf 2, sandpaper, and mat 2, have random spatial
frequencies. Also, although no signiﬁcant difference was ob-
tained between sandpaper and mat 2, both scores exceeded 3.0.
This suggests that our two-dimensional vibration presentation
method is good at presenting textures with random spatial
frequencies. With soft textures,such as artiﬁcial grass 1, carpet,
and mat 3, there was no signiﬁcant difference between the
one-dimensional and two-dimensional vibration presentations.
Our proposed method records vibrations in the X-axis and
Y-axis directions and selects and presents vibrations by the
direction of ﬁnger movement, making it easier to generate
random-period vibrations than one-dimensional vibrations it
is conceivable that. In particular, since the display surface is
Figure 8. Texture used in experiment
Figure 9. Result of reality evaluation
a hard material, it can be said that the evaluation of a texture
having a hard random spatial frequency tends to be high. This
may be related to the perception of softness due to the change
in the contact area between the ﬁnger and the texture.
B. Evaluation of image feature superposition method
From Figure 9, as you can see that for some textures, the
presentation method that augments image features on vibration
information is highly evaluated.
From the two results, the proposed two-dimensional ren-
dering method is suitable for presenting materials with random
spatial frequencies (artiﬁcial grass 2 and sandpaper 2). In other
words, it is not suitable for presenting materials with certain
spatial frequencies (e.g., tile). We will discuss the reasons for
this result. In the proposed method, independent vibrations are
presented on the X-axis and the Y-axis, and it is speculated that
vibrations with random periods are likely to occur, depending
on the direction in which the ﬁnger is moved since the subject
can freely move the ﬁnger during the experiment. However,
it is difﬁcult to present a periodic vibration. Also, the larger
the period of the real texture, the easier it is for the users to
recognize the periodicity. Therefore, the reality of the virtual
texture tends to be lower when compared to the real texture.
For these reasons, the users felt ﬁdelity on materials with
random spatial frequencies. On the other hand, they couldn ’
t feel ﬁdelity on materials with large periodic patterns. Since
the texture of tiles, place mat1 and punched plastic sheet has
large periodic patterns, it is considered difﬁcult to reproduce
it with the two-dimensional rendering method.
However, from the results of the image feature-based ren-
dering method, we found the method can display large periodic
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 10. Result of reality evaluation
patterns. By using the image feature, we can emphasize the
characteristic part of the texture. Figure 10 shows the result of
selecting the higher evaluation one of the two image feature
augmentation methods.
The
method
that
did
not
apply
the
logarithmic
function(e0(x)) in all three textures received higher ratings.
We consider the reason for this result. The method using a
logarithmic function for image features (e1(x)) reduced loss of
vibration information but also reduced feature enhancement.
In particular, since place mat1 has the longest distance
between features among the three textures, that the periodicity
of the features seemed to contribute more to the ﬁdelity
than the magnitude of the vibration. Also, the score of the
punched plastic sheet texture exceeds 3.0 even in the case of
a two-dimensional vibration presentation, although the texture
has a certain spatial frequency. This is probably because the
distance between feature points of the texture is small and
it is difﬁcult to recognize a constant period. This indicates
that the two-dimensional vibration presentation method is not
good at presenting textures that have a constant and large
period.
VII.
CONCLUSION
We proposed a method to record the vibration of a texture
tracing using a three-axis acceleration sensor and reproduce it
as faithfully as possible in two dimensions. Experiments show
that our proposed method is suitable for displaying textures
with random spatial frequencies. In addition, we proposed
a presentation method that combines image features, and
succeeded in improving the reproducibility of textures that are
difﬁcult to present.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI
18H04104G1 (Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (A)) and
19K2287900 (Grant-in-Aid for challenging Exploratory Re-
search).
REFERENCES
[1]
E. C. Chubb, J. E. Colgate, and M. A. Peshkin, “Shiverpad: A glass haptic
surface that produces shear force on a bare ﬁnger,” IEEE Transactions
on Haptics, vol. 3, no. 3, 2010, pp. 189–198.
[2]
M. Konyo, H. Yamada, S. Okamoto, and S. Tadokoro, “Alternative
display of friction represented by tactile stimulation without tangential
force,” in International Conference on Human Haptic Sensing and Touch
Enabled Computer Applications.
Springer, 2008, pp. 619–629.
[3]
D. Wang, K. Tuer, M. Rossi, and J. Shu, “Haptic overlay device for ﬂat
panel touch displays,” in Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and
Teleoperator Systems, 2004. HAPTICS’04. Proceedings. 12th Interna-
tional Symposium on.
IEEE, 2004, p. 290.
[4]
A. Brisben, S. Hsiao, and K. Johnson, “Detection of vibration transmitted
through an object grasped in the hand,” Journal of Neurophysiology,
vol. 81, no. 4, 1999, pp. 1548–1558.
[5]
K. Minamizawa, Y. Kakehi, M. Nakatani, S. Mihara, and S. Tachi,
“Techtile toolkit: a prototyping tool for design and education of haptic
media,” in Proceedings of the 2012 Virtual Reality International Confer-
ence.
ACM, 2012, p. 26.
[6]
Y. Visell, A. Law, and J. R. Cooperstock, “Toward iconic vibrotactile
information display using ﬂoor surfaces,” in EuroHaptics conference,
2009 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and
Teleoperator Systems. World Haptics 2009. Third Joint.
IEEE, 2009,
pp. 267–272.
[7]
J. M. Romano and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Creating realistic virtual textures
from contact acceleration data,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 5,
no. 2, 2012, pp. 109–119.
[8]
S. Saga and R. Raskar, “Simultaneous geometry and texture display based
on lateral force for touchscreen,” in World Haptics Conference (WHC),
2013.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 437–442.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

