Tablet PCs – An Assistive Technology for Students with Reading Difficulties? 
 
Andrea A. Gasparini  
Digital Services, University of Oslo Library 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: a.a.gasparini@ub.uio.no 
Alma L. Culén  
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: almira@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the results of a descriptive case 
study concerning adoption of iPad or other tablets as assistive 
technology. Two pilot studies concerning the adoption and use 
of the iPad for active reading in a teaching/learning situation 
have recently been conducted at elementary school level and at 
university level. In the course of both studies, students with 
reading difficulties were encountered. For each group of 
students, a key case has been chosen. The paper presents our 
findings regarding adjustments that needed to be made for 
these students and initial research on iPad usability for 
students with special education needs. By describing two 
instances, one involving a university student and the other two 
elementary school children, we hope to bring attention to 
application of ICT for students with reading difficulties. 
Students with this kind of impairment are often neglected in 
comparison to students with visual impairments or other 
disabilities. In one case, the iPad has been successfully 
integrated into students’ life as an assistive technology. The 
cases may be both instructive and inspirational for educational 
situations involving students with similar disabilities as 
adjustments and applications used to help students do not 
involve any large investments in software or devices. 
Keywords-assistive technology; iPad; reading difficulties; 
tablet PC; technology adoption  
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Two pilot studies involving the use of iPads for active 
reading in a teaching/learning situation have recently been 
conducted [1], [2] and [3]. One of the studies has involved 
University students and the other, 4th grade children in 
elementary school. The goal of the studies was to explore the 
potential of mobile and wireless technologies (the iPad was 
used in both cases) to change classroom information 
ecologies and enable anytime anyplace learning situations. 
The concept of information ecology was introduced by Nardi 
and O’Day in [4] as  “a system of people, practices, values, 
and technologies in a particular local environment” and it 
focuses on five defining characteristics 1) it is a system 2) the 
system contains diversity of people and tools 3) there is a 
change or co-evolution happening over time and through use 
of technology 4) keystone species are part of the ecology 
(their presence is critical for the system’s survival) and 5) 
local habitation (the habitation of technology is its location 
within a network of relationships). Nardi argues: “Human 
expertise, judgment and creativity can be supported, but not 
replaced by computer-based tools.” One should contemplate 
the technology with both the head and the heart and not fall 
prey to either technophilia or technophobia. The approach 
based on classroom information ecology was taken in all the 
studies we conducted with iPads.  
In [5], Turkle states the following regarding computer 
technology: 
“Most 
considerations 
of 
the 
computer 
concentrate on the “instrumental computer”, on what work 
the computer will do. But my focus here is on something 
different, on the “subjective computer”. This is the machine 
as it enters into social life and psychological development, 
the computer as it affects the way we think, especially the 
way we think about ourselves. We saw both the view of 
“instrumental tablet” and “subjective tablet”.” The 
instrumental side answering questions around how the iPad 
may be best used in the classroom and outside of the 
classroom for the purposes of learning. The subjective side 
addressing the plethora of factors such as personal 
relationship with iPad, social changes it induces, taking a 
larger freedom in designing the curriculum (empowerment), 
avoiding stigmatism in cases of children with special needs, 
self-image, changes in a way of thinking and interacting with 
technology etc.  
The personal relationship to the device opens up for the 
new uses of the iPad in the classroom setting, such as 
assistive technology (AT) for children with special needs 
(see, for example, [6]).  
The adoption of tablet PC as an assistive technology 
became the subject of our case study that was conducted 
from September 2010 until September 2011. 
In this paper, we will focus on two cases that we have 
worked with, involving students with reading difficulties.  
The first one is a University student whom we will call Mary 
in this report. Mary is diagnosed with dyslexia. She was 
highly motivated on her own to work with this new 
possibility iPad offered.  
Our second case presents a much more sensitive 
situation, involving two elementary school children, whom 
we will call Iris and Josh in describing their case. Iris and a 
Josh are both aged nine. These children do not have any kind 
of diagnosis. Neither the teacher nor parents are trying to 
have the children diagnosed. This approach may have some 
advantages 
such 
as 
protecting 
the 
children 
from 
stigmatization, but it also has problems. The main issue is 
children’s low self-esteem [7, 8]. Iris, in particular, has a 
twin sister at school, with no impairments. On the contrary, 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the sister excels in academic achievements. Iris is aware that 
she does not perform as well as her sister. Josh may or may 
not be aware that he has a problem at all. So this case is 
extremely interesting for bringing to light issues related to 
awareness of the existence of the problem and its 
acknowledgment that can have effects on the policy making 
for schools regarding AT, rather than silencing it until the 
students are older. 
While the causes of dyslexia may be complex to 
understand, it often manifests as a learning disorder marked 
by impairment of the ability to recognize and comprehend 
written words. A significant proportion of students seeking 
help from the Accessibility Services at the University of 
Oslo are diagnosed with dyslexia. About 46% of those [9,10] 
are first diagnosed after they start their higher education. 
This fact is in stark contrast to other kinds of disabilities such 
as visual impairment, hearing loss or physical impairments, 
which are usually diagnosed much earlier. This is important 
both for how fast and how much help these students get in 
order to minimize the impact of their impairment on learning 
[11]. A further complication with offering help to dyslexic 
students is that they often require individual adjustments. 
In parallel with technological developments, from 
hardware to Internet and Communication Technologies 
(ICT), systems for dyslectic and visually impaired users have 
been developed. The effects of these systems have been 
reported in a number of different studies [12]. For instance, it 
has been found that different voices reading the text have an 
impact on the user’s text comprehension [13].  
School and university libraries have traditionally offered 
help for their users with dyslexia or visual impairments. 
Libraries would often have expensive equipment such as a 
special enlargement screen and computers using “text to 
speech” software. The reasons the libraries have all this 
special equipment is the prohibitive cost of the equipment 
paired with “access for all” philosophy. An additional benefit 
for users was help with mastering of this rather complex 
equipment generously provided by library personnel.  
With the arrival of the e-book readers, and later tablet 
PCs, this scene is changing for dyslexic students. What they 
had to go to the library for before, they could now have with 
them, anywhere, anytime. A new world of possibilities has 
opened up for the dyslectic community, although tablets may 
be used as assistive technology (AT) for other kinds of 
impairments as well [14]. 
In the first case, Mary cooperated with us in trying 
different approaches, meandering between problems and 
solutions until we found what works for her. After more than 
a year of following Mary’s iPad use, we can report that this 
technology has made a significant difference in her academic 
performance and she became somewhat of a virtuoso in 
handling her iPad. In [15] the author states: By using the very 
digital media that is helping drive this information society, 
computing technologies may be a viable means of providing 
reading support and accommodation. For such technologies 
to be successful, though, they must be adopted into regular 
use. Unfortunately, studies have shown that 35–50% of all 
assistive devices are abandoned after purchase.  Mary has 
made a margin of those who keep on using their AT. 
In the second case, such an open approach was not 
possible. Instead, an experiment involving the two children 
with reading difficulties and a control group was carried out. 
The experiment helped us showcase the potential the iPad (or 
another tablet) may have as an AT for children with reading 
difficulties.   
Both cases suggest strongly that at least some portion of 
dyslexic students could be helped by similar means. In [15] it 
is pointed out that many factors (socio-cultural, technical, 
economic, environmental etc) influence adult adoption of 
assistive technology.  We find that all those same factors 
influence the children. Invisible nature of reading disorder 
and even stronger impulses not to disclose it are of huge 
importance with children. The statistics valid for adult 
population (5-15%) are probably the same within the young 
population, except that these are not available, in part due to 
the invisibility issue. Therefore it is of large importance to 
bring awareness to this situation. Some of the methods 
developed for adults such as Value Sensitive Design 
proposed in [14] may be of use with children as well. The 
mobile AT adds additional value in that it does not draw 
attention to the person using it (as opposed to sitting in a 
special room in the library, in front of a huge screen). 
Someone “reading” the text by listening to it from the iPad 
looks quite “normal”, but the impact of this kind of AT may 
be quite huge on children’s education, social life and self-
esteem among other things.  
The technology adoption issues are difficult in the best of 
circumstances with so many factors influencing the success 
or failure.  Assistive technologies are even more difficult. 
However, from 2020, universal accessibility will be enforced 
by law in Norway, and thus it is timely to investigate how 
this can be done in the classroom. 
From the design perspective, solutions found for groups 
with special needs often find their way to the mainstream. In 
this case, tablets may become an example of a device 
designed for the mainstream, but having potential to be 
accepted and adopted by groups with special needs.  
II. 
THE APPROACH TO THE PROBLEM 
The research conducted around the two pilot studies 
[1,2,3] has organically led to discovery of students with 
disabilities. We, at the beginning of the pilot studies, did not 
have any intention to study the use of iPad by students with 
dyslexia, but we thought that seeing what Mary does with 
the tablet will be very interesting. We were going to 
interview her periodically and record what happens. 
However after the very first interview with Mary, we 
realized that we would need to take an active role in making 
adjustments for her, as well as observing her in the class, 
having interviews both with other stakeholders, such as 
software producers or anyone else who could help her. We 
needed to think of what kinds of software, applications as 
well as potentially other devices would work for her. We 
also quickly found out that it is fascinating to learn about 
learning practices of dyslexic students. And so it also 
unfolded into looking at policies including privacy, role of 
environment, social and cultural positioning of the student, 
and the role of teachers. This paper will cover only the 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

grounds of how the technology became part of Mary’s 
everyday life, and how working with her inspired us to look 
at the reading difficulties in younger children. We find the 
problem of adoption of technology in the case of young 
children even more challenging, due to the fact that they 
themselves are often not aware that they have difficulties 
with reading and learning that can be helped. 
The nature of the problem that we were looking at was 
such that only a few subjects were available for the study. 
Thus, naturally, a case study (see for example [16]) became 
a method of choice. We use a descriptive case study, an in-
depth study of a specific instance of assistive technology 
adoption, with explanatory purpose, placing the spotlight on 
what might become important to look at more extensively in 
the future research. Our techniques have included direct 
observations in class, interviews with Mary, and interviews 
with elementary school teacher as well as Iris’s family.   
III. 
MARY’S CASE  
Mary was appointed by the University of Oslo 
Accessibility Services to participate in a larger project, 
involving introduction of the iPad into a geology course [3]. 
In practice, this meant that Mary received an iPad to use. She 
did not get any special support with it, except for having 
Dropbox, iAnnotate, and a 25$ gift card as part of the iPad 
deal.  
Some major problems that she encountered while 
attempting to use the iPad to her advantage, were disclosed 
during our first interview with her. This was the story in a 
nutshell: since Mary is dyslexic, the Norwegian Library for 
the Impaired (NLB) was charged with the task of finding, if 
available on the market, curriculum for her in speech 
synthesis. Usually, the curriculum is delivered in the Daisy 
file format, which contains both speech and text. Using 
special software, Mary should be able to hear the text and 
watch it being highlighted at the same rate as the speech is 
progressing.  However, the Daisy file reader was made for 
the Windows platform and Mary is a Mac user. The NLB 
could not locate the software for Mac or iPad.  On her own 
initiative and without help, Mary tested several free 
applications from the Appstore that can read Daisy files on 
the iPad. But she ran into problems again. The Apps would 
crash all the time.  She thought the problem was caused by 
lower quality of the free software, and thus, she bought a $30 
full price version of the Daisy reader. There was no 
improvement. The program kept crashing. With some 
evident frustration, she shared: “So I tried some different 
software that worked a little, but it froze often, both audio 
and text, and sometimes the iPad went completely dead!” 
There were other technical problems contributing to this 
negative overall experience.  An example is that the student 
housing where she lives, has no Wi-Fi connection. “If I had 
an Internet connection I would have used it (the iPad) more 
actively”.   In summary, Mary was not really able to use the 
iPad in the ways she wished and needed to do. 
We made a joint agreement to give it another try during 
the following semester (Spring 2011). One of the authors 
started investigating the problems with the Daisy files. The 
application Mary bought to play Daisy files with on the iPad 
was Voice of Daisy (VOD). After testing it on another iPad 
with no improvement, a request for information on the files 
and plea for help was sent by email to NLB. Although the 
library showed huge interest in our approach, the only 
information we got was how the CDs with Daisy files were 
produced in the house. A second effort was then made 
involving contact with the Japanese developer of the VOD 
application. After several emails, they resolved the problem. 
The reason for crashing of the App was the poor quality and 
the erroneous offset of the files she received from the NLB.  
As part of the agreement between the student and us a 
supplementary intensive support period was given to her, 
teaching her how to use the iAnnotate and other iPad 
applications. Mary also agreed on monthly interviews with 
the authors, in order to make sure that the progression of the 
use of the iPad was not interrupted by yet another technical 
problem.  
It is very interesting to note that we have asked if we 
could observe her working with the iPad in her courses. 
Mary at once agreed to be observed at the lectures, with 
many students attending. However, she definitely did not 
want to have anyone observing her at small work group 
meetings that are part of the course set up: “If I let you do 
that, then I for sure will not make any friends in this class.” 
Mary spoke directly about the issues of stigmatization in 
relation to her need for assistive technology. 
During the next few meetings in the spring semester she 
reported increased use of the iPad for studying.  And then, 
one day it all fell into place. With some help, she had 
developed her own way of working with the iPad, turning it 
into a proper AT tool. She was able to use it anytime, 
anywhere. And most importantly, she really enjoyed it!  
Mary was using different applications for different needs. 
Voice of Daisy was used for the part of the curriculum 
involving books. For articles she used two applications 
simultaneously. The first one was Speak-It with the 
possibility to cut and paste part of the text and hear it. The 
second one was iAnnotate where she could mark the text, 
annotate it and enlarge it while simultaneously listening to it. 
She was very pleased with the fact that she could choose part 
of the text she wanted to hear, and was not forced to listen to 
the whole text. She found her “own” special ways to use the 
color and the strikethrough (see Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of how Mary worked with text while listening to it. 
The color was used to group similar topics, while the 
strikethrough was used to remove uninteresting parts of the 
text. The tactile interface made quick selection of the text 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

possible. Using a normal laptop and mouse interaction would 
have taken much longer. Mary’s interaction with the iPad 
also became beautiful to watch; her movements are quick, 
certain, effective, lightly dancing around the touch surface 
(see Figure 2). 
          
 
Figure 2.  Mary is engaging with the text before it even loads fully. 
 
Using VOD on the iPad was also easier than on the PC. 
She explains: “Zooming in and out gives me a better view. 
For example, I can always quickly find out where I am in the 
text.”   
In the classroom, she had the possibility of taking and 
grouping all her notes on the iPad, using the default software 
such as Notes shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Taking notes in class on the iPad 
 
The aftermath of these joint efforts to make the iPad into 
an AT shows that Mary’s interest in her field has increased; 
her confidence in being able to finish her studies has 
increased and her overall attitude towards AT has improved. 
IV. 
IRIS’S AND JOSH’S CASE 
In the beginning, the children with reading difficulties 
were indistinguishable from their peers. Together, they made 
up a class of 26 students in a rural Norwegian school. Six 
iPads were given to the class, five for students and one for 
the teacher. Classroom got wireless connectivity in 
conjunction with the pilot study, thus enabling wider use of 
the Internet. Digitalized curriculum is not yet common in 
elementary schools. In spite of this, access to digitalized 
curriculum was obtained from the academic publisher (free 
of charge) for Religion Studies, Mathematics and Science. 
English is relevant both as the subject at school and as the 
language of applications. The students have some knowledge 
of the language, but many are far from fluent. The traditional 
way of teaching English was supplemented from the start of 
the study with stories and Apps (such as Alice in 
Wonderland or balloons) that could help students to improve 
their English through play.  One day per week was set as an 
observation day.  
All of the children were rather excited about having the 
iPads in the classroom. They could also bring them home 
(according to the schedule they made).  
From the very start, we observed that many pupils liked 
enlarging text, sometimes quite a bit (see Figure 4), while 
reading.  
 
 
Figure 4. Iris is enlarging text while reading 
 
It is worthwhile mentioning a study [17], done on Kindle, 
but with similar possibilities to enlarge letters. The authors 
report: “The Kindle provides a choice of six different font 
sizes. During this study, Amy generally kept her font at a 
larger size than Winnie. In an interview, she explained that it 
helped her "read faster when the text was large." The 
varying text size did create some challenges on days when 
the girls decided to partner read, as the visual layout of their 
Kindle "pages" differed. The girls quickly learned to 
synchronize their settings when reading together.” 
The preference for larger text and ease in reading with 
large letters is related to dyslexia [18]. If a child enlarges the 
text to an unusual size, it signals that the child may have 
reading difficulties. Both Iris and Josh do prefer to read on 
the iPad to reading from paper, mainly because of the ability 
to enlarge the text. 
When iPads were collected for the first time in order to 
see what kind of content the children have placed on their 
them, one iPad differed from others significantly (see Figure 
5). Josh has organized all the content into thematic groups, 
being displayed quite neatly on the iPad. That was strange, 
but even stranger was the fact that one of those groups had to 
do with languages and translating from one language to 
another using speech.  
The organization of content soon became a class 
standard, but no other students ever installed apps for 
learning languages or translating from one language to 
another. These actions made Josh visible to us.   
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 5. Josh’s iPad, compared to another one from the class. Note: the 
third item in the first column is a category marked as snakk (trans. speak), 
containing language speech based applications 
 
In the course of the pilot study [1], Iris and the rest of her 
family were interviewed twice. During the first interview, the 
parents pointed out that the girls are “much more” interested 
in homework, especially the one of them that has some 
problems with reading. This is how we got interested in Iris.  
In a later interview with the teacher, it was confirmed 
that both children have difficulties reading.  However, the 
teacher told us: “This is very, very confidential.”  
The teacher had some specific wishes regarding the use 
of the iPad in class as assistive technology for children with 
special needs. She said: “Groups who need special education 
can be helped by the school. Having some iPads could be 
like “a carrot on the stick” for students who cannot be 
helped so easily and who are struggling a lot”. (trans. 
Culén). The statement, positive as it is, also had a note of 
resignation in the face of the complexity of the problems 
comprising 
the 
child’s 
self-esteem, 
self-perception, 
perception by others (often involving stigmatization), 
parents’ involvement etc. On top of these challenges the 
school would also face organizational challenges around 
supporting the adoption for everyday use coupled with 
adaption to the needs of an individual student.  
The teachers comment about confidentiality has made 
direct inquiry with children impossible, as well as use of the 
same approach as we had with Mary. We were limited to 
direct observations and questions around why do students 
like to use the iPad. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The children participating in an experiment comparing the 
understanding and retention after reading from paper and ipad using 
SpeakText program. 
 
In order to be able to grasp what kind of difference in 
comprehension the iPad (through text-to-speech App 
SpeakText, see Figure 6) could enable for these two children 
we designed a simple experiment. The experiment engaged 
five children: the two with reading difficulties, and 3 without 
difficulties, including Iris’s twin sister. The purpose of the 
experiment was to give and indication of what could be done 
with the use of iPad, and not to provide any statistically 
significant results. The real purpose of the experiment was 
not presented to the students for confidentiality reasons. 
Rather, the experiment was presented as testing of the 
effectiveness of reading on the iPad.  
A. Experiment design 
Our null hypothesis was that there is no difference in 
understanding the text for children with and without reading 
difficulties when they read from paper and when they select 
the text on iPad and heard it read to them. It involves two 
independent variables each having two conditions (children 
with and without reading difficulties and reading from paper 
or iPad’s app SpeakText).  
The dependent variable (understanding of the text) was 
measured by how the children answered 8 simple questions 
after the reading (or hearing the text).  Four of the questions 
were retention (memory) based and the other four based on 
understanding causes and effects in the story.  
Due to the small number of children with reading 
difficulties that we could recruit, the within the group design 
was an obvious choice. Thus each student repeated the 
reading session, followed by the answering session, twice – 
once with paper and once with the iPad, where which was to 
be done first was determined at random (see Figure 6). 
The reading was done from two distinct passages from 
the same text, approximately equal in length (374 words vs. 
380 words), from a children’s book. The iPad app 
SpeakText, with voice over text and highlighting while the 
text is being read, needed 3 min. and 18 seconds to read the 
380 word paragraph. The children’s reading from the paper 
based on 374 words was timed for all five children. The 
clock was stopped when the child indicated that they have 
finished reading the paragraph. In one case, there is a slight 
imprecision due to the fact that we did not stop the watch 
precisely enough when the child indicated that she finished 
the reading. The result is given as an approximate time in 
Table 1. 
The answer session was not timed, but the children knew 
what to expect the second time around and they were 
somewhat faster on the second set of questions than on the 
first, indicating that some learning effect has taken place.  
B. Results 
Table 1 summarizes the results obtained from children 
without reading difficulties. Table 2 summarizes the results 
from those with reading difficulties. Each field in the table 
gives the number of questions that were answered correctly 
by the child. As mentioned above, in conjunction with paper 
reading, the reading time was recorded (the iPad time was 
always 3 min. and 18 seconds). After the reading was over, 
the questions were handed in and the students could no 
longer view the text they just read (or heard). 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  
SUMMARY FOR CHILDREN WITHOUT READING DIFFICULTIS 
Under-
standing 
 
Child 1 
 
Child 2 
 
Child 3	  
iPad 
Memory 
Comprehension 
 
4 
4	  
 
4 
2	  
 
4 
3 
Paper 
Memory 
Comprehension 
Time 1:54 
3 
4 
Time 2:27 
3 
2	  
Approx. 2:30 
4 
3	  
 
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY FOR CHILDREN WITH READING DIFFICULTIES 
Understanding 
Child 1 
Child 2 
iPad 
Memory	  
Comprehension 
 
3 
2	  
 
4 
4	  
Paper 
Memory	  
Comprehension 
Time 15:29 
2 
0 
Time 6:27 
1  
0  
 
Note that neither of the children with reading difficulties 
has answered any comprehension questions when reading 
from the paper. Retention questions did not fare much better. 
Although not perfect for both children, the results after the 
iPad use were improved. It is also interesting to note that for 
the children without reading difficulties, the iPad use shows 
slightly better results. 
These results are, of course only indicative due to a very 
small sample size.  
Post experiment, we collected impressions from the 
children around the experience of reading from the iPad. The 
children remarked that they liked zooming on the text as 
well. Iris in particular mentioned twice that zooming helps 
her. It would have been perhaps interesting to repeat the 
experiment with both readings from the iPad, one of them 
with possibility of enlarging the text and the other one with 
SpeakText App.  
V. 
CONCLUSION  
In the process of working with the two cases, we believe 
to have seen how tablet PC can bring forward some new 
possibilities as AT in this sensitive and complex field.   
In spite of the small sample size, the case of elementary 
school children, at the very least, indicates the need for more 
research related to AT. Our hope is that larger studies will be 
conducted at elementary schools worldwide, inspired by this, 
and similar small studies. We view the outcome of this study 
to also be a contribution to the body of evidence that mobile 
technology may be in some cases effectively used as AT. 
The introduction of the iPad in the elementary class has, 
in general, been a success. In particular, it offers clear 
support to some children with reading difficulties. Even in 
the situation where the impairment itself is confidential and 
kept in silence. While it is still true that each child/student 
with dyslexia or with reading difficulties needs individual 
assessment as to what works and what does not work, there 
is a number of possibilities that were very simple to try with 
iPads (things like different apps for text to speech, changing 
synthetic voices in order to find the one that works the best, 
enlargements, color annotations etc).   
A very important point in favor of mobile assistive 
technologies is that it minimizes stigmatization for the ones 
using it. For example, for Mary, she could sit in the 
classroom with her headset on and listen both to the text and 
to the lecturer, without anyone thinking that this is strange or 
even noticing it. Thus the stigmatization problem is 
minimized at the same time allowing the user to attain more 
self-confidence in academic arena. 
In Iris’s and Josh’s case, the results of the experiment we 
conducted have convinced the teacher and given her the will 
and the encouragement she needed in order to support this 
kind of iPad use in her class. Silently and inconspicuously 
for the time being.  
Finally, future work as we see it lies in conducting series 
of smaller studies showcasing how different impairments 
may be helped, followed by larger studies validating the 
smaller ones and convincing the school leadership and the 
policymakers as well.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful to Akademika, the University 
bookstore and publishing house for providing the iPads for 
the study, Gyldendahl academic publishing house for 
providing digitalized text the children could use and the 
University Library for the support.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Gasparini and A. L. Culén, "Children´s Journey with iPads 
in the Classroom," presented at the Opportunities and 
Challenges when Designing and Developing with Kids @ 
School at the Interaction Design for Children Conference 
(IDC 2011), Ann Arbor, Michigan, 2011. 
[2] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, "iPad: a new classroom 
technology? A report from two pilot studies", INFuture 
Proceedings, 2011, pp. 199-208. 
[3] A. L. Culén, B. K. Engen, A.Gasparini and J. Herstad, "The 
Use of iPad in Academic Setting: Ownership Issues in 
Relation to Technology (Non)Adoption ", Old Meets New: 
Media in Education – Proceedings of the 61st International 
Council for Educational Media and the XIII International 
Symposium on Computers in Education, 2011, pp. 555-563. 
[4] B. A. Nardi and V. L. O'Day, Information ecologies : using 
technology with heart. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999. 
[5] S. Turkle, The second self : computers and the human spirit. 
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984. 
[6] N. Shah, "Special Ed. Pupils Find Learning Tool in iPad 
Applications," Education Week, vol. 30, 2001, pp. 1-1, 16, 
17. 
[7] N. Humphrey, "Facilitating a positive sense of self in pupils 
with dyslexia: the role of teachers and peers," Support for 
Learning, vol. 18, 2003, pp. 130-136. 
[8] T. D. Lackaye and M. Margalit, "Comparisons of 
Achievement, Effort, and Self-Perceptions Among Students 
With Learning Disabilities and Their Peers From Different 
Achievement Groups," Journal of Learning Disabilities, vol. 
39, 2006, pp. 432-432-46. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[9] University of Oslo. "Dysleksi: lese- og skrivevansker", 
available at: http://www.uio.no/studier/admin/tilrettelegging/ 
dysleksi/ (accessed September 16, 2011). 
[10] E. A. Draffan, D. G. Evans, and P. Blenkhorn, "Use of 
assistive technology by students with dyslexia in post-
secondary education," Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive 
Technology, vol. 2, 2007, pp. 105-116. 
[11] N.Diraä, J. Engelen, et al., "The Use of ICT to Support 
Students with Dyslexia. HCI and Usability for e-Inclusion", 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 5889, 2009, pp. 457-
462. 
[12] P. Williams, R. H. Jamali, and D. Nicholas, "Using ICT with 
people with special education needs: what the literature tells 
us," Aslib Proceedings, 2006, vol. 58, pp. 330-345. 
[13] T. Ouimet and E. Balaban, "Auditory stream biasing in 
children with reading impairments," Dyslexia, vol. 16, 2010, 
pp. 45-65. 
[14] H. Sampath, J. Sivaswamy, and B. Indurkhya, "Assistive 
systems for children with dyslexia and autism," SIGACCESS 
Access. Comput., 2010, pp. 32-36. 
[15] K. N. Deibel, "Understanding and Supporting the Adoption of 
Assistive Technologies by Adults with Reading Disabilities," 
University of Washington Ph.D., University of Washington, 
United States -- Washington, 2011. 
[16] B. Flyvbjerg, B. Flyvbjerg, "Case Study," in The SAGE 
handbook of qualitative research, N. K. Denzin and Y. S. 
Lincoln, Eds., ed Los Angeles: Sage, 2011, pp. XVI, 766 s., 
ill. 
[17] L. C. Larson, "Digital Readers: The Next Chapter in E-Book 
Reading and Response," The Reading Teacher, vol. 64, 2010, 
pp. 15-22. 
[18] B. A. O'Brien, J. S. Mansfield, and G. E. Legge, "The effect 
of print size on reading speed in dyslexia," Journal of 
Research in Reading, vol. 28, 2005, pp. 332-349. 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

