Position and Force-direction Detection for Multi-ﬁnger Electrostatic Haptic System
Using a Vision-based Touch Panel
Taku Nakamura and Akio Yamamoto
Dept. of Precision Engineering
The University of Tokyo, Japan
Email: {taku nkat, akio}@aml.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract—This article proposes a method of detecting position and
force-direction for multi-ﬁnger electrostatic haptic system using
a vision-based touch panel. The system consists of a vision-based
touch panel, a transparent ITO (Indium Tin Oxide) electrode
on the panel, and multiple stimulators with markers. Analyzing
positions of the markers with the vision-based touch panel, the
proposed method can detect position and force-direction of each
stimulator. Detection of applied force direction is imperative to
reduce undesired stickiness of virtual walls in passive haptic
rendering systems. The developed system could successfully
reduced the stickiness, but its performance was limited due to
the limited tracking performance of the touch panel.
Keywords-Surface haptics; Visuo-haptic; Passive haptic system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, multi-ﬁnger interaction on ﬂat panel displays
has been a hot topic in computer-human interaction. Many
mobile devices and personal computers are now equipped
with touch panels that allow user operations on their screens
using multiple ﬁngers. However, these devices do not fully
exploit their multi-touch feature for information output, since
they do not have haptic feedback. There are some systems
that can provide haptic feedback on a ﬂat panel display, such
as electro-tactile display [1]–[3], string-based stimulator [4]
and electromagnetic actuation [5], which however can provide
stimuli to a single ﬁnger alone; rendering independent stimulus
to multiple ﬁngers have not been realized.
To realize haptic feedback to multiple ﬁngers on a ﬂat
panel display, we have proposed on-screen multi-ﬁnger haptic
feedback systems in [6] and [7], based on indirect electrostatic
stimulation. The system requires only a transparent electrode
on a visual screen and multiple stimulator pads attached to
user’s ﬁngers for generating force feedback, and thus can be
easily integrated onto a ﬂat panel display. It presents passive
(resistive) force feedback by friction force which is modu-
lated by electrostatic attraction force between the transparent
electrode and the stimulator pads. Applying different voltages
to different stimulators provides independent stimulus to the
multiple ﬁngers.
The ﬁrst prototype reported in [6] realized two independent
haptic stimuli up to approximately 1 N on an LCD (Liquid
Crystal Display) monitor. In that prototype, the positions of the
ﬁngers were detected using an over-mounted camera. Besides
position detection, the system requires a force-direction sensor
to solve “sticky wall” problem, which is commonly found in
passive haptic systems [8], [9]. Our second prototype in [7]
incorporated a simple force-direction sensor in the stimulator
pads, which successfully reduced the stickiness of virtual
walls.
Although those prototypes have successfully demonstrated
multi-ﬁnger haptic feedback on ﬂat panel displays, the systems
relied on the overhead cameras, which tends to complicate
the system structure; they should preferably be integrated
with multi-touch input interfaces. Unfortunately, the indirect
electrostatic stimulation is not yet compatible with typical
capacitive-type touch interfaces, and thus other touch input
principles need to be investigated for the integration. In this
paper, we focus on the vision-based touch panel technology
and investigate its compatibility with the multi-ﬁnger haptic
feedback technology. Since both technologies, vision-based
touch panel and multi-ﬁnger haptic technology, are designed
for large-size displays, their integration is expected to realize
rich user experience on a large-size tabletop display.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II reviews
related studies on electrostatic haptic feedback. Section III
explains the concept of the proposed method to realize posi-
tion and force-direction detection. Section IV investigates the
compatibility of the electrostatic haptic system with the vision-
based touch panel, using SAMSUNG SUR40 with Microsoft
PixelSense as an example. Section V discusses the design of
the stimulator pad for force-direction detection. Section VI
demonstrates multi-ﬁnger visuo-haptic interactions with the
developed system and evaluates the performance of the force-
direction detection in haptic rendering. Section VII concludes
the paper.
II.
RELATED STUDIES ON ELECTROSTATIC HAPTIC
FEEDBACK
The multi-ﬁnger electrostatic haptic system described in
this article utilizes indirect-type electrostatic stimulation. Elec-
trostatic stimulation (or electrotactile stimulation/vibration),
which was ﬁrstly reported in [10], utilizes friction force mod-
ulated by electrostatic force between two conductive objects
facing each other. Using a transparent electrode as one of the
two objects, haptic feedback can be realized on visual displays
without impeding the visual information on the screen [1]–[3].
There are two types in electrostatic stimulation: direct and
indirect. Direct-type system stimulates a ﬁnger by inducing
electrostatic force between a ﬁnger and a transparent electrode
on a display [1], [2]. It can render haptic feedback directly
on the user’s ﬁnger with a considerably simple setup. The
system, however, requires segmented electrodes if we want to
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ITO electrode
Stimulator
V1
Visual display
V2
Passive
force
Electrostatic
force
Motion
direction
Multi-finger electostatic haptic feedback system 
Vision-based touch panel
Figure 1: System overview of proposed system
realize multi-touch interaction, which is practically not easy to
develop. Moreover, the presented force is prone to instability
due to ﬁnger perspiration [11] and can provide only weak force
(approximately 0.1 N as reported in [12]). Due to the small
feedback force, the system can only render surface texture
sensations in cutaneous sense.
On the other hand, indirect-type system stimulates a ﬁnger
through a stimulator pad, which results in larger and more
stable feedback force [3]. It can be easily extended for multi-
touch by employing multiple stimulator pads and applying
different voltages to different stimulators [6]. One drawback
of the indirect type is that the stimulator pads need to be
arranged on the display, which results in more complicated
system structure than the direct-type. Due to this drawback,
the indirect type would not be suitable for mobile devices,
such as smartphones and tablets. Indirect type is rather suitable
for large-size tabletop systems, to enhance user interaction on
those systems.
III.
MULTI-FINGER HAPTICS ON A VISION-BASED
TOUCH PANEL SYSTEM
A. Prototype Overview
Figure 1 shows the overview of the prototype system that
was studied in this paper. The system integrates multi-ﬁnger
electrostatic haptic feedback system as proposed in [6] on a
vision-based touch panel PC (Samsung SUR40 with Microsoft
PixelSense). The novelty of this work compared to the previous
studies in [6], [7] is to utilize the touch panel for positions and
force-directions detection, which can considerably simplify
the setup. The touch panel contains IR (infrared) backlight
and IR sensor array inside the LCD panel, with which the
system detects the object locations on the screen. In the
integrated prototype, the touch panel detects the positions of
the stimulator pads, as well as applied force directions on the
pads. The system then calculates feedback force based on the
interaction within the visually-rendered virtual world, which
is then provided to the pads such that the user can haptically
feel the virtual world through their multiple ﬁngers.
The multi-ﬁnger electrostatic haptic feedback system con-
sists of a non-segmented transparent electrode that covers the
whole surface of the display and multiple stimulator pads.
A user is equipped with those pads on his/her ﬁngertips to
receive haptic stimulus. The transparent electrode is electri-
Moving
part
Base part
Moving part
marker
Base part
marker
User's
finger
Force
direction
Captured with a vision-
based touch panel
Bottom view
Transparent
Electrode
Figure 2: Concept of stimulator and marker equipped to its bottom
(a) Appearance
(b) Captured image
ITO
Figure 3: Appearance (a) and captured image (b) of objects on ITO ﬁlm
cally grounded, and each stimulator pad is fed voltage through
a voltage feeding wire. The voltage application to the pad
changes vertical electrostatic attraction force between the pad
and the display. The motion of the ﬁngertip, then, converts
the attraction force into horizontal friction force, which is
perceived as haptic stimuli. Without ﬁngertip motion nor
putting the ﬁngers on the pads, no feedback is given to the user.
By applying different voltages to different stimulator pads, the
pads can render different stimuli simultaneously.
B. Position and Force-Direction Sensing
Detection of position and applied force direction is realized
by analyzing a captured IR image taken by the vision-based
touch panel. The position means positions of stimulator pads,
and the applied force direction is detected by using relative
displacement of a user’s ﬁnger to the stimulator pad attached
to the ﬁnger. Figure 2 shows the concept of the structure of the
stimulator pads that realizes the detection. Each stimulator pad
consists of a base part and a moving part which the user wears
on his/her ﬁngertip. The base part is connected to a transparent
electrode, to which the voltage for electrostatic stimulation is
applied. The base part is ring-shaped and is marked in white on
its bottom. The moving part, which is marked in black on its
bottom, can be moved freely by a user within the inner circle of
the base part. The system detects the position of the stimulator
by calculating the center position of the white marker and force
direction by comparing the black marker position against the
white marker.
IV.
DESIGN CONSIDERATION
A. Interference of ITO Film to Vision-based Touch Panel
The applicability of ITO electrode to the vision-based
touch panel using IR sensors is investigated in this section.
As the ITO transparent electrode is not perfectly transparent
in infrared region, its effect on the vision-based touch panel
needs to be investigated. To examine the interference, some
IR images were captured through a small ITO ﬁlm. Figure 3
shows one of the captured images. In this image, the ITO ﬁlm
covers the rectangular area, on which some objects are placed.
The objects are two sheets of black/white paper and two rolls
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Appearance
Captured
Image
Binary
Image
Figure 4: Appearance (top), captured image (middle), and binary image
(bottom) of striped pattern
of black/white vinyl tape. The image shows that the ITO is
not perfectly transparent in the IR region, but is transparent
enough for object detection.
It was conﬁrmed that the black vinyl tape completely
absorbed the IR light, and thus invisible, whereas the white
paper and vinyl tape were clearly visible even through the
ITO ﬁlm. The black paper sheet did not provide clear image,
and thus is not suitable as a marker. In addition, an interesting
phenomenon was observed. In the captured image, the inside
of the black vinyl tape roll appears bright, although there is
nothing inside. That is probably because IR light was reﬂected
on the inside of the roll, whose color was white. It shows that
the captured image is affected not only by the bottom color
of the objects, but also by the vertical edge faces, suggesting
that the color of edge faces should be designed carefully when
making the stimulator pads.
B. Resolution of Captured Image
The resolution of the captured images through the ITO
ﬁlm was investigated, as the resolution is important to design
marker pattern for the stimulator pads. According to the
speciﬁcation of the display, the display size is 885.6 × 498.15
mm and the captured image has 960 × 540 pixels, which
means the pixel resolution is approximately 1 mm. However,
the IR image can be blurred and practical resolution can be
much worse.
To evaluate the resolution, some black striped patterns
printed on white paper were observed through an ITO ﬁlm.
Four different stripe patterns were prepared, with different
widths for black strips: 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mm. The white
strips had the same width as the black strips. Figure 4 shows
their appearance, a captured image on the touch panel, and
a binarized image. Although the boundaries of the striped
patterns are blurred in the captured image, all the stripes except
0.5-mm interval were recognized as stripes even in the binary
image. This pilot evaluation indicates the system can recognize
1.0 mm object through the ITO ﬁlm.
C. Latency of the vision-based touch panel
The latency of the vision-based touch panel in position
detection was measured. A white marker was moved laterally
on the touch panel, whose position was measured by both the
touch panel and a laser displacement sensor (OMRON, ZX-
LD100). Figure 5 compares the measurement results. The red
dashed line indicates the reference position measured with the
laser sensor. The blue line indicates the position detected by
Time [s]
Position [10 mm/div]
Measured
Reference
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 5: Latency of the vision-based touch panel in position detection.
xc
xrim 3xc
xin
Moving
part
Base
part
Moving
part
Base
part
Figure 6: Assembly diagram (left) and cross section (right) of stimulator pad
the touch panel. The latency of the touch panel in position
detection was found to be about 80 ms.
The latency limits the maximum motion speed for proper
operation on the electrostatic haptic system. If we suppose
4-mm tolerance for position detection, the maximum speed
is limited to 0.05 m/s for the latency of 80 ms. The speed
is much smaller than a desired speed: e.g. 0.5 m/s, which
was realized in the previous tracking system in [7] using an
overhead motion-tracking camera, which has 8-ms latency.
The desired speed could be achieved by compensating the
latency with some kind of predictive control, which would
be implemented in our future work.
V.
FORCE-DIRECTION DETECTING
A. Design of Stimulator Pad and Its Marker
Figure 6 shows the assembly diagram and cross sectional
view of the proposed stimulator pad to facilitate force-direction
detection, as well as position detection. The stimulator pad
consists of a base part ﬁxed on a small ITO electrode and a
moving part ﬁxed to a user’s ﬁnger. The base part has a cap to
prevent the moving part from popping out from the base part.
The proposed system calculates the applied force direction by
detecting relative displacement of the moving part to the base
part. Thus, it requires large clearance for accurate detection
of force-direction. According to the resolution of captured
image, the clearance must be larger than 1.0 mm. The accuracy
of force-direction detection is expected to be higher as the
clearance becomes larger. However, large clearance enlarges
the size of stimulator pad, in trade-off. As shown in Figure 6,
the radius of the stimulator r becomes r = xrim + 3xc + xin,
where xrim is the width of the cap part, xc is the clearance
between the base and moving part, and xin is the radius of
the marker for the moving part.
We determined the size so that the width of the stimulator
pad becomes comparable to the width of human ﬁnger, to
avoid occlusion of visual information. Figure 7 shows the
appearance of prototype stimulator pads. Two stimulator pads
with different design parameters were prepared for evaluation:
the smaller one has 1.0 mm clearance and its diameter is 16
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Top view
Bottom view
Figure 7: Appearance of stimulator. Top view (left) and bottom view (right)
Captured image
Binary image
Figure 8: Captured image (left) and binary image (right) of prototype
stimulator on the vision-based touch panel
mm, and the larger one has 1.5 mm clearance and its diameter
is 19 mm. They have common width of the cap (1 mm) and
radius of the moving part marker (4 mm). To obtain high
contrast images at the border between the black and the white
marker, a black circle marker (φ6 mm) enclosed by white ring
(1 mm width) is attached to the bottom of the moving part.
Figure 8 shows a captured IR image and a binarized one
for the two stimulator pads placed on the touch panel covered
with the ITO ﬁlm. Red dashed lines in the ﬁgure indicate the
contours of the stimulator electrodes and those of the base-part
markers. The clearance between the base part and the moving
part is blurred in the captured image and not clearly visible.
Yet, the black marker on the moving part is clearly observed
as a black circle, and thus it is expected that the force direction
can be calculated from the relative position between the black
circle and surrounding white circle, for both prototype pads.
B. Evaluation
The force-direction detection capability was evaluated for
the two prototypes in a static condition. The stimulators were
ﬁxed on the touch panel displaying no visual image, and their
moving part was pushed to 8 directions in every 45◦. The
force-direction (which is pushed direction) was calculated from
the relative position of the markers. Then, the mean, maximum,
and minimum values of detected direction for two seconds in
every direction were measured. Figure 9 and Figure 10 show
the results for the smaller prototype and the larger prototype,
respectively. Both prototypes succeeded in detection, but their
resolutions are considerably different. The smaller prototype
showed an error up to approximately 45◦, while the larger
prototype indicated an error up to approximately 15◦. It
conﬁrms that the larger clearance increases the accuracy of
the force-direction detecting, as expected.
Although the above static evaluation was conducted on
the black screen, if there is some visual image displayed on
the screen, it can inﬂuence the performance of force-direction
detection. An example of such inﬂuence is shown in Figure 11.
When the stimulator pad is placed on the border of black and
white image as shown in Figure 11(a), the touch panel captures
a distorted image of the marker as the images on the display is
reﬂected by the ITO ﬁlm and the makers, as in Figure 11(b). In
this case, the system cannot detect the force-direction correctly,
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
Reference direction [rad]
Measured direction [rad]
Max.
Mean
Min.
Figure 9: Results of force-direction detecting of small clearance pad
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
−π
−π/2
π/2
π
Reference direction [rad]
Measured direction [rad]
Max.
Mean
Min.
0
Figure 10: Results of force-direction detecting of large clearance pad
(a)
(b)
(c)
Actual direction
Measured direction
Figure 11: Failure case of force-direction detecting. Appearance (a),
captured image (b), and binary image (c) of stimulator at the border on
black and white background.
as shown in Figure 11(c) that shows completely opposite force
direction.
There are two possible approaches to solve this problem.
One is to ﬁx the image under the stimulator. By tracking the
stimulator position and drawing a constant-colored background
below the stimulator, the system can ﬁx the condition for
force-direction detection. This approach, however, limits the
motion speed of the stimulator pad quite low, since the position
tracking speed of the touch panel is not so fast in this system.
The other is to render virtual environments in low contrast
colors. Using colors which are captured in similar brightness,
such like black and blue, the system can reduce the marker
distortion, even when the stimulator pad is placed on a border
between different colors. This approach limits coloration of
virtual environments, but it is not affected by the tracking
speed. In the ﬁnal experiment described in section VI-B, we
adopted this latter approach.
To evaluate the dynamic performance, the response time
was measured with the large-clearance stimulator. The re-
sponse time, or latency, of the force-direction detection was
found to be about 80 ms, which is almost the same as the
latency of the touch panel.
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V
Command
voltage
Amp.
D/A, A/D
converter
For each stimular
ITO film on LCD
Visual
Rendering
Force
Rendering
Position &
force-direction
detection
Vision-base touch panel
Figure 12: Prototype setup
(a) Wall and bumps
(b) Texture
(c) Dynamically moving cubes
Figure 13: Examples of multi-ﬁnger visuo-haptic interaction
VI.
PILOT EXPERIMENT FOR HAPTIC RENDERING
A. Demonstrations without force-direction detection
Figure 12 shows the setup of the whole experimental
system. The system consists of the SUR40, whose surface is
covered with a transparent ITO electrode, four stimulator pads,
a DA/AD converter board, and four high-voltage ampliﬁers.
The ITO electrode was grounded electrically, and its surface
was insulated with a PET ﬁlm (8 µm in thickness). The four
stimulator pads are the larger one of the two types discussed.
The bottom surface of stimulator ITO electrode was also
covered with the PET ﬁlm.
In [6] and [7], rendering of static objects, such as walls,
bumps, and surface textures, as well as dynamically moving
objects, were reported. First, the same interactions have been
implemented, but without force-direction detection, on the
developed system as shown in Figure 13. In these interactions,
the rendering program runs at approximately 80 Hz. When
the system did not employ the force-direction detection, if
we ignore the sticky wall and object stiction [7] problems,
the system could successfully render the haptic reaction force,
although the maximum operation speed of the contact pads was
limited to several centimeters per second for proper operation.
This limitation was due to the low sampling rate and the
latency of the touch panel.
B. Evaluation of Force-Direction Detection in Wall Rendering
In a passive haptic rendering, a surface of a static virtual
wall can be felt sticky. This stickiness comes from the fact that
passive friction force always acts toward the opposite direction
of user’s motion. Typically, a virtual wall is described as a
spring; if a contact point is penetrating the surface, a force
proportional to the penetration depth is fed back, which should
be directed toward outward direction. When the contact pad is
Virtual wall
Free space
O
Force sensor
Push & pull
Figure 14: Setup of virtual wall rendering evaluation
proceeding into the wall, there is no problem as the reaction
force is in the opposite direction of the moving direction. On
the other hand, when retreating, the force direction and the
moving direction are the same, which is not possible to realize
on a passive system.
Typical solution for this is to cut the force rendering during
retreating. To facilitate that, the system needs to detect in
which direction the user is trying to move the contact pad.
In the developed system, the direction of the applied force
is achieved by the force-direction detection mentioned above.
Thus, the following evaluates if the force-direction detection
method can successfully eliminate the sticky wall problem.
The schematic illustration of the experimental setup dedi-
cated for the purpose is shown in Figure 14. In this setup, only
one pad was used whose motion is limited in one-dimension
by using a linear guide. The stimulator was manually moved
to enter into and retreat from a virtual wall, during which the
rendered force was measured with a force sensor (Nitta, PD3-
32). Virtual wall was visually rendered using blue color on
black background to prevent the malfunctioning of the force
detection, as mentioned before.
Figure 15 shows the result of virtual wall rendering, ﬁrst
without considering force direction. The plot on the top shows
the center position (solid line in the top) and the both edges
(dashed line in the top) of the stimulator pad, calculated from
the IR captured image. The penetration depth was calculated
using the edge position. The other two plots are for the applied
voltage and the measured force. When the stimulator pad hits
and pushed on the wall (the ﬁrst half of the plots), the reaction
force from the wall was rendered correctly. However, in the
latter half, force is exerted in negative direction while the
operator was trying to retreat from the surface. This means
that the contact pad is sticking to the virtual wall.
Figure 16 shows the result of virtual wall rendering that
considered applied force direction. The former half is almost
the same as the previous experiment, but the latter half shows
the distinct difference. As the force direction was altered, the
applied voltage was cut to zero, which allowed the stimulation
pad to retreat from the virtual wall easily. Although, some
negative force was observed, its magnitude and duration was
considerably reduced, which conﬁrmed the effectiveness of the
proposed system.
C. Discussion
First of all, the most signiﬁcant problem in the current
system is the limited operation speed. In all the experiments,
the operation speed of the stimulation pads was limited up to
several centimeters per seconds for proper operations. This is
due to the limited tracking performance of the touch panel.
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

-40
-20
0
20
Position [mm]
0
100
200
300
400
Voltage [V]
-1.0
-0.5
0
0.5
1.0
Time [s]
Force [N]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
touch
detach
turn back
wall
Figure 15: Result of virtual wall rendering without force-direction
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-40
-20
0
20
Position [mm]
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
Direction [rad]
0
100
200
300
400
Voltage [V]
-1.0
-0.5
0
0.5
1.0
Force [N]
touch
detach
turn back
wall
Figure 16: Result of virtual wall rendering with force-direction
For force-direction detection on a virtual wall, two ma-
jor problems were found. One is vibration during detaching
(which is not observed in Figure 16). As the force-direction
detection is not robust enough, it sometimes outputs wrong
direction. If the detection malfunctions during detaching from
a wall, it results in rapid on and off of the voltage that creates
vibrative sensation. This would be solved by having a dead
zone in force-direction detection and to use low pass ﬁltering
in the detection result.
The other problem was the negative spike in rendering
force when the user changed the force direction (which is
clearly observed in Figure 16). This negative spike would be
the result of the latency of the information processing. As there
is time-lag between the real motion and the image capturing,
the voltage was not instantly switched off as the user alters
the force direction. If a user rapidly alters the force direction,
the time-lag of voltage-off results in the spike of the rendered
force.
The ﬁrst and the third problems are both due to the
processing speed of the touch panel. The problems might be
solved by implementing some kind of predictive control, which
we would like to work on in our future study.
VII.
CONCLUSION
This article described position and force-direction detection
using a vision-based touch panel, for multi-ﬁnger electrostatic
surface haptic system. Using the embedded IR capturing
system in the touch panel, the system can detect the positions
and applied force directions of the stimulator pads, without
relying on an overhead camera.
The paper investigated compatibility of the vision-based
touch panel with the electrostatic stimulation, based on which
a prototype system was designed and demonstrated. The
prototype realized various visuo-haptic interactions, but the
motion speed was limited due to the slow tracking speed of
the touch panel. The system demonstrated successful force-
direction detection, but at the same time, some limitations have
become clear, which are the vulnerability against visual images
and slow detection speed due to the slow tracking speed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Funding Program for Next-
Generation World Leading Researchers (LR013) from Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.
REFERENCES
[1]
O. Bau, I. Poupyrev, A. Israr, and C. Harrison, “Teslatouch: Electrovi-
bration for touch surface,” in Proc. 23rd annual ACM symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology, 2010, pp. 283–292.
[2]
J. Linjama and V. M¨akinen, “E-sense screen: Novel hapitc display with
capasitive electrosensory interface,” in HAID 2009, 4th Workshop for
Haptic and Audio Interaction Design, 2009.
[3]
A. Yamamoto, S. Nagasawa, H. Yamamoto, and T. Higuchi, “Elec-
trostatic tactile display with thin ﬁlm slider and its application to
tactile telepresentation systems,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 12, 2006, pp. 168–177.
[4]
S. Saga and K. Deguchi, “Lateral-force-based 2.5-dimensional tactile
display for touch screen,” in Proc. 2012 IEEE Haptic Symposium, 2012,
pp. 15–22.
[5]
M. Weiss, C. Wacharamanotham, S. Voelker, and J. Borchers, “Fin-
gerﬂux: near-surface haptic feedback on tabletops,” in Proc. the 24th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 2011, pp. 615–620.
[6]
T. Nakamura and A. Yamamoto, “Multi-ﬁnger electrostatic passive
haptic feedback on a visual display,” in Proc. IEEE World Haptics
Conference 2013, 2013, pp. 37–42.
[7]
——, “Multi-ﬁnger surface visuo-haptic rendering using electrostatic
stimulation with force-direction sensing gloves,” in Proc. 2014 IEEE
Haptics Symposium, 2014, (accepted).
[8]
J. E. Colgate, M. A. Peshkin, and W. Wannasuphoprasit, “Nonholo-
nomic haptic display,” in Proc. 1996 IEEE International Conference on
Rotobitcs and Automation, 1996, pp. 539–544.
[9]
J. Furusho, M. Sakaguchi, N. Takesue, and K. Koyanagi, “Development
of ER brake and its application to passive force display,” Journal of
Intelligent Material Systems and Structure, vol. 13, 2002, pp. 425–429.
[10]
E. Mallinckrodt, A. L. Hughes, and W. S. Jr., “Perception by the skin of
electrically induced vibrations,” Science, vol. 118, 1953, pp. 277–278.
[11]
H. Tang and D. J. Beebe, “A microfabricated electrostatic haptic
display for persons with visual impairments,” IEEE Transactions on
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 6, 1998, pp. 241–248.
[12]
D. J. Meyer, M. A. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “Fingertip friction
modulation due to electrostatic attraction,” in IEEE World Haptics
Conference 2013, 2013, pp. 43–48.
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

