Online Casinos: The Addiction Under Control 
Role of Web 2.0 and re-documentarisation. 
 
Karim Fraoua, Christian Bourret 
Equipe Dispositifs d’Information et de Communication à l’Ère Numérique (DICEN) 
Université Paris-Est 
77454 Marne-la-Vallée, France 
fraoua@univ-mlv.fr, bourret@univ-mlv.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this work, we will consider how to design and 
implement tools or Information System based and enriched by 
a semantic search engines to the forums in the world of online 
gambling (articles, tutorials, etc.) supporting both textual and 
semantic expressions. On the basis of this new approach, based 
on neuro-economic field, we will look on addiction using 
neuroscience and game theory in order to construct an 
efficient Information System that takes into account the 
expectations and attitudes of players. 
Keywords-online; 
gambling; 
addiction; 
neuroeconomy; 
game theory; information system. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
For a long time the game became a regular and 
acceptable part of our society. For most people, gambling is 
a social activity that is fun and entertaining. Besides the 
casino, companies insist on this aspect to indicate that this is 
primarily a leisure activity. But for others, gambling problem 
cause a real addiction phenomenon similar to drugs: they 
become uncontrollable and the game is no longer a choice 
for them [1]. Studies on the game take into account 
gambling behavior including those conducted by the casino 
companies. Recently a study of gambling problem in France 
shows clearly that this problem is growing, with more than 
600 000 players may be considered as presenting a risk of 
addiction or considered as addict [2]. 
The online game is a new element in our modern society, 
creating a new type of players and new audiences. The 
challenge today is to consider the broad issue of addiction to 
online gamers and bypass techniques possible to ban it. It is 
now quite possible to manage the technical aspect of 
changing IP address or credit card during elicitation for 
gambling anonymous IP addresses to be managed by 
operators. The issue of access of online gaming raises new 
questions that are less marked for classical casino. 
We will see in this paper that we can bring in new sight 
on addiction problem using neuroscience approach and how 
to design a new scheme in re-documentarisation of forums 
that permit to detect an addictive player and to orient him to 
a medical space, where his problem can be treated. 
II.   THE ADDICTION PHENOMENON 
The addiction to gambling has always existed. It has 
been described by writers such as Dostoïevski in “The 
Player” [3]. This problem affects the mental health of some 
players [4]. It has been studied in some U.S. cities that focus 
on spaces for whose playing become an important issue for 
residents [5]. Gambling problems often co-occur with mental 
health problems, chemical dependency with drug use and of 
course this affects the family, generating legal and financial 
problems. This can lead to suicidal behavior with acting out 
often observed especially when the player has lost all hope 
of settling the quagmire in which he began by referring to 
the phenomenon mentioned above. 
The behavior of these so-called addictive games players 
was the subject of several sociological studies, both in 
behavioral terms [6] and from few years the contribution of 
neuroscience [7]. Several studies on psychological factors in 
a rational point of view of addiction exist in the literature 
[8].  
The question of how to handle this problem is essential, 
we believe that to understand the path of decision, we should 
look to the issue in terms of neuroscience or neuro-
economics, not only in psychological terms.  
Thus, the problem arises from the classification of the 
addiction. Look so far where are focused the addiction, our 
society consider that it is mainly clinical, although studied in 
a particular context. It should be noted that the factor game 
can also be cultural, social or ethnic like in Chinese or 
Jewish communities [9]. However no study shows the 
prevalence of gambling addiction except in a population of a 
certain socio-economic with a lowest wages where research 
shows sometimes the extreme behaviors, leading to games to 
match with words addictive behavior. 
The reasons why people play to game and why they can 
becomes addict in general are poorly identified. They can be 
numerous and varied [10]. Several ideas were discussed, as a 
social acceptance within a group, the enrichment, a painful 
event in the life that lead to emotions such as anger, 
depression, anxiety attacks [11], the desire to test his luck in 
the game and the excitement of such gaming experience 
motivated by reward and highlighting the role of dopamine 
[12].  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

)
 In general, it seems that the main reason that pushes the 
people to play, is the desire to win and the denial of loss. The 
gain is considered as a success, corresponding to the 
development of self-esteem and recognition by others [13]. 
To encourage the people to play, the barrier of the loss is 
now filled by some online operators with an offer of free 
play at first to lead the player into the game space [14].  
Presumably some games are popular because they are 
based on socialization, real or virtual like for the poker free 
online website Zynga [15]. In addition, poker is largely 
diffused in the broadcast on several television stations, ant it 
suffers a major craze, leading to highly addictive attitudes. 
The addiction to poker is very specific. It can be considered 
as dangerous because the game can be considered by the 
players as a rational game; the success depends therefore 
from the capacity of players and less from chance. 
III. 
NEW GAME MODALITIES FOR NEW ONLINE PLAYERS 
The spectacular development of Internet and mobile 
telephony has accompanied the new forms of online 
gambling. Many video games are evolving in the "network" 
space. The MMORPG (Massive Multiplayer Online Role 
Playing Game) a networking player system, with significant 
numbers of players, can now collect up to several million 
participants. For most of them, these games usually require 
expensive subscriptions. Mobile telephony also facilitates 
the appearance of no new quizzes via SMS.  
This type of contest mainly aimed to the youngest, 
offering prize money, new forms of gambling and other 
subscriptions and downloads dramatically increase the risk 
of negative consequences (costs, isolation, disinvestment of 
daily living) for the affected population: adolescents and 
young adults and large consumers of new technologies [16]. 
The family aspect can play an important role in the 
emergence, development and maintenance of the pathology 
of the game [17]. It is the same on the social learning model, 
acceptance of the game at the social level, leading the player 
to understand the game as a normal social activity as it is 
approved by the legal system.  
The attitude of the player as an individual is marked by 
the traditional social behavior through learning, modeling 
and maintenance of socially acceptable behaviors and 
attitudes. The family can be the basis of the driving game, 
since children often play cards with the family to indicate its 
acceptance as a normal social activity or when they 
encouraged to play with other kids [17].  
The genetic factors were studied and showing the 
existence of such a phenomenon of addiction situations with 
twins. A detailed study of identical twins living together or 
separated was conducted on 155 twins [18]. However, this 
study leaves out some aspects that can influence the 
behavior of players due to the environment of the players or 
their personalities. 
The sociological aspect is the overriding factor. Indeed, 
in the social model the player tends to enhance the game, 
because it is less complex and could bring a reward, social 
and financial value in the gain.  
A player will have a form of recognition through his 
player activity by operators in a form of marketing strategy. 
This sociological aspect of escape from the complexity of 
the social model contributes significantly to the pathology of 
the game [19].  
There is now a neuroscientific approach to the 
phenomenon 
of 
addiction, 
which 
encourages 
new 
explanations. Indeed, several authors have identified this 
approach that appears to be an interesting way for 
understanding the phenomenon of addiction [20]. 
IV.     NEUROSCIENCE, GAME THEORY AND DECISION 
CHOICE 
This approach can help to renew the study of the issue of 
addiction. First neuroscience has made considerable progress 
with brain imaging. Until now the traditional approach 
treated human behaviors by game theory of Von Neumann 
and Morgenstern [21] revisited by J. Nash [22]. 
 Indeed, players can easily understand that they are in a 
situation of asymmetric information and a non-cooperative 
game. However the player is master of his choice which 
tends to maximize its usefulness in the game. This utility is 
either an economic or the well-being.  
The second category does not fall within the scope of this 
investigation. This is a customer, also sought by the 
operators of casinos coming to play with the primary 
objective of leisure. The first type of clientele would be 
subject to the risk of addiction because the main objective is 
the gain factor or optimization of utility. It is so ironic that 
this customer led to addictive client because the loss does 
not seem to be a hindrance to the game 
Why do players become addictive even though they are 
so inconsiderate? In general, in the economic model of the 
individual player, the choices are for most of them rational. 
The concept of rationality was originally developed by Von 
Neumann and Morgenstern. 
 This first model was useful to explain the economic and 
social situation at some point although the model assumes a 
perfect environment result from the theory of general 
equilibrium. This environment requires a perfect symmetry 
of information system and cooperation between agents. 
Indeed, in economy of goods or services, or other areas 
in perfect competition, the equilibrium is defined by an 
economic agent who chooses a solution which does not 
damage that of another agent. This also requires an atomistic 
market namely n-players market. 
We thus see that the situation resembles to the game in 
which the agent makes a choice that necessarily depends on 
the choices of others agents but for which he has perfect 
information.  
The issue of well being or welfare provided by this act 
depends on the decision taken by other actors. The situation 
in the middle of the game appears in a model where sharing 
information is asymmetric. The operator has information that 
the player does not control, yet it should discriminate on the 
game where the player participates. 
Indeed, although the overall rate of redistribution is 
known by the players, and it is not known at certain time 
during the game, whatever the game, the payout of the slot 
machine in question or another game where player hopes in 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

)
a prospective approach to optimize his utility function by 
building more. 
From a mathematical point of view, for a player to be in 
a position to optimize his choice, he should know all the 
players participating in the game, the rules of the game and 
the information available to the other players, which may 
seem useful in a poker tournament for example, and 
individual preferences.  
When the player enters in a physical place, some of these 
elements will be respected. 
 For online game, little is known, since the choices are 
totally made in the total absence of known parameters. This 
creates a climate of uncertainty, which puts the player in a 
prime position where he accepts himself the lottery concept.  
When the outcome is certain, the choice may lead in our 
sense to an addictive situation, harmful in economic terms. 
The action is not related to a gain or loss of money, it is also 
the case when the player participates in a recreational 
activity.  
The utility theory gives a first explanation for this type of 
attitude in an uncertain environment as the factor of utility is 
based on the calculation of hope, that ignoring the decision 
himself and especially his attitude versus the risk.  
It is recognized that most agents are risk averse from the 
work of Allais [23] and Ellsberg [24]. The question of the 
decision based on the expected value of utilities has already 
been asked in the past and it is clear that the expected value 
is justified in the long run if the game is repeated several 
times.  
Von Neuman and Morgenstern make a response stating 
that the election is made by considering the value of each 
share and this is the obvious choice as risk aversion, it is still 
necessary that each set leads to a result independently. 
We can imagine that the addict player is not risk-averse 
or ignore all of the parameters of the game in its 
mathematical form. 
Risk is defined by a given situation as the objective 
probability corresponding to a lottery known result, like the 
game of roulette at the casino or a roll of the dices that the 
area is classified as uncertain when the outcome is uncertain 
as game of poker, slot machine, the result of a "football 
game". John Nash provides an answer to this question by 
stating that the players do not cooperate, through the 
example of prisoner's dilemma because they may be placed 
in information asymmetry. This new approach allows then to 
explain some forms of choice that we can operate which are 
optimal in terms of choice or expected utility because we can 
be devoid of useful information. Lack of resources 
(knowledge, understanding, etc.) or time does not collect 
useful information and, consequently, the utility bill is not at 
its maximum, but at its best. We can have also a behavior 
leading to a losing attitude or utility or sometimes to a 
negative attitude 
The neuroscientific aspect has been also clearly 
demonstrated by several works, as seen before. Van Holst et 
al. showed that brain areas are activated specifically in the 
case of gambling, that can be said at risk of addiction 
specially, the ventral tegmental-orbito frontal cortex [25]. 
V. 
VARIOUS TYPES OF PLAYERS 
The world of gamers is not an uniform medium. To build 
an efficient Information system, it is useful to study the 
general typology of the players. We must not ignore that 
there are still subtypes namely women where there is 
evidence that online gambling is like visiting a shopping site, 
namely a place of socialization [26]. We must consider the 
category of young people who remain vulnerable to this type 
of offer [27].  
We see that the sociology of players is widely diffused 
and cannot conceive the intermediation via a general purpose 
tool, but an "agile" tool that can adapted to the type of 
players according to the subcategory. 
The player is usually acting individually thinking that he 
can maximize his welfare function, based on beliefs in 
giving assumptions about the state of the world and the 
potential usefulness of each of the possible consequences. 
This is what he hopes calculate but beliefs and superstitions 
are subjective in nature. 
 All these questions can be studied nowadays in a new 
way that takes into account the cognitive approach rather 
than collective societal behavioral approaches such as fads, 
but on an individual basis. 
This new sight helps to understand the concept of how 
decision may be irrational, and especially to understand the 
mechanisms that push players to act this way. In opposite, 
the rationalist approach indicates that difference in beliefs 
between the players can be explained solely by differences 
in their level of information 
VI. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF AN ONLINE INFORMATION 
SYSTEM 
Training and education seem also necessary that the 
implementation program for information on how to react and 
to prevent gambling problems.  
In the case of online games, we will need to act via the 
web interface since the player is isolated from the place of 
game where all the aspects we have mentioned exist. The 
existence of the semantic web would be useful to the extent 
that we could reconstruct the behavior of the player 
participation in forums which would be included in the 
online game site where registration is required. 
Indeed, the player was registered by duty on the gaming 
physical place; it will be thus invited to participate in the 
forum. It may be encouraged by forms of rewards for 
participation in this forum. For example, they can be invited 
through a scoring rate of participation, or the development of 
voucher on the co-branding, i.e.,  Drinking offers. 
On the other hand, for the development of Information 
system (IS), the main difficulty in creating semantic 
operators is linked to the fact that the corpus will not be 
considered as mere undifferentiated text books because their 
constitution involves a number of criteria of homogeneity as 
well as contrast on the quality of the ontology. 
It will be assumed to constitute a representative set of 
productions, where each community could develop its own 
ontology, is difficult. Indeed, this may cause the constitution 
of ontology with a low level of use; it is the risk of the 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

)
purely social approach, since players can develop specific 
ontology that is very specific to their own point of view of 
the world of games, i.e., “j’ai pris une gamelle” where in 
French “gamelle” may means “loosing term” or a plate. 
In order to enhance the usability of this ontology, we will 
look to the constitution of this type of little formal ontology 
to the status of the data as well as the place of the expert in 
the reconstruction of corpus via a more developed ontology, 
which will be designed in this IS. This will define the role of 
tools in extraction of terms.  
We will also propose the practices and the uses to the 
player that feed the Information System by analyzing in 
depth their methods and practices research and selection of 
documents, and their methods of treatment of these 
documents to insert them in the Information System 
The goal is to reach an automated process of alert 
following automatic extraction of knowledge from texts 
related to the game. This is in order to automatically extract 
knowledge concerning the specific terms of the addiction 
from texts, with a derived method of automatic processing of 
language similarly to other domain [28]. 
This will define a tool which would broadcast 
information to the owners of the sites of online games on the 
model of information systems for the detection of the signal 
and the management of knowledge in addiction.  
When addictive behavior is detected, a quiz may be sent 
to the player which will measure the risk of the player to 
addictive behavior and especially in order to better take in 
charge this risk and to maintain the spirit of leisure. 
The objective targeted in this work is purely 
informational, because it is the basis of the correction of 
these phenomena in our connected society that increasingly 
appears and which primarily affect the most disadvantaged 
social populations (unemployed, resigned, etc.)  
We need to bring elements of knowledge to the operator 
to provide the finest and most complete information of very 
low granularity to the players who are no longer in a position 
to make or to choose among a lot of  decisions possibilities 
to fit their best utility factor.  
We can be optimistic if we base our approach on the 
result of Polemarchakis and Geanakoplos [28] that players 
will eventually find consensus between them indicating this 
fundamental result: agents however fails necessary the same 
consensus than if they had directly communicated all their 
information. The main result is that this situation does not 
continue always. Indeed they indicate this major result that 
the agents can't disagree forever. 
A  Re-documentarisation for forum in online casino website 
Usually the specialists organize the document according 
to a classical model, a summary, an index and eventually put 
it in certain categories. In a certain way, when the work is 
made by a specialist and the writer of the document is a 
professional, the task can be easily made. However, the 
problem of forum is that the language is likelihood different 
and the automatic extraction of a semantic scheme or 
metadata can be slightly different for the attendance. This 
may causes a very weakest information level finally and is 
not exploitable by the specialist of game addiction in our 
case. 
The re-documentarisation can appear in this situation as a 
good approach to correct these biases [30]. Indeed, the 
methodology base is to reconfigure the document with 
creating annotation or new metadata in order to put the 
document in a right category. 
Zacklad et al. [31, 32] has shown that participatory 
spaces and forums that fall within the socio-semantic web 
are likely to structure the documentation process associated 
with collective governance issues. This may be seen as a key 
to create an enrichment tool to help specialists to better assist 
the players against the risk of addiction. 
 
CONCLUSION 
This work is a prospective paper under progress and is 
related to the appearance of the legal online game in France 
that creates today important phenomenon of addiction.  
Parliament proposes control measures but this remains 
inefficient despite this goodwill. 
It is clear that this control will not be exercised if the 
operators themselves don’t put in place the online forums 
with a continuous and automated process that permit the 
analysis to detect the so-called players with addictive 
behaviors.  
We are looking forward how to implement to re-
documentarisation tool in a casino website space. We are 
also looking for the best ontology that leads to a better 
guidance in direction of the players, towards specialized sites 
or to custom monitoring in order to eliminate addictive 
behavior.  
References 
[1] M. Bronnec, B. Rocher, G. Bouju and J.L. Venisse, « Jeu et 
addiction », Annales Médico-psychologiques, revue psychiatrique, 
Volume 168, issue 7, pp. 509-512, September 2010. 
[2] http://addiction-au-jeu-600-000-francais-menaces-6709456.html, 
September 2011. 
[3] The Player, Fiódor Dostoiévsky 
[4] P. Sacco, R.M. Cunningham-Williams, E. Ostmann and E.L. 
Spitznagel Jr., The association between gambling pathology and 
personality 
disorders,  Original 
Research 
Article, 
Journal 
of 
Psychiatric Research, Volume 42, issue 13, pp. 1122-1130, October 
2008.  
[5] J. S. Lemmens, P. M. Valkenburg and J. Peter, Psychosocial causes 
and consequences of pathological gaming, Computers in Human 
Behavior, Volume 27, issue 1, pp. 144-152, January 2011.  
[6] E. Boyle, T. M. Connolly and T. Hainey, The Role of Psychology in 
Understanding the Impact of Computer Games, Entertainment 
Computing, Volume 2, issue 2, pp. 69-74, 2011. 
[7] E. Duven, K.W. Müller and K. Wölfling, Internet and computer game 
addiction - a review of current neuroscientific research, European 
Psychiatry, Volume 26, Supplement 1, p. 416, 2011.  
[8] N. Raylu and T. Po Oei , Pathological gambling, a comprehensive 
review, Clinical Psychology Review, Volume 22, pp. 1009–1061, 
2002. 
[9] N. Raylu and T. Po Oei , Role of culture in gambling and problem 
gambling  Clinical Psychology Review, Volume 23, issue 8, pp. 
1087-1114, January 2004. 
[10] G.J. Smith, Gambling Studies Encyclopedia of Social Measurement, 
pp. 75-84, 2005. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

)
[11] A. Verdejo-García and A. Bechara, A somatic marker theory of 
addiction, Neuropharmacology, Volume 56, Supplement 1, pp. 48-
62, 2009 
[12] I. H.A. Franken, J. Booij and W. van den Brink, The role of 
dopamine in human addiction: From reward to motivated attention, 
European Journal of Pharmacology, Volume 526, issues 1-3, pp. 
199-206, 5 December 2005. 
[13] B. Ayin and S. Volkan San, Procedia-Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, Volume 15, pp. 3500-3505, 2011. 
[14] D.H. Shin and Y.J. Shin, Why do people play social network 
games?, Computers in Human Behavior, Volume 27, issue 2, pp. 
852-861, March 2011. 
[15] http://company.zynga.com/games/featured-games, December 2011 
[16] S. Hwa Hsu, M.-H. Wen and M.-C. Wu, Exploring user 
experiences as predictors of MMORPG addiction, Computers & 
Education, Volume 53, issue 3, pp. 990-999, November 2009. 
[17] M.E. Gifford-Smith and C.A. Brownell, Childhood peer 
relationships: social acceptance, friendships, and peer networks, 
Journal of School Psychology, Volume 41, issue 4, pp. 235-228, 
July-August 2003. 
[18] Addiction, A disorder of choice, Gene M. Heyman, Harvard 
University Press, 2009. 
[19] H. Rachlin, Economic Concepts in the Behavioral Study of 
Addiction? Chapter 5, Choice, Behavioural Economics and 
Addiction, pp. 129-153, 2003. 
[20] T. Takahashi, A neuroeconomic theory of bidirectional synaptic 
plasticity and addiction, Medical Hypotheses, Volume 75, issue 4, 
pp. 356-358, October 2010. 
[21] J. von Neumann, and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and 
Economic Behavior, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 
1944, second ed. 1947, third ed. 1953. 
[22] J. F. Nash, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 36, pp. 48-49, 1950. 
[23] M. Allais, Le comportement de l'homme rationnel devant le risque : 
critique des postulats et axiomes de l'Ecole américaine, 
Econometrica, 21, pp. 503-546, 1953. 
[24] D. Ellsberg, Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms, The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 643-669, 1961. 
[25] R.J. van Holst, W. van den Brink, D.J. Veltman and A.E. 
Goudriaan, Why gamblers fail to win: a review of cognitive and 
neuroimaging findings in pathological gambling, Neurosci 
Biobehav Rev. Jan Volume 34(1), pp. 87-107, 2010. 
[26] T.O. Afifi, B.J. Cox, P.J. Martens, J. Sareen and M.W. Enns, 
Demographic and social variables associated with problem 
gambling among men and women in Canada  Psychiatry Research, 
Volume 178, issue 2, pp. 395-400, 30 July 2010. 
[27] L. Blinn-Pike, S. Lokken Worthy and J. N. Jonkman, Adolescent 
Gambling: A Review of an Emerging Field of Research   
Journal of Adolescent Health, Volume 47, issue 3, pp. 223-236, 
September 2010. 
[28] H. Déjean, E. Gaussier, J.-M. Renders and F. Sadat, Automatic 
processing of multilingual medical terminology: applications to 
thesaurus 
enrichment 
and 
cross-language 
information 
retrieval,  Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Volume 33, issue 2, 
pp. 111-124, February 2005. 
[29] J. Geanakoplos and H. Polemarchakis, We Can’t Disagree Forever, 
Journal of Economic Theory, Volume 28(1), pp. 192-200, 1982. 
[30] J.-M. Salaün, Redocumentarization, Challenge For Information 
Studies, Études de communication, 30, pp. 13-23, 2007. 
[31] M. Zacklad, Documentarisation processes in Documents for Action 
(DofA): the status of annotations and associated cooperation 
technologies. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, June, vol. 
15, n° 2-3, pp. 205-228, 2006. 
[32]  M. Zacklad, Participative documentary spaces and governance. 
International Journal of Sustainable Development, vol. 11, Nos. 
2/3/4, pp. 247-261, 2008. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

