Interaction with Real Objects and Visual Images on a Flat Panel Display using
Three-DOF Transparent Electrostatic Induction Actuators
Norio Yamashita, Kota Amano, and Akio Yamamoto
Department of Precision Engineering
University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
Email: {norio, amano, akio}@aml.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper describes a new type of computer-user
interactions through an actuated real object and visual images on
a liquid crystal display (LCD). The interactions are realized by
three degrees-of-freedom (three-DOF) transparent electrostatic
induction actuators placed on the display. The dynamic inter-
action was realized using asynchronous driving characteristics
of the induction actuator. The actuator does not interfere with
visual images on the screen because of the optical transparency
of the actuator. The actuator is equipped with eight sets of one-
DOF actuators, which enables three-DOF driving, XY translation
and rotation, of sheet objects. Fundamental performances of the
actuator regarding the 3-DOF motions are investigated. Also, a
prototype interactive application is demonstrated.
Keywords-electrostatic actuator; transparent; three-DOF; visual
interaction;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent progress of information technologies have provided
us with many digital contents. In the use of the digital
contents, user interfaces have been given an important role
to determine user experiences. In the days when pointing
devices and keyboards were principal input devices, touch
panel screens enhanced user experiences by giving intuitive
interaction with computers. While their use of touch modality
is limited for manipulation of digital graphics, other trials
of using real tangible objects for communication modality
have also been studied [1–4]. In such interactions, users can
communicate with computers intuitively by touching, moving,
and picking up the real objects. This intuitive interaction will
be further enhanced by returning responses to the real objects
by actuating them based on the digital data, which requires
embedded actuators. Most of the actuators used for such
interaction systems are electro-magnetic actuators. Although
electromagnetic actuators have high output forces and high
controllability, they typically have heavy and bulky structures.
Recently, an electrostatic actuator has been introduced in
this ﬁeld as an alternative actuator [5–7]. The electrostatic
actuator is a thin and lightweight actuator, which can directly
drive a sheet-type object placed on it [8]. In addition, it can be
manufactured in transparent color by means of transparent con-
ductive materials, such as indium tin oxide (ITO). Since it does
not occlude the images on a LCD display, combinations of the
actuators and LCD displays have successfully demonstrated
interactions with a real tangible object and virtual images, with
considerably simple system setups.
The electrostatic actuators that were incorporated in those
systems can be divided into two different types: asynchronous
and synchronous types. As discussed more in detail in the
next section, due to their different characteristics the suitable
applications are also different. Asynchronous type is suitable
for dynamic user interaction, whereas synchronous type is
suitable for rather static one. For synchronous type, two-DOF
motions have been demonstrated for active tangible systems
[7], [9]. On the other hand, for asynchronous type, only one-
DOF actuator has been introduced for active tangible systems,
although three-DOF motion was already investigated for this
actuator, apart from active tangible systems [10].
In this paper, a transparent electrostatic asynchronous ac-
tuator to realize three-DOF motion is reported and applied
for an active tangible system. The system utilizes pen-tablet
digitizer to detect the motion of an actuated sheet. With the
help of the digitizer and the actuator, the system realizes
intuitive interaction with computer animation through a sheet-
like tangible object.
Section II compares two different driving characteristics of
the electrostatic actuators from the viewpoints of interactive
systems. Section III introduces the basic driving principle of
an electrostatic actuator. Section IV describes the structure and
features of fabricated transparent 3-DOF electrostatic actuator.
Section V evaluates the actuator experimentally. Section VI
proposes active tangible interaction system using the actuator.
Section VII concludes this paper.
II.
ELECTROSTATIC ACTUATORS FOR INTERACTIVE
SYSTEMS
Electrostatic actuators have several types of driving meth-
ods, which provide different characteristics of slider behavior.
According to the interactive systems, we can classify them
into two different types based on their driving characteristics:
synchronous and asynchronous. In the synchronous type, the
displacement of the actuated object is determined by driving
signal. In the case of the synchronous electrostatic motor [7],
[9], the displacement or speed of the object is in proportional
relationship with the phase or frequency of the driving ac
signals. This facilitates positioning of the object in open-loop
control without any external sensors. By changing phase or
frequency, the system can easily control the position or the
speed of the object. However, when subject to too large exter-
nal forces (which means overloading), synchronous actuators
typically ”step-out”. If the external load is too large such that
the actuator cannot keep the designated object displacement
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I: FEATURES OF TWO DIFFERENT ACTUATION PRINCIPLES
Driving motion
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Position
control
Available
in open-loop control
Requiring
Sensor feedback
Behavior in
overloading
step-out and causes
vibration
smooth motion
without step-out
Suitable
application
Applications requiring
relatively accurate
positioning
Dynamic interaction
between users and
tangible objects
anymore, the object will jump to some other point, which is
called step-out. When an actuator steps-out, the object shows
vibrating behaviors because of the jumping, which can be felt
unpleasant if it is used in an interactive system.
In an asynchronous type, the driving force is determined
by driving signal. The displacement of the object has no
direct relation with the driving signal. Thus, for displacement
or speed control, sensor feedback is necessary. On the other
hand, there is no ”step-out” in asynchronous actuator since
asynchronous operation does not deﬁne the displacement. If
there is too much external force, the object will be simply
pushed back without distinct vibrations.
The two different actuation principles features are summa-
rized in Table I. Due to their different characteristics, they can
be used in different interactive applications. A synchronous
type would be more suitable for applications that require
position control. For example, the application demonstrated
in [7] fully exploited the feature of the synchronous actuator.
It realizes synchronous motions of computer animation and a
tangible object, without any external sensors.
An asynchronous type would be rather suitable for ap-
plications requiring dynamic interaction. Here, ”dynamic in-
teraction” means that a user continuously moves the object
to interact with some computer graphics. In [5], [6], such
interactions have been demonstrated where a user can play a
game of catch with a computer animation. In this application,
the asynchronous behavior was imperative, as the user pushes
back a ball against actuator’s operation. If a synchronous
actuator was utilized, the user would have felt unpleasant
vibrations.
In this work, we focus on asynchronous actuator and
develop 3-DOF version to realize more dexterous interaction
than those demonstrated in [5], [6].
III.
BASIC PRINCIPLE OF ELECTROSTATIC
ACTUATOR
The three-DOF actuator used in this paper combines several
one-DOF actuators. Thus, the basic structure and principle of
one-DOF actuator is explained ﬁrst. Fig. 1 illustrates the basic
structure. It has a sheet with embedded electrodes, which is
called ”stator”, and a sheet object that is to be actuated. The
slider electrodes are connected into three phases so that three-
phase ac voltage can be applied. The actuated object is a
dielectric material without any electrode inside. A paper sheet
or a plastic sheet is available as the actuated object.
Applying ac voltages to the stator electrode generates
traveling voltage wave on the stator, which induces traveling
electric charge wave on the slider, as shown in Fig. 1. The
electrostatic interaction between the two traveling waves pro-
vides horizontal actuating force. As the electrostatic interaction
also provides vertical attraction force, the friction between the
actuated object and the stator must be kept low enough.
voltage supply
resistive sheet object
stator
parallel electrodes
traveling 
voltage wave
traveling 
electric charge
wave
driving 
direction
Figure 1: Schematic diagram of a one-DOF electrostatic actuator.
x1
y1
x2
y2
43 mm
48.5 mm
48.5 mm
x
y
Figure 2: Structure of a 3-DOF actuator designed using combination of
1-DOF electrodes of X or Y.
IV.
TRANSPARENT THREE-DOF ACTUATOR
A. Structure
This section describes a transparent three-DOF electrostatic
actuator, which can realize XY translation motion and rotating
motion of a slider. The three-DOF actuator is designed by tiling
multiple one-DOF actuators in a checkerboard pattern. Fig. 2
shows the design of the electrodes, which has a four-by-four
tiling structure. The units in the same color are connected to the
same bus lines, and thus will be activated with the same voltage
patterns. Fig. 3 shows driving methods for translations. One
half of the electrodes produce X-direction force and the others
produce Y-direction force. Using either one of the electrode
groups, one can drive a slider in an X or Y translational motion.
Diagonal motion can be available using both of them. The
direction of the translation can be changed by exchanging any
two of the three phases of the voltages, which reverses the
traveling direction of the voltage wave.
Rotating motion can be produced using a combination of
four electrodes, as shown in Fig. 4. Rotating can be realized
only on limited points. As shown in a later section, possible
rotating direction is ﬁxed for each point due to the electrode
structure. The rotation toward the other direction is not stable.
Fig. 5 shows the available rotating points and their stable
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a) x-motion
(b) y-motion
(c) xy-motion
Figure 3: Driving method for X, Y, and diagonal translations.
Rotational direction: CW
Rotational direction: CCW
Stable case
Unstable case
Figure 4: Driving method for rotation. (Left) stable and (Right) unstable
rotation in a rotating point.
rotating directions. Four points have clockwise (CW) rotating
direction and the others have a counter-clockwise (CCW)
rotating direction.
This rotating motion is unique to this asynchronous ac-
tuator; it is not possible with the two-DOF synchronous
actuator reported in [7] as the synchronous actuator requires
the electrodes within an actuated object to always be parallel
to the stator electrodes.
x1
y1
x2
y2
x
y
stable in CCW direction
stable in CW direction
Figure 5: Available stable clockwise (CW) or counter-clockwise (CCW)
rotations in a 3-DOF electrode.
x
y
bus lines
external
terminals
Figure 6: Photo of a 3-DOF transparent electrostatic actuator (upper) and its
appearance on an LCD display (lower).
B. Fabrication
Fig. 6 shows the transparent 3-DOF actuator that was
developed in this work. The actuator has transparent ITO
electrodes on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) sheet, which
is also transparent [6]. Although the main actuating electrodes
are transparent ITO, bus lines, which connect the actuating
electrodes into three phases, are not perfectly transparent as it
is made of conductive polymer ink; it has pale blue color.
In the fabrication of the actuator, three-phase actuating
electrodes were fabricated on a PET sheet by etching. Then,
they were covered with insulating ink except for through-
hole positions by screen-printing. Next, bus lines were printed
over the through-holes to obtain electrical connection with the
actuating electrodes. Finally, all of the electrodes were covered
with insulating ink again except for electric terminals that
connect to voltage sources.
The pitch of the actuating electrodes is 1.0 mm with
line/space width of 0.7/0.3 mm. Size of each one-DOF elec-
trode measures 48.5 by 43 mm.
V.
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF ACTUATOR
This section evaluates slider motions on the developed
3-DOF electrostatic actuator. A polyethylene sheet with a
thickness of 0.1 mm and square size of 90 mm was used as
an actuated object. Fig. 7 shows a photo of the sheet and the
condition for position detection. The sheet has printed markers
with a diameter of 10 mm, at the center and the four corners.
Motion of the actuated sheet was measured using motion
analyzing microscope (VM-6000, Keyence Corp.). The frame
rate was 250 fps. Applied voltages were generated from
waveform generator (7075, Hioki E. E. Corp.) and ampliﬁed
thousand-fold using high voltage ampliﬁers (Model 609C-
6, TReK Inc.). Applied voltage was three-phase sinusoidal
waves with amplitude of 600 V0−p. Glass beads with diameter
of 100 µm were scattered between the stator and a slider
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

dia. 10 mm
90 mm
90 mm
position marker
bus lines
Figure 7: An example of a slider with size of 90mm square used for motion
evaluations.
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
X position (mm)
Y position (mm)
Figure 8: Bidirectional X motion of a 90 square -sized slider.
to reduce friction. First, translational motion along X axis
was investigated. Changing the applied voltages realized a
bidirectional X motion, as shown in Fig. 8. Similarly, Y
motions were evaluated using the same slider. Fig. 9 shows
the results of Y motions. Diagonal motions were also evaluated
by exiting both X and Y electrodes. Trajectories of the slider
for the diagonal motion are shown in Fig. 10. These results
showed that sliders can be actuated in any directions.
Next, rotating motions were evaluated. The slider was
placed on the center of the three-DOF electrode. Two direc-
tions of rotation were evaluated, as shown in Fig. 11. Fig.
11(a) showed a stable CCW rotation at the center point. In
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
X position (mm)
Y position (mm)
Figure 9: Bidirectional Y motion of a 90 square -sized slider.
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
X position (mm)
Y position (mm)
initial position
Figure 10: Diagonal motion of a 90 square -sized slider with four directions
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
X position (mm)
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
X position (mm)
Y position (mm)
Y position (mm)
(a) stable motion
(b) unstable motion
Figure 11: A stable motions and an unstable motion in a rotating point. (a)a
stable CCW rotation. (b)an unstable motion
contrast, the CW motion failed in a short time, as shown in
Fig. 11(b). The cause of the failure is outward force direction.
When the sheet was rotated in CCW direction, all the four sets
of the actuating electrodes generate inward forces, which keep
the sheet at the rotation point. On the other hand, when CW
rotation was tried, all the four electrode sets produce outward
forces, in such a case, the rotation point is unstable equilibrium
for the sheet.
Through these results, we conﬁrmed that the newly de-
signed 3-DOF actuator can provide quasi 3-DOF motion,
which are X and Y translation and rotation at selected points.
VI.
ACTIVE TANGIBLE INTERACTION SYSTEM
A. System overview
Finally, a tangible interaction system was prototyped by
placing the 3-DOF actuator on top of LCD of a digitizer pen-
tablet. The overview of the prototype system is shown in Fig.
12. We utilized a digitizer (Cintiq 22HD, Wacom Co., Ltd),
which has a LCD display of 1920×1080 pixels and position
detecting function using electromagnetic induction, which is
compatible with the electrostatic actuator.
Two sets of the three-DOF actuators were placed on the
display. A polyethylene sheet with a position and orientation
sensor was placed on the display as an actuated object. The
position and orientation sensor was extracted from an input
pen of the digitizer. The circuit was cut and placed in a
plastic container, as shown in Fig. 13. The size was 39×16×18
mm and the weight was 4.6 g. The XY resolution of the
digitizer was set as 19200×10800 for the whole area and
angle resolution of one degree. The total weight of the actuated
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

control
circuit
function
generator
voltage
amplifer
transparent
three-DOF
electrostatic
actuators
real object
(sheet)
PC
sensor
sensor data
virtual object
digitizer
driving
direction
Figure 12: Overview of whole system using two 3-DOF electrodes placed on
a digitizer.
detecting coil
sensor circuit
plastic container
Figure 13: Position and orientation sensor fabricated using a circuit of an
input pen of the digitizer.
object including the sensor shown in Fig. 14 was 5.8 g. Glass
beads with 100 µm were scattered between a stator an a
slider. A three-phase voltage with amplitude of 600 V0−p
and frequency of 100 Hz was used for actuation. Voltages
were switched on and off by photo-mos relays, depending on
the status of the application software and driving directions.
Motions of the slider will be asynchronous under the voltage
condition.
B. Position and orientation detecting
The position and orientation of the slider were detected
using the digitizer, as shown in Fig. 15. The square in pink
color is a temporary marker to indicate the detected position
and orientation. In a relatively slower motion, the position and
orientation are successfully obtained, and the marker position
and orientation match with the slider, as shown in Fig. 15
(a). In contrast, the digitizer output shows a delay in a faster
motion such as more than 100 mm/s, as shown in Fig. 15 (b).
Since the program ran at about 100 Hz and the digitizer signal
was successfully obtained at each time loop, the delay is not
attributed to the program; it would be probably due to internal
90 mm
90 mm
position sensor
printed polyethylene sheet
Figure 14: Slider of a polyethylene sheet with a fabricated position sensor.
(b) faster motion
1/3 s
1/3 s
1/3 s
delay
(a) slower motion
1 s
1 s
1 s
sensor
virtual image (pink)
Figure 15: Detection of position and orientation on the interaction system.
(a) In slower motion (b) In faster motion.
delay of the digitizer.
C. Demonstration
We programmed a simple application using the system, as
shown in Fig. 16. A movie of the application can be found
on the Internet [11]. In this application, a virtual character
representing a wizard is walking around on the screen. Users
can interact with the wizard through the actuated sheet. When
a user throws the sheet to hit the character, it shows a
puzzled behavior and steps back. At the same time, the sheet
bounces back on the character. This motion was achieved by
applying appropriate voltages to each electrode set based on
the position and orientation of the slider. Asynchronous feature
showed smooth motions without step-out vibration in cases of
changing direction where higher driving forces were required.
As another feature, the wizard character can throw a magic
ball to the slider. The ball chases the slider and when they
contact, the slider starts to rotate, as shown in Fig. 17. The
asynchronous driving realized smooth and continuous rotation
without any step-out. These results successfully demonstrated
availability of a newly designed three-DOF transparent elec-
trostatic actuator for a three-DOF user interaction.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduced a three-DOF transparent electrostatic
actuator for active tangible user interaction. Asynchronous
driving characteristics of the actuator achieved smooth X,
Y, and diagonal translations and rotations of a plastic sheet.
The smooth motions are suitable for a dynamic application.
Combination of a digitizer and three-DOF actuators achieved
three-DOF dynamic interaction between a user and a virtual
character using a sheet-type real object. The simple demon-
stration program conﬁrmed that the newly developed three-
DOF transparent electrostatic actuator is suitable for a dynamic
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
sheet object
user
position
sensor
virtual 
character
Figure 16: Collision between a virtual character and a real object.
sheet object
virtual 
character
magic effect
position
sensor
bus line of
electrode
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 17: Rotating motion caused by a hit of virtual magic ball.
tangible user interaction. The usability of the proposed system
would be evaluated in future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Funding Program for Next
Generation World-Leading Researchers (NEXT) from Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Brave, H. Ishii, and A. Dahley, ”Tangible Interfaces for Remote
Collaboration and Communication”, Proc. CSCW’98, Nov. 1998, pp.
169-178.
[2]
D. Avrahami, J. O. Wobbrock, and S. Izadi, ”Portico: Tangible Interaction
on and around a Tablet”, Proc. UIST’11, Oct. 2011, pp. 347-356.
[3]
G. Pangaro, D. Maynes-Aminzade, and H. Ishii, ”The Actuated Work-
bench: Computer-Controlled Actuation in Tabletop Tangible Interfaces”,
Proc. UIST’02, Oct. 2002, pp. 181-190.
[4]
S. Yoshida, H. Noma, and K. Hosaka, ”Proactive Desk II: Development
of a New Multi-object Haptic Display Using a Linear Induction Motor”,
Proc. IEEE Virtual Reality Conference 2006, Mar. 2006, pp. 269-272.
[5]
K. Amano and A. Yamamoto, ”An Interaction on a Flat Panel Display
Using a Planar 1-DOF Electrostatic Actuator”, Proc. ITS 2011, Nov.
2011, pp. 258-259.
[6]
K. Amano and A. Yamamoto, ”Tangible Interactions on a Flat Panel
Display Using Actuated Paper Sheets”, Proc. ITS 2012, Nov. 2012, pp.
351-354.
[7]
T. Hosobata and A. Yamamoto, ”Mixed Reality System on Flat Panel Dis-
play with Real Object Driven by Synchronous Transparent Electrostatic
Actuator”, Proc. Int. Conf. Multimedia and Human Computer Interaction,
July 2013, pp. 127-1-127-7.
[8]
S. Egawa, T. Niino, and T. Higuchi, ”Film Actuators: Planar Electrostatic
Surface-Drive Actuators”, Proc. 1991 IEEE MEMS, Jan.-Feb.1991, pp.
9-14.
[9]
T. Hosobata, A. Yamamoto, and T. Higuchi, ”2-DOF Synchronous Elec-
trostatic Actuator with Transparent Electrodes Arranged in Checkerboard
Patterns”, Proc. 2013 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), Vol. 1, Nov. 2013, pp. 4919-4924.
[10]
A. Yamamoto, S. Tsuruta, and T. Higuchi, ”Planar 3-DOF Paper Sheet
Manipulation Using Electrostatic Induction”, Proc. 2010 IEEE ISIE, July
2010, pp. 493-498.
[11]
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bht9B5ku5R8
(last
access
to on
30/Jan./2014)
299
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

