Integrating Active Learning and Analysis with Near-Infrared Spectroscopy  
into Virtual English for Specific Purposes Classes 
Rumi Tobita  
Center for Liberal Arts and Sciences  
Ashikaga University  
Tochigi, Japan 
email : tobita.rumi@g.ashikaga.ac.jp 
Abstract— This study introduces an effective online course 
design adopting active learning and analysis with Near-
Infrared Spectroscopy from a brain science and educational 
technology perspective to meet English for Specific Purposes
Curriculum goals for Japanese engineering students and 
develop global engineers. Before introducing active learning 
into English for Specific Purposes classes, an experimental 
study using Near-Infrared Spectroscopy was conducted to 
clarify preferable combinations of learners’ characteristics and 
the pedagogical methods. Based on its results, project-based 
learning was successfully integrated into face-to-face English 
for Specific Purposes classes as active learning. This new 
attempt obtained favorable outcomes, enhancing learners’ 
collaborative skills, and critical and creative thinking. The 
results show the effects of adapting active learning strategy 
into the online English for specific purposes classes.  
Keywords- Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS); English for 
Specific Purposes (ESP); Active Learning (AL); project-based 
learning (PBL); online 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
English for Specific Purposes （ESP） is often defined 
as English language teaching which is designed to meet 
specified needs and related in content to particular 
disciplines, occupations, and activities of learners. ESP also 
requires careful research and design of pedagogical materials 
and activities for an identifiable group of adult learners 
within a specific learning context [1]. According to a 
theoretical framework of ESP, Needs Analysis-based 
researches and experiments had been conducted to develop 
global engineers. In previous studies, the outcomes revealed 
that many  Japanese engineering students tend to be anxious 
about expressing themselves in English and less motivated to 
improve their communication skills [2][3]. To solve these 
concerns, several studies have been implemented integrating 
data from brain activities and the pedagogical concept to 
verify an effective ESP course design [4][5]. Before the 
COVID-19 pandemic, Active Learning (AL) had been 
introduced as in-person ESP classes and obtained favorable 
outcomes, such as, raising students’ motivation and attitudes 
to engage tasks and activities [6]. In this study, to develop an 
effective online ESP course design, AL was embedded into 
ESP classes using a virtual meeting platform.  
Section II briefly introduces pedagogical methods related 
to brain science and educational technology. In Sections III 
and IV, implementing AL strategies in ESP classes is 
described, and Section V presents the conclusions and future 
remarks. 
II. APPLYING BRAIN DATA TO COURSE DESIGN 
In the field of educational technology, Aptitude 
Treatment Interaction suggests that pedagogical strategies 
work effectively when the instructions match to the learners’ 
aptitudes [7]. Recently, brain activity has become subject to 
monitoring by technologically innovative instruments, such 
as Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) [8]. NIRS is 
recognized as a practical non-invasive optical technique to 
detect hemoglobin density dynamics response during 
functional activation of the cerebral cortex [9]. Accordingly, 
to develop an effective ESP course design, Aptitude 
Treatment Interaction based experiments using NIRS data 
have been conducted to examine the interaction of learners’ 
aptitudes and instructions in previous studies. In these 
experiments, participants’ listening proficiencies were 
adopted as learners’ aptitudes, and silent and oral reading 
were adopted as instructions to investigate the difference of 
brain activity during practice to verify effective AL strategy 
[6]. 
III. ACTIVE LEARNING METHODOLOGY 
Recently, The Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology attempted to integrate AL methodology to 
Japanese education. Thus, AL frequently appears in 
university syllabi and textbooks used by instructors. 
Methodologically, there are various terms used to describe 
AL, including: student-centered learning, collaborative 
learning (team, peer or group learning), and participatory 
learning in which students are actively engaged in building 
their understanding of facts, ideas, and skills through the  
completion of instructor- directed tasks and activities [10].
Moreover, AL has a number of benefits for students, for 
instance, raising motivation, engaging in tasks and activities 
and, in higher order thinking skills such as synthesis, and 
evaluation, and avoiding passive listening.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. APPLYING PROJECT- BASED LEARNING 
Acquiring English communication skills is a critical 
need so as to develop global engineers who can work in the 
real-world environment and exchange ideas globally. Thus, 
in this study, Project-Based Learning (PBL) is implemented 
to develop global engineers. PBL is a pedagogical approach 
encouraging learners to gain knowledge and skills through 
engaging tasks; therefore, in this study, adapted material 
was task-based themed, in addition to applying a 
communicative approach to improve communication skills. 
The material is ideal for building English communicative 
fluency 
and 
confidence 
while 
developing 
practical 
workplace knowledge and skills. Especially through this 
material, learners imagined that they were new interns at a 
fictional company where they worked together in small 
teams to perform a series of linked tasks and projects to 
develop new products such as SWOT analysis and focus 
group. Therefore, integrating PBL material enabled the 
learners to develop fluency and confidence in speaking, 
listening, reading, and writing via highly-contextualized 
tasks (as shown in Table 1), including discussions, 
presentations, self and team evaluations, report writing, and 
viewing video instructions using online meeting platform. In 
addition to PBL, assignments for improving reading and 
vocabulary-building skills were given to the learners. Due to 
the COVID-19 pandemic, PBL had to be integrated into 
virtual ESP classes. This online ESP classes conducted for 
about 150 engineering students at Japanese technical 
colleges in 2020 and 2021. 
TABLE I. PBL: PROJECT SEQUENCE.
Stage 1 
Inters join the company orientation 
Stage 2 
Teams prepare new product proposals 
Stage 3 
Teams discuss and evaluate product proposal 
Stage 4 
Teams perform market research on the product 
Stage 5 
Teams plan a multimedia advertising campaign 
Stage 6 
Interns prepare a resume and interview for a job 
Table 2 shows the implementation of PBL strategies in 
ESP classes with Zoom. Having learners in shared small 
groups could foster a deeper level of connection and 
communication through breakout rooms. 
TABLE II. PBL: INSTRUCTIONSL SEQUENCE USING ZOOM.
Intro-
duction and 
review 
(10min.)
Viewing  
video 
instruction  
(10min.) 
Giving instructions 
for small group 
activities 
(15 min.)
Breakout 
rooms’ 
activities 
(30 min.)
Feedback 
and 
review 
(15 min.)
However, breakout rooms’ activities enabled learners to 
engage with small group discussion, presentation, and 
evaluation, offering opportunities for deeper learning in 
context and for the development of valuable skills tied to 
learners’ career readiness, instructors’ involvement, and 
support visiting each breakout room is essential. To clarify 
the effect of integrating AL into virtual ESP classes, the 
learners were required to submit weekly reflection papers 
and a final reflection report, to conduct a Can-Do statement 
and 
take 
The 
Test 
of 
English 
for 
International 
Communication (TOEIC) at the end of the semester. 
V.  CONCLUSION 
Learners' feedback gathered from the reflection papers 
was mainly positive. Significant improvements were also 
noted in students’ competence to communicate using 
engineering terms and capability of team-work skills to 
attain the tasks such as SWOT analysis and focus group.   
Accordingly, it can be said that continuously implementing 
an AL pedagogical framework into virtual ESP classes 
could result in effective outcomes and enhance and promote 
learners’ qualities as global engineers. This study and its 
findings could be relevant to online AL classes. There are 
still some limitations that need to be addressed. In further 
study, the latest data of NIRS should be integrated to clarify 
the effectiveness of AL.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study is supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific 
Research (C) (No. 18K00788), from 2018 to 2022. 
REFERECES 
[1]
T. Dudley-Evans, “Developments in English for Specific 
Purposes: 
A 
multi-disciplinary 
approach”. 
Cambridge 
University Press, 1998. 
[2]
R. Tobita and H. Kuniyoshi, “The Needs Analysis of English 
Learners in a Technological College” in Ashikaga Institute of 
Technology Collaborative Research Center Annual Review. 
Vol.7,  pp.160- 174, 2006. 
[3]
R. Tobita, M. Miyazaki and M. Ochiai, “ Curriculum 
Development based on Needs Analysis of English Education 
–Comparison 
between 
Technical 
and 
Co-medical 
Universities-“, 
in 
Ashikaga 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
Collaborative Research Center Annual Review. Vol. 8, 
pp.161 -178,  2007. 
[4]
R. Tobita, “Effectiveness of Analysis with Near-Infrared 
Spectroscopy for EFL Learners in Japan”, HCI International 
2016 - Posters' Extended Abstracts - 18th International 
Conference, HCI International 2016, Toronto, Canada,  
Proceedings, Part II pp.201-206, 2016. 
[5]
R. Tobita, “Development of effective ESP course design 
integrating analysis with near-infrared spectroscopy” ICSIT 
2017 - 8th International Conference on Society and 
Information Technologies, Proceedings Volume 2017-March, 
Orlando; United States, pp. 183-186, 2017. 
[6]
R. Tobita, E. Takahashi and T. Okoda, “ Effective usage of 
NIRS data for Japanese EFL Course Design”, in Ashikaga 
University Collaborative Research Center Annual Review. 
Vol.20 , pp.91-96,  2019. 
[7]
L. J. Cronbach and R. E. Snow, “Aptitudes and Instructional 
Methods: A Handbook for Research in Interactions”. John 
Wiley & Sons Inc, New Jersey, 1977. 
[8]
T. Shimura ed., “Prefrontal Lobe Measurement Using Near 
Infraraed Spectroscopy – Evaluation of Early Detection 
Methods and Rehabilitation Methods of Dementia － ”, 
CORONA Publishing, 2009. 
[9]
Shimadzu. 
LABNIRS. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.an.shimadzu.co.jp/bio/nirs/nirs2.htm /2022.03.21. 
[10] K. Y. Zewdu, “Active Learning in Teaching English 
Language Support Courses to First-Year Students in Some 
Ethiopian Universities,” Doctorate Thesis of Unicersity of 
South Africa, 2017. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

