Transparent Electrostatic Actuator with Mesh-structured Electrodes
for Driving Tangible Icon in Tabletop Interface
Ryuta Iguchi, Takuya Hosobata and Akio Yamamoto
Department of Precision Engineering, School of Engineering
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan.
{r.iguchi, hosobata, akio}@aml.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper proposes a transparent electrostatic ac-
tuator for actuating tangible objects in a tabletop interface.
The actuator is a planar actuator with two degrees-of-freedom,
capable of actuating a small dielectric sheet placed on top. The
feature of the actuator is in having mesh-structured electrodes,
patterned on a transparent ﬁlm using a conductive polymer.
By applying pulse voltages to the electrodes, electrostatic force
act on the charges induced on the sheet to produce step-wise
motion. The transparency of the actuator enables this actuation
while maintaining the visibility of graphics on a visual display
underneath. To demonstrate the suitability of the actuator for
a tabletop interface, we constructed a simple human-computer
interaction system, in which a physical icon travels on the actuator
placed on a ﬂat panel display. In the demonstration, the user
could interact with the computer by handling active and passive
tangible icons. The actuator used in the system could actuate a
small icon in a broad area of 300 mm by 300 mm, with application
of 500 V pulse voltages.
Keywords-tangible media; tabletop interface; human-computer
interaction; surface actuator; electrostatic actuator.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In 1997, Ullmer and Ishii showed that great enrichment is
brought to a tabletop interface by bringing in physical objects
as tangible media to coexist with a visual display [1]. A way
to further improve such an interface was demonstrated by Pan-
garo et al., which is to have the tangible objects actuated [2].
Actuated tangibles let the computer inform us of its internal
state through their physical motion, which we can comprehend
with familiarity. In this paper, we introduce an actuator de-
veloped for such tabletop interface: a transparent electrostatic
actuator with mesh-structured electrodes. In addition, we prove
its effectiveness through a simple tabletop interaction, which
is illustrated in Fig. 1. The actuator specializes in actuating
physical icons on a surface of a Flat Panel Display (FPD).
Forms and functions of active tangibles vary depending
on types of interactions expected in the tabletop interface. To
satisfy the requirements of each case, it is important to choose
the proper means of actuation. To have the active tangibles
represent handheld-sized objects, the most effective way is to
have the objects move by themselves, that is, to use wheeled
robots [3][4] or legged robots [5]. An advantage of this solution
is that multiple robots can collaborate to perform various tasks.
However, shapes and sizes of the objects representable with
robots are limited by their functionality; the robots must carry
transparent mesh electrodes
passive tangible icon
image on flat panel display
active tangible icon (real object)
slider
obstacle (real object)
(real object)
(digital image)
Figure 1: Conceptual photograph of tabletop interface on ﬂat panel display
with tangible icon actuated by mesh-structured electrostatic actuator.
batteries and driver electronics, which prevents the robots to
disguise as physical icons that do not resemble them.
To have physical icons of various shapes actuated, a
tabletop interface must incorporate an actuator capable of
driving objects on a displayed image. Various magnetic surface
actuators satisfy this requirement, which include electromag-
net arrays [2][6], planar induction motors [7] and sawyer
motors [8]. Magnetic levitators are also effective, providing
an actuation in mid-air [9][10][11]. These actuators have
excellent driving performance, but the drawback is in requiring
ferromagnetic cores embedded in the system, which consume
space and increase the total weight of the system.
As another choice of actuator for actuating physical icons,
we propose a transparent electrostatic actuator, which we
can easily install on an FPD. The original concept of the
transparent actuator was proposed by Egawa et al. in 1991 [12].
The actuator is a transparent plastic ﬁlm with array of strip-
electrodes made of transparent conductors. The ﬁlm drives
dielectric sheets (e.g., papers, plastics, and glass) placed on
its surface, by electrostatic forces excited by voltages applied
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

to the electrodes. The actuator is suited for tabletop interface
because of its transparency and thinness; simply by placing
it on top of a visual display, we can drive objects while
maintaining visibility of displayed images.
Previously, we reported an FPD-based interaction using
the transparent electrostatic actuator, in which users could
play catch with an animated cat, using a ball printed on a
paper sheet [13]. In this system, the actuator could actuate the
ball only in one direction. To realize multi-directional motion,
we developed a transparent actuator with 2-DOF [14], and
demonstrated a mixed-reality on an FPD, in which an animated
robot could interact with a small ball driven based on virtual
dynamics [15]. One problem of this actuator was in having
short stroke; it could move the ball only within a small area
of the FPD, because the actuated ﬁlm was much larger with
respect to the ball it carried. Such restriction in stroke was
caused by the actuator’s electrode structure. Thus, as a next
step, we chose to develop a 2-DOF transparent actuator that
can actuate small ﬁlms in a broad area.
The transparent electrostatic actuator we developed in this
work has mesh-structured electrodes, which realize actuation
of small objects with large stroke. The idea of using mesh
as electrodes in an electrostatic actuator is already reported
using woven copper wires [16]. We combined this idea with
the concept of transparent actuator, and developed an actuator
with printed mesh, fabricated by screenprinting using a trans-
parent conductive polymer. In the mesh, there are vertical and
horizontal printed belts, containing three-phase electrodes. The
belts intersect in a manner that electrodes producing different
directioned forces appear on the surface alternately. When the
electrodes are excited with pulse voltages, electrostatic forces
arise to give a step-wise motion to a dielectric sheet placed
on top. We designed the belts to be 12 mm in width, which
makes the minimum size of the driven ﬁlm twice this size.
The actuator itself has an area of 300 mm by 300 mm, which
allows long distance travel of the actuated sheet. With the
long stroke and the transparency, the actuator enables planar
actuation on visual displays, which is especially useful for
tabletop interfaces.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we explain the structure and driving principle of the transparent
actuator. Then, we report on the evaluation of the actuator’s
performance in Section III. Finally, in Section IV, we demon-
strate the actuator’s suitability for tabletop interfaces through a
simple human-computer interaction with a physical icon driven
on an FPD.
II.
TRANSPARENT ELECTROSTATIC ACTUATOR WITH
MESH ELECTRODES
This section provides explanations on the structure and the
driving principle of the transparent mesh actuator shown in
Fig. 2. Details on the principle of 1-DOF actuator is reported
in [12]; the same principle applies to this actuator, but with
an extra DOF.
A. Structure of the Actuator
Fig. 3 shows the basic structure of the actuator. The
actuator consists of two ﬁlms; we refer to the ﬁxed ﬁlm
as the stator and the driven ﬁlm as the slider. The stator
has a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) ﬁlm with 100 µm
50 mm
50 mm
12 mm
12 mm
25 by 25 squares
300 mm
slider film
tangible icon
mesh electrodes
Figure 2: Photograph of the transparent electrostatic actuator with mesh
electrodes.
bottom layer
inter-layer insulator
top layer
transparent
electrodes
connection
0.4 mm 0.8 mm
Figure 3: Structure of the transparent electrostatic actuator with mesh
electrodes.
thickness as a substrate. On the surface of this ﬁlm, pat-
terns of electrodes and insulators are printed by screen-
printing technology. The electrodes are strips of transparent
conductive polymer: poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-
styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), 400 µm in widths and spaces,
printed in two layers. We chose this polymer because of its
transparency and compatibility with the screenprinting; the
polymer appears in pale blue, but is transparent enough to
see through the actuator.
The electrodes in the bottom layer are directly printed
on the PET ﬁlm. There are vertical electrodes and horizontal
electrodes; the former are the X electrodes and the latter are the
Y electrodes, which respectively drive the slider in directions X
and Y. The X and Y electrodes are separated in small squares,
arranged alternately as in a checkerboard pattern. Note that
in this layer, electrodes in all squares are isolated from each
other. Lengths of the sides of each square are 12 mm, and
each contains twelve electrodes. There are 25 by 25 squares
in total, which makes the total length of the stator 300 mm.
On top of the bottom-layer electrodes, there is a inter-layer
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

insulator, which is also screenprinted using thermo-setting
polymer paste. The insulator covers most of the bottom-layer
electrodes, but leaves the ends of the electrodes uncovered.
Over this inter-layer insulator, top-layer electrodes are
printed. These electrodes are arranged in different directions
from the bottom-layer electrodes; X electrodes are printed
over Y electrodes and vice versa. The top-layer electrodes are
connected at their ends to the bottom-layer electrodes, in areas
not covered by the inter-layer insulator. Thus, the connected X
and Y electrodes form 300 mm long belts, which appear as if
they are woven, with X and Y belts alternately appearing to the
surface. Finally, the surface is covered with another insulating
layer, on which the slider is driven.
The stator is very thin; each of the insulating layers are
approximately 20 µm thick, which makes the total thickness
of the stator 147 µm. Thickness of the electrodes are 2 µm,
almost negligible compared to the ﬁlm thickness. The thinness,
together with the transparency, provides a feeling that the slider
is driven directly on the images displayed underneath.
As a slider, we could choose from various dielectric sheets,
such as paper, plastic or glass. In this work, we chose to use
a slider with PET sheet 50 mm × 50 mm as a substrate, with
its top surface coated with glass particles 100 µm in diameter.
This slider was chosen empirically; the slider performed the
best among those we tested. There is an interesting problem
in the optimization of materials for the slider, which we leave
for future works.
B. Driving Principle
Fig. 4 shows the patterns of voltages applied to the
electrodes to drive the slider in different directions. The X
and Y electrodes in the outer most squares are connected
to three-phase buses, to which three-phase pulse voltages are
applied. The slider is driven in the X direction by shifting the
pulse voltages on X electrodes while the electrodes of Y are
grounded, and the similar applies to driving in the Y direction.
To drive the slider in a diagonal direction, we shift pulses on
both X and Y electrodes.
Fig. 5 schematically illustrates the induced charges on
the slider and the electrostatic forces acting on them. The
driving sequence consists of three steps: charging, shifting and
stepping. First in charging, the electrostatic ﬁeld excited by the
applied voltages induce charges of corresponding polarity on
the slider. Then the voltage pattern is shifted in the driving
direction, but the arrangement of charges lags behind because
the slider has a low conductivity. Finally, electrostatic forces
act on the lagged charges and steps the slider forward.
For the slider used in this work, 10 to 30 seconds of pre-
charging was necessary as a preparation for driving. This is
because the time constant for the charges to arise or decay
was on the order of seconds. Once the slider was pre-charged,
constant shifting of voltages could drive the slider full-stroke in
one direction. However, occasional re-charging was necessary
when the slider had to turn 90 degrees. For example, without
this re-charging, the slider could not move in Y direction after
traveling full-stroke in X direction. The reason is still unclear,
but we presume that the charges required for driving in Y
direction diminish while the slider is traveling in X direction.
The stepping distance of the slider depends on the balance
x
y
Force
x
x
y
y
backward
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
1 2 3
1
23
forward
1
2
3
Figure 4: Voltage patterns applied to the electrodes in the mesh actuator.
x
y
Cross Section
glass beads
glass beads (glued)
slider
(for lubrication)
electrodes
+V
−V0
+V
−V
−V
−V
0
0
+V
0
+V
Figure 5: Schematic of driving principle of the mesh actuator.
of thrust and frictional force. With the actuator of this work,
the friction is small enough and the stepping distance per pulse
is nearly equal to the length of an electrode pitch: 800 µm.
This characteristic allows us to roughly control the position
of the slider in open-loop. In the application in Section IV,
we take advantage of the characteristic to realize variety of
motions with a simple control method.
III.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We conducted two experiments to evaluate the actuator’s
performance. First, we tested for the maximum speed the slider
could travel. Then, we conﬁrmed the actuator’s capability of
actuating the slider over all areas of the stator in different
directions.
sends it to a DSP (DS1104, dSpace [17]) in Fig. 2, which
is made of a polystyrene foam and weighs 0.48 grams. The
magnitude of the pulse voltage was ﬁxed at ±500 V and glass
beads of 20 µm diameter were scattered on the surface of the
stator to reduce friction. Before each experiment, the slider was
pre-charged by applying (500, − 500, 0) V DC voltages to
both of X and Y electrodes for 30 seconds.
A. Maximum Speed
We drove the slider in X direction with pulse voltages of
different frequencies, to see how fast the slider can travel while
carrying the icon. Fig. 6 shows the motion of the slider driven
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Displacement
(0.8 mm/div)
−500
0
500
Phase 1
Time (0.5 s/div)
Applied voltage (V)
−500
0
500
Phase 2
−500
0
500
Phase 3
Figure 6: Step-wise motion of slider carrying icon and applied three-phase
pulse voltage.
time (0.1 s/div)
Position (0.8 mm/div)
Pulse frequency
2 Hz
4 Hz
8 Hz
16 Hz
27 Hz (Max. speed)
Figure 7: Motion of the slider driven by 500 V three-phase pulse voltages
with different frequencies.
by 1 Hz pulse voltage in X direction, recorded using laser
displacement sensor (Keyence LB-01). This result shows that
the slider travels 2.4 mm per one cycle of the three-phase pulse,
which is equal to the length of three electrode pitches. Fig. 7
shows the results with higher frequencies. The results indicate
that the step-wise motion is damped as the speed increases
with the frequency. This is because the inertia of the slider
and the friction disable the slider to instantly respond to the
pulsating force.
When the frequency exceeded 27 Hz, the slider stood still
at its initial position; the maximum speed was approximately
64 mm/s. The speed is nearly equal to the frequency times
three electrode pitches (27 Hz × 2.4 mm = 64.8 mm/s).
This indicates that even at the maximum speed, the traveling
distance of the slider is controllable by the number of voltage
pulses. Thus, we can assume that the position of the slider is
roughly controllable in open-loop.
B. Full-stroke motion
To conﬁrm the actuator’s capability as a long-stroke surface
actuator, we recorded the full-stroke motion of the slider in
different directions. In this experiment, the frequency of the
pulse voltage was ﬁxed at 5 Hz, and trajectories of the slider
were recorded using a visual motion tracking system with high-
speed camera (VW-6000, Keyence). The results are shown in
Fig. 8, indicating that slider was successfully driven over the
Position x (50 mm/div)
Position y (50 mm/div)
Plot interval = 0.5 s
Stator electrode area
Slider size
Driven direction
Figure 8: Result of Motion Tracking.
whole 300 mm × 300 mm area of the stator.
We expect that driving in intermediate angles (such as
30 degrees) is possible in principle, by exciting X and Y elec-
trodes with pulse voltages of different frequencies. However,
we could not realize such motion in this work; cause of this
is still under investigation.
IV.
TANGIBLE INTERACTION USING MESH ACTUATOR
To demonstrate the actuator’s suitability for tabletop inter-
faces, we constructed a simple interaction system illustrated in
Fig. 9. In this system, the transparent mesh actuator covers an
FPD, which is displaying an undirected graph. The actuator
drives the person icon carried by the slider along the shortest
path leading to another icon, which represents the person’s
home.
The user of this system can take three actions to interact
with the computer. First, the user can pick up and move
the person icon. Second, the user can move the home icon
to change the destination of the path. In addition, the user
can block the path by placing an obstacle (a marker pen).
All these actions are monitored by the computer, as it is
constantly tracking the positions of the objects using a web
camera(PlayStation Eye, Sony Computer Entertainment). The
computer responds to the actions by rerouting the path, and
the result is presented to the user not only by the displayed
images, but also by the person icon’s actual motion.
A. Control Approach
Fig. 10 shows how the person icon is controlled during the
interaction. The person icon and the home icon have their own
nodes aside from those in the preset graph, and these nodes
are automatically connected to nearby links.
The computer constantly updates the shortest path from
the person icon to the home icon using the Dijkstra’s al-
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

X
Y
3
3
3
3
PC
Image
Serial  
I/F
DSP
3-phase 
pulse×2
Voltage
amp.×6 
Camera
Home icon
Person icon
on slider
Obstacle
(marker pen)
 LCD (32 inch widescreen)
Path calculation
Image
processing
Rendering
±500 V to 
electrodes
Transparent 
stator with 
mesh electrodes
Figure 9: Conﬁguration of the tangible tabletop interface using transparent
mesh electrostatic actuator.
Person icon
(start node)
Home icon
(goal node)
Extra nodes & links
   to connect icons to graph
Shortest path by
Dijkstra's algorithm
Preset
 nodes & links
Direction 
  command
    to actuator
Figure 10: Control approach to drive the slider along the shortest path.
gorithm. Based on the calculated path, the computer detects
the direction from the person icon to the next node in the
path, and sends it to a DSP (DS1104, dSpace [17]). The DSP
generates waveforms of three-phase pulses corresponding to
the direction. The pulses are ampliﬁed by High-Voltage Am-
pliﬁers (HVA4321, NF Co. [18]) and applied to the electrodes
to drive the person icon in the speciﬁed direction.
An exceptional condition is when the person icon is too
close to the next node. In such a condition, the computer uses
the direction from the person icon to the node after the next.
This exceptional procedure was necessary, because without it
the person icon would stop advancing and start oscillating
around the next node. In this work, we applied the procedure
when the icon was within a 10 mm diameter circle of the next
node.
We chose this simple control approach because the mesh
actuator can generate step-wise motion. This motion ensures
that the driven icon does not overshoot beyond the next node
by long distance. With this characteristic, specifying direction
was sufﬁcient to keep the driven icon on the planned path.
Such simplicity in control is one advantage of this actuator,
especially for tabletop interfaces using visual tracking; realiz-
ing fast servo control is difﬁcult with cameras, whose frame
rate limits the speed of the control cycle.
B. Motion of the Slider During Interaction
Fig. 11 shows the motion of the person icon recorded by
tracking camera during three interaction experiments. In these
experiments, the computer responded to the three actions from
the user by rerouting the driven path of the person icon. In
each experiment, the slider ﬁlm carrying the person icon was
pre-charged for 30 seconds by applying (500, −500, 0) V DC
voltages to both X and Y electrodes, and then driven at 7.2
mm/s by a ±500 V three-phase pulse voltage. As explained
in Section II-B, the slider ﬁlm was re-charged for 10 seconds
every time it had to make a 90 degrees turn. The re-charging
was done by applying the same set of voltages as in pre-
charging.
Fig. 11a shows the result of the user repositioning the
person icon. At ﬁrst, the person icon was traveling from the
upper-right corner toward the home icon, along the shortest
path in the graph. Then, the user picked the person icon up
and repositioned it to prompt the computer to reroute the path,
along which the person icon continued its travel. Fig. 11b
and Fig. 11c show the result of the user’s indirect action
of handling passive tangible objects. In Fig. 11b, the user
extended the travel of the person icon by changing the position
of the home icon, which is the destination of the path. Fig. 11c
shows the result of placing a marker pen: the obstacle, to block
the preplanned path. The computer immediately detected that
the links in the preplanned path is no longer available and
rerouted the path.
C. Problems
The results prove that the proposed actuator realizes a vari-
ety of human-computer interaction by allowing active (driven)
and passive tangible objects to collaborate with computer
graphics on a surface of an FPD. However, through these
experiments, we also found some problems of the actuator.
First, the charging time needs to be shortened, because
the waiting time during the charging prevents the user from
being immersed in the interaction. Second, the gripping force
of the slider need to be increased. The user could touch and
feel the person icon, but was provided with no force feedback,
because of the low friction, light weight and weak force. These
problems indicate that further improvements are necessary in
terms of materials, design and driving method of the actuator.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we proposed a transparent electrostatic ac-
tuator with mesh-structured electrodes especially designed for
tabletop interaction. With a working prototype, we proved the
actuator’s capability of presenting various planar motions of
a physical icon together with graphics displayed on an FPD
underneath the actuator. To extend the actuator’s application
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Position x (50mm/div)
Position y (50mm/div)
Start
Goal
Plot interval = 1.0 s
(a) Repositioning active icon (person icon).
Position x (50mm/div)
Position y (50mm/div)
Start
Goal
Plot interval = 1.0 s
(b) Changing destination by moving passive icon (home icon).
Position x (50mm/div)
Position y (50mm/div)
Start
Goal
obstacle
Plot interval = 1.0 s
(c) Path blocking by placing obstacle (marker pen).
Figure 11: Rerouted path of person icon by user’s handling of tangible
icons. Plots indicate trajectory of person icon recorded with tracking camera.
range, a challenge lies in simultaneous actuation of multiple
objects. In future works, we expect to realize this by inde-
pendently controlling the voltages on different sections of the
actuator.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Funding Program for Next
Generation World-Leading Researchers (#LR013) from JSPS,
Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Ullmer and H. Ishii, “The metaDESK: models and prototypes for
tangible user interfaces,” In Proc. of the 10th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, 1997, pp. 223–232.
[2]
G. Pangaro, D. Maynes-Aminzade, and H. Ishii, “The actuated work-
bench: computer-controlled actuation in tabletop tangible interfaces,” In
Proc. of the 15th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology, 2002, pp. 181–190.
[3]
E. W. Pedersen and K. Hornbæk, “Tangible bots: interaction with active
tangibles in tabletop interfaces,” In Proc. of the 2011 Annual Conf. on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, pp. 2975–2984.
[4]
M. Sugimoto, T. Fujita, H. .Mi, and A. Krzywinski, “RoboTable2: a
novel programming environment using physical robots on a tabletop
platform,” In Proc. of Int. Conf. on Advances in Computer Entertain-
ment Technology, 2011, pp. 10:1–10:8.
[5]
S. Somanath, E. Sharlin, and M. C. Sousa, “Integrating a robot in a
tabletop reservoir engineering application,” In Proc. of ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. on Human-robot Interaction, 2013, pp. 229–230.
[6]
M. Weiss, F. Schwarz, S. Jakubowski, and J. Borchers, “Madgets:
actuating widgets on interactive tabletops,” In Proc. of the 23nd Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 2010,
pp. 293–302.
[7]
S. Yoshida, H. Noma, and K. Hosaka, “Proactive Desk II: Development
of a New Multi-object Haptic Display Using a Linear Induction Motor,”
In IEEE Virtual Reality Conf., 2006, pp. 269–272.
[8]
M. Sugi et al., “Motion Control of Self-Moving Trays for Human
Supporting Production Cell “Attentive Workbench”,” In Proc. of the
IEEE International Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2005, pp. 4080–
4085.
[9]
J. Lee, R. Post, and H. Ishii, “ZeroN: mid-air tangible interaction
enabled by computer controlled magnetic levitation,” In Proc. of ACM
Symp. on User Interface Software and Technology, 2011, pp. 327–336.
[10]
M. Marshall, T. Carter, J. Alexander, and S. Subramanian, “Ultra-
tangibles: creating movable tangible objects on interactive tables,” In:
Proc. of SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012,
pp. 2185–2188.
[11]
P. Berkelman, M. Miyasaka, and J. Anderson, “Co-located 3D graphic
and haptic display using electromagnetic levitation,” In: Proc. of Haptics
Symp., 2012, pp. 77–81.
[12]
S. Egawa, T. Niino, and T. Higuchi, “Film actuators: Planar, electrostatic
surface-drive actuators,” In Proc. of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems Workshop, 1991, pp. 9–14.
[13]
K. Amano and A. Yamamoto, “Tangible interactions on a ﬂat panel
display using actuated paper sheets,” In Proc. of the ACM Int. Conf.
on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces, 2012, pp. 351–354.
[14]
T. Hosobata, A. Yamamoto, and T. Higuchi, “2-DOF Synchronous Elec-
trostatic Actuator with Transparent Electrodes Arranged in Checker-
board Patterns,” In Proc. of IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2013, pp. 4919-4924.
[15]
T. Hosobata and A. Yamamoto, “Mixed Reality System on Flat Panel
Display with Real Object Driven by Synchronous Transparent Elec-
trostatic Actuator,” In Proc. of Int. Conf. on Multimedia and Human
Computer Interaction, 2013, pp. 127:1–127:7.
[16]
A. Yamamoto, H. Yoshioka, and T. Higuchi “A 2-DOF Electrostatic
Sheet Conveyer Using Wire Mesh for Desktop Automation,” In Proc.
of IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation , 2006, pp. 2208–13.
[17]
http://www.dspace.com/en/pub/home/products/hw/singbord/ds1104.cfm
Last accessed on 10/Feb/2014.
[18]
http://www.nfcorp.co.jp/english/pro/pp/p amp/h vol/hva4321/index.html
Last accessed on 10/Feb/2014.
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

