 
Developing a Human Computer Interaction Course for an  
Information Technology Major 
Cynthia Y. Lester 
Department of Computer Science 
Tuskegee University 
Tuskegee, Alabama, USA 
cylester@mytu.tuskegee.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract – It has been reported that even in the slowing 
economy in the United States, that the field of technology will 
continue its projected growth in the job market through the 
year 2018.  Consequently, many institutions have begun to 
offer degrees that specialize not just in engineering or 
computer science, but in information technology, as well.  
Degrees are offered at the associate’s, bachelor’s, master’s, and 
PhD levels from a variety of two-year and four-year 
institutions.  Students who major in information technology 
explore 
management 
and 
information 
theory. 
More 
specifically, students focus on current technology trends and 
applications as it relates to the business and communication 
applications of computing with special emphasis on e-business, 
e-commerce and business computing.  As a result of the merger 
between technology and business many of the degree programs 
especially at the undergraduate and graduate levels offer 
specific courses in human factors in information systems or 
human-computer interface to cover designing systems with 
human behavior in mind. The aim of this paper is to present 
the development of an undergraduate human computer 
interaction course for a newly developed information 
technology major leading to a bachelor’s degree in information 
technology.  The paper presents the teaching pedagogy selected 
for the course; course description including course outcomes 
and topics; and, student assessments.  Also discussed are 
challenges in the development of the course as it relates to 
being cross-listed for enrollment by both information 
technology and computer science majors. 
 
 
Keywords – Human computer interaction; information 
technology; undergraduate students.  
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
In the United States, the software development industry 
is 
about 
a 
$220 
billon 
industry 
which 
involves 
approximately 50,000 companies [1].  Roughly sixty percent 
of the software development revenue comes from software 
publishing or generic products, while the rest comes from 
customized products commissioned by a particular customer 
[1].  This trend influences the software development 
industry and the way in which newly trained technologists 
view the development of products and its users. 
Users of these new technologies demand more from 
their systems now more than ever.  Long gone are the days 
of command-line interfaces where only those “professing to 
be experts” in technology usage can claim ownership in the 
technology wars.  However, now anyone who carries a cell 
phone, or uses a PC to type a paper, or “friends a person on 
Facebook” considers themselves a technology aficionado.  
Moreover, as e-commerce, e-business, and e-sharing 
become the “norm”, there is a growing need to extend the 
focus of software development beyond engineering and 
computer science to a conversation that involves the 
management of software and the ability to connect 
customers with the software. 
The aim of this paper is to present a re-designed human-
computer interaction (HCI) course to be offered in a newly 
developed information technology (IT) major at a medium-
sized four-year university.  The IT major is offered in the 
Department of Computer Science as one of two 
undergraduate degrees granted within the department.  The 
original course [2], although designed to attract students 
from varying backgrounds, was typically taken by computer 
science and engineering majors, with a handful of social 
science majors.  Students with other backgrounds, especially 
those in business, when asked, stated they were not attracted 
to the course because of the technical implications of the 
course and its prerequisites.  Consequently, the newly re-
designed course removes some of these barriers. 
The paper begins by providing a brief introduction to 
information technology as a discipline.  The following 
section provides a brief history of human-computer 
interaction and discusses the rationale for its inclusion as a 
required course in the IT curriculum.  The next section 
presents the teaching pedagogy chosen for the course, the 
course description, and how students are assessed.  Lastly, 
some challenges in offering the course as an inter-
disciplinary course for a varied audience are discussed. 
 
II. 
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CURRICULUM 
 
Information technology can be defined as the processing, 
storing, and dissemination of textual, numerical, vocal, and 
pictorial 
information 
by 
a 
microelectronics-based 
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

combination of computing and telecommunications [3].  The 
term first appeared in a 1958 article that was published in 
the Harvard Business Review. The authors of the article, 
Leavitt and Whisler commented that “the new technology 
does not yet have a single established name. We shall call it 
information technology (IT) [4].”  However, since that time, 
information technology has become an emerging discipline 
of significant importance, with degrees being offered in the 
discipline at increasing rates. 
In 2005, the ACM Special Interest Group on Information 
Technology Education (SIGITE) presented its final report 
for baccalaureate programs in Information Technology [5].  
SIGITE chose to define the IT discipline as “in its broadest 
sense encompasses all aspects of computing technology. IT, 
as an academic discipline, focuses on meeting the needs of 
users within an organizational and societal context through 
the 
selection, 
creation, 
application, 
integration 
and 
administration of computing technologies [5].” 
The final report presented the IT Body of Knowledge, 
learning outcomes, the IT core, IT electives, curriculum 
models, and course descriptions.  It was decided by the 
group that the aim of an IT program would “provide IT 
graduates with the skills and knowledge to take on 
appropriate 
professional 
positions 
in 
Information 
Technology upon graduation and grow into leadership 
positions or pursue research or graduate studies in the field 
[4].” More specifically, it was decided that within five years 
of graduation a student must be able to [5]: 
• Explain 
and 
apply 
appropriate 
information 
technologies and employ appropriate methodologies 
to help an individual or organization achieve its goals 
and objectives 
• Manage the information technology resources of an 
individual or organization 
• Anticipate the changing direction of information 
technology and evaluate and communicate the likely 
utility of new technologies to an individual or 
organization 
• Understand and for some to contribute to the 
scientific, mathematical and theoretical foundations 
on which information technologies are built 
• Live and work as a contributing, well-rounded 
member of society 
It was decided that in order to meet these goals that the 
IT Body of Knowledge would include the areas of study, 
identified and presented in Table I [5]. 
The next section presents a brief history of HCI.  Also, 
stated in this section is the rationale for the inclusion of HCI 
as a required as part of the IT curriculum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I. IT BODY OF KNOWLEDGE 
Area of Study 
Information Technology Fundamentals 
Human Computer Interaction 
Information Assurance and Security 
Management 
Integrative Programming & Technologies 
Networking 
Programming Fundamentals 
Platform Technologies 
Systems Administration and Maintenance 
System Integration & Architecture 
Social and Professional Issues 
Web 
 
III. 
HUMAN COMPUTER INTERACTION: A BRIEF HISTORY 
 
Human-computer interaction has been defined in 
various ways.  Some definitions suggest that it is concerned 
with how people use computers so that they can meet users’ 
needs, while other researchers define HCI as a field that is 
concerned with researching and designing computer-based 
systems for people [6], [7].  Still other researchers define 
HCI as a discipline that involves the design, implementation 
and evaluation of interactive computing systems for human 
use and with the study of major phenomena surrounding 
them [8].  However, no matter what definition is chosen to 
define HCI, the concept that all these definitions have in 
common is the idea of the technological system interacting 
with users in a seamless manner to meet users’ needs.   
Human-computer interaction has its roots embedded in 
the systematic study of human performance [9].  It has been 
stated that World War II provided the impetus for studying 
the interaction between machines and humans, as the 
military for each side attempted to manufacture more 
effective weapons systems [10].  These research activities 
led to the development if the field of Ergonomics and in 
1948 the Ergonomics Research Society of England brought 
together researchers of varied backgrounds who had an 
interest in the design of equipment for human use [8].After 
the World War, the focus of concern expanded to include 
worker safety, where more research led to the development 
of an additional field, human factors [11].   
With the advances in technology, the terms, ergonomics 
and human factors are now often used interchangeably. 
More specifically, the terms as now defined by the 
International Ergonomics Associate, the world’s leading 
organization on ergonomics and human factors defines the 
similar terms as, “the scientific discipline concerned with 
the understanding of interactions among humans and other 
elements of a system, and the profession that applies theory, 
principles, data, and other methods to design in order to 
optimize human well-being and overall system performance 
[12].”  These disciplines are noted to have provided the 
basis for human-computer interaction as both are concerned 
with user performance of any system, whether machine or 
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

computer [8]. Consequently, HCI serves as an important 
area in information technology and the IT Body of 
Knowledge. 
The Department of Computer Science at Tuskegee 
University developed its IT curriculum based on the SIGITE 
report and included as part of its core courses, human-
computer interaction [5].  The rationale for the inclusion of 
HCI in the curriculum was two-fold.  The first reason to 
include HCI in the curriculum was to provide students with 
an opportunity to gain a knowledge base in an 
interdisciplinary field as information technology is also 
multi-disciplinary.  The other reason was to provide students 
with an opportunity to gain training in the humanistic side of 
technology where the focus is not only on the system but on 
the user as well. 
The next section presents an overview of course 
development.  Included in this section is the teaching 
pedagogy 
chosen, 
course 
description, 
and 
student 
assessment. 
 
IV. 
TEACHING PEDAGOGY 
 
A. Teaching style 
According to Grasha, there are four styles of teaching, 
which encompass the following [13]: 
• Formal authority – instructor-centered approach 
where the instructor provides and controls the flow of 
content for the course 
• Demonstrator/personal model – instructor-centered 
approach where the instructor demonstrates the skills 
that students are expected to learn 
• Facilitator – student-centered approach where the 
instructor acts as a facilitator and the responsibility is 
placed on the student to achieve results for various 
tasks 
• Delegator – student-centered approach where the 
instructor delegates and places the control and the 
responsibility for learning on the students and/or 
groups of students 
 
The facilitator teaching style was chosen because it is a 
student-centered approach which shifts the focus of activity 
from the teacher to the learners.  This method includes 
active learning, collaborative learning and inductive 
teaching and learning [13].  The facilitator teaching style has 
been stated to work best for students who are comfortable 
with independent learning and who can actively participate 
and collaborate with other students [14]. In particular, this 
approach was chosen because in education literature, the 
method has been shown to increase students’ motivation to 
learn, to lead to a greater retention of knowledge, and to 
positively impact attitudes toward the subject material being 
taught [15], [16], [17].  Additionally, the method places a 
strong emphasis on collaborative learning. 
 
B. Collaborative learning 
 
Students learn best when they are actively involved and 
engaged in the learning process.  In educational 
environments, study groups are often formed to gain better 
insight on course topics through collaborative efforts. 
Collaborative learning is defined as the grouping and/or 
pairing of students for the purpose of achieving an academic 
goal [18].  Davis reported that regardless of the subject 
matter, students working in small groups tend to learn more 
of what is taught and retain it longer, than when the same 
content is presented in other more traditional instructional 
formats [19].   
Supporters of collaborative learning suggest that the 
active exchange of ideas within small groups not only 
increases interest among group participants, but also helps 
to improve critical thinking skills.  The shared learning 
environment allows students to engage in discussion, take 
responsibility for their own learning, hence becoming 
critical thinkers [18]. Students are responsible for their own 
learning as well as the learning of others.  Research has 
shown that collaborative learning encourages the use of 
high-level cognitive strategies, critical thinking, and positive 
attitudes toward learning [20].  Further, it has been 
suggested that collaborative learning has a positive 
influence on student academic performance [16].   
 
V. 
COURSE DESCRIPTION 
 
The description of the course, CSCI 440 – Human Computer 
Interaction, which is set to be offered during the 2012-2013 
academic year, is to provide students with an introduction to 
human-computer interaction and to expose them to current 
research topics within the field [21].  The perquisites for the 
course include successful completion of CSCI 220 – 
Programming II and IT 325 – Web Systems Design or CSCI 
230 – Data Structures.  The prerequisites were chosen to 
ensure that students had some experience with structured 
programming and scripting languages; and, that they had 
completed many of the general university requirements, 
where some of the concepts from these courses would be 
used in the HCI course. 
 
The course outcomes describe the specific knowledge 
and skills that students are expected to acquire.  The course 
outcomes for CSCI 440 include the following, and at the end 
of the course a student should be able to: 
• 
Clearly state the multi-disciplinary nature of HCI 
and its origin. 
• 
Identify the different areas of study within and 
current research topics related to the HCI 
discipline. 
• 
Identify the basic psychological and physiological 
attributes of computer users. 
• 
Describe and identify the components and devices 
of computer systems. 
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
Describe the fundamentals of the HCI design 
process. 
• 
Explain 
how 
technologies 
help 
organizations/individuals meet their goals. 
To meet the objectives of the course outcomes, the 
content of the course included: 
• 
Introduction to HCI 
• 
The Human Component of HCI 
• 
The Computer Component 
• 
Interaction Basics 
• 
The Design Process 
• 
Evaluative Techniques 
• 
Current Topics in HCI 
Table II is an outline of the topics covered during the 
sixteen week semester [21]. 
 
TABLE II. – COURSE SCHEDULE 
Week 
Topic 
1 
Introduction 
2 
Historical Perspective of HCI 
3 
The Human 
4 
The Human 
5 
The Computer 
6 
The Computer 
7 
The Interaction 
8 
The Interaction 
9 
Spring Break – No Class 
10 
Interaction design basics 
11 
Design rules 
12 
Evaluation techniques 
13 
Evaluation techniques 
14 
Universal design 
15 
Universal design 
16 
Putting it all together 
 
Learning resources may be of the following two broad 
types: (a) lecture materials; and (b) development or 
modification of class projects and descriptions. Lecture 
materials introduce specific concepts, terminology, and 
techniques to the students in the classroom.  Class projects 
are often used to reinforce student learning. The next section 
presents a description of the class projects, the paper in 
special topics, and the in-class debates on case studies, 
which are all used to assess student learning.  Also, 
presented is how each assessment has been designed to 
reinforce the theoretical concepts taught in class. 
 
VI. 
STUDENT ASSESSMENT 
 
A. Class Projects 
Three class projects were re-designed.   Each project was 
named for a popular television show.  Students are required 
to complete each project according to the stated 
specifications and then provide a written report and to 
present the result of the project during the class hour.  The 
names of the projects are: 
• 
Designers’ Challenge  
• 
Design on a Dime 
• 
America’s Next Top Model  
This section discusses the projects in detail. 
 
1) Designers’ Challenge 
The purpose of Designers’ Challenge is to allow 
students to use their creativity to redesign an indirect input 
device. The specifications for this project include 
developing a prototype or mock-up of a hand-held device 
that could be used by United Parcel Service of America, Inc. 
(UPS).  The following fictional scenario is provided for 
review by the students: 
Mangers at UPS have noticed that it takes a delivery 
person approximately 10 minutes to deliver a package, 
which includes having the receiver sign for the package.  
Managers have also noticed that it is the signing for the 
package by receivers that takes the longest amount of 
time and results in the largest number of errors.  Often, 
customers want to chat with the UPS employee and 
forget to sign for the package, the UPS employee forgets 
to charge the device, or the UPS employee injures his or 
her hand when handling the device as well as the 
package.  Therefore, to minimize error rate and to 
improve performance, UPS has enlisted a company to 
redesign their current input device receiving packages, 
which is an electronic signature board and pen, to a new 
and improved device using the latest technology for the 
UPS employee to use to capture the signature of the 
receiver of the package. 
Also provided are the following fictional general 
requirements: 
The device cannot be any larger than one 8½ X 11’’ 
sheet of paper and no smaller than the size of regular-
sized PDA.  The device must not weigh more than one 
(1) pound.  Anything else would be too heavy for the 
UPS employee and the receiver of the package to use.  
The device may use text entry or a positioning, pointing, 
or drawing device. 
  
2) Design on a Dime 
The purpose of the Design on a Dime exercise is to 
allow students to design the interface to a device.  Students 
are required to supply the following: 
• A persona that describes the core user group 
• A scenario that describes an example of how the 
ordering tool will be used 
• A network diagram that illustrates the main screens 
or states of the ordering tool 
• A functional prototype of the ordering tool 
Students are given the following fictional scenario: 
A new Apple store is coming to town.  Apple expects the 
store to be wildly popular since it will cater to the more 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

than 3000+ students, faculty, and staff at Tuskegee 
University.  To get the store up and running it has 
decided to allow students in the CSCI-440 class to 
design an interface for its new inventory tool. 
 
3) America’s Next Top Model 
The purpose of this project is to allow students an 
opportunity to use the experimental evaluation techniques 
discussed in class to analyze and assess user interaction with 
software.  Students are required to select two popular search 
engines currently being used and to conduct an experimental 
evaluation to determine if the products are successful 
according to today’s users.  The method that students are 
encouraged to use, include the following: 
• Choose at least six but no more than ten of their peers 
to participate in the study 
• Develop a series of tasks that each person is to 
perform 
• State two hypotheses that can be tested 
• Use statistical tests to display results  
• Use descriptive statistics to make inferences about the 
population 
The written report must include the following: 
• A statement of the problem (purpose of the study) 
• An introduction to the search engines  
o 
Important features of each  
o 
Illustration of each 
• A description of the evaluate technique used, 
including the stated hypotheses 
• Results  
o 
Description of the population 
o 
Descriptive statistics describing results (i.e., 
charts, graphs) 
• Discussion of results and concluding thoughts 
• An appendix containing the hard copies of the end 
user survey 
 
B. Collaborative Learning 
The premise of the collaborative learning was to expose 
students to current case studies in the field and then allow 
them to discuss the pros and cons of the case studies.  In the 
field of software security it has been stated that case studies 
provide an opportunity to review the practical aspects of 
software security [17].  Therefore, this concept was applied 
to HCI as it relates to current IT trends. 
The directions stated that the student should do the 
following: 
• Analyze the situation  
• Use analogies and similar cases where possible 
• Identify possible risks or consequences  
• Discuss how the new technology changes the 
situation, if relevant 
• Discuss the advantages or problems resulting from 
using the “new and now” technology and compare it 
to the “old and then” use of technology 
• Present your opinion of the situation 
Additional directions include that the presentation of 
each student team should be no less than fifty minutes in 
length which covers the entire class period.   Each team is 
also required to submit a typed-written paper, not to exceed 
one (1) page, which includes the aforementioned points.  
The paper must include at least three (3) references from 
which the information was gathered. 
 
C. Special Topics Paper 
Students are to select any current topic in the field of 
HCI to research, which is not presently covered in class.  
Students are required to write a research paper on the topic 
and to present the paper in class.  The paper has to be type-
written and between eight and ten pages in length.  
Additionally, students are required to follow either the IEEE 
Computer Society Style Guide or The Publication Manual of 
the American Psychological Association.  A list of research 
papers is made available to the students along with 
suggested topics for presentation.   
The aim of the technical-writing component allows 
students to practice their technical writing skills as well it 
reinforces the concepts of writing a technical literature 
review.  Lastly the special topics paper also allows students 
to choose a topic of their interest and present the concepts 
not previously explored in class. 
 
VII. 
CHALLENGES 
 
The author encountered several challenges in re-
designing the course.  The first challenge that the author 
faced was course enrollment and constituency [22].   
Although originally designed from a multi-disciplinary 
perspective, the overwhelming majority of the students 
enrolled in the course were computer science and 
engineering majors with a very small sprinkling of social 
science majors.  The original course was designed to take 
advantage of students’ skill set in programming, technical 
writing, and math (as it relates to statistical analysis).  
Therefore, to meet the needs of the needs of the original 
constituency group and the new IT majors, it was decided 
that the course would still be taken by students at the senior 
level, but the prerequisites would change to include those 
with programming experience in structured and or scripting 
languages.  It was further decided that keeping the course as 
a senior level course would ensure that all had completed 
general education university requirements, ensuring the 
multi-disciplinary scope of the course. 
The next challenge the author faced was deciding on the 
content for the course projects.  The author wanted to ensure 
that information technology students who would be well- 
grounded in application development tools and web systems 
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

design would be comfortable alongside their computer 
science counterparts who would be well-grounded in theory 
and programming and vice-versa.  Therefore, it was decided 
that the projects would remain multi-disciplinary in nature, 
but would also encompass business principles. 
Lastly, the author wanted to ensure that students left the 
course understanding the current topics in the ever-changing 
field of technology.  Therefore, it was decided that the best 
way to engage students in this area is through the current 
topics paper and through the collaborative learning 
exercises. 
 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The aim of this paper was to present a re-designed  
undergraduate human computer interaction course for a 
newly developed information technology major leading to a 
bachelor’s degree in information technology.  The paper 
provided a high level overview of the teaching pedagogy 
selected for the course, a description of the course and the 
assessment methods chosen to examine student learning.  
Also, presented are certain challenges the authored 
encountered in further revising the course for an even more 
multi-disciplinary audience.  
As technology increases in complexity and users 
demand more from their technological systems, it is 
imperative that academia continue its dominance in training 
the technologists of the future.  As educators, we must 
provide students with more options to gain entrance into the 
technology race besides the traditional engineering and 
computer science tracks.  The broad discipline of 
Information Technology allows students to gain an 
understanding of how to meet the needs of the diverse user 
by merging the technical side of computing with its 
humanistic side.  From ergonomics, to human factors, to the 
human computer interface and beyond, the influence of 
humans on technology is persistent but also ever-changing 
creating a dynamic interplay somewhere between humans, 
computers, and their interaction. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] First Research Industry Profile. http://www.csb.uncw.edu/ 
people/farinellaj/classes/FIN430/Handouts/Industry%20Profil
e%20for%20case%202.pdf (Accessed on September 6, 2011). 
[2] C. Lester, C. “Advancing the Multidisciplinary Nature of 
Human Computer Interaction in a Newly Developed 
Undergraduate Course.”  (2008). Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interaction.  IEEE Computer Society Press. 
[3] D. Longley and M. Shain. (1985). Dictionary of Information 
Technology (2 ed.), Macmillan Press, p. 164, ISBN 0-333-
37260-3 
[4] Information Technology. (1989). Oxford English Dictionary 
(2 ed.), Oxford University Press. (Accessed August 4, 2011). 
[5] SIGITE Curriculum Committee Special Interest Group on 
Information Technology Education of the ACM (Association 
for Computing Machinery) (2005). Information Technology 
Curricula. 
http://www.acm.org/education/curric_vols/IT_ 
October_2005.pdf (Accessed on August 31, 2011). 
[6] D. Benyon; G. Davies; L. Keller; J. Preece & Y. Rogers. 
(1998). A Guide to Usability, Addison Wesley, 0-201-6278-X, 
Reading, MA. 
[7] H. Sharpe; Y. Rogers & J. Preece. (2007). Interaction design: 
beyond human-computer interaction 2nd ed.  John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd, 978-0-470-01866-8, England. 
[8] J. Preece, Y. Rogers, H. Sharp,  D. Benyon, S. Holland and T. 
Care. (1994).  Human-Computer Interaction.  Addison 
Wesley, 0-201-62769-8, Reading, MA. 
[9] A. Dix, J. Finlay, G.B. Abowd and R. Beale.  (2004). Human-
Computer Interaction.  Prentice Hall, 0130-461091, Boston, 
MA. 
[10] L. Wilson and I. Benbasat. Designing an electronic commerce 
Research and Applications, Volume 2, Issue 3, Autumn 2003, 
Pages 
240-253, 
ISSN 
1567-4223, 
10.1016/S1567-
4223(03)00026-7. 
[11] FAQ for Interface Design, Human Factors & Ergonomics. 
http://www.usernomics.com/ergonomics-faq.html (Accessed 
September 15, 2011). 
[12] Human Factors and Ergonomics Society http://hfes.org/web/ 
AboutHFES/about.html (Accessed on September 2, 2011). 
[13] A.F. Grasha. (1994). “A matter of style: The teacher as expert, 
formal authority, personal model, facilitator, and delegator.” 
College Teaching. 42:142-149. 
[14] R.M. Felder and R. Brent. (1996). “Navigating the Bumpy 
Road to Student-Centered Instruction.”  College Teaching.  
44:43-47.  
[15] C.C. Bonwell and J.A. Eison. (1991). “Active learning: 
Creating excitement in the classroom.” ASHE-ERIC Higher 
Education 
Report 
No. 
1. 
Washington, 
DC: 
George 
Washington University.  
[16] R.T. Johnson and D.W. Johnson.  “An Overview of 
collaborative learning.”  Creativity and Collaborative 
Learning; Baltimore: Brookes Press. 1994. [Electronic 
Version].http://www.cooperation.org/pages/overviewpaper.ht
ml (Accessed on August 31, 2006). 
[17] C. Meyers and T.B. Jones.  (1993). Promoting active learning: 
Strategies for the college classroom. San Francisco: Jossey 
Bass.  
[18] A. Gokhale.  (1995). “Collaborative learning enhances critical 
thinking.” Journal of Technology Education 7, no. 1. 
[19] B.G. Davis. (1993). Tools for Teaching. San Francisco:  
Jossey-Bass Publishers. 
[20] S. Wang and S. Lin. (2006). “The effects of group 
composition of self-efficacy and collective efficacy on 
computer-supported collaborative learning.”  Computer and 
Human Behavior. 
[21] C. Lester.  (2011). CSCI 440 – Human Computer Interaction. 
Course Syllabus.  
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

