Virtual Simulation of the Construction Activity 
Bridge Decks Composed of Precast Beams 
 
Luís Viana 
Technical University of Lisbon 
Dep. of Civil Engineering and Architecture 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: luis.viana7@gmail.com 
Alcinia Z. Sampaio 
Technical University of Lisbon 
Dep. of Civil Engineering and Architecture 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: zita@civil.ist.utl.pt 
 
 
Abstract— In the execution of bridge or overpass decks several 
construction processes are applied. A geometric model 4D (3D 
+ time) in a Virtual Reality environment which simulates the 
construction of a bridge deck composed of precast beams was 
implemented. The model allows viewing and interaction with 
the various steps and the main elements involved in the 
construction process. In order to develop the virtual model, the 
components of the construction, the steps inherent in the 
process and its follow-up and the type and mode of operation 
of the required equipment were initially examined, in detail. 
Based on this study, the 3D geometric modeling of the different 
elements that make up the site was created and a schedule that 
would simulate an interactive mode of construction activity 
was established. As the model is interactive, it allows the user 
to have access to different stages of the construction process, 
thus allowing different views in time and in space throughout 
the development of construction work, thereby supporting 
understanding of this constructive method. Since the model is 
didactic in character it can be used to support the training of 
students and professionals in the field of Bridge Construction. 
Keywords - Bridge construction; interaction; simulation; 
virtual reality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In Civil Engineering, there are several construction 
methods for the execution of bridge decks. This study 
analyses the constructive method applied to bridge decks 
using precast beams. In Civil Engineering prefabricated 
elements are frequently used, because they offer several 
advantages in urban areas, in works over railway lines, and 
in general in areas where the placement of trusses is difficult, 
as this allows quick and economical construction without 
generating significant local constraints. 
 Using prefabrication in bridges presents several 
advantages, such as: the good quality of the concrete of the 
components produced; economic benefits that result from the 
use of optimized and standard solutions, which can be used 
repeatedly throughout the whole process; reduction of 
congestion on the construction site and the shortening of 
time-limits for construction, and finally, greater security 
because it reduces the number of tasks to be carried out on 
site [1]. 
This present work aims to contribute to the dissemination 
of this methodology of construction through a visual 
simulation created in a virtual environment and to draw 
attention to its usefulness as a teaching tool, supporting, as it 
does, the in-depth understanding of this process. For the 
creation of a visual simulation application Virtual Reality 
(VR) technology was applied. This technology offers 
advantages in communication allowing the user to interact 
with the 4D model as it allows access to different modes of 
viewing the model in space and time [2]. 
In order to create models, which could visually simulate 
the progressive sequence of the process and allowing 
interaction with it, techniques of virtual reality were used.  
When modelling 3D environments there must be a clear 
idea of what should be shown, since the objects to be 
displayed and the details of each must be appropriate to the 
goal the teacher or designer wants to achieve with the model. 
The use of virtual reality techniques in the development of 
these didactic applications is, also, generally beneficial to 
education in that it improves the efficiency of the models in 
the way it allows interactivity with the simulated 
environment of each activity. The virtual model can be 
manipulated interactively allowing the teacher or student to 
monitor the physical evolution of the work and the 
construction activities inherent in its progression. This type 
of model allows the participant to interact in an intuitive 
manner with 3D space, and to repeat the sequence or task 
until the desired level of proficiency or skill has been 
achieved always performing in a safe environment. 
Therefore, it can be seen that this new concept of VR 
technology applied to didactic models brings new 
perspectives to the teaching of subjects in Civil Engineering 
education [3]. 
The model discussed here follows other VR models 
developed within the Technical University of Lisbon at the 
Department of Civil Engineering, concerning construction 
works (Figure 1): The models relate to the cantilever process 
and the incremental launching method of bridge deck 
construction [4]. 
II. 
CONSTRUCTIVE PROCESS OF BRIDGE DECKS 
The construction of bridge decks composed of 
prefabricated beams uses an equidistant distribution of 
isolated elements placed side by side, complemented by a 
slab that establishes continuity on the surface of the deck. 
 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 1.  Didactic virtual models of bridge deck construction. 
The prefabricated beams are usually built with a length 
equal to the bridge spans, each consisting of several beams 
connected from above by a slab concreted “in situ”, and 
crosswise by transversal beams located on the support. The 
slab can be made “in situ” using a false-work or pre-slabs, 
which can contribute to structural strength or assist only as 
formwork while the slab of the deck is concreted. The most 
common cross sections in these types of beams are I- shaped  
(Figure 2) or, sometimes, U-shaped. The shape of the section 
is determined by various constraints, such as: the procedure 
of manufacture; the pre-stressing system used (pre- or post-
tensioned); transport and assembly; the construction method 
of the bridge deck slab. 
 
Figure 2.  Cross section of a bridge with "I" beams [5]. 
The constructive method applied to bridges with 
prefabricated beams can include differences in placement of 
prefabricated beams, or the type of connection between 
elements and execution of slabs. The first step consists of 
placing the prefabricated beams, which can be carried out by 
means of cranes a launcher (Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3.  Placing of precast beams on the pillars [6]. 
The constructive method applied to bridges with 
prefabricated beams can include differences in placement of 
prefabricated beams, on the type of connection between 
elements and implementation of slabs. The first step consists 
in placing the prefabricated beams, which can be effected by 
means of cranes or by means of a launcher. After placing the 
prefabricated beams in its final position, can be used several 
solutions of connection between these elements and 
structure: isostatic spans (consist of separate sections, 
separated by expansion joints, simply supported on the 
pillars); isostatic spans with solid slab over the joins 
(prefabricated beams are assembled on supports in an 
independent way, and a slab in concreted over the joints 
defining the continuity of the overall deck); hiperstatic solid 
spans with ordinary reinforcements (continuity is performed 
by placing the longitudinal slab continuous reinforcements, 
on the supports, and the space between beams is concreted). 
After placing the prefabricated beams in their final 
position, the connection between these elements is 
performed using pre-slabs: This method consists of replacing 
the shuttering and supporting structure of the previous 
solution for reinforced concrete or pre-stressed slabs with a 
thickness that usually varies between 6 cm and 10 cm. These 
pre-slabs can be used as lost shuttering, - in construction they 
can be used only to support the concrete slab or as bi-
functional formwork, that is, functioning as formwork during 
the constructive phase, but as reinforcement during service. 
III. 
GEOMETRIC MODELLING AND EQUIPMENT 
After different kinds of bridge deck construction methods 
had been analyzed, a commonly used model was chosen for 
the implementation of the 4D (3D + time) virtual model. The 
deck is composed of beams with I-shaped cross section, 
lifted by cranes and supplemented with composite pre-slabs. 
Initially, three-dimensional (3D) geometric modeling of all 
elements necessary to the implementation of the desired 
visual simulation was created. The example modeled 
corresponds to a bridge with the highway profile composed 
by five spans with the extension of 30m (central) and 24m 
(lateral) [7]. The cross-section of the bridge deck consists of 
4 precast beams (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4.  Cross section of the deck. 
The 3D modeling process is initiated with the generation 
of the surroundings of the working place, followed by the 
pillars, stair towers, worker platforms, provisional and 
definitive supports and two cranes needed to lift the precast 
beams.  
Figure 5 represents the configuration of the cross-section 
of the prefabricated beam used and the respective 3D model. 
In the projection it is possible to see: the running boards 
(red), protruding out of the beam, which serve to provide 
resistance and support for the connection of concrete of 
different ages of the deck slab; the reinforcements 
connecting precast beams (yellow); other reinforcements 
needed for lifting the beam (blue). 
For the execution of the slab composite pre-slabs were 
chosen. The dimensions applied in creating the 3D model of 
the pre-slabs were established based on the drawings of the 
design of Beira Interior viaducts. Differentiation can be 
made between pre-slabs, depending on their location on the 
cross-section: type 1, between beams or type 2, in the 
console. 
 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 5.  Cross section and prefabricated beam model.  
Figure 6 shows a picture of the placement of both types 
of pre-slabs. The virtual model includes two types of pre-
slabs: central and cantilever.  
 
Figure 6.  Placement and position of pre-slabs on the deck.  
Figure 7 illustrates the geometric model of two kinds of 
pre-slabs used in the virtual model. The pre-slab in the 
console is placed in the side of the deck cross-section and the 
central pre-slab is placed between beams.  
 
Figure 7.  3D models of the pre-slabs.  
IV. 
THE CONSTRUCTIVE PROCESS ACTIVITY 
The 
visual 
simulation 
of 
the 
construction 
was 
accomplished using software based on the Virtual Reality 
(VR) technology, the Eon Studio (www.eonreality.com). In 
accordance with the programmed sequence of the 
construction: 
• 
The virtual simulation starts with the presentation of 
the work place environment; 
• 
The simulation of the construction activity continues 
with the insertion of additional elements, such as the 
stair towers (for access to the top of the pillars) and 
the work platforms (which allow the workers to 
move around and complete their tasks) (Figure 8).  
 
Figure 8.  Display stair towers and work platforms.  
• 
In the virtual space the placing of the definitive 
support device is simulated, followed by the 
placement of the temporary support, on the top of 
the pillars (Figure 9); 
 
Figure 9.  Placing of definitive and provisional support and the 
prefabricated beam.  
• 
Each beam is raised by two cranes and placed on the 
temporary support devices (Figure 9); 
• 
The simulation of construction process proceeds 
with the placement of the pre-slabs on the 
prefabricated beams (Figure 10); 
 
Figure 10.  Placement of pre-slabs and concrete transversal beam and slab.  
• 
At this stage, it was found that due to the large 
amount of reinforcements set in the pre-slabs 
(Figure 11), the movement of the camera (from the 
point of view of the user) through the virtual 
environment was very slow because the drawing file 
was already too heavy. It was, therefore, decided not 
to display 3D model of the pre-slab reinforcements 
and also the brackets from prefabricated beams; 
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 11.  Large amount of reinforces set in the pre-slabs. 
• 
Then, the reinforcement of the slab is placed over the 
pre slabs and the deck slab is concreted (Figure 12); 
 
Figure 12.  Placing reinforcement and concreting the deck slab.  
• 
Next, the transversal beams are concreted. Figure 13 
illustrates the reinforcements, the 3D model and the 
placement of the formwork and reinforcement of one 
of the transversal beam; 
 
 
Figure 13.  Concreting one of the transversal beam.  
• 
After the completion of the construction of the deck 
the provisional support devices are removed 
(Figure 14); 
 
Figure 14.  Removing the provisional support devices.  
• 
Finally all complementary elements necessary for 
the road traffic were inserted into the top of the deck 
(Figure 15).  
 
Figure 15.  Placing the complementary elements.  
• 
The complete bridge can now be observed from any 
point of view (Figure 16). The model allows the user 
to use the zoom sufficiently well in order to 
understand the final configuration of the bridge. 
 
Figure 16.  Views of the complet deck.  
V. 
EDUCATIONAL ASPECTS 
The virtual model is currently used in the discipline of 
Bridges. The introduction of the topic on the construction 
processes used in bridges, in particular, the methods related 
to bridges composed of precast beams is supported with the 
visual and animated simulation of the modeled construction 
deck. The teacher of bridges, which refers to the use of the 
virtual classroom model, verifies that the student is quite 
observant with the lively presentation of the entire process of 
construction of the bridge. All constructive and the sequence 
type and geometric form of constructive elements required in 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the execution of the deck are presented in the virtual model 
with enough clarity. 
The model was implemented with great accuracy in 
terms of scientific content in order to obtain a correct model 
technically and so is effective as a teaching model. The 
target student of the virtual application is the student of the 
last year of the course of Civil Engineering, in particular of 
the area of Structures, as is the branch that is more related to 
the general theme of bridges. The constructive process of 
bridges is a theme that is fundamental in the teaching of 
design and types of bridges. This model and other previously 
performed (incremental method and method of advances [4]) 
composes together with this virtual model, a set of 
educational tools, based on IT (information technology) and 
VR (virtual reality), which serve as support for the discipline 
of Bridges. The models were made available to students in 
the www sites of Bridges and research related to masters’ 
theses. There request and manipulation are made available to 
any student. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS  
This paper analyzes some constructive processes 
concerning bridge deck formed of precast beams and 
describes the implementation of an interactive model that 
simulates the construction work activity. The virtual 
application shows one of the methods most often applied in 
the construction of this type of Deck Bridge. In the creation 
of the model software based on the RV technology was used.  
Virtual Reality allows, through interaction with 3D 
models 
of 
the 
environment, 
representing 
building 
components and equipment, the creation of the constructive 
sequence in time and space by simulating the progression of 
the construction of the deck, which allows a good 
understanding of the whole process.  
The model 4D (3D + time) offers several advantages, 
allowing a deeper awareness of the relationship of the 
components of the building and the phasing of the work, 
leading to a better understanding of the spatial movement of 
equipment and of the component placement in work. Since 
the traditional designs of graphic documentation of the 
construction project are sometimes more difficult to 
understand, it can be seen that this model is clearly didactic 
in character and as such can be used to support the training 
of students and professionals in the field of Bridges. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. N. Câmara, “Prefabrication of Bridges and Viaducts”, National 
Meeting of Prefabricated Structures, Prefabricated Company Castelo, 
Lisbon, Portugal, January 18, 2001.  
[2] S. Woksepp, “Virtual Reality in Construction. Tools, Methods and 
Processes”, PhD thesis in Civil Engineering, Luleå University of 
Technology, Sweden, November 2007.  
[3] A. Z. Sampaio and P. G. Henriques, “Virtual Reality Technology 
Applied to the Visual Simulation of Construction Activities”,The 
Open Construction & Building Technology Journal, Mathew Honan, 
Editorial Director, Bentham Science Publishers Ltd., vol. 2, pp. 7-14, 
2008.  
[4] A. Z. Sampaio, P. G. Henriques, P. Studer and R. Luizi, “Interaction 
with Virtual 3D Models in Order to Access the Construction 
Processes of a Wall and a Bridge”, CC-2005, The 10th Int. Conf. on 
Civil, Structural and Environmental Engineering Computing, ed. B. 
Topping, Rome, Italy, 2005. 
[5] C. F. F. Sousa, “Structural Continuity in bridge decks built with 
Prefabricated 
Beams. 
Solutions 
with 
Reinforced 
Concrete 
Connection”. MSc thesis in Civil Engineering Structures, FEUP, 
Porto, Portugal2004.  
[6] F. Leonhardt, “Basic Principles of the Construction of Concrete 
Bridges”, Volume 6, Interciencia, Rio Janeiro, Brasil, 1982. 
[7] A. J. Reis, “Bridges”, Didactic text, ed. AEIST, Lisbon, Portugal, 
2006.  
 
 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

