Comparison of Vibrotactile Display and Pseudo-mastication Sound
Display on Food Texture Perception
Yuki Nishi
Faculty of Engineering
Kumamoto University
2-39-1, Kurokami, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, Japan
Email: nishi@saga-lab.org
Satoshi Saga
Faculty of Advanced Scinence and Technology
Kumamoto University
2-39-1, Kurokami, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, Japan
Email: saga@saga-lab.org
Abstract—Several cross-modal augmentation research on food
texture has been conducted in recent years. These results revealed
that pseudo-mastication sound can affect the perception of food
texture. However, there have been few studies on food texture
using vibrotactile stimuli to the whole body. Thus, we proposed
a method of presenting vibrotactile stimuli using mastication
sound or myoelectric potential under mastication. Twelve subjects
participated in the experiment and were asked to rate nine
adjective-pairs related to the food texture of two types of
food. The results showed that the proposed method affects the
perception of the hardness, crispiness, chewiness, freshness, and
thickness of certain foods.
Keywords—Food Texture; Cross-modal; Vibrotactile Stimuli;
Mastication Sound.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, several research efforts have been conducted
to improve the experience of eating by making full use of
Virtual Reality (VR) technology. When people eat food, they
taste the ﬂavor, appearance, aroma, texture, mastication sound,
and other elements. Therefore, eating is a cross-modal expe-
rience of the ﬁve senses. The presentation of auditory, tactile,
and other information using multisensory interactions has been
reported to affect the perception of food texture during the
eating experience. Zampini et al. [1] proposed a method to
affect the perception of the crispiness and chewiness of potato
chips by amplifying and returning the high-frequency com-
ponent of the mastication sound generated when eating potato
chips. Endo et al. [2] reported that participants felt hardness in
soft foods by presenting pseudo-mastication sound generated
from electromyogram (EMG) signals of chewing movement.
These studies have investigated methods for presenting sensory
information, such as auditory and tactile sensation, to speciﬁc
body parts.
However, few studies evaluated method of presenting vi-
brotactile information to the entire body. This study focuses
on vibrotactile stimuli, and proposes a method to present
vibrotactile stimuli by employing mastication sound or elec-
tromyogram as input signal in real-time. For comparison, we
also generated pseudo-mastication sound from the two input
signals described above and presented it under mastication.
We conducted psychophysical experiments on two types of
food to compare the effects of vibrotactile stimuli and pseudo-
mastication sound on food texture perception.
The structure of this paper is as follows. This section
explains the background and our approach. In Section II,
we present related work. Section III describes our proposed
method. Section IV describes a psychophysical experiment.
Section V shows the result of the experiment. Section VI
discuss the effect of proposed method on food texture. Section
VII draws a conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO
11036:2020) deﬁnes texture as ”all the mechanical, geometri-
cal, and surface attributes of a product perceptible by means
of mechanical, tactile, and, where appropriate, visual and
auditory receptors” [3]. Thus, tactile and auditory senses are
considered to play a signiﬁcant role in food texture perception.
Eating is not only an essential activity for a living but also
an experience of sharing the taste, enjoyment, and pleasure of
food. Meals can also be viewed as a form of entertainment.
Therefore, improving the dining experience makes food more
palatable and improves quality of life. Therefore, various
studies have been conducted to improve the dining experience
considering meals as entertainment and amusement.
Nakaoka et al. proposed a system called eat2pic [4] that
encourages users to develop healthy eating habits. Chopstick
sensors recognize what and how much the user eats, and
the digital campus is colored according to the type of food.
Chewing food slowly and consuming a well-balanced diet will
result in the painting reﬂecting attractive colors and motivating
healthy eating habits.
Narumi et al. proposed MetaCookie+ [5] that uses visual
and olfactory senses to change the ﬂavor of cookies. For
example, the system superimposed a cookie of a different color
than the actual one on the Head Mounted Display (HMD)
wearer’s ﬁeld of vision, and added an odor by olfactory display
to make him perceive the same cookie as tasting differently.
Many of the participants in the experiment tasted chocolate
cookies even though they were eating butter cookies.
Other studies have focused on food texture. It has been
suggested that the bubble structure of bread affects the food
texture [6]. The brittleness of sweet potatoes varies depending
on the cooking method, affecting their texture [7].
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Physical feedback-based food texture display has also been
reported. Uemura et al. [8] constructed a device employing a
crank mechanism and presented the texture of each food by
controlling the torque. Hashimoto et al. [9] proposed a straw
device, which vibrates the suction pressure in the straw and
can reproduce the suction sensation of foods. Niijima et al.
[10] presented food texture by presenting Electrical Muscle
Stimulation (EMS) to the masseter muscle.
While the physical presence of texture has been proposed,
there are also cross-modal approaches to texture. Several
studies indicate that cross-modal texture can affect appetite
[11] [12]. In general, the elderly have less ability to mas-
ticate food than the young. Especially elderly people with
impaired masticatory and swallowing functions often have
difﬁculty eating hard foods and are restricted to soft foods
only. However, constantaneous eating of soft foods without a
crisp texture can cause appetite attenuation. Endo et al. [13]
ampliﬁed the 250 Hz to 1000 Hz frequency component of the
EMG acquired from the masseter muscle under mastication
and generated pseudo-mastication sound feedback to the user.
They reported that feedback of pseudo-mastication sound by
the timing of mastication increased the perception of food
hardness, the sense of comfort and satisfaction. Chewing
JOCKEY [14] by Koizumi et al. is designed for a typical home
dining experience. The system acquires mastication sound
and provides audio feedback via bone-conducting headphones,
making it less susceptible to ambient noise and conversation.
The design does not obstruct conversation during meals by not
covering the ears.
III. METHODS
This section explains the two display methods, pseudo-
mastication sound and vibrotactile stimuli. The mastication
sounds or electromyograms were used as input signals of
vibrotactile stimuli.
A. Vibrotactile stimuli
Our proposed method employs whole-body vibrotactile dis-
play to enhance the food texture perception. To realize the
method, we built a large vibration device by mounting a trans-
ducer and ampliﬁer on a wooden chair. The device vibrates
the user’s whole body from his thighs. By employing the
chair-type device, user can feel the vibration without wearing
some kind of vibration motors. We used a TST239Silver
Transducer (CLARK SYNTHESIS INC.) and a Nobsound TA-
21 MiniBluetooth 5.0 DSP digital ampliﬁer for the vibration
device. In this study, myoelectric potential or mastication
sound were used as input signals of mastication. The myo-
electric potential is obtained from an electrode attached to the
masseter muscle of the participant, and the mastication sound
signal is obtained from a condenser microphone attached to
the other masseter muscle. The input signal, either myoelectric
potential or mastication sound, is ampliﬁed by an ampliﬁer and
output from the transducer as vibrotactile stimuli. When seated
on a large vibrating device, users can perceive vibrotactile
stimuli from their thighs to their whole body according to
the timing of mastication. Figure 1 shows the large vibration
device created in this study and Figure 2 shows the system
conﬁguration of the proposed method.
Figure 1. Vibration device
PC
Myoelectric
Amplifier
Electrode
Arduino
Uno
Condenser
Microphone
Transducer
Mastication
Sound
EMG
Vibrotactile
Stimuli
Amplified
EMG
Amplifier
Figure 2. Presenting vibrotactile stimuli
B. Pseudo-mastication sound
We also investigated auditory stimuli for comparison with
vibrotactile stimuli. We generated pseudo-mastication sound
using a simpliﬁed method based on Endo et al [2]. The EMG
signal detected under mastication sounds like a noise or the
sound of the wind. Endo et al. generated pseudo-mastication
sound by amplifying the amplitude with an equalizer using the
250 Hz to 1000 Hz frequency components of the EMG. This
study applied a high-pass ﬁlter of 250 Hz to the input signals,
such as myoelectric potential obtained from an electrode at-
tached to the masseter muscle of the participant, or mastication
sound obtained from a condenser microphone attached to the
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

other masseter muscle, and output to headphones as pseudo-
mastication sound. Figure 3 shows the system conﬁguration
for presenting pseudo-mastication sound.
Arduino
Uno
PC
Myoelectric
Amplifier
Electrode
Condenser
Microphone
Mastication
Sound
EMG
High-pass
Filter
Pseudo-mastication
Sound
Amplified
EMG
Figure 3. Presenting pseudo-mastication sound
IV. EXPERIMENT
We conducted an experiment to investigate whether the food
texture perception of two kinds of foods can be affected by pre-
senting vibrotactile stimuli or pseudo-mastication sound under
mastication. Twelve participants (9 males and 3 females, with
ages ranging from 18 to 22 years and an average age of 21.25
years) took part in this experiment. The same explanation was
given to each participant to keep the experimental environment
the same. The participants wore an eye mask to shut the visual
information out. Further, the experiment was conducted in a
soundproof room so that ambient noise information would not
affect the perception of food texture.
First, participants were seated at the chair, and were asked
to masticate food without listening to any sound by wearing
the noise-cancelling headphone (BOSE QuietComfort 15). The
condition was treated as control condition and named as
condition A. Next, the participants experienced vibrotactile
information or pseudo-mastication sound based on their own
mastication sound or myoelectric potential during mastication.
The conditions of each pair were named as condition B, C, D,
and E (Table I).
After the experiment of each condition, they were asked
to rate the following nine adjective-pairs on a 7-point Likert
scale; “soft - hard,” “not crispy - crispy,” “sparse - dense,”
“thin - thick, “not chewy - chewy,” “unnatural - natural,” “stale
- fresh,” “uncomfort - comfort,” and “not sticky - sticky.”
The conditions B to E were performed in a random order
to eliminate the order effect.
As described in Section II, some foods have different tex-
tures depending on the cooking method and bubble structure.
Thus, it is desirable to use foods that have already been
processed and have little difference in food texture from
one individual to another. We chose rice cracker (Setono-
sioage, KURIYAMABEIKA Co., Ltd.) and gummy (Meiji
fruit gummy candy grape, Meiji Co., Ltd.). The characteristic
of the rice cracker we chose is soft and crispy texture, and
gummy’s is elastic, but not too soft. In the experiment, we
split the rice cracker in a half and made it into bite-size pieces
for easy mastication.
In the experiment during mastication of gummy, the con-
denser microphone could not collect mastication sound. Thus,
we held experiments under mastication of gummy with con-
ditions A, D, and E, except for conditions B and C. Figure
4a and Figure 4b show the overview of experimental scenes
and Table II shows the adjective pairs of questionnaires. As
a caveat, this experiment was not blind to the food items
because the experiments on rice cracker and gummy were
conducted independently. In addition, this experiment may not
be generalizable because of the male bias of the participants,
the lack of control variables for age and ethnicity, and the use
of speciﬁc foods.
TABLE I. EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS
condition
input
output
A
none
none
B
mastication sound
vibrotactile stimuli
C
mastication sound
pseudo-mastication sound
D
myoelectric potential
vibrotactile stimuli
E
myoelectric potential
pseudo-mastication sound
(a). Participant is sitting on the vibrotactile
chair
(b). Participant is masticating food
Figure 4. Experimental scene
TABLE II. ADJECTIVE PAIRS OF QUESTIONNAIRES
Question
Item
Scale
Item
Q1 Hardness
Soft
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Hard
Q2 Crispness
Not crispy
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Crispy
Q3 Dense
Sparse
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Dense
Q4 Thickness
Thin
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Thick
Q5 Chewiness
Not chewy
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Chewy
Q6 Naturalness of sound
Unnatural
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Natural
Q7 Freshness
Stale
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Fresh
Q8 Comfort
Uncomfort
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Comfort
Q9 Stickiness
Not sticky
1-2-3-4-5-6-7
Sticky
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V. RESULT
In this section we explain each result of the experiment.
First we describe the result of rice cracker, followed by gummy
texture result.
A. Perception of rice cracker texture
The distributions of the evaluation score in the conditions A
to E under rice cracker mastication are shown in Figure 5a to
Figure 5h. The triangle in the ﬁgure represents the mean, and
the black line represents the median. The circle points indicate
outlier. Questionnaire data were analyzed between control
condition A and other conditions using Wilcoxon signed-rank
test. ∗ indicates a signiﬁcant difference. (p-value was 0.05.)
＊
(a). Q1 Hardness
＊
(b). Q2 Crispness
＊
(c). Q3 Dense
＊
(d). Q4 Thickness
＊
(e). Q5 Chewiness
＊
＊
(f). Q6 Naturalness
＊
(g). Q7 Freshness
＊
(h). Q8 Comfort
Figure 5. Evaluation score of each condition during rice cracker mastication
Comparing the conditions of A and B, the perceived hard-
ness (questionnaire 1: “soft - hard”) was shown signiﬁcantly
greater in condition B (p = 0.0196). Also, perceived freshness
(questionnaire 7: “stale - fresh”) was signiﬁcantly greater in
condition B (p = 0.0412). Comparing the conditions of A and
C, although food texture of rice cracker was perceived as dense
(questionnaire 3: “sparse - dense” (p = 0.00496)) and thick
(questionnaire 4: “thin - thick” (p = 0.0339)) in condition
C, participants perceived the sounds of pseudo-mastication
sound as unnatural (questionnaire 6: “unnatural - natural” (p
= 0.0313)).
Furthermore, among the conditions of A and D, the judged
crispness (questionnaire 2: “not crispy - crispy”) was presented
signiﬁcantly greater (p = 0.00589), and the judged chewiness
(questionnaire 5: “not chewy - chewy”) was shown signiﬁ-
cantly greater (p = 0.00830) in condition D. In condition E,
participants perceived the sound of the rice crackers as unnat-
ural (questionnaire 6: “unnatural - natural” (p = 0.00310)) and
perceived uncomfort (questionnaire 8: “uncomfort - comfort”
(p = 0.0199)). Therefore, the analysis revealed that vibrotactile
stimuli and pseudo-mastication sound presented during masti-
cation affected the food texture perception of rice cracker.
B. Perception of gummy texture
The distributions of the evaluation score given by the par-
ticipants in conditions A, D, and E during gummy mastication
are shown in Figure 6a to Figure 6c. The triangle in the ﬁgure
represents the mean, and the black line represents the median.
The circle points indicate outlier. Questionnaire data were
analyzed between control condition A and other conditions
using Wilcoxon signed-rank test. ∗ indicates a signiﬁcant
difference. (p-value was 0.05.)
＊
(a). Q4 Thickness
＊
＊
(b). Q6 Naturalness
＊
(c). Q8 Comfort
Figure 6. Evaluation score of each condition during gummy mastication
Among the conditions of A and D, participants perceived
the sound as unnatural (questionnaire 6: “unnatural - natural”
(p = 0.0311)) in condition D. Moreover, among the conditions
of A and E, the perceived thickness (questionnaire 4: “thin
- thick”) was shown signiﬁcantly greater (p = 0.0384) ,and
participants perceived pseudo-masticaion sound as unnatural
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(questionnaire 6: “unnatural - natural” (p = 0.00210)), and un-
comfort (questionnaire 8: “uncomfort - comfort” (p = 0.0422)).
Thus, the analysis showed that vibrotactile stimuli and pseudo-
mastication sound presented during mastication affected the
food texture perception of gummy.
VI. DISCUSSION
Our results show that the perception of rice cracker and
gummy texture are affected both by the vibrotactile stimuli and
pseudo-mastication sound during mastication. In particular,
vibrotactile stimuli affected food texture perception, which is
different from that of pseudo-mastication sound.
A. Effect of vibrotactile stimuli on food texture
When the vibrotactile stimuli were provided, participants
were more likely to evaluate rice cracker as having the
property of hardness, crispness, chewiness, and freshness.
Condition B, in which mastication sound was used as the input
signal, affected the perception of the hardness and freshness
of the rice cracker. Under the condition B, some participants
commented that “I felt the food to be hard more than usual.”
and “I felt vibration from the chair as if something hit the
bottom of the chair.”
Condition D, in which a myoelectric potential was used
as the input signal, affected the perception of the crispness
and chewiness of the rice cracker. Under the condition D,
some participants reported that “I felt like I was eating with
my whole body.” and “I felt the enhanced chewiness of rice
cracker.”
Regarding the gummy texture, when the vibrotactile stimuli
were provided, participants evaluated the perceived sound as
more unnatural. Under the condition D, some participants
reported that “I felt strange between the vibrotactile stimuli
and gummy texture.” Since gummy is relatively soft food, the
vibrotactile stimuli presented during mastication was different
from that of the usual eating environment, and it is thought
that some participants felt a sense of discomfort. Under the
condition in which vibrotactile stimuli were presented, there
was no commonality among the texture perception that showed
signiﬁcant difference between rice cracker and gummy. This
suggests that the low-frequency component (0-200 Hz) is
signiﬁcant in these texture perceptions, and affected them
differently for rice cracker and gummy.
B. Effect of pseudo-mastication sound on food texture
When the pseudo-mastication sound was provided, par-
ticipants tended to evaluate rice cracker as denser, thicker,
unnatural sounding, and uncomfort. Under the condition C,
some participants commented that they heard a chewing sound
and felt that the volume of rice cracker had increased when
masticating rice cracker.
The pseudo-mastication sound was generated from the air-
conducted sound of masticating rice cracker and presented
to the headphones of participants. Thus, it is likely that the
pseudo-mastication sound modiﬁed by the high-pass ﬁlter
enhanced the perception of density and thickness in condition
C. Under the condition E, some participants commented that
the pseudo-mastication sound was uncomfort and sounded
like an ASMR (Autonomous Sensory Meridian Response)
of earpick. The pseudo-mastication sound is generated by
applying high-pass ﬁlter to myoelectric potential in condition
E.
Under the condition E, some participants reported that they
felt the pseudo-mastication sound was unnatural, and that they
perceived gummy texture more than no sound.
Under the condition in which pseudo-mastication sound was
presented, the texture perception, “unnaturalness of sound”
and “discomfort” that showed signiﬁcant difference have a
commonality between rice cracker and gummy. This suggests
that the high-frequency component of the auditory information
may have inﬂuenced these texture perceptions. As described in
Section VI-A, there was no commonality among the affected
texture perception in rice cracker and gummy. Therefore,
different frequency bands in vibrotactile information auditory
information could have led to differences in affected attributes.
In addition, this experiment did not blind to the food items.
Since this may have little inﬂuence on the result, we consider
conducting the study under blind conditions such as randomly
presenting food items.
VII. CONCLUSION
This study proposed a method to present vibrotactile stim-
uli to the whole body by employing mastication sound or
electromyogram as input signal. We investigated whether the
food texture of rice cracker or gummy can be affected by
presenting vibrotactile stimuli or pseudo-mastication sound
during mastication.
The analysis revealed that when the vibrotactile stimuli were
provided, participants tended to be perceived the rice cracker
texture as harder, crisper, fresher, and the sound as unnatural
compared to control condition. In the case of gummy texture,
they perceived the sound as unnatural more than usual.
On the other hand, under the presentation of pseudo-
mastication sound, participants tended to be perceived the
rice cracker texture as denser, thicker, unnatural sounding
and uncomfort compared to control condition. In the case of
gummy, they were more likely to perceive gummy texture as
thicker, unnatural sounding, and uncomfort.
Consequently, our research showed that proposed method
affects the food texture perception, and presenting vibrotactile
information throughout the body has the potential to improve
the eating experience.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This study was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI
18H04104
(Grant-in-Aid
for
Scientiﬁc
Research
(A)),
19K22879 (Grant-in-Aid for Challenging Exploratory Re-
search), and the Asahi Glass Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Massimiliano and C. Spence, “The role of auditory cues in modulating
the perceived crispness and staleness of potato chips,” Journal of sensory
studies, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 347–363, 2004.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[2] H. Endo, S. Ino, and W. Fujisaki, “The effect of a crunchy pseudo-
chewing sound on perceived texture of softened foods,” Physiology &
behavior, vol. 167, pp. 324–331, 2016.
[3] ISO, “Sensory analysis - Methology - Texture proﬁle,” https://www.iso.
org/obp/ui/#iso:std:76668:en, [retrieved: May, 2022].
[4] R. Nakaoka, Y. Nakamura, Y. Matsuda, S. Misaki, and K. Yasumoto,
“eat2pic: Food-tech design as a healthy nudge with smart chopsticks
and canvas,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications Workshops and other Afﬁliated Events
(PerCom Workshops).
IEEE Computer Society, 2021, pp. 389–391.
[5] T. Narumi, S. Nishizaka, T. Kajinami, T. Tanikawa, and M. Hirose,
“Augmented reality ﬂavors: gustatory display based on edible marker
and cross-modal interaction,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems, 2011, pp. 93–102.
[6] E. N. C. Mills, P. J. Wilde, L. J. Salt, and P. Skeggs, “Bubble formation
and stabilization in bread dough,” Food and bioproducts processing,
vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 189–193, 2003.
[7] A. Andersson et al., “Effect of preheating on potato texture,” Critical
Reviews in Food Science & Nutrition, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 229–251, 1994.
[8] H. Iwata, H. Yano, T. Uemura, and T. Moriya, “Food simulator: A haptic
interface for biting,” in IEEE virtual reality 2004.
IEEE, 2004, pp. 51–
57.
[9] Y. Hashimoto et al., “Straw-like user interface: virtual experience
of the sensation of drinking using a straw,” in Proceedings of the
2006 ACM SIGCHI international conference on Advances in computer
entertainment technology, 2006, pp. 50–es.
[10] A. Niijima and T. Ogawa, “Virtual food texture by electrical muscle
stimulation,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Symposium
on Wearable Computers, 2016, pp. 48–49.
[11] L. Mioche, P. Bourdiol, and M. Peyron, “Inﬂuence of age on mastication:
effects on eating behaviour,” Nutrition research reviews, vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 43–54, 2004.
[12] K. Swan, R. Speyer, B. J. Heijnen, B. Wagg, and R. Cordier, “Living
with oropharyngeal dysphagia: effects of bolus modiﬁcation on health-
related quality of life―a systematic review,” Quality of Life Research,
vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 2447–2456, 2015.
[13] H. Endo, S. Ino, and W. Fujisaki, “Texture-dependent effects of pseudo-
chewing sound on perceived food texture and evoked feelings in re-
sponse to nursing care foods,” Appetite, vol. 116, pp. 493–501, 2017.
[14] N. Koizumi, H. Tanaka, Y. Uema, and M. Inami, “Chewing jockey:
augmented food texture by using sound based on the cross-modal effect,”
in Proceedings of the 8th international conference on advances in
computer entertainment technology, 2011, pp. 1–4.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

