Effects of Automation on Situation Awareness in Controlling Robot Teams  
 
 
Michael Lewis 
School of Information Sciences 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 15208, USA 
ml@sis.pitt.edu 
Katia Sycara 
Robotics Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15208, USA 
katia@cs.cmu.edu
 
 
Abstract—Declines 
in 
situation 
awareness 
(SA) 
often 
accompany automation.  Some of these effects have been 
characterized as out-of-the-loop, complacency, and automation 
bias. Increasing autonomy in multi-robot control might be 
expected to produce similar declines in operators’ SA.  In this 
paper we review a series of experiments in which automation is 
introduced in controlling robot teams.  Automating path 
planning at a foraging task improved both target detection and 
localization which is closely tied to SA. Timing data, however, 
suggested small declines in SA for robot location and pose.  
Automation of image acquisition, by contrast, led to poorer 
localization. 
 
Findings 
are 
discussed 
and 
alternative 
explanations involving shifts in strategy proposed. 
 
Keywords-human-robot interaction; robot teams; situation 
awareness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
The relation between situation awareness, performance 
and automation has been the subject of active investigation 
for more than forty years. Early researchers were concerned 
that isolating operators from the processes they controlled 
through automation might lead to deskilling [1], losing the 
psychomotor and cognitive skills needed to perform the 
tasks manually.  Others have been concerned that losing 
touch with the moment to moment state of the process might 
lead to inattentiveness [2] or unfamiliarity [3] with what is 
going on. 
Other less chronic effects are associated with the 
introduction of automation.  The term, out-of-the-loop, has 
been used by [4] to describe a variety of such effects.  
Operators who are out-of-the-loop have been shown to have 
decreased situation awareness (SA) as evidenced by direct 
measures such a SAGAT [5] or SART [6] and indirectly 
through declines in performance [7].  Performance declines 
most often involve failures in monitoring and can arise from 
either undetected process anomalies [8] or failures of the 
automation itself [9].  The first case has been referred to as 
complacency [10] and occurs when an operator’s trust in 
automation exceeds its trustworthiness.   As a consequence, 
the operator fails to monitor the automation as intently as 
needed and does not detect process anomalies or automation 
failures as they occur.  This may result either due to 
sampling displays too infrequently [11] or attentional 
blindness in which they fail to notice the fault despite 
observing the evidence. 
A related effect, automation bias [10],  has been used to 
refer to a tendency to accept recommendations or actions of 
automation 
despite 
contrary 
evidence. 
 
While 
in 
complacency, the operator fails to notice, in automation 
bias, the operator may notice but still fail to act giving 
automation the benefit of the doubt.  A common finding has 
been that users of automation have particular difficulty in 
dealing with novel failures [12].   Out-of-the-loop operators 
may fail to notice the failure [4] or noticing it, fail to 
properly diagnose, or diagnosing properly fail to take a 
correct action.  These later failures may be due to either 
unfamiliarity with the system’s expected states or 
unfamiliarity with available manual actions and their 
effects.   There are many exceptions, however, and it is not 
uncommon to find better performance in novel situations 
when automation is well designed [13]. 
We are conducting a series of studies to develop theories 
and techniques to allow individual or groups of human 
operators to control a larger number of robots.  Controlling 
multiple robots substantially increases the complexity of the 
operator’s task because attention must be shared among 
robots in order to maintain situation awareness (SA) and 
exert control. In the simplest case, an operator controls 
multiple independent robots interacting with each as needed. 
A foraging task [14] in which each robot searches its own 
region would be of this category although minimal 
coordination might be required to avoid overlaps and 
prevent gaps in coverage especially if robots are in close 
proximity.  Control performance at such tasks can be 
characterized by the average demand of each robot on 
human attention [15]. Because robots are operated 
independently an additional robot imposes only an additive 
242
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

demand on cognitive resources. Under these conditions 
increasing autonomy for individual robots should allow 
them to be neglected for longer periods of time making it 
possible for a single operator to control more robots.  
Because robots are controlled independently, operators and 
robots can be added to increase system performance.  For 
more strongly cooperative tasks individual autonomy is 
unlikely to suffice. The round-robin control strategy used 
for controlling individual robots would force an operator to 
plan and predict actions needed for multiple joint activities 
and be highly susceptible to errors in prediction, 
synchronization or execution.   
In a recent series of experiments, we have investigated 
both increasing autonomy and number of operators to 
increase the size of robot teams that might be controlled.  In 
an initial experiment we identified path planning as the most 
fruitful task to automate.  In subsequent experiments we 
tried increasing the number of operators, alarming 
navigation failures, and automating the acquisition of 
imagery.  Although absolute performance generally 
improved with increasing automation, our data suggest these 
improvements were accompanied by less dramatic decreases 
in SA as predicted. 
A. USARSim&MrCS 
The experiments reported in this paper were conducted 
using the USARSim robotic simulation with simulated 
Pioneer P2-AT robots performing Urban Search and Rescue 
(USAR) foraging tasks.  USARSim is a high-fidelity 
simulation of urban search and rescue (USAR) robots and 
environments developed as a research tool for the study of 
human-robot 
interaction 
(HRI) 
and 
multi-robot 
coordination.  USARSim supports HRI by accurately 
rendering user interface elements (particularly camera 
video), accurately representing robot automation and 
behavior, 
and 
accurately 
representing 
the 
remote 
environment that links the operator’s awareness with the 
robot’s 
behaviors. 
USARSim 
uses 
Epic 
Games’ 
UnrealEngine2 [16] to provide a high fidelity simulator at 
low cost and also serves as the basis for the Virtual Robots 
Competition of the RoboCup Rescue League.  Other sensors 
including sonar and audio are also accurately modeled.   
Validation data showing close agreement in detection of 
walls and associated Hough transforms for a simulated 
Hokuyo laser range finder are described in [17]. The current 
UnrealEngine2 integrates MathEngine’s Karma physics 
engine [18] to support high fidelity rigid body simulation.  
Validation studies showing close agreement in behavior 
between USARSim models and real robots being modeled 
are reported in [19,20,21,22]  as well as agreement for a 
variety of feature extraction techniques between USARSim 
images and camera video reported in Carpin et al. [23]. 
MrCS (Multi-robot Control System), a multi-robot 
communications 
and 
control 
infrastructure 
with 
accompanying user interface(s), developed for experiments 
in multirobot control and RoboCup competition [24] was 
used in these experiments. MrCS provides facilities for 
starting and controlling robots in the simulation, displaying 
multiple camera and laser output, and supporting inter-robot 
communication through Machinetta, a distributed multi-
agent coordination infrastructure.  Figure 1 shows the 
elements of the baseline version of MrCS.  The operator 
selects the robot to be controlled from the colored 
thumbnails at the top of the screen.  To view more of the 
selected scene shown in the large video window the operator 
uses pan/tilt sliders to control the camera. The current 
locations and paths of the robots are shown on the Map Data 
Viewer (bottom right).  The map is developed over the 
course of the run by fusing results of successive laser scans 
from the team of robots.   Robots are tasked by assigning 
waypoints on one of the maps or through a teleoperation 
widget (upper right).   The victim marking task requires the 
operator to first identify a victim from a video window, 
identify the robot and its pose on the map,and then locate 
corresponding features near the victim’s location in order to 
mark it on the laser generated map. 
B.  Human vs. Automated Path Planning 
The foraging task can be decomposed into exploration 
and perceptual search subtasks corresponding to navigation 
of an unknown space and searching for targets by inspecting 
and controlling onboard cameras.  An initial study [25] 
investigated the scaling of performance with number of 
robots for operators performing either the full task or only 
one of the subtasks to identify limiting factors.   If either of 
the subtasks scaled at approximately the same rate as the 
full task while the other scaled more rapidly, the first 
subtask could be considered the factor limiting performance.  
If performance were equal across the conditions or the 
subtasks scaled at the same rate, automation decisions 
would need to be based on other factors. The logic of our 
approach depends upon the equivalence among these three 
conditions.   
In the fulltask condition, operators used waypoint 
control to explore an office like environment. When victims 
were detected using the onboard cameras the robot was 
stopped and the operator marked the victim on the map and 
returned to exploration. Equating the exploration subtask 
was relatively straightforward.  Operators were given the 
instruction to explore as large an area as possible with 
coverage judged by the extent of the laser rangefinder 
generated map.  Because operators in the exploration 
condition did not need to pause to locate and mark victims 
the areas they explored should be slightly greater than in the 
fulltask condition.   
243
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure 1. Multi Robot Control System (MrCS)
Developing an equivalent perceptual search condition is 
more complicated.  The operator’s task resembles that of the 
payload operator for a UAV or a passenger in a train, in that 
she has no control over the platform’s trajectory but can 
only pan and tilt the cameras to find targets.  The targets the 
operator has an opportunity to acquire, however, depend on 
the trajectories taken by the robots.   If an autonomous path 
planner is used, robots will explore continuously likely 
covering a wider area than when operated by a human 
(where pauses typically occur upon arrival at a waypoint).  
If human generated trajectories are taken from the fulltask 
condition, however, they will contain additional pausesat 
locations where victims were found and marked providing 
an undesired cue.  Instead, we have chosen to use canonical 
trajectories from the exploration condition since they should 
contain pauses associated with waypoint arrival but not 
those associated with identifying and marking victims.  As a 
final adjustment, operators in the perceptual search 
condition were allowed to pause their robots in order to 
identify and mark the victims they discover.   
II. 
EXPERIMENT 1 
Forty-five paid participants, 15 in each of the three 
conditions took part in the experiment.  A large USAR 
environment previously used in the 2006 RoboCup Rescue 
Virtual Robots competition [24] was selected for use in the 
experiment.  The environment was a maze like hall with 
many rooms and obstacles, such as chairs, desks, cabinets, 
and bricks. Victims were evenly distributed within the 
environment. A second simpler environment was used for 
training. The experiment followed a between groups 
repeated measures design with number (4, 8, 12) of robots 
defining the repeated measure.  Participants in the fulltask 
condition performed the complete USAR task.  In the 
subtask conditions they performed variants of the USAR 
task requiring only exploration or perceptual search.   
Participants in the fulltask condition followed instructions to 
use the robots to explore the environment and locate and 
mark on the map any victims they discovered.  The 
exploration condition differed only in instructions.  These 
operators were instructed to explore as much of the 
environment as possible without any requirement to locate 
or mark victims.  From examination of area coverage, 
pausing, and other characteristics of trajectories in the 
fulltask and exploration conditions a representative 
trajectory was selected from the exploration data for each 
size of team.  In the perceptual search condition operators’ 
retained control of the robots’ cameras while robots 
followed 
the 
representative 
trajectory 
except 
when 
individually paused by the operator. 
Coverage was similar for fulltask and exploration 
conditions, however, perceptual search participants found 
more victims and reported lower workload than those in the 
244
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

fulltask condition. For these tasks differences in SA can 
most readily be inferred from accuracy in marking victims 
because this task requires simultaneously considering robot 
location, pose, camera orientation, and victim location 
relative to landmarks, e.g., high SA.  In this experiment 
accuracy in marking was better in the perceptual search 
condition  with RMS Error (Figure 4) for perceptual search 
participants significantly more precise (F1,28 = 23.84, p< 
.0001) than fulltask participants, although accuracy in both 
groups declined for an increasing number of robots.  This 
finding suggests that SA was actually higher for participants 
using automation. 
 
Figure 2. Error in marking victims 
A. Experiment 2 
Experiment 2 compared teams of two operators 
controlling 24 robots with either 12 robots assigned to each 
or control over the 24 shared.  The robots were controlled 
either manually or by an automated path planner 
demonstrated in [26] to generate paths that did not differ 
significantly in area covered but having higher tortuosity as 
measured by fractal dimension than humanly generated 
trajectories.  Sixty teams (120 participants) were run in the 
experiment.  While the division of responsibilities within 
teams affected performance the comparisons of concern to 
this paper involve manual and automated path planning.   
 
  
Assigned 
Robots 
Shared Pool 
Manual 
15 teams 
15 teams 
Automated 
15 teams 
15 teams 
Experiment 2 replicated Experiment 1’s finding that 
more victims were found using automated path planning 
although area covered did not differ significantly.  Accuracy 
was again better in the autonomous condition again 
suggesting that SA was higher under increased automation.  
Process measures, however, suggested that there might be 
some loss of SA associated with automated path planning.  
Temporal data were analyzed to gain a more complete 
picture of the processes involved in victim observation, 
detection, and marking.  A MANOVA was conducted to 
analyze the effects of autonomy and group organization on 
these monitoring and operation process measures. A 
significant main effect for autonomy was found for process 
measures (F4,52 =12.118, p<.001), but no effects were 
found  for the group organization (F4,52 =1.781, p=.112).  
The  ANOVA for the time from which the victim is 
displayed in the camera to being successfully marked by the 
operator( Display to Mark), found a main effect for 
autonomy, F1,56=4.750, p=.034 (Figure 3).  Tests for team 
organization and the interaction were not significant.  
 
Figure 3. Display to Mark 
The ANOVA for “Selected to Mark”, which calculated 
the time from when the operator selected the robot to 
successfully marking the victim (Figure 4), by contrast, 
found main effects for autonomy, F1,56=7.440, p=.009, and 
for team organization, F1,56=4.029, p=.050.   
III. 
SYNCHRONOUS VS. ASYNCHRONOUS VIEWING 
When considering the foraging task exploration needs to 
be more than simply moving the robot to different locations 
in the environment.  For search, the process of acquiring a 
specific viewpoint or set of viewpoints containing a 
particular object is of greater concern.  Because search relies 
on moving a viewpoint through the environment to find and 
better view target objects, it is an inherently ego-centric 
task.   
 
245
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure  4. Selected to Mark 
Multi-robot search, presents the additional problem of 
assuring that areas the robot has “explored” have been 
thoroughly searched for targets.  This requirement directly 
conflicts with the navigation task which requires the camera 
to be pointed in the direction of travel in order to detect and 
avoid objects and steer toward its goal.  These difficulties 
are accentuated by the need to switch attention among 
robots which may increase the likelihood that a view 
containing a target will be missed.  In earlier studies [23,24] 
we have demonstrated that success in search at these tasks is 
directly related to the frequency with which the operator 
shifts attention between robots and hypothesized that this 
might be due to victims missed while servicing other robots.   
To combat these problems of attentive sampling among 
cameras, incomplete coverage of searched areas, and 
difficulties in associating camera views with map locations 
we are investigating the potential of asynchronous control 
techniques previously used out of necessity in NASA 
applications as a solution to multi-robot search problems.  
Due to limited bandwidth and communication lags in 
interplanetary robotics, camera views are closely planned 
and executed.  Rather than transmitting live video and 
moving the camera about the scene, photographs are taken 
from a single spot with plans to capture as much of the 
surrounding scene as possible.  These photographs taken 
with either an omnidirectional overhead camera (camera 
faces upward to a convex mirror reflecting 360◦) and 
dewarped [27,28] or stitched together from multiple pictures 
from a ptz camera [29] provide a panorama guaranteeing 
complete coverage of the scene from a particular point.  If 
these points are well chosen, a collection of panoramas can 
cover an area to be searched with greater certainty than 
imagery captured with a pan-tilt-zoom (ptz) camera during 
navigation.  For the operator searching within a saved 
panorama the experience is similar to controlling a ptz 
camera in the actual scene, a property that has been used to 
improve eleoperation in a low bandwidth high latency 
application [30].  
In this modification of the MrCS shown in figure 5 we 
merge map and camera views as in [31].  The operator 
directs navigation from the map being generated with 
panoramas of a chosen extent being taken at the last 
waypoint of a series.  Due to the time required to pan the 
camera to acquire views to be stitched operators frequently 
chose to specify incomplete pans. The  
 
Figure 5. MrCS Asynchronous Panorama mode 
panoramas are stored and accessed through icons 
showing their locations on the map.  In the Panorama 
interface thumbnails are blanked out with the arcs at the 
viewing icons indicating the viewing angles available.  The 
operator can find victims by asynchronously panning 
through these stored panoramas as time becomes available.  
When a victim is spotted the operator uses landmarks from 
the image and corresponding points on the map to record the 
victim’s location.  By changing the task from a forced paced 
one with camera views that must be controlled and searched 
on multiple robots continuously to a self paced task in 
which only navigation needs to be controlled in realtime we 
hoped to provide a control interface that would automate 
image acquisition and allow more thorough search with 
lowered mental workload.  The reductions in bandwidth and 
communications requirements [32] are yet another potential 
advantage offered by this approach.   
Judgments of SA for operators using asynchronous 
displays needs to be different from instantaneous SA such 
as evaluated by SAGAT.   In asynchronous search the 
operator’s task has been transformed to depend on 
awareness of the products of the search to date rather than 
the state of the environment currently in camera view.  For 
the asynchronous operator, awareness of the association 
between a marked panorama and its camera views 
corresponds to the relation between thumbnails and map in 
the synchronous case.  The measure most strongly reflecting 
SA, therefore, would again be accuracy in marking victims. 
In an initial experiment reported in [33], we compared 
performance for operators controlling 4 robot teams at a 
246
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

simulated 
USAR 
task 
using 
either 
streaming 
or 
asynchronous video displays.   In the scaling experiments 
we reported as “found” victims marked within 2 m of their 
actual location and reported RMS error for the distance 
between actual and marked locations.  In the asynchronous 
display experiments we have reported these data differently 
by counting the number of victims marked within concentric 
circles of the actual location.  Figure 6 shows these data 
from the initial experiment. In this experiment the average 
number of victims found across conditions using the 2m 
radius was 4.5, falling to 4.1 for a 1.5m radius, 3.4 at 1m 
and 2.7 when they were required to mark victims within 
.75m. Repeated measures ANOVAs found differences in 
victim detection favoring the streaming video mode at the 
1.5m radius F(1,19)  = 8.038, p=.01, and 2.0m radius 
F(1,19)=9.54, p=.006.  These data suggest a pattern of 
greater error in marking for operators using the panoramic 
display, an effect indicative of reduced SA. 
Victims Found
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
rad .75
rad 1
rad 1.5
rad 2
marking accuracy
panorama
streaming
 
Figure  6. Victims marked within given radius 
An alternative explanation is that the superiority of 
streaming video might have occurred simply because these 
users had the opportunity to move closer to victims thereby 
improving their estimates of distance in marking the map.  
A contrasting observation was that frequency of shifting 
focus between robots, a practice we have previously found 
related to search performance [32] was correlated with 
performance for streaming video participants but not for 
participants using asynchronous panoramas.  Because 
operators using asynchronous video did not need to 
constantly switch between camera views to avoid missing 
victims we hypothesized that for larger team sizes where 
forced pace search might exceed the operator’s attentional 
capacity asynchronous video might offer an advantage.   
 In a follow-on experiment we compared panoramas 
with the streaming video condition from Experiment 1 with 
teams of 4, 8, and 12 robots to test our hypothesis that 
advantages might emerge for larger team sizes. Data were 
analyzed using a repeated measures ANOVA comparing 
streaming video performance with that of asynchronous 
panoramas.  On the performance measures, victims found 
and area covered, the groups showed similar performance 
with victim identification peaking sharply at 8 robots in the 
streaming condition accompanied by a slightly less dramatic 
maximum for search coverage.   
Figure 7 shows, operators in the panorama condition 
were again less accurate in marking victims as indicated by 
the 1.5 m performance which is substantially lower than the 
2 m values which are very close to those of streaming video 
operators.  This replicates the earlier finding that automating 
image acquisition appears to decrease SA of operators 
Victims Found by Distance
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
N Robots
Stream 2 m
Pan 2 m
Stream 1.5 m
Pan 1.5 m
 
Figure 7.  Victims found for 4, 8, 12 robots 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
While automation has frequently been associated with 
loss of SA and degradation of performance this does not 
appear to be the case with the forms of multirobot control 
studied.  Of the performance measures expected to strongly 
depend on SA, marking victims which requires a variety of 
relational knowledge was reliably found to be more accurate 
at higher levels of automation for path planning but showed 
the expected decline for image acquisition. The process 
measure select-to-mark was faster under manual conditions 
suggesting that manual operators were more aware of the 
location and orientation of the robots.  The faster display-to-
mark times in the autonomous conditions, however, indicate 
operators using autonomous path planning may have better 
awareness of streaming video from the thumbnails.  By this 
account automation may not lead to more or less SA but 
rather changes the way operators perform their tasks.  In the 
manual conditions operators more attention to the map as 
they need to set waypoints and pay closer attention to the 
locations and orientations of the robots so they are better 
prepared to use this information to mark after selecting the 
robot.  Operators in the autonomy condition, freed from the 
need to navigate the robots devoted more of their time to 
monitoring thumbnails and hence were able to achieve 
247
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

shorter display-to-mark times since they were better able to 
catch victims as they appeared on camera. 
An alternative explanation may also be possible for the 
grater accuracy of autonomy participants in marking 
victims.  As operators with autonomous path planning 
reported lower workload and controlled larger numbers of 
robots, they may be presumed to have greater reserve 
capacity allowing them to devote greater attention to the 
marking task leading to greater accuracy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been sponsored in part by AFOSR 
FA955008-10356 and ONR Grant N0001409-10680. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Billings, C. E. (1996). Aviation automation: The search for a human-
centered approach. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
[2] 
 Parasuraman, R., Molloy, R., and Singh, I. (1993). Performance 
consequences of automation-induced complacency,  International 
Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3, 1-23. 
[3] 
 Wiener, E. and Curry, R. (1980). Flight-deck automation: Promises 
and problems, Ergonomics, 23, 995-995-1011. 
[4] 
 Endsley, M. and Kiris, E. (1995). The out-of-the-loop performance 
problem and level of control in automation, Human Factors: The 
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (June 1995), 
pp. 381-394.  
[5] 
 Endsley, M. (1995). Measurement of situation awareness in dynamic 
systems, Human Factors, 37(1), 65-84. 
[6] 
 Taylor, R. (1990). Situational awareness rating technique (SART): 
the development of a tool for aircrew systems design. In Situational 
Awareness in Aerospace Operations (AGARD-CP-478) (pp 3/1-3/17) 
Neuilly Sur Seine, France: NATO-AGARD 
[7] 
 Scerbo, 
M. 
(1996). 
Theoretical 
perspectives 
on 
adaptive 
automation, Automation and human performance: Theory and 
applications (A98-12010 01-54), Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Publishers, p. 37-63  
[8] 
 Norman, D. (1990). The problem of automation: Inappropriate 
feedback and interaction, not over-automation, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 1-18. 
[9] 
 Parasuraman, R., and Riley, V.   (1997). Humans and automation: 
Use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human Factors, 39, 230-253. 
[10]  Parasuraman, R. and Manzey, D. (2010). Complacency and bias in 
human use of automation:  An attentional integration, Human 
Factors, 52(3), 381-410. 
[11]  Senders, J. (1964). The human operator as a monitor and controllers 
on multidegree of freedom systems, IEEE Transactions on Human 
Factors in Electronics, HFE,5, 1-6. 
[12]  Parasuraman, R., Mouloua, M., and Molloy, R. (1996). Effects of 
adaptive task allocation on monitoring of automated systems, Human 
Factors, 38(4), 665-679. 
[13]  Tharanathan, A., Bullemer, P., Laberge, J., Reising, V., and McLain, 
R. (2010). Functional versus schematic overview displays: Impact on 
operator situation awareness in process monitoring, Proceedings of 
the 54th Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. 
[14] Cao, Y., Fukunaga, A., and Kahng, A. (1997). Cooperative mobile 
robotics: Antecedents and directions, Autonomous Robots, 4, 1-23. 
[15]  Crandall, J., Goodrich, M., Olsen, D., and  Nielsen, C. (2005). 
Validating 
human-robot 
interaction 
schemes 
in 
multitasking 
environments. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 
Part A, 35(4),438–449. 
[16]   (UE 
2) 
UnrealEngine2, 
http://udn.epicgames.com/Two/rsrc/Two/KarmaReference/KarmaUse
rGuide.pdf, accessed February 5, 2008. 
[17] S. Carpin, J. Wang, M. Lewis, A. Birk and A. Jacoff (2005). High 
fidelity tools for rescue robotics: Results and perspectives, Robocup 
2005 Symposium, 301-311. 
[18] Mathengine, 
MathEngine 
Karma 
User 
Guide, 
http://udn.epicgames.com/Two/KarmaReference/KarmaUserGuide.pd
f, accessed May 3, 2005. 
[19] Lewis, M., Hughes, S., Wang, J., M, Koes, and S. Carpin, S.(2005). 
Validating USARsim for use in HRI research, Proceedings of the 
49th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 
Orlando, FL, 2005, 457-461 
[20] Pepper, C., Balakirsky, S., and Scrapper, C. (2007). Robot Simulation 
Physics Validation, Proceedings of PerMIS’07. 
[21] Taylor, B., Balakirsky, S., Messina, E., and Quinn, R. (2007). Design 
and Validation of a Whegs Robot in USARSim, Proceedings of 
PerMIS’07. 
[22] Zaratti, M., Fratarcangeli, M., and  Iocchi., L. (2006).A 3D Simulator 
of Multiple Legged Robots based on USARSim. Robocup 2006: 
Robot Soccer World Cup X, Springer, LNAI, 13-24. 
[23] Carpin, S.,  Stoyanov, T., Nevatia, Y., Lewis, M. and Wang, J. 
(2006). Quantitative assessments of  USARSim accuracy". 
Proceedings of PerMIS 2006. 
[24] Balakirsky, S., Carpin, S., Kleiner, A., Lewis, M., Visser, A., Wang, 
J. and Zipara, V. (2007). Toward hetereogeneous robot teams for 
disaster mitigation: Results and performance metrics from RoboCup 
Rescue, Journal of Field Robotics, 24(11-12), 943-967. 
[25] H. Wang, M. Lewis, P. Velagapudi, P. Scerri, and K. Sycara, How 
search and its subtasks scale in N robots  2009 Human Robot 
Interaction Conference, ACM, 141-148. 
[26] Chien,  S., Wang, H., Lewis, M. (2010). Human vs. algorithmic path 
planning for  search and rescue by robot team, Proceedings of the 
54th Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 379-
383. 
[27] Murphy, J. (1995). “Application of Panospheric Imaging to a 
Teleoperated Lunar Rover,”  in Proceedings of the 1995 International 
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 3117 – 3121. 
[28] Shiroma, N., Sato, N., Chiu, Y. & Matsuno, F. (2004). “Study on 
effective camera images for mobile robot teleoperation,” In 
Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Workshop on Robot and 
Human Interactive Communication, 107 – 112. 
[29] Volpe, R. (1999). “Navigation results from desert field tests of the 
Rocky 7 Mars rover prototype,” in The International Journal of 
Robotics Research, 18, pp.669-683. 
[30] Fiala, M. (2005), “Pano-presence for teleoperation,” International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2005), 3798-
3802.   
[31] Ricks, B., Nielsen, C., and & Goodrich, M. (2004). Ecological 
displays for robot interaction: A new perspective. In International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems IEEE/RSJ, 2855 - 2860 
[32] Bruemmer, D., Few, A., Walton, M.,  Boring, R., Marble, L.,  
Nielsen, C., & Garner, J. (2005)..  Turn off the television: Real-world 
robotic exploration experiments with a virtual 3-D display. 
Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on Systems 
Science (HICSS’05), 50130b. 
[33] Velagapudi, P.,Wang, J., Wang, H., Scerri, P., Lewis, M., & Sycara, 
K. (2008). Synchronous vs. Asynchronous Video in Multi-Robot 
Search, Proceedings of first International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interaction (ACHI'08), 224-229. 
 
 
248
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

