Contents Enforme: Automatic Deformation of Content for Multi-features without 
Information Loss 
Hiroaki Tobita 
Sony Computer Science Laboratory Paris 
Paris, France 
tobby@csl.sony.fr 
 
Abstract—We introduce a deformation technique that enlarges 
the feature areas in an image while retaining the information 
in the non-feature areas. Our main purpose is to provide an 
effective thumbnail that is useful for practical use in small 
display devices (e.g., cellular phones, digital cameras, and 
game devices). Even though many approaches to achieve our 
purpose have been developed, they are not useful because they 
require enough time to calculate features. In contrast, our 
approach can quickly deform image features based on a rapid 
segmentation technique that our laboratory has proposed. 
Moreover, our system calculates each segmented area, so it can 
treat multi-features as deformation elements. As a result, the 
feature areas were enlarged and the non-feature areas were 
reduced at almost processing speed, and the total information 
contained in the original image was retained. Our smooth 
deformation technique is useful not only for image deformation, 
but also for a wide variety of contents such as net-meeting and 
video contents. In this paper, we describe the concept 
underlying the image enforme technique and its applications. 
Keywords-Contents Deformation; Information Retrieval; 
Video Compression; Zooming; Thumbnail; Net-meeting. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The continuing improvements in computer hardware 
have led to improved and more compact devices (e.g., 
cellular phones, personal digital assistants, and digital 
cameras), thereby making it easier for people to record and 
carry a huge amount of content, such as images, video files, 
and audio files. These devices are characterized by small 
displays with high resolution, so users can easily obtain 
information and examine the contents in detail. In addition, 
many content formats have been developed with a focus on 
effective file size. However, even though there have been 
considerable advances in device styles and media formats, 
the methods for previewing contents have remained almost 
unchanged. For example, to browse a set of images, a user 
has to look at a set of simple thumbnails or to look at the 
images individually. 
To solve this viewing problem, considerable effort has 
been made towards providing effective thumbnails. Cropping 
[1, 2] is an effective way to create a clear thumbnail. The 
non-feature areas are cropped, leaving only areas with 
features. The resulting picture is clearer, and the thumbnails 
produced are useful for browsing images in small devices. 
Since the calculation involves mainly identifying features, it 
is very simple. However, cropping the non-feature areas 
eliminates some of the image’s initial information, so the 
total amount of information is reduced. This makes it 
difficult to distinguish between similar images. For example, 
if the original images contain similar objects but different 
backgrounds, the cropped images will be almost the same, 
making it difficult to retrieve a desired image. 
Image retargeting is also an effective approach to 
emphasize an image’s feature. Setlur et al. [3] developed an 
image deformation technique that uses a non-photorealistic 
algorithm. The objective is to provide effective small images 
by preserving the ability to reconcile important image 
features, so the quality of the features is an important 
element. Foreground objects are first separated from the 
background, and then a new smaller background image is 
created. After the background area is reduced, the foreground 
objects are restored to the image. As a result, the blank areas 
of the image are removed, and an effective small image that 
has the same-sized features is created. However, this 
technique focuses on a whole clear object, so the 
deformation scale is quite limited. Feng et al. [4] also 
provided a deformation technique that is based on a fisheye 
view [5]. In a deformed image, a feature area can be enlarged 
by liner scaling and non-feature areas can be reduced by non-
linear scaling. However, this technique can only treat one 
feature area, so other features are not deformed and will be 
reduced if an image has multi-features. Most images contain 
multi-features (e.g., “two people” or “a person and a 
building”), so this technique has practical limitations. 
Moreover, these two approaches require enough time to 
calculate features, so they are impractical for small display 
devices that do not have enough calculation power. 
We have developed a technique that supports effective 
content viewing [16]. We think that the following two 
elements are important for image deformation. First, 
consideration should be given to the relationship between the 
feature and non-feature areas, as Feng proposed [4]. The 
feature area is important for finding an image because it 
becomes the trigger for browsing. The non-feature area is 
also important because it becomes an element for 
recognizing similar images. Second, multi-features should be 
supported, as Setlur proposed [3]. An image generally has 
more than one feature, so the technique should deform such 
features clearly. Based on our approach, the deformed image 
contains advantages outlined by Setlur [3] and Feng [4]. 
We also think that calculation speed is important for 
small devices. Our main purpose is to provide an effective 
thumbnail for image browsing in small devices, so efficient 
calculation to deform image features is important because the 
calculation power of a small device is quite limited. The 
calculation process is divided into finding regions that users 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

focus on and deforming these regions. As we have also 
proposed a rapid image segmentation method [7], we used 
this method to retrieve features rapidly. The deformation 
depends on the result of image segmentation, so we treated 
each part of an object (e.g., only a face area or part of a 
building) as a feature area. To deform multi-features, we 
used rubber sheet [10] and constrained fisheye [11] 
techniques, thus, the deformed image had clear multi-
features.  
As a result, the deformed image had bigger feature areas 
and smaller non-feature areas than normal images. Although 
the gradation of the image changed, the total amount of 
information contained in the image remained the same. 
These processes were rapidly and automatically performed, 
so complex user interaction was unnecessary. A unique 
thumbnail was provided for use with small devices on the 
basis of setting deformed images. 
The next section describes the image enforme overview. 
Section 3 describes the implementation of the system in 
detail. In Section 4, we mention the applications of our 
concept. In Section 5, we discuss advantages and limitations 
of our system. Section 6 concludes the paper. 
II. 
IMAGE ENFORME OVERVIEW 
Figure 1 shows example deformed images, of which the 
retargeted image (1) had the highest quality. With image 
retargeting, however, if the foreground object itself is big, 
the deformed features are of the same size as the input 
features. Thus, the deformed image is not effective for 
information retrieval. The fisheye warp image (2) had a clear 
contrast between feature and non-feature regions. With 
fisheye warping, however, if an image has multi-features, the 
system can only recognize one region as a deformation area. 
Thus, second or third features are no longer useful. 
An image produced using our deformation technique is 
shown in Fig. 1 (3). Using our approach, even part of an 
object can be a feature area, for example, if the image shows 
the face and body of a person and only the face area was 
deformed. Thus, in this example image users could identify 
the man’s face more clearly than they could with the image 
shown in (1). Also, our approach treated multi-features as 
deformation areas, so the multi-features were more deformed 
and clearer in (3) than in (2). As we described, the non-
feature areas were reduced and retained in the deformed 
image. Thus, users could easily understand what the subject 
was wearing as compared to the cropping method. Our 
objective is not to obtain excellent image quality but to 
produce clear features for effective thumbnails. 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
As shown in Fig. 2, there are two processes in the 
deformation step: extracting the feature areas from an image 
and deforming the feature areas. An image generally 
contains characteristic objects (faces, buildings, symbols, 
etc.); so the system retrieves these kinds of objects and then 
deforms them.   
 
Figure 1.  Example images deformed by image retargeting (1), fisheye 
warping (2), and image enforme (3). 
 
Figure 2.  Deformation step is grouped into two processes: extracting 
feature areas and deforming them. 
A. Face Detection 
We think that a human face in an image is the most 
important element, because the image itself would become 
strange if the system did not recognize a face as a feature, as 
shown in Figure 1 (2). Thus, a face detection process is first 
performed on an image. We use the method described by 
Sabe and Hidai [6] to detect the faces. 
B. Image Segmentation 
After face detection, the system starts an image 
segmentation process. For this we use our previously 
proposed image segmentation method [7], which is a 
practical and readily available method for segmenting 
images (Fig. 3 (top)). It segments images into various 
regions; examples of the segmentation are shown in Fig. 3. 
After 
image 
segmentation, 
the 
system 
deletes 
the 
background regions using the method proposed by Tanaka 
[9]. In this method, the system first calculates the border 
between a focused region and its neighboring regions, then 
determines the foreground using the relationship between the 
length of the border and the length of the contour of the 
focused region.  
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 3.  Extracting features: System retrieves feature areas through 
image segmentation (top). If the distance between regions is less than the 
threshold, regions are merged as a new region (bottom). 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Comparisons of deformations: Images are deformed by a 
normal fisheye (1) and our multi-fisheye method (2, 3). 
C. Attractiveness 
To identify features, we need to know which region is 
important. We used Kansei factors [8] to identify highly 
attractive regions. The Kansei factor for each area was based 
on simple parameters (e.g., color, size, and position). Based 
on the calculated Kansei factors, we can determine which 
regions of a picture will interest viewers. The system 
calculates this factor for each segmented area and then 
detects features by comparing each attractiveness value with 
an attractiveness threshold.  
D. Combining Regions 
If the distance between two regions is shorter than a 
distance threshold, the regions are combined into one. Figure 
3 (bottom) shows an example of combining two regions that 
exist within the threshold. If the distance between the two 
regions is longer than the threshold, the regions are treated 
separately. 
E. 
Deforming Feature Areas 
We used a multi-fisheye technique to treat multi-features 
[10, 11]. The image was initially mapped onto a mesh and 
then deformed by the mesh translation. The system sets 
multi-viewpoints for zooming on the basis of the desired 
features. The system calculates the inside of the feature areas 
linearly and the outside of them non-linearly.  
Figure 4 shows simple example of multi-deformation. In 
Figure 4 (1), there is no borderline to deform multi-features. 
In Figure 4 (2), the system sets a borderline between two 
features and deforms each feature. The system also treats 
features as a kind of node, so it can move the node position 
freely. In Figure 4 (3), the system first moves features 
merely by controlling the mesh’s UV coordinates (texture 
mapping parameter) and then deforms them by using the 
mesh’s XY coordinates (position parameter). By the fisheye 
method, the structure of the mesh is translated based on the 
relationships between the center of each feature area and a 
constant force that controls deformation size. We can thus 
control the size of a feature area by adjusting the force 
interactively. 
With our method, only the feature areas were deformed 
and were made larger and clearer than in normal images, 
while the non-feature areas became smaller than in normal 
images. Thus, feature and non-feature areas can be 
distinguished more clearly even if an image has multi-
features. In addition, the two processes used (identifying 
features and deforming them) were very simple and were 
based on almost processing speed for a particular image (256 
pixels x 256 pixels) and base mesh (200 polygons) using a 
normal PC. Since we can adjust the image resolution and 
mesh flexibly, we can adapt them to the capabilities of the 
target device. 
F. Results 
Two groups of thumbnails are shown in Fig. 5 (121 
images, each 256 x 256 pixels). The original images are 
shown on the left and the images deformed using the image 
enforme technique are shown on the right. Although the 
feature areas in the original images were found using image 
processing, the characteristic objects (human faces, buildings, 
symbols, etc.) were successfully identified and deformed. 
Since most of the original images contained such objects, the 
subjects on the right are much clearer. 
Figure 6 shows some examples of effective and 
ineffective deformations using the contents enforme 
technique. When the feature areas were small, such as those 
shown in (1) and (2), the objects were deformed more 
effectively. Although the object in (2) was initially difficult 
to identify due to its small size, the deformation clarified the 
image. When there were multiple small areas, such as those 
shown in (3) and (4), the deformation again clarified the 
objects in the image. Two groups of thumbnails are shown in 
Fig. 7. Those on the left are 16 normal thumbnails and those 
on the right are 25 deformed thumbnails. Although the 
deformed images are smaller, the feature areas are about the 
same size as in the originals. Two pairs of representative 
thumbnails are shown in Fig. 8. The objects in the feature 
areas, a building and two people, are virtually the same size 
as in the originals. Our technique thus produces images 
suitable for display on small devices. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

  
Figure 5.  Example thumbnails deformed using our technique. Original 
thumbnails are shown at left and deformed thumbnails are shown at right.  
 
Figure 6.  Comparisons of normal images (left) and images deformed 
using image enforme technique (right).  
 
 
Figure 7.  Comparison of thumbnails of two different sizes. Originals are 
shown at left and images deformed by using image-enforme technique are 
shown at right. 
 
Figure 8.  Representative thumbnails taken from images in Fig. 8. 
Although the deformed images are smaller, the feature areas are about the 
same size as in the originals. 
IV. 
APPLICATIONS 
A. 
Net-meeting 
We think our deformation technique should be useful for 
net-meeting systems by making contents more fun and 
interesting. Net-meeting systems operate using an input 
image from a camera. The “attendees” are linked by a 
network and communicate “face to face” (Fig. 9 (top-right)). 
Net-meeting system users communicate with other users 
through the camera image and their voice, so users’ facial 
expressions are one of the most important elements. 
However, conventional net-meeting systems focus on how to 
achieve an effective network model or how to share 
information, rather than on interaction techniques. With our 
deformation technique, net-meeting content could be 
enhanced. For example, our method recognizes a user’s face 
as a feature area and deforms it automatically to enlarge it 
(Fig. 9 (bottom, left to right)). After deforming a face area, 
the user’s face becomes slightly comical (big face and small 
body). Thus, the deformation can make net-meetings more 
fun and interesting. Moreover, as our system can treat multi-
features, more than two face areas are deformed in the same 
frame. This kind of net-meeting system is suitable for casual 
use cases, such as communicating with relatives and friends 
or playing video games. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Net-meeting enhancement with contents-enforme technique. In 
this case, a user’s face is deformed and made bigger. 
Also, user expressions are enhanced, which should 
improve communication and clarify who is speaking. In 
conventional meeting systems, all attendees’ faces are the 
same size, so voice is the only trigger to understand who is 
speaking. However, by integrating voice information with 
our deformation, users can clearly understand who the 
speaker is.  Thus, the deformation method is also useful for 
regular meetings such as business meetings. 
B. 
Video Contents 
The use of video contents, such as recorded TV programs 
and home videos, is becoming widespread in everyday life, 
and many people have to handle large amounts of contents. 
Thus, it is important for users to understand video contents 
quickly. Generally, to find out what the video contents are 
people have to play them one by one manually at high speed. 
In this case, deformation is an effective way to roughly 
determine the nature of the contents. There are two different 
types of deformation for treating video contents: frame 
deformation and timeline deformation. 
As video contents consist of a number of frames set on a 
time axis, they are based on two elements, the frame data and 
the time data. Both elements have feature areas, so our 
technique can be used for video deformation. Since the 
frame data is deformed in the same way as net-meeting data, 
we here describe only deformation of the time data. Our 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

technique can also treat the time data along with the content 
features and deform the video contents. We focus here on 
using it to view or compress the contents. The deformation is 
done by controlling the video play speed on the basis of the 
frame features and by simple image processing that 
combines non-linear and linear deformation. 
A simple example of timeline deformation is shown in 
Fig. 10. This example focuses on a soccer game. The actions 
are reflected by the differences between each frame and the 
average frame. The histogram at the top shows the 
differences between each frame and the average frame. The 
average frame is created first from all the frame data; each 
frame is then compared with the average one. In a soccer 
game, one camera catches the overall image of the field and 
many other cameras closer to the field catch more detailed 
images. The average frame is the one captured by the main 
camera. When an exciting moment occurs, such as a free 
kick or a chance for a goal, other cameras zoom in on the 
action. The frame data thus dynamically changes and these 
changes are obtained by comparing the frame caught by each 
camera with the average frame.  
The feature areas are set by controlling the threshold 
level (Fig. 11 (1)). The play speed is calculated by the 
fisheye algorithm. Thus, the play speed depends on the 
distance between an area and a feature area (Fig. 11 (2)). If 
an area is close to a feature area, the area is played at almost 
normal speed. On the other hand, if an area is far from a 
feature area, the area is played at quicker speed. The feature 
area contents and close areas to the feature are played at 
normal speed and the non-feature area contents are played 
quickly. As a result, the total playing time can be as little as 
one-fourth that of the original video (Fig. 11 (3)). 
V. 
DISCUSSION  
A demonstration of our contents enforme technique 
during a laboratory open house prompted many interesting 
reactions and comments from the visitors. Although this was 
not a scientific evaluation, it still provided useful input. 
A. 
Images Enforme and Thumbnails 
The visitors could generally identify the deformed 
images more clearly than the original images. Most visitors 
could understand the concept of providing partly deformed 
images for use as thumbnails and the value of retaining 
reduced non-feature areas. They quickly comprehended the 
efficiency of doing this by comparing normal and deformed 
thumbnails (Fig. 5) and different size thumbnails (Fig. 7). 
People often take several similar pictures with a digital 
camera, so the zoom capability is useful for browsing among 
such images. The visitors could easily identify the objects in 
the deformed image even when it was difficult to identify 
them in the normal image (Fig. 6). Also, since the features 
are produced through a combination of non-linear and linear 
deformation, most of the deformed images, especially the 
faces, looked quite funny. Thus, these deformed images are 
useful for comic creation [15].  
We think our approach offers two advantages for 
information retrieval compared to conventional approaches. 
One is that it supports memory-oriented browsing. Generally, 
users can remember the most impressive part of the pictures 
they took with a camera or created using paint tools. The 
elements often make a strong impression on them and 
become a trigger for browsing. Although our approach 
deforms only part of an object, we think it is particularly 
effective in this regard. The other advantage is that it 
supports more effective browsing among similar images 
because the total information is kept the same as for the 
original 
image 
by 
combining 
non-liner 
and 
liner 
deformations. Also, if two images are similar, the differences 
between the deformed images are greater than the differences 
between the original images. Thus, our approach can 
enhance differences between similar images.  
 
 
Figure 10.  Retrieving feature data. The histogram shows the difference 
between a frame and the average frame. 
 
Figure 11.  Deformation of video data: the video data is deformed along 
with the feature area. The feature areas are played at normal speed and the 
non-feature areas are played more quickly. 
Many visitors asked questions about the image enforme 
calculation and the error rate. Although they could easily 
imagine it working effectively in small devices, they 
imagined that much computational power would be needed 
to deform images. Actually, the image segmentation and 
fisheye calculation require only moderate computational 
power. However, since we can adjust the image resolution 
and mesh flexibly, we can adapt them to the capabilities of 
the target device. The error rate is related to the size of the 
feature area and is important because a deformed image is 
not effective if the original features cannot be retrieved 
precisely. Since our deformation is based on fisheye 
calculation, objects close to deformed features are also 
deformed. Moreover, both the feature and non-feature areas 
still reside in the deformed image without correct features. In 
contrast, with cropping, unrecognized feature areas are 
cropped. 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

  
Figure 12.  Deformed map: A simple example of a deformed map created 
by combining the contents-enforme technique with optical character 
recognition.  
Users also suggested many possible applications such as 
deformed CD jackets and maps. Thumbnails of deformed 
CD jackets could be used in applications for browsing the 
contents of music storage devices. Moreover, maps could be 
deformed to give prominence to areas of interest. A simple 
example of a deformed map is shown in Figure 12.  
B. 
Video Enforme 
Our concept for deformed video contents was well 
received. Many deformation techniques for video contents 
are available, especially in the product field [12]. Although 
they also focus on the feature areas, they create a digest by 
collecting only the feature areas. While users can quickly 
view the contents, they can understand only parts of the 
contents, so they may have trouble understanding the 
relationships between the whole story and the features. They 
are thus quite similar to image cropping in that the non-
feature areas are discarded. In contrast, our technique focuses 
on the non-feature areas and maintains the relationships 
between them and the feature areas. The contents in non-
feature areas are played more quickly, enabling users to view 
the entire video and understand the importance of the 
contents based on the playback speed. By adjusting the 
threshold level, a user can set the total playtime.  
It is difficult to define the features of TV programs by 
using one universal method because TV programs cover a 
very wide range of areas. We demonstrated different types of 
feature retrieving for three different types of TV programs. 
We can retrieve some information about a TV program 
through the Web or TV listings. Sound and face detection are 
again useful features for deformation. When an exciting 
moment occurs, such as the chance for a home run or a goal, 
the announcer’s voice generally becomes louder. Thus, a part 
where the voices are louder often contains an interesting or 
emotional scene, so voice-based deformation is promising 
for use with video contents. Moreover, scenes with the user’s 
favorite actor, i.e., someone previously registered to the 
system by the user, would play at normal speed. 
Our deformation focused on the time axis can be used 
effectively for sound deformation in, for example, a song. 
Most sound data contains refrain or chorus parts [13]. These 
parts often include the “hook” of a song and are a kind of 
feature area. It should be possible to deform sound data 
based on such features and control the playing speed 
accordingly. A sound digest should be an effective way to 
browse music available through the Web because it focuses 
on feature areas and plays more quickly than the original 
sound data. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We have described our contents enforme technique for 
deforming and reducing the features of contents (image and 
video). The technique uses image processing (face detection 
and image segmentation) and zooming (non-linear and 
linear). We showed some examples of our deformation and 
discussed its effectiveness. Since this technique has potential 
applications in various areas, including video content 
browsing and net-meeting systems, we mentioned these 
applications in addition to describing our concepts. 
We are planning to improve our technique by combining 
it with conventional information visualization systems, 
which focuses on the information layout. Combining our 
approach with VelvePpath [14] 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. H. Ling, B. B. Bederson, and D. W. Jacobs, Automatic Thumbnail 
Cropping and its Effectiveness, In Proceedings of ACM UIST 2003, 
pp. 95–104. 2003. 
[2] 
X. Fan, X. Xie, W. Ma, H. Zhang, and H. Zhou, Visual Attention 
Based Image Browsing on Mobile Devices, In Proceedings of ACM 
Multimedia 2003, pp. 148–155, 2003.  
[3] 
V. Setlur, S. Takagi, M. Gleicher, and B. Gooch, Automatic Image 
Retargeting, In Conference Abstracts and Applications of ACM 
Siggraph 2004, pp. 4, 2004. 
[4] 
F. Liu, and M. Gleicher, Automatic Image Retargeting with Fisheye 
View Warping, In Proceedings of ACM UIST 2005, pp. 153–162, 
2005. 
[5] 
G. W. Furnas, Generalized fisheye views. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Tran. on Computer-Human Interaction 1, 2, pp. 126–160, 1994. 
[6] 
K. Sabe and K. Hidai. Real-time Multi-view Face Detection using 
Pixel Difference Feature, Recognition, In proceedings of SSII 2004, 
2004.  
[7] 
R. Nock and F. Nielssen. Statistical Region Merging, Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) IEEE CS Press 4, 
pp. 557–560, 2004. 
[8] 
S. Tanaka, S. Inoue, M. Ishikawa, and S. Inoue. A Method for 
Extracting and Analyzing “Kansei” Factors from Pictures, In 
Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing 
1997, pp. 251–256, 1997. 
[9] 
S. Tanaka, A. Planete, and S. Inoue. A Foreground-Background 
Segmentation Based on Attractiveness. In Proceedings of CGIM 1998, 
pp. 191–194, 1998. 
[10] M. Sarkar, S. S. Snibble, O. J. Tversky, and S. P. Reiss. Stretching the 
Rubber Sheet: A Metaphor for Viewing Large Layouts on Small 
Screens, In Proceedings of ACM UIST 1993, pp. 81–91, 1993. 
[11] L. Bartram, A. Ho, J. Dill and F. Henigman. The Continuous Zoom: 
A Constrained Fisheye Technique for Viewing and Navigating Large 
Information, In Proceedings of ACM UIST 1995, pp. 207–215, 1995. 
[12] Iitokomi 
http://prius.hitachi.co.jp/go/prius/pc/2005sep/iitokomi/index.html 
[retrived: December, 2011] 
[13] M. Goto. SmartMusicKIOSK: Music Listening Station with Chorus-
Search Function, In Proceedings of ACM UIST 2003, pp. 31–40, 2003. 
[14] H. Tobita. VelvetPath: A Layout Design System with Sketch 
Manipulations, In Proceedings of EuroGraphics 2003 Short 
Presentation, pp. 137-144, 2003. 
[15] H. Tobita, K. Shibasaki. EnforManga: Interactive Comic Creation 
Using Drag-and-Drop and Deformation, In Proceedings of IEEE 
Multimedia 2009, pp. 269-274, 2009. 
[16] H. Tobita, and F. Nielsen, Image Enforme: Automatic Deformation of 
Image for Multi-features without Information Loss, Pervasive 2009 
(late breaking result), 2009. 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

