Picking Assistance System with MS-KINECT and Projection Mapping 
 
Yuki Takehara, Yoshitoshi Murata 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: g031m104@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp, y-murata@iwate-
pu.ac.jp 
Takamichi Yoshikawa 
Aioi Systems Co., Ltd 
Ota-ku, Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: yoshikawa@hello-aioi.com 
 
Abstract—Industry 4.0 is a well-regarded concept for 
automation in manufacturing. However, a shortage of high-
skilled workers has necessitated realistic solutions for 
establishing high productivity and quality. We propose an 
information and communications technology (ICT) picking 
assistance system to lower human errors for high quality. In this 
system, MS-KINECT detects whether a hand is inserted into the 
correct cell of a shelf to pick items and whether a hand is 
inserted into the correct box in a cart to put items in. The miss-
detection rate for wrong operation in the picking process is very 
low in an experimental evaluation, and we expect it to be very 
close to zero in a near future. We determine that the proposed 
picking error detection function would be useful for business. 
However, we must improve the delivery detection accuracy 
because of its higher detection error rate in an experimental 
evaluation. In this system, projection mapping technologies are 
used to indicate which cell items should be picked from, instead 
of using a lamp. The indicating system which uses a projector 
lowers the introduction cost than existing one when compared 
to the existing system using a lamp. We clarified that gray 
sandpaper is one of the best materials to serve as a tag for MS-
KINECT to recognize indicated colors and digits. 
Keywords-Smart factory; Industry 4.0; picking; KINECT; 
projection mapping. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The German government’s Industry 4.0 (ID4) initiative 
Industrie 4.0 has revolutionized Germany’s manufacturing 
industry [1], with goods in “smart factories” being moved, 
picked, and delivered automatically [2]. ID4 technologies are 
useful for establishing high productivity and quality in light of 
a shortage of high-skilled workers. If the latest manufacturing 
robotics and custom assembly lines were introduced in model 
factories for ID4, products would be automatically conveyed 
and assembled, and there would be fewer workers. However, 
it is impossible for most existing factories to replace all of 
their manufacturing lines with more advanced ones. Realistic 
solutions for establishing high productivity and quality in light 
of a shortage of high-skilled workers are as follows: 
(1) 
Developing 
and 
introducing 
information 
and 
communications technology (ICT) systems to assist a low-
skill worker to be close to a high-skill worker and lower 
the human error. 
(2) Replacing workers with robotics step by step. 
 
In this paper, we propose an ICT picking assistance system 
to lower human errors in the picking process. The picking 
process is when a worker picks items, such as assembly parts 
out of numbered cells on shelves and puts them into boxes. 
For example, in an automobile assembly factory, a worker 
takes different parts from cells of a shelf and puts them into 
assortment boxes corresponding to production orders. The 
parts in each cell are the same, and different items are stored 
in different cells. Assortment boxes are carried to workers on 
an assembly line. If a worker picks parts from an incorrect cell 
and the parts are subsequently assembled into a product, it 
would take too much time to detect the incorrect parts and 
exchange them with correct ones. In the worst case, an 
automobile assembled with incorrect parts could be shipped. 
These processes in which such mistakes can occur are widely 
used, not only in assembly factories, but also at delivery 
centers. 
Even though picking operations are monotonous, 
completely preventing mistakes is difficult because workers 
are human. Therefore, there are several kinds of picking 
assistance systems for decreasing incorrect pickings. Aioi 
Systems Co. Ltd. to which one of co-authors belongs provides 
the digital picking system “L-PICK,” which indicates the cells 
of a shelf and the number of items to pick from those cells by 
lighting a lamp mounted on each cell [3]. However, since L-
PICK does not have a function that detects incorrect picking, 
completely preventing it is impossible. Many companies 
request Aioi Systems Co. Ltd. to develop and provide the 
picking error detection system to lower recovery cost. Hence, 
we developed an operation error detection system for the 
picking process with MS-KINECT [4]. In this system, two 
sets of MS-KINECT v1 [5] trace a hand wearing a colored 
glove from diagonally backward and monitor whether the 
hand is inserted into a cell. Since this system uses a color 
tracing function to measure the position of a hand, it cannot 
be applied to a food material delivery service because of 
differences in food color.  
This time, we developed a new picking assistance system 
for the picking process. It uses a set of MS-KINECT v2 
mounted on the top of a shelf. Since our partner Aioi Systems 
Co. Ltd. has developed a new cell lighting technology that 
uses a projector [3], we used it in our new system. Our system 
recognizes the position of a cell lit by a projector and the 
number presented on a tag, detects the position of a cell into 
which a hand is inserted, counts the number of times a hand 
has been inserted into the cell, and compares them with 
recognized ones. In addition to picking functions, we have 
developed delivery functions. Our delivery assistance 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
function detects whether a hand that has items is inserted into 
the correct delivery box. 
The miss-detection rate for wrong operation in the 
picking process is very low in an experimental evaluation, 
and we expect it to be very close to zero in a near future. We 
determine that the proposed picking error detection function 
would be useful for business. However, we must improve the 
delivery detection accuracy because of its higher detection 
error rate in an experimental evaluation.  
After introducing related work in Section II, detection 
methods for incorrect operations are introduced in Section III. 
Detection technologies in which MS-KINECT are used are 
introduced in Section IV. Experiments and results are 
described in Section V. Conclusions and future work are 
described in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Human beings have excellent abilities. Workers in an 
automobile assembly factory can use their sense of vision and 
touch to detect subtle depressions or distortions that a 
computer system cannot. On the other hand, human beings 
sometimes make mistakes. Several kinds of assistance 
systems that decrease the number of mistakes have therefore 
been developed. Existing picking assistance systems are 
introduced in this section. 
A picking assistance system has some of the following 
four functions: 
(1) Indicating a cell of a shelf from which an item 
should be picked and the number of items that should be 
picked from that cell. 
(2) Detecting whether a worker has picked the correct 
number of items from the correct cell. 
(3) Indicating the box or cell of a tray in which picked 
items should be stored. 
(4) Detecting whether a worker has put items in the 
correct box or cell of a tray. 
 
There are several kinds of system for indicating cells. Aioi 
Systems Co. Ltd. provides the digital picking system “L-
PICK,” which indicates cells of a shelf and the number of 
items to pick from those cells by lighting a lamp mounted on 
each cell [3]. There are several systems in which a Head-Up 
Display (HUD) and augmented reality technology are used to 
assist picking operations. Schwerdtfeger used a semi-
transparent HUD and augmented reality technology enabling 
a worker to see an arrow or frame displayed in front of a cell 
of a shelf [6]. Baumann used a single-eye HUD, and a worker 
recognized a cell from which he or she would pick up items 
with guidance displayed on a mirror of the HUD [7][8]. 
Guocompared the HUD, cart-mounted display (CMD), Light, 
and Paper Pick List as picking assistance systems [9]. This 
system also provided the delivery assistance function. They 
concluded that the pick-by-HUD and pick-by-CMD were 
superior by all metrics than the current pick-by-paper and 
pick-by-light systems, but the differences between the HUD 
and CMD were not significant and did not show that a HUD 
was better than a CMD. However, experimental results 
should be different in other experimental conditions. In 
practical situations, the number of cells (in that paper they 
were called bins) is usually less than 12, and a worker can see 
a lighted lamp at a glance. And multiple lamps are not lighted 
simultaneously; a single lamp is lighted for each occurrence 
where an item is picked up. Therefore, the practical error 
rates and task times recorded in this study would produce 
better results than those in that study. Furthermore, it is not 
certain whether a worker should have a palm-size PC and 
wear a HUD for extended periods. In our research, most 
workers would not like to carry a barcode reader. 
As described above, systems indicating a cell by a lamp 
have been used in business. Likewise, indicating systems 
using an HUD have been developed in research.  
We consider a picking and delivery error detection 
method in the next section. 
III. 
PICKING AND DELIVERY ERROR DETECTION METHODS 
In this section, prospective methods for detecting whether 
items are picked from the correct cell and delivered to the 
correct box are introduced and evaluated. This time, in 
addition to detecting when items are picked from a cell, these 
methods determine when a hand is inserted into a cell, when 
a tag, such as the barcode attached to a cell is read, and when 
a picked item is dropped, and a new item is picked. The 
following are the prospective methods: 
(1) Reading a barcode attached on a cell with a barcode  
reader. 
(2) Reading a passive Radio Frequency (RF)-ID set on a 
cell with a RF-ID reader. 
(3) Reading an active RF-ID set on a cell with a RF-ID 
reader. 
(4) Detecting change of weight with a load sensor. 
(5) Detecting when a hand and/or arm is inserted into the 
correct cell with a photoelectric sensor. 
(6) Detecting when a hand and/or arm is inserted into the 
correct cell with a 3D camera, such as MS-KINECT. 
 
The above methods are narrowed down by the following 
evaluation criteria: 
(1) Additional cost to introduce a detection function. 
(2) Additional operations for a worker. 
(3) Detection accuracy. 
 
An evaluation of the picking error detection methods is 
shown in Table I. As for barcodes, the cost of attaching a 
barcode to each cell is cheap, and barcode readers are not 
expensive. However, carrying a barcode reader and scanning 
barcodes are cumbersome for workers.  
Passive RF-ID presents the same difficulties as barcodes. 
In addition to having to carry a RF-ID reader, the weak signal 
strength of passive RF-ID requires positioning the reader in 
close proximity to a RF-ID tag. 
As for active RF-ID, despite having to carry the reader, it 
does not need to be positioned in close proximity to a RF-ID 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
tag because the signal strength is strong. However, because 
of their strong signal strength, active RF-ID readers 
sometimes read RF-ID tags placed in other cells. 
As for load sensors, their detection accuracy is high. 
However, they are usually expensive, and each sensor must 
be wired to a PC. Introduction costs are therefore high. The 
same holds true for photoelectric sensors.  
3D cameras using MS-KINECT usually cost a few 
hundred dollars. While introduction costs would be high 
under our proposed system because one MS-KINECT set 
would be required per shelf, our system alleviates the need 
for workers to carry a reader, and the detection accuracy is 
high. We have determined that 3D cameras would be the best 
method overall for our picking assistance system. 
The following three prospective methods are considered 
for delivery: 
(1) Detecting change of weight with a load sensor. 
(2) Detecting whether a hand is inserted into the correct box 
with a photoelectric sensor. 
(3) Detecting whether a hand is inserted into the correct box 
with a 3D camera, such as MS-KINECT. 
 
The evaluation criteria for delivery is the same as those 
for picking. The evaluations for the above three methods are 
the same as those in Table I. We think a method using a 3D 
camera is the best for delivery when its accuracy is high. 
TABLE I. EVALUATION OF PICKING ERROR DETECTION METHODS 
Method 
A. Cost 
A. Operation 
Accuracy 
Barcode 
Low 
Big 
Middle 
Passive RF-ID 
Middle 
Big 
Low 
Active RF-ID 
Middle 
Little 
Middle 
Load 
High 
Little 
High 
Photoelectric 
High 
Little 
Middle 
3D camera 
Low 
Little 
This paper 
IV. 
DETECTION TECHNOLOGY 
In this section, a detection technology by which a worker 
picks items from a cell, delivers them to a box,  and a reading 
technology that detects the number on a tag lit by a projector 
are introduced. 
A. Detection technology for picking items from the correct 
cell 
As described in the previous section, a technology that 
detects whether a worker picks items from an indicated cell 
is needed. Since detecting whether a worker is picking items 
from a cell is difficult, we decided to focus on detecting when 
a hand is inserted into a cell and counting the number of times 
a hand is inserted into an indicated cell instead of detecting 
and counting hands picking items from an indicated cell. The 
motion monitoring function in MS-KINECT is popularly 
used to estimate position of joints on the body. However, the 
MS-KINECT must be set in front of the body between 0.5 – 
5 m. It is impossible to set the MS-KINECT in front of a 
worker in a factory or delivery center. Therefore, Open-CV 
color tracing technologies [10] were used to trace hands in 
our previous system. And, since two MS-KINECT sets were 
needed for each shelf, the system was not economical. 
Therefore, we decided not to use the color tracing technology 
and opted to detect a hand inserted into a cell using a MS-
KINECT set. 
From past experiments we have determined that the best 
mount position for a MS-KINECT to detect whether a hand 
enters a cell is just above the surface of a shelf aperture. The 
MS-KINECT 3D camera searches for a hand and arm just 
over the surface of a shelf aperture as shown in Fig. 1. The 
MS-KINECT must be set at a position in which its 3D camera 
can observe the entire shelf aperture. This system detects 
whether a hand is inserted by changing the depth in front of 
a cell. When a hand and/or arm is inserted into a cell, the 
depth in such a view is changed from Lf to Lh. A change in 
depth Lh corresponds to the length between the MS-KINECT 
and the hand and/or arm. Its position is within the cell 
aperture in which the hand and/or arm is inserted. 
The coordinates of the four corners of each cell are pre-
set before estimating the cell number. In Fig. 1, the 
coordinates of 16 corners are pre-set. The number of the cell 
in which a hand is inserted is estimated by comparison 
between a coordinate of the detected hand and the coordinates 
of four corners for each cell ○
n . 
 
Figure 1. Mounting position of MS-KINECT and searching zone 
B. Lighting a tag and number 
Since our partner AIOI System Co. Ltd. has developed 
the new lighting method into which the projection mapping 
technology is used to indicate a picking cell, our experimental 
system uses this projection mapping technology. A very short 
focal projector mounted near the MS-KINECT lights a tag 
attached to a cell and projects a digit on it to indicate the cell 
and the number of items to be removed as shown in Fig. 2.  
A computer knows which tag of a cell is lit, so there is no 
need for it to detect which tag is lit with the MS-KINECT. In 
this case, the MS-KINECT is connected to a computer. 
However, we plan to develop a picking robot that picks items 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
up and puts them into an indicated box in the near future. 
Since the robot must detect which tag is lit and read a digit 
on it, we developed a technology that realizes the above 
functions with the MS- KINECT. In this system, the font used 
for digits is a seven-segment font as shown on the right side 
of Fig. 2. Our system recognizes which kind of number is 
presented by detecting which segments are white. 
 
Figure 2. Layout of projector and cells 
C. Detection technology for delivering items 
We imagine a delivery cart as shown in Fig. 3. A MS-
KINECT is mounted to search the surface of a mass of boxes. 
The search zone is just above the mass of boxes. When a 
hand/arm or item is inserted into a box, the PC on this cart 
detects whether a hand/arm or item is inserted into the box by 
the change in depth.  
The number of the box that a hand is inserted into is 
estimated to compare it with a coordinate of the detected hand 
and the coordinates of four corners for each box, the same as 
for a cell in Section IV-A. 
 
 
Figure 3. Image of delivery cart 
 
V. 
EXPERIMENT 
We developed an experimental shelf as shown in Fig. 4. 
An MS-KINECT is mounted 65.5 cm away from the shelf. 
The shelf consists of 3 x 3 cells. The size of the shelf is 67.5 
x 64.5 cm, and the size of each cell is 22.5 x 21.5 cm. The 
length between the floor and the bottom of the shelf is 98 cm. 
We measured the error rates for detecting a hand inserted into 
a cell and whether the MS-KINECT can recognize a lit tag 
and the number on it using the experimental shelf.  
Before estimation, the coordinates of the corners of each 
cell are pre-set using the pre-set windows shown in Fig. 5. 
The corner number is selected with the corner number button. 
The coordinates of each corner are entered by clicking a 
corner or inputting digits. The red grid of the shelf aperture is 
generated by clicking the grid button. 
 
Figure 4. Experimental shelf 
 
 
Figure 5. Pre-set window 
A. Detection error rate for picking operation 
The detection error rate for picking operation would 
change depending on the width D of the searching zone, the 
searching period, the cell position, and the threshold width to 
detect a hand and/or arm. We measured the detection error 
rate under conditions in which the width D of the searching 
zone is 1 cm / 3cm / 5 cm / 10 cm, the searching period is 500 
msec. / 1000 msec., and the threshold width for detecting a 
hand and/or arm is 1 cm. Beer cans were used as picking 
items. The number of participants was ten. Each participant 
picks an item from each cell five times. The average detection 
error rates of every cell vs. the width of searching zone D are 
1 cm / 3cm / 5 cm / 10 cm as shown in Fig. 6. The parameter 
of this figure is the searching period. The detection error rate 
in 500 msec. is lower than that in 1000 msec. in each the 
searching width D. The average error rate for each cell in 
which the searching period is 500 msec. is shown in Table II. 
The error rate increases in accordance with an increase in 
width D. This is because a participant tends to insert his/her 
hand into a cell through the searching zone in front of other 
cells. 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 6. Average detection error rates for every cell  
TABLE II. AVERAGE DETECTION ERROR RATES (%) FOR EACH CELL 
 
 
The most serious problem in the picking error detection 
system is that the system recognizes wrong operations to be 
fair. We measured the miss-detection rate for wrong 
operation. In this experiment, a correct cell is No. 5. The 
number of participants is ten. Each participant picks an item 
from cells around the No. 5 cell five times. The detection rate 
for wrong operations to be wrong, detection rate for wrong 
operation to be fair and practical detected wrong operations 
are shown in Table III. Average detection rate for wrong 
operations to be wrong is 95.7 %. And, the proposed system 
did not recognize wrong operations to be fair, completely 
detected wrong operations.  
TABLE III. MISS-DETECTION RATE FOR WRONG OPERATIONS 
 
However, the system recognized that a participant picked 
an item from the No. 6 cell, even though he picked it from the 
No. 3 cell. The reason of this error detection is that the system 
detects an item in front and within 1 cm from the No. 6 cell 
after picking from the No. 3 cell. We think this miss-detection 
rate is low, but not enough. This reason would cause the 
detection for wrong operation to be fair. We plan to constitute 
a few cm non-detection area around each cell, and guard time 
not to detect after detecting an item to be picked from a cell. 
We think these constitutions would lower the detection rate 
for wrong operation to be fair exceedingly close to zero. 
B. Recognition of a lit tag and the number on it 
We noticed that the color through the video camera of the 
MS-KINECT was very different from the color we 
recognized and that the color through the video camera of the 
MS-KINECT changed in accordance with the color and luster 
of a tag. Example colors on a sheet of white paper, black 
paper, and gray sandpaper are shown in Fig. 7. The 
differences between the colors as displayed on a smartphone 
and those as displayed on the MS-KINECT are shown in Fig. 
8. The colors displayed on a smartphone are almost equal to 
those seen with the naked eye. We selected red, green, and 
blue as the colors projected on a tag. The color characteristics 
of the MS- KINECT are very different from those of a 
smartphone. As a result, gray sandpaper is the best material 
for representing original colors. Our system can read every 
number perfectly on a red, green, or blue background. When 
implementing systems for clients, these three colors are 
usable.  
 
 
Figure 7. Colors on tags as displayed on video camera of MS-KINECT 
 
 
Figure 8. Colors as displayed on smartphone and MS-KINECT 
C. Delivery error rate 
We measured the delivery error rate using six boxes on a 
table as shown in Fig. 9 instead of using a delivery cart. The 
MS-KINECT is placed on another table. It was placed 60 cm 
from the top of the boxes. From the results of Experiment A, 
we decided that the searching period is 500 msec. and that the 
width of the search zone is 1 cm.  
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Since we noticed that our system easily detected multiple 
boxes, we constituted a 5 cm wide non-detection area on 
boxes that are on the near side of a worker, as shown in Fig. 
9. When the depth far from the boxes was not fixed, the 
detection accuracy was poor and unstable. We set the screen 
low to fix the maximum depth from the MS-KINECT. The 
average error rate for each box is shown in Table IV. The 
number of participants was five, the same as in the picking 
experiment. Each participant puts an item into each box five 
times. Overall, the error rate, especially the double count rate, 
is high.  
In some cases, a worker might throw an item into a box, 
so we also measured the delivery error rate when items were 
thrown into a box. However, our system could not detect a 
thrown item because the searching period of 500 msec. was 
longer than the necessary period for detecting an item. 
 
 
Figure 9. Experimental system for measuring delivery error rate 
TABLE IV. AVERAGE DELIVERY ERROR RATES (%) FOR EACH BOX 
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A realistic solution for establishing high productivity and 
quality for the picking process in light of a shortage of high-
skilled workers is to introduce a picking assistance system 
that detects incorrect operations by workers. We introduced 
a picking and delivery assistance system in which an MS-
KINECT detects whether a hand is inserted into the correct 
cell of a shelf to pick items and whether a hand is inserted 
into the correct box on a cart to put items in.  
The miss-detection rate for wrong operation is very low 
in this system, and it is possible to be exceedingly close to 
zero in a near future. We determine that the proposed picking 
error detection function would be useful for business. The 
other hand, we must improve the delivery detection accuracy. 
We try to adopt the MS-KINECT motion monitoring function 
to estimate the position of hand.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMNT 
Thanks to Kazuhiro Yoshida for help in performing this 
research. This project is partially supported with the 
competitive research funding by Iwate Prefectural University. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Industrie 4.0;  
http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Dossier/industrie-40.html, 
[retrieved: February, 2018]. 
[2] What is a smart factory? ; 
http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/FAQ/Industrie-4-0/faq-
industrie-4-0-03.html, [retrieved: February, 2018]. 
[3] AIOI SYSTEMS Co., LTD Digital Picking System Products 
Introduction; 
 
https://www.hello-aioi.com/en/product/product-list/, [retrieved: 
February, 2018]. 
[4] Y. Uda, K. Yoshida, and Y. Murata, “Operation Error Detection 
System in Picking Processes by Camera Depth Sensors,” IPSJ, 
Transaction of Consumer Device and Service, Vol.6 No.1, pp. 
1-12,  2016, [written in Japanese]. 
[5] Meet Kinect for Windows;  
https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/kinect, 
[retrieved: February, 2018]. 
[6] B. Schwerdtfeger, and G. Klinker, “Supporting order picking 
with augmented reality,” Proceedings of 7th IEEE/ACM 
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pp. 
91–94, 2008. 
[7] H. Iben, H. Baumann, C. Ruthenbeck, and T. Klug, “Visual 
based picking supported by context awareness: Comparing 
picking performance using paper-based lists versus list 
presented on a head mounted display with contextual support,” 
Proceedings of 11th International Conference on Multimodal 
Interfaces, pp. 281–288, 2009. 
[8] H. Baumann, T. Starner, H. Iben, and P. Zschaler, "Evaluation 
of graphical user-interfaces for order picking using head-
mounted 
displays," 
Proceedings 
of 
13th 
International 
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, pp. 377–384, 2011. 
[9] A. Guo et al., “A comparison of order picking assisted by head-
up display (HUD), cart-mounted display (CMD), light, and 
paper pick list, “Proceedings of 2014 ACM International 
Symposium on Wearable Computers, pp. 71–78, 2014. 
[10] Open-CV; https://opencv.org/, 
 [retrieved: February, 2018].
 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

