Human Operator Perspective to Autonomic Network Management  
 
Marja Liinasuo, Iina Aaltonen, Hannu Karvonen  
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Espoo, Finland 
e-mail: marja.liinasuo@vtt.fi, iina.aaltonen@vtt.fi, 
hannu.karvonen@vtt.fi 
Beatriz Fuentes, Alfonso Castro 
Network Oriented Automation Department 
Telefónica I+D 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: fuentes@tid.es, acast@tid.es 
 
 
Abstract -  Autonomic  Communications  is  a  promising  
approach for the management of future networks, based on 
providing self-management and other self-x capabilities to the 
network elements. Network Governance approach aims to 
develop new methods for operators to efficiently manage this 
intelligent 
infrastructure, 
ensuring 
human-to-network 
communication. This paper presents an interview-based 
analysis of the expertise of human network operators in their 
network management activity and the derived requirements 
for the governance of a self-managed network from a human 
point of view. The requirements cover the aspects of trust, 
division of labor between human operators and self-x 
functionalities, self-x design and human-to-network interface.  
Keywords - autonomic networks; self-x; Network Governance; 
human operators; human factors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Future computation, storage, and communication services 
will be highly dynamic and ubiquitous: an already increasing 
number of heterogeneous devices will be used from different 
places to access a myriad of very different services and/or 
applications. Users’ devices, smart objects, machines, 
platforms, and the surrounding space will be interconnected 
as a decentralized tree of resources, conforming dynamic 
networks of networks. The complexity of managing such a 
network presents a challenge for telecom operators. 
Current operation support paradigms cannot effectively 
manage this situation; rather a new reliable, dynamic, and 
secured communication infrastructure with highly distributed 
capabilities is needed. The autonomic network approach 
envisions meeting these features, helping network operators 
to achieve the desired levels of dynamicity, efficiency, and 
scalability to manage current and future networks. 
Autonomic computing was first introduced by Paul Horn 
as a solution to the increasing complexity in the management 
of IT systems [1]. The suggestion was to design and build 
future systems and infrastructures capable of running 
themselves and adjusting to varying circumstances by taking 
the massively complex systems of the human body as a 
model. In fact, the name “autonomic” was derived from the 
human autonomous system. This proposal was well accepted 
by the industrial and scientific community, and it was 
extended to other fields. Then, Autonomic Communications 
was born with the objective of providing autonomic behavior 
to network infrastructures [2][3]. The terms self-monitoring, 
self-diagnosis, self-configuration, self-healing, and in general 
self-x were introduced to denote the new capabilities of the 
network nodes to manage themselves without external 
intervention. 
UniverSelf [4] is an EU-funded FP7 project with the aims 
of overcoming the growing management complexity of 
future networking systems and reducing the barriers that 
complexity and ossification pose to further growth. The 
project aims at consolidating autonomic methods of the 
future 
Internet 
into 
a 
novel 
Unified 
Management 
Framework. It also includes the design of a privileged, 
powerful and evolved human-to-network interface that will 
be used by the human operator for expressing their business 
goals and requests, thus shifting from network management 
to network governance. Network Governance approach is 
meant to provide a mechanism for the operator to adjust the 
features of the demanded service/infrastructure using a high 
level language [5]. These high level directives must be 
translated into low level policy rules that can be enforceable 
to control the behavior of the autonomous agents.  
Since the new management or government framework is 
intended to be used by human network operators (HNOs), it 
is of utmost importance to produce solutions that are usable 
by human users and meaningful in the context of their work. 
Presently, it is not known how autonomic functionalities 
should be designed in order to be functional from the human 
operator’s viewpoint. Thus, it is important to learn what the 
characteristics of the HNO work are from the perspective of 
these professionals and what the specific demands are that 
the work sets on human performance. Also the conceptions 
regarding autonomic tools should be elaborated. For this 
purpose, as part of the UniverSelf project, we have carried 
out a set of interviews to human operators of two European 
telecom companies. This paper describes the results of these 
interviews. In particular, HNOs’ views of the network 
characteristics and network management, their knowledge on 
autonomic functionalities, and the impacts (both benefits and 
risks) they foresee after the potential deployment of a self-
managed network are focused on. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents a deeper elaboration on the objectives of this work.  
Section III details the methods utilized in the interviews and 
the analysis of the answers. Section IV presents the results of 
this analysis, which are further refined in the discussion 
included in Section V. This section presents the requirements 
that were extracted from the interviews and grouped into 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

requirements on network maintenance and requirements on 
self-x functionalities. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper 
by summarizing the outcomes of this work and anticipating 
future work. 
II. 
OBJECTIVE 
The tremendous evolution of network technologies in 
terms  of  their  design,  capabilities,  and  capacities  has  not  
been accompanied by advancements of the same magnitude 
in network management solutions [6]. Therefore, network 
management depends currently on the abilities of HNOs, and 
it is still a widely unknown area with very little knowledge 
from the human network operators’ perspective. The 
willingness of HNOs to accept the new autonomic networks 
may constitute one bottleneck in the transitional period from 
human-centered to autonomically manageable networks. In 
this direction, when a new technological solution such as a 
self-managing network becomes ready to be deployed in 
large scale, the role of the HNOs, the demands of their work 
and other possibly affecting factors should be addressed in 
order to guarantee a smooth transition phase from 
deployment to flexible and efficient every-day use. 
An analysis showed that the strategy to manage network 
operability depends on the demands and possibilities of the 
situation that vary in the continuums of options available for 
network operations and the instability of the situation [7]. In 
this study, however, the key personnel that had access to 
both strategic and operational level was found to be middle 
level professionals. Regarding network operation, it has been 
claimed that the cause of a major failure in system operation 
is not an accident but a conscious choice that proves wrong 
in  that  specific  situation  [8].  This  indicates  that  when  
studying network operation in an operational level, the whole 
working system must be taken into account. In Finland, a 
study has been performed about the dependability of IP 
networks, including also human factors research related to 
the meaning of human error in the work of a HNO [9][10]. It 
was found out, among other things, that the error resulting 
from the work of HNO may originate from a lapse or typo 
but may also be a side effect of the whole working system 
that has deficiencies in its functioning. 
Our approach in the present study was to seek 
information by enquiring into the work of technical experts 
that are currently operating the network in different 
companies. The main objective was to get information on the 
work of the HNO and additionally on user acceptance, i.e., 
the factors that effect and ease the deployment of autonomic 
network solutions from the HNO point of view. The aim was 
to get information directly from the professionals who 
operate the network, avoiding managerial levels. This 
practical approach provided information about the insight of 
the user perspective on network operation. In short, 
interviews were double-faced: on one hand, they tried to get 
a picture of the general network management as perceived by 
a  HNO;  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  a  set  of  questions  
aiming 
to 
extract 
their 
conceptions 
about 
self-x 
functionalities. 
The objective of this document is to present the results, 
analysis process, and conclusion of the HNOs’ interviews. 
From this analysis, general requirements on network 
automation can be extracted. These requirements can be used 
for guiding the design and implementation of the governance 
of future networks. 
III. 
METHODS 
The background approach of the interviews was based on 
Core-Task Analysis method [11]. The aim of Core-Task 
Analysis is to identify the core task of a specific work. Core 
task is the main result-oriented content of the work that can 
be derived by analyzing the objective of work and the 
demands that the objective lays on workers both in general 
and in specific situations.  
Interviews 
were 
conducted 
in 
telecommunication 
companies participating in the UniverSelf project. The 
interviews focused on the perspective of a HNO performing 
network monitoring or some other corresponding work in the 
same level, lower than the one of a manager, so that the 
characteristics of the network as a target of work would 
become highlighted.  
Interviews were conducted anonymously in the native 
language of the interviewee. 
A. Data gathering 
All  but  one  of  the  interviews  were  performed  in  a  
meeting room at the company premises where only the 
interviewer and interviewee were present. One interview was 
performed over telephone.  
The interview comprised of 40 questions. The questions 
were built on two main themes: a) work characteristics of a 
HNO as conceived by the human operator and b) opinions of 
the manageability of self-x functionalities. Interviews were 
conducted during April and May 2011. Results of 
17 interviews, acquired from two European telecom 
companies, are presented. The duration of interviews ranged 
from 10 minutes to 1 hour 40 minutes, which is reflected in 
the variety of quality in the interview data. 
All interviews were audio recorded. The recordings were 
later on transcribed and translated into English for analysis 
purposes, resulting in about 180 pages of interview material. 
B. Analysis 
The performed analysis was qualitative. As the 
interviewees did not form a representative or statistically 
significant sample of all HNOs, all replies are important. 
Thus, even if an opinion expressed by several interviewees 
was regarded as more general and was self-evidently taken 
into account, single replies may have acquired similar weight 
in the analysis process if the expressed conception included a 
clearly expressed idea.  
The analysis took place in several phases. First, the 
transcribed interviews were grouped according to interview 
questions. Similarly, questions that needed to be scrutinized 
together as well as questions that produced similar replies 
were grouped together. Then, the core idea or main message 
in each interview reply was extracted. These ideas or 
messages are here called notions. In practice, a notion is 
usually a shortened version of the expressed opinion (reply). 
In some cases, interviewee presented more than one notion 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

in the reply; then, the notions within the reply were 
categorized in more than one category. Thereafter, 
similarities among the notions were sought for. Investigating 
iteratively the notions and the possible similarities among 
them, similarities between notions became gradually more 
apparent and notion categories could be created. All the 
notions belonging to the same category have about the same 
core message from the perspective of that category.  
When extracting the results from the analysis, several 
information sources, based on interview data, were 
simultaneously available and used: 
x 
the classified notion categories and the notions 
themselves, collected question-wise 
x 
the original replies for each question, collected 
question-wise 
x 
the 
replies 
by each 
interviewee, 
collected 
interviewee-wise. 
The notion categories were important in acquiring an 
overview of the replies. This information source was the 
most important due to the amount of information. Original 
replies were important if the validity of some specific reply 
had to be checked. The interviewee-wise information is 
important to know if some deviant or specific opinion is 
presented; for instance, if the interviewee had some specific 
occupation, (s)he may have produced replies different from 
other interviewees’ replies due to this deviant working 
experience. When reporting the results, mainly notions and 
notion categories are used.  
The interview data were classified according to general 
topics: (1) background information related to the work of the 
interviewees, (2) network characteristics as perceived by 
human operator, (3) interviewees’ work with the network, 
and (4) conceptions of self-x functionalities. 
Background information (above, class 1) was used for 
validating the results so that it is known what is the source of 
the opinions and information gathered in the interviews.  
Network characteristics and interviewees’ work with 
network (above, classes 2 and 3) already tell what the work 
demands and difficulties are in network operation. Thus, 
even if the interviewees may not be expressive in the 
answers related to self-x functionalities, the demands the 
network sets for the human operator were expressed here. 
Work demands and difficulties revealed in these replies can 
be used for inferring in what way self-x could support 
network maintenance. 
Opinions of self-x functionalities (above, class 4) tell 
directly how human operators assume the self-x could 
support network maintenance and what should be avoided 
when designing them.  
Finally, the conceptions classified as above were 
interpreted in the light of the requirements the domain sets to 
the work and tools of HNO from the two perspectives: a) 
requirements on network maintenance, and b) requirements 
on qualities of the self-x functionalities. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
This section summarizes the result of the analysis of the 
interviews. Requirements were extracted on two main 
topics: requirements on network maintenance and on self-x 
functionalities. 
A. Requirements on network maintenance 
The requirements the network maintenance sets for 
HNOs are based on the uncertainty and complexity of 
network for many reasons: (i) technically (30 notions), a 
network is affected by many factors that are hard to control 
(especially complexity due to various types of equipment 
and the variety of manufacturers). Obsolete, but functional 
systems create a challenge in themselves as their use 
prevents the transformation of the network to become more 
homogeneous and easier to maintain. Furthermore, (ii) a 
network is never perceived directly but through supervision 
mechanisms that also may fail or provide insufficient 
information that cannot be trusted (5 notions). Also, (iii) 
human work is not always perfect (27 notions): information 
is not always delivered in time, it may not have been 
registered in the system that is used in network maintenance, 
and there might be hurry due to customer needs. Finally, (iv) 
weather (5 notions) and physical problems (accidental cable 
cuts and the stealing of cables; 6 notions) cause trouble that 
are hard to control. 
The criterion of the good status of network is clear and 
strict. Either directly or indirectly (via alarms sent by the 
supervisory system) the availability and functioning of the 
network as perceived by the end user or customer service 
was the most usual way to evaluate the seriousness of a 
network problem (15 notions, opposed to 6 notions where 
the operators only referred to their own work). Depending on 
the Service Level Agreement (SLA), problem must be solved 
within a certain period. 
Network maintenance requires mastering a large set of 
knowledge 
related 
to 
the 
various 
equipment 
and 
manufacturers and the ability to react rapidly to network 
breakdowns, knowing that each breakdown could be solved 
in a different manner from the previous one. HNOs cannot 
rely on the information acquired earlier but must update their 
knowledge constantly in order to be able to maintain the 
network functional. The demands of acquiring enough 
information and of maintaining it during rapidly changing 
situations are hard. The piece of information acquired earlier 
may be unavailable as the next time it is needed is several 
months later.  
Also cooperation and communication are needed. 
Network is in a constant change and information of these 
changes should be constantly updated so that everybody has 
the essential information available. Additionally, cooperation 
is an essential part of work for most HNOs; for some, 
cooperation is required to get help and support when needed 
(6 notions) and for others, cooperation is part of normal work 
procedures (11 notions). 
B. Requirements on self-x functionalities 
The design of the self-x functionality from the 
perspective of a HNO depends on what the role of this 
functionality has relative to the tasks that the human 
operators have on their responsibility. The interviewees, 
HNOs, did not have a clear vision what the options in this 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

kind of situation could be, nor were they asked to further 
elaborate a vision of such a possible future. In many cases, 
HNOs seemed to describe present functionalities that are 
automatic instead of elaborating the features of future 
autonomic functionalities. Some clues can be found from the 
replies. 
First, interviewees were 
aware that 
self-x 
functionalities could reduce the amount of personnel needed 
(22 notions). Second, some opinions were presented 
according to which the work of the human operator could 
become easier or that the deployment of self-x results in the 
possibility for the HNO to do some other, but more 
productive work (18 notions). Third, self-x could perform 
better (quicker etc.) than presently (12 notions). 
In the following, the general requirements are described, 
drawn on the information gathered from the interviews. 
1) Trust 
The trust of the human operator to self-x can be easily 
destroyed 
by erroneous 
functioning 
of the 
self-x 
functionality in question. Possibly, any or only a very few 
mistakes is sufficient to ruin trust and willingness to use the 
self-x functionality (16 notions). Furthermore, if the 
functionality is of the kind that diminishes the need of human 
personnel, it is probably more intolerable for the rest of 
personnel to work with such functionality. 
The interviewed HNOs stated that demanding tasks – 
which require human ingenuity as well as solving new and 
unexpected problems – cannot be performed autonomically 
(9 notions). The self-x functionalities in this context should 
work without problems that require human intervention: such 
problems would probably pose the greatest challenge in 
network maintenance from the human operator point of 
view. 
Based on the perceived benefits of self-x expressed in the 
interviews, especially performance speed (7 notions), smaller 
amount of network breakdowns (3 notions), and stability of 
performance (10 notions) are characteristics that are valued 
among HNOs. In addition, the possibility to dedicate routine 
tasks to self-x functionalities was found an advantage (15 
notions). If these qualities can be provided and they function 
practically without faults, the self-x could be perceived as 
valuable and needed by HNOs maintaining the network. 
2) The need of human control 
In the interviews, it was repeatedly stated that the human 
operator must have some control over the self-x 
functionalities: the lack of control was perceived as the 
greatest danger in autonomic functionalities (8 notions). 
Fault and failure of the autonomic functionality are important 
to know especially if the HNO needs to act in order to solve 
the problem. HNOs must also have enough information of 
the autonomic process so that they can intervene manually in 
a meaningful way, for instance to perform the task at least 
partly in lieu of the self-x if needed. If the failure of the 
self-x causes trouble for network maintenance, amending 
measures should be easily performable. In general, human 
control is needed for knowing that the functionalities are 
working; the urgency to get this status information and the 
need to control or maintain further the self-x functionalities 
depends on the nature of the task in question.  
3) Interface between HNO and self-x 
The performance of self-x functionalities should be 
visible to the human operator when the self-x performance is 
somehow connected to the tasks of the human operator. 
HNOs need information of the functioning of the self-x in a 
general level. The work of the human operator requires 
sometimes rapid reactions; it is preferable to deliver clearly 
and briefly only the most important information, and, when 
needed, the human operator should be able to find more 
information about the matter relevant in the context in 
question.  
The interface should include information that enables the 
evaluation of the performance of the self-x functionality so 
that it becomes evident whether it is functional or not.  If 
possible, the system should deliver information that supports 
the HNOs in fixing the problem. In some cases it might even 
be necessary for the HNO to do manually the work or part of 
the work that was in the responsibility of the self-x. Last but 
not least, autonomic system should not overload the human 
user with recurring information. All in all, opinions of the 
good interface qualities were scarce and scattered. 
4) Designing self-x functionalities 
The domain of telecommunication seems to be complex 
and hard to control. On one hand, operators are somewhat 
used to the fact that the tools they are using are not perfect at 
least in the beginning of their deployment. On the other 
hand, operators should not be burdened by poorly 
functioning tools as the work is quite straining already and 
because 
weaknesses 
in 
network 
maintenance 
are 
immediately reflected in the quality of services and customer 
satisfaction, vital for the telecom companies. Before taking a 
new functionality into use, it should be thoroughly verified 
that the functionality works; redesign might be needed later 
if changes affecting this specific self-x are made in the 
network. 
5) Human tasks 
Tasks that are obviously left for humans are all physical 
tasks: implementing new cables and equipment, organizing 
cooperation among humans when a cable is cut or equipment 
must be replaced, and each time something unexpected or 
totally new is introduced to the network. Some human 
control must also be maintained to supervise the functioning 
of the network and of the self-x. What are the tasks that can 
be totally or mainly relied on self-x functionalities and when 
and to what extent self-x functionalities may require human 
involvement are questions that perhaps should be solved by 
each telecom company, depending on the kind of supervising 
tools and network equipment they have. Furthermore, the 
quality of the task determines the party performing the task; 
for instance, tasks requiring decision making in a highly 
specific situation without predefined preferences might best 
be left for humans whereas those requiring rapid and 
complex functioning that can be performed with existing 
definitions can be left for autonomic functionalities. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper has presented the methods, analysis, and 
results of the interviews of HNOs carried out in UniverSelf 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

project. The interviews have shown that network operators 
define the network as complex, uncertain, and hard to 
control. Therefore, specific knowledge is needed to handle 
the issues that may appear. An autonomic network aiming to 
be deployed should embed this knowledge in order to 
success in its self-managed activity. 
The analysis has also highlighted that human operators 
see self-x functionalities as supporting their current work; 
not necessarily replacing them or performing independently.  
Even when some of the interviewees expressed their fears 
about personnel reduction in case autonomic functionalities 
are deployed into the network, the majority expressed a 
positive opinion about the introduction of self-x features. In 
this direction, the HNOs thought that their role might change 
from current active monitoring and problem solving to an 
expert performing higher level tasks and solving only highly 
complex or unexpected problems, while routine tasks are left 
to the autonomic network. On the other hand, it also became 
evident that there was no deep understanding of the nature of 
self-x functionalities among HNOs: The conception of 
autonomic functionalities was often mixed with the 
automatic functionalities that are presently used in telecom 
companies. 
The conceptions of human operators on the impact of 
self-x functionalities – loss of work, division of difficult 
tasks to autonomic functionalities, and the emerging 
possibility to do more productive work themselves as 
autonomic functionalities take over routine tasks – can be 
translated into a vision in which there are three options for 
the shared work between HNO and self-x (see Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  A graph describing the role of self-x functionalities relative to 
the role of the HNO. Yellow box “Sx” refers to tasks performed by self-x 
functionalities and blue box “H” refers to tasks performed by HNO. The 
figure describes three basic alternatives for a share of work between human 
and technology: Replacement, support and independency. 
 
The conception of losing jobs with the deployment of 
self-x can be translated into such a solution where self-x 
functionality replaces human work in some specific task (in 
Figure 1, the leftmost option, “Replacement”). The option of 
the self-x functionality to facilitate the work of the HNO is 
not as easily translatable to a division of work between 
human and technology. Apparently, self-x functionality then 
assumes some subtask that the human used to perform or 
extends it further in some way (e.g., by performing more 
complex calculations than the human operator is able to do 
within such a short period of time), supporting the work of 
the human operator. The functionality may perform part of 
the work human did earlier or the functionality could do 
something related to the task human performs but going 
beyond it for instance in speed or complexity (in Figure 1, 
the option in the center, “Support”, and there the left and 
right sub options “Sx assists H” and “Sx improves H”, 
respectively).  
Interviewees thought they could devote themselves to 
more productive work while the self-x perform something 
else, possibly the tedious tasks that require a lot of 
mechanical work of the human operator but not so much 
human intellect. Obviously, here it is a question of work that 
the self-x functionality does entirely or mainly by itself. 
Basically, this situation develops whenever a self-x 
functionality takes over any part of human work as it then 
leaves the human a possibility to do something else, applying 
both “Replacement” and Support” options.  
Additionally, self-x could perform something that human 
is not able to do but that could either ease the HNO’s 
workload indirectly by, e.g., diminishing the amount of 
network failures, or elevating the functioning of the network 
in a totally new way. For this case we invented a third type 
of solution for the division of the work between the human 
operator 
and 
self-x 
functionality, 
labeled 
here 
as 
“Independency” (in Figure 1, the rightmost option). It 
illustrates the situation where the tasks of human and 
technology are separate. This option is valid in a situation 
where the self-x performs something that has never been on 
the responsibility of a human operator: it could be a new task 
that enhances or supports network availability or the like, in 
a new and unique manner.  
Human control over the self-x functionalities is needed. 
If the self-x functionality is used for replacing human work 
(case “Replacement” in Figure 1) or it assists or improves 
human performance (case “Support” in Figure 1), it is 
important to know about the status of the autonomic 
functionality to guarantee a smooth joint performance 
between the human and autonomic functioning. More 
specifically, HNO needs to know if the self-x is functional; 
due to the nature of work, this should be evident to HNO. 
HNO also needs to know how to fix a problem in self-x 
functioning in order to keep the network manageable and 
functional (provided that the malfunctioning of the self-x 
functionality causes trouble in these areas). Furthermore, 
HNO should be able to know how to perform the same or 
about the same as the self-x functionality in case of failure of 
the functionality.  
However, if the self-x is independent of human work 
(case “Independency” in Figure 1), the need for human 
control is not straightforward. An independent task is of the 
kind that is beyond human capabilities – hence, it can be 
concluded that when it works as defined, it raises the quality 
of network functioning but if malfunctioning it might cause 
trouble and is probably hard to control. Hence, HNO or at 
least an expert should be able to evaluate whether such 
functionality is functional but only an expert might have 
sufficient knowhow to repair a problem in such self-x 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

functionality. There is no possibility for a human to perform 
the same task manually, anyway. 
Making amending measures requires, of course, that 
self-x functionality has an interface towards the HNO and 
that the human operator knows enough of the functioning of 
the  self-x  so  that  the  information  it  delivers  can  be  
interpreted correctly. Thus, if the malfunctioning of the 
self-x causes trouble in normal network functioning and/or 
complicates the work of the human operator, HNO should be 
able to perceive that there is a problem in the self-x 
functionality and to infer the severity of it in order to decide 
whether to intervene or not and if to intervene, how urgently. 
Furthermore, it should be made possible to conclude what 
is/are the available way(s) to proceed in problem solving and 
to have access to means to perform the amending measures.  
All the options presented above – replacement, support 
and independency – don’t automatically result in a 
considerable decrease of personnel. It is possible that in 
addition to, or instead of decreasing the amount of personnel, 
self-x functionalities could enable more efficient network 
maintenance and higher-level services. HNOs could operate 
alongside self-x or only by human power alone while the 
more elementary issues are left for the responsibility of 
self-x. To sum up, the benefits self-x functionalities could 
bring are not only cost reduction in the form of decreased 
amount of personnel, but also higher income to the telecom 
operator due to more sophisticated, more stable, or novel 
services to customers. What is the relative impact of each of 
these possibilities remains to be seen.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
How soon these visions of autonomic networks become 
true depends on the rate of emergence of self-x 
functionalities in network maintenance on large scale and on 
the qualities of the self-x. Possibly some type of joint work 
arrangement between the human operator and the self-x 
dominates at first, and the situation evolves with time. 
To be effectively useful and widely adopted, the new 
management system, which also includes the management 
of self-x functionalities, must provide the telecom operators 
with tools to seamlessly govern the network infrastructure 
by means of decision oriented operational tasks rather than 
low level command execution. At the same time, reliable 
mechanisms should be included for the human operator to 
receive all the needed information for the supervision of the 
network, so that any impossibility to continue self-managed 
operation or realistic danger will be reported to humans with 
pertinent details of the situation. Furthermore, tools to start 
the recovering process are needed as well. The adoption of 
this approach should decrease the human intervention 
required for deploying new services and configuring and 
operating the network. 
The results of our interviews have provided a number of 
requirements about network maintenance and self-x 
functionalities. Since almost all the knowledge required to 
manage the current networks resides in the human operators, 
they may constitute a bottleneck when trying to deploy an 
autonomic network. The generation of self-x functionalities 
fulfilling the operator’s demands and suggestions will 
become an important factor for the success of the autonomic 
networks. The research presented in this document supports 
the identification and extraction of operator’s requirements 
for this purpose. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has been performed 
within the UniverSelf project (www.UniverSelf-project.eu) 
and received funding from the European Community's 
Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under 
grant agreement n° 257513. Additionally, we thank the two 
telecom companies for giving the permission to perform the 
interviews and for making the practical arrangements for it; 
Helena Rivas and Martin Varela for kindly performing the 
interviews; and last but not least, all the human network 
operators who shared their opinions and conceptions with us 
in the interviews.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Horn, P., “Autonomic computing: IBM’s Perspective on the 
State of Information Technology,” 2001. Available at 
http://www.research.ibm.com/autonomic/manifesto/autonomi
c_computing.pdf, accessed 2011.11.25. 
[2] Smirnov, M., “Autonomic Communication, Research Agenda 
for 
a 
New 
Communication 
Paradigm,” 
Autonomic 
Communication, 
White 
Paper, 
2004. 
Available 
at 
http://www.autonomic-
communication.org/publications/doc/WP_v02.pdf, 
accessed 
2011.11.25. 
[3] Schmid  S.,  Sifalakis  M.,  and  Hutchison  D.,  “Towards  
autonomic Networks,” Proc. of 3rd Annual Conference on 
Autonomic 
Networking, 
Autonomic 
Communication 
Workshop (IFIP AN/WAC), Paris, France, pp. 25-29, 2006. 
[4] http:// 
www.univerself-project.eu/, 
Univerself 
webpage, 
accessed 2011.08.13 
[5] Chaparadza, R., Vigeraux, M., Lozano-López, J. A., and 
González Muñoz, J. M.,  “Autonomic Mobility and Resource 
Management Over an Integrated Wireless Environment – A 
GANA Oriented Architecture,” Proc. of the 2nd International 
Workshop on Management of Emerging Networks and 
Services (MENS), pp. 565-570, 2010. 
[6] Samaan, N. and Karmouch, A., “Towards Autonomic 
Network Management: an Analysis of Current and Future 
Research Directions,” IEEE Communications Surveys & 
Tutorials, 11(3), pp. 22-36, 2009. 
[7] Schulman, P.,  Roe, E., Eeten, M., and Bruijne, M., “High 
reliability and the Management of Critical Infrastructures,” 
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 12(1), pp. 
14-28, 2004. 
[8] Besco, R. O., “Human performance breakdowns are rarely 
accidents: they are usually very poor choices with disastrous 
results,” Journal of Hazardous Materials, Vol. 115, pp. 155-
161, 2004. 
[9] http://iplu.vtt.fi/. IPLU web page, accessed 2011.08.26. 
[10] Norros, I. and Norros, L. “Human factors in the dependability 
of IP networks,” ENISA Quarterly Review, 5(3), pp. 20-21, 
2009. 
[11] Norros, L., “Acting Under Uncertainty – The Core-Task 
Analysis in Ecological Study of Work,” VTT Publications, 
Espoo, 2004, pp. 241. 
 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

