A Non-commercial Approach to Experience Design Teaching 
Interactive Systems Developed at Escola Superior de Desenho Industrial 
Marcos André Franco Martins 
 ESDI (Escola Superior de Desenho Industrial) 
University of the State of Rio de Janeiro 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
e-mail: marc.a.martins@gmail.com 
 
Abstract – Experience design teaching faces the challenge of 
balancing two main pedagogical proposals: (1) commercially 
driven projects intended to satisfy market needs also 
understood as user needs; and (2) experimental projects, not 
primarily concerned with consuming, aimed at exploring 
innovative designs. In a design school, this problem is of special 
interest, since academic environment offers rare opportunities 
for experimentalism. Anxious about professionalization, both 
professors and students usually ignore those opportunities and 
tend to follow recipes provided by literature in the experience 
design field. In this paper, we propose, through the analysis of 
case studies, a pedagogical approach intended to stimulate 
both critical thinking and unexpected interactions. The 
prototypes presented here demonstrate that it is possible to 
teach and learn experience design through a non-commercial 
approach.   
Keywords – pedagogy; interactive design; experience design; 
non-commercial applications; experimentalism. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Interaction Design field has been marked by the term 
UCD (User Centered Design), since its coinage in 1986 by 
Don Norman [1]. His insight has created a shift in the HCI 
(Human Computer Interaction) field from the development 
of interactive systems focused on the product to the 
foregrounding of the user's needs. As it is known, this 
concept was the basis to the more recent field UXD (User 
Experience Design), made popular by (besides Norman 
himself) authors like Marc Hassenzahl [2], Bill Buxton [3] 
and Nathan Shedroff [4]. UXD implies that design is 
required to go beyond the creation of products and interfaces. 
It has to consider situations of use, which are now seen as 
“designable”.  
We suggest that both terms, “user centered design” and 
“user experience design” – in spite of their unquestionable 
importance in HCI history – have obscured, a simple fact: 
users, today, maybe more than ever, are not merely people 
who have "authentic" needs and everyday routines just 
waiting for a designer’s enlightened assistance to fulfill those 
needs. Both needs and experiences are also produced by 
constant market demands from contemporary capitalism, 
named by authors such as Maurizio Lazzarato as “immaterial 
capitalism”. To Lazzarato, contemporary “products” (which 
can be immaterial themselves, e.g., Facebook) are 
“producers of the needs, the imaginary and the tastes”, 
creating and transforming the “ideological and cultural 
environment of the consumer” [5]. To Italian philosopher 
Giorgio Agamben “one single individual […] can be the 
place of multiple processes of subjectification: the user of 
cellular phones, the web surfer, the writer of stories, the 
tango aficionado, the anti-globalization activist, and so 
forth.” [6].  
If we agree that the user is also a product of economical 
and marketing needs, it becomes difficult to view him/her as 
an absolute starting point for the development of design 
systems, as the terms UCD and UXD may imply.  
Such a complex scenario brings particular challenges to 
teachers, schools, universities and anyone related to design 
teaching: In what ways can one teach experience design 
today? Should we just follow the widespread understanding 
of the user as the starting point for any design project? 
Should we encourage students to base and justify their 
projects upon supposedly infallible recipes? If we are to 
understand the learning environment as a rare space for 
lively and independent critical debate where innovative 
thinking can flourish, the answer is obviously no!  
This paper presents the concepts user and experience 
beyond their immediate commercial implications. The basic 
proposal is to temporarily free students from market driven 
rules and to encourage them to design unusual interactions. 
While the projects they develop are playful and humorously 
informal, they follow rigorous methodological steps that 
encompass the basic knowledge related to the design of 
interactive systems.  
In order to present our pedagogical research and results, this 
paper follows the following structure: Section II gives a brief 
historical account of interaction design teaching at ESDI 
(Escola Superior de Desenho Industrial). Section III provides 
the schematic framing in project development employed at the 
School and explains the approach chosen for describing the 
case studies. In Section IV, we will present three completed 
projects: (A) a radio that can broadcast news, music and soap 
operas from the past, (B) a real physical tightrope that uses 
sound and image feedback from Nintendo’s computer game 
Super Mario Bros, and (C) an installation in which captured 
silhouettes and movements of participants are transformed into 
colorful graphics projected on a screen. Section V sums up the 
essential aspects demonstrated by the case studies and indicates 
future developments.  
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
EXPERIENCE DESIGN TEACHING AT ESDI 
In 2010, interaction design became part of the 
undergraduate curriculum at ESDI, a School traditionally 
devoted to Graphic and Product Design. Since then, we have 
been testing a variety of pedagogical approaches in order to 
develop students’ interaction design skills, mainly focusing 
on practical project development.  
Before describing the non-commercial applications, 
which are the focus of this paper, we will emphasize that, 
naturally, we have not abolished market driven assignments. 
In fact, when we started teaching interaction design, project 
proposals were based on existing products such as websites 
and tablet apps. In these cases, the focus was on the 
importance of visual clarity, semiotic concepts, analytical 
critique, usability aspects and user testing. In 2012, for 
instance, students were asked to search for a website they 
considered especially problematic. They had to analyze the 
site in terms of visual pleasantness and coherence, semantics, 
metaphor efficiency, usability and overall experience. Before 
and after images [7] show how their analysis have guided 
them in the search for better graphic and interactive solutions 
(Figure 1).  
Projects like these were carried out exclusively through 
simulations, such as interactive pdfs and Adobe Flash 
prototypes. Gradually, we have introduced programming 
workshops on hardware and software platforms such as 
Arduino [8], Processing [9], Microsoft’s Kinect [10] and 
MakeyMakey [11]. The benefits of teaching the logic of 
programming languages to design students are twofold:  
firstly, the logic of programming can free students from 
clichéd solutions (embedded in any commercial software 
package) and empower them with a critical awareness of 
design-presuppositions [12]; secondly, this very logic may be 
exported to projects other than interactive ones, since 
programming language foster the development of planning, 
synthesis and organizing skills.  
It was this proximity with programming that has 
encouraged us – teachers and students – to engage in 
experimental projects not destined for commercial use. For 
design students who had never programmed before, learning 
was usually an arduous process. More often than not, they 
faced difficulties in getting their original plans executed as 
they had imagined, inevitably leading to frustration and 
discouragement. However, such “mistakes” could be (and in 
fact were) taken as creative “busters”, once inventive 
solutions had to be called upon in order to adapt original 
plans to the constraints imposed by programming. There 
were, thus, two potential creative paths for the projects: an 
emerging acquisition of programming skills and the 
inclusion of random surprises.  
Without abandoning the more commercial assignments 
mentioned above, we have welcomed an approach to 
teaching experience design that was experiential in itself and 
that encouraged project development as a nonlinear process. 
Besides that, it became accepted that a project’s goal is not 
always initially clear and that innovative ideas can arise from 
a temporary suspension from the commitment to any existing 
system devised to be “used”.  
III. 
PROJECT STAGES AND GUIDELINES  
FOR THE CASE STUDIES 
 
Flexible and free as the following cases may seem, the 
employed pedagogic methods for their development have 
strict pre-defined traditional stages: 
 
• 
Theme assignment.  
• 
Research. 
• 
Brainstorming. 
• 
Project proposal. 
• 
Low-fidelity prototyping. 
• 
Sensorial design. 
• 
Programming. 
• 
User testing. 
• 
High fidelity prototyping. 
• 
Final demo film.   
 
This sequence is merely a suggestion, since any one of 
these phases can be (and usually is) revisited and/or 
anticipated: for instance, a group of students in the 
brainstorming phase may want to jump ahead and create a 
quick low-fidelity prototype to fast test their ideas; another 
Figure 1. Before and after: Tickets for fun website re-design. 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

group whose design is well advanced may want to go back to 
research, led, say, by unexpected programming or sensorial 
design issues. 
Given such flexibility, it would be deceiving to present 
the following case studies strictly under the above linear 
sequence. Instead, we have chosen to present all three cases 
according the following sequence: 
 
• 
Project overall description. 
• 
Relevant development issues and turning points 
specific to each project. 
• 
Main 
achievements 
and 
innovative 
contributions. 
 
 
IV. 
CASE STUDIES 
A. Scheidemann Radio  
A haunted radio that transmits music, soap operas and 
news from 1939 to 2012 was the proposal of a group of 
students for the given theme “Remix”. In this assignment, 
students were required to search for an out-of-order object 
and assign to it new functionalities.  
In project Scheidemann [13], an old radio was conceived 
as interface for a databank containing sounds from past 
decades. When turning a radio knob, the user could choose 
which category to listen to (music, soap opera or news) and 
combine this choice with a time selector (another knob) in 
order to choose a specific date. Besides this content, a 
mysterious character was said to “inhabit” the radio. This 
was Viktor Sheidemann, the device’s creator, who intended   
his invention to predict the future. His life had ended in a 
tragic suicide, followed by the capturing of his soul by the 
radio. Since then, his voice interrupts randomly the radio 
transmission uttering Viktor’s memories and predictions. If 
one listens to the radio long enough, one will be able to 
recompose, out of the fragmentary narrative, all relevant 
facts of Viktor’s life.  
In the project’s early phases, the radio would offer little 
interaction. It would be standing in an ordinary busy 
environment, like a restaurant or a classroom, occasionally 
turned on by movement sensors. The project’s authors 
imagined a situation where people would suddenly be made 
aware of the radio and get curious about its bizarre behavior. 
To better analyze the potentialities of this plan, a cardboard-
made low fidelity model was used for experience 
prototyping. The students enacted and filmed what they 
imagined would happen in a real situation (Figure 2). Two of 
them played common passers-by who would, they presumed, 
be surprised by the device, while another one, using the 
“wizard of Oz” technique [14], would hide behind the radio 
and manipulate both sound transmissions and a clock pointer 
which should indicate a date in time. 
The film revealed little level of interaction and this 
poorness could potentially weaken the overall idea, as it 
depended too much on little sensorial appeal. They, then, 
resolved that the radio should have its knobs activated for 
interaction. Besides that, they decided to create, in the 
school’s basement, a scenographic setting which included 
Viktor’s diary sheets on the floor, spider webs hanging from 
the ceiling, a glass of water half emptied (his last one?), an 
open book, and finally, the radio (Figure 3). 
Radio Sheidemann was a successful project, attracting 
the curiosity of a wide variety of users. During the project’s 
development, students were able to understand design as an 
activity that needs to consider, besides the product itself, 
architectural, sensorial and behavioral issues, i.e., experience 
design typical concerns.  
Figure 2. Radio Scheidemann's low fidelity and experience prototyping. 
Figure 3. Ambiance and Radio Sheidemann. 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
B. Super Slack Bros. 
In the summer of 2014 slacklining (or tightrope 
equilibration) was the hit sport at Rio de Janeiro’s beaches. 
A student came out with an original idea: an outdoor 
installation that would bring Nintendo’s 1990’s game Super 
Mario Bros to physical reality [15]. The piece may be 
described like this: interaction starts when someone jumps up 
a slackline stretched between two trees. He/she receives 
“stage accomplished”, “win” and “fail” sound feedbacks 
imported from original Mario’s soundtrack. As the user 
evolves on the line he/she advances on game stages, just as 
in a typical computer game. The “scoring” system also 
includes the touching of real Mario Bros’ icons (printed and 
mounted on cardboards) that hang from another stretched 
line located above the user’s head (Figure 4). 
The basic technical setting is the assemblage of two wires 
(one phase and the other one signal), on the slackline, that 
close electrical circuit when the heel and the instep of one 
feet touch simultaneously the different wires. These wires 
are connected to MakeyMakey’s input slots, which substitute 
for the computer’s inputs (keyboard, mouse, etc.). A 
Processing code receives those inputs and retrieve 
appropriate sounds from a database. The same technique is 
used for the activation of the icons hanging above.  
In the initial plan, the input was thought of in terms of 
pressure sensors (Figure 5). It took many experience 
prototypes and intense research until the idea of a feet-
closing circuit was devised. The overall experience was also 
refined: the student abandoned his original idea that included 
lights’ feedback and opted to use exclusively sound, since 
light proved to be a distraction to a user trying to balance on 
a rope.  
This remarkably original project attracted a lot of 
attention, 
including 
MakeyMakey’s 
creator, 
Eric 
Rosenbaum’s [16]. When the functional prototype was 
installed, a lot of people were eager to experiment with the 
modified game. But, besides such success, the system also 
provided food for thought in what concerns our intensely 
virtual and digitized culture. Super Slack Bros., by inverting 
the usual path from real to virtual, was a humorous and 
ironic commentary on today’s widespread arrest of physical 
reality.  
 
C. Psychokinectic  
Developed in 2015, over the assigned theme “Movement 
and Color”, this interactive system was a Microsoft Kinect-
based application [17]. The system works like this: users’ 
movements and body contours are continuously captured and 
sent to a computer. Through Processing Language, the 
contours define an area to be filled with various graphic and 
video elements.  
This technical setting involves software and hardware 
knowledge usually unfamiliar to design students. During the 
project’s developing process the authors undertook strenuous 
tests and research of Kinect’s body recognition capabilities. 
They have also investigated Processing Language and 
Resolume Arena software in order to mix images and 
silhouettes in real time. The code was based on libraries 
Syphon and Kinect Projector Toolkit [18]. 
In technically complex projects like this, it is not 
uncommon that students get so busy researching and 
debugging software and hardware that they tend to neglect 
fundamental aspects of experience design. Almost close to 
Figure 4. Super Slack Bros' installation. 
Figure 5. Super Slack Bros. First ideas and initial pressure sensor based 
technical solution. 
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the project’s final deadline, challenging conceptual problems 
arose. Since the very first drafts (Figure 6), there was an 
arrangement of actors and devices that remained unchanged: 
the user was expected to stand facing the projection and the 
Kinect’s sensor and the projector would stand behind 
him/her. Initially the resulting shadows derived from this 
setting were intended as part of the project. But technical 
investigation had led the students do decide that images 
would appear inside and not outside the body’s contour, thus 
making any shadow improper.  
It was only when the main technical issues had been 
solved, that filmed experience prototypes were possible, 
revealing experiential problems. As the user interacted with 
the system, his/her attention was locked to the screen (Figure 
7).  
This disposition generated two problems. Firstly, the 
user’s shadows, initially part of the concept, actually made it 
difficult for one to see what was inside the silhouette and, 
secondly, participants became “hypnotized” by the images, 
what resulted in low-level interaction amongst users 
themselves.  
The original project’s concept, framed in terms of “how 
to create a user experience in which the body could control 
images” was reformulated as “how to create a projection that 
interacts with user’s movements without forcing his/her 
attention to be locked to the projection’s plane”. Their 
solution was to elevate the whole set, by hanging the screen 
on buildings from two sides of a street (Figure 8). 
In the end, the system was finally tested and validated as 
a device for dance parties, such as one organized by 
student’s themselves at the School. The final setting allowed 
people to interact with the system, without having to enter a 
specially prepared closed room. Therefore, Psychokinectic’s 
originality was that of serving both as party decoration and 
interactive piece – an experience that was neither immersive 
nor theater-like. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper has demonstrated the qualities of a 
pedagogical method not based primarily on the user. We are 
hardly suggesting, though, that commercial concerns are to 
be forgotten in a design school, or that users are unimportant. 
The point addressed here is that there may be gains if we 
temporarily suspend those concerns. The focus on the design 
of the experience in itself, apart from any predefined or 
supposed “needs”, has made it possible for students to both 
understand how to formulate design problems in terms of 
experience and to develop creative projects. In spite of not 
having any particular user in mind they were able to attract 
and enchant those who undertook the designed experiences.  
Perhaps this approach points to a more flexible 
understanding of the user as someone who can profit 
emotionally and intellectually from engaging in unexpected 
settings, rather than solely having his/her needs quickly 
fulfilled. Besides that, these projects, due to their emphasis 
on physical collective experiences, are also critical 
statements against the immaterial seclusion typical of social 
networks. They envisage alternatives to a kind of sociability 
composed by lonely users, connected to one another and to 
the world mostly through screens. 
 As for future developments of the work presented here 
we shall pursue both external and internal endeavors. On the 
external level, we have been establishing connections with 
other design schools across the globe so as to promote 
collaborative initiatives following the methods described 
above. Internally, we plan to introduce, in our interaction 
design 
courses, 
a 
more 
effectively 
blend 
between 
commercial and non-commercial approaches, encouraging 
students to find inspiration in the experimental results in 
order to the create innovative marketable products.  
Figure 6. Psychokinectic's first draft and early imaging tests. 
Figure 7. Psychokinectic's experience prototyping. 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
D. A. Norman, The Psychology of Everyday Things. New York, New 
York: Basic Books, 1988. 
[2] 
M. Hassenzahl. “User experience and experience design,” in 
Interaction 
Design 
Foundation. 
<http://www.interaction-
design.org/printerfriendly/encyclopedia/user_experience_and_experie
nce_design.html > [retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
[3] 
W. Buxton, Sketching User Experiences: Getting the Design Right 
and the Right Design. Amsterdam; Boston, Massachusetts: 
Elsevier/Morgan Kaufmann, 2007. 
[4] 
N. Shedroff, Experience Design 1. Indianapolis, Indiana: New Riders, 
2001. 
[5] 
M. Lazzarato and A. Negri, Capitalismo Imaterial [Immaterial 
Capitalism]. Rio de Janeiro, RJ: DP&A, 2001. 
[6] 
G. Agamben, What is an Apparatus? and Other Essays. Stanford, 
California: Stanford University Press, 2009. 
[7] 
C. França, C. Ribeiro and F. Chaves, Tickets for fun Rededign, 
unpublished. 
[8] 
Arduino official site. <https://www.arduino.cc/> [retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
[9] 
Processing official site. <https://processing.org/> [retrieved: 03, 
2016]. 
[10] Kinect 
for 
windows. 
<https://dev.windows.com/en-us/kinect> 
[retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
[11] MakeyMakey 
official 
site. 
<http://www.makeymakey.com/> 
[retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
[12] M. A. F. Martins, "Prototyping in a learning environment - digital 
publishing projects from the Escola Superior de Desenho Industrial," 
in Design, User Experience, and Usability. User Experience Design 
for Everyday Life Applications and Services. vol. 8519, A. Marcus, 
Ed.: Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 195-206. 
[13] C. Martins, F. Chaves, L. Ribeiro, Radio Scheidemann, unpublished. 
[14] J. Preece, Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, Interaction Design: Beyond Human-
Computer Interaction. New York, New York: J. Wiley & Sons, 2002. 
[15] Y. Santos, Slack Line Bros, unpublished. 
[16] Slackline 
Bros. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J-
pBbwFUXN0> [retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
[17] R. Bortolami, C. Menezes, N. Borba, D. Rocha, T. A. Dias, 
Psychokinectic, unpublished. 
[18] Genekogan Library. <http://genekogan.com/> [retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
 
Figure 8. Psychokinectic screen's final setting and party with the actual working system. 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

