What games do 
Interaction, Design, and Actor Network Theory 
 
Jari Due Jessen 
Center for Playware 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
jdje@elektro.dtu.dk 
Carsten Jessen 
Centre for Teaching Development and Digital Media 
Aarhus University 
2400 Copenhagen, Denmark 
cj@dpu.dk
 
 
Abstract—When interacting with computer games, users are 
forced to follow the rules of the game in return of the 
excitement, joy, fun, or other pursued experiences. In this 
paper, we investigate how games achieve these experiences in 
the perspective of Actor Network Theory (ANT). Based on a 
qualitative study we conclude that both board games and 
computer games are actors that produce experiences by 
exercising power over the user’s abilities, for example their 
cognitive functions. Games are designed to take advantage of 
the characteristics of the human players. 
Keywords: computer games; board games; Actor Network 
Theory; interaction; game research; game design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Using computer software usually means the user is the 
active part, which controls the interaction by input and direct 
manipulation [1]. Interaction with computer games is a 
different experience, because the user acts in a game world, 
where the game content has excessive influence on the 
gamer’s behavior. Game figures and other game items are 
not just passive objects, they can be manipulated as the 
gamer pleases. If a game is to come alive, the gamers have to 
follow rules and act as the game indicates. Playing a 
computer game like Counter Strike [2] or World of Warcraft  
[3] is not just a question of manipulating an avatar. The game 
is forcing the gamer to react to events in the game by acting 
in a certain way, if the gamer wants to survive and prosper in 
the game, i.e., the gamer is placed in a role he or she has to 
fulfill. In other words: games do something to and with 
people who play them, and, in a certain way, games are just 
like actors who have an agency. What this agency consists of 
and how it is engineered is of interest for designers. 
In this paper, we will show how games can be seen as 
actors and as organizers of actors and actions on the basis of 
Actor Network Theory (abbreviated to “ANT”) [4]. ANT is 
well suited for the analysis of user interaction with games 
because ANT offers an approach to agency that does not 
assign power only to human actors, but allows the possibility 
for objects and rules to be studied as actors. Also, ANT 
opens a way of seeing design as a social enterprise. As 
Yaneva stresses:  “…design has a social goal and mobilizes 
social means to achieve it” [5]. 
ANT has received some attention in game studies during 
the last decade. Several scholars have studied games on the 
basis of ANT [6], especially focusing on the interchange 
between humans and technology [7] or on the development 
of social networks in online games [8]. In this paper, we will 
take a different approach and show how the ANT perspective 
can explain which forces are at work, when games are 
actually played. Thus, our focus is on what the immediate 
effects of using games are. 
The paper is the result of a research project where we 
studied gamers in different ages playing computer games as 
well as board games. Our point of departure was that 
computer games are games before they are anything else [9]. 
Therefore the study focused on studying games as a genre 
rather than just digital games, and our main example in this 
paper is a board game. 
In the next section we will introduce the ANT focusing 
mainly on the concept of “translation”, which is employed as 
our main analytical foundation. After this, the paper will 
present the used research methodology for collecting data. In 
the following sections, the selected case of game playing will 
be presented, followed by a presentation and a discussion of 
the results of our investigation.  
II. 
ACTOR NETWORK THEORY 
ANT was first developed by science and technology 
study scholars Michael Callon and Bruno Latour [10] as a 
new approach to social theory.  ANT is of interest to any 
analysis of technology, which goes beyond the assumption 
that technology is a mere instrument that we, as humans, 
utilize. ANT holds that any element of the material and 
social world (nature, technology, and social rules) can be an 
actor in the same way humans are. Agency is never only 
human or social, but always a combination of human, social 
and technology [11]-[13]. 
ANT is not a theory in the usual sense of the word, 
according to Latour himself, since ANT does not explain 
“why” a network takes a certain form or “how” this happens 
[4]. ANT is more a method of how to explore and describe 
relations in a pragmatic manner, a "how-to book" as Latour 
calls it [4], and thereby offers a way to describe ties and 
forces within a network.  
The main idea in ANT is that actions always take place in 
interaction between actors in networks, where the actors 
influence each other and struggle for power. We usually see 
social interaction between humans this way, but ANT differs 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

from traditional social theory by stating that the actors are 
not only humans but can be other elements as well. 
A. The traffic example 
ANT can be hard to grasp, and even counter-intuitive 
[11], because it reverses our common understanding of 
actors and agency, for instance when it cuts across the 
subject-object division underlying our thought about the 
world, we live in. In an attempt to clarify ANT, Hanseth and 
Monteiro [14] use traffic as an example to explain the 
implications of seeing something in the perspective of ANT. 
We find their example very usable to give a better 
understanding of ANT and, hopefully, what we later have to 
say about what games do. The following is a short 
presentation of their attempt and afterwards we will use it to 
explain the process of translation: When you are driving in 
your car from one place to another, you are acting, but your 
acts are heavily influenced by technology and the material 
world (the car’s maneuvering abilities, the layout of the 
roads, traffic signs, traffic regulation), the immaterial (traffic 
rules, traffic culture) and habits (your own experience as a 
driver) [14]. 
According to ANT, these factors (including you) all 
function as actors and should be understood as forces of 
agency in a linked network. Human and non-human, 
technical and non-technical elements are part of the network, 
and none of the elements are per definition granted special 
power over the others [11], [14]. 
Expanding the thoughts of Hanseth and Monteiro, we can 
add that, in the traffic example, you want to move from place 
to place, but you are dependent on technology and forced to 
act in accordance with both social rules and physical 
conditions. Even though you are the driver, you will clearly 
feel the forces of other actors when acting out the driving. 
For instance, the road forces you to follow a certain route, 
the traffic light forces you to stop and start. One can say that 
in order to reach your goal safe and fast, you have to “give 
in” to the network and in a way “hand over” your acting 
power and control over the car, so that the vehicle will move 
in accordance with the demands of traffic network. You have 
to “delegate” [11] power to the traffic network, and, in 
return, you will reach your goal fast and safely. Of course 
you are not handing over the control of yourself to the 
network. To delegate is more to act as prescribed by other 
actors. According to ANT, this is what happens in an actor-
network relation. 
B. Translation 
The way delegation is done is through the process of 
translation. This process requires the actors in a network to 
accept roles, a worldview, rules of acting, a path to follow 
etc. Michel Callon [15] describes the process of translation 
as a process of “persuading” with four distinct phases, he 
calls 
“moments”: 
problematization, 
interessement, 
enrolment, and mobilization. These moments are inter-
related overlapping steps that describe how stable actor-
networks come to be established [16]. We will introduce 
them briefly in the following, and later use them in our game 
analysis. 
The first moment, problematization, is where some of the 
actors in the network in question bring forth a definition of 
the problem and present a viable solution to it for the other 
actors. This is also the process in which the actors’ roles are 
defined (both human and non-human actors). To use the 
traffic example above, this is where the car and the traffic 
network are presented as a solution to the transport problem. 
As part of the problematization process, a so-called 
obligatory passage point (OPP) is defined, i.e., a practicable 
solution, which the actors have to accept to achieve their 
goal. An OPP “is viewed as the solution to a problem in 
terms of the resources available to the actant [actor] that 
proposes it as the OPP (…) It controls the resources needed 
to achieve the actant’s outcome.” [17] By defining an OPP, 
other possibilities are closed [15].  In the traffic example, the 
OPP is literally a passage, since it’s the roads and the current 
traffic rules etc., which have been established as a solid, 
reliable network. 
The second moment, interessement, is where the main 
objective is to convince all the involved actors that the 
proposed problem and solution is the correct one so that they 
will accept to use this solution and not another one. In the 
traffic network, this is done by the use of sanctions from 
traffic rules, signs, and, not the least, by the learning 
processes human actors go through to get a driver’s license. 
When the interessement of the actors is successful, the 
third moment, enrollment, is happening. This moment is 
important since it is here that support and allies are created, 
and the process by which actors become part of a network. 
The process can happen in many ways: “To describe 
enrollment is […] to describe the multilateral negotiations, 
trials 
of 
strength 
and 
tricks 
that 
accompany 
the 
interessements and enable them to succeed.” [15]. In relation 
to the traffic network, one can think of all the things that 
support cars and their moving along the roads. 
Finally, the last moment, mobilization, is where the 
actors are mobilizes in such a way that they act in 
accordance with the prescribed roles and thereby they 
maintain the established network. This happens when the 
drivers drive their cars following the rules and pathways of 
the traffic network. 
C. Design as inscription 
The effect of translation is delegation of power and 
agency. I relation to design of objects, e.g. computer games, 
translation is about how to construct an object in such a way 
that users are convinced to delegate agency. This is described 
as inscription and description by Madeleine Akrich [18]. 
Inscription is the process where a designer embeds a 
special way the user has to interact with the designed object. 
The designer is envisaging a user and a use case for the 
object and develops an intended use, which is inscribed into 
the object by use of, for instance, physical shape, GUI, 
behavior of objects, and affordances in general. 
Akrich compares inscription with a movie script, and 
calls the result a script for how the user should use the 
object. We see this, for example, in the design of the iPad’s 
user interface, where users are compelled to use finger 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 1.  Photo of the game Quackle! with animals, cards, and barns 
on the left. 
 
movements to interact, which is a more intuitive way of 
interacting and quite different from using a computer mouse.  
While inscription is the designer’s idea and framing of 
the interaction, Akrich uses the term description to describe 
the actual usage of the objects. This is where the script build 
into and drawn upon in the design process, meets the user in 
an actual user setting. Coming alive is the central part of 
description. It is central to ANT that a non-human actor can 
have agency and perform actions, and this is what we see 
when the scripts embedded in designed objects comes to live 
and the objects engage in a network with other actors. 
In the perspective of ANT, a game can by studied as a 
designed object with inscriptions that has agency and does 
something with the user, because the user invokes a network 
of actors and agency when he or she starts playing a game, 
i.e., following the rules of the “game world”. A game 
designer has to be aware of the network of actors the specific 
game design can invoke if he or she wants to be able to use it 
in the process of inscription. Networks of actors are the unit 
of analysis in our study presented below. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Our research method relied on qualitative data collected 
through observation, both non-participatory observation and 
active participation [19], [20]. We collected data from 12 
game sessions where we observed informants, recorded their 
behavior and interviewed them before, during and after 
playing. To ensure recordable data, we used games, where 
players had to be social and communicate with one another 
and board games was especially well suited for this, since 
people tend to talk more when playing such games. We 
observed children as well as grownups and mixed age groups 
playing games in natural settings at home, in the family, or 
with friends. 
The purpose of our study was to investigate and describe 
agency and actors at work when gamers play games. As our 
framework of analysis, we employed the concept of actors 
and agency and the four described moments of translation, 
being careful not to differentiate between non-human and 
human actors. We recorded spoken language as well as body 
language and gestures, and managed data using theoretical 
coding as described by Uwe Flick [21]. We analyzed agency 
by following what people did with games, extracting actors 
and ties, and described the translation process in the actual 
game situations, as we will demonstrate in the next two 
sections. 
IV. 
CASE:  THE GAME “QUACKLE” 
The case of playing the board game “Quackle” in a 
mixed age group is exemplary for our observations in 
general and in the following we will use our analysis of this 
case to present our interpretation of what the game actually 
does. 
A. Quackle! The game 
The game, which was awarded “Game of the Year” in 
Denmark in 2006, is a typical funny board game for the ages 
5 and up. In short, the game consists of 12 different animal 
figures, 8 barns and 97 playing cards with pictures of the 
animals and one arrow card (see Figure 1). The game starts 
with each player pulling an animal figure from a clothed bag, 
showing it to the others and then hiding it in his barn so the 
others can no longer see it. The cards are dealt and placed in 
a pile in front of each player face down. 
The objective of the game is to get rid of all the cards you 
have in your pile. Each round of the game consists of the 
players in turn turning a card and placing it for all to se. If 
two players have the same animal on their card they enter a 
battle, where the players compete on being the first to loudly 
say the sound of the other player’s animal hidden in the barn. 
The player that looses the battle needs to pick his own and 
the others pile of upwards facing cards. The game continues 
until there again are two identical animals in the cards, or 
one of the players gets rid of all their cards [22]. 
The game seems pretty simple, but requires that the 
players can remember and quickly mobilize the correct 
sounds when two identical cards are turned, which is more 
difficult than one might think, even for adults. 
B. Game inscription 
As we see in the above description of the game, there is a 
special way, players are expected to interact with the game 
(the inscription), and, as we will argue in the following, by 
this the game uses the learned scripts that the player brings 
along and the player’s physical and psychological abilities. 
Among other things, the game takes advantage of the 
players’ knowledge (i.e., scripts) about animals and animal 
sounds, and the game utilizes the fact that in pressured 
situations most humans have a tendency to react 
automatically. It is precisely this automatic reaction that 
makes the game fun, because the players’ makes a lot of 
mistakes trying to be the fastest, which often result in weird 
sounds that is a mix between different animal sounds. 
The game designer has created an inscription that can be 
indicated as follows: We must say a particular animal sound, 
while we see and try to remember a lot of other animals. 
These many inputs are combined with the stress factor that 
the game introduces by stating we must respond faster than 
our opponents! Thus, the inscription creates a special way 
the player has to act, i.e., a way the players have to use their 
abilities.  
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In the perspective of agency it is noteworthy that the 
game forces the player to make mistakes and thereby 
produce a mishmash of sounds, which the player would not 
normally produce. When we asked our informants about the 
experience most of them said their tongue was “out of 
control”. In that sense, it is apparent, that the game has 
agency and does something to the player. 
C. Translation 
The inscription plays an important role when considering 
the whole situation as a translation. As previously described, 
the translation consists of four moments that we will now 
outline in relation to the game scenario. 
The first moment is the problematization, which is where 
we are presented with a problem. In our case, the game is 
played in natural situations on a Friday evening in a family 
of four (parents and two children, son age 12 and daughter 
21). For the family, the problem is the need for entertainment 
understood as a peaceful and enjoyable social time together. 
In this case, the game of Quackle is set up as a solution. Like 
any family game and most entertainment products, it 
promises that playing the game will lead to the experience of 
fun. Thus, the game is put forward as an actor who can do a 
piece of work (give us fun) through the way other actors treat 
it. This happens when one of the family members says, "Let's 
play Quackle, its fun. We always laugh so much when we 
play it." (quote from the daughter from the case). 
The game is put forward as a solution and as the 
obligatory passage point (OPP) to social entertainment. The 
solution simultaneously suggests roles and organizes 
relations, i.e., a specific network where the family members 
will become game players, and the living room table and 
chairs will facilitate that the family can sit close together. No 
less important is it that the games will establish equality 
between the players, regardless of age and family position. 
In the next moment, the interessement, which actually 
takes place in parallel with the problematization, the family 
members are convinced the proposed solution is the right 
one, and barriers for alternative solutions to the problem are 
added. One of the things that are cut off is television, a 
frequently used source of entertainment in the family, when 
one of the adults says: "We shouldn’t watch television, we 
always do. We should do something together instead." (quote 
from the episode). 
Enrollment is the third moment where the players are 
enrolled and this entails that we must accept the roles of 
participants as players of Quackle! and accept the terms of 
the game. 
In the last moment of translation, mobilization, the 
solution is executed, when the family members sit down with 
the game and start playing. If the mobilization works and 
translation process is thus successful, then it becomes 
possible to experience fun and laugh together. This is exactly 
what happened to the family via the interaction with the 
game, which created a lot of laughing, especially when the 
parents made weird sounds. 
The game re-organizes the family’s social connections 
and in so doing builds a new network of actors and agency. 
The game is what Latour has named a “mediator” that 
“transform, translate, distort, and modify” relations [11]. But 
the game does more than alter the social relations. It 
mediates the body and mind of the individual players. In the 
following we will address how Quackle! accomplishes the 
mobilization of the players physical and cognitive abilities. 
V. 
WHAT THE GAME DOES 
A game cannot do much itself, but is dependent on other 
actors, and this is, of course, especially true for board games. 
Nevertheless, games have agency that makes game players 
act in a manner they would not have acted without the game. 
In that sense, the game “does” something in line with 
Latour’s concise statement on what defines an actor: 
“anything that does modify a state of affairs by making a 
difference is an actor [...]” [4]. 
Latour stresses that, when we are studying a network in 
ANT, we are focusing on the circulation between the 
connections that make up the network [16]. When we look 
into the Quackle game, we are looking at how agency is 
floating between the involved actors, which we will try to 
demonstrate through an analysis of a play scenario. 
First, the scenario in bullet points of the family playing 
the game: 
1) The game is placed on the table and the players sit 
down around it. 
2) The game is opened, and the game elements are 
displayed. There are animals, barns, and cards and a cloth 
bag. 
3) The animals are hidden in a cloth bag and all players 
get a barn. 
4) Each player pulls an animal from the cloth bag: 
Player 1 gets a snake, player 2 a dog, player 3 a donkey and 
player 4 a frog. 
5) After all animals and sounds have been introduced, 
they are stored out of view in the barns. 
6) The cards are shuffled and dealt. 
7) Everyone is ready and turn their first card. 
8) A horse, a cow, a duck and a pig is turned, so there is 
no match. 
9) Next cards are turned: a snake, a pig, a frog and an 
owl appears, still no match. 
10) The third cards are turned: A mouse, a donkey, a 
rooster and an owl appear. 
11) The game gathers speed and the cards are turned a bit 
faster. 
12) The fourth card is turned: a cat, a dog, a cat and a 
frog. 
13) Player 1 shouts "Qu..iau" [sounds a combination of a 
frog sound and a cat sound] and player 3 "Vu..sh"[a 
combination of dog sound and snake sound] followed by a 
grinning "Oh no, uh" and finally player 1 says "Miau" just 
before playing 3 said "Sssshh". 
14) Player 3 must gather player 1's card and the game 
continues. 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This is the basic structure of the game, which continues 
in a similar manner for a long time (about 30 minutes) before 
a player wins. 
Points 1 and 2 are of practical character, but they help to 
create the framework for what is going to happen. Thus, the 
following activities are framed and the game's inscription 
starts to become clear, especially in the form of the rules. 
The agency is still with the players. This is also the case in 
point 3, but here the game starts to gain agency. It starts to 
have an effect on the players, as it prescribes their actions in 
the next steps. 
Our observations show that at the same time the players 
build up anticipation about what is going to happen, which is 
seen by the body movements and heard by the tone and pitch 
of voices. This anticipation started when the players accepted 
the game as an OPP. It was especially noticeable in point 4 
and 5 where the joy of hiding the animals in the cloth bag 
and pulling one provides a form of excitement that is 
particularly evident in the youngest child. Thus, we see here 
that the agency is distributed to the game as a kind of pre-
disposition of body and mind [5]. 
In point 5, the players need to remember all the animals, 
the other players have. The individual player has to establish 
links between the different animals, the barns and the players 
around the table. In point 7, the number of links is expanded 
by the creation of connection to the cards and in point 9, the 
game is made even more complex as more animals are 
introduced and it makes it harder to remember the animals 
hidden in the barns, which is of course part of the game 
designers’ inscription. 
We continue to point 13, where we see the first match of 
cards. When this match appears, a special script appears 
which is part of the inscription of the game. The script forces 
the player to act as prescribed by the game rules and thereby 
it functions as a type of mechanism that governs players' 
actions. The mechanism re-organizes the connection 
between the players body and their cognition in a special 
way by means of rules and materials (cards, animal figures, 
barns) and in this manner the game utilizes the faculties of 
the player. As mentioned earlier, the player is driven to make 
mistakes when pronouncing words, and it is this “drive” that 
shows an agency from the game. 
What the game does can be described as follows: First, it 
mobilizes the individual players memory, but overstates the 
demands of remembering. There is a wide range of images, 
sounds, figures and places that are in play, and the player 
will have to revive all of these objects and connections when 
the match of card appear. There are different animal figures 
and their sounds to choose from, and several sounds become 
actualized, before the players say the correct sounds. 
Second, the game cuts across the usual connection 
between the players mind and body. In point 13 it is clear 
that the game disrupts the normally well-controlled 
connections between the player’s cognitive ability and their 
ability to control their tongue. The inscription provides a 
procedure for a specific requested response to certain signals 
where the player has to use specific cognitive functions, i.e., 
perceive, remember, associate the images and sounds as well 
as mobilize the organs of speech, and it all has to happen as 
quickly as possible. It is a simple task that the players do not 
usually have problems with, but by adding a wide range of 
signals in the form of different images and sounds, and by 
forcing the players to compete with others, the result is that 
cognitive and bodily functions responds in an incorrect 
manner, and the players end up saying the wrong sounds. 
The game has, in a way, taken over body and mind.  
The case of playing Quackle! is an example of a 
translation process in action, where agency is delegated to a 
network. The case is also an example of how such a network 
is comprised of human, material, and social actors. The 
translation is only happening because the players have 
allowed themselves to be enrolled as players and fulfill their 
roles, using the material, and following the rules and thereby 
delegate agency. In return they are entertained. 
B. Playing a computer game 
Earlier, we stated that we consider computer games to be 
games before anything else. Thus, our thesis is that computer 
games do something to the players when played, just as the 
case of Quackle! What we have attempted until now is to 
establish a framework for analyzing what games do, and, in 
the following, we will briefly show how the framework 
could be applied to computer games. 
The setting, which we observed, are three boys 12, 12 
and 14 years old playing Grand Theft Auto V (GTA) on a 
Playstation 3. Grand Theft Auto has become very popular 
with its mixture of racing and adventure, where the players 
can follow a story already inscribed in the game, but they can 
also just go racing around in the game city. 
The boys take turns at controlling the game, while the 
two others comment and talk about what is happening. In 
one scenario, the 14 year old is controlling the game. He gets 
an assignment from the game where a tough looking guy on 
the screen tells him that he needs to win a race with a 
computer-controlled opponent to progress. Then the game 
begins. 
The setting we are analyzing is a network that consists of 
the interior (couch, table, etc.), the Playstation (consisting of 
screen, game console, controller and DVD), the three boys, 
and the game. The game itself consists of multiple actors of 
which some are activated coupled with the other actors of the 
network. We do not have room here to analyze all actors and 
possible networks the game can initiate and will only take a 
short look at how the game impacts the players’ bodies. 
When playing, the boys have to follow the rules of the 
game. They are complicated, but for our example here we 
can just point to the traffic rules in the game and how the car 
is driven via the controller. In the same manner as in a real 
traffic system, the player has to delegate agency to the 
system. Just as in the real traffic, there is police in the form 
of multiple cars and helicopters, roads, houses, pedestrians 
and the normal traffic on the road, which has to be avoided 
during the race. All of these actors become active as the boy 
starts the race, which lasts for a few minutes. 
It is apparent how the game influences the player’s body. 
First, of the boy presses hard on the controller and swings it 
forward, and the next second he and the controller are 
leaning heavily to the left side, almost leaning into one of the 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

other boys. Next second all of the boys shout “Wow, that 
was close!”, while they all jump a little in the couch. At the 
end they are all standing up and leaning forward and to the 
side as they follow the movements of the car on the road it 
tries to follow. 
If we look at this scenario as a translation, we can see the 
problematization is set forward, the boys need to win the 
race and this is also the OPP. In the interessement, the game 
builds on the fact that the boys are already enrolled in the 
game (emerged in it) and thus they need to progress to keep 
playing. The enrollment is made more stable by the use of a 
character in the game and adding a storyline to the race (why 
they have to win), thus agency is transferred to the game. 
This also builds up the tension for the next moment, where 
the boys are mobilized to play. The term “boys” indicated 
that all three boys participate even though two of them don’t 
control the game. 
When the race begins, the boy controlling is leaning 
forward and swinging to the side with his body. This is 
where the game uses some of its agency, and the bodily 
action of the player shows that the game is mobilizing the 
player’s ability. In our observations, we saw this again and 
again, the players could not help it but move their body to 
the side as they turned a corner, even though in this game it 
wasn’t needed, as the controller doesn’t react to it. 
The game further uses its agency when it makes the boys 
shout and jump. This happens as the car almost hits a wall 
that would have crushed the car, and made them lose the 
game. This kind of danger is present all the time in the race. 
Here, the game is exercising its agency by using the player’s 
body and mind, including his imagination that allows him 
and the other boys to experience danger, which in the real 
world would have produced fear, but in the framework of the 
game produces excitement.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the introduction, we stated that games from our point 
of view could be regarded as actors because they function as 
organizers of other actors. Following Latour, quoted above 
games are actors because they make a difference, not 
because they are human or non-human, social or material. 
We have tried to show how such “difference” is created 
when games do something with players. This view represents 
an understanding of interaction where the subject-object 
dichotomy is dissolved and agency is distributed in a process 
of reorganizing, recreation and modification of actions in 
networks, which even stretch into the mind and body of the 
individual player and take advantage of abilities and 
faculties.  
If one accepts this way of viewing, this has implications 
for game design, because design is not just a question of 
creating game worlds and interfaces, but a question of how 
to design social actors that can take agency and thereby 
initiate and guide the building of social networks, which can 
bring human and non-human actor to act together in such a 
way that the players can achieve an experience, they find 
pleasant, joyful, funny or alike. As we have tried to point 
out, this does not only involve organizing social relations, 
actions and material, but also requires utilization of the 
player’s abilities, for instance of physical and cognitive kind. 
We believe game design should be done on the basis of 
knowledge about how human abilities can be organized and 
influenced, including knowledge of the abilities of different 
user groups. In the analysis, we showed how the games 
orchestrate actions by humans and non-humans that resulted 
in experiences the players find engaging, joyful and 
entertaining. From our point of view that is prototypical 
examples of what games do. They organize the acting of 
actors in order to achieve certain kind of experiences. 
Through the inscription the designer assigns agency in such a 
way that the game can take advantage of the characteristics 
of the human players. The games are examples of how the 
design render agency to a non-human object, and this object 
they perform a job by getting the players to do a job.  
A.     Future work 
The main theme of this paper has been to establish an 
understanding of what games do in the perspective of ANT. 
We believe that ANT is beneficial when we look into 
computer game design. While it can seem trivial that games 
do something to users, it is highly important for game 
designers to understand how games do this. We have 
demonstrated that using ANT as a tool for analysis can give 
us a new understanding of the interaction between games 
and users. We believe that game designers can advance 
interaction design by “following the actors” and by 
understanding how agency in games works. We are fully 
aware that our analysis has shortcomings due to only 
covering two games and, thus, only a few examples of the 
kind of actor network, which creates play. There are 
numerous other examples of this kind of network operating 
in many different ways in games. Future work should focus 
on identifying, characterising, and possibly systemizing 
actor networks in different games.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Dourish (2004): “Where the Action is – The foundation of 
Embodied Interaction”. The MIT Press, Cambrige 
[2] Valve Corporation (2011). Counter Strike. Washington:Valve 
Corporation 
[3] Blizzard Entertainment (2013): World of Warcraft. Irvine: 
Blizzard Entertainment 
[4] B. Latour (2005): Reassembling the social: an introduction to 
Actor–network theory- Oxford: University Press, 2005. 
[5] A. Yaneva (2009): "Making the Social Hold: Towards an 
Actor-Network Theory of Design." Design and Culture no. 3, 
2009, pp. 273-288. 
[6] M. Cypher and I. Richardson (2006): An actor-network 
approach to games and virtual environments. In CyberGames 
'06: “Proceedings of the 2006 international conference on 
Game research and development“, 2006, pp. 254-259. 
[7] K. Kallio, F. Mäyrä, and K. Kaipainen (2011) “At Least Nine 
Ways to Play: Approaching Gamer Mentalities” Games and 
Culture, vol. 6, no. 4, 2011, pp. 327-353 
[8] U. 
Plesner 
(2013) 
“Researching 
Virtual 
Worlds: 
Methodologies for Studying Emergent Practices”. New York, 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Routledge, 
(Routledge 
Studies 
in 
New 
Media 
and 
Cyberculture, Vol. 14). 
[9] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman (2004): “Rules of play: game 
design fundamentals”. Cambridge, The MIT Presse. 
[10] M. Callon and B. Latour (1981): Unscrewing the Big 
Leviathan: how actors macrostructure reality and how 
sociologists help them to do so. In K. D. Knorr-Cetina and A. 
V. Cicourel (eds.) “Advances in Social Theory and 
Methodology: Toward an Integration of Micro- and Macro-
Sociologies”. Boston, Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
[11] B. Latour (1996) “The Trouble with Actor-Network Theory”. 
In F. Olsen: “Om aktor-netværksteori. Nogle fa afklaringer og 
mere end nogle fa forviklinger” Philosophia, Vol. 25 N. 3 et 
4, 1996, pp. 47-64. 
[12] B. Latour (1992) “Where are the Missing Masses? The 
Sociology of a Few Mundane Artifacts”. In W. E. Bijker and 
J. Law (eds.): “Shaping Technology/Building Society”. 
Cambridge, The MIT Presse. 
[13] B. Latour (1995) “A Door Must be Either Open or Shut: A 
Little Philosophy of Techniques”. In A. Feenberg and A. 
Hannay (eds.): “The Politics of Knowledge”. Bloomington, 
Indiana University Press. 
[14] O Hanseth and E. Monteiro (1998) “Understanding 
Information 
Infrastructure”, 
University 
of 
Oslo  
(http://heim.ifi.uio.no/oleha/Publications/bok.html, [retrieved: 
January, 2014] ) 
[15] M. Callon (1986) “Some Elements of a Sociology of 
Translation: Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen 
of St Brieuc Bay”. In J. Law (eds.), “Power, Action and 
Belief: A New Sociology of Knowledge”. London, Routledge 
& Kegan Paul. 
[16] B. J. Kraal (2007) “Actor-network inspired design research: 
Methodology and reflections”. In Proceedings Internationl 
Association of Societies for Design Research, Hong Kong, 
2007, pp. 1-12. 
[17] J. Rhodes (2009) “Using Actor-Network Theory to Trace an 
ICT (Telecenter) Implementation Trajectory”.  Information 
Technologies & International Development, Vol 5, Issue 3, 
2009, pp. 1-20.  
[18] M. Akrich (1992) “The De-scription of Technical Objects”. In 
W. Bijker and J. Law (eds.) “Shaping Technology/Building 
Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change”. Cambridge, The 
MIT Presse. 
[19] J. P. Spradley (1980) “Participant Observation”. Orlando, 
Florida, Harcourt College Publishers, pp. 58-62. 
[20] P. Atkinson and M. Hammersley (1994). "Ethnography and 
Participant Observation". Handbook of Qualitative Research, 
pp. 248–161. 
[21] U. Flick (2006). “An Introduction to Qualitative Research”. 
3rd ed., London, Thousand Oaks. 
[22] Algaspel (2011). Quacklemanual. 
 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

