The Role of Physical Prototyping in Participatory Design with Older Adults 
An Exploration of Form and Materials in the Design of a Robot for Older Adults 
Heidi Bråthen, Harald Maartmann-Moe, Trenton Schulz 
Departments of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: heidi.brathen@imv.uio.no, harald.maartmann-moe@mn.uio.no,  trentonw@ifi.uio.on 
 
Abstract— How can older adults actively participate in the 
design processes of assistive robots designed for their homes? 
We have organized workshops with a group of older adults 
who worked actively with materials and physical prototyping 
to design a fetch robot for the home. We present the basics of 
the workshop materials, how the workshop was performed, 
and findings on the role of physical prototyping from the 
workshops. 
Keywords — robots; human-robot interaction; physical 
prototyping; older adults; participatory design 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Assistive technology, such as robots, is designed and im-
plemented to help older, retired people to stay independently 
at home longer. In the Participatory Design tradition, one of 
the core values and points of origin is the ideal of democratic 
design of technological artefacts [1]. In this paper, we delve 
into how material exploration in physical prototyping work-
shops may facilitate the participation of older adults [2] in 
the design process of robots in the context of their homes. 
The older adults participating in our workshops were ex-
perts on their homes and daily practices, but their expertise 
and interest regarding design and robot technology varied. 
We were interested to see if physical prototyping could ena-
ble their participation in design. 
This work is part of a larger research project called Mul-
timodal Elderly Care Systems (MECS) aimed at using robots 
and future sensors to help with monitoring events in the 
home and aid people living longer independently longer. 
Previous work by the MECS project includes long-term user 
testing of vacuum cleaner robots in the home of older adults. 
Some of the participants in our workshops had been part of 
this study [3] and thus had some experience with robots in 
the home. The results in terms of the design and material 
preferences and ideas of our participants will go into a fur-
ther study in the project and be developed further in proto-
types by the MECS research group. In this paper, we will 
review our workshops in terms of how physical prototyping 
and material exploration affected the level of participation. 
In the next section, we outline related work on facilitation 
of participation when designing with older adults and robots 
in the home. In Section III, we describe our method: how we 
conducted the workshops and how we prepared and present-
ed the samples of shapes and materials that we used. Sec-
tion IV presents the results from our workshops, and in Sec-
tion V, we discuss the main findings regarding what we 
learned from working with older adults through physical 
prototyping and material explorations before we conclude 
the paper in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Participants’ limited in-depth knowledge of a design pro-
ject [4] may make it difficult for them to gain an overview of 
the possibilities in the design domain, and hence challenging 
to be creative within the design problem. Joshi and Bratteteig 
[5] suggest that elderly users should be enabled to participate 
in mutual learning and co-construction activities on their 
own terms. They describe a successful mutual learning pro-
cess as the possibility for both groups to extend their creative 
and imaginative capacity and build on each other’s ideas to 
design concrete artefacts. To participate on their own terms, 
the participants should be able to express themselves in their 
own language, without having to adopt the professional ter-
minology of the design team in which they participate [5]. 
This may include the opportunity to show and do rather than 
to tell.  
To express their tacit knowledge and their everyday lived 
practice, Brandt et al. stress the importance of being able to 
make things that give this practice a presence in the world. 
Telling about one’s practice may become “generative also of 
that which has not yet been experienced” [6]. Physical arte-
facts have also proved useful in participatory design work-
shops to trigger unexpected and additional stories from the 
participants [7]. Participatory prototyping and generative 
tools have been central in the making activities since the 
beginning of participatory design [6]. Generative tools are 
two- and three-dimensional visual components that non-
designers can use to express their ideas and dreams for future 
scenarios of use [6]. 
Robots designed to aid in the home include domestic ro-
bots such as vacuum cleaning robots and lawn mowing ro-
bots [8.] Robots have also been suggested as a form of assis-
tive technology that can help care workers by being present 
in the home of older, retired people when care workers can-
not. [9] What can robots do in these situations? Asking the 
opinion of older adults themselves, one survey found that 
older adults feel a robot could help in recovering from a fall 
or retrieving objects that were hard to reach [9]. One attempt 
to categorize robots targeted at older adults at home found 
that robots must offer something that makes the people inde-
pendent and goes beyond being a tablet on wheels [10]. 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
METHODOLOGY AND METHODS 
A. Co-construction on the participants’ terms 
The goal of our workshops was to engage older adults in 
the co-construction of a robot. We wished to gain insight into 
how older adults would prefer for the robot’s appearance and 
feel in the home, with special attention to the materials it 
could be constructed from, rather than realistic technical 
implementations.  
Due to the varying degree of interest and expertise in ro-
bot technology among our participants, one of our main aims 
in the workshops was to explore ways to enable an exchange 
of ideas and expertise between the participants and the de-
signers through telling and making. We designed a material 
exploration workshop featuring a variety of traditional mate-
rials to encourage the participation and co-construction on 
the participants’ terms, visualizing some possibilities in the 
design domain and enabling creativity. 
B. Pilot workshop: A purpose for the robot 
We conducted a pilot workshop with one participant. 
This workshop took place in the home of the participant. 
After the pilot workshop, we adjusted the assignment to be 
more specific, from constructing a robot to constructing a 
robot with a dedicated purpose, a robot to fetch and carry 
objects. This emerged as an important theme as the pilot 
workshop did not proceed as expected. The materials we 
brought were discussed, but not explored by touching or ex-
amining them, and no prototyping was done. The procedure 
derailed from our plan when Patricia (not her real name) 
insisted on a more concrete and personally useful purpose 
than what we originally proposed working on: a robot. The 
derailment started a conversation about what this purpose 
could be. Patricia was concerned about the value of the ro-
bot, as she initially could not imagine any need for a robot in 
her home. After exploring this issue together, we arrived at 
the idea of a fetch robot that would prove to be a valuable 
point of departure for the following workshops.  
C. The workshops 
Subsequently, we ran two workshops in the library of an 
independent living facility in Norway with a total of seven 
participants aged 75 to 92 years old, one of whom participat-
ed in both (see Table 1). 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF PARTICIPANTS 
Activity 
Participants (P.) 
Pilot 
August 
P. 1 Female 
Patricia 
WS1 
September 
P. 
1A 
Female  
Aimee 
P. 
1B 
Female 
Anca 
P. 
1C 
Female 
Angelica 
P. 1D 
Female 
Antonella 
WS2 
September 
P. 2A  
Male 
Bruno 
P. 2B Male 
Basilio 
P. 
2C 
Female 
Brenna 
P. 1D 
Female 
Antonella 
  
In preparation for workshop one, we posted flyers in the 
living facility a few days prior. The posters promoting our 
workshop were displayed alongside other voluntary activities 
to avoid misusing the power of recruiting participants 
through independent living facilities’ platforms and 
staff.  Four inhabitants showed up to our first workshop ses-
sion, and they all participated for the full length of our 
planned session, and, by their request, for 15 more minutes. 
Exactly one week later, we held our second workshop. 
Two men and two women participated from beginning to end 
in the second session, one of which had participated in the 
previous session as well. 
D. Workshop Materials   
To facilitate material explorations of robot design we 
brought a set of materials that we believed the participants 
would be comfortable with, such as traditional materials 
commonly found in the interior design of homes, see Fig-
ure 1. We brought samples, swatch books with colour and 
texture samples for textiles, textile ribbons, yarn, crocheted 
and knitted textile samples, veneer from different woods, 
different self-adhesive foils and films, including aluminium 
foil, coloured wooden pearls, pipe cleaners, coloured paper, 
corrugated cardboard, acrylic glass, wooden rods, duct tape, 
wood glue, ordinary scissors, textile scissors, pens, marker 
pens/felt tip pens. 
One of the things we observed in the pilot workshop was 
that prototyping a robot with no structural building blocks 
was troublesome. To minimise crafting tasks that were de-
manding in fine motor skills and still provide the participants 
with flexible choices regarding material samples, we pre-
pared building blocks in the form of cardboard and veneer 
boxes and shapes to represent robot bodies and wheels. See 
Figure 2. We made the boxes from scratch to standardise the 
height of the boxes to prepare material samples that could 
easily be fitted onto the base boxes. We tailored the other 
material samples like textiles to this measure.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Workshop setup 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2.   Top: Basic shapes. Bottom:  Laser cut wheels 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Pilot Workshop 
As mentioned in Section III.B, Patricia initially could not 
imagine any need for a robot in her home. We suggested that 
she could think about possible needs of her acquaintances. 
Thinking about a friend with severe tremors in her hands that 
made it difficult to carry coffee cups across the floor, made 
Patricia think of a robot that could fetch and carry items. 
This, in turn, made her think of her own problem with reach-
ing things that were placed on top of tall shelves, especially 
the problem of dropping things that were difficult to get a 
hold of. She then suggested that a robot could sweep the 
floor after accidents with breaking objects, carry things, pour 
coffee and fetch things from hard to reach shelves. 
Patricia wanted the hypothetical robot to be easily 
cleaned. She also expressed a wish for a robot that would not 
be camouflaged, but visible, something simple and nice, not 
requiring extra work, not shiny but matte. She explained that 
she believed that older adult participants required several 
repetitions of information, the possibility to try out and expe-
rience what they are being told in small steps and increments 
of information and task instructions to be able to follow and 
understand the new activity properly.   
We decided to bring this concept of a fetch robot to our 
workshops. Considering concrete and useful purpose ap-
peared to be a necessary step preceding prototyping. 
Patricia also felt that it seemed futile for her to try and 
design a robot. “I can’t imagine that I can make a robot. It’s 
too utopian. I’m just grateful that someone else is taking care 
of building robots” 
B. Workshops 
Aimee shaped a prototype (Figure 3, E) with great atten-
tion to function. The robot would be waterproof so that it 
could wash her back and withstand spills. It would be white 
to match her furniture. It would nearly have the height of a 
human, to reach the upper cupboards. It would be round so it 
could navigate among all the plants in her home. Tasks came 
to Aimee’s mind during the prototyping. The robot could 
also stir the sauce, empty the dishwasher, water plants, clean 
windows, fetch things, vacuum, carry hot and heavy cups of 
coffee to her chair, open bottles and lids, pour from heavy 
containers, 
During a conversation between Aimee and Anca con-
cerning the purpose and function of the robot, Aimee sug-
gested that her robot could be a dancing partner, and a hair-
dresser as Anca had expressed a wish for this previously. 
Anca embraced the suggestion of a dancing partner and 
hairdresser robot. She constructed long arms for the robot 
(Figure 3, F) that would enable it to dance and style hair. 
Angelica was inspired by the challenges a friend had told 
her about. She then recalled that they shared one of these 
challenges: reaching the upper cupboards. She then fash-
ioned a long grabbing arm with a member of our project 
group. The prototype (Figure 3, G) was dressed in alumini-
um foil and acrylic glass to represent stainless steel and glass 
to match her modern interior design. A green patch of fabric 
was carefully chosen to match her green curtains but was 
later disregarded because she wanted the design to be ex-
tendable to other households beyond her own. Glass would 
be installed in one side of the robot because she wished to 
see the inner workings of the robot as it worked and moved. 
“I think that will make it more familiar and personal, to see 
that it starts working when I’m calling on it”, she explained. 
By the end of the workshop, she was proud of her design, 
and she told us that the experience had been fun. 
Antonella constructed a prototype (Figure 3, K) with a 
smooth wooden exterior, represented by aluminium foil with 
a wood image, to represent a wooden surface that would be 
easy to clean. Antonella modeled edges along the top to rep-
resent a board with raised edges to keep things from falling. 
She also added a textile bag that would keep a pen and her 
glasses which she often spent time looking for. Antonella 
expressed satisfaction in having crafted the prototype and 
asked if she could also join our second workshop, which she 
did. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Workshop 2 had the same aim and setup as workshop 1. 
Here, Bruno made a prototype (Figure 3, H and I) exploring 
the implementation of robot locomotion. He constructed a 
detailed mechanical conceptual solution. It included pump-
ing water in a tube, connected to a belt, connected to two 
cogwheels on the side of the robot. This could shift the cen-
ter of mass to roll the robot forwards. Shifting the center of 
mass could also be used by the robot to “stand up”, by shift-
ing the weight to one side. This form of movement would 
also allow the robot to navigate tricky passages and corners 
in small spaces like the residents’ apartments. He decided on 
plastic as a material, as it is common and durable. He chose 
the colour yellow to awaken visual interest. He said that he 
would lose interest if it was too dark. Yellow plastic would 
also match his surroundings. The yellow foil was to repre-
sent yellow plastic in the prototype. He did not wish to solve 
the implementation of the robot fetching things but ex-
pressed that he imagined an excavator-like arm that would 
stand still relative to the body of the robot. 
Brenna said that the elliptical box in our kit was to slim, 
and too short. She did not want to have to bend to reach the 
objects the robot would be transporting. She pointed out that 
the table we were using in our workshop was at an appropri-
ate height (70–75cm). She then chose a rectangular wooden 
box but expressed dislike for the sharp corners. Therefore, 
she rounded the corners by covering paper towels in fabric 
and placing it on top of the prototype (Figure 3, D) to repre-
sent rounded edges. She specified that three sides should be 
covered in dark green, smooth, dust repelling, easy to clean, 
and easy to keep clean. She commented that the boxes of 
wood and cardboard we brought with us were too rough, 
would gather dust, and be difficult to keep clean. 
Antonella (who had participated in workshop 1) chose an 
elliptical base for the prototype (Figure 3, B, and C); she 
covered the base in red-purple flexible cardboard and assem-
bled wheels for the robot prototype. She would have pre-
ferred covering the prototype in a single colour, but we did 
not bring enough. She further developed her design from 
workshop 1, and she added a pocket for her glasses and 
raised edges along the top to prevent things from falling 
down. 
Basilio made a prototype (Figure 3, J) with 4 legs and a 
pointed top. The top could be folded down to a shelf. The 
side of the robot would be full of colourful lights, represent-
ed by the wooden colourful beads. The robot had a rectangu-
lar box as a base. He told us that he was fond of wood and 
that it was pretty. He told us that he thought it was fun and 
nice to participate in the workshop, he had not done anything 
similar previously, but he would want to do it again. 
C. Material explorations 
We noticed that the participants were not moving around 
the table and remained seated in their original positions 
through the workshop, and therefore assisted with fetching 
tools and materials. Some participants used wheelchairs that 
made moving around the table difficult. Others had pain. 
Some participants may also have refrained from exploring 
the piles and boxes of materials out of courtesy. 
Some of the more successful material samples to present 
for the participants in terms of the extent to which the partic-
ipants engaged with the samples presented to them, were 
textile swatch books. These consisted of equally cut pieces of 
textiles bundled together according to qualities and sorted by 
colour. These presented the participants with a chance to get 
an overview of the possibilities regarding textile colour and 
texture without engaging with large sets of materials at once. 
The same was true for a small collection of knitted and cro-
chet samples, although these were larger and were not easily 
moved across the table. They were, however, explored by the 
participants who sat close by to them. 
From the initial requirements formulated by the partici-
pants during their telling and making, the materials steel, 
aluminium, and glass was identified as missing in our sam-
ples. We did bring aluminium foil, which served as different 
types of metal in the prototypes, as well as one piece of 
acrylic glass which was reused as glass in two prototypes. 
The design choice to bring ready-made basic forms, to 
partly prepare samples of material proved to be a good deci-
sion. Even if the samples could have been more varied in 
Figure 1.   
Figure 2.  
Figure 3. A: “Burger” robot with a 3D printed “backpack” for demonstration,  B: Antonella, C: Antonella,  D: Brenna, E: Aimee, F: Anca,  G: Agelica 
H: Bruno, I: Bruno,  J: Basilio,  K: Antonella,  L: Antonella 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

terms of sizes and forms, the partially prepared samples that 
fitted the basic forms helped make less demands on fine mo-
tor skills. The participants expressed a clear preference to 
delegating most of the physical work to us. Each participant 
was assisted by a researcher in many making tasks, such as 
cutting. Reducing cutting of fabric to one cut made it possi-
ble for some participants to do this themselves. 
V. 
FINDINGS 
Considering how older adults may be enabled to partici-
pate actively in designing robots for the home through physi-
cal prototyping, two themes recurred in our notes from the 
workshops. Throughout the workshops, it was clear that the 
participants needed to understand the purpose, context, and 
function of the robot clearly before being able to generate 
ideas about how it should look. The participants in the sub-
sequent workshops needed to further explore the stated pur-
pose of the fetch robot and understand it in the context of 
their own lives before they could start designing the robot. 
They wished to reconcile the purpose with the needs of their 
homes and daily lives. The thought of having a robot in the 
perceived limited space of their apartments made them con-
cerned whether the robot would really be useful to them. The 
lack of a clear purpose for the robot made it difficult, if not 
impossible, for the participants to start generating ideas and 
building a prototype.  
Secondly, nearly all the participants questioned their abil-
ity to contribute to the design of robots. They felt like they 
did not have the right technical competence for designing 
robots, and they told us that it seemed futile to try to contrib-
ute new ideas to a group of researchers who were devoting 
their work to robot design. However, during the workshop, 
the participants understanding of their environment and ex-
periences resulted in them contributing many ideas of what a 
robot can do in the home and what it could look like. 
Regarding the method of material exploration and partic-
ipatory prototyping, we found that the criteria for the choice 
of materials reported by the participants could be categorized 
broadly in aesthetic and functional concerns. The aesthetic 
concerns revolved around how the technology would fit into 
the existing and specific interior decoration of their homes. A 
related criterion was that the materials match current stand-
ards available in trade, that the product would match similar 
technology and that the materials were readily available in 
the production line. Several of the participants expressed 
concern about the functionality of the materials, especially 
regarding the maintainability of the robot. Most important to 
many participants was that the robot surface would be easy 
to keep clean. Some also stressed the need for visibility in 
terms of materials contrasting the relevant contextual materi-
al like the floor. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
A. The need for a clearly understood context and purpose 
for the design 
Many of our participants started out focusing on the real-
ism of the robot design in terms of both the perceived need 
for and value of the robots, as well as their own ability to 
contribute to robot design in a meaningful way. They needed 
to first understand the purpose and be convinced of the value 
of the robot before they were willing to engage in the physi-
cal exploration. The purpose of the fetch robot seemed to be 
a purpose most participants could reconcile with their own 
needs in some way, and fetching items was also a popular 
suggestion in a survey among older adults [10]. We achieved 
this in the workshops by having a researcher pair up with 
each participant to explore the story of the participant. Even 
if the conversations went across the table between several 
researchers and participants, the one-to-one working pairs 
seemed important for the gradual development of a purpose 
and a context emerging from each participant. The literature 
emphasizes the role of physical prototyping for enabling 
stories about practices, understanding and mutual learn-
ing [5], [6]. We have experienced that telling and making 
operate in tandem and that the stories are also necessary to 
enable physical prototyping.  
B.    
Material explorations 
Our main aim with the workshop assignment was to ex-
plore the look and feel of a robot in the home, but this proved 
to be secondary to the purpose and value of the robot for our 
participants. While we could identify several criteria of 
choice of materials for the design of a robot in the home, as 
outlined under findings, these criteria often emerged during 
the conversation, and less so during the exploration of our 
material samples. The material samples were more often 
chosen and examined based on the aesthetic and functional 
requirements that emerged from the stories of the practice 
and the homes of the participants. 
The design choices we made initially regarding what ma-
terial samples to bring to the workshop and how to present 
them might have both limited and opened the design space in 
terms of new design ideas [1]. The form and positioning of 
the material samples and tools in relation to the participants 
may have influenced the extent to which any given material 
was explored. This suggests that the placement of samples of 
the available materials and tools should be given thought in 
the panning of physical prototyping workshops with older 
adults. It might have been useful to prepare samples of all 
available materials in small collections that the participants 
would be able to handle to compare the whole selection in 
one overview. This would imply preparing multiple equal 
sets of samples, and then offer to assist them in fetching 
larger quantities of the chosen materials as the participant 
reviewed the samples and got ideas for compositions. Tools 
should be available and placed in a handy distance so that all 
participants could see all the tools available to them. 
C. Creativity and technical feasibility 
While the participants started out focused on the realism 
of the assignment, most were able to use their imagination 
freely during the prototyping activity. Many of the partici-
pants developed their prototypes beyond their initial needs 
and requirements, such as dancing partner robot and hair-
dresser robot. In this phase of the design process, we were 
interested in the look and feel of the robots rather than the 
technical feasibility of the suggestions, and we encouraged 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

creativity and fantasy in the prototyping. As we explained in 
our findings, Section V, several participants questioned the 
value of their prospective contribution to design ideas for 
robots. To share their expertise with us, they needed us to 
share our domain knowledge with them, so that they could 
understand the problem area and the possibilities they had in 
generating design ideas for robots in their homes. In the fur-
ther exploration of this method, it would be interesting to 
introduce digital and technical components to visualise the 
technical possibilities and limitations of robot technology to 
this user group. 
VII. 
 CONCLUSION 
We have reported from two workshops where we have 
used participatory prototyping and material explorations to 
facilitate participation in the design of robots for the home 
with older adults. Our findings suggest that while it is im-
portant to provide a context for the design of a robot at 
home, the development of the story about the robot in this 
context and in the daily life of the participants is essential to 
successful prototyping. A story of a robot placed into their 
life makes the basis for generating ideas about design. In our 
workshops, the activity of telling proceeded and informed 
the making and the material explorations. Due to the low 
mobility of the participants, the material exploration became 
more complicated, hence the presentation and forms of the 
material samples and tools provided in the workshops were 
important.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partly supported by the Research Council of 
Norway as a part of the Multimodal Elderly Care Systems 
(MECS) project, under grant agreement 247697. We would 
like to thank the staff and residents at the living facility and 
Ingeborg, Jo Herstad, Suhas Govind Joshi, Tone Bratteteig, 
and Åsmund Dæhlen. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, “Design decisions and the sharing of 
power in PD”, pp. 29–32, 2014. Presented at the Proceedings of the 
13th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Industry Cases, 
Workshop Descriptions, Doctoral Consortium papers, and Keynote 
abstracts - Volume 2, ACM. doi: 10.1145/2662155.2662192. 
[2] 
V. L.  Hanson, A. Cavender and S. Trewin, “Writing about 
accessibility,” 
Interactions, 
22(6), 
pp. 
62–65, 
2005. 
doi: 10.1145/2828432. 
[3] 
R. Soma, V. Dønnem Søyseth, M. Søyland, and T. Schulz, 
“Facilitating Robots at Home: A Framework for Understanding Robot 
Facilitation,” in ACHI 2018, The Eleventh International Conference 
on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, IARIA, 2018, pp. 1–
6, ISBN: 978-1-61208-616-3 
[4] 
J. Blomberg and H. Karasti, in Ethnography. Positioning ethnography 
within Participatory design in Simonsen, J and Robertson, T (ed.) 
Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design, 2013. 
[5] 
S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Assembling fragments into continuous 
design”: On participatory design with old people. Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing.  ISSN 1865-1348.  223, s 13- 29, 
2015. doi: 10.1007/9783-319-21783-3_2. 
[6] 
E. Brandt, T. Binder and E. B. Sanders, in Tools and Techniques. 
“Ways to engage telling, making and enacting” in Simonsen, J and 
Robertson, T (ed.) Routledge International Handbook of Participatory 
Design, 2013. 
[7] 
J. Jarke and S. Maaß, “Probes as Participatory Design Practice”, I-
Com, 17(2), pp. 99–102, 2018. doi: 10.1515/icom-2018-0026 
[8] 
J. Forlizzi and C. DiSalvo, “Service Robots in the Domestic 
Environment: A Study of the Roomba Vacuum in the Home,” in 
Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conference on 
Human-Robot Interaction, ser. HRI ’06, New York, NY, USA: ACM, 
pp. 
258–265, 
2006. 
ISBN: 
978-1-59593-294-5. 
doi: 10.1145/1121241.1121286. 
[9] 
L. Pigini, D. Facal, L. Blasi, and R. Andrich, “Service robots in 
elderly care at home: Users’ needs and perceptions as a basis for 
concept development,” Technology and Disability, vol. 24, pp. 303–
311, 2012. 
[10] S. Bedaf, G. J. Gelderblom, and L. de Witte, “Overview and 
Categorization of Robots Supporting Independent Living of Elderly 
People: What Activities Do They Support and How Far Have They 
Developed,” Assistive Technology, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 88–100, 2014, 
ISSN: 1040-0435. doi: 10.1080/10400435.2014.978916. 
 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

