Social Media Usage in Supporting Children with Cognitive Disabilities and Their 
Caregivers from Saudi Arabia: A Qualitative Analysis 
Reem Nasser Alshenaifi1,2 and Jinjuan Heidi Feng1 
1Department of Computer & Information Sciences, Towson University, Towson, MD, USA 
2 Department of Computer Science, Majmaah University, Al-Majmaah, Saudi Arabia 
Email: ralshe1@students.towson.edu, jfeng@towson.edu 
Abstract— This study investigates the use of social media in 
supporting and empowering Saudi caregivers of children with 
cognitive disabilities. Through interviews with 13 caregivers, we 
examined their motivations and concerns around using social 
media in relation to their children or students’ conditions. We 
also investigated the role of social media during the COVID-19 
pandemic. We found that caregivers used social media with 
caution to seek information and emotional support, to spread 
awareness, and to communicate and build communities. Our 
findings also suggest that caregivers face a great deal of 
challenges in security and privacy, social stigma and negative 
discussions, misinformation, as well as lack of resources. We 
propose recommendations to the government, specialists, and 
parents that could lead to more effective use of social media to 
support children with cognitive disabilities and their caregivers 
in Saudi Arabia. 
Keywords-Social Media; Cognitive Disabilities; Children; 
Saudi Arabia; Accessibility. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 Caregivers across the world face challenges when raising 
a child with a disability. Therefore, they are constantly in need 
of information and social support to navigate through these 
challenges [1]. Social media has become a desirable means for 
spreading awareness, advocating for rights, establishing 
communities, acquiring information, and much more [2]-[4]. 
Numerous studies have confirmed the substantial value of 
social support and community belonging for individuals with 
disabilities and their caregivers. However, existing literature 
mainly focuses on Western users. In fact, public perceptions 
around disabilities differ across cultures [5]. Saudi caregivers, 
in particular, face unique challenges which might not exist in 
the Western context due to differences in social and cultural 
customs and values [6].  
Saudi users have shown an increasing interest in using 
social media in the past decade. Previous studies emphasized 
its significant role in empowering members of Saudi society. 
These empowerment opportunities cover many aspects of 
their lives, ranging from establishing new forms of cross-
gender communications [7] and possibly examining potential 
spouses [8] to facilitating interaction skills among adult users 
with autism [9]. Social media has helped women, specifically, 
in their integration into entrepreneurship [10], their 
participation in political activities and rights campaigns [11], 
as well as facilitating their inclusion in research and 
humanitarian studies [12]. However, to date, there is no 
research that investigated how social media was used to 
support children with cognitive disabilities and their 
caregivers from Saudi Arabia. We, therefore, conducted a 
study of online interviews as our initial effort to fill in this gap. 
Knowledge in this area can provide insights for educators and 
social workers to improve their services and support for 
families with children with cognitive disabilities. It can also 
help designers and developers of social media platforms 
implement features that accommodate the special needs of this 
population. Finally, government and non-profit organizations 
may benefit from this body of knowledge when developing 
policies and practices related to children with cognitive 
disabilities.  
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II presents 
an overview of the related work; Section III describes the 
methodology we used to conduct this research; Section IV 
presents the findings in four main themes; Section V discusses 
the results, their implications, and the limitations of our study; 
Section VI introduces our conclusions and further work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Researchers have explored the value of social media in 
promoting public awareness around disability, as well as in 
building relationships and establishing communities. A recent 
work by Auxier et al. [13] found that Twitter is an effective 
means for establishing political action and awareness 
campaigns. Similarly, Li and Brady indicated that social 
media platforms can be effective tools for users, especially 
disability rights activists and people with disabilities, to 
promote public awareness, address accessibly issues, and 
encourage taking corrective actions [14]. In regard to building 
communities, Hashemy studied the use of social media 
platforms among 17 Canadian high school students with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) to find that social media 
platforms, particularly Facebook, are widely used to share 
information and connect with others [15]. 
An individual’s disability does not only affect them, but 
also affects their caregivers. As many studies noted, parents 
of children with disabilities are in a desperate need for 
information and social support. Kirby et al. found that parents 
of children with developmental disorders have the majority of 
postings on an online message board [16]. Their analysis of 
the posts identified multiple themes, including assistance 
seeking and experience sharing. Several studies investigated 
the role of social media in supporting caregivers of children 
with disabilities [2][3]. For example, Ammari et al. conducted 
research on parents of children with special needs in the 
363
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

United States and found that they relied mainly on Facebook 
and Yahoo groups for acquiring information and obtaining 
social support [3]. Furthermore, their study indicated that their 
participants experienced more freedom and less judgment 
online compared to real world scenarios. These studies only 
involved Western users; more research is needed to explore 
how users from substantially different cultures, such as the 
Saudis, interact with such technologies. Studies particularly 
addressing disability-related matters in Saudi Arabia are very 
scarce.  
III. 
METHODS 
We conducted in-depth semi-structured interviews, 
following the procedures elaborated by Lazar et al. [17]. The 
interview questions were grouped into five main categories: 
(1) demographics and background, (2) general use of social 
media applications, (3) social media use related to children 
with cognitive disabilities, (4) government support, (5) the 
role of social media during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
A. Interview Procedure 
Thirteen participants were interviewed for the study. 
Participants were recruited through the ‘snowball’ technique 
recommended for highly conservative countries, such as 
Saudi Arabia [8][12][18]. Among the 13 participants, 12 were 
female. Five were specialists working with children with 
cognitive disabilities and their families, six were parents of 
children with cognitive disabilities, and two were siblings. 
The ages of the interviewees ranged from 19 to 44 years; eight 
participants had an undergraduate degree, while four had 
graduate degrees and one had a high school diploma. The 
conditions of the children that the participants cared for 
included ASD, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD), Down syndrome, severe cognitive disabilities 
(unspecified), dyslexia, Cerebral Palsy, learning disabilities 
(unspecified), and brain atrophy. Interviews were conducted 
online through social media applications, such as Snapchat, 
WhatsApp, and Skype, by using voice call and/or instant 
messages. Interviews lasted between 40 and 120 minutes. The 
participants were given the freedom to choose the language of 
the interview. Two interviews were conducted in English 
while 11 interviews were conducted in Arabic (the native 
language of the participants as well as the first author).  
B. Data analysis 
In preparation for the analysis, the first author 
carefully transcribed and translated the interviews into 
English. We conducted thematic analysis following the 
approach proposed by Braun and Clarke [19]. The interview 
transcripts were coded in NVivo12 [20] using an inductive 
approach, which is suitable for areas of research, such as ours, 
that have not been thoroughly investigated.   
In the first phase of analysis, the first author open-coded 
the transcripts and organized the codes into themes. Then, the 
second author reviewed the codes and themes and discussed 
with the first author all cases of disagreement until the 
disagreements were resolved. At last, the two authors worked 
together to finalize the main themes and sub-themes. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
We present our findings in four main themes: motivations, 
difficulties and challenges, opportunities for enhancements 
(desires), and social media use during the pandemic. The main 
themes and their subthemes are illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Thematic map, showing four main themes and their sub-themes. 
A. Motivations 
Participants used social media for four reasons: seeking 
and sharing information, raising social awareness, expanding 
communication, and building communities.  
1) Information Seeking and Sharing 
Twelve participants reported that they used social media 
to acquire or share general knowledge and resources about 
their child’s disability. Family members increased their use of 
social media in relation to their child’s condition after their 
initial diagnosis, while specialists used it more intensively 
after joining the field of special education. For example, four 
parents shared their experiences of how social media helped 
them in gaining knowledge regarding their children’s 
conditions. P4, who has four children, the youngest with 
autism, expressed how unaware she was about autism before 
her child’s diagnosis and that she sought information on 
YouTube to educate herself: “Once I knew about my son’s 
condition, I opened the YouTube immediately to get 
information about his disability, how to look after him, and 
how to enhance his case.” While P4 chose to surf YouTube 
for educational videos, P11 chose to follow some accounts on 
Twitter: “I added several accounts that my child’s specialist 
recommended me to follow right after she diagnosed him with 
ADHD and Dyslexia.” In this excerpt, it is promising to see 
healthcare providers encouraging parents to educate 
themselves and directing them to reliable accounts on social 
media. This is particularly important for parents who believe 
that their healthcare provider is the only source of 
information: “I only communicate with specialists who follow 
my son’s condition in the hospital.” (P13) 
Some participants were approached by other caregivers of 
children with cognitive disabilities in an attempt to learn more 
about their own child’s condition and its symptoms: “The 
question I usually receive is how I knew my son is autistic.” 
(P10). P7 shared that searching the internet, Facebook and 
forums in particular, helped her to self-diagnose her sister and 
364
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

to find available governmental services: “I learned there are 
cases called learning difficulties, which is what my sister was 
suffering from, and then I knew that there was a governmental 
establishment which tested her and sent her to the appropriate 
school.” Additionally, all 5 specialists indicated that social 
media is a great avenue to “connect with specialists who have 
a great deal of experience in [the] field.” (P1) 
Interestingly, out of seven family members who used the 
platforms for the acquisition and dissemination of 
information, only three individuals shared information 
publicly. Out of these individuals, two are current graduate 
students living in the United States where their children 
received their diagnoses. This reflects a reservation in public 
sharing, which may be caused by fear of public criticism, lack 
of awareness, or privacy concerns. P11 commented on such a 
common practice: “I don’t share anything in public […], but 
I give advice privately to anyone whom I know have children 
with the same condition.”  
2) Raising Social Awareness  
The wide use of social media as a means of spreading 
social awareness has been acknowledged in many Western 
studies. In this study, only five out of 13 participants used 
social media to spread public awareness. Still, we found 
promising signs of using social media for this purpose among 
Saudi caregivers. Three participants used it to advocate for 
their children/students as well as to promote and defend their 
rights. Twitter, according to our participants, is the most used 
and suitable platform for advocacy as they exploit some of its 
known features to accelerate the spread of their message. 
These features include the use of “hashtagging” and 
retweeting. P3 shared her experience in sharing a hashtag that 
was directed to the government to change a regulation related 
to registering children with disabilities in daycare centers:  
“The Ministry of Labor changed the criteria of 
beneficiaries of the daycare services so that more than half 
of the children were excluded from the service. Families 
and 
specialists 
released 
a 
hashtag 
#ﮫﻗﺎﻋﻻا_يوذ_لﻮﺒﻗ_رﺎﻌﺷا_فﺎﻘﯾا [#TurnningOff_admission_ 
childrenWithDisabilities] calling for returning to the old 
criteria. We tweeted and retweeted until the decision was 
made by the custodian of the two holy mosques, King 
Salman, to restore the old regulations.” 
 While P3 has had a positive experience, P8, the father of 
an autistic daughter, feels “helpless” in that technology had 
not supported him in communicating his voice due to the lack 
of public engagement. He stated: “We need more awareness 
and cooperation of the competent authorities to spread 
awareness. I post hashtags on Twitter, but unfortunately, they 
are usually deleted after two or three hours because they lack 
the participation of tweeters.”  
In the same token, P3 wished she “had a louder voice” 
through having a great number of followers, so that her “posts 
were more valuable and influential in terms of media 
awareness and true implementation on the ground.”  
3) Communication 
Participants discussed the role of social media in 
supporting two-way communications. Twelve participants 
used social media to get connected with professionals or 
parents who had children with similar conditions. The purpose 
of communicating was mostly about providing and obtaining 
social support, specifically informational support. All five 
specialists stated that they use WhatsApp to communicate 
with parents. Some specialists used social media to 
continuously monitor children’s progress beyond their 
daycare center: “I use social media to check on the children’s 
progress in training and learning needed skills.” (P2) 
Participants reported that they mainly communicated 
through private social media communities, such as in 
WhatsApp 
groups, 
or 
through 
private 
one-to-one 
communication. P1 stated that she shared information and 
communicated with her collogues through a WhatsApp group, 
while communicates individually with the parents of her 
students. She said: “I do not share any information outside the 
scope of my colleagues’ WhatsApp group [...]and I send 
[information] to each mother separately.”  
Moreover, we found that the nature of the relationship 
between two entities, whether they have a personal or non-
personal relationship, had a substantial role in determining the 
platform used for communication. For instance, WhatsApp is 
preferred for interpersonal communications, whereas Twitter 
is a favorite for impersonal communications. We observed 
that platform preference was based on various factors, 
including security as well as the supported interaction features 
within each platform. For example, P2 expressed that she felt 
secure using WhatsApp: “WhatsApp is linked with phone 
numbers of the users; it is more reliable.”   
4) Community Building 
All specialists were part of online groups that brought 
them together in professional settings to share general advice 
and resources. However, only three out of eight family 
members belonged to online groups. P4 felt confused and lost 
after her son was diagnosed with autism, and she sought 
emotional and informational support from other parents 
online:  
“I started to look for people who have a child with the 
same condition as my son’s. I was asking about how to 
deal with him and improve his skills. I was confused and 
shocked ….” 
While three parents shared their positive experiences with 
online gatherings, five participants stated that they were not 
part of any online groups.  
B. Difficulties and Challenges 
Saudi caregivers face barriers that hinder them from fully 
exploiting the potentials of social media. Five major barriers 
identified in the interviews include: privacy concerns, 
negative discussion, misinformation, lack of resources, and 
design of technology. 
1) Privacy concerns 
Ten participants expressed worries regarding their privacy 
when using social media. P9 believed that the degree of 
security and privacy varied across platforms and that she 
trusted Twitter more than other platforms: “Twitter is 
excellent in security and privacy, where in Telegram, as an 
example, fears exist from hacking and suspicious links.”  
Regardless of her own view, P7’s family did not approve 
of her sharing information about her sister’s condition online 
because they did not want to reveal her case to others. She 
365
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

expressed: “My family prefer not to talk about my sister's 
condition in front of anyone.” Her family also disallowed her 
sister from using certain applications on her smart phone for 
fear of violating her privacy and sharing her private 
information with strangers: “They try to keep my sister away 
from using Snapchat, Facebook, or Twitter because she can 
be easily contacted by strangers and fake accounts”.  
Similarly, P3 believed that “as everyone can use anything 
on social media, our intellectual property is vulnerable to 
theft”, and referred to her experience by saying: “I've shared 
a number of self-designed posters with my students; then, one 
day I was surfing Instagram […] and was shocked to see my 
work being displayed for sale in one of the commercial 
accounts on Instagram.” 
Furthermore, the response from six participants revealed 
an interesting contradiction where they stated that they were 
not concerned about their privacy; Yet, they did not share any 
information about themselves or about the children they cared 
for on social media.  
“I am not concerned, if someone posts something, he 
knows it can be circulated a lot on social media, so each 
user is responsible and bears the consequences of his 
actions. For me, I am very cautious and do not share 
things I do not wish to spread.” (P1) 
It is clear that there was great concern among parents about 
sharing basic information about their children, such as their 
disability treatments and training updates with other parents. 
Three out of five specialists stated that they communicated 
with their students’ mothers individually through WhatsApp 
as there was no group that brought them together. “I do not 
guarantee that each mother is okay with me sharing 
information related to her child’s case. I do not have a group 
for all the mothers together since some of them refused the 
idea.” (P1)  
2) Negative discussion and comments 
Sharing negative experiences may be seen by some as a 
way to relieve personal stress, to find emotional support, or to 
show solidarity with other caregivers. However, most 
participants expressed their displeasure at sharing such 
experiences. P1 explained her reason for disapproving of such 
posts: “In Snapchat, a mother of an autistic son always shares 
about her son’s constant crying; sharing such experiences 
negatively affects other parents who have children with 
Autism, […] other mothers might lose hope that their children 
will improve over time.”  
While most participants were against posting any negative 
posts, P11, on the other hand, believed it could open the door 
for discussion and criticism, which might help in raising 
public awareness: “I think that they are published to be 
criticized and to spread awareness.” 
P3 took a middle place between the two opinions, where 
she thought that someone should not post bad behaviors about 
a specific child, but talk about these behaviors scientifically 
for the purpose of spreading the knowledge needed.  
Furthermore, being concerned about social stigma 
negatively affected the caregivers’ engagement level. Some 
became passive users, where they only read and browsed 
information. For instance, P4 chose YouTube to search for 
answers instead of asking someone she personally knew as she 
was afraid of public judgment: “I feel embarrassed when I ask 
questions on WhatsApp. Also, because I do not want anyone 
to look at me or at my son with pity or to diminish his value.” 
While P7 believed social media could be a great avenue 
for sharing and raising public awareness, she stopped sharing 
or asking public questions about her sister’s condition out of 
respect for her parents’ desire because they were afraid that by 
sharing her condition, she might get judged or bullied: “they 
are afraid talking about her in social media may let people 
bully her and call her names or treat her differently.”  
Another reason behind refrainment of sharing was the fear 
of being blamed. P4 stated “blaming them[parents] as they 
are the reason of their child’s disability” as the most negative 
attitude that bothered her in social media discussions.  
Similarly, P10 shared that people on social media always 
criticized and blamed her for the way she was raising her son: 
“My son is Autistic. I will get attacked, people will tell me that 
I did not hug him enough and even I am spoiling him too much 
[..] it used to put me in tears.” 
In addition to the challenges they already face as 
caregivers of children with disabilities, the fear of online 
judgment and exposure to negative comments adds an extra 
layer of complexity to fully adopting social media platforms.  
3) Misinformation 
The caregivers reported that seeking credible information 
could be a challenge. Some specialists showed their 
resentment about spreading false statements that might 
mislead parents: “They call autism “disease,” and this thing 
is wrong because it is a disorder and has no cure!” (P1).  In 
the same token, P7 questioned the credibility of social media 
content and referred to her experience on Instagram about an 
advertisement announced as an educational event for families 
of children with disabilities:  
“According to the post, if the family attended, they would 
be provided with information about the children’s 
conditions and methods of treatment; so, I, my sister, and 
my brother went to find out that the program was all about 
distributing cake and brochures. It was just an 
advertisement which is often found on this platform.” 
 Misinformation about health treatments can actually put 
children with disabilities in danger. Therefore, concerns 
around using generalized treatment plans or fake medications 
were a major theme in the specialists’ responses. One 
participant shared, in pain, one of her student’s experiences:  
“I have a case of a child who has paralysis. His mother 
travelled to meet a traditional healer after she had seen 
his ads and clips on social media. The medication was in 
the form of burning her son’s skin [a form of moxibustion]. 
The mother said I paid him a lot of money.  The worst part 
is my son is still not able to walk.” (P6)  
Some participants also expressed worry about the 
credibility of social media accounts. For example, some 
questioned the credibility of the qualifications presented in a 
user’s profile. P1 wondered: “[ how can someone] identify 
themselves in their bio as specialists of autism, learning 
difficulties, delayed speech, etc. This is incorrect! No one can 
be a specialist in all tracks.” Therefore, participants wished 
that the identities of users, especially those who identify 
366
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

themselves as specialists and health care providers, could be 
verified.   
4) Lack of resources 
The majority of our participants believed that there was 
scarcity in the available resources to support them and their 
children. In addition to the general lack of resources related to 
cognitive disabilities, two problems are especially pressing, 
namely the scarcity of related information in Arabic and 
online communities. 
To deal with the shortage of educational resources, 
especially in Arabic, P12 had to search for information in 
English because she “did not find much information in Arabic 
[…] about dyslexia ...” Besides the lack of Arabic language 
resources and Arabic content makers in the way that 
caregivers aspired to, most of the attention and effort was 
devoted to certain disabilities. All caregivers have expressed 
that there was “more interest in Down syndrome” compared 
to other conditions. 
With regard to the scarcity of online communities, P11, 
when asked about why she was not a part of any online group, 
answered: “simply because no one had created one and 
invited me to join.” In a similar way, P2 stated that she 
communicated with the mothers of her students separately 
since there was no group to bring them together.   
The lack of resources and online engagement around 
topics related to children with cognitive disabilities affected 
the level of awareness within the society, which in turn 
discouraged some participants from publicly sharing their 
children’s cases: 
“Honestly, I feel people in our society don’t know what 
dyslexia is. I remember one time I was talking to a friend 
about my daughter's condition. Later my friend came to 
me saying that she did not notice anything different about 
my daughter and that she looked “normal!” [..] I don't 
want to tell other people that my daughter is dyslexic. I'm 
afraid by doing so I will cause her harm [..]. I do not share 
any information about my child on social media. They see 
a person with dyslexia as a sick person.”  
5) Design of the technology 
Several parents complained about some of the inherent 
features within the nature of social media platforms, such as 
constant advertisements as well as abbreviating information 
especially when using Twitter. A mother shared her 
frustration with distracting ads hindering her ability to stay 
focused: “social media platforms display ads in an irritating 
way. I wish if they were Ads-free; those ads distract my 
attention.” (P11) 
Another element of social media design that some 
participants did not like is the abbreviation of information. 
The problem is particularly frustrating on Twitter due to the 
limit of 140 characters for each tweet. “The abbreviation of 
the information is done in an aggressive way where it becomes 
too short, misleading, and unclear.” (P9) 
C. Opportunities for Enhancements  
While the overall experience of using social media among 
Saudi caregivers was positive, they expressed a desire for 
certain features or functions on social media that might boost 
their level of confidence and improve accessibility. 
One proposed feature was a centralized storage unit where 
all the files related to a specific topic shared within a social 
media platform can be easily accessed: “I hope there is a 
place to keep all the files scattered here and there in one 
center and classify them according to the conditions, 
functional goals, etc.; as a file bank which has a search 
engine.” (P1).   
Having an account verified will encourage users to trust 
and engage in online interactions. As clarified by P9: “I use 
twitter in relation to the child's care because it includes a 
number of authenticated accounts […] their accounts verified 
with the Twitter blue checkmark.” Although social media 
platforms offer verification, only certain groups of people 
have the privilege to get their accounts verified, mostly 
celebrities and public figures. Participants expressed their 
desire in expanding social media credential checking, 
especially when the account owner claims to be a health care 
worker: “Check credentials of people who claim they are who 
they are!  For example, on Instagram, you will see actual 
doctors and fake ones, you will see actual speech therapists 
and people who took one course and called themselves speech 
therapists.” (P10) 
D. Social Media Use During COVID-19  
Participants shared the benefits as well as the downsides 
of using social media during the novel COVID-19 pandemic. 
Using social media during the COVID-19 pandemic has 
brought many benefits to the children and their caregivers, 
such as raising virus awareness, facilitating distance learning, 
and seeking social support.   Participants stated that social 
media helped them "learn about the disease and know how to 
protect [themselves and their] family. As, on social media, 
[they] can find the most important guidelines and instructions 
about [COVID -19].” (P4). 
Eight participants praised the role that social media played 
during the pandemic in facilitating the continuation of the 
learning process. Social media served as an alternative 
solution for sharing educational materials with parents, 
especially with the absence of a specialized educational 
platform: “The center my daughter attends did not provide 
any online courses and was completely shut down. My 
daughter’s teacher sent me a package of activities via 
WhatsApp to implement them with my daughter.” (P8) 
Furthermore, some participants used social media for 
social support. P10 stated that she turned to a group of mothers 
on Facebook for support when she could not find her son’s 
favorite snack due to the pandemic: 
“I reached out to other special needs parents for 
emotional support, as my son has his daily breakfast 
meltdown because he doesn’t see his favorite PJ sandwich. 
They all reached out to arrange for me to get some peanut 
butter and they sure did.” 
Finding social support through social media not only for 
the parents, but also for the children themselves is valuable: 
“my daughter misses her teacher […] she always brings the 
phone […] and repeats her name to call her. She calls her 
with an audio or video call through Snapchat.” (P8) 
Regarding the downsides, specialists stated that, during 
this tough time, they were unable to maintain long and direct 
367
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

communication with their students through social media. 
Thus, they fell short in adequately training them and 
evaluating their behavior goals and that they mainly relied on 
the children’s mothers to train and evaluate their progress: “I 
cannot evaluate children correctly; the training of children is 
not done fully and adequately by the mother due to limitations 
of understanding.” (P9) Another downside of social media 
during this time was the dissemination of misinformation 
around the novel Coronavirus. Two participants believed that 
“social media is the reason for increasing the anxiety level 
among people by promoting rumors and spreading 
information about infected people and deaths which caused 
panic among people.” (P5) 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The findings suggest that social media has the potential to 
empower Saudi caregivers and meet their informational and 
social needs. Caregivers increased their use of social media in 
regard 
to 
their 
child’s 
condition 
after 
the 
initial 
diagnosis, which is consistent with parents from the United 
States [21]. Caregivers from Saudi Arabia tend to prefer 
private over public sharing of information due to privacy 
concerns. This private sharing is maintained within private 
social media groups or one-to-one communications. While 
they share general information within social media channels, 
they are hesitant to ask private questions regarding their 
child’s condition due to fear of social stigma. Therefore, they 
prefer the passive format of communication to find answers, 
suggesting the importance of effective searching and filtering 
functions. This finding is consistent with an early study in 
which blind users felt hesitant to use their social networks as 
a Q&A avenue to their vision-related questions [22].  
The subject of our study "cognitive disabilities among 
children" is considered relatively sensitive matter to discuss 
specifically in the Saudi Arabian context [23], where privacy 
is highly appreciated and tied with core cultural values, such 
as honor and modesty [18].  In our study, privacy concerns 
among participants goes beyond concerns for maintaining 
self-identity and honor to fear of public judgment and social 
stigma. In fact, several participants mentioned that they have 
hidden their children’s disabilities from others, especially 
when the child is a girl and has an “invisible disability”, such 
as dyslexia. More research is needed to investigate caregivers’ 
online interaction with cyberbullying and the content shared 
that is considered culturally inappropriate and could cause 
negative reactions. While fearing stigmatization also exists in 
Western context [24], families and children with disabilities 
experienced less judgment online [3][25].  
The participants of this study revealed promising signs and 
positive examples of using social media, especially Twitter, to 
advocate on behalf of their children and influence policy 
changes. However, there is still lack of public engagement 
around topics related to disability. For decades, there were 
many misconceptions around disability and social exclusion 
practices within the kingdom; however, this has gradually 
started to change as a result of establishing a new 
governmental vision in 2016 entitled “Vision 2030” that 
emphasizes the rights of people with disabilities [26]. As a 
result, many initiatives to reform and promote the rights of 
persons with disabilities have taken place, such as the 
Authority for the Care of Persons with Disabilities and the 
Mowaamah program. All of these newly established programs 
and authorities have accounts on social media channels, 
especially on Twitter, to reach out to beneficiaries and raise 
public awareness. This is a promising effort that might 
encourage openness and information sharing. Still, substantial 
effort is needed to boost the public engagement level. 
Adopting more comprehensive mechanisms to spread 
awareness among society will be beneficial, such as funding 
seminars and conferences and other online and offline 
awareness activities. The government may also need to 
publicize their national efforts and online activities as many 
of our participants were unaware of them. We also 
recommend the allocation of funding to develop social media 
content in Arabic to address the lack of Arabic resources.  
Many studies conducted in Western context confirmed the 
significant value of online communities in supporting their 
members [2][3][27]. However, only three out of eight family 
members in our study belonged to online groups. This may 
indicate low engagement in online communities among Saudi 
parents and family members of children with cognitive 
disabilities. Their limited engagement may be due to the 
scarcity of dedicated online communities and/or privacy 
concerns. To encourage community engagement, we 
recommend incorporating online communities as a part of 
educational centers’ technological plans. We also urge social 
activists of parents, teachers, and health workers to initiate 
special interest communities. Additionally, the government 
could legislate data privacy policy to protect the rights of 
caregivers and their children on social media. Further research 
is needed to analyze other dimensions of caregivers’ 
engagement behaviors: e.g., understanding barriers of actively 
participating in online communities and the nature of online 
discussion that stimulates their participation. 
As an initial effort to explore this topic, the study has 
several limitations. Participants voluntarily reached out to us 
to be part of the study; therefore, the data sample is subject to 
self-selection bias. Those who volunteered may be more 
comfortable and open to share information about themselves 
and their children/students. As we mainly relied on social 
media channels for recruiting participants, caregivers who do 
not use social media were under-represented. Finally, our 
study oversampled female caregivers. Thus, our results might 
not be reflective of the whole population. In our future work, 
we aim to  mitigate these limitations through using different 
methods and data sources (e.g., social network analysis) 
and triangulating results between the current study and future 
work.  
VI. 
 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we studied how Saudi caregivers of children 
with cognitive disabilities use social media to support their 
needs as well as their children’s. We found that participants 
used social media to seek emotional and informational 
support, raise awareness, communicate with professionals and 
other parents, and build online communities. However, they 
encountered obstacles which hindered them from fully 
exploiting the advantages of social media, such as privacy 
368
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

concerns, misinformation, and lack of resources. We 
introduced several recommendations to the government, 
specialists and parents to help mitigate challenges faced by 
caregivers of children with cognitive disabilities on social 
media and enhance their user experience and online 
engagement.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to express our sincere appreciation to our 
participants for taking part in this study. Special thanks to 
Nourah Alshenaifi for her help with recruiting participants. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. W. Gowen, D. S. Christy, and J. Sparling, “Informational needs of 
parents of young children with special needs,” Journal of Early 
Intervention, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 194–210, 1993. 
[2] 
B. A. DeHoff, L. K. Staten, R. C. Rodgers, and S. C. Denne, “The role 
of online social support in supporting and educating parents of young 
children with special health care needs in the United States: A scoping 
review,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 18, no. 12, p. e333, 
2016, doi: 10.2196/jmir.6722. 
[3] 
T. Ammari, M. R. Morris, and S. Y. Schoenebeck, “Accessing social 
support and overcoming judgment on social media among parents of 
children with special needs,” in Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM 2014, 2014, pp. 
22–31. 
[4] 
A. C. Wright and S. Taylor, “Advocacy by parents of young children 
with special needs: Activities, processes, and perceived effectiveness,” 
Journal of Social Service Research, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 591–605, 2014. 
[5] 
S. Mohamed Madi, A. Mandy, and K. Aranda, “The Perception of 
Disability Among Mothers Living With a Child With Cerebral Palsy 
in Saudi Arabia,” Global Qualitative Nursing Research, vol. 6, p. 
2333393619844096, 2019, doi: 10.1177/2333393619844096. 
[6] 
M. S. Al-Jadid, “Disability in Saudi Arabia.,” Saudi Medical Journal, 
vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 453–460, May 2013. 
[7] 
S. Nassir and T. W. Leong, “Conducting Qualitative Fieldwork with 
Ageing Saudis,” in Proceedings of the 2018 on Designing Interactive 
Systems Conference 2018 - DIS ’18, 2018, pp. 427–439, doi: 
10.1145/3196709.3196820. 
[8] 
A. Al-Dawood, N. Abokhodair, H. El Mimouni, and S. Yarosh, 
“‘Against Marrying a Stranger’: Marital Matchmaking Technologies 
in Saudi Arabia,” in DIS 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 2017, pp. 1013–1024, 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064683. 
[9] 
A. Mashat, M. Wald, and S. Parsons, “Improving Social and 
Communication Skills of Adult Arabs with ASD through the Use of 
Social Media Technologies,” in International Conference on 
Computers 
for 
Handicapped 
Persons, 
Springer 
International 
Publishing, 2014, pp. 478–485. 
[10] A. A. AlArfaj and E. Solaiman, “Investigating commercial capabilities 
and trust in social media applications for entrepreneurs,” in 
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & 
Technologies-Transforming Communities, 2019, pp. 65–75, doi: 
10.1145/3328320.3328390. 
[11] E. Thorsen and C. Sreedharan, “#EndMaleGuardianship: Women’s 
rights, social media and the Arab public sphere,” New Media & 
Society, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1121–1140, May 2019, doi: 
10.1177/1461444818821376. 
[12] S. Nassir and T. W. Leong, “Traversing Boundaries: Understanding the 
Experiences of Ageing Saudis,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2017, vol. 
2017-May, pp. 6386–6397, doi: 10.1145/3025453.3025618. 
[13] B. E. Auxier, C. L. Buntain, P. Jaeger, J. Golbeck, and H. Kacorri, 
“#HandsOffMyADA: A Twitter Response to the ADA Education and 
Reform Act,” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19, 2019, pp. 1–12, doi: 
10.1145/3290605.3300757. 
[14] H. Li and E. Brady, “#accessibilityFail: Categorizing Shared 
Photographs of Physical Accessibility Problems,” in Proceedings of 
the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers 
and Accessibility - ASSETS ’16, 2016, pp. 277–278, doi: 
10.1145/2982142.2982186. 
[15] S. T. Hashemy, “Usability and accessibility of social media among 
Canadians with high functioning autism,” (Master’s thesis, Library and 
Archives Canada, Montreal, Quebec), 2011. 
[16] A. Kirby, L. Edwards, and A. Hughes, “Parents’ concerns about 
children with specific learning difficulties: Insights gained from an 
online message centre,” Support for Learning, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 193–
200, 2008. 
[17] J. Lazar, J. H. Feng, and H. Hochheiser, Research Methods in Human-
Computer Interaction. Morgan Kaufmann, 2017. 
[18] N. Abokhodair and S. Vieweg, “Privacy & Social Media in the Context 
of the Arab Gulf,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on 
Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’16, 2016, pp. 672–683, doi: 
10.1145/2901790.2901873. 
[19] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in psychology,” 
Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, Jan. 
2006, doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa. 
[20] B. Edhlund and A. McDougall, NVivo 12 essentials. Lulu. com, 2019. 
[21] T. Ammari and S. Schoenebeck, “Networked Empowerment on 
Facebook Groups for Parents of Children with Special Needs,” in 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in 
Computing 
Systems, 
2015, 
pp. 
2805–2814, 
doi: 
10.1145/2702123.2702324. 
[22] E. L. Brady, Y. Zhong, M. R. Morris, and J. P. Bigham, “Investigating 
the appropriateness of social network question asking as a resource for 
blind users,” in Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work - CSCW ’13, 2013, p. 1225, doi: 
10.1145/2441776.2441915. 
[23] M. S. Al-Jadid, “Disability in Saudi Arabia.,” Saudi Medical Journal, 
vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 453–460, 2013. 
[24] S. E. Green, “‘What do you mean “what’s wrong with her?”’: Stigma 
and the lives of families of children with disabilities,” Social Science 
and Medicine, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1361–1374, 2003, doi: 
10.1016/S0277-9536(02)00511-7. 
[25] K. S. Sweet, J. K. LeBlanc, L. M. Stough, and N. W. Sweany, 
“Community building and knowledge sharing by individuals with 
disabilities using social media,” Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1111/jcal.12377. 
[26] Government of Saudi Arabia, “Vison 2030 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,” 
Report, 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://vision2030.gov.sa/download/file/fid/417. [Accessed: 02-Nov-
2020]. 
[27] J. Meng, L. Martinez, A. Holmstrom, M. Chung, and J. Cox, “Research 
on Social Networking Sites and Social Support from 2004 to 2015: A 
Narrative 
Review 
and 
Directions 
for 
Future 
Research,” 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 
44–51, Jan. 2017, doi: 10.1089/cyber.2016.0325. 
 
369
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

