Accessibility and Augmented Reality into Heritage Site Interpretation 
A pilot experience with visitors at the monument Lonja de la Seda in Valencia (Spain) 
 
 
Marina Puyuelo Cazorla, Lola Merino Sanjuán, 
Mónica Val Fiel 
Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería del Diseño  
Universitat Politècnica de València UPV  
Valencia, Spain 
 e-mail: mapuca@ega.upv.es, mamesa@ega.upv.es, 
movalfie@ega.upv.es 
José Luís Higón Calvet 
Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura de Valencia  
Universitat Politècnica de València UPV  
Valencia, Spain 
 e-mail: jhigon@ega.upv.es 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper summarizes a pilot experiment with 
Augmented Reality (AR) at this architectural monument 
declared World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1996. The 
project aims to increase accessibility to this site and provide 
users, in this case, visitors to the place, with intuitive 
experience of this technology. The experience and the 
application are proposed as a complement to the visit in the 
real environment, emphasizing the site as a context for situated 
learning that contributes to knowledge. Comprehensive visits 
to world heritage sites endow them with extraordinary cultural 
and social value. Augmented reality was chosen to activate the 
visit experience of the place by providing elements that can be 
visualized and manipulated directly by users in the real 
environment of the building itself without the need for any 
excessively invasive equipment in this historical and artistic 
context. This application is proposed firstly, to resolve 
perceptual issues due to poor lighting, the distance from many 
details and access to some areas and secondly, to explain some 
of the more complex construction aspects. This pilot 
experiment aims to establish initial contact with visitors to the 
place in order to obtain relevant information for modifications 
and adjustments to improve the components designed and 
developed for this site. 
Keywords; augmented-reality; accessibility; inclusive-design; 
heritage-sites; interactivity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Information and communication technologies together 
with technological tools for graphic and tactile representation 
are currently undergoing continuous development and 
expansion in the form of a wide variety of emerging 
applications in objects with multiple added characteristics. 
These new applications and their future possibilities open up 
a wide panorama for research ranging from the perceptual 
experiences these tools can offer to the nature of future 
devices that will incorporate them to interact with people.  
This research presents an Augmented Reality application, 
based on a graphic substrate, to improve accessibility to this 
built heritage site. The most significant challenge in this 
experiment is make this technology available to visitors to 
the monument so they can explore and visualize building 
details as directly and intuitively as possible. This pilot 
experiment attempts to test on visitors, potential users firstly, 
receptivity to the whole experience and secondly, the use of 
the equipment which forms the system's general interface. 
Augmented Reality is defined [1] as the combination of 
the real and the virtual, interactive in real time and can also 
be said to integrate the real context. With Augmented Reality 
it is possible to overcome certain limitations in the 
environment and/or users, and provide new perceptions and 
understanding of these places. The choice of AR technology 
for this site is based on a previous accessibility study [2] and 
the idea that this virtual reality application is less intrusive 
and provides the greatest opportunity for users to directly 
manipulate complex three-dimensional models in real space 
environments [3]. Augmented Reality (AR) is characterized 
as a technology that enables users themselves to interact with 
and visualize virtual models.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  This pilot experiment took place in the room of columns at the 
Silk Exchange, Valencia. This room is the most charismatic space in the 
building and it characterised by its slender twisted columns. 
 
This paper shows the role of this particular technology as 
mediator of a virtual representation/reality in building new 
ways of interacting with places and knowledge that can be 
useful in situations of disability. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This tool enables a new relationship to be established 
between the interpretation and conservation of heritage 
property, permitting access to simulated perceptions that 
helps to overcome the common limits of visual accessibility 
in a specific place, due to distance, high ceilings, poor 
lighting or in visitors themselves: impossibility of moving 
towards or approaching details, reduced discrimination and 
visual identification abilities, etc. 
The first part of this paper presents some direct 
antecedents of this type of application and experiments and 
their possibilities for accessibility. At the heart of the 
communication presents the AR system design and main 
components created for this pilot experience at this singular 
building. We observe interaction with users in the real 
scenario, their choice of the element to be observed, handling 
the marks and their appraisals. Finally, conclusions can be 
drawn firstly, from users' experience of the tool in order to 
correct aspects of the components which can contribute to 
more intuitive use. Secondly, from the experience as a 
contribution to accessibility to the place and its contents. To 
this end, visitors who had used AR to visualize some 
elements and understand them better completed an in situ 
questionnaire after visiting the site. The questionnaires were 
not analyzed but will be taken into account to guide the 
redesign of the data gathering tool itself. The redesigned 
questionnaire will be used in a longer implementation 
experiment at this site when this project has finished. 
 
II. 
VIRTUAL REALITY APPLICATIONS FOR INTERPRETING 
AND VISITING MONUMENTS 
The basis for this approach is situated learning [4] which 
assumes that learning occurs more efficiently in a real 
context and that the real context becomes an important part 
of the basic knowledge associated with this type of learning. 
The use of virtual reality systems can provide interpretations, 
stimuli and explanatory models that adapt more closely than 
others to the discourse of the disciplines to which they refer. 
In terms of accessibility, both in situ and through virtual 
experiences, they have an undisputed ability to compensate, 
by providing perceptions for understanding and enjoyment of 
such places, and are obviously irreplaceable in certain 
situations of disability. 
A. Augmented Reality 
AR is a field of unceasing experimentation as a 
technological tool at the service of three-dimensional graphic 
representation under constant development and expansion 
through a wide range of very different applications. Its 
ability to expand information in real environments through 
easy-to-use dynamic virtual visualizations can solve, among 
others, aspects of visual accessibility in real time [5]. 
Many AR applications generate different types of 
environments with varying requirements and spatial 
performance. Some of these tangible or tactile AR 
applications use a backlit table which can be manipulated 
from the surface by manually dragging elements as though it 
were a desktop [6]. In a particularly interesting approach, the 
MIT's Tangible Media group implemented interfaces linked 
to tangible objects in an attempt to demonstrate that 
interaction is more intuitive and functional when a 
relationship is established between the physical objects being 
manipulated and augmented and the computer-generated 
image (Ishii & Ullmer, 1997). SitePack is directly related to 
the area of representation and visualization of architectural 
models and warrants mention because of the instrumental 
nature of the application [7]. It was designed for exteriors 
and enables the combination of dynamic virtual 3-D 
elements to assess their impact on the real environment. 
Similarly, the Prisma 22 project proposes visualization of 
real landscape space by superimposing additional virtual 
content with relevant information. The portable AR21 
application attempts to explain the historical evolution of 
heritage buildings using animations and virtual descriptions 
in situ.  
 
III. 
A PILOT EXPERIMENT WITH AUGMENTED REALITY AT 
THE LONJA SILK EXCHANGE IN VALENCIA 
This section describes the first experimental application 
of AR designed for this site to explore the use and 
coexistence of the system in this singular monument as 
context scenario. The research focuses on interaction with 
users in the real environment where visitors can experience 
the application, identify the elements and acquire broader 
knowledge of the place and certain details.  
This pilot experiment aims to establish initial contact 
with visitors to the place in order to obtain relevant 
information for modifications and adjustments to improve 
the components designed and developed for this site. These 
are: the marks created for visitors to identify and use, the 
number of elements in the experiment, each of the 3-D 
models created and introduced in the AR engine and which 
are visualized in movement on the screen. Finally, a 
questionnaire was used to obtain users' opinions on 
receptiveness, use and appraisal of the application as an 
accessibility tool. In this initial contact with users and 
visitors to the place, the aim is to obtain relevant information 
for any modifications and adaptations required to improve 
the components designed for the site. 
The method for creating this Augmented Reality 
experience has been developed in two stages. First, the 
technical design of the 3-D visual models, based on selected 
elements from the site, and the panels which are the basic 
interface for expanding the chosen motifs. Second, the 
application was implemented in the real scenario for visitors 
to the building la Lonja. 
 
A. Technical desin: the 3-D models and the markers 
3-D visual models were created based on selected 
elements from the site. There are two different types of 
chosen elements according to volume: fully three-
dimensional construction elements (Fig 2), such as the shaft 
of the column, the capitals and stairs and plan-dependent 
elements such as windows traceries (Fig 3), doors, coffering 
and paving.  
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2.  The model of the column is another of the elements that provide 
a better explanatory model of the construction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The proportions of the gothic traceries are particularly light and 
delicately related to the visualization format. 
After determining the elements to be shown, three-
dimensional models with representation capacity must be 
generated to be visualized in the AR application. These 
models basically consist in geometry and texture or surface 
[8] and there are two possible approaches [9] to generating 
them as three-dimensional models: data acquisition using 
laser scanner technology or, three-dimensional modeling of 
the elements based on their graphic definition. 
The large quantity of descriptive graphic information on 
this building, together with general and partial measurements 
for the elements to be modeled, was considered sufficient. 
The models thus obtained have a low triangular load because 
the geometry representing them clearly and unmistakably 
defines the edges and apexes of the models. 
To represent the textures of the models, shadows were 
pre-calculated and then mapped on the model as material. 
Shadow pre-calculation used as surface material is not 
intended to be a faithful imitation of the texture of the 
represented objects, but to conceptualize the different 
materials in the constructive definition. The results for model 
geometry and texture are sufficiently representative to show 
the relevant aspects of the models on the AR application. 
Once the virtual 3D models where installed in the RA 
engine, the next decisive step for usability is to design the 
element that will act as intermediary in the user's experience: 
the markers. This interaction panels are used to trigger the 
loading of the different 3D models. 
Considering the informative superiority of iconologies 
over the written word to identify actions in other interactive 
systems, familiar figurative references can be versatile 
resources for an interaction space.  
The choice of graphic metaphors can help users to 
understand interface functionality better and improve 
accessibility. In an attempt to follow these considerations 
and bearing in mind the characteristics of this historic 
building, we didn’t use common binary marks and it was 
proposed that these marks should be identified directly by 
users and related to the motifs they show. So, graphic 
formats were designed ex profeso for this site, paying 
particular attention to integration and comprehension. This 
process required some images to be retouched and the 
proportion of representation areas to be varied to obtain 
those that were finally used in the experiment. 
The outcome, assessed by users, is a composition focused 
on a square combining photographic images with high iconic 
and representative value. The image that identifies the 
element to be visualized is in the centre, framed by another 
photographic image that refers to the period and what was 
worked with in the building, that is, silks.  
These panels provide the necessary texture to be read by 
webcam. The proportions, size and format of these marks 
were pre-tested to ensure robust webcam recognition, and 
levels 4 and 5 were found to be optimum for the tracking 
technology employed. This system uses LabHuman 
markerless library which is based on the works of Wagner et 
al. [10] and Kim et al. [11]. The proposed method works fine 
with textured planar objects, that is, with planar images 
which contain a great number of keypoints. This library 
implemented a method based on image retrieval techniques 
in order to recognize simultaneously a great number of 
images, specifically, Nister and Stewenius [12] vocabulary 
tree method was used. 
For this experience, 6 different panels were executed and 
tried. 4 of these panels have two different scales of 
visualization which allows more detailed information. To get 
this zoom in or zoom out effect user must move the markers 
closer or farther to the webcam. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Marks designed and used to activate 3D models of different 
details in the building. 
B. Usage Scenario and Pilot Study 
A total of 45 individuals from different age groups and 
background who were visiting the monument with or without 
a guide, took part in this pilot experiment and completed all 
parts of it. The site has a constant stream of visitors 
throughout the year, with peak times during the summer and 
the cruise season (cruise ships have been stopping at the port 
of Valencia since 2008). At those times especially, some 
three thousand visitors can concentrate around the building 
on a single day, with a predominance of families and people 
over fifty. Because the project aims to validate AR 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

technology as an accessibility resource, we were particularly 
interested in inviting participation from adults and the 
elderly. 
The used scenario in which the experience was 
developed consisted of an information panel with a 
description of the experience to be done and the technical 
equipment for sampling: support table, 23 inch television 
screen with web cam, laptop loaded with the models, the six 
marks printed in matte finish surface with the elements to be 
visualised representing the models. It is worth noting that, 
given the characteristics of this protected heritage site, one of 
the requirements was include the minimum number of 
objects in order not to interfere with the global view of the 
monument. 
The fact that users see their own hands on the screen 
means they immediately experience and interpret what has to 
be done while they direct the panel to the camera. The speed 
at which users learn to handle the marks and remember and 
find positions and the shapes they want obeys the concept of 
“proprioception” [13] and can be observed in these 
immersion experiments.  
Another positive aspect worth mentioning [14] is that 
despite having visited the building or just passing through, 
visitors were willing to try out different models and dedicate 
more or less time to each one as they chose. They never said 
they were tired of standing up or of having to get up and 
direct the panels towards the video camera. Although the 
effect of surprise disminished over time trying different 
models, it persisted and increased at multiple occasions 
depending on the 3Dmodel. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.   Some visitors like the elderly showed a lot of interest and 
surprise when using the application, observing elements that are difficult to 
see because of where they are (a). The opportunity to locate different 
elements in the place and identify them in the real space is one of the 
greatest attractions for users and a game for young children (b). 
After the visit to the monument, users were asked to fill a 
survey in an informal pilot study in order to gather 
qualitative 
data. 
These 
interviews 
were 
conducted 
individually when they had used the marks and the AR 
application as they wished. Participants were asked about the 
degree of satisfaction with the use of this technology and 
how AR helped them to perceive aspects of the monument, 
which otherwise they had gone unnoticed. A general 
overview of the results suggests that users are satisfied with 
the use of technology, finding easy and useful for enhancing 
the comprehension/perception of the monument. 
Finally it is worth noting that they showed less interest in 
this conventional participation instrument than in their prior 
experience with the application. In general, we found that 
almost all participants felt comfortable using the system, it 
made an impact on them and they valued the use of AR in 
real contexts like this one very positively. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This experience with Augmented Reality at this heritage 
site shows the effectiveness of the tool as an instrument for 
accessibility and communication of the specific cultural 
content of the place by actively supplementing and extending 
vision. Visitors' experience with this technology has 
provided a profile of component characteristics for 
adaptation to the target public from the perspective of 
inclusive design. 
The marks were found to be effective and appreciation, 
impact and interest was found to be linked to their aesthetic 
and figurative dimension. Users enjoy identifying and 
selecting the motifs they are going to visualise with this 
technological tool. They can select what they wish to 
"enlarge" from the whole visit. This aesthetic and figurative 
quality increases cognitive compatibility in relation to these 
signals and consequently, is a determining factor for 
improving interaction with the system.  
The use of this technology acts in certain publics with a 
“picklock” effect for certain segments [12] who are directly 
attracted by these communication systems such as children 
and young people who feel enveloped, comfortable and 
participative with this type of digital media. Children and 
young people were eager and skilled in using the marks and 
tried to explore each model in great detail as if it were a 
game. However, other visitors closer to the target population 
of the experience as accessibility resource took part and were 
very attracted by the idea of being able to visualise the 
details of the place better. For these users, the fact that the 
system was easy to use and did not require the use of 
common computer peripherals was, as they noted, an 
advantage of the system 
The nature of these visual applications closely related to 
holistic perceptual phenomena makes it difficult to obtain 
quantitative results [8]. As perceptual phenomena are subject 
to interpretation, analysis and observation is complex. There 
has been no attempt to extract quantitative results from the 
experiment through the satisfaction questionnaire because, 
although it is a suitable strategy for obtaining information on 
aspects of technology use and acceptance, it has only been 
analysed in order to rectify the data collection instrument 
itself, sound out types of users, their receptiveness, 
satisfaction, etc.  
As a pilot experiment, it has enabled us to profile 
particular aspects in order to improve the application and its 
implementation in the Lonja Silk Exchange, such as 
redefining certain characteristics of the models, their 
visualization on screen and their evocation from the 
corresponding mark.  
The user's position in front of the screen had to be 
determined and highlighted and the camera re-located to 
obtain a medium shot of users during their experience to 
make it more global and inclusive. Groups of 3D models 
were established according to proximity in order to favour 
their localization in the place and details in the satisfaction 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

questionnaire were reconsidered to make it shorter and more 
operational in this use context. 
We conclude that this AR application project will 
enhance this artistic and historical heritage site in Valencia, 
giving an interactive resource which increases visitor 
interest, its participation and a holistic experience of this site. 
The future works of the research team are directed to 
improve the aspects of usability of the tool, allowing thus a 
better access to the heritage to the groups with limitations in 
his visual or perceptive capacities. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This pilot experience has been carried out in 
collaboration with the HumanLab as part of a research 
project in progress, funded by the Universitat Politècnica de 
València 
Research 
Program 
PAID0511 
"Nuevas 
Aplicaciones de las Tecnologías Gráficas para la Mejora de 
la Sostenibilidad, el Conocimiento y la Accesibilidad al 
Patrimonio” (Ref 2786).  
It is also necessary to be grateful to the Town hall of 
Valencia which has allowed us to realize the experience in 
this protected building. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Azuma, “A Survey of Augmented Reality”, Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, Vol. 6, nº 4, 1997, 
pp. 355-385. 
[2] M.Puyuelo, L. Merino, M. Val, F. Felip and J. Gual, “Access 
to World Heritage Sites: Design Products that Transform Sites 
into Collective Spaces for Enjoyment and Interactive 
Learning”, DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES: AN 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL  in Champaign, Illinois, USA 
by 
Common 
Ground 
Publishing 
LLC 
http://ijg.cgpublisher.com/product/pub.154/prod.364  (último 
acceso 23/01/2013), 2010, pp.  409-433. 
[3] D. Schmalstieg and A.Fuhrmann, VRVis Research Center for 
Virtual “The Studierstube Augmented Reality Project”, 
PRESENCE: Vol. 11, No. 1, February © 2002 by the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, pp. 33–54.    
[4] S. Scribner, “Thinking in action: Some characteristics of 
practical thought”, en Sternberg, J. y Wagner, R. K., Practical 
intelligence: Nature and origins of competence in the 
everyday World, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
1986, pp. 13-30. 
[5] G. E. Jaramillo, J. E. Quiroz, C. A. Cartagena, C. A. Vivares, 
and J. Willian Branch: Mobile 
Augmented Reality 
Applications in Daily Environments”. Revista EIA, ISSN 
1794-1237, Número 14, Escuela de Ingeniería de Antioquia, 
Medellín (Colombia), Diciembre 2010, pp. 125-134. 
[6] B .Ullmer and H. Ishii, “The metaDESK: Models and 
prototypes for tangible user interfaces”. Proceedings of ACM 
User Interface Software and Technology (UIST’97), 1997, 
223–232. 
[7] M. B. Nielsen, G. Kramp, and K- Grønbæk, "Mobile 
augmented reality support for architects based on feature 
tracking techniques". Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Interactive Visualization and Interaction Technologies, 
Krakow, Poland, 2004. 
[8] O. Bergig, N. Hagbi, J. El-Sana, K. Kedem and M. 
Billinghurst, “In-Place Augmented Reality”, Virtual Reality 
Springer-Verlag London Limited, 2011, pp. 201–212. 
[9] F. Fantini, “Variable Level of Detail in Archaelogical 3D 
Models Obtained through a Digital Survey”. Revista EGA 
Nº19, 2012, pp 306-317 
[10] D. Wagner, G. Reitmayr, A. Mulloni, and T. Drummond, 
Schmalstieg D, “Real-time detection and tracking for 
augmented reality onmobile phones”, IEEE Trans Vis 
Comput Graph 16(3), 2010, pp. 355–368. 
[11] K. Kim, V. Lepetit, and W. Woo, “Scalable real-time planar 
targets tracking for digilog books”, Vis Comput 26(6), 2010, 
pp.1145–1154 
[12] D. Nister and H. Stewenius, “Scalable recognition with a 
vocabulary tree”, In: IEEE Comput. Soc. conf. comput. vis. 
pattern recognit., vol 2. IEEE, 2006  pp 2161–2168. 
[13] M. Mine, F. Brooks Jr., and C. Sequin, “Moving objects in 
space: Exploiting proprioception in virtual-environment 
interaction”. Proceedings SIGGRAPH ’97, 1997 19 –26. 
[14] C. Baber, H. Bristow, S. Cheng, A. Hedley, Y. Kuriyama, M- 
Lien, J. Pollard, and P. Sorrell, "Augmenting museums and 
art galleries", 13rd Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction Interact 2001. Tokyo, Japan (9-13 July, 2001, pp. 
439-447. 
[15] O. Bergig, N. Hagbi, J. El-Sana, K. Kedem, and M. 
Billinghurst, In-Place Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality 
Springer-Verlag London Limited, 2011, pp. 201–212. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

