Towards Essential Visual Variables in User Interface Design  
 
Johanna Silvennoinen 
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems 
University of Jyväskylä,  
Jyväskylä, Finland 
e-mail: johanna.silvennoinen@jyu.fi 
 
 
Abstract—This paper focuses on visual variables in user 
interface design from the user perspective. Visual design of 
user interfaces is essential to users interacting with different 
software. The study is conducted with 3E-templates for users 
to express their impressions by writing and drawing regarding 
visual website design. The data is analyzed with qualitative 
content analysis through interpretation framework. The 
results of this study provide new insights into user-centered 
visual user interface design. The results indicate which are the 
most essential visual variables in user interface design and 
therefore should be emphasized in user-centered design that 
promotes positive UX and, thus, benefit user-centered visual 
UI design. The results of this study are beneficial for 
researchers in the field of visual aesthetics in human-computer 
interaction and to user interface designers.  
Keywords-visual user interface design; visual variables; user-
centered design; human-computer interaction 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Visual design of user interfaces (UIs) is significant to 
users interacting with different software.  In addition to the 
traditional efforts in human-computer interaction (HCI), 
current and future UIs need to be developed in a novel way 
to match the potentials offered by the newest computing 
technologies and the users´ requirements based on their 
visual experiences. However, the snowballing research of UI 
design has, until now, largely left the study of visual 
variables in UI design aside as means to enhance user 
experience (UX).  Current research concentrating on visual 
UI design in the research area of visual aesthetics in HCI has 
mainly focused on high-level attributes [1]. The high-level 
attributes, which have been in focus are, for example, unity 
and prototypicality [2], novelty [3], typicality and novelty 
[4]. Visual aesthetics in HCI lacks knowledge of low-level 
attributes, i.e., visual elements, such as color, size, and 
balance [5]. In this paper, a qualitative approach is adopted 
in order to increase knowledge of visual elements in UI 
design. 
In addition, from a user-centered viewpoint, the rapid 
development of UI technologies demands clarification of 
how visual variables should be utilized in UI design to 
promote positive UX. In this study, visual representations 
that draw on the theories of two-dimensional pictorial 
elements are utilized as theoretical vehicles to create novel 
insight into visual UI design. The dispensation of visual 
theory is in that it provides knowledge of exact visual 
variables, such as size, value, hue, orientation, contrast, 
texture [6], shape, proportion, and position [7] and, for 
instance, form, and expression [8], that are seen as visual 
elements inherent in contemporary UIs. Mullet and Sano [7] 
refer to visual language in designing visual UIs. Through 
visual language, based on visual elements, UIs communicate 
to the users. Visual language of UIs is divided into visual UI 
design factors, which are visual characteristics (shape, color, 
position, texture, size, orientation, etc.) in a specific set of 
design elements (point, line, volume, plane, etc.) and the 
factors by which they relate to each other; such as balance, 
structure, proportion, and rhythm. 
These elements facilitate in finding the essential visual 
elements that should be applied intentionally to modern UI 
design in a manner that enhances interaction between UIs 
and users. Further, visual theory serves as a starting point in 
the study because aesthetic impressions conveyed by visual 
representations are the best way of evoking UX [9] that may 
promote positive feelings on UIs [10] due to the emotional 
nature of an aesthetic experience [11], [12]. 
In addition, the improvement of visual aesthetics of UI 
design will also enhance the usability of the product, by 
promoting visual organization, clarity, and conciseness of 
UIs [7]. More profound understanding of visual variables in 
UI design from user-centered perspective contributes to 
enhanced visual usability of UIs [13]. Moreover, in the 
current era of visual UIs, usable designs need to highlight 
aesthetic expression as meaningful presence for users instead 
of just providing designs from the functional tool perspective 
[14]. Clearly, research on users’ experiences on specific 
visual variables in UIs is needed. 
Aesthetic qualities are currently emphasized in designing 
software for HCI. According to Tractinsky [1] usability 
experts and designers came to the conclusion that these two 
aspects of design, visual aesthetics and usability, could and 
should coexist in the same context of use. Before this shift in 
the first decade of 21th century, visual aesthetics and 
usability were often seen to have a contradictory relation, in 
that, when one was emphasized the other one was 
automatically omitted. The shift has emerged mostly because 
recent research corroborates a positive correlation between 
aesthetic and usability principles [9], [15], [16], [17].  
Yet, often in the software development process, only the 
implementation of software (e.g., programming) and the 
traditional, general usability design [18] are considered as 
the most important parts of the process [19]. In reality, users’ 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

needs are not taken into account in the software development 
process [20]. The essential deficit in UI design lies in the 
absence of visual UI design specialists in the development 
process. 
This paper focuses on studying the visual elements as 
variables in UIs in order to provide usable insight into the 
evaluation and design of visual variables in UIs that promote 
UX and thus, to benefit user-centered visual UI design. This 
study focuses on shedding light into the following research 
questions: which visual variables contribute to positioning of 
the viewer as UIs´ ability to communicate the whole content 
in a visual manner as quick and easy to grasp? What are the 
essential visual variables in modern UIs´ from a users’ point 
of view?  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the 
method for the study is described. Second, the analysis of the 
data is presented. Third, the results of the study are discussed 
and finally, conclusions with future research and limitations 
of the study are presented. The results of this study will 
provide novel insights into what are considered as the most 
essential visual variables in UI design. Also, the results 
provide knowledge of what is considered important in visual 
UI design for future programmers, engineers, and 
practitioners in the field of information technology. 
II. 
METHOD 
When people encounter visual representations, such as 
visual UIs, numerous visual elements are encountered [21]. 
People may experience visual elements as both explicit and 
simple, but also as elements involving interpretation. 
Therefore, the research method should facilitate the 
combination of the analysis of qualitative and quantified 
issues. As Collier [22] points out, a studied phenomenon 
must first be examined without a precocious descent into 
analyses, maintaining a focus on pre-existent structures and 
points of interest. In this study, the data is collected and 
analyzed with a mixed methods approach [23]. 
First, a data driven qualitative analysis is conducted to 
find and describe the UI elements depicted by the informants 
after having looked at the selected UIs. Second, the elements 
found and defined were quantified in order to find the visual 
variables that are considered important in visual user 
interface design, particularly in layout design. The analysis 
was conducted with these two procedures, which supported 
the analysis from two different viewpoints.  
The quantification of the explicitly written words 
representing specific objects is important, but it also relates 
to the qualitative procedures. Krippendorf [24] emphasizes 
the meaning of context in content analysis. Texts and images 
are always produced in some specific cultural context and 
they also refer to wider cultural context. Regarding content 
analysis, this aspect is considered by first deploying the 
interpretative viewpoint as an independent phase before 
quantifying the found elements. 
The methodological decisions for the study are 
influenced by the nature of the visual viewpoint: instead of 
directly analyzing visual UIs, the data is comprised of 
participants’ descriptions of those visual UIs. Therefore 
many methods, for example visual anthropology [22], 
semiotics and iconography [25] as well as social semiotic 
visual analysis [26], are not applicable because they assume 
that the data along with the object of analysis are visual 
images. Furthermore, even though the data collected by other 
methods (such as eye tracking) could enable the extraction of 
specific points of attention, it would be impossible to analyze 
which particular element draws attention; color, form or, for 
instance, a tension between elements.  
The data collection was conducted in the University of 
Jyväskylä in the “The User-centered software development: 
Designing, realizing and testing the visual appearance and 
usability of user interface” course, held in the Department of 
Mathematical Information Technology. The course included 
10 lectures and 5 demo exercises. Three lectures dealt with 
visual UI design. The first lecture of visual design 
concentrated on user-centered visual UI design, the second 
dealt with layout design and composition and the third with 
color design. The data was collected with the 3E (expressing 
emotions and experiences) -template [27], [28] from the 
lecture dealing with layout design. The 3E-template was 
selected as a data collection method to allow respondents to 
express their thoughts both verbally and non-verbally: by 
writing and drawing (Fig. 1).  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The 3E-tempalate. 
From the beginning of the lecture, participants were 
familiarized with the design process in general, the 
evaluation methods of visual UIs, pictorial elements, such as 
lines with different characters, visual rhythm, dynamics, 
balance, tension, contrast and Gestalt laws. After this part of 
the lecture, the participants were introduced to the 3E-
template and they were asked to write and draw their 
thoughts and impressions of two still pictures of web pages, 
with a unique focus on the compositional elements. 
The participants took approximately 20 minutes in 
answering the two templates. The research data is comprised 
of the written and drawn reflections and interpretations on 
the compositional aspects of example web pages.  A total of 
100 templates were answered; 50 templates times two visual 
web pages.  
The common factors between the participants were that 
they all were in the same auditorium, heard and saw the 
same content of the lecture, and were all introduced to the 
web pages as well as to the template at the same time with 
the same advice, and were allotted the same amount of time 
for answering the template. In addition, all the participants 
were university students, mainly from the faculty of 
information technology. The group of participants included 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

both novice and expert users of information technology. Of 
the participants, 18.5 % were female and 81.5 % male. The 
age of the participants ranged from 19 years to 50 years. The 
average age of the participants was 25 years, standard 
deviation of the age was 5.8. The circumstances of the data 
collection were designed similarly for all the respondents.  
The objects for the compositional reflection were two 
web pages (Fig. 2) from the CSS Zen Garden web page 
gallery, a web page created with CSS-based design [29]. All 
the web pages have the exact same content but altering visual 
appearances. The CSS Zen Garden web pages were scoured 
in order to find two example layouts that would differ from 
each other. Especially with regards to the amount of 
elements that divide the surface; diagonal and horizontal 
lines, and the overall use of space. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The two UIs used in data collection. 
All the CSS Zen Garden web pages were looked through 
and opened in new tabs. The web pages were first divided 
into two categories and then compared step by step, finally 
resulting in two example web pages.  
Emphasis on a choice of web pages according to their 
differentiating elements was made in order to provoke 
participants towards a comparative analysis between web 
page layouts. Bell [30] also emphasizes that evaluations with 
content analysis are often comparative. The web pages were 
therefore selected with a comparative setting, regarding the 
pages’ differences in constructing visual elements. This was 
achieved in the study by using two different web pages with 
similar content but differing visual appearances. 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
The data analysis proceeded as follows. First, the data 
was observed as a whole by reading the templates. The 
purpose was to first focus on the visual variables in a neutral 
context in order to gain an understanding of the visual 
elements that are seen as important in visual UI design 
despite of the emotions they might evoke. Therefore, 
emotional aspects of the visual variables are not studied in 
this paper. The human figure in the templates was only used 
in a few papers to illustrate emotions by drawing facial 
expressions. Almost none of the drawings emphasized the 
written content or the facial emotions of the figure, but 
brought to attention something without a clear connection to 
the written content. Due to these characteristics of data, the 
focus of the analysis was on the written texts describing the 
visual elements. 
The aim was on finding the visual variables that have 
drawn the most attention and can be seen to have importance 
due their frequent emergence and contentual significance. 
After becoming acquainted with the data, a data-driven 
interpretation rule was developed, which was used to assist 
in the analysis. The interpretation rule included the items, 
which directed the focus on a conceptual level during the 
data analysis, in interpreting and comparing interesting 
insights within the data.  The interpretation rule consisted of 
compositional interpretation [31] and visual variables in UI 
design [7]. 
Compositional interpretation refers to describing the 
appearance of images with a detailed terminology. This form 
of visual analysis requires contextual knowledge of art work 
and a particular way of looking at images (“the good eye”), 
which is not methodologically explicit, but functions as 
visual connoisseurship and is a specific way of describing 
images. Compositional interpretation focuses on the image 
itself by trying to comprehend its significance mostly by 
focusing on its compositionality. Interpretation does not 
focus on “external factors” such as, what kind of messages 
the image sends and does it have some functional meaning.  
The terminology of compositional interpretation includes 
several components. First, the content: what the image 
actually shows. The second component is color, which is 
more specifically defined with concepts of hue, saturation 
value and the harmony of color combinations. Thirdly, 
spatial organization, which includes volume, lines, static and 
dynamic rhythm, geometrical perspective, logic of figuration 
(how the elements of a picture offer particular viewing 
position outside the photo) and focalisers (the visual 
organization of looks and gazes inside the picture and in 
relation to the viewer’s gaze). The fourth is light, what type 
of light is represented and from what sources of light. The 
last component is expressive content, which describes the 
“feel” of the image combining the effect of the subject matter 
and visual form.  
Compositional interpretation approach is established in 
Art History and is usually used in studying paintings [31]. 
Visual UIs can be comprehended as paintings or, in a more 
general viewpoint, as any two-dimensional representation 
that is constructed with pictorial elements, such as lines and 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

volumes. Compositional interpretation can, therefore, also be 
extended to analyzing visual UIs.  
Mullet & Sano [7] present visual UI design factors, 
which are shape, color, position, texture, size, orientation, 
point, line, volume, balance, symmetry, scale, contrast, 
structure, proportion, rhythm and position. The emphasis on 
visual factors in UI design is to provide insight into 
designing good visual usability and effective visual 
communication. They also point out that negative space and 
grouping are important components in visual UI design.  
The interpretation rule combined the discussed visual 
elements. The elements were derived from the two 
approaches described above and created the content of the 
interpretation rule.  The interpretation rule included, but was 
not restricted to, the following components: color (hue, 
saturation, value, harmony of color combinations), spatial 
organization, geometrical perspective, volume, lines, points, 
size, texture, shape, static and dynamic rhythm, orientation, 
balance, symmetry, scale, structure, proportion, negative 
space, grouping, position, figuration logic, focalisers, 
contrast and light. 
From a compositional interpretation, the expressive 
content component was excluded from the interpretation rule 
because of its emphasis on subject matter evoking 
emotionality which is not in the focus in this study. The 
templates that comprise the data were mainly used by the 
participants to express their impressions of the UIs in written 
form.  Examples of written expressions in the speech and 
think bubble are presented in Fig. 3 below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Examples of written expressions. 
The interpretation rule functioned as a ‘theoretical lens’ 
in the analysis. The lens was constructed based on the 
elements that were included in the rule.  The analysis 
required accuracy and concentration in detecting tiny 
nuances in finding the relations between the different visual 
elements, which required close attention in detecting how 
many altering ways there are, for instance, to describe the 
use of space in UIs. All the 100 templates were analyzed by 
writing down all the described elements in the templates and 
by counting the frequency of their occurrence.  
The second phase was to create categories of relations 
and then to critically combine several different categories of 
relations between elements, into main categories. For 
instance, from the example described above the first 
observation about left side alignment is related to the spatial 
organization as is the second notion of diagonal lines. The 
stability refers to symmetry and the role of the arrow is 
related to functionality. The interpretation rule guided the 
detection of written reflections of the described elements. 
For instance, the interpretation rule did not include usability, 
which emerged from the data as a connective factor between 
relations of different elements, especially in terms of visual 
usability [13] of the UI. In many templates think bubbles 
were used to express additional reflections, mostly about the 
supposed functionality of the UI.  
In the data, spatial organization was reflected in detail 
and visual elements referring to this category were most 
often mentioned. Observations of balance and imbalance 
were seen in relation to symmetry. Justification and 
alignment to the left or right were often in the same context 
as the sensation of space. The use of negative space was 
taken into account, but overall was not in focus. Another 
important relation was often found between the continuity, 
groupings and togetherness of the whole.  
Even though the participants were instructed to only use 
the template for reflecting the impressions of the 
compositional elements of the layout, a lot of attention was 
paid towards contrasting colors and their role in visual 
usability. In relation to contrast most of the remarks were 
about contrasting colors, especially between the texts and 
background, which was, moreover, attached to readability. 
Size was only discussed in the context of the font size.  
The position of the viewer (including figuration logic and 
focalisers) was seen as a visual strategy that guides the 
viewer’s gaze in the UI. The shape of an arrow along with 
horizontal, diagonal and vertical lines, were especially 
emphasized and seen as visual elements that guide the gaze 
forward.  There was a strong emphasis on describing how the 
visual elements function and how they support visual 
usability and interaction, especially the ways by which visual 
elements direct attention in the UI towards the important 
areas. Without knowledge of the context and aid of the 
interpretation rule, the data driven qualitative interpretation 
would have been problematic. 
IV. 
RESULTS  
The analysis is reflexively highlighted and evaluated in 
the following sections. Implications for future research and 
limitations of the study are also discussed. Based on the 
results, insights into the essential visual variables in UIs are 
represented 
in 
Table 
1: 
Essential 
visual 
variables 
contributing to positioning of the viewer.  
Positioning of the viewer refers UIs ability to 
communicate the whole content in a visual manner as quick 
and easy to grasp. Positioning of the viewer gathers all the 
results under one definition, and functions as the main 
viewpoint in interacting with visual UIs from user-centered 
perspective. Positioning of the viewer was emphasized 
regarding the communicative ability of the visual variables 
[7], and in relation to the UIs content suitability. The overall 
visual impression of the UI´s appearance should be suitable 
for the context for which it is designed.  
”Only aligned to the left side. Diagonal shapes  not 
very stable. The arrow has some kind of function, but 
not so efficient, dislike”. 
 
”By squinting one´s eye the title 
is easier to detect”. 
 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I ESSENTIAL VISUAL VARIABLES CONTRIBUTING TO 
POSITIONING OF THE VIEWER 
 
Besides communicability, positioning of the viewer was 
approached from the viewpoints of visual usability and 
interaction. Visual usability and interaction include the ways 
how different visual elements guide the interaction and 
usability. Users appreciate UIs that fluently communicate the 
content in an understandable visual form. Thus, in designing 
visual UIs the power of the visual elements to guide users´ 
attention need to be taken into account.  
Positioning the viewer was discussed in relation to visual 
variables contributing to spatial organization and contrast. 
Spatial organization and contrast were seen to apply both to 
communicability and to visual usability and interaction. 
Spatial organization was emphasized by focusing on 
grouping and symmetry.  Grouping and symmetry were seen 
as the two primary visual variables essential to spatial 
organization of visual UI elements, and in creating an 
impression of the UI as a consistent totality, in which visual 
variables contribute to the impression of the UI as a whole. 
 Grouping of similar contents and functions were seen as 
substantive factors creating continuity and clarity. Spatial 
organization through balance and symmetry was seen 
important regarding the overall use of space. Grouping and 
symmetry were further discussed in terms of aligning or 
centering the content, and were seen constitutive factors 
influencing both grouping and symmetry. Diagonal, 
horizontal and vertical lines were highly emphasized as 
visual variables that strongly affect the positioning of the 
viewer and lead the interaction as the main low-level 
variables. 
In addition to spatial organization, contrast was seen as 
influential 
variable. 
Functional 
and 
communicative 
impressions of the visual elements were in focus regarding 
understandability and legibility of the content.  Contrast 
between figures, text and background was conveyed through 
different font sizes and color combinations. These ways in 
creating contrast between visual elements in UIs were often 
mentioned, especially concentrating on the contrast between 
background color and the size and color of fonts. Moreover, 
designing contrast between these elements was highlighted 
due to its ability to promote effortless visual usability, which 
leads to better UX in interacting with visual UIs. Essential 
visual variables contributing to fluent and pleasurable 
interaction have a strong impact on users´ perceptions and 
interpretations of the UIs´ communicative abilities and visual 
usability. Therefore, in designing visual UIs, the essential 
visual variables should be noticed as factors contributing to 
position the viewer. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results of this study provide novel insights into what 
are considered the most essential visual variables in UI 
design that contribute to communicability, visual usability 
and interaction aiming to position the viewer. Spatial 
organization and contrast, with the lower-level variables 
which they are based, such as diagonal lines and font colors,  
are essential to users in visual UI design that promote fluent 
interaction and visual usability. Characteristics of lines have 
an important role in emphasizing visual usability and 
communicability of UIs. Spatial organization through 
balance and symmetry contribute to the overall impression of 
the UI, and grouping similar objects contributes to 
understandable and effective design. Contrast between 
figures, texts and backgrounds enhance visual usability and 
interaction with the UI. In addition, through contrast UIs can 
be designed to communicate the content in an effortless 
manner, by grasping the content with one glance. 
Communicability of the UI also refers to the content´s 
suitability in relation to the context. 
Without contrast between visual elements, UIs could not 
communicate the content to the users interacting with them. 
This notion emphasizes the essence of visual variables 
contributing to fluent HCI. UI´s ability to position the viewer 
through visual variables is essential for pleasurable 
interaction and efficient visual usability leading to good UX.   
Moreover, the results of this study provide knowledge of 
what is considered important in visual UI design among 
future programmers, engineers, and practitioners in the field 
of information technology. 
Future research focuses on proceeding from specific 
contexts towards the discussion of a more general 
understanding of the studied phenomena. Data collection 
could also be conducted with participants, with differing 
backgrounds in order to get more insight in dealing with the 
importance of different visual variables. In addition, 
participants could vary more according to their cultural 
backgrounds in order to provide understanding of the 
essential visual variables in different cultures. Moreover, the 
UIs of this study could also be analyzed through different 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

data collection methods, such as questionnaires, in order to 
test the validity of 3E-template and to compare different 
approaches in relation to the subject of study.  
Visual design of UIs is not universally understood and 
appreciated similarly in different cultures. Different 
meanings attached to, for instance, dimensions of visual 
space are highly influenced by the writing and reading 
direction [32]. Therefore, due to the context of this study, the 
results can be applied to Western culture. In addition, this 
study was conducted in relation to visual web site design and 
therefore, might not be applicable to other visual UI design 
contexts, such as mobile UI design. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I thank COMAS (Doctoral School of the Faculty of 
Information Technology in University of Jyväskylä) for 
making this research possible. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Tractinsky, “Visual aesthetics: in human-computer 
interaction and interaction design,” In Encyclopedia of 
human-computer interaction, M. Soegaard, and D. Rikke 
Friis, Eds. Aarhus, Denmark: The interaction-design.org 
foundation, 2012. Available online at http://www.interaction-
design.org/encyclopedia/visual_aesthetics.html.[retrieved: 
01/2014] 
[2] R. W. Veryzer and J. W. Hutchinson. “The Influence of unity 
and prototypicality on aesthetic responses to new product 
designs,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 24(4), pp. 374–
385, 1998. 
[3] W. –K. Hung and L. L. Chen, “Effects of novelty and its 
dimensions on aesthetic preference in product design,” Int. J. 
of Design, vol. 6(2), pp. 81–90, 2012. Available online at 
http://www.ijdesign.org/ojs/index.php/IJDesign/article/viewFi
le/1146/474 [retrieved: 01/2014] 
[4] P. Hekkert, D. Snelders and P. C. W. Wieringen, "Most 
advanced, yet acceptable: Typicality and novelty as joint 
predictors of aesthetic preference in industrial design,” British 
Journal of Psychology, vol. 94(1), 111–124, 2010. 
[5] D. Cyr, M. Head and H. Larios, “Colour appeal in website 
design 
within 
and 
across cultures: 
A 
multi-method 
evaluation,” International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, vol. 68(1–2), pp. 1–21, 2010. Available online at  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S107158190
9001116 [retrieved: 01/2014] 
[6] M. Wiberg and E. Robles, “Computational compositions: 
Aesthetics, materials, and interaction design,” Int. Journal of 
Design, vol. 4(2), pp. 65–76, 2010. Available online at 
http://www.ijdesign.org/ojs/index.php/IJDesign/article/viewFi
le/757/290 [retrieved: 01/2014]  
[7] K. Mullet and D. Sano, Designing visual interfaces: 
Communication oriented techniques. New Jersey, USA: 
Prentice Hall, 1995. 
[8] L. Hallnäs, “On the foundations of interaction design 
aesthetics: Revisiting the notions of form and expression,” Int. 
J. of Design, vol. 5(1), pp. 73–84, 2011. Available online at 
http://www.ijdesign.org/ojs/index.php/IJDesign/article/viewFi
le/689/319 [retrieved: 01/2014] 
[9] N. Tractinsky, A. S. Katz and D. Ikar, “What is beautiful is 
usable,” Interacting with Computers, vol. 13, pp. 127–145, 
2000. 
[10] D. Norman, Emotional design: Why we love (or hate) 
everyday things), New York, USA: Basic Books, 2004. 
[11] J. Dewey, Art as Experience, New York, USA: Capricorn 
Books, 1958. 
[12] P. Hekkert, “Design aesthetics: principles of pleasure in 
design,” Psychology Science, vol. 48(2), pp. 157–172, 2006. 
[13] T. Schlatter and D. Levinson, Visual usability, principles and 
practices for designing digital applications, MA, USA: 
Morgan Kaufman, 2013. 
[14] L. Hallnäs and J. Redström, “From use to presence: On the 
expressions and aesthetics of everyday computational things,” 
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, vol. 
9(2), pp. 106–124, 2002. 
[15] N. Tractinsky,  A. Cokhavi, M. Kirschenbaum and  T. Sharifi, 
“Evaluating 
the 
consistency 
of 
immediate 
aesthetic 
perceptions of web pages,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 64(11), pp. 1071–1083, 2006. 
[16] M. Thüring and S. Mahlke, “Usability, aesthetics, and 
emotions in human-technology interaction,” International 
Journal of Psychology, vol. 42, pp. 253–264, 2007. 
[17] A. Sonderegger, G. Zbinden, A. Uebelbacher and J. Sauer, 
“The Influence of product aesthetics and usability over the 
course of time: A longitudinal field experiment,” Ergonomics, 
vol. 55(7), pp.713–730, 2012. 
[18] J. Nielsen, Usability engineering. San Fransisco, CA: Morgan 
Kaufman, 1993. 
[19] J. Iivari, H. Isomäki and S. Pekkola, “The user – the great 
unknown of systems development: reasons, forms, challenges, 
experiences 
and 
intellectual 
contributions 
of 
user 
involvement,” Information Systems Journal, vol. 20, pp. 109–
117,  2010. 
[20] B. Bygstad, G. Ghinea and E. Brevik, “Software development 
methods and usability: Perspectives from a survey in the 
software industry in Norway,” Interacting with Computers, 
vol. 20, pp. 375–385, 2008. 
[21] H. Zettl, Sight, sound, motion: Applied media aesthetics, 
Boston: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1999. 
[22] M. Collier, “Approaches to analysis in visual anthropology,” 
In handbook of visual analysis, 4th ed., T. Van Leeuwen and 
C. Jewitt, Eds. London: Sage,  2004. 
[23] J. W. Creswell and V. L. Plano Clark, Designing and 
conducting mixed methods research, Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 2007. 
[24] K. Krippendorf, Content Analysis: An introduction to its 
methodologies. London: Sage, 1980. 
[25] T. Van Leeuwen, “Semiotics and iconography,” In handbook 
of visual analysis, 4th ed., T. Van Leeuwen and C. Jewitt, Eds. 
London: Sage,  2004. 
[26] C. Jewitt and R. Oyama, “Visual meaning: a social semiotic 
approach,” In handbook of visual analysis, 4th ed., T. Van 
Leeuwen and C. Jewitt, Eds. London: Sage,  2004. 
[27] M. Tähti and L. Arhippainen, “A proposal of collecting 
emotions and experiences,” vol. 2 in Interactive Experiences 
in HCI, pp. 195–198, 2004. 
[28] M.  Tähti and M. Niemelä, “3E - expressing emotions and 
experiences,” 
Proc. 
WP9 
Workshop 
on 
Innovative 
Approaches for Evaluating Affective Systems. HUMAINE 
(Human-Machine Interaction Network on Emotion), 2006.  
[29] CSS Zen Garden gallery: http://www.csszengarden.com 
[30] P. Bell, “Content analysis of visual images,” In handbook of 
visual analysis, 4th ed., T. Van Leeuwen and C. Jewitt, Eds. 
London: Sage,  2004. 
[31] G. Rose, Visual methodologies. An introduction to the 
interpretation of visual materials. London: Sage, 2005. 
[32] T. van Leeuwen and G. Kress, Reading images. The grammar 
of visual design (2nd ed.), Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2006.
 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

