Making Technology Matter for Processes of Co-Creation and Innovation in     
Cross-Sectorial Collaborations  
Fahd Bin Malek Newaz, Joakim Karlsen 
Department of Computer Science and Communication 
Østfold University College 
Halden, Norway 
{fahd.b.newaz, joakim.karlsen}@hiof.no 
 
Jo Herstad 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
johe@uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—This 
article 
discusses 
the 
use 
of 
different 
representations of technology to expose, inform and engage 
participants taking part in co-creation activities. In our project, 
the participants co-create an activity to support the learning of 
cultural heritage. We build our research on the “design choices 
framework”, which provides a convenient structure for co-
creation projects, but does not address the role of technology in 
such projects. We discuss the benefits of adding a technology 
choice addressing how to enhance co-creation processes and 
improve the utility of the framework. By representing 
technology through, e.g., images, demos, and prototypes, 
appropriately in different stages of our co-creation project, we 
see a clear, positive impact. 
Keywords-co-creation; design; design choices; innovation; 
cross-sectorial collaboration; technology. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
To address increasingly complex societal challenges, it is 
imperative to collaborate across organizations and different 
sectors and conceptualize innovative approaches to tackle 
them. Involving multiple stakeholders working toward a 
shared goal, however, creates difficulty in balancing their 
interests [1]. Taking inspiration from the field of Participatory 
Design (PD), we look to create a shared understanding 
through representational tools focusing on ICT solutions, and 
by this, facilitate for co-creation. Many projects implement 
co-creation as a process, agenda or tool [2]–[4] to support 
design and innovation. Lee et al. [4], attempt to provide some 
structure to the co-creation process through their ‘design 
choices’ framework. While this framework is mostly based on 
technology design projects, there is little focus on the 
representation of technology and its impact on the co-creation 
process, which is becoming increasingly relevant [5]. 
Bjögvinnson et al. [6] discuss the importance of 
representations to introduce new technologies and make it 
more accessible for a broader range of stakeholders. In our 
project, we focus on finding ways to represent technology in 
co-creation processes and seek to strengthen Lee et al.’s [4] 
´design choices´ framework. The technology aspect was 
fundamental for our design process, having a strong impact on 
the co-creation experience, and in turn, the project results. 
The research has implications for organizations looking to 
incorporate technology into their co-creation process, and for 
designers seeking to facilitate stakeholder engagement and 
drive innovation. The guiding question that is addressed in this 
paper is: in what ways can the representation of a diverse 
range of technology be used and be of value in co-creation 
processes?  
We attempt to answer this question from our work in the 
pARTiciPED project. The overarching goal of the project is 
to explore a way for teachers in Norwegian schools (current 
and upcoming), to collaborate with external partners from 
various cultural institutions, and co-create innovative ways of 
teaching, resulting in a more engaging, enjoyable, and 
integrated (in terms of the overall school curriculum) learning 
experience for secondary school students. The external 
partners could be artists, musicians, actors, or in our case, 
museum educators. We, the designers, have facilitated the co-
creation process through a series of workshops following the 
principles of PD, such as ‘having a say’ and ‘mutual learning’ 
[7], and incorporated the representation of technology through 
various tools, such as interactive prototypes, design cards, 
images and demonstrations. 
In the following, we present the Design Choices 
Framework developed by Lee et al. [4]. Then we describe our 
project in relation to the framework, focusing on the impact of 
the technology choices we made, followed by a discussion on 
how the framework could benefit from an additional design 
choice related to how technology should be represented. In 
conclusion, we present the potential societal impacts of the 
improved co-creation processes. 
II. DESIGN CHOICES FRAMEWORK FOR CO-CREATION 
Lee et al. [4] present their design choices framework to 
build an understanding of what kinds of dimensions a co-
creation project consists of, and which attributes and 
alternatives are relevant when planning and conducting such 
a project. The framework consists of ten design choices: 1) 
Openness of the brief, describing the mode of inquiry with 
which the project approaches the goals of co-creation, 2) 
Purpose of Change, elaborating on what and why certain 
changes are necessary to be achieved through the co-creation 
project, 3) Scope of Design which is often closely related to 
the purpose of change, but rather than focusing the long term 
impact of the project, looks at what specifically will be 
designed during the co-creation process, 4) Diversity in 
Knowledge, bringing together stakeholders from different 
fields of expertise with comprehensive knowledge of the 
product, service, or process they are developing, 5) 
Differences in Interests, requires careful planning to 
incorporate stakeholders’ interests, manage the complexity of 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

their relationships, and potential conflicts, 6) Distribution of 
Power, as power dynamics may be influenced by the 
stakeholders’ knowledge, interests, roles and backgrounds but 
also between designers leading the co-creation activities and 
those participating; designers need to be aware of their role as 
facilitators, and decide how active or neutral they will be in 
the process, 7) Types of Co-creation Activities, refers to the 
different events throughout the project, or stages within a 
single co-creation event that may include techniques such as 
future workshops, or generative tools to share, disseminate 
and create knowledge 8) Setting for Co-creation, making sure 
that the location and materials used can greatly impact the 
success of a co-creation, 9) Outputs of the Project can refer to 
what is created by participants during the co-creation 
activities, but can also be in the form of consolidated reports 
and proposals by researchers or designers, both of which can 
range from ideas for concrete changes and their visualizations 
(e.g., improvement ideas, touch points, customer journey 
maps) to new service concepts (e.g., scenarios, videos, service 
blueprints, and process models) to future strategies (e.g., a set 
of experience goals and future roadmaps), 10) Outcomes of 
the Project refer to changes achieved on a larger scale, such 
as changes in mindset, processes, and culture, which have a 
direct impact on the target population. These design choices 
are further grouped into four categories where they can be 
related to the following: Project Preconditions (design 
choices 1-3), Participants (design choices 4-6), Co-creation 
Events (design choices 7-8), and Project Results (design 
choices 9-10). 
III. METHODS 
The design process for the project was iterative, as 
presented in the timeline in Figure 1. We used both 
participatory prototyping, design cards and probes in our 
workshops [8]. Brandt et al. [9] present ‘the making of things 
as a means of design participation’, which is what we did. A 
variety of methods, such as observation and interviews, were 
used to gather data during the co-creation activities. 
Observation as a research method enables the study of a 
phenomenon in ‘naturally occurring settings’ [10][11]. In 
other words, for our research, we gain knowledge about how 
different participants experience the collaborative design 
process by directly observing their interactions in real-life 
situations and retrospectively through audio recordings, notes, 
and photographs. Interviews enable the capture of people’s 
point of view, with reflections and rationalizations. In this 
study, we undertook semi-structured interviews with some of 
the participants [12]. By analysing the data gathered, with a 
plan, act, reflect approach [13], we were able to unpack 
several aspects of the co-creation process, relevant to 
strengthening the design choices framework. 
Throughout the duration of the project, we conducted a 
total of nine workshops. Four of these workshops were with 
4th-year pre-service teachers, which we call student 
workshops. Five smaller workshops were conducted with the 
project group, including museum educators and teachers. We 
call these group workshops. All of these workshops took place 
over a period of nine months, starting from when we held our 
first workshop on the 10th of June 2021, until our final 
workshop on the 4th of March 2022. This timeline is presented 
in Figure 1. The group workshops consisted of 8 participants, 
3 females and 5 males. These participants represented the 
Østfold Museums (1), the department of education at the 
Østfold University College (1), secondary school teachers (2) 
in Viken county, pre-service teachers (1), and designers (3). 
The main participants for the student workshops were 51 pre-
service teachers who were currently in their 4th year of the 
teaching studies. All participants of the project provided 
written consent to participate in the project and all its relevant 
activities. The participants were informed about how the data 
would be collected, analysed, and stored, as well as who 
would have access to the data. The data collection was 
reported to the Norwegian Agency for Shared Services in 
Education and Research, a public administrative body under 
the Ministry of Education and Research.  
We will now use the design choices framework to present 
and give a rich description of the project, before moving 
further to our findings related to how representational tools 
made technology matter in our workshops.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Project Timeline 
 
A. 
Design Choices Related to Project Preconditions  
1) 
Openness of the Brief 
The goal of the pARTiciPED project is to improve cross 
sectorial collaborations in schools and more specifically how 
the school sector and cultural sector collaborate in The 
Cultural Schoolbag’ (TCS), a program set up to provide 
cultural experiences to Norwegian school children. As the 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

scope was open-ended (focusing on cross sectorial 
collaborations), the process was also exploratory, enabling us, 
the design researchers, to create and experiment different 
types of co-creation methods. There was an additional 
component to the brief, which was to explore how to create a 
mixed reality learning experience fitting TCS. Thus, to focus 
on XR technology throughout the co-creation process, was 
central. 
2) 
Purpose of Change 
In accordance with the open-ended brief, the project team 
focused on supporting the collaboration between museums 
and schools, fostering innovation and new ways of thinking 
through access and exposure to technology. Being exposed to 
and having participated in co-creation activities, we expected 
the project members to have a more positive attitude toward 
collaboration with each other and a better understanding of 
each other’s expertise, needs and priorities. This would in turn 
serve our purpose of improving the current TCS program. 
3) 
Purpose Scope of Design 
As the main purpose of change was to enhance 
collaboration between multiple organizations, leading to a 
better TCS program, the scope of design would be on two 
different levels. One would be to develop co-creation tools 
and techniques to support cross-sectorial collaboration. The 
other would be to design digital concepts with complementary 
teaching curriculum that provided high school students with a 
more interactive and engaging experience of cultural heritage 
as part of a TCS activity.  
B. 
Design Choices Related to Participants 
1) 
Diversity in Knowledge 
The group participating in the activities represented a high 
diversity of knowledge: the museum staff had extensive 
knowledge of cultural heritage including history and artefacts, 
and the how to disseminate that knowledge; the teachers could 
bring in their experiences in the field related to the school and 
teaching processes; the pre-service teachers would also bring 
in a certain amount of knowledge about teaching, based on 
their education and previous practical experiences; lastly, the 
design researchers brought their expertise in design—on the 
co-creation process and tools applied.  
2) 
Differences in Interests 
The design researchers needed to design the process in a 
way that would support the different interests of the 
participating stakeholders. The teachers wanted to contribute 
their expertise in making the experience being designed 
relevant to the students, the schools and for achieving the 
learning objectives set out by the government. The teacher-
educator’s main interest was to provide a relevant learning 
experience for her students, the pre-service teachers. The pre-
service teachers had the primary objective of completing their 
course in the best way possible. The museum educators were 
keen to attract the students and make the interested in cultural 
heritage. The design researchers wanted to develop and 
experiment new types of co-creation methods.  
To accommodate for the negotiation of these interests, we 
employed various kinds of visual objects and facilitation 
techniques, for example, mind maps, simulation, scenarios, 
and idea generation with design cards. 
3) 
 Distribution of Power 
As the design researchers were the ones at the helm of the 
project, there was an inherent imbalance of power biased 
toward the designers, especially since we were choosing the 
methods to be used. Additionally, the young pre-service 
teachers who were participating in our workshops, looked up 
to the more senior teachers, and the museum staff, as 
authoritative figures. While some authority was needed to 
conduct the project and its activities, the designers carefully 
maintained their role as facilitators.  
Through participatory design techniques [9], we enabled 
the project members, and the pre-service teachers 
participating in our workshops, to contribute with knowledge, 
ideas, and opinions in different forms. We paid special 
attention to the power imbalance when designing co-creation 
activities to engage the participants, regardless of knowledge 
backgrounds. 
For 
example, 
we 
introduced 
various 
technologies and let the participants try them out to create a 
common understanding of the possibilities the technologies 
could provide.  
We focused on creating possibilities for teachers and 
museum staff to share their knowledge and present their ideas. 
Rather than making creative inputs ourselves, we helped the 
pre-service teachers perform the co-creation tasks, for 
instance with the design card game. In the co-creation 
workshops, the pre-service teachers were asked to reflect on 
the theme and current challenges from the viewpoint of 
teachers, to then work on a relatively new concept for a future 
curriculum, based on the content that was discussed, and the 
technology that was presented.  
C. 
Design Choices Related to Co-creation Events  
1) 
Types of Co-creation Activities 
Our choice of co-creation activities for the project were 
selected based on the purpose of change and the scope of 
design. We also considered the knowledge, interest, and 
power distributions among the participants. The project 
included a series of workshops leading up to the trial and 
testing of a prototype learning experience in the field. We 
conducted two large scale workshops in addition to several 
smaller workshops within the project team. In the following 
section, we will focus on the two large workshops. 
The first large workshop involved the project members 
and a class of 51 pre-service teachers, designed to create a 
shared understanding between the stakeholders. The museum 
representative set the scene by introducing the theme of Moss 
town’s industrial history. The teacher educators then 
introduced the current curriculum and teaching goals set for 
Norwegian secondary schools. In this workshop, we led 3 
activities. We first presented current and emerging 
technologies that are, or could be, used by museums to provide  
cultural heritage education. Then, we conducted an online 
‘digital literacy’ survey. Lastly, we created a technology probe 
in the form of a webapp that allows the user to create video, 
image, or text content and geolocate it on a map. The students 
used this to create content presenting different parts of the 
university campus. Through these activities, we were able to 
learn about how comfortable the pre-service teacher 
participants were with different forms of technology. At the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

same time, the participants were exposed to new technology 
and were given the opportunity to become aware of their 
possibilities. This was crucial to us, to plan the way forward 
and reflect on which technologies the pre-service teachers 
were comfortable with using. 
The second large workshop was focused on ideating 
concepts for a TCS learning experience, and for this, we 
created a design game using a bespoke deck of design cards. 
The concepts developed in the workshop were later used to 
inform the development of a working prototype and tested in 
the field with secondary school students in the county. All pre-
service teachers were allocated practical training / internships 
for 4 weeks, at various schools. During this period, they would 
dedicate two classes to run the TCS activity. They had some 
time beforehand to use the tool themselves and implement it 
as part of the lessons. We observed six classes across four 
schools, from the 31st of January to the 11th of February 2022. 
In some cases, we were able to follow up with interviewing 
the pre-service teachers conducting the activities, immediately 
after the class.  
2) 
Setting for Co-creation  
To encourage the participants to be motivated and 
productive, we paid careful attention to the physical setting, 
materials, and atmosphere of the workshops. The pre-service 
teachers commonly sit in rows, listening to lectures from their 
professors, so for the indoor part of our workshops, we 
arranged the tables into groups, where four to six participants 
could sit around each table. By this, the participants were able 
to interact with each other much more easily and be active in 
the creative process. This proved to be particularly useful 
when doing the design game, as the physical setting not only 
allowed for better interaction within the group, but also made 
it easier to arrange the cards on the table, and to draw/sketch 
their proposals. One activity required the participants to spend 
time around the campus, to build a virtual museum with one 
of the technologies that was presented to them. Not only did 
this provide very valuable results as to how the technology 
was perceived, but it also created a much more enjoyable 
experience for the participants, which was apparent from the 
creative content they created during the activity, and from 
feedback in the surveys given at the end of the workshop.  
D. 
Design Choices Related to Project Results 
1) 
Outputs of the Project 
Over the course of the workshops, there were several 
artefacts that were created, and data was collected in various 
formats including audio recordings, observation notes, and 
photographs. After the first workshop, we had questionnaire 
responses regarding technology literacy, and mind maps that 
the participants had created of the cultural heritage themes 
related to the selected case for our project (industrial history 
of the city of Moss). The participants also created a virtual 
museum/digital campus guide containing content created by 
the participants, using a purpose-built web-application 
enabling the creation and publishing of geo-tagged media 
content. The results and data from this first workshop were 
analysed, and subsequently informed the design of the second 
workshop, for which we, the designers also produced a 
customized deck of design cards. The design cards were also 
based on a combination of the results from the workshop, and 
a follow-up workshop conducted within the project team. The 
design cards themselves, can also be considered as an output 
of the project. 
At the end of the second workshop, each group produced 
complete concepts for a TCS activity. These were documented 
and visualized on an A3 sheet of paper and presented to the 
entire group. Based on these concepts created by the groups, 
a member of the design team built a web-based tool, that 
would enable the pre-service teachers to carry out their 
planned teaching activities. The third workshop, which we 
had to do digitally, resulted in concrete teaching plans created 
by the participants, which could then be implemented in the 
secondary schools that were participating in the project. 
Following this third workshop, the design team built a new 
and improved web-based application with which the pre-
service teachers implemented their planned teaching 
activities. The design team was also able to collect data by 
visiting the schools, observing the activities, taking notes, and 
through follow-up interviews with the pre-service teachers. 
 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGY REPRESENTATION AND CO-
CREATION ACTIVITIES 
 
2) 
Outcomes of the Project 
In addition to the tangible outputs of the project, there were 
additional outcomes from each activity as their goals were 
achieved. This is shown in 0These could also be a basis for 
change in the way the museums, the teachers, and those in 
charge of the TCS program collaborate and design future 
teaching experiences. Regarding technology, there was 
increased awareness of, and familiarity towards, technology 
among all participants and an increased willingness to 
incorporate technology to improve and reform existing 
processes. 
IV. RESULTS 
It was clear that the different technology representations 
had a positive impact on the activities, and consequently on 
the results. In our first three workshops (two group 
Tools 
Event 
Goals 
Participants 
Oral 
presentation 
Group workshop 2 
Scoping, Introduction 
Pre-service 
teachers  
Museum staff 
Student workshop 1 
Introduction 
Surveys 
Student workshop 1 
Understanding participants’ 
familiarity with technology 
Pre-service 
teachers 
Images 
Group workshop 2 
Scoping, Introduction 
Pre-service 
teachers  
Museum staff 
Student workshop 1 
Introduction 
Design Cards 
Student workshop 2 
Idea generation 
Concept development 
Pre-service 
teachers 
Demonstration 
Student workshop 1 
Increasing familiarity 
Pre-service 
teachers  
Museum staff 
Student workshop 3 
Increasing familiarity  
Concept Development 
Interactive 
prototype 
Student workshop 1 
Increasing familiarity 
Pre-service 
teachers 
Student workshop 3 
Hands-on experience  
Idea generation 
Field testing 
Identifying pros and cons 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

workshops, one student workshop), we were working to build 
a shared understanding of each other’s expertise, and interests.  
A. 
Group workshop 1  
Already from the first workshop, we highlighted the 
technological possibilities. Except for the designers, the 
members of the workshop initially had little to no concern for 
the technological aspects of designing a XR learning 
experience. It was only towards the end of this first 
introductory workshop that we briefly introduced the 
possibilities of using Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual 
Reality (VR) and projection mapping technology to create a 
learning experience. We proposed the use of these interactive 
technologies to digitally co-create historical artefacts and 
sites. Subsequently, the other group members reacted 
positively, and hinted at the fact that “this could be an 
interesting way to present cultural heritage to the students”. 
They provided no further input or elaboration, however, 
which leads us to believe that they had not really thought 
about how technology could be used to increase engagement 
and curiosity among the target secondary school students 
before now. 
B. 
Group workshop 2  
In the second workshop, which took place at the Moss 
Town and Industry Museum (Moss, Norway), we again 
briefly discussed the technological possibilities verbally. Here 
the goal was to learn about Moss and its history, as well as 
plan how we would conduct the first workshop with the pre-
service teachers. We would also have to decide how to present 
the technology for the participants at the upcoming workshop, 
and thus we, the designers would again present several 
technologies that could be relevant. Interestingly, building on 
the discussions from the previous workshop, both the museum 
representative, and one of the teachers discussed how certain 
technologies could be relevant. The museum representative 
suggested to create a ‘digital assembly line’ which would, 
through VR, allow the students to experience what it was like 
to work on the assembly line of a factory. A second suggestion 
from the teacher educator was to use AR technology, so the 
students could walk around their own towns and place 3D 
models of historical buildings and artefacts there. 
C. 
Student workshop 1  
In the third workshop, now involving pre-service teachers, 
technology was represented in many forms: oral presentation, 
images, interactive prototype and surveys. Through the 
different representations of technology, we tried to make the 
participants familiar with some relevant technologies while at 
the same time get a better understanding of how familiar the 
participants already were. In this workshop, we led three 
technology related activities. We first presented current and 
emerging technologies could be used by museums to teach 
about cultural heritage. This was done through an oral 
presentation, supplemented by images and video of relevant 
examples. We then conducted an online ‘digital literacy’ 
survey. The survey included general questions about the 
participants’ use and familiarity with technology, and specific 
questions regarding technologies such as VR and AR. 
Responses from the survey showed a varied level of 
familiarity with the presented technologies.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Virtual museum application 
We also developed an interactive prototype in the form of 
a web-based application, that allowed them to create video, 
image, or text content and automatically incorporate its 
geographic location from the participants’ device. The 
students essentially created a ‘virtual museum’, presenting 
different parts of the university campus, and describing its 
significance (see Figure 2.  
There was a clear positive transformation in the 
participants’ attitudes from when the technologies were 
presented orally, to when they themselves got to try out the 
technology. They were much more engaged and seemed to 
care much more about the entire process. This was apparent 
when several students exclaimed that initially they “did not 
quite see how the presented technologies could be relevant in 
the context of teaching cultural heritage to secondary school 
students”. On the other hand, after the ‘virtual museum’ 
activity, most students expressed that “this could be very 
relevant in the given context”. There were many more 
participants engaging in discussions after the activity, and this 
was also evident in the subsequent survey responses. They 
were also excited to share the content they had created in the 
application and so, due to popular demand, we presented 
many of their videos in front of the entire group, which also 
turned out to be quite entertaining. 
This understanding was crucial for us designers, to plan 
the way forward. How could we further incorporate 
technological aspects in our future co-design activities, while 
considering 
the 
participants’ 
familiarity 
with 
those 
technologies?  
D. 
Student workshop 2  
In this workshop, building on our previous activities, we 
needed a way to represent technology that would facilitate 
brainstorming and creativity. We chose to organize a design 
game using a bespoke set of design cards. Technology was 
one of the key categories in the deck. We were able to identify 
four relevant categories that needed to be addressed when 
creating a TCS activity. These were the following: things, 
requirements, actions, and technology. We identified nine 
‘things’ that were relevant to Moss town’s industrial history, 
thirteen ‘requirements’ from a pedagogical point of view, ten 
‘technologies’ that could be used and twelve ‘actions’ that 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

could be encouraged. Each card had a title, colour code 
indicating the category, and a relevant image in the 
background that provided a visual cue to the title. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Student Workshop 2 – Design Cards 
We facilitated the design game to let participants design 
their ideal concepts (see Figure 3. Using the different 
categories of cards, the pre-service teachers were able to 
sketch three concepts. In a second round, participants were 
asked to identify and select the good parts from all three 
concepts and design a final concept that would be presented 
to the class. Technology became the cornerstone of all the 
concepts that were presented. 9 of the 11 groups in the 
workshop included some form of technology as a central part 
of their proposals, with most incorporating several 
technologies as evident in Figure 4. The example to the left 
proposed using AR to recreate important historical figures. 
The example to the right proposes the use of maps and 
simulation games to get acquainted with the cultural heritage 
and history, and then create content about some historic event 
that can be projected Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Workshop 2 concept examples, incorporating AR, projection 
mapping, maps, and simlation games as technological components 
E. 
Student Workshop 3 
This workshop was conducted online due to COVID-19 
restrictions. We created a demo toolkit in the form of an AR 
app. This was both a demonstration of the technology, but also 
allowed the participants to try it out. The goal of this workshop 
was to conceptualise and plan a larger activity for secondary 
school students based on the available technology. 
Participants were to incorporate this demo app into a 
concreate TCS activity. The app was created using 
Facebook’s Spark AR. The pre-service teachers created a 
lesson plan including how they would introduce the 
information about Moss town’s industrial history, how they 
would introduce the toolkit, and how they would incorporate 
the activities using the toolkit into the learning activity. Again, 
the app was central to the teaching plans they all made. 
F. 
Field testing 
The goal of this activity was to evaluate the outcomes of 
the previous workshops in the real world, and so, we needed 
to provide a working technological artefact that could be given 
to the secondary school students to use. Based on the results 
of workshop 3, we built a more complete version of the AR 
tool in the form of a web-based application. The application 
allowed the students to take pictures of themselves, use filters 
to apply historical clothing (e.g., uniforms) to the pictures, and 
place that composite image onto a historical background. The 
complete image was then used as the basis for more 
discussions in the class. The secondary school students 
enjoyed using the application, uploading pictures, putting on 
filters, and writing stories about what they had made (Figure 
5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Testing web app in secondary schools 
As the students were introduced to the web-application, 
there was increased discussion and dialog between the 
students and the teachers, as well as among the students. Some 
students used their mobile phones while some used tablet 
devices provided by the school. Some groups were also 
allowed to go out of the classroom to create their content. 
They were being physically active, running around, posing for 
the pictures, and applying a variety of filters and background 
images. Subsequently they discussed what backstory they had 
conceived to create their final images. One group, for 
example, placed their own images in front of a group of 
factory workers, and used that as a basis to discuss the poor 
working conditions at the time, how the workers would look 
after each other, and how they later formed unions. Some 
groups incorporated our application into a larger workflow 
consisting of other tools they had on their computers. For 
example, after having generated an image using our tool, some 
groups further placed that image into a PowerPoint 
presentation, added more text, recorded audio to narrate their 
story, and finally combined all of this to present to the class. 
How the students were able to make this tool their own, and 
use it creatively in combination with other tools, was a clear 
signal of how introducing new technology, can lead to 
solutions and concepts that might not have been conceived 
otherwise. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

G. 
Student Workshop 4 
Following the field testing, we had a final workshop with 
the pre-service teachers. The goal of this workshop was to 
reflect on the entire co-creation process, the outputs, and the 
final application in schools. We did not introduce any new 
technology, nor did we have any specific part of the workshop 
dedicated to technology. By now, technology had been 
applied to the problem, informed the concepts that were 
developed, and constrained the activities that were carried out 
in the field. However, the participants were given a final 
chance to design a teaching activity based on their experiences 
from the field. Surprisingly, almost all groups had very similar 
concepts, which resembled the activities they had just 
conducted in the field and proposed minor improvements to 
how the technology should be used. 
H. 
Summary 
From the first to the final workshop, we used several forms 
of representation to present and involve technology. Initially, 
when the brief was relatively open, we presented different 
technologies in a more general way through simple 
representations such as images, through surveys and orally. 
This allowed us to gain an understanding of the participants’ 
familiarity with different technologies (and technology in 
general), spark curiosity among the workshop participants, 
and allowed them to imagine new possibilities involving the 
use of technologies. We also presented a simple working 
prototype (virtual museum application), which allowed the 
participants to become more familiar with AR, and thus 
become more comfortable the application. Participants started 
to discuss how the technology could be relevant to the larger 
problem we were trying to address.  
To facilitate idea and concept generation, we incorporated 
technology in the form of design cards. This allowed the 
participants to be part of a creative process combining their 
budding teaching expertise with their newfound knowledge of 
different technologies, resulting in innovative and realizable 
concepts. As the concepts became more certain, and context-
specific, we could then create high-fidelity technology probes 
to be used in the real world, and incorporated into larger, more 
complete teaching/learning activities. As these activities were 
conducted in secondary schools all over the region, we could 
also reflect on the pros and cons of those activities, and how 
they could be improved. 
In the final student workshop, following a period of field 
testing, we also noticed that after having used the high-fidelity 
probes, it was difficult for the participants to think creatively, 
as their thinking was very constrained by familiarity with the 
application they had used. It thus became clear that how the 
technology is represented matters greatly for what outcomes 
are achieved in the co-creation process. Low-fidelity, general 
representations of technology provided the opportunity for 
creativity and innovation, while high-fidelity representations 
were more useful for critique and improvements. This leads 
us to discussing why technology and its representation is also 
an important design choice. 
V. DISCUSSION 
What was apparent from all the activities in the different 
stages of the project was that including an appropriate 
representation of technology in the right stage of the co-
creation process, directly impacted the results of each activity 
as well as the entire process. We observed three major effects 
of including a technological aspect throughout our co-design 
activities.  
First and foremost, there was a clear increase in 
engagement when the workshop participants were introduced 
to novel technologies and their capabilities. The discussions 
became more active, more questions were asked, and more 
suggestions were offered.  
Secondly, by being able to interact with, and try out the 
technology themselves, initially on a smaller scale, the 
participants gained a level of mastery they could use as a 
resource later in the process.  
Finally, having gotten a good understanding of the 
technological possibilities, the participants were able to 
suggest realistic and innovative concepts that incorporated the 
technology in relevant and beneficial ways. 
Judging from the positive impact of technology in the co-
creation process, we believe ‘representation of technology’ 
should be an additional design choice that needs to be 
considered when planning co-creation projects. We see that 
identifying technological possibilities can help with several 
aspects of Lee et al’s [4] design choices framework.  
• To help define the scope of design as the choice of 
technology will both limit, and guide it;  
• balance the distribution of power by familiarizing all 
participants with the technology; 
• enhance activities and settings for co-creation by 
providing 
supportive 
tools 
for 
co-creating 
with 
technology; 
• help generate outputs of the project, as technology is both 
the means and goals in many co-creation projects; and 
finally,  
• contribute to a new mindset among the participants that is 
more aware and positive to technology, a first step towards 
becoming lasting outcomes of the project activities.  
 
It must be noted, however, that the choice of technology 
and its representation must be appropriate to the stage of co-
creation, and in accordance to how familiar the project 
participants are with the technology. One of the challenges in 
any co-creation or indeed in all co-anything processes is 
mutual learning [13] and mutual understanding. A shared or 
common understanding of possibilities, limitations and 
challenges is the goal with any co-anything processes. At the 
same time there must be room for respect and wonder about 
what unique understanding and engagement there is from the 
different stakeholders. 
One approach to make representations of diverse range of 
technologies is to invoke the concept of familiarity. We are 
familiar with the tools, technologies, and environment we live 
in. By focusing on familiarity, we build on people’s and user’s 
pre-existing involvement, understanding and relationship of 
the “everyday” world, such as naive physics (up, down), our 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

own bodies and the surrounding place, or things we use in 
everyday life. The familiarity concept is introduced by Turner 
[13] to HCI and inspired by other concepts such as the use of 
metaphors, analogies, similarities and resemblances. The 
familiar is often what we are comfortable and safe with. What 
we are unfamiliar with, are often things that we do not engage 
with, have no skill or understanding of and are foreign to. To 
move from something that is unfamiliar and making it familiar 
is what we often do when learning something “new”, and 
hence the concept is used in pedagogies [14]. 
One way to operationalize the concept of familiarity in the 
context of representing technologies and tools is to investigate 
the three underlying human phenomena of: Understanding of, 
engagement with and relationship in. In what way do you 
understand this tool in use? In what way are you engaged or 
involved with it? And what kind of relationship do you have 
with this technology or tool in your everyday life? This may 
be strong indicators of degrees of familiarity with tools and 
technologies. And learning about the familiarity of tools and 
technologies among the various stakeholders might then be 
applied and used when representing technologies and tools in 
co-design processes that make sense and that engage the 
participants.  
Through such engaging co-design processes, the relevant 
stakeholders can become active participants contributing to a 
variety of different design goals, such as: design for 
experiencing, design for emotion, design for interacting, 
design for sustainability, design for serving, or design for 
transforming [3]. Familiarity with technology can first and 
foremost be a resource, which can be a building block for 
effective co-creation, as we have discussed in reference to the 
design choices framework [4]. Through its understanding, 
designers can suggest the right representations of technology, 
at the right stages of the co-creation process, with the right 
participants. Additionally, as the co-creation process 
progresses, exposure, interaction, and engagement with 
different representations of technology can help build this 
familiarity even further, leading to even more insightful 
participation, better design choices and more innovative and 
relevant outcomes of co-creation. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Technology matters, as does the practice of co-creation, 
especially when addressing the increasingly complex 
challenges of today’s society. We have found that using 
different representations of technology can significantly 
enhance co-creation processes and improve the utility of 
existing frameworks, such as the design choices framework. 
By representing technology through images, demos, and 
prototypes, we have seen a clear and positive impact on 
participant engagement and collaboration. We believe that 
further exploration and experimentation in the use of 
technology in co-creation projects can help to create more 
inclusive and equitable design processes.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to all the wonderful participants in schools, 
museums, and universities! 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. B. Page, M. M. Stone, J. M. Bryson, and B. C. Crosby, 
“Public Value Creation by Cross-Sector Collaborations: 
a Framework and Challenges of Assessment: Public 
Value Creation by Cross-Sector Collaborations,” Public 
Admin, vol. 93, no. 3, pp. 715–732, Sep. 2015, doi: 
10.1111/padm.12161. 
[2] K. Halskov and P. Dalsgård, “Inspiration card 
workshops,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference 
on Designing Interactive systems  - DIS ’06, University 
Park, 
PA, 
USA, 
2006, 
p. 
2. 
doi: 
10.1145/1142405.1142409. 
[3] E. B.-N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Co-creation and the 
new landscapes of design,” CoDesign, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 
5–18, Mar. 2008, doi: 10.1080/15710880701875068. 
[4] J. Lee, M. Jaatinen, A. Salmi, T. Mattelmäki, R. Smeds, 
and M. Holopainen, “Design choices framework for co-
creation projects,” International Journal of Design 
[Online], vol. 12, no. 2, 2018. 
[5] V. 
Lember, 
“The 
Increasing 
Role 
of 
Digital 
Technologies in Co-Production and Co-Creation,” in 
Co-Production and Co-Creation, 1st ed.New York: 
Routledge, 2018, pp. 115–127.  
[6] E. Bjögvinsson, P. Ehn, and P.-A. Hillgren, “Design 
Things 
and 
Design 
Thinking: 
Contemporary 
Participatory Design Challenges,” Design Issues, vol. 
28, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
101–116, 
Jul. 
2012, 
doi: 
10.1162/DESI_a_00165. 
[7] K. Bødker, F. Kensing, and J. Simonsen, “Participatory 
Design in Information Systems Development”.T. 
Binder, 
Computer 
Professionals 
for 
Social 
Responsibility, 
and 
Association 
for 
Computing 
Machinery, Eds., Proceedings of the Participation 
Design Conference: Malmö, Sweden, 23 - 25 June, 2002. 
Palo Alto, Calif: Computer Professionals for Social 
Responsibility, 2002. 
[8] E. Brandt and J. Messeter, “Facilitating collaboration 
through design games,” in Proceedings of the eighth 
conference on Participatory design: Artful integration: 
interweaving media, materials and practices - Volume 1, 
New York, NY, USA, Jul. 2004, pp. 121–131. doi: 
10.1145/1011870.1011885. 
[9] “Eva Brandt. 2006. Designing exploratory design 
games: a framework for participation in Participatory 
Design? In Proceedings of the ninth conference on 
Participatory design: Expanding boundaries in design - 
Volume 1 (PDC ’06). Association for Computing 
Machinery, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
57–66. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1147261.1147271”. 
[10] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. Los 
Angeles: SAGE, 2007. 
[11] J. Lazar, J. H. Feng, and H. Hochheiser, Research 
methods in human-computer interaction, Second edition. 
Cambridge, 
MA: 
Elsevier, 
Morgan 
Kaufmann 
Publishers, 2017. 
[12] P. Checkland and S. Holwell, “Action Research,” in 
Information Systems Action Research, N. Kock, Ed., in 
Integrated Series in Information Systems, vol. 13. 
Boston, MA: Springer US, 2007, pp. 3–17. doi: 
10.1007/978-0-387-36060-7_1. 
[13] P. Turner, “Being-with: A study of familiarity,” 
Interacting with Computers, vol. 20, no. 4–5, pp. 447–
454, Sep. 2008, doi: 10.1016/j.intcom.2008.04.002. 
[14] R. Parker‐Rees, “Liking to be liked: imitation, 
familiarity and pedagogy in the first years of life,” Early 
Years, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 3–17, Mar. 2007, doi: 
10.1080/09575140601135072.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

