Ethnographic Examination for Studying Information Sharing Practices in Rural 
South Africa 
Amandeep Dhir#, Imad Moukadem+, Nobert Jere@ , Puneet Kaur#, Sari Kujala!,  Antti Ylä-Jääski# 
#Department of Computer Science and Engineering, School of Science, Aalto University, Finland – 02150 
+Computer Science Department, Gulf University for Science and Technology (GUST), Kuwait 
@Telkom Center of Excellence in ICTD, Computer Science Department, University of Fort Hare, South Africa, Alice-5700 
!Department of Design, School of Art and Design, Aalto University, Finland - 00076 
{firstname.lastname@aalto.fi}#! {moukadem.i@gust.edu.kw}+ {njere@ufh.ac.za}@ 
 
Abstract— This progress paper describes a study plan and 
research theme with the focus on information sharing 
practices, social habits and behavioral access patterns in the 
context of the mobile phone and ICT usage of rural users in 
the emerging economies such as South Africa.  The aim is to 
design new solutions to support rural users and their economic 
existence.  An ethnographic field study was performed in order 
to understand the living conditions of rural communities and 
the related problems and opportunities in the field of mobile 
phone and ICT usage. A variety of qualitative measures such 
as 
contextual 
inquiry, 
participant 
observation, 
design 
exercises, focus and individual interviews were used during the 
field. However, only preliminary results from field studies are 
described in this paper.  In our study, we found that needs and 
expectations of the users dwelling in rural context of different 
emerging economies are very much different from that of 
developed world.  Product designers must consider these needs 
in order to deliver successful ICT and mobile-based services. 
Keywords-Emerging markets; ethnography; information 
sharing; oral culture; rural users. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
    Telecom sector has witnessed unprecedented growth in 
the last decade due to which mobile phones have penetrated 
deep inside our everyday life.  Mobile phones have now 
turned into a commodity item that was considered an 
element of luxury, a decade ago. Majority of the mobile 
phones are now owned and used by people dwelling in   
resource constraint rural communities of emerging markets.  
Emerging markets are defined as nations holding low to 
middle income earning people for example India, China and 
South Africa [1]. According to an estimate, 80% of world’s 
total population is living in these emerging markets and they 
account for 20% of worlds’ economy [2]. World economists 
have predicted that emerging markets will continue to show 
twice growth rates as compared to developed nations [2]. 
This has resulted in ever-growing interest in exploring and 
investing in these emerging markets. Technology and 
related infrastructure have been special area of interest. 
However, we believe that low income, illiterate and 
resource constraint communities dwelling in different 
emerging markets are understudied. Hence, use of 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) and 
mobile phones in business and daily routines by these 
resource constraint communities is still a young field of 
research. Our study is concerned with the examination of 
the issues involved in the development of interactive 
technologies for rural environments. The rural environment 
studied in this paper is actually the remote region of the 
development world.  
      After the invention of mobile phones, scientists 
considered 
mobile 
phones 
as 
new 
mediums 
for 
communication and connectivity. But, with the emergence 
of mobile services such as text messaging and multimedia 
have transformed this notion.  In resource constraint regions 
of different emerging markets, mobile phones are used for 
micro-financing and sound medium for carrying out 
different business activities [3][19]. Mobile phone is now 
increasingly used for accessing information pertaining to 
health, education, e-services, government welfare schemes 
and most importantly farming and related practices. 
According to a recent estimate, only India and China 
account for more than 2 billion mobile phone users [4]. 
Mobile phones are not only portable but also they are easy 
to use, cost effective and above all, they have become very 
much affordable. Mobile phones are seen as tools for 
bridging the existing digital divide between developed and 
developing world. Previous work on ICT and development 
argues that under utilization of the ICT infrastructure is one 
of the main reasons behind this increasing digital divide. We 
see ICT as an essential catalyst that can potentially help 
local indigenous markets to expand and develop beyond the 
local borders.  
       So far, the users dwelling in resource constraint rural 
communities of emerging markets are understudied. There 
are not many studies on developing ICT solutions for 
resource constrained, low income and digitally unstable 
communities [17][18][19][20][21][24][25][26][27][28]. We 
argue that these users are having different needs, 
expectations and requirements from ICT use. These needs 
are different from that of users living in developed world. 
Hence, product developers and ICT designers must 
understand and examine these different needs in order to 
manufacture successful ICT adoption in these emerging 
markets.  In our study, we have also emphasized on 
studying local needs, social habits and behavior patterns of 
users dwelling in rural communities that are also resource 
constraint.  
      The rural areas of emerging markets such as South 
Africa and India suffer from a lack of economic activity due 
to which the problem of poverty is further exacerbated. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Rural communities possess a huge potential in developing 
opportunities for agriculture and other small enterprises, but 
due to limited or inefficient markets and marginalized basic 
infrastructure, these communities are not strong enough to 
tackle poverty and improve rural living. Mobile phone 
services and ICT possess the required potential for opening 
these rural markets to the outside world.   
     In our research, we are seeking to better understand the 
living conditions of rural residents in India and South Africa 
so that later, based on the study results, we can propose and 
develop innovative solutions for improving rural life.  
Through the ethnography field study we want to identify the 
existing 
problems, 
opportunities 
and 
their 
possible 
solutions. Our goal of designing new solutions for the rural 
users in India and South Africa will be achieved through a 
cross-cultural ethnographic study of rural communities in 
both these countries. However, in this paper, we have only 
reported our ethnography field study and its results from 
two rural communities in South Africa. In this study, we 
accomplished two main objectives - First, we studied the 
information-sharing practices in the rural regions of South 
Africa in order to understand if and how new mobile phone 
design and ICT solutions can improve their lives. Second, 
we have cross-examined the findings and understanding 
present in the existing literature on ICT and development 
from India and China in context to South Africa. So, in a 
way, our empirical study is partially cross-cultural by 
nature.  
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
outlines the description of our field sites. Section III briefly 
describes the related work to our topic. Section IV describes 
study methodology by explaining the used research 
methods, study participants and the process of data 
collection and analysis. Section V presents the themes under 
investigation in our study and Section VI outlines the results 
of our ethnography study. Finally, our paper ends with 
presenting study conclusion and future works.  
II. 
FIELD SITES 
    Our study is based on understanding the information 
sharing practices, ICT use and ownership in resource 
constraint rural communities of emerging markets where 
low literate and low income users dwell. In this direction, 
we have selected two rural but resource constraint 
communities in South Africa. Our ethnography study is 
based on the two rural communities located in the Eastern 
Cape of South Africa, i.e., Alice and Dwesa rural 
communities. University of Fort Hare is located within 
Alice while Dwesa rural community is located on the south-
eastern coast of South Africa that comprises of an area 
spread over 235 square Km. The closest town to Dwesa is 
50 km away. Dwesa suffers from a low human development 
index i.e., 0.41 [5], far below the national average of 0.61 
[6]. Dwesa also has a low literacy rate at 44.24% against the 
national rate of 68.5% [7], an unemployment rate of around 
78%, and increasing dependence on agriculture, state grants 
and remittances from urban areas [5].  The working 
population of this region is mainly involved in farming 
related practices, while marginal numbers are dependent on 
art and craft for their subsistence. Due to the high 
percentage of youth migration to urban areas, Dwesa is left 
with mostly elderly people and children below 20 years of 
age [8][9][10][11]. Dwesa and Alice differ in socio-
economic status as Alice is more advanced compared to 
Dwesa in terms of technology use because the Alice rural 
community lies in the vicinity of bigger towns and people 
dwelling here are having higher penetration of ICT and 
mobile phones compared to Dwesa.    
III. 
RELATED WORK 
      Given our focus on the day to day practices in rural 
settings, we concentrated on three aspects of rural living: 
oral cultures and their mobile phone usage, existing 
information sharing practices, and the role of ICT and 
mobile services in farming and other professions in rural 
settings. First we referred to the existing work in the Alice 
and Dwesa rural communities in order to get a basic 
understanding of the current use and ownership of mobile 
phones and ICT in these communities [7][8][9][10][11][22]. 
After this we looked at the existing research in the Human-
Computer Interaction for Development (HCID) literature 
[12]. HCID practitioners have recommended focusing on 
community-centered design rather than user-centered design 
when development related issues are the main reasons for 
the research [12]. Similarly to research on Chinese 
immigrant workers and ICT [9][10][11] our research also 
turned to family centered design as the majority of the 
people in the Dwesa rural community have migrated to 
urban areas, and they are the ones who provide urban 
resources to the rural families.  
    Similar to our argument, i.e., users dwelling in resource 
constraint communities of emerging markets have different 
needs, expectations and requirements. Winschiers and 
Fendler [13] also emphasized this difference in their study 
as they found western usability notions failed desperately in 
Nigeria. It was found that western world’s notion for 
evaluating 
usability 
i.e., 
learnability, 
speed 
and 
memorability do not sell as criteria’s for usability in Nigeria 
because Nigerians considered other criteria for considering 
any software successful. Sukuraman et al. [20] argued that 
findings from the developed nations are not directly 
applicable in context to emerging markets due to different 
needs and requirements. They found that the users in 
resource constraints communities do not have a pressing 
need for security and privacy in ICT use unlike developed 
markets. Sherwani et al. [17] presented the concept of oral 
and literate culture in order to understand the preference for 
face-to-face information exchanges in both oral and literate 
cultures. “Intermediated technology use” is recognized as an 
important research area in HCID research. Intermediated 
technology use refers to the situation where users cannot use 
mobile phone services, ICT or other related technologies on 
their own due to any one of several reasons like poverty, 
illiteracy, and lack of accessibility or sufficient skills 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

required for independent use. In such cases, users often 
become dependent on others or rely on third parties [18] 
[19][20]. India has been a testing platform for intermediated 
technology use [18][19][20][24] and these findings can also 
be applicable to South Africa for the following reasons: 
Both countries have a high level of illiteracy and unstable 
development in infrastructure. Both are also emerging 
economies that are facing a vast rural and semi-skilled 
population, poor quality of education, uneven economic 
development and inefficiency in their local markets.  Smyth 
et al. [25] studied the media sharing through mobile phones 
in India in order to understand the mobile phone use, 
ownership and adoption in emerging market context.  In this 
study, we found that if a user is highly motivated then 
existing hurdles in ICT use and adoption are easily crossed. 
These hurdles are – cost of Internet use, privacy, complex 
user interfaces, software virus, legal issues and limited 
Internet and network connectivity. But users due motivation 
for entertainment overcomes these challenges. However one 
of the notable findings from this study was that emerging 
markets are not yet ready for the advanced ICT 
development.  
       In the exiting literature on ICT and development world, 
there are different research agendas for example; ICT4D, 
HCI4D and recent of all UbiComp4D, all these platforms 
have more or less one common objective i.e., focus on the 
needs and requirements of development world. ICT4D 
refers to ICT for development where the primary focus is on 
“how technology can solve challenges faced in global 
development”. UbiComp4D refers to Ubiquitous computing 
(UbiComp) for development that strives for the integration 
of development of resource constraint communities and 
UbiComp research agendas. Similarly HCI4D stands for 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) for development that 
argues for developing new methods and organizing studies 
for the development of digitally unstable communities.  
HCI4D came into limelight as a mechanism for countering 
the challenges faced in applying traditional HCI research 
methods when contributing to global IT development. All 
these three different terms have common agenda i.e., to 
eradicate poverty from neglected socio-economic contexts 
[17][18][19][20][21][24][25][26][27][28]. In this direction, 
some of the notable initiatives are GlobiComp, workshop 
organized on “Taking UbiComp beyond developed worlds” 
at UbiComp 2009 [26].  “Transnational times” workshop at 
UbiComp 2010 [27] and workshop titled "Transnational 
HCI" organized at CHI 2011 [28]. All these different 
initiatives emphasized the need for understanding social, 
economic and cultural practices in emerging markets for 
potential ICT development.  
IV. 
STUDY METHODOLOGY 
      The ethnographic study was performed in three different 
phases where the first phase was exploratory in nature. At 
this stage, we emphasized gathering information on social 
habits, access patterns in regard to mobile phone and ICT 
usage, information sharing and exchanges in rural settings. 
In the second phase, the information gained from the first 
phase was validated using the same research methods and 
study methodology, but with more systematic sampling of 
participants.  In third phase, we performed a cross-cultural 
study where findings and results available in the existing 
literature but from different continent were cross examined 
with the learning and results obtained through our 
ethnography study 
      The first phase of our ethnography study was completed 
in course of a 5-week ethnography study during May-July 
2011 in both Alice and Dwesa Communities.  The data 
collected from the first of the study was analyzed using 
thematic analysis approach [23]. Based on the study 
findings, we made some adjustments to our study. Some 
questions were modified and added in order to know more 
about the unclear facts. Second study was organized with 
modified questions between September-October, 2011 in 
course of 5-week ethnography. 
       The entire ethnography study was carried twice in the 
course of 6 months.  Three researchers from University of 
Fort Hare organized and performed the ethnography studies. 
The researchers made six visits to Dwesa and Alice where 
they stayed for four to five consecutive days on each visit. 
They stayed with the local residents and followed a daily 
routine of visiting common meeting places, social gathering, 
schools, and adult learning centers, farming sites and 
shopping places. Before conducting the first phase of this 
study, we took certain steps to ensure that the results of the 
study were correct and genuine. For example, three 
researchers were picked who were already familiar with 
both communities in order to establish trust and a certain 
degree of comfort with the study participants. This ensured 
the easy availability and accessibility of the subjects 
involved. Second, well-known people from both the 
communities were taken into confidence so that the subjects 
participated in our study in a motivated and willing fashion.  
For example, the respective heads of the communities and 
principals of the adult learning and training centers located 
at Dwesa and Alice. 
A. Research Methods 
    Mixed method research was practiced during our 
ethnography study i.e., combination of different qualitative 
research methods such as contextual inquiry, participant 
observation, design exercises; focus and individual 
interviews were used for gaining rich user data. We 
employed the triangulation research principle in the data 
collection where findings from every research method 
complemented the other methods. Tables 1 and 2 present the 
classification of participants based on gender in different 
user groups. Table 1 presents the classification in first field 
study while Table 2 represents second field study.  
 
 
 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  CLASSIFICATION OF PARTICIPANTS IN FIRST STUDY  
User Group 
Dwesa 
Alice 
Youth 
11 males 
17 females 
16 males 
13 females 
 
Women 
 
14 females 
28 females 
Farmers 
10 males 
2 females 
5 males 
3 females 
Old People 
6 males 
8 females 
11 males 
6 females 
Teachers/ 
Workers 
3 males 
8 females 
6 males 
8 females 
TABLE II.  CLASSIFICATION OF PARTICIPANTS IN SECOND STUDY  
User Group 
Dwesa 
Alice 
Youth 
15 males 
15 females 
11 males 
10 females 
 
Women 
 
15 females 
15 females 
Farmers 
8 males 
5 females 
8 males 
2 females 
Old People 
7 males 
8 females 
        7 males 
7 females 
Teachers/ 
Workers 
5 males 
10 females 
6 males 
9 females 
B. Study Participants 
     In our study, we tried to involve different stakeholders 
from the both rural communities. This includes youth 
(below 25 and not working), women (mostly staying at 
home, married and from all age groups), farmers (all age 
groups), older people (above 55 years of age), and 
professionals involved in other than farming (teachers, 
craftsmen from all age groups). Our user group contains 
both illiterate and literate participants who either do or do 
not possess mobile phones.   
      In both communities, youth was classified into a 
primary school group (8-12 years) and a secondary school 
youth (13-30 years).  The youngsters interviewed at Dwesa 
were between 7-20 years of age due to rural to urban 
migration, as those above 20 years of age had already left 
the community. The youngsters interviewed at Alice were 
more technologically savvy compared to the youngsters at 
Dwesa. The majority of the interviewed youngsters at Alice 
had mobile phones while in Dwesa few possessed their own 
mobile phones. As Alice is closer to towns, there are high 
numbers of children who are the victims of theft. As a 
result, parents at Alice preferred their children to have 
mobile phones so that their children could call them in case 
of emergency. Furthermore, it was found that the youth at 
Alice play indoor games such as Sudoku and snakes and 
ladders; while at Dwesa the children rely on traditional 
outdoor games in groups. 
      Farming is more common in Dwesa than Alice, and 
more farmers were available in Dwesa for this reason. 
Almost all the interviewed farmers both at Alice and Dwesa 
possess mobile phones. In both Alice and Dwesa, we found 
that a large number of subjects joined in discussions but 
only few of them were active in answering the interview 
questions.  We cannot restrict or eliminate such people from 
our discussions as it was against social rules in African 
society so we allowed everyone to join at their own will. In 
Tables 1 and 2, we mentioned number of only those users 
who have participated actively in the discussions.  Almost 
all the focus group discussions organized at Alice were 
informal in nature because in Alice people are either busy 
doing their work or travel to the nearest big city to seek 
employment: hence we met most of our subjects at a 
community hall except for farmers and older people who 
were interviewed at farming sites and their homes.  Figures 
1, 2 and 3 presents an overview of different types of 
discussions organized by researchers in Alice and Dwesa 
communities. 
 
Figure 1.  Researchers organizing focus group discussions at Alice 
community 
 
Figure 2. Researchers interviewing youth in a local school 
 
Figure 3. Focus discussions with working user group 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Data Collection and Analysis 
    All the qualitative measures were performed in the native 
language of that region, for example, in Dwesa and Alice 
rural communities isiXhosa language is widely spoken and 
written; so, all our qualitative and design methods were 
practiced in isiXhosa language. Three researchers from 
University of Fort Hare are fluent in written and spoken 
isiXhosa, so all observations and conversations were carried 
in isiXhosa. The data was collected in the form of audio 
recordings and written field notes while practicing different 
qualitative measures in the ethnographic field study. The 
participating researchers transcribed the recordings first in 
isiXhosa and later translated them into English. The field 
researchers crosschecked the translations in order to avoid 
any incorrect translation of the original text and the 
associated meanings. The collected data was analyzed using 
thematic analysis approach where common themes and 
meanings were obtained after objective and systematic 
process of data analysis [18].  The whole process ends with 
higher abstraction levels that were carved from the original 
data.  
V. 
THEMES UNDER INVESTIGATION 
     We have identified three themes for investigation under 
this study that are listed below: 
A. Oral cultures and Mobile phone usage  
     Both the Alice and Dwesa rural communities possess 
large numbers of people who represent oral culture, i.e., 
illiterate people. We wanted to investigate the different 
mobile phone features used by oral and literate users. Our 
two main objectives under this theme are: 
 
1. How do oral users make use of different features in 
their mobile phones? For example, how do oral users 
save contacts on their mobile phones? Do they seek 
help from friends and family? Or have they become 
familiar with the process of saving contacts in the 
phone address book? In some of the earlier studies [19], 
it was found that oral cultures use paper diaries for 
storing contacts, so we also wanted to examine the 
possible reasons behind this behavior. In what way do 
oral users save contacts in their mobile phones and their 
paper diaries? What is the basis, for instance, for 
indexing and searching for saved contacts in the paper 
dairies?  
 
2. Investigating the kind of problems faced by oral users 
in mobile phone use. Our hypothesis on mobile phone 
use is that oral users make use of only few mobile 
phone features. There are many such never used 
functionalities such as organizing contacts to family, 
friends and office, the speed dial option as a shortcut 
for calling someone by pressing a single key, and 
associating icons or colors with contacts. The question 
is do oral users really use such functionalities in their 
daily routine?  
B. Information sharing practices in rural regions 
      Under this theme, we are investigating the role of face-
to-face or oral information exchange in the daily routine of 
different user groups. How do different user groups receive 
the updated information related to the product they want to 
purchase or sell their produce on the market? We are 
interested in exploring the access pattern of such 
information exchanges.  We believe that ICT should support 
the existing information sharing practices that are currently 
based on social habits.  We are also examining the access 
patterns and different channels through which information 
flows in rural settings. For example, how do different user 
groups receive national and international news and updated 
information on new products they want to purchase.  How 
do they perceive information sharing through computers and 
Internet? Different state owned TV and radio programs are 
aired, but what is their overall usefulness to different 
professions such as farmers, shop owners and small 
business owners? Furthermore, we are interesting in 
understanding the role of the different education and health 
oriented 
programs 
owned 
by 
the 
respective 
state 
governments for our user group. 
C. Role of Mobile phones and ICT in farming related 
practices  
      In this topic, we are studying the role of ICT and mobile 
phone usage in facilitating different farming related 
practices such as seed selection, sowing, fertilization and 
disease management, harvesting and selling agricultural 
purchase on the market.  Our three main objectives under 
this theme are - 
 
1. Investigating the role of text messages and other mobile 
phone services in different farming related practices. 
We want to understand the attitude of farmers to 
different mobile services, and their associated benefits 
and risks. How do farmers, for example, sell their 
produce in market? Do they sell locally or in other big 
cities? How do they get updated information about their 
crops? Do they have long-standing relationships with 
the buyers? 
 
2. Examining the role of state owned infotainment media, 
i.e., radio and TV programs in the daily routines of 
different user groups such as information related to 
markets, to weather forecasts, and also to government 
policies related to their profession. We are interested in 
examining “how farmers perceive these informing 
sharing programs”.  
 
3. Other farming specific questions under investigation are 
different crop diversification programs and their 
usefulness. Crop diversification programs are promoted 
by the state government so that farmers can earn more 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

profits, 
but 
do 
farmers 
agree 
and 
see 
crop 
diversification as useful? 
 
VI. 
PRILIMINARY RESULTS 
     Our presented study is still in progress and this paper is 
also a work in progress contribution; so, we also only 
outlined some of the preliminary findings here that are 
crucial findings as per already defined themes of 
investigations.  
A. Oral cultures and Information sharing practices 
       Similar to the existing studies in emerging markets 
[15,16], we found that in both rural communities, oral or 
face-to-face communications are most preferred medium for 
sharing 
information. 
Majority 
of 
the 
interviewed 
participants in Dwesa community had strong affection for 
oral way of communication as they consider it to be more 
relaxing, helps in socializing better and free from 
miscommunication that frequently happen if communication 
happens through mobile phones. Information sharing in both 
rural regions is highly unstructured and people consider 
technology such as mobile phones and Internet as expensive 
and un-necessary for delivering non-urgent information for 
example discussing normal daily routine, gossips and other 
local news.  Youth as well as business professional such as 
farmers and other employed people excessively use mobile 
phones. Old people make use of mobile phones mostly for 
receiving phone call.  In both Alice and Dwesa 
communities, it was found that majority of the people have 
strong opinion that in future technology can never 
completely replace the oral or face to face communications. 
This can be interpreted as people in rural communities are 
not as addicted as are urban users. Furthermore, technology 
use is still considered expensive while oral or face-to-face 
communications are considered effortless. 
B. Role of Mobile phones and ICT in farming related 
practices  
         In Dwesa community, we found that almost all the 
interviewed farmers are dissatisfied with the government 
initiatives related to farming practices. Farmers in Dwesa 
mentioned that crucial information related to farming 
practices such as seed selection, sowing, weather forecast, 
insecticide and pesticide selection could be easily provided 
using mobile phones. Mobile phones are universally and 
huge number of farmers possesses feature phones, which 
support text message facility. However, ICT is underutilized 
like earlier studies in other emerging countries like China 
[15][16].  A farmer in Dwesa community is depending upon 
local school and community centers for getting farming 
related advice.  Some farmers even expressed that main 
reason for agriculture related losses such as bad yield is due 
to improper information sharing. In Alice community, 
farmers are in better position compared to Dwesa because 
Alice is close to bigger towns so farmers have easy 
accessibility to farming related equipments unlike Dwesa. In 
both the communities, we found that mobile phones are 
excessively owned and used by the farmers for example, 
informing neighboring farmers about farming and weather 
updates, getting updates about the yield price from the local 
markets. Overall, we got the impression that mobile phones 
and ICT in general are owned and used in high numbers 
however; ICT is underutilized due to poor government 
initiatives. Unlike other researchers [21] who believe that 
emerging markets are not yet ready for the advanced 
developed, we hold a different opinion on this matter. In 
both Alice and Dwesa communities, infrastructure is already 
present in form of mobile phones; so, any kind of text or 
voice based services can be easily launched and provided to 
local community.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      This paper described the design of an ethnographic field 
study, which aims to investigate mobile phone and ICT 
usage patterns of rural users in developing countries. The 
goal is then to identify opportunities for mobile phone and 
ICT usage based on the results of this study. We believe that 
bringing ICT to remote environments is growing area of 
interest in various research communities, and thus our study 
of the relevant practical and cultural issues is very timely. 
The paper has been structured in a way that its content not 
only remains interesting for its readers but also thought 
provoking. In future, we plan to organize similar 
ethnographic studies in other emerging markets such as 
India, China and countries in Middle East. We aim to repeat 
our existing study in India and China. In this direction, we 
will locate two similar rural communities as we had in 
South Africa and apply similar research methods so as to 
perform cross-cultural analysis of the results. This kind of 
comparison will enable us in deriving important design 
drivers that will lead to possible innovative designs for 
different rural communities that are also resource constraint 
in nature.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
     The presented work has been funded and supported by 
Data communication software (DCS) and Information 
Systems and Service Engineering (ISSEG) research groups 
at Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
School of Science, Aalto University, Finland. We are 
thankful to the University of Fort Hare, South Africa for 
providing necessary logistics required for organizing 
ethnography studies at Alice and Dwesa rural communities. 
We are grateful to our fellow researchers Siphe Mhlana and 
Sikhumbuzo Ngenya for their help during the whole study. 
We also thank the participants from the Alice and Dwesa 
communities who took the time to participate in the 
different phases of this study and share their opinions and 
experiences. We express our great respect and honor for 
village heads in Dwesa community who supported our study 
in every possible way.  
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

REFERENCE 
[1] What 
Is 
An 
Emerging 
Market 
Economy? 
August, 
2009. 
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/03/073003.asp#axzz1diEas23D 
(retrieved: January, 2012) 
[2] Emerging Market Growth Poles are Redefining Global Economic 
Structure, Says World Bank Report, 17 May, 2011 (retrieved: 
January, 2012) 
[3] N. Rangaswamy and N. Sambasivan. Cutting Chai, Jugaad, and Here 
Pheri: towards UbiComp for global community. Personal Ubiquitous 
Computing. 15, 6 (August 2011), pp.  553-564. 
[4] Global mobile statistics 2011, http://mobithinking.com/mobile 
marketing-tools/latest-mobile-stats (retrieved: January, 2012)  
[5] M. McCann. District Profile Eastern Cape Amathole District 
Municipality (DC12), Programme of Support to Local Economic 
Development in  the Eastern Cape, Eastern Cape Competitive 
Advantage Assessment And Training Support Project, European 
Consultants 
Organisation, 
2006. 
(retrieved: 
January, 
2012) 
http://www.thinasinako.co.za/files/documents/290806175552.pdf  
[6] UNDP. “Human Development Report 2007/2008 - Country Fact 
Sheets- South Africa,” 
2007.  (retrieved: January, 2012) 
http://hdrstats.undp.org/countries/country_fact_sheets/cty_fs_ZAF.ht
ml  
[7] Statistics 
South 
Africa, 
Provincial 
Profile 
2004: 
http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/Report-00-91-09/Report-00-
91-092004.pdf (retrieved: January, 2012) 
[8] L. Dalvit, H. Muyingi, A. Terzoli, and M. Thinyane. The 
Deploymentof an e-Commerce Platform and Related Projects in a 
Rural Area in South Africa,  International journal of Computing and 
ICT Research, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 9-18. 
[9] C. Pade-Khene, R. Palmer, and M. Kavha. A baseline study of a 
Dwesa rural community for the Siyakhula Information and 
Communication Technology for Development project: understanding 
the reality on the ground. Information Development. Information 
Development Journal November 2010 vol. 26 no. 4, pp. 265-288.  
[10] G. N. Sicelo, Implementation of a Virtual shopping  mall for Dwesa, 
a rural area in the Eastern Cape, South Africa. MSC thesis, 
Department of Computer Science,  University of Fort Hare, South 
Africa. 
[11] Dwesa Village Connection Business Modelling,Feasibility Analysis, 
October 2008 (retrieved: January, 2012) http://www.ungana-
afrika.org/sites/default/files/documents/dwesa_business_modelling_r
eport.pdf 
[12] A. Dearden, User-centered design considered harmful. Information 
Technologies and International Development 4, 3 (2008), pp. 7-12. 
[13] M. Friedewald and O. Raabe, Ubiquitous computing: An overview of 
technology impacts, Telematics and Informatics, Volume 28, Issue 2, 
May 2011, pp. 55-65. 
[14] X. Lang, E. Oreglia, and S. Thomas. Social practices and mobile 
phone use of young migrant workers. In Proc. MobileHCI2010, ACM 
Press (2010), pp. 59-62. 
[15] X. Liu, J. Liu, J. Cai, Y. Liu, and X. Wang. Design for China's 
migrant workers: A case of user research and mobile product 
concepts development. In Proc. HCD09, Springer-Verlag, Berling, 
Heidelberg, pp. 482-491. 
[16] E. Oreglia, Y. Liu, and W. Zhao. Designing for emerging rural users: 
experiences from China. In Proceedings of the 2011 annual 
conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI '11). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 1433-1436. 
[17] J. Sherwani, N. Ali, C. P. Rosé and R. Rosenfeld, Orality-Grounded 
HCID: Understanding the Oral User, Information Technologies and 
International Development, vol. 5, Dec 16 2009, pp.  37-49 
[18] T. Parikh and K. Ghosh. Understanding and designing for 
intermediated information tasks in India. IEEE Pervasive Computing 
5, 2 (2006), pp. 32-39. 
[19] N. Sambasivan, E. Cutrell, K. Toyama, and B. Nardi. Intermediated 
technology use in developing communities. In Proc. CHI2010, ACM 
Press (2010), pp. 2583-2592. 
[20] A. Sukumaran, S. Ramlal, E. Ophir, V. R. Kumar, G. Mishra, V. 
Evers, V. Balaji, and C. Nass. Intermediated technology interaction in 
rural contexts. In Ext Abstracts CHI 2009, ACM Press (2009), pp. 
3817-3822. 
[21] E. Brewer, M. Demmer, M. Ho, R. J. Honicky, J. Pal, M. Plauche, 
and S. Surana. The challenges of technology research for developing 
regions. IEEE Pervasive Computing 5, 2 (2006), pp.15-23. 
[22] E. A. Emmanuel and H. N. Muyingi. A mobile commerce application 
for rural economy development: a case study for Dwesa. 
In Proceedings of the 2010 Annual Research Conference of the South 
African 
Institute 
of 
Computer 
Scientists 
and 
Information 
Technologists (SAICSIT '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 58-
66. 
[23] L. Rourke, T. Anderson, D. R. Garrison, and W. Archer. 
Methodological Issues in the Content Analysis of Computer 
Conference 
Transcripts. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Artificial 
Intelligence in Education 12 (2000), pp. 8-22. 
[24] A. Joshi, N. Welankar, N. BL, K. Kanitkar, and R. Sheikh, Rangoli: a 
visual phonebook for low-literate users. In Proceedings of the 10th 
international conference on Human computer interaction with mobile 
devices and services (MobileHCI '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
pp. 217-223. 
[25] T. N. Smyth, S. Kumar, I. Medhi, and K. Toyama. Where there's a 
will there's a way: mobile media sharing in urban india. In 
Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (CHI '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 753-
762. 
[26] Globicomp: 
Taking 
Ubicomp 
beyond 
developed 
worlds. 
http://www.cs.swan.ac.uk/globicomp2009/, 
UbiComp 
2009 
Workshop, 30 September, 2009 (retrieved: January, 2012) 
[27] I. Shklovski, S. Lindtner, J. Vertesi, and P. Dourish, Transnational 
Times: Locality, Globality and Mobility in Technology Design and 
Use. Ext. Abst. Ubicomp 2010, ACM Press (2010), pp. 515-518.  
[28] J. Vertesi, S. Lindtner, and I. Shklovski, Transnational HCI: humans, 
computers, and interactions in transnational contexts. Proceedings of 
the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts on Human factors in 
computing systems (CHI EA '11). ACM, New York, USA, pp. 61-64. 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

