Rapid Prototyping Spiral for Creative Problem Solving in Developing Countries
Shohei Aoki, Koichi Hori
School of Engineering
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
emails: {aoki@ailab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, hori@computer.org}
Abstract—In this paper, we focus on how we can assist the local
designers in the developing countries to design and manufacture
the problem solving products. Although there are a lot of
examples of appropriate technology, most of them were designed
by the experts who have professional knowledge. To solve this
issue, we propose a design method rapid prototyping spiral,
considering the conventional studies on creativity support. The
rapid prototyping spiral is a quick iterating process of creating
prototypes and getting feedbacks from the users. The advantage
of this method is that it enables the designers to discover the
hidden issues or the unconscious assumptions underlying the
users or the community. Our method also takes advantage of the
limitation of materials, which has been regarded as a negative
aspect so far. We illustrate how our method is applicable to design
in the developing countries, taking a project in Ghana as an
example.
Keywords-Design method; Prototyping; Design space.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Problem solving products in developing countries
Creating the innovative product to solve daily problems
gives great impact especially to the people in the developing
countries, where they are exposed to severe constraints. One of
the famous activities to make these products is the appropriate
technology. The appropriate technology is an application that is
small-scale, labor-intensive, energy-efﬁcient, environmentally
sound, and locally controlled [1]. A well-known example of
the appropriate technology is Q Drum, a plastic water tank
which can be easily moved with its rotation [2].
B. Assisting local designers
So far, the designers of these problem solving products
needed to understand the culture and the situation in the
area they are targeting thoroughly since they were usually
the outsiders of the community. To achieve this purpose, for
instance at the d.school in Stanford university, various methods
were invented for the designers to discover the local needs
efﬁciently. To identify the essential needs in the developing
countries, the framework of the participatory development was
contrived in the ﬁeld of the international development, which
proceeds the project through interaction with inhabitants [3].
The inclusive design concept is also similar, to include the
people, such as physically challenged people, into the design
process to identify the socially important needs [4]. On the
other hand, in terms of sustainability, it is also important to
establish the environment for the local designers to design the
product by themselves. For example, the tutorial to make some
appropriate technologies is provided online for the local people
to recreate the products by themselves, which is called Open
Source Appropriate Technology (OSAT) [5]. Moreover, in the
Fab lab, the worldwide open workshop which provides the
digital fabrication tools to the people in the community, local
designers have produced some useful products. For example,
the Fab-Fi, the low cost Wi-Fi antenna for building the Internet
mesh network, was developed in the Fab lab Jalalabad in
Afghanistan [6]. Despite the increase of those platforms, the
authors believe there still are plenty ways to accelerate the
creation of the problem solving products in the developing
countries. In this paper, as shown in Figure 1, we propose the
design method and the support system for local designers to
create the problem solving products by themselves.
Figure 1. Design method and support system for assisting local designers
First of all, in Section 3, we discuss the existing difﬁculties
that local designers face and clariﬁes the requirements for
creating the design method. Considering the result, we propose
the design method based on our past projects in Section 4.
Moreover, we present the support system for assisting the
design using our method in Section 5.
II.
RELATED WORK
A. Appropriate technology
A lot of products of the appropriate technology have been
invented and currently in use [2]. For example, a solar cooker
is a device to generate heat using solar power as an energy
source. People can make the reﬂector of the solar cooker with
an unused parabolic antenna, which is an example of using
materials in a different way. Other example is a hydraulic
ram, a kind of water pump which can lift the water to a
higher point without any external energy source. The hydraulic
ram is interesting because it is based on a simple principle of
ﬂuid dynamics, which is the water hammer. These products
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

were designed by the experts who have the knowledge of
each domain, therefore we aim to involve more local people
in the design of such products. In this perspective, some
successful products designed by ordinary people in South
Asian countries have got attention. These products are called as
frugal innovation or Jugaad, which means a creative problem
solving with improvised arrangements [7]. For example, a
hand-made vehicle was invented by local inhabitants using the
agricultural water pump. Although there are such cases of the
design by local people, there seems to be little researches on
the design methodology and the support system for it.
B. Prototyping for creating ideas
One of the key issues of creating the problem solving
products is to identify the needs of local people correctly.
Some studies clariﬁed the effectiveness of the prototyping
for discovering the personal needs. Lim et al. pointed out
their unique prototyping method called Discovery-Driven Pro-
totyping (DDP) promoted discovering underlying issues of
individuality [8]. Kelly also mentioned the importance of the
prototyping in the problem solving [9]. So far, the prototyping
of hardware has taken a long time; however, the recent
developments of the fabrication tools drastically changed the
environment around amateur creators. A 3D printer enabled the
production of the plastic parts with less cost and time. With a
laser cutter, the creators can cut the wooden or acrylic board
in precise dimensions. Moreover, the micro controller board
such as Arduino enabled users to prototype the electronics
much easily [10]. Using such micro controller board, users can
try various combinations of sensors and actuators to explore
the design solution. We implement the support system using
those fabrication tools effectively. It is important to support
both conceptualisation and manufacturing in the design process
since our targets are local designers, who usually don’t have
much knowledge and experience in design and manufacturing.
C. Creativity support
Boden described the three forms of creativity [11]. The
ﬁrst one is the combination of familiar ideas in unfamiliar
ways. The second and third are the exploration and the
transformation of conceptual space. Gero divided the design
into the three types: routine design, innovative design and
creative design [12]. Their arguments seem similar if we
deﬁne the creative design as the transformation of conceptual
space. Finke et al. discussed the creative activity based on
the psychological experiment [13]. They proposed geneplore
model, which demonstrates that the creative process is a cyclic
process, which consists of generation of preinventive structure
and preinventive exploration and interpretation. Although such
theoretical researches and the laboratory experiments exist,
there are a small number of practical studies on how to
assist local designers to make the problem solving products
in developing countries. Based on those preceding studies, we
propose the design method, which promotes the exploration of
the design space through the continuous prototyping.
III.
REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS
A. Identiﬁcation of needs
It may seem easy for a local designer to identify the needs
in a community, and no special design method is necessary
to identify the needs. However, from the experience in the
past project, we propose a design method is required not only
for external designers, but also for local designers. In 2010,
the authors engaged in the project with a Non-Governmental
Organization (NGO) to develop a movie material of the science
experiment for enhancing the educational quality at a farm
area in Bangladesh. The movie was shot in the high school
known for its high educational level. Contrary to expectations,
the created movie was not good enough to be published in
terms of the quality of the content, mainly because of the
lack of the safety instruction by the teacher. The interesting
point was that, prior to making the pilot movie, no one in the
local NGO was suspicious of the quality. In this sense, making
the prototype enabled us to realise the hidden assumption in
the community, which was the less awareness of the safety
education. However, the more interesting point was that one
of the members in the NGO ﬁnally proposed to reuse the movie
for the teachers not for the children, in order to enlighten the
teachers about the importance of safety instruction. We point
out it is a good example of the transformation of the product
use to a different way. Every single person, no matter where he
or she is from, has the personal bias based on the experience
or cultural background, which unconsciously regulates his or
her thoughts. Liberating designers from those unconscious
constraints makes it possible to explore the different solutions
unexpected at the initial phase in the design process.
B. Considering limitation of materials
In general, manufacturing resources, such as materials and
tools, are limited in the developing countries. These constraints
sometimes make designers give up using speciﬁc material.
However, the limitation of materials sometimes promotes
designers to come up with an innovative way of solving
problems. For example, in our project in Ghana, we have been
forced to select a wooden board rather than metal for making
a magnetic rotor because of the availability. As a result, the
choice enabled us to make the parts easier and with less cost. In
another instance, the Jaipur Foot, a prosthesis foot developed in
India, uses locally available rubber which satisﬁed the various
requirements at the same time, such as the resemblance to the
appearance of normal human foot, durability, waterproofness,
and affordability [14]. The product diffused from India into
parts of the world, which is opposite of the conventional
technology dissemination. Recently, the movement of these
inventions is referred as the reverse innovation [15]. Regarding
this, we need to focus on the positive aspect of the limitation
of materials.
C. Manufacturing knowledge
The open source software and hardware made it easier to
develop the products with less cost, time and human resources.
Besides, the online tutorial, such as Instructables, also enabled
the sharing of knowledge and skills of the manufacturing.
However, so far the designer of the appropriate technology
was the expert who has the fundamental understanding of the
technology. Since we aim to assist the local designers including
amateurs, not only providing knowledge but also supporting
the utilization of the knowledge is required.
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV.
DESIGN METHOD
A. Deﬁnition of design space
Conventional design studies provided several ways for
describing design space to discuss design process. For ex-
ample, Maher et al. presented the co-evolution model, which
describes the design exploration as the interaction of problem
space and solution space [16]. As shown in Figure 2, we
split the design space into four layers which are problem
space, function space, structure space, and tool and material
space. The problem space consists of the needs of the product
users. The function space involves the required function of
the products. The structure space is the collection of the
entities which materialises the given functions. The tool and
material space represents the whole available materials and
the facility of manufacturing including machine tools. This
separation concept is similar to the design model proposed by
Suh [17]. In particular, we focus on the feedbacks from the
tool and material space to the other spaces, which we believe is
the unique feature of production in the developing countries.
Due to the limited resources, the exploration of the suitable
structure is regulated by the locally available materials. We
use this design space model to discuss the transformation of
each space during the design process.
Figure 2. Deﬁnition of the design space
B. Dynamic transformation of design space
The main focus of the proposing design method is to
transform the design space dynamically by the iteration of the
prototyping. Here, we show the transformation of the design
space taking the project in Ghana as an example.
In Figure 3, the solid arrows represent the initial ﬂow of
the designer’s thoughts. In our project in Ghana, we initially
targeted to solve the e-waste problem that was associated with
the health hazard among the laborers who are working in the
waste dump to extract metals such as gold and copper by
burning the wastes. To avoid such problem, we deﬁned the
required function as the eddy current separation, which can
separate the metals from plastics without burning the wastes.
Subsequently, we picked up the sub functions of the eddy
current separation as follows:
•
Magnetic rotor to generate the electromagnetic ﬁeld
by the rotation of the magnets
•
Power source for driving the magnetic rotor
Figure 3. Design ﬂow at initial state
•
Platform to hold the magnetic rotor, a drive shaft, and
bearings
Then, we started designing the magnetic rotor. At the begin-
ning we expected to use the neodymium magnets, but later
we noticed there were no neodymium magnets available in
the local shops. After discussions, we decided to dismantle
hard disk drives to extract the neodymium magnets. This
transition of the design can be regarded as the extension of
the tool and material space because we were able to discover
the availability of the particular material through the design
process. Such transformation is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Transformation of structure space and tool-and-material space
In Figure 4, the dotted arrows show the ﬂow of the induced
thoughts through the prototyping process. In similar ways, each
design space reﬂects on other design spaces, which triggers
the transformation of the design space. Interestingly, as we
mentioned the uniqueness of the tool and material space, the
tool and material space can affect the problem space directly.
For example, as indicated in Figure 5, if we come up with
the idea of using the electric motor and the lead battery to
drive the magnetic rotor, it signiﬁes that we are aware of
the local availability of the lead battery. Then, we can start
the discussion on the possible product made with the lead
battery, which may lead to the use of the product to supply
the electricity in the unelectriﬁed area.
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 5. Transformation of function and problem space
C. Rapid prototyping spiral
Our focus is how we can accelerate the transformation of
the design space. We propose the design method using the
quick iteration of design, manufacturing the prototype and test-
ing, which we call rapid prototyping spiral. The signiﬁcance
of prototyping is described in the design ﬁeld from various
perspectives. For example, Thoring et al. mentioned that the
iteration of prototyping enables designers to ﬁnd the next
problem, while explaining the process of the design thinking
[18]. In Figure 6, our design method is shown compared with
the design thinking process.
Figure 6. Prototyping spiral compared to the design thinking (used the ﬁgure
from HPI D-School as reference [18])
In Figure 6, the left part shows our rapid prototyping spiral,
and the right side represents the design thinking process. As
shown in the ﬁgure, we propose to start the design process
from prototyping. The reason we changed the order in the
design process is that we focus on the following three aspects,
which should be considered when assisting local designers in
the developing countries.
•
Limitation of materials
•
Intrinsic motivation
•
Production of practical products
TABLE I. EXPLORATION OF FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS
Design phase
Problem space
Prototype
Initial phase
Low quality
Science movie
of science education
shot in the
Lack of resources
high-level school
Second phase
Lack of carefulness
Material for teachers
for safety instruction
to instruct safety
First, due to the limitation of materials, local designers
may not be able to manufacture the product with the materials
required in the ideal design. In our method, by starting the
design process from prototyping, the designers are promoted
to focus on the material space mentioned in the previous
section, and it leads to the exploration of the unexpected use
of materials. Second, we expect that the continual process
of the materialisation motivates the local designers, and such
motivation enhances the creativity in the design process as
indicated in the conventional researches [19] [20]. Third, the
problem solving in the developing countries requires not the
conceptual but the practical outputs as materialised things.
Although the primary role of the prototype in our design
method is an explorer of the design space, it is also aimed
to be used as the real solution at the same time.
V.
SUPPORT SYSTEM
We propose the support system to assist the design using
our method. The support system consists of following four
components.
A. Exploration of fundamental problems
What makes our design method differ from the conven-
tional product development is the transformation of the initial
problem space during the design process. The purpose of
transforming the problem space is to ﬁnd out the fundamental
problem, in which the initially addressed problem is rooted. We
illustrate this feature by taking our project in Bangladesh as
an example. As shown in Table I, we assumed the initial goal
as creating the science movie to compensate the experimental
environment at the farm area, which ended up revealing the
relative incautiousness of the safety instructions even among
the teachers at the school in an urban district. To accelerate
such discovery of the fundamental issues, the iteration cycle
of the prototyping will be effective.
B. Knowledge base of available materials and tools
The advantage of making knowledge base of the locally
available materials is that it enables users to try the alternative
solutions when the expected material is not available. The
knowledge base is also helpful for reducing manufacturing
time. For example in our project in Ghana, we faced difﬁculties
regarding materials. When we looked for the metal shafts
and pulleys, it took so much time to get the suitable ones
because the local shop did not always stock ﬁxed kinds of
products. In this case, because the shops were concentrated in
a speciﬁc commercial area, it was better to create the inventory
for the whole area in advance. With the knowledge base,
the designers can run the prototyping process more quickly.
Furthermore, making the knowledge base of the available
tools is also worthwhile. Although the fabrication tools are
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

limited in the developing countries in general, each situation
is inhomogeneous deﬁnitely. In our project in Ghana, we
were able to use a laser cutter and a large CNC (Computer
Numerical Control) milling machine, which seemed unusual
equipments compared to the ones in the surrounding areas. The
authors deﬁne those irregular environments as technological
spike. We expect to create the products which are adaptable
to the locality, by making the knowledge base of the tools
including these technological spikes.
C. Knowledge base of manufacturing
The manufacturing knowledge base is required to support
the innovative design [21]. Existing knowledge base to support
the ordinary creators, such as Instructables, includes the list of
the required materials and tools, and the description of the each
process of manufacturing. Additionally, we propose to add the
feature that the user can append additional knowledge on the
different layer of the description. The additional knowledge
is the knowledge discovered during the design process, for
example, the description of a material which is different from
its ordinary usage. Although the general documentation is
expected to be simpliﬁed and include the least information
required, we assert that these redundant information is valu-
able.
D. Archiving format of prototyping
We suggest the archiving format to describe the design
process as shown in a following ﬁgure.
Figure 7. Archiving format of the prototyping
With the format shown in Figure 7, we are able to describe
how each prototype affected the four design spaces. The reason
why we relate the transformation of design space to each
prototype is because it enables us to track such transformation
in a chronological order. In the words of software development,
this archiving format corresponds to the revision control.
VI.
ONGOING EXPERIMENT
In this section, we explain how our method is applicable
for assisting the design and manufacturing in the developing
countries. We introduce the ongoing experiment that we are
currently preparing with the help of the Takoradi Technical
Institute (T.T.I.). T.T.I. is a technical high school in Ghana,
which has a Fab lab inside. In the Fab lab, students can
use digital fabrication machines, such as a laser cutter or a
CNC milling machine. First, we explain how the designers can
identify the fundamental problems using our design method.
Figure 8. Sound alarm prototype
Figure 8 shows the prototype of a sound alarm made with
our design method, which announces the beginning and end of
the class to the teachers and students. It was based on the need
of the principal, who told the authors the only one function to
implement, which is emitting a sound triggered by a timer. The
authors made the ﬁrst prototype using Arduino, which plays
a song at a scheduled time with electronic sound generated
by a micro controller. The initial reaction of the teachers in
T.T.I. to the prototype was different from expected, which was
surprising to the authors. They demanded the authors to change
the electronic sound to much louder and noisier siren. This
feedback is noticeable because it changed the requirements
speciﬁcation of the prototype. Even though this observation is
a slightly trivial example, by continuing to give feedback to
the initial design space, we believe that the iteration process
contributes to clarify the hidden assumption and fundamental
problems.
Secondly, we introduce another example to discuss the
transformation of design space. In this experiment, we set the
goal as developing a 3D printer to produce inexpensive plastic
parts. The expected transformation of design space is shown in
Figure 9. In Figure 9, as well as the example shown in Section
4, the design proceeds from problem space to next spaces.
A typical concept of a 3D printer using fused deposition
method (FDM) is assembling an extruder of a plastic ﬁlament
and a Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine. Recently,
the RepRap project allowed ordinary people to create a 3D
printer by sharing all the information including 3D data of
the parts and schematics of the circuit board [22]. Using such
resources, in addition, we prepare the same mechanical unit
for x, y, and z axes for building a CNC component. We take
this module-based approach so that we can easily disassemble
and reassemble it to build different machines. By creating
different types of machines, we promote designers to discover
unexpected functions of the machine. Also, in this example,
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 9. Expected transformation of design space
the tool and material space plays an important role. We try
to use several materials, such as an acrylic board, plywood
and even scrap wood, to ﬁnd out the best choice in terms
of cost and availability. The material space has an effect not
only on the structure space, but also on the problem space.
If a designer ﬁnds a lead battery, he or she may come up
with the idea of powering the 3D printer by the battery. The
customization makes the 3D printer portable, which can be
regarded as the transformation of structure space. The portable
3D printer enables designers to take it to home and discover
the possible use of it, such as creating the spare parts for ﬁxing
machines. This is an exploration of problem space, which is
especially focused on the rapid prototyping spiral. After the
whole design process, we analyse how the design space was
transformed. When recording the design process, we utilize
the web-based support system for archiving prototypes, as
discussed in Section 5.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed the rapid prototyping spiral, a design method
for assisting the local designers in the developing countries to
create the problem solving products. In our design method, the
four kinds of design space are transformed during the design
process, which enables us to discover the underlying issues in
the users and the community, or come up with the unexpected
usage of the materials. We also discussed the features of our
support system to assist the design using the method we are
proposing. As an example of applying our method to the design
project, we introduced the experiment which is currently going
on in Ghana. Based on the example of creating a sound
alarm prototype, we observed a change of the requirement of
a prototype, which induces the transformation of the design
space. In addition, we introduced the design project to create
a 3D printer, to prove the iteration of prototyping process
contributes to identify more fundamental problems. We believe
that the rapid prototyping spiral can also be applied to design
and manufacture in the developed countries. The core of the
method is supporting designers who have limited resources,
such as materials, tools, and manufacturing knowledge. With
the increase of the so-called maker communities and avail-
ability of digital fabrication tools, more individuals in the
developed countries will be involved in design projects in the
near future. We expect that our method also assists individual
creators in the developed countries to identify the socially
important issues, which leads to user-oriented innovation.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Smillie, Mastering the Machine Revisited: Poverty, Aid and Technol-
ogy.
Practical Action, December 2000.
[2]
C. E. Smith, Design for the Other 90%. Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2007.
[3]
V. Desai and R. B. Potter, The Companion to Development Studies.
Hodder Education, 2008.
[4]
S. Keates, P. J. Clarkson, L.-A. Harrison, and P. Robinson, “Towards
a practical inclusive design approach,” in Proceedings on the 2000
Conference on Universal Usability, ser. CUU ’00.
ACM, 2000, pp.
45–52.
[5]
J. M. Pearce, “The case for open source appropriate technology,”
Environment, Development and Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 3, June 2012,
pp. 425–431.
[6]
N. Gershenfeld, FAB: The Coming Revolution on Your Desktop - From
Personal Computers to Personal Fabrication.
New York: Basic Books,
2005.
[7]
N. Radjou, J. Prabhu, and S. Ahuja, Jugaad Innovation: Think Frugal,
Be Flexible, Generate Breakthrough Growth. Jossey-Bass, April 2012.
[8]
Y. kyung Lim, D. Kim, J. Jo, and J. bum Woo, “Discovery-driven
prototyping for user-driven creativity,” Pervasive Computing, IEEE,
vol. 12, no. 3, August 2013, pp. 74–80.
[9]
T. Kelley, “Prototyping is the shorthand of innovation,” Design Man-
agement Journal (Former Series), 2001, pp. 35–42.
[10]
J. Sarik and I. Kymissis, “Lab kits using the arduino prototyping
platform,” in Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2010 IEEE.
IEEE, 2010, pp. T3C–1.
[11]
M. Boden, The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms.
New York:
Basic Books, 1991.
[12]
J. S. Gero, “Computational models of creative design processes,” in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Creativity, ser. Studies in Cognitive Systems,
T. Dartnall, Ed. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994, vol. 17,
pp. 269–281.
[13]
R. A. Finke, T. B. Ward, and S. M. Smith, Creative Cognition.
MIT
Press, 1992.
[14]
D. H. S. Katherine Ott and S. Mihm, Eds., Artiﬁcial Parts, Practical
Lives: Modern Histories of Prosthetics.
NYU Press, April 2002.
[15]
V. Govindarajan and R. Ramamurti, “Reverse innovation, emerging
markets, and global strategy,” Global Strategy Journal, vol. 1, no. 3-
4, 2011, pp. 191–205.
[16]
M. L. Maher, J. Poon, and S. Boulanger, “Formalising design explo-
ration as co-evolution,” in Advances in formal design methods for CAD.
Springer, 1996, pp. 3–30.
[17]
N. P. Suh, The Principle of Design.
Oxford University Press, 1990.
[18]
K. Thoring and R. M. M¨uller, “Understanding the creative mechanisms
of design thinking: an evolutionary approach,” in Procedings of the
Second Conference on Creativity and Innovation in Design.
ACM,
2011, pp. 137–147.
[19]
E. A. Edmonds and L. Candy, “Knowledge support systems for con-
ceptual design: the ampliﬁcation of creativity,” in HCI (2), 1993, pp.
350–355.
[20]
T. M. Amabile, Creativity and Innovation in Organizations.
Harvard
Business School, 1996.
[21]
J. C. Thomas, A. Lee, and C. Danis, “Enhancing creative design via
software tools,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, no. 10, 2002,
pp. 112–115.
[22]
R. Jones, P. Haufe, E. Sells, P. Iravani, V. Olliver, C. Palmer, and
A. Bowyer, “Reprap - the replicating rapid prototyper,” Robotica,
vol. 29, no. 1, 2011, pp. 177–191.
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

