‘Pop-up’ Maker-spaces: Catalysts for Creative Participatory Culture 
Sumit Pandey 
Design of Information Systems, Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
sumitp@ifi.uio.no 
Swati Srivastava 
Design of Information Systems, Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
swatisr@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—The changing technology landscape has reshaped 
the relationship between producers and consumers and has 
signaled a shift towards more collaborative and social cultural 
forms. These changing cultural practices are referred to as 
‘Participatory Culture’. While the Internet offers an always on 
and readily accessible mode of engagement and involvement 
within participatory culture, these platforms need to be 
complemented with collaborative and creative participation in 
physical spaces for sustained engagement in real world cultural 
activities. Recent research on maker cultures and the growth of 
maker-spaces offers very relevant lessons in this regard. Using 
this research as a point of departure, we propose a 
decentralized and semi-organized form of maker-spaces called 
‘pop-up’ maker-spaces that could act as triggers to create 
engagement 
within 
communities 
towards 
creative 
and 
collaborative production and informal knowledge sharing. 
Further, we describe three workshops that were setup as ‘pop-
up’ maker-space environments as a part of a case study to 
discuss our findings and insights. While all the workshops had 
a pre-defined thematic area, the final outcomes were very 
different and represented differing conceptual and material 
explorations conducted by the participants. 
Keywords- Participatory Culture; Collaborative Spaces; 
Creative Engagement; Co-operation; Awareness; Motivation; 
Digital Engagement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The changing technology landscape has reshaped the 
relationship between producers and consumers and has 
signaled a shift towards more collaborative and social 
cultural forms. These cultures re-consider the passive role of 
consumers as mere users of content from controlled and 
established channels to a much more active social and 
collaborative role - one where they actively access content 
through ever increasing number of dispersed channels, 
discuss, re-appropriate and share it. Media scholars and the 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) community refer to 
these changing cultural practices as “participatory culture” 
[1] - a culture of creation, re-appropriation, sharing and 
collaboration. Literature points to the importance of 
participatory 
culture 
in 
today’s 
society 
including 
collaborative learning, an informed attitude towards 
intellectual property, better civic engagement and a more 
empowered concept of citizenship [1]. While the most 
common and current examples of participatory culture do 
seem to come from Internet based services and platforms, the 
history of participatory cultures predates these technologies 
and has always existed as a form of de-centralized 
expression particularly amongst the youth [2].  
While the Internet offers an always on and readily 
accessible mode of engagement and involvement within 
participatory culture [3], research suggests that such 
platforms are not always successful in sustained engagement 
in real world civic and cultural activities [4][5]. Papert [6] 
also stressed on the importance of face to face interaction, 
with a diverse mix of skill levels, from complete beginners to 
experts, for informal learning in a social setting. While 
participatory culture is discussed exclusively as a form of 
Internet based media production and sharing [7]–[9] there is 
growing interest in the HCI community on a different but, in 
our opinion, closely related phenomenon of ‘maker cultures’ 
[10]. Maker cultures refer to alternative practices of material 
and technology ownership and use with a focus on Do It 
Yourself (DIY) repairs, craft, hacking, digital fabrication and 
electronic tinkering [10][11]. Research has also highlighted 
[11]–[13] the role of collaborative co-creation spaces called 
‘maker-spaces’ [14] and ‘fablabs’ [15] in catalyzing maker 
cultures. These spaces aim to create accessible co-production 
platforms for physical products and promote collaborative 
and social problem solving [14][16], which is in-line with 
Jenkins’ [1] description of participatory culture. Hence, we 
propose that platforms like maker-spaces should be seen as 
the physical counterparts of online content production and 
sharing platforms and have the potential to configure 
participatory cultures within communities by aiding creative 
production and discussion. However, while maker-spaces 
and 
maker 
culture 
in 
general 
have 
an 
openness, 
democratization 
and 
empowerment 
driven 
intent 
[10][12][14], critical research has also pointed out the gaps 
between the ideal nature of their intent and the realities of 
practice [17][18]. The highly technological nature of the 
material and culture in maker-spaces tends to also make 
them exclusive and limited to a ‘techno-savvy’ audience 
[13]. In light of such critiques, we suggest that maker-spaces 
need to take a more decentralized and semi-organized form 
with permanent spaces being complemented by ‘maker’ 
community run temporary or ‘pop-up’ maker-spaces that 
could serve to engage larger communities in the means of 
creative 
and 
collaborative 
production 
and 
informal 
knowledge sharing. We argue that the temporal nature of 
these pop-up maker-spaces could serve to create interest in 
otherwise disengaged communities and help translate the 
open and democratic intent of the maker culture without 
requiring the large scale investments needed for a traditional 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

maker-space. Moreover, the advent of ‘maker’ oriented 
portable kit based technology platforms like littleBits [19], 
SAM [20] and Printrbot [21] allows these spaces to take a 
mobile and decentralized shape and does not limit them to 
fixed areas with expensive hardware on site. Hence, we 
suggest these ‘pop-up’ maker-spaces could act as bridges for 
grassroots participation by virtue of being accessible and 
offering a low barrier to entry.  
In this paper, we use one such platform, littleBits [19], 
and examine the role it can play in conjunction with specific 
spatial 
arrangements 
and 
low-fidelity 
materials 
in 
configuring a ‘pop-up’ maker-space setup intended to 
provoke creative engagement within different communities. 
We describe three workshops that were setup as ‘pop-up’ 
maker-space environments as a part of a case study to 
discuss our findings and insights. While all the workshops 
had a pre-defined thematic area, the final outcomes were 
very different and represented differing conceptual and 
material explorations conducted by the participants.  
The paper is structured as follows: The conceptual 
considerations and the technological platform that we build 
on to develop the construct of pop-up maker spaces is 
introduced in Section II. In Section III, we present our case 
study using three workshops that used the pop-up maker 
space construct in real world scenarios and highlight our 
approach with participants from different age groups and 
professional areas of practice. Finally, we discuss our 
findings in Section IV followed by a conclusion in Section 
V.  
II. 
CONCEPTUAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 
In this section, we briefly outline the theoretical 
considerations that helped frame the approach and design of 
the elements of decentralized and mobile “pop-up maker-
spaces”. 
A. Participatory Cultures 
Jenkins et al. [1], in their seminal work, defined 
participatory culture as  
“a culture with relatively low barriers to artistic 
expression and civic engagement, strong support for 
creating and sharing creations, and some type of informal 
mentorship whereby experienced participants pass along 
knowledge to novices.”  
They also argue that a participatory culture also allows its 
members to believe in their contributions and feel “some 
degree of social connection” [1] with others and their 
opinions about their creations. In general, participatory 
cultures reward participation but do not force it. This idea 
stems from the advancements in technology that has allowed 
people to shift from their roles of passive consumers to 
active creators of content and more recently products using 
self-fabrication techniques [22][23]. Further, Delwiche and 
Handerson [24] discuss three broad classifications within 
participatory 
culture, 
depending 
on 
the 
nature 
of 
participation. Their work suggests that the nature of 
participatory culture is largely defined by real world factors 
like space, participants and their level of engagement with 
the community and the media being generated. 
1) Consensus cultures 
This is an “agreement based” culture that is typically 
work or productivity oriented, usually with specific goals 
that need to be met or problems that need to be addressed. A 
special form of this kind of participatory culture can be seen 
in “expert cultures” where people with “specialized 
knowledge” come together like in think tanks. 
2) Creative cultures 
This is a culture which encourages its participants to 
create, re-purpose, remix, share and comment within a safe 
and supportive environment. Participants are often very 
passionate about their areas of interest and creativity and are 
willing to share and build on their knowledge and creations. 
This kind of participatory culture is known to foster 
sustained engagement. The maker, remix and art cultures are 
examples of this type of culture. Work within this thesis 
would primarily explore participatory culture in this context. 
3) Discussion cultures 
This is a culture that fosters participation around specific 
topics of personal and professional interest rather than 
specific objects and outcomes. Engagement in this kind of 
culture is varied with participant’s interests changing over 
time. Since the objective of this kind of culture is discussion 
and debate, the nature of participant exchange may vary from 
support to heated disagreement, often in real time. News 
sites and fan forums are examples of this type of culture. The 
discussion outlined in this paper primarily concentrates on 
creative cultures, with its focus on collaborative exchange, 
sustained engagement and creative production. 
B. Maker Culture 
Maker culture refers to practices related to DIY, craft, 
electronic tinkering and technology repair leading to the 
development of alternate notions of material ownership and 
use within ‘maker communities’ [12]. Lately, maker cultures 
have been given a lot of interest within HCI with empirical 
studies on maker identities and values [12], analysis of the 
modes of material engagement [25][26] and larger 
investigations into the democratizing effects of maker culture 
on technology and technological practices. Maker culture is 
also turning into a popular phenomenon rather than a fringe 
activity for specialized communities largely propelled by the 
rise of maker-spaces, hacker-spaces or fab labs across the 
world [10]. While discussions on maker cultures tend to take 
a largely technology centric stand point as opposed to the 
media centric outlook of participatory cultures, we argue that 
there is a natural overlap between them with a focus on 
practices of community building, knowledge sharing and 
democratized expression and material access. Further, we 
suggest that maker spaces provide the spatial setting and 
cultural framework for sustained engagement with diverse 
means of creative production.  
C. LittleBits 
LittleBits [19] is a technological platform for aiding rapid 
prototyping and electronic tinkering aimed at people with 
little to no prior experience with electronics. The platform is 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

designed to be modular and plug and play in nature with 
little to no configuration needed. It consists of an assorted set 
of color coded magnetic ‘bits’ that encapsulate a specific 
function like temperature sensing, light sensing, USB power, 
Direct Current (DC) powered motors, servo motors, Light 
Emitting Diode (LED) lights and so on. Based on the nature 
of the bits, they are divided into four categories – power 
(blue), input (pink), output (green) and wire (orange). These 
functions can be arranged in linear sequences that can then 
be triggered using programmatic, cloud connected or sensor 
driven bits. The color coding of the functions allows for ease 
in identification and configuration aided by their magnetic 
nature that only allows the bits to be connected in their 
correct orientation (since the bits repel each other in an 
incorrect orientation). The bits by themselves are intended to 
act as alternatives to bare bones electronics components and 
allow ease of use while prototyping the interactive functions 
of a concept. Therefore, they are intended to be used along 
with other lo and hi-fidelity materials that would create the 
external form and tangible interfaces for the concept being 
prototyped. LittleBits [19] were chosen as the technological 
material for the purposes of our workshops because of their 
ease of use and configurability due to the limited time 
available to the participants in a pop-up maker-space 
scenario.  
III. 
CASE STUDIES 
As stated in the introduction, our goal was to explore the 
portable kit-based platform littleBits [19] as a material in a 
workshop setting to explore the construct of a ‘pop-up’ 
maker-space for configuring creative participatory cultures. 
These workshops were conducted as a part of larger project, 
which aims to investigate technology centric design 
interventions as a means of configuring public engagement 
and participatory culture. In this paper we describe and 
discuss the outcomes from three workshops conducted with 
different user groups: (i) Children from the age group of 7 to 
12 years, (ii) Design researchers, (iii) Professional graphic 
designers. These groups highlight a broad spectrum of 
creatively inclined individuals with differences in age, nature 
of practice and access to technology. While all three groups 
identified engaged with creative production, with children 
regularly engaging in creative activities at school and in their 
home environment, design researchers using various 
prototyping methods in their design projects and graphic 
designers primarily engaging with creative production in a 
professional setting, all groups had limited to no experience 
with the use of tangible technological materials in practice.  
We organized pop-up maker spaces in a workshop setting 
with each group of participants separately. Due to the 
differences in the nature of each group, the approach used to 
engage with them in the workshop was different. However, 
the physical space in each case was temporarily converted 
into a maker space like setting, with free and easy access to 
prototyping materials like colored paper, card sheets, foam 
boards, paints, scissors, brushes, ice-cream sticks, rubber 
bands, cups, assorted lego bricks and play-doh (Figure 1). 
Multiple littleBits [19] workshop kits were used as the 
primary technological material for provoking electronic 
tinkering. The quantity of each material differed based on the 
themes of each workshop. This also helped us evaluate the 
role and impact of supportive materials on the nature and 
form of engagement when used in conjunction with littleBits 
[19].  
 
 
Figure 1.  The spatial setup (top) and the materials used (bottom) in the 
pop-up maker-space. 
As the workshops were conducted in the form of open 
pop-up maker spaces, the format of participation was either 
open (walk-in) or sign-up (pre-registation) based. While the 
sign-up 
based 
workshops 
began 
with 
an 
informal 
introduction to the littleBits [19] platform and a loosely 
defined theme for the day and ended with a presentation and 
feedback, in the open workshop setting, the introduction was 
interspersed between the activities. Previous experience with 
littleBits [19] or any other technological tools was not 
required for any of the workshops. 
The sub-sections below describe each workshop in 
greater detail. Photo-documentation was the main analytical 
tool used for the purposes of this research. Therefore, a large 
number of photographs were collected during the workshops, 
both of the final outcome as well as the interim explorations 
by the participants. These photographs were then analyzed to 
identify differences in the mode of engagement and 
processes undertaken by each group of participants to arrive 
at their respective outcomes.  
A. The First Workshop with Children 
The first workshop was conducted as an open (walk-in) 
exploratory pop-up maker space with children. It was 
conducted as a four hours long workshop, with 23 
participating children. There were three moderators in the 
workshop. All moderators were well versed with littleBits 
[19] and were practicing designer researchers and ‘makers’. 
The theme of this workshop was “Sound and Motion”. This 
workshop was setup as a part of a larger maker event, open 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

for children from the age group of 7-12 years. An enclosed 
hall was taken up for the workshop adjacent to a library’s 
open lounge area. The materials for the workshop included 
the littleBits [19] kits and craft materials described earlier. 
As there was no planned introductory session, artifacts such 
as a bend sensor controlled wind mill and a simple draw-bot 
were made and displayed on the tables in the workshop area 
along with the littleBits [19] and the craft materials to give a 
visual explanation of the bits’ potential and to provoke 
interest. Multiple copies of the littleBits [19]  ‘getting 
started’ guide containing simple projects were also placed on 
the tables. The tables were arranged linearly with chairs for 
working. The bits themselves were grouped by color and 
kept on a central table along with other materials.  
The workshop started with children observing the 
demonstrative interactive artifacts. The moderators gave a 
quick demo of the different ways of connecting the bits to 
the children in small groups by connecting and making a 
small circuit with sound and light. The participants explored 
the bits on their own for half an hour in the workshop. The 
interaction between the participants and moderators was 
more intense during this exploratory phase when the children 
were trying to identify different possibilities of using the bits. 
However, after the first half an hour, children started 
working on their own projects. Some of them who knew 
each other beforehand worked in groups of two while rest 
engaged with them individually. While most of the projects 
started with creating a sound or light driven artifact, slowly 
they progressed towards creating a button driven car, a 
drawing car and interactive music boxes that worked through 
different sensors (Figure 2).    
 
 
Figure 2.  Some outcomes from the first workshop. 
Looking at the artifacts made by the participants, 
littleBits [19] in conjunction with the available craft 
materials and the open spatial configuration where all the 
participants engaged in similar activities played a pivotal role 
in triggering creative engagement. Further, the ease of 
connecting littleBits [19] lowered the barrier to entry 
tremendously and a quick demo was effective and sufficient 
for the children to get started with making things. Finally, 
successfully being able to build feedback in the system 
developed confidence in them leading to greater engagement 
and attempts at creating more complex artifacts.  
B. The Second Workshop With Design Researchers 
This workshop was conducted in a design lab with 
similar materials as the first case at a university with eight 
participating design researchers. Amongst them, four were 
PhD fellows and the remaining participants were professors 
in design research. Participation in this workshop was based 
on pre-registration and it was conducted over a duration of 
three hours. The theme of the workshop was light and 
motion. The participants in this workshop had no previous 
experience with using littleBits [19].  
This workshop started with a formal presentation on 
littleBits [19], which introduced the participants to the 
platform and its basic functions and interactions. Possibilities 
of using the platform as a prototyping tool in design projects 
were also explained briefly to closely relate the materials 
with the participant’s practice. After the introduction, the 
participants used the littleBits [19] manual do some initial 
exploration followed by a round of brief ideation. They 
moved organically from very roughly thought out ideas to 
trying to make interactive prototypes of their concepts, 
highlighting the really low barrier to entry to the prototyping 
process. One wireless remote based car was made by one 
group of three participants while other participants made by 
a ‘head banging’ light device that blinks with neck motion, a 
drawing machine and Arduino [27] connected lights (Figure 
3).  
 
 
Figure 3.  Light following bot and drawing bot created by participants in 
workshop 2. 
We observed all the participants completely engaged in 
looking for extra materials on their own in their environment 
to complete their prototypes. Although all the participants 
felt that they lacked a very clear intent of a project to make 
something more complex and just littleBits [19] were not 
enough invoke more advanced projects ideas. However, most 
of them indicated that they wanted to come back to this 
space to prototype their own design ideas.  
C. The Third Workshop with Graphic Designers 
The third workshop was carried out in the context of a 
design school. There were twelve participating graphic 
design professionals and students in this workshop. An open 
foyer in the design school was identified as the space for 
setting up the pop-up maker-space. A similar set of materials 
was arranged for the participants in this workshop as well 
with a higher quantity of sketching and painting tools like 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

brushes, different kinds of paints, crayons and markers due 
to the workshop theme - ‘printing/drawing machines’. It was 
a full day workshop conducted over a duration of five hours. 
Like the previous workshop, the first activity in this 
workshop was a formal presentation on littleBits [19]. It was 
introduced as platform for quick prototyping and sketching 
in hardware and a tool that can be easily incorporated by 
graphic designers with no experience with technological 
prototyping as a means for creative expression. When the 
making session started, it was conducted as a round table 
activity. The participants formally introduced themselves and 
their backgrounds to each other. The initial plan was to do a 
similar exploration exercise with the bits followed by 
jumping into projects afterwards in groups. However, being 
practicing designers, the participants started to work with the 
platform while ideating concepts simultaneously. While two 
participants who were classmates made a group, others 
embarked on individual conceptualization and rapidly 
making ideas.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Drawing machines and artwork created in workshop 3. 
This time we observed the participants did not spend time 
exploring littleBits [19] in isolation. Each one of them took 
time to plan their project outcomes and prepared materials 
for it. Their final projects were more finished in comparison 
to the previous workshops as well in addition to having very 
different interactions despite all of them being drawing 
machines (Figure 4).  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
We 
analyzed 
our 
first 
hand 
observations 
and 
documentation for insights with a keen focus on uncovering 
the role of modularized and easy to use technological 
platforms like littleBits [19] in shaping the physical spaces 
into cultures that foster creative engagement and lead to an 
organic sharing of knowledge and ideas.  
Firstly, a clearly designated physical space with an open 
and exploration friendly configuration helped create a 
context for the exploration and use of the technological 
material (littleBits [19]) specifically and engaging with 
electronic tinkering in general. For example, in the first 
workshop with children, even before children could get a 
hands on ‘maker’ experience, the set up of the space with 
demonstrative artifacts, freely kept materials and bits, and 
various manuals combined with free seating arrangements 
conveyed the nature of the space. The crafts materials on 
display also contributed to the maker space environment. 
While the library’s open lounge required greater efforts to 
convert it into a space for creative activity, the design studio 
for the second workshop and graphic design school foyer in 
the third workshop lent itself naturally to the nature of the 
activity.  
Secondly, the technological material combined with 
quick access to seasoned makers in itself played a pivotal 
role in driving the creative focus and confidence in exploring 
ideas which previously seemed out of reach by the 
participants. For instance, during the first workshop children 
were fascinated by the interactive windmill on display but 
displayed hesitance in lifting and examining the artifact 
itself. However, when moderators helped them in making 
similar interactions on their own, it led to a realization of the 
ease of getting started with electronic tinkering and the fact 
that they could also create something similar to the artifact 
on display on their own. This led to the children being less in 
awe with what they were seeing but more engaged with what 
they could accomplish on their own by using the bits. 
Although one of the downsides of such a setup was that 
many children started making projects very similar to what 
was already on display. A similar but slightly different 
response was observed in the other two workshops, an 
introduction to the platform and a small session with the bits 
sufficed in breaking the fear of working with technological 
materials and participants then started focusing on their ideas 
and concepts rather than trying to learn the technology itself. 
We could see modularized easy to use platforms like 
littleBits [19] as an encouraging platform that seemed to get 
out of the way and instead let the participants have 
conversations and engage with making things without having 
to go through a prolonged learning processes. We argue that 
such quick access platforms are pivotal in creating initial 
interest in creative maker cultures at ‘pop-up’ or temporary 
spaces where there is limited time to engage with the 
materials at hand.  
Thirdly, we observed that while the bits themselves 
largely formed the internal components of most ideas, they 
were the primary drivers of conversations and the exchange 
of knowledge. As discussed in Section II, this technological 
platform in itself consists of a large number of bits that 
encapsulate a single function that compound exponentially 
into a huge number of potentially complex interactions when 
configured into different kinds of arrangements. Therefore, it 
can be difficult and quite monotonous for one individual to 
sit and learn all of these functional characteristics and 
configurations. However, engaging in the act of making and 
in an organic and exploratory manner coupled with 
exchanges 
with 
other 
participants, 
the 
participants 
inadvertently get exposed to most of the different 
components through the process of helping and watching 
other people engage with them. This was observed more 
prominently in both the second and third workshop, where 
individuals working on their idea kept to themselves during 
the making process but constantly engaged in listening and 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

contributing to the discussions around the function and use 
of a new bit along with inquiring about bits that they 
stumbled into or saw lying around.  
  Finally, craft materials were used to construct the 
physical form of the ideas conceptualized by the participants 
and remained pivotal in all the three workshops. The bits 
made complex concepts feasible and quicker to configure 
than with traditional electronic toolkits like the Arduino [27] 
but the craft materials allowed for the interactive functions to 
have an engaging and usable form. For instance, in one of 
the projects in the third workshop made by a two graphic 
design students, the function of a large scale drawing 
machine was prototyped using the bits but the concept could 
not have been complete without the rotating plates and the 
scaffolding for the paint bucket. Finally, the use of external 
camera lights added an element of drama to the art 
installation and made it even more engaging. Therefore, we 
argue that a technological platform like littleBits [19] needs 
to be situated within a larger ecosystem for exploratory and 
creative engagement. Specifically, in the case of a ‘pop-up 
maker space’ having a diverse set of electronic and non 
electronic reconfigurable tangible materials is critical to 
engage and fully involve participants and help them in 
physically realizing their ideas to their fullest potential. The 
temporal nature these pop-up arenas leave little space for 
isolated struggles with the tools themselves which can 
hamper the drive to work with the ideas in the limited 
timeframe.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The paper illustrates the use of ‘pop-up’ maker-spaces as 
a construct to configure creative culture based engagement 
and participation, using modular and easy to use 
technological platform in conjunction with craft based 
materials and an open spatial setup for fostering creativity in 
participating 
communities.  
Three 
workshops 
were 
organized, in the form of pop-up maker events. The first 
featured children from the age group of seven to twelve 
years, while the remaining two were focused on design 
researchers and graphic designers. The main tool for 
engaging the workshop participants in process of tangible 
construction and representation of their ideas was littleBits 
[19]. The process was photo documented and analysed.   
First, we remark that using the modular technological 
platform, littleBits [19] for DIY prototyping proved effective 
for the workshop participants. While the intent of 
participating in the pop-up maker-spaces differed for all 
three categories of participants in the three workshops, the 
ease of access and understanding of littleBits [19] played a 
pivotal role in engaging the users. We witnessed that the 
participants engaged extensively with the bits and the other 
craft material provided to make their ideas in all the 
workshops.  
Our key finding was that a hands on popup maker-space 
environment engaged participants in collaborative exchanges 
around an easy to use technological platform led to creative 
outcomes even though all the participants were completely 
new to electronic tinkering. The spatial configuration and 
access to technical and craft based materials helped catalyze 
the engagement and explorations. Moreover, they also served 
as triggers for exchange of knowledge and informal 
conversations among the participants who suggested 
alternative bits and techniques to each other based on their 
limited experience to aid the construction of each other’s 
artifacts.  
The insights and early results from these pop-up maker-
spaces can serve as a foundation for further research on the 
role of technological toolkits and materials on sustained 
engagement and creative expression. Our future work would 
involve identifying design patterns for configuring pop-up 
maker-spaces along with exploring other technological 
toolkits, materials and diverse spatial configurations for 
exploratory and creative DIY engagements amongst 
participants.  
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors are indebted to all the workshop participants 
for their participation and the Gemini UX Lab at the 
University of Oslo for supporting the project with the 
littleBits [19] platform. In addition, we would like to 
acknowledge Creative Europe for providing partial financial 
support through the People’s Smart Sculpture project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
H. Jenkins,  
Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: 
Media Education for the 21st Century. MIT Press, 2009. 
[2] 
TEDxNYED - Henry Jenkins - 03/06/10. 2010. 
[3] 
R. A. Hart,  
Children’s Participation: The Theory and Practice of 
Involving Young Citizens in Community Development and 
Environmental Care, First Printing edition. New York: Routledge, 
1997. 
[4] 
“Our Space: Online Civic Engagement Tools for Youth.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.issuelab.org/resource/our_space_online_civic_engagemen
t_tools_for_youth. [Accessed: 17-Mar-2016]. 
[5] 
“Can Games Motivate Urban Youth for Civic Engagement?” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.academia.edu/11321757/Can_Games_Motivate_Urban_
Youth_for_Civic_Engagement. [Accessed: 17-Mar-2016]. 
[6] 
S. A. Papert,  
“Some Poetic and Social Criteria for Education 
Design,” Jun. 1976. 
[7] 
J. Hamilton,  
“OurPlace: The Convergence of Locative Media and 
Online Participatory Culture,” in Proceedings of the 21st Annual 
Conference of the Australian Computer-Human Interaction Special 
Interest Group: Design: Open 24/7, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 
393–396. 
[8] 
R. R. Johnson, M. J. Salvo and M. W. Zoetewey,  “User-Centered 
Technology in Participatory Culture: Two Decades #x201C;Beyond a 
Narrow 
Conception 
of 
Usability 
Testing 
#x201D;,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Professional Communication, vol. 50, no. 4, Dec. 
2007, pp. 320–332. 
[9] 
D. Rotman, et al.,  
“From 
Slacktivism 
to 
Activism: 
Participatory Culture in the Age of Social Media,” in CHI ’11 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 819–822. 
[10] M. G. Ames, J. Bardzell, S. Bardzell, S. Lindtner, D. A. Mellis and D. 
K. Rosner,  
“Making Cultures: Empowerment, Participation, and 
Democracy - or Not?,” in CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 
1087–1092. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[11] D. K. Rosner, S. Lindtner, I. Erickson, L. Forlano, S. J. Jackson and 
B. Kolko,  
“Making cultures: building things & building 
communities,” 2014, pp. 113–116. 
[12] A. Toombs, S. Bardzell and J. Bardzell,  
“Becoming 
Makers: Hackerspace Member Habits, Values, and Identities,” 
Journal of Peer Production, 2014. 
[13] D. Slatter and Z. Howard,  “A place to make, hack, and learn: 
makerspaces in Australian public libraries,” The Australian Library 
Journal, vol. 62, no. 4, Nov. 2013, pp. 272–284. 
[14] A. Smith, S. Hielscher, S. Dickel, J. Soderberg and E. van Oost, 
 
“Grassroots digital fabrication and makerspaces: Reconfiguring, 
relocating and recalibrating innovation?,” Sep-2013. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.sussex.ac.uk/spru/research/swps. [Accessed: 
17-Mar-2016]. 
[15] “Fab Foundation – About Fab Foundation.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fabfoundation.org/about-us/. [Accessed: 17-Mar-2016]. 
[16] L. Britton,  
“A Fabulous Labaratory: The Makerspace at 
Fayetteville Free Library,” Public Libraries Online. . 
[17] G. Hertz,  
Critical Making. Telharmonium, 2012. 
[18] M. Ratto,  
“Critical making: Conceptual and material studies in 
technology and social life,” The Information Society, vol. 27, no. 4, 
2011, pp. 252–260. 
[19] “littleBits: DIY Electronics For Prototyping and Learning.” [Online]. 
Available: http://littlebits.cc/. [Accessed: 17-Mar-2016]. 
[20] “SAM Labs.” [Online]. Available: https://samlabs.me/. [Accessed: 
29-Feb-2016]. 
[21] “Printrbot | Affordable high resolution 3D printers.” [Online]. 
Available: http://printrbot.com/. [Accessed: 29-Feb-2016]. 
[22] G. Ritzer and N. Jurgenson,  
“Production, 
Consumption, 
Prosumption The nature of capitalism in the age of the digital 
‘prosumer,’” Journal of Consumer Culture, vol. 10, no. 1, Mar. 2010, 
pp. 13–36. 
[23] J. J. Burke,  
Makerspaces: A Practical Guide for Librarians. 
Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2014. 
[24] A. Delwiche and J. J. Henderson,  
The 
Participatory 
Cultures 
Handbook. Routledge, 2012. 
[25] D. Rosner and J. Bean,  
“Learning from IKEA hacking: i’m not 
one to decoupage a tabletop and call it a day.,” presented at the 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, 2009, pp. 419–422. 
[26] J. G. Tanenbaum, A. M. Williams, A. Desjardins and K. Tanenbaum, 
 
“Democratizing technology: pleasure, utility and expressiveness 
in DIY and maker practice,” 2013, p. 2603. 
[27] “Arduino - Home.” [Online]. Available: https://www.arduino.cc/. 
[Accessed: 24-Jan-2016]. 
 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

