Exploring the Effect of Wordmark in E-Commerce Website Interface Design 
 
 
Yao Song 
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hung Hom, Hong Kong SAR 
e-mail: yao.song@connect.polyu.hk 
Yan Luximon* 
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hung Hom, Hong Kong SAR 
e-mail: yan.luximon@polyu.edu.hk
 
 
Abstract—Interface design plays a key role for many 
companies, promoting their business metrics to consumers 
since it could help companies to enjoy greater benefits by 
communicating their products or services in a more effective 
way. Wordmark is one of the most important components in 
interface design since it is the basic component helping to 
communicate specific information to consumers. However, the 
effect of wordmark on consumer’s perception in e-commerce 
website interface appeal has not been studied in detail. This 
study tries to validate the effect of wordmark on online 
shopper’s perception from interface appeal perspective. An 
online experiment was conducted to explore and test the 
perceived edge using three different types of wordmark with a 
given product. Results indicated that all capital letters and 
initial capital letter could create a higher level of the perceived 
edge than the small letters for the given product and website 
interface design. However, there is no significant difference 
between initial capital letter and all capital letters scenarios. 
From the managerial perspective, our research offers 
implications for marketers and designers to choose the 
appropriate wordmark for their interface design, improving 
online shopper’s experience. 
Keywords-wordmark; letter; website design; interface; e-
commerce  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Internet, especially website interface design, plays a key 
role for many companies when promoting their business 
metrics to consumers since it could help companies enjoy 
greater benefits through communication of their products or 
services in a more effective way [1]. However, many of the 
commercial websites do not communicate and promote as 
they wish. According to Kearney’s research [2], over 80% of 
people met some problems and did not finish online 
shopping because the website design did not meet their 
online-shopping satisfaction and expectation [3]. Although 
previous research has a long history focusing on the 
relationship between store’s atmosphere and consumer 
experience, little research has addressed the relationship 
between web’s atmosphere and online shopper’s experience 
[4]. Specifically, the way to improve online shopper’s 
experience through optimizing appropriate website attributes 
remains ambiguous [5] since it would be inappropriate to 
directly apply the guidelines of store’s atmosphere to 
interface design [3]. Wordmark, as one of the most 
commonly used elements in website interface design, plays 
an important role in influencing users’ perception [5]. 
However, the effect of wordmark has rarely been discussed 
in previous literature.  
 
In order to address this phenomenon, this study tries to 
use an experimental method to check whether wordmark 
could influence people’s perception. The rest of the paper is 
organized as following. Section II discusses the literature 
review on e-commerce website design and latest trends on 
interface design research. Section III introduces the 
experiment-based approach to analyze the effect of 
wordmark on users’ perception. Section IV shows the results 
of the statistical analysis. Section V discusses the results and 
limitations of current research, and future research direction. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Prior research has long focused on the role of e-
commerce website design in IT system building. Even within 
traditional IT system, e-commerce website design is different 
from other systems. It highlights the attributes in information 
exchange (computer factors) and consumer communication 
(human factors), containing both computer and human 
interaction from an interface design perspective [6].   
 
While computer factors are task-specific, improving 
functionality from the technical perspectives, such as website 
navigation and information presentation, human factors are 
focused on aesthetic components, meeting consumer’s 
expectation and improving consumer experience [7]. To be 
more specific, human factors contain six elements of website 
interface design: consumer satisfaction, cognition attributes, 
consumer empowerment, trustworthiness, interface appeal 
and information content [7]. 
 
An efficient interface design should be human-oriented 
and should rely on its framework and aesthetic attributes 
because the interface design works as the design 
communication 
element 
immediately 
perceived 
by 
consumers [1][8]. An effective interface design could 
influence consumer behavior, such as perception, decision-
making procedure and post-buy evaluation [8] [9]. For 
example, Carlson and Cass [9] inferred the significant role of 
consumer perceived comfortability, usability, time-spend and 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

purchase intention in the interface design of e-commerce 
website. However, this study did not determine the suitability 
of any particular interface design components. 
 
Compared with the content of the website, the majority 
of online shoppers would pay more attention to the aesthetic 
part of the interface that helped to make an efficient interface 
design [10]. Particularly, online shoppers could have a more 
positive attitude with human factors than computer factors 
since it would place them in a user-friendly atmosphere [10]. 
Actually, the aesthetic part of interface design is a 
fundamental element in influencing initial perception [11] 
which contains the arrangement of color, graphics and image 
selection, wordmark, layout, etc [12].  
 
Several studies have explored the effect of the aesthetic 
part of interface design on website usability and website 
evaluation [8][13][14]. The study mentioned color would be 
more suitable for expressing specific emotion, while shape of 
different elements in interface design played an important 
role in recall and memory [8]. Schrott and Gluckler [13] 
suggested that aesthetic design components, such as main 
color of interface, photographs themes, wordmark, design 
harmony and general layout, had a great effect on the 
usability of a website. In addition, the perceived aesthetics of 
the website helped to improve interface experience [14]. In 
other words, better website interface appeal, such as colors, 
graphics and wordmark, could improve online shoppers’ 
evaluation of website design. However, the inappropriate 
interface design could have negative effect on users’ 
evaluation. Head and Ivanov [14] suggested that crowed 
layout and low color saturation might not be helpful in 
interface design and communicating specific information to 
users since user would form the initial attitude and 
perception at the very beginning when they browsed the 
website.  
 
Although several aesthetic design components have been 
discussed, previous research has not examined the effect of 
wordmark on consumer’s perception regarding the e-
commerce website interface appeal in detail. Wordmark 
design is tremendously important for interface design [15]. 
For example, Benchmade [16] and Otario [17] knife 
companies are using different wordmarks on their websites. 
While Benchmade knife company uses almost every word or 
sentence with the capital letters, Otario knife company uses 
only the initial capital letter in its website design. Prior 
research on wordmark has discussed how appropriate 
wordmark influenced consumers’ brand perception [18]. For 
example, the congruence between font and brand perception 
could improve brand identity building [18]. While the small 
letter tends to be associated with perceived friendliness, the 
capital letter tends to be associated with perceived authorities 
[19]. In addition, compared with the capital letter, the small 
letter is more frequently used in everyday life [20]. In New 
York Times, the capital letter was far less utilized than the 
small letter. Actually in the most common cases, the capital 
letter is only used in the first letter of a whole sentence, logo 
design or advertisement [19]. Although there were 
discussion about sharp cornered font could create tension and 
represented the attributes of heavy metal [21], this has not 
been validated with online shoppers’ perception from 
interface appeal perspective. 
 
To sum up, previous research has rarely discussed and 
emphasized the effect of wordmark on users’ perception of 
the products in interface design of e-commerce website. 
Regarding the existing theoretical research gap, it is 
necessary to empirically examine the role of wordmark on 
users’ interface perception. Among all wordmark design 
elements, the current study tries to focus on improving user 
interface 
experience 
from 
letter 
case 
perspective. 
Specifically, we would like to investigate whether capital 
letter would significantly increase people’s perceived edge of 
a given product in a commercial website. Particularly, the 
research questions are: 
Do the different types of wordmark have an impact on 
interface perception? 
What kind of wordmark would increase people’s 
perceived edge? 
 
In order to address the research questions above, an 
online experiment was conducted to explore and investigate 
the perceived edge using different types of wordmark with a 
given product. 
 
III. 
METHOD  
In this section, an online experiment was conducted to 
empirically analyze the effect of wordmark on people’s 
perceived edge under three scenarios: all capital letters, 
initial capital letter and all small letters.  
A. Participants 
In order to analyze the relationship, a sample (from 
Amazon Mechanical Turk) participated in the experiments 
online. To avoid self-selection and professional survey 
takers, Qualtrics utilizes by-invitation-only online panel 
recruitment, thus attracting a cross-section that better 
generalize the population to a large extent. In total, 139 
people were recruited from this online platform (63 males 
and 76 females; the average age is around 38 years).  
B. Procedure 
There were three wordmark scenarios: all capital letters, 
initial capital letter and all small letters. One professional 
interface designer made all scenarios with the same interface 
layout, a “knife” image at left side and a word description at 
right side. In order to control the cofounding effect of the 
position and the size of the knife, all three knives were 
controlled to be the same size. The length and font size of the 
description wordmark were also controlled for the same. The 
first scenario was composed with all capital letters and a 
knife (“xxx PRODUCT”). The second scenario was 
composed with the initial capital letter and a knife (“xxx 
Product”). The third scenario was composed with all small 
letters and a knife (“xxx product”). All participants were 
divided into three groups where each group was exposed to 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

one scenario only. In other words, a between-subject  
experiment was designed in this study. After consenting to 
participants in this experiment, they were required to look at 
the product image for 5 seconds and then report their 
perceived edge of the given product according to a 7-point 
Likert scale (1 = blunt; 7 = sharp). 
 
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULT  
We conducted a one-way ANOVA (Analysis of variance) 
on the perceived edge with different wordmark scenarios as 
independent variables. ANOVA is a collection of statistical 
models and the associated estimation procedures for 
analyzing the differences among group means in a sample, 
which is widely used in social science research. Details of 
the perceived edge for different types of wordmark are 
shown in Table I. 
 
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTIVES OF THE PERCEIVED EDGE FOR DIFFERENT 
TYPES OF WORDMARK 
Perceived 
edge 
Different Types of Wordmarks 
All Capital 
letters  
Initial Capital 
letter  
All Small 
letters 
Mean 
5.5 
5.4 
4.7 
S.D. 
1.1 
1.1 
1.7 
Maximum 
7 
7 
7 
Minimum 
1 
1 
1 
 
 
The result of ANOVA showed a significant difference of 
the perceived edge among these three scenarios (F(2, 
136)=5.5, p < 0.05). The post-hoc Tukey HSD results 
showed that people in all capital letters scenario gave 
significant higher perceived edge than those in all small 
letters scenario (Mean=5.5 vs. 4.7; Tukey HSD, p < 0.05). 
People in initial capital letter scenario perceived also 
significant higher level of sharpness than those in all small 
letters (Mean=5.4 vs. 4.7; Tukey HSD, p < 0.05). However, 
there was no significant difference between initial capital 
letter and all capital letters scenario in terms of the 
perceived edge (Mean=5.4 vs. 5.5; Tukey HSD, p=0.98). 
  
V. 
 CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
Interface design is very important for companies to 
promote their products and services in e-commerce website. 
This study tries to contribute to interface appeal design 
literature through investigating the effect of various types of 
wordmark design on users’ perception. The results of the 
current study showed that wordmark with capital letter 
(including all capital letters and initial capital letter 
scenarios) achieved a significantly higher level of the 
perceived edge than all small letters scenario for an online 
knife shopping experience. The results were consistent with 
previous literature that capital letter would be easy to attract 
people’s attention [19]. These results indicated that it would  
be more appropriate to use all capital letters or initial capital 
letter wordmark in website interface design when the context 
is associated with something related with sharpness. 
However, there is no significant difference between all 
capital letters and initial capital letter which suggests that 
merely exposing to the capital letter would be sufficient 
enough to elicit the perceived edge regardless of all capital 
letters or only initial capital letter.  
 
By showing appropriate wordmark in the website appeal 
could affect users’ perception, our work contributes to the 
website design theory from wordmark design perspective.  
Through the empirical experimental process, we identified 
the positive effect of the capital letter on the perceived edge 
and its application in the business field. From practical point 
of view, as one of the major elements in interface design, 
wordmark design would act as an efficient tool to 
communicate specific information to website users compared 
with other interface design elements [8]. Therefore, the 
current research results provided some fundamental and 
useful design references to practitioners. In addition, since 
previous research has examined the effect of color in the 
interface design on people’s specific perception to some 
extent [8], it would also be interesting to figure out the 
interaction between wordmark and color selection in future 
study.  
 
Some limitations in this study are worth noting. The 
current study was conducted in the context of a given 
product related interface design that would potentially 
influence the generalization of the current finding. Actually, 
different types of product may interact with wordmark to 
influence people’s perception. In future study, we would use 
different product contexts to figure out the association 
between wordmark and specific perception. For example, 
while the capital letter was more compatible with edge-
related stuff, the small letter might be more congruence with 
stuffed animals.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the support of the UGC 
Funding Scheme from the Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Lee and R. J. Koubek, “The effects of usability and web 
design attributes on user preference for e-commerce web 
sites,” Computer Industry, 2010 May, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 329–
341. 
[2] H. Ben-Shabet and K. Gada, “Beauty and the E-Commerce,” 
A. T. Kearney Report, 2017 May. 
[3] W. C. Chiou, C. C. Lin, and C. Perng, “A strategic framework 
for website evaluation based on a review of the literature from 
1995–2006,” Information Management, 2010 Aug, vol. 47, 
no. 5–6, pp. 282–290. 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[4] H. L. O’Brien and E. G. Toms, “The development and 
evaluation of a survey to measure user engagement,” Journal 
of American Social Information Science and Technology, 
2010 Jan, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 50–69. 
[5] J. Song and F. Zahedi, “A Theoretical Approach to Web 
Design in E-Commerce: A Belief Reinforcement Model,” 
Management Science, 2005 Aug, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1219–
1235. 
[6] A. V. Hausman and J. S. Siekpe, “The effect of web interface 
features on consumer online purchase intentions,” Journal of 
Bussiness Research, 2009 Jan, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 5–13. 
[7] N. Tractinsky, “Toward the Study of Aesthetics in 
Information Technology,” 2004 Jan, proceeding of 
Association for Information Systems AIS, pp. 11-20 
[8] J. Johonson, “Designing with the mind in mind,” Engineering 
Notes, 2011 Sep, vol. 36, no. 5, p. 52. 
[9] J. Carlson and A. O’Cass, “Exploring the relationships 
between e-service quality, satisfaction, attitudes and 
behaviours,” Journal of Service Marketing, 2010 Apr, vol. 24, 
no. 2, pp. 112–127. 
[10] T. Tullis and B. Albert, “Measuring the user experience : 
collecting, analyzing, and presenting usability metrics.” , 
Elsevier, 2008 Jan.  
[11] O. W. Bertelsen, M. G. Petersen, and S. Pold, “Aesthetic 
Approaches to Human-Computer Interaction,” DAIMI Report 
Series. 2004 Feb, vol. 33, pp572. 
[12] G. Chao, “Human-Computer Interaction: Process and 
Principles of Human-Computer Interface Design,” 
International Conference on Computer and Automation 
Engineering, 2009 May, vol 32, no. 9, pp. 230–233. 
[13] G. Schrott and J. Glückler, “What makes mobile computer 
supported cooperative work mobile? Towards a better 
understanding of cooperative mobile interactions,” 
International Journal of Human Compution Study, 2004 May, 
vol. 60, no. 5–6, pp. 737–752. 
[14] D. Cyr, M. Head, and A. Ivanov, “Design aesthetics leading 
to m-loyalty in mobile commerce,” Information Management 
, 2006 Dec, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 950–963. 
[15] J. Tselentis, “The graphic designer’s electronic-media 
manual : how to apply visual design principles to engage users 
on desktop, tablet, and mobile websites. ” Rockport 
Publishers, 2012 Sep. 
[16] Benchmade Knife Company, “Benchmade Knife Company.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.benchmade.com/. 
[Accessed: 01-Jan-2019]. 
[17] Ontario Knife, “Online Knife Tool Kit | Buy Knives Online | 
Hunting, Survival amp; Tactical Knives.” [Online]. Available: 
http://ontarioknife.com/. [Accessed: 01-Jan-2019]. 
[18] J. R. Doyle and P. A. Bottomley, “Font appropriateness and 
brand choice,” Journal of Bussiness Research, 2004 Aug, vol. 
57, no. 8, pp. 873–880. 
[19] X. Xu, R. Chen, and M. W. Liu, “The effects of uppercase 
and lowercase wordmarks on brand perceptions,” Marketing 
Letters, 2017 Sep, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 449–460. 
[20] M. Perea and V. Panadero, “Does Viotin Activate Violin 
More Than Viocin ?,” Experimental Psychology, 2014 Jan, 
vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 23–29. 
[21] E Sadko, “Guide to 10 font characteristics and their use in 
design,” Medium, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://medium.com/@eugenesadko/guide-to-10-font-
characteristics-and-their-use-in-design-b0a07cc66f7. 
[Accessed: 31-Dec-2018]. 
 
 
 
 
 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

