A New Definition of Competence Developing Games 
- and a framework to assess them – 
Johannes Alexander König 
Lab. for IT Organization & Management  
FH Aachen University of Applied Sciences 
Aachen, Germany 
email: koenig@fh-aachen.de 
Martin R. Wolf 
Lab. for IT Organization & Management  
FH Aachen University of Applied Sciences 
Aachen, Germany 
email: m.wolf@fh-aachen.de
 
Abstract—There are different types of games that try to make 
use of the motivation of a gaming situation in learning 
contexts. This paper introduces the new terminology 
‘Competence Developing Game’ (CDG) as an umbrella term 
for all games with this intention. Based on this new 
terminology, an assessment framework has been developed and 
validated in scope of an empirical study. Now, all different 
types of CDGs can be evaluated according to a defined and 
uniform set of assessment criteria and, thus, are comparable 
according to their characteristics and effectiveness. 
Keywords-Serious Games; Gamification; Business Simulations; 
Assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Using gaming concepts for teaching approaches provides 
the advantage of transferring the motivation of a gaming 
situation into a learning situation [1]. In addition, games 
provide a safe room which gives players the possibility to 
explore new behaviors or strategies without taking any risks 
on their health or their (business) environment [2]. There are 
three major kinds of games which are used in teaching 
context: Serious Games, Business Simulations/Games and 
the approach of Gamification. According to current research, 
there is no framework or tool that stipulates the capability to 
assess Serious Games, Business Simulation/Games and 
gamified applications in a structured and comparable way. 
One reason for this is the lack of an aligned terminology for 
such games. In Section II and Section III, a terminology 
suggestion will be further motivated and defined. Section IV 
describes a framework needed to handle the new 
terminology. Section V offers an overview about future work 
and further use. 
II. 
MOTIVATING COMPETENCE DEVELOPING GAMES  
A variety of publications defines the terms Serious 
Games, Business Simulations/Games or Gamification, e.g., 
[3][4][5]. Furthermore, there is a number of definitions for 
game concepts that are close to Serious Games (e.g., Game-
based Learning). By now, some authors argue that these 
kind of game concepts are more or less equal to Serious 
Games [6]. Other authors try to elaborate differences 
between these concepts [7]. However, there is the 
conviction that characteristics, pedagogies and the way of 
game design are too different and that it is impossible to 
handle all three concepts within one approach.  
In order to develop an umbrella term that combines the 
three concepts mentioned within one approach, similarities 
and differences had to be identified: All different kinds of 
game concepts try to teach someone something, by using 
different teaching approaches. There are very simple 
designed games that teach only pure information without 
any pedagogical concept or significant Game Design, Game 
Mechanics, e. g., a vocabulary trainer. Such applications are 
not inside the scope of the umbrella term because they are 
not real games. If you extend the vocabulary trainer with 
ranking systems or with a dynamic vocabulary in simulated 
conversations, you get a gamified application that starts 
touching the target field of the assessment framework. A 
vocabulary trainer teaching the vocabulary inside a 3D-
world while telling a discoverable story (independent of the 
pedagogical nature of such a game) is – by definition – a 
Serious Game and, thus, inside the target field. Games in 
scope of the umbrella term CDG have one characteristic in 
common: They do not transfer information only, they also 
teach how to use them. 
III. 
DEFINE COMPETENCE DEVELOPING GAMES  
The European Parliament published a recommendation 
for the definition of the term ‘competence’ based on the 
work of the European Universities Continuing Education 
Network (EUCEN). They are defining ‘competence’ as 
follows: “‘competence’ means the proven ability to use 
knowledge, skills and personal, social and/or methodological 
abilities, in work or study situations and in professional and 
personal development…” [8]. This definition of competence 
describes the idea behind transporting knowledge -and how to 
use it- in a sophisticated way. Games have the ability to teach 
knowledge, skills, methodological abilities and how to use 
them. If needed, they can even teach attitudes (Examples: [3]). 
So CDG seems to be a suitable umbrella term. The following 
definition of CDG is based on the above-mentioned definition 
of ‘Competence’: 
A Competence Developing Game (CDG), is a game that 
has the primary purpose to teach knowledge, skills and 
personal, social and/or methodological abilities, in work or 
study situations and in professional and personal development 
of the game player, by retaining the motivation of a gaming 
situation. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
PYRAMID ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK FOR 
‘COMPETENCE DEVELOPING GAMES’  
The “Pyramid Assessment Framework for ‘Competence 
Developing Games’“ (short PACDG-Framework) provides the 
possibility to assess any CDG in a systematic way. Assessment 
results are comparable even if CDG are different in their nature.   
A. Framework layers and steps  
With the PACDG-Framework CDGs are evaluated from a 
“Designer” and a “Player” perspective in seven separated steps 
that build up on each other (hierarchical structure).  
The basic idea of having a designated “Designer”-Layer is 
to evaluate the game’s potential by investigating the integral 
game components and the game’s goals. To support this, the 
Designer-Layer 
includes 
the 
Pyramid-steps 
“Problem”, 
“Learning Goal”, “Story & Pedagogy” and “Game Design & 
Aesthetics”.   
The main goal of the “Player”-Layer is to investigate the 
effect on the players during and after playing the game. In 
scope of that, the game experience and the desired learning 
effect on the player are investigated. The basis for that are the 
Design-Layer results. However, the PACDG-Framework 
provides 
three 
pyramid-steps 
inside 
the 
Player-Layer: 
“Experience”, “Aftereffect” and “Impact”. Figure 1 illustrates 
the framework and described the framework steps.  
 
 
Figure 1.  
The PACDG-Framework 
Using the framework means to execute the illustrated steps 
from bottom to top. Each layer focuses on another game part. 
Because of the hierarchical structure causes for failures or 
unwanted effects can be found in each underlying step. Every 
step requires different assessment operations. These operations 
are described on the right hand site of every step.  
 
B. Framework derivation and evaluation  
Game types summarized under the CDG umbrella entail a 
variety of frameworks, assessment tools, etc. The PACDG-
Framework combines these established approaches that can be 
found e.g., in [9]. It represents a universal solution for all game 
types summarized under the CDG umbrella. Thus, in scope of 
its development, the most relevant and acknowledged game 
focusing concepts as well as their underlying measurement 
tools have been considered. Furthermore “Bloom’s taxonomy 
of the Cognitive Domain” was taken into account as a common 
measurement tool for learning outcomes [10]. Table 1 shows 
which PACDG-Framework element has been mainly extracted 
from or is inspired by which approach. In order to establish an 
integrating concept by utilizing these different approaches the 
major work had to be done by adjusting the concepts among 
each other. That means, the PACDG-Framework combines 
these concepts avoiding the identified weaknesses. By this, it 
expanded the framework range. The original approaches 
presented in Table 1 support either Serious Games or Business 
Simulations. The PACG-Framework supports both and 
Gamification-Application beyond.  
TABLE I.  
DERIVATION OF THE PACDG-FRAMEWORK 
Base Approach 
PACDG-Framework Step 
Bloom’s Taxonomy [11][12] 
Impact   
Annetta’s Framework [13] 
Experience  
Game Design 
DPE Framework [14] 
Game Design & Aesthetics 
Story & Pedagogy 
SDGA Framework [15]  
Learning goals 
Eight fields instrument [2] 
Aftereffect 
Problem 
 
An empirical study with 39 education experts was 
conducted to validate the hierarchical PACDG-Framework 
structure. The results show that the framework structure is 
valid. First practical experiences using the framework show a 
very suitable way to assess all kinds of CDGs. In addition, the 
assessment results facilitate the description of game problems 
and the identification of the associated causes in a systematic 
way. The theoretical assumptions (game design & learning) on 
which the framework is constructed are based on many 
established and used approaches. That ensures a sophisticated 
level of validity for the theoretical aspects, too. By this, in 
short, the PACDG-framework validity is shown.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Further explanation about the empirical study and practical 
tests will follow in a longer version of this paper. In addition, 
more detailed assessment criteria underlying the assessment 
operations of each step are being worked on. They will 
contribute a better level of comparability between assessments. 
Next, the framework will be used to assess games developed 
for Cyber-Security trainings. By this, critical success criteria 
for this kind of games should be defined and used for 
developing an exemplary serious game within this scope.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Sanchez, “Key criteria for Game Desing,” France, 2011. 
[Online]. Available from: 
http://archives.reseaucerta.org/meet/Key_criteria_for_Game_
Design_v2.pdf [retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[2] J. W. M. Kessels, P. Keursten and C. A. Smit, “The eight field 
instrument: analysis framework for training effects,” Kessels 
& Smit, The Learning Company, 1996.  
[3] D. Michael and S. Chen, “Serious Games: Games That 
Educate, Train, and Inform,” Thomson Course Technology 
PTR, 2005.  
[4] U. Blötz, „Planspiele und Serious Games in der beruflichen 
Bildung,“ Bertelsmann, 2015. 
[5] M. Schulten, "Gamification in der Unternehmenspraxis: 
Status quo und Perspektiven," Dialogmarketing Perspektiven 
2013/2014, Wiesbaden, Springer, 2014. 
[6] K. 
Corti, 
“Gamesbased Learning 
a 
serious 
business 
application,” PIXELearning Limited, 2006. 
[7] C. Lampert, C. Schwinge and D. Tolks, "Der gespielte Ernst 
des Lebens - Bestandsaufnahme und Potenziale von Serious 
Games (for Health)," MedienPädagogik. 2009. 
[8] EUCEN, "European Universities Continuing Education 
Network," 
2009. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.eucen.eu/EQFpro/GeneralDocs/FilesFeb09/GLOS
SARY.pdf [retrieved: 03, 2016]. 
[9] F. Hauser, A. Leich and K. Schiffer, „Facing the Challenge: 
Evaluation of Serious Games,“i-com Journal of Interactive 
Media, 2013, pp. 32-38.  
[10] W. Sitte and H. Wohlschlägl, Eds., „Beiträge zur Didaktik des 
„Geographie und Wirtschaftskunde“-Unterrichts,“ 4th edition, 
Vienna: Department of Geography and Regional Research, 
University of Vienna, 2001. 
[11] Forehand, M., “Bloom's Taxonomy: From Emerging 
Perspectives on Learning, Teaching and Technology;” 
Georgia: University of Georgia, 2012. 
[12] Krathwohl, D. R, “A Revision of Bloom's Taxonomy: An 
Overview. In Theory Into Practice (Vol. 41),” College of 
Education, The Ohio State University, 2002. 
[13] Annetta, L. A., “The “I's” have it: A framework for serious 
educational game design,” In A. Gerianne, Review of General 
Psychology, Special Issue: Video Games: Old Fears and New 
Directions (Vols. 14, Nr. 2 ), 2010, pp. 105-112. 
[14] Winn, B. M., “The Design, Play, and Experience 
Framework;” In R. E. Ferdig, Handbook of Research on 
Effective Electronic Gaming in Education. 3 edition, USA: 
Information Science Reference, 2009, pp. 1010-1024. 
[15] Mitgutsch, K., & Alvarado, N., “Purposeful by design?: a 
serious game design assessment framework,” Proceedings of 
the International Conference on the Foundations of Digital 
Games. Raleigh, North Carolina, 2012, pp. 121-128. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

