 
 
Information Needs of Chinese Mobile Internet Users  
A User Study  
 
Yanxia Yang 
TWYWI Consulting,  
San Jose, CA, USA 
marsha.yang@gmail.com 
Grace Deng 
TWYWI Consulting 
San Jose, CA, USA 
graceyd2006@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates the information needs of 
Chinese mobile Internet users in their fast-paced environment.  
The mobile Internet users grown up in such an environment 
would have different interests, ways of using, and information 
needs. In order to obtain a better understanding on Chinese 
mobile Internet user behavior, a web survey was conducted in 
Xi’an, China, followed by the previous ethnographical study. 
With the pervasiveness of smart-phones, people from different 
age groups joined the mobile Internet market, and the results 
of this study illustrated the various user behaviors on the 
mobile Internet across different age groups of people. The 
study revealed that in the mobile Internet era, Chinese users 
are more concerned with information relating to the scope of 
safety and love/belonging needs, advancing towards the next 
level in Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs.  
Keywords-Internet; mobile Internet; interests; user behavior; 
web survey; mobile applications.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Mobile applications have emerged as one of the most 
popular sector of the mobile industry chain. As shown by the 
newest statistics published by EnfoDesk databases, in the 
third quarter of 2011, the number of mobile Internet users in 
China has reached 396 million users, increasing at a rate of 
4.4% [1]. 
The following graph shows the number of new iOS and 
Android device activations in China at the beginning of year 
2012, an astounding growth which has surpassed that of the 
United States to become number one around the globe. 
 
 
Figure 1. iOS and Android Device Activations 
 in China and USA [2]. 
 
Based on Flurry’s data in Figure 1, from Q1 2011 to Q1 
2012, China led in the mobile app session growth as well, 
increasing 1,126% year-over-year.  In such a fast-paced 
environment, users have various needs for the mobile 
applications.  In order to better design mobile applications, 
we need to understand the information needs of mobile 
users.  Thus, we designed a questionnaire and conducted a 
web survey in Xi’an, China. 
The next section of this paper will discuss the 
methodology prescribed in questionnaire design and survey 
procedure. The third section will discuss findings and 
results of the web survey. The final section will analyze and 
summarize our findings.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The research plan consists of ethnographic interviewing 
and web surveys. Ethnographic interviews were first 
conducted in Xi’an [3].  Afterwards, a web survey on 
customer concerned issues was administered as the second 
step of the research.  This paper focuses on the second step.  
According to the best practice suggested by Kuniavsky  
[4], the study plan was drafted to collect data to validate 
research 
hypothesis. 
 
According 
to 
the 
previous 
ethnographical study, Chinese Internet users focus more on 
two levels of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs [3], safety and 
love/belonging, when surfing the Internet. We hypothesize 
that this same user behavior and focus on safety and 
love/belonging needs is demonstrated when these users 
utilize the mobile Internet. Out of these two levels, we wish 
to further investigate which subcategories are more 
important to the users. What specific information within 
these categories do they care about the most?   Based on the 
previous study, we know that people have interests on trust, 
safety, education, job, psychology, communication, and 
health, etc., so this paper will study more on these interests. 
A. Questionnaire Design 
We designed the questionnaire based on the ethnographic 
results: Internet user behavior correlated to the user age 
group and other user demographic information. Since we 
assume that the users’ information needs while using the 
mobile Internet are similar to their using the Internet, 
therefore we designed questionnaire focusing on the three 
basic needs in Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs: physiological, 
safety, and love/belonging.  
The questionnaire includes both a first level factor and a 
second level factor.  Each second level factor in turn 
encompasses multiple different related questions, and each 
question was designed for a 5-Lirket Scale answers from 
383
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
most agree to most not-agree. There are also some multiple 
choices or open ended questions that allowed survey 
participants to provide more inputs.  
The first level factors are seven broad categories, such as 
Trust; Communication; Safety; Education; Jobs and Career; 
Psychology; and Health. The first level factors are further 
specified and divided by second level factors. For example, 
under the first level factor “Trust”, there are several second 
level factors such as “Consumer Recommendation”, 
“Shopping and Merchandise”, “Trust in Society”, “Location-
Based Information Acquirement”,  “Traffic”, etc. The 
following describes a few examples of the details of the 
questionnaire.  
 
 
Example1:   
First level factor - Trust  
Second level factor - Consumer Recommendation 
Related Questions:  
1) When I purchase expensive electronic 
products, 
I 
usually 
research 
online 
beforehand. 
1. Most Not Agree, 2. Not Agree, 3. 
Neutral;  4. Agree, 5. Most Agree 
2) What information do you look for? Choose 
from the following options or add your 
input. 
__quality of product, __manufacturer 
reputation, __ market price, __consumer 
reviews, 
__after-sales 
service, 
or 
other______? 
. 
 
Second level factor – Shopping and Merchandise 
Related Questions 
1) I only go shopping at a fixed number of 
stores. 
1. Most Not Agree, 2. Not Agree, 3. 
Neutral,  4. Agree, 5. Most Agree 
 
2) I wish to receive information about sales at 
local stores. 
1. Most Not Agree, 2. Not Agree, 3. 
Neutral,  4. Agree, 5. Most Agree 
 
3) I wish to receive electronic coupons and 
vouchers instead of paper ones. 
1. Most Not Agree, 2. Not Agree, 3. 
Neutral,  4. Agree, 5. Most Agree 
 
4) I wish to save time by checking for 
information regarding products I buy often 
on my smart-phone. 
1. Most Not Agree, 2. Not Agree, 3. 
Neutral,  4. Agree, 5. Most Agree 
 
B. Questionnaire Validity 
The web survey was conducted using a formally 
designed questionnaire and surveyed a total of 200 mobile 
Internet users in China. In accordance to a completely 
randomized design in order to yield the most accurate results, 
the questionnaire was sent to a polling agency, where it was 
reviewed and proofread. Afterwards, the questionnaire was 
sent to a variety of different websites over the Internet in 
order to sample a more diverse and random population.  
When prefixed percentage ratios were satisfied, the poll was 
closed and data analysis was conducted on the results.  
 
C. Predictive Validity 
Prediction validity refers to the effectiveness of the 
outcome of a survey to predict the results of future surveys 
or experiments. As a form of criterion validity, the validity 
of the results is established when compared against known 
criteria. The main purpose of this survey is to target the 
most common problems current users face when using the 
mobile Internet. We also hope to investigate some of the 
most common issues these users are concerned about as well. 
When information needs based on geographical location 
are taken into account, careful analysis of the survey results 
reflects the information needs of current users in different 
situations and holds predictive value on a long-term basis.  
 
D. Construct Validity 
Construct validity refers to whether the questionnaire is 
comprehensive and takes into consideration all facets and 
elements of the questions. It also refers to the extent to 
which what was to be measured was actually measured, and 
whether the results of the survey can account for the 
survey’s accuracy and validity. The formal questions in this 
survey are derived from the previous ethnographical study 
and the analysis of the users’ most commonly faced 
problems.    
 
E. Content Validity 
Content validity refers to the effectiveness of translating 
factors surveyed into specific and relevant questions, and 
the level by which these questions through content can 
accurately and comprehensively reflect a surveyed factor.  It 
additionally refers to the verification of whether the survey 
method measures what is expected, as well as whether such 
a measure accounts for all aspects of a social construct.  
These questions in the survey have been improvised and 
refined by comparing the content validity between a 
preliminary survey and that of a formal survey. Only 
conducting questions that involve measuring the satisfactory 
level of users when they encounter problems cannot 
completely reveal the information needs that users are 
interested in or are concerned about.  
Hence, when designing this questionnaire, we not only 
took into account issues that users may confront, but also 
384
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
verified the specific types of information these users want to 
see. This particular verification process is administered by 
allowing surveyed users to select types of information they 
are interested in from a list of options and following up with 
analysis of the most popular choices indicated by the 
subjects. 
III. 
FINDINGS AND RESULTS 
A. Demographical Information  
1) Age group 
Out of the total 200 web survey participants, the chart 
below illustrates the age group distribution for people who 
were born after the 1960’s, 70’s, 80’s and 90’s:  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Age Group Distribution. 
 
 
2) Sex 
Out of the total web survey participants, 40.2% are 
female and 59.8% are male.  
 
3) Marital status 
Out of the total web survey participants, 15% were 
married with kids, 15%  were married without kids;  30% 
were single and in a relationship;  40%  were single and not 
in a relationship. The following chart shows this breakdown.  
The participants’ marital status could influence their 
regularly-sought information. For example, if they are 
married with kids, their information seeking is more related 
to the family than if they were not married with kids, 
especially on issues such as childcare and children’s 
education.   
 
 
 
Figure 3. Marital Status Distribution. 
 
4) Education background 
Out of the total web survey participants, the education 
level breakdown is presented by the following chart: 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Education Level Distribution. 
 
B. Information Needs Related to the Gender  
By observing Figure 5, we find that a significant amount 
of women are more concerned with the job search category, 
compared to that of men because job security in China for 
women is lower than men due to the culture reason.  Women 
are particularly interested in finding a job nearby. In another 
relevant category, career plan, it can also be concluded that 
women demonstrate more interest, although there is less of a 
statistical difference.  
Another observation is the significant difference in 
interest between men and women on the education of 
children. On this topic, there is a greater difference than that 
of any other category. Men tend to like the information 
pushed to their mobile devices regarding how to educate 
their children, while women like to chat with their social 
385
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
groups in order to get the information for children and 
education related topics.   
Some of the common topics that both men and women 
are equally concerned about are those regarding food and 
nutrition safety, health and lifestyle, local events, and career 
planning.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Interest in Different Information Categories Across Genders. 
 
C. Information Needs Related to the Age Groups 
The information needs broken down by age groups can 
be seen in the Table 1.  The average Likert scale score for 
each type of questions were calculated according to the age 
groups.   
TABLE I.  
INFORMATION NEEDS RELATED TO AGE GROUPS 
Information 
Needs 
Age Groups (born after …) 
60s 
70s 
80s 
90s 
Compare 
Prices  
4 
4.45 
4.59 
4.56 
Food Safety 
4.4 
4.64 
4.27 
4.22 
Career Plan 
3.6 
4.36 
4.3 
4.78 
Stress 
4.4 
4.36 
4.13 
4.44 
Health/Life 
Style 
3.8 
4.27 
4.13 
4.56 
Job Search 
3.4 
4 
4.19 
4.11 
Local Events 
4 
3.82 
3.95 
3.89 
Sales/ 
Discounts 
3.4 
3.55 
4 
4.22 
Education for 
Children 
4 
4.55 
3.65 
4.11 
Social 
Network 
4.2 
3.82 
3.73 
4.11 
  
The above data can be illustrated in Figure 6. From this 
figure, it reveals that mobile Internet users born after the 60s 
are notably less concerned about sales/discounts, career 
planning and job search, compared to all other age groups, 
which indicated that this group has more financial freedom 
than other groups.    
On the other hand, people born after the 90s are the most 
attentive to their career. In addition, this age group also 
display great attention to information related to the 
sales/coupons/discounts and health/lifestyle category, as 
compared to the three other age groups. A consistent trend 
shown by Figure 6 is that the younger age groups tend to be 
more concerned with physiological needs than safety needs, 
and pay more attention towards information that relate to 
livelihood (finding jobs and saving money).  
For the people born after 70s, their main concerns focus 
on the food safety and education for children. Their needs 
are more related to safety and love/belonging as they have 
established social status. They like to check nearby 
restaurant reviews through their mobile devices before 
dining, and quickly learn from their mobile devices on 
others’ or experts’ opinions on how to educate their children. 
A topic that evokes interest across all four age groups is 
that of news about local events and information regarding the 
local environment.  They like to check local information 
through mobile devices on their way to commute in the 
public transportation, or in their spare time, because they 
think only local (specific to one city) information is most 
relevant to their daily lives. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Interest in Different Information Categories Across Different 
Age Groups. 
 
 
386
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
D. Local Information Needs-Checked with Mobile Devices 
Frequently  
Figure 7 shows the top categories of information that 
surveyed mobile Internet users indicated what they wanted to 
know regarding their local community. As the chart 
illustrates, information related to saving money, such as 
discounts and sales, is clearly a high priority. 
 Users also like to utilize their mobile devices for quick 
access to daily local news and events happening in the 
neighborhood.  They believe that the things happening 
around them are more meaningful to their lives.   
Finally, many users also express equal interest in issues 
regarding livelihood, such as job openings and the price of 
gas and electricity. News regarding education also appears to 
be of considerate interest.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Local Information Needs. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
 
It can be concluded that mobile Internet users in China 
demonstrate information needs that are mostly on 
physiological, safety needs and love/belonging, and leaning 
towards the needs of safety and love/belongs.  The mobile 
Internet users’ information needs are the same as those on 
the Internet, and thus, also follow the egg theory by Yang 
[3].   By looking overall at Figures 5 and 6, the top 
categories of information that all mobile Internet users are 
concerned about as a whole are related to price comparison, 
food and nutrition safety, and career planning. Figure 7 also 
reinforces this observation. Categories that fall under 
physiological needs are that of price comparison. The 
mobile Internet introduced a quick access to people for 
online shopping and browsing.   Categories that fall under 
safety needs are that of career planning, job search and self 
improvement, food safety, and health and lifestyle, which 
the users are more concerned with.  Categories that full 
under the love/belonging are that of communication with 
friends and family, and child education, which have drastic 
use in the mobile Internet era. 
Within the two categories of needs that mobile Internet 
users most focused on, safety and love/belong, which 
specific information do they care about the most?   Analysis 
of Figures 5 and 6 reveals that the two most popular topics 
surveyed mobile Internet users were interested in are food 
safety, and career planning which all fall under the safety 
level of needs. The communal interest on information 
regarding the safety of food may be a result of the numerous 
reports of food poisoning or false products.  Users may wish 
to go online through their mobile devices and check 
references or other customers’ reviews of 
nearby 
restaurants’ reputation and history before choosing those 
restaurants.   
 Here we elaborate more on how people’s need relate to 
the level of love/belonging.  The users communicate with 
their friends and family through cell phone calls, instant 
messaging, text, or wechat, which already has more than 
200 million users, either to talk, share popular news/topics, 
or send personal pictures. Since a mobile phone’s basic 
function is to communicate, the drastic increase in sales for 
mobile phones in China is due to a greater demand for 
faster, more accessible communication by the people. Many 
of these new mobile phone users are from the large amount 
of immigration of workers into the city from the 
countryside. In addition, college graduates often find jobs in 
bigger, well-developed cities than their home towns. This 
distance from their families contributes to these users’ 
dependence on mobile phones to quickly connect with their 
families. The mobility within the cities also cause people to 
rely more on mobile phones than landlines because it is 
harder to keep a permanent landline number. Some people 
even have two or three phone numbers to reduce the cost of 
communication. 
Finally, the demographical difference may cause different 
user behavior for the mobile Internet use.  For example, as a 
result of the developing global economy, many job 
opportunities and career options have surfaced; therefore, 
many people are eager to acquire career information and 
counseling. This trend is especially prevalent in the female 
subset of surveyed subjects. This may be because women 
tend to want to find a job close to home in order to avoid 
traffic and to easily take care of their families.  From a 
different perspective, the rankings given by people born in 
the 1960s show they are less concerned compared to the 
younger age groups regarding career planning and job 
search. As an overall trend, some of the older age groups 
tend to focus more attention towards information that fall 
under the safety category.  
Human needs are a powerful resource of explanation of 
human behavior and social interactions [5, 6]. In the mobile 
Internet era, human needs have overall moved towards a 
higher level in the Maslow Hierarchy of Need [3].  People 
387
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
are more concerned with things relating to the scope of 
safety and love/belonging.  Between these two categories, 
different age groups of mobile Internet users have different 
methods of using the mobile Internet, as well as distinctive 
focused interests and objectives.  There are several possible 
reasons that may contribute the variance, such as society 
development, influence of popular applications in the 
market during different times, education levels, amount of 
time spent on the Internet and mobile Internet, and many 
others.  
The study of user behavior on the mobile Internet also 
reveals the extent by which mobile Internet is fusing into 
users’ life.  The closer mobile Internet is to its users’ daily 
life, the more popular mobile applications will be. The next 
study will focus more on how users interact with the 
different types of mobile devices (phone/pad) on iOS, 
Andorid, and Win Mobile.    
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
     Special thanks to the students of Xi’an Jiaotong 
University for their help to recruit participants.  
REFERENCES 
[1] EnfoDesk Databases, [Mobile Internet Users in China], 
Retrieved from http://www.enfodesk.com,  October 2012. 
[2] Flurry Analytics, [Graphic Illustration of iOS and 
Android Device Activations in China and USA]. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.flurry.com/flurry-analytics.html, 
June 
2012. 
[3] Y. Yang, H. Li, and G. Deng, “Case study: Internet and 
Mobile Internet User Behavior in China,” Proc. HCII, 
Orlando, Florida, USA, 2011.   
[4] M. Kuniavsky, “Observing the User Experience-A 
Practitioner’s Guide To User Research,” San Francisco, CA: 
Morgan Kaufmann Publisher, 2003.  
[5] R.A. Coate and J.A. Rosati, "Preface," in The Power of 
Human Needs in World Society, ed. Roger A.Coate and 
Jerel A. Rosati, vol. IX, Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner 
Publishers, 1988. 
[6] A. H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” in 
Psychological Review, vol. 50, pp. 370-96, 1943.
 
 
 
388
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

