The iPad in a Classroom: A Cool Personal Item or Simply an Educational Tool? 
 
Andrea A. Gasparini  
Digital Services, University of Oslo Library 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: a.a.gasparini@ub.uio.no 
Alma L. Culén 
 Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: almira@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract — In this paper, we discuss the dual role of the iPad 
among the teenage high school students using the tablet as a 1-
1 (one tablet per student) educational tool. On one hand, the 
iPad is a personal, mobile and cool piece of technology. On the 
other hand, it is a piece of technology provided by the school 
and given to students as anytime, anyplace mobile educational 
tool. Our goal is to understand the space between the use 
situations related to school work and those that are private and 
personal. After ten months of observations of the use of the 
iPad, we conclude with that the iPad is treated by teenage 
participants in our study as purely educational tool.  
Keywords - cool; identity; iPad; education; learning; techno-
cools. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
When the iPad was launched in the 2010, numerous iPad 
oriented projects and studies emerged worldwide within 
diversity of settings. Specifically, for the field of education, 
the interest was, according to Apple [1], reaching 
unprecedented heights.  
This new artifact came quickly to represent a promise of 
a paradigm change in learning, nearly a promise of a 
revolution in the field of education [5]. It also represented a 
possibility to change a known trend of classroom technology 
non-acceptance [8, 20] and become a tool that proves that 
technology can bring considerable benefits to education [1].  
Creativity was expected to play a major role in moving 
the education towards more constructivist practices [7]. The 
iPad has a large number of applications supporting 
productivity and creativity. In using them, students may open 
up a possibility to take a more active part in their own 
education, by, for example, designing a part of their own 
curriculum through the use of different apps.  
However, creativity in the digital era is quite complex. It 
involves navigating in a plethora of platforms, channels and 
applications, all of which may demand some learning and 
mastery. A cognitive aspect of multimodal representations of 
content in the learning processes typically supported on the 
iPad [4] requires a new kind of literacy to deal with, both for 
teachers and students. The multimodality theory advocates 
an understanding that communication, when using a device 
such as the iPad, occurs through multiple but synchronous 
modes such as images and graphics from the camera or the 
Internet; touch using the touch screen, and audio input and 
output. This problematic is not new. For instance, Sneller 
describes an earlier study [25] done with a class where 
students used a tablet PC. The study showed that students 
had a positive attitude towards the use of the tool that 
supported their active learning styles. It also showed that 
much more work was required from the teacher; the effective 
use of the tool implied a major redesign of the curriculum to 
be taught in a classroom. Sneller concludes with “Even on 
those days when you feel like this challenge is akin to that 
involved in herding cats, the victories will come.” 
An obvious use of the iPad for students is to use it as an 
e-book reader and read books on this electronic platform. An 
increasing part of new e-books, including the academic ones, 
developed for the iPad or other electronic reading devices 
offer brand new features. Some examples of those features 
include direct interaction with the content, word search, 
video or images access, hyperlinks to references etc. This 
kind of reading can be described as is an intermittent, 
digressive and collective act [14], where, in spatial 
transitions, remembering words becomes very difficult to 
achieve or is no longer possible [14]. For students, the book 
is transitioning from a product to a service.  
Given that the cognitive complexity has increased and 
different kinds of skills are needed to deal with new, 
multimodal, mobile learning tools, it is difficult to say if the 
iPad actually enables increased creativity and production and 
in which ways it does so.  There are three angles of approach 
to investigation of this: studying the problem with the tool in 
focus, focusing on users involved in a use situation and a 
combination of both. The later is the approach we chose in 
the study described in this paper. 
In our previous study with the iPad as an educational tool 
for geosciences university students [11], we found out that 
productivity and creativity were strongly related to various 
ownership issues such as time investment into mastery of the 
device one does not own, cost of applications that are to be 
installed on the device that one does not own, proprietary 
software that is hard to modify and customize, issues around 
annotating curriculum related articles, ownership/copy rights 
issues related to that, etc.. Additionally, factors from the 
educational Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [27] such 
as perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and teachers 
influence were found also relevant for the use of the iPad in 
the classroom ecology.  
The study described in this paper takes into account 
users, the use situation and the tool. The users are technology 
savvy students, also referred to as the Net generation, digital 
natives, millennials, etc. These ever more mobile students 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

actively use different technologies offering them content 
access anyplace, anytime. The technologies such as smart 
phones and tablets have become a new arena for the “cool” 
products, making the Net generation students more aware of 
the choices they make. Coolness is a factor that this youth 
responds to [9, 19, 21]. As an attribute of the product, it is 
somewhat elusive and paradoxical. In [9], the term techno-
cool is used to describe such products. Clearly, designing 
techno-cools is different from designing cool products that 
are not technology based. The design and production of 
technology must strike a balance between short-term, fast 
changing product versus long-term product and brand 
building. Most large, mature technology producers trying to 
cater to the “cool” market understand the need for branding 
efforts that give sustainable, long-term advantage. Thus, 
really well designed products may become what we call 
mainstream techno-cools, the iPad representing one of them. 
The high number of sold iPads can not only be understood as 
a demand from the market for this device, the coolness effect 
was also a factor [2]. In their turn, researchers in interaction 
design have recently begun to study coolness as a factor to 
take into account when designing new technology [9, 16, 
24]. It is interesting that Holtzblatt [16] proposes a model for 
designing cool innovative products with joy, identity, 
connectivity, sensation and accomplishment as drivers, 
coupled with use situations (see Fig. 1). The components in a 
wheel of joy are precisely those that are generally important 
for the Net generation we are considering in our study. 
 
 
Figure 1. Holtzblatt’s wheel of joy and a triangle of design. 
 
The group perception of coolness is obviously important in 
the social context for these young people at school, work, 
home, or out and about with friends. In [9] we define some 
attributes of coolness relevant for the iPad:  
“However, if one invests in a piece of technology, one 
expects it to do what it is designed for and much more, to be 
useful and easy to use, almost never unique, but possibly 
customizable and definitely, one expects it to be fun.” 
Attributes making a product cool like usefulness, ease of use, 
mainstream techno-cools, connectivity, identity, fun and 
happiness are thus representing the appropriate context 
investigate in relation to “cool” educational technologies we 
well. Coolness can also be related to different attitudes 
young people may have, from rebellious [23] to more laid 
back [26]. 
Related to the use of the iPad and identity, it is of 
importance how users personalize this artifact. More and 
more of our lives is now kept and represented by a large 
group of software in the cloud. Users need then to take a 
stand where, when and how they shall be in touch with this 
“second”, “cloud” representation of their lives. Turkle [28] 
advocates and defines this representation as the “second 
self”. In the earlier 1980s work, Turkle [28] defined how 
then new, personal computer affected the identity of the user 
and her angle of studying it:  
“…my focus here is on something different, on the 
“subjective computer”. This is the machine as it enters into 
social life and psychological development, the computer as it 
affects the way we think, and especially the way we think 
about ourselves.”   
The iPad has the possibility to acquire and reflect a 
number of attributes, and represent the content of our second 
self in a new wrapping, re-sorted, re-made, sometimes better 
than the original, almost as a simulacrum [3]. For the user, 
the iPad can be a new companion, with all the positive and 
negative aspects this companionship involves. 
In this paper, we report from a case study in a high 
school, where we focus on the personal and the educational 
use of the iPad. Factors such as self identity and coolness 
affect these uses. We also recognize the importance of 
factors like joy and fun as mandatory for a positive user 
experience with the device.  Yet, this study shows that 
students prefer to use the device mostly for educational 
purposes. 
The paper is organized in five sections. In the next 
section, Section 2, we describe our case study. In Section 3, 
we present our methods and findings, followed by Section 4, 
where we use an identity and coolness driven approach to 
discuss our results. Section 5 concludes the paper.  
II. 
THE CASE STUDY 
Our case study involved teenagers, aged 16-17 and their 
use of the iPad both as a personal mobile device, and as a 
mobile educational tool.  They are the generation that has 
grown up with technology and are being educated with it 
[10, 17, 22]. This research project was a joint venture 
between different actors: a private school, a representative 
from Apple, a company offering help to introduce 
technology in education, and us as researchers. The whole 
project had a broader purpose of seeing if the iPad could help 
students in their studies, if it is a game changer in education 
[5]. For this case study, as mentioned in the introduction, we 
focused on relation between the identity (including 
personalization) and coolness (including fun, joy, cool 
behaviors, etc.) and how they influence private vs. 
educational use. Since in Norway every high school student 
receives both school books and a laptop for free during their 
studies, the project also gave us the possibility to explore the 
following question: is the iPad cooler and more personal than 
the laptop?  
The private high school at which the study took place is 
in the situated very central, in the heart of a major city in 
Norway. A class of 25 first year students was chosen, and 
after two preliminary stakeholders meetings in January of 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

2012, we started our study. A study was of one-student-per-
iPad type. The students have received iPads 2, preloaded 
with about 200 applications, as well as an external keyboard 
and a small cover.  
At the start of the spring semester (January – June, 2012), 
all the students had a week long support from the company 
facilitating the introduction of the iPad in education (see Fig. 
2). During this week, it was explained how the iPad and all 
of the preloaded apps worked. The support from this 
company did not stop there. The school organized monthly 
visit by the same team for the rest of the semester.  
The classroom was also equipped with an Apple TV 
system in order to provide students with the possibility to 
present their work for the whole class directly from their 
iPads. The classroom, and the rest of the school, had a 
wireless connection to the Internet.  
The teachers had received the iPad four weeks before the 
students, at the end of the fall semester and had time during 
the Christmas break to play with the device, explore it both 
as a personal item and as a tool it was soon going to be. They 
too received some intensive course training at the start of the 
spring semester. The focus for teachers was on learning how 
to use different apps for re-creating the curriculum, when 
possible, and how to use them in class teaching. For instance, 
iMovie was recommended as a tool for recording homework 
assignments and iThoughts for making overviews of diverse 
subjects and assignments. 
The curriculum books were delivered by the publishing 
houses in PDF format, and made available to the students to 
download. For the school this was a large logistic gain. 
Moreover, for the IT support center of the school the 
migration from laptops to iPads was a definitive 
improvement since the iPads were much easier to support 
and manage. It was planned to deploy one server as a backup 
of students’ iPads. At the end of the semester this server was 
still not online, illustrating the fact that standard issues with 
technology, including non-deployment and break-downs 
were part of this study as well.  
As far as we know, there were no restrictions or 
instructions given to either students or teachers regarding the 
use of the iPads outside the educational framework.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS 
A total of five full school day observations were carried 
out. In addition, a series of interviews were conducted. 
Nearly all students and faculty were interviewed both at the 
beginning and at the end of the semester. With one especially 
interested student, whom we will call Stella, observations 
and interviews with the family members were carried out in 
the home environment. 
The visits to the school were divided in two periods, one 
at the start of the semester (3 days) and one at the end (2 
days). In addition to observations and interviews, two 
surveys were carried out. The first survey explored students’ 
perception of the iPad as a techno-cool artifact and contained 
questions around private use as well. The second survey, 
carried out at the end of the semester, covered a range of 
subjects, from the use of the curriculum on the iPad to the 
Learning Management System (LMS) of the school, i.e., 
focused on the use of the iPad as an educational tool.  
At the start of the study, almost all teachers were positive 
toward introduction of the iPad into classroom ecology and 
had envisioned new ways of teaching using the iPad in the 
classroom. Having all the books available at all times in 
class, organization and systematization of their notes, 
making of subject mind-maps, and extensive use of movies 
were all new and exciting. One teacher said:  
“If they use pen and paper for taking notes, the next time 
they have a class they have either forgotten what the notes 
were about or they forgot to take the notes to school with 
them. Now, using iThought, it is easier to check if they have 
done it right and then it is certain that they have it ready for 
the next session” (author’s translation). The euphoric mood 
around the iPad and remarks on its coolness were also 
present among the teachers. One of them stated in an 
interview: “I like my iPhone, but I love my iPad!” 
 
 
Figure 2. Introductory workshop for students on use of the iPad. 
 
Introducing new technology in the classroom ecology 
was also difficult for the teachers. New plans for the 
curriculum required new expertise. The use of camera, touch 
screen, and microphone in various ways by various 
applications represented a challenge. One of the teachers 
made an interesting remark related to how to prepare the 
students to deliver homework. If the teacher chooses an app, 
then it is mandatory for him/her to test if it is possible to use 
the app correctly towards specific learning goal, and prepare 
some potential tips to give them. Another major issue was 
related to whether students will be able to, or not, learn the 
curriculum using the iPad. The aforementioned multimodal 
literacy, bringing a new pedagogy into the classroom, 
requires a huge effort, thus confirming the findings of [25].  
The end of the semester interview period with teachers 
still showed a positive attitude. What seemed to be appealing 
to the teachers was the possibility the iPad had to provide a 
greater variety in the way students can deliver their work. 
Allowing the students to use videos, drawings, comic strips 
and mind maps led a larger number of students to take a 
more active part in the classroom life. This view was also 
confirmed by observations: the students were indeed more 
active in class at the end of the semester than they were at 
the beginning. The possibility of presenting the results of 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

their work, sharing the results and observing what others 
have made, invited all the participants to repeat and have a 
greater focus on the content of the lesson. Interviews with 
the students at the start of the project revealed a very 
enthusiastic approach to this new technology. Some the early 
feedback from students also touched upon well known 
problems [13] such as the lack of Flash support. In particular, 
the students found a lot of appropriate content on the web for 
science classes which was not available on the iPad. Using 
the iPad for mathematics homework proved to be difficult 
also, since it was not so easy to write fast all the calculations. 
One student, Stella, found a workaround: taking pictures 
with the iPad and inserting them in the homework (see Fig. 
3) using Notability.       
 
 
Figure 3. New ways of doing homework in mathematics 
 
From the very start Stella was unique; she loved the iPad, 
and she loved using it. She gives the iPad credit for 
improving her grades and a feeling a larger degree of 
mastery over her school days. She used the iThought to 
organize all the content for all her different subjects. For 
instance, Fig. 4 shows an excerpt of a map where 200 
keywords for a specific subject are plotted. Stella had some 
problems with her vision, so reading text was sometimes 
difficult. Enlarging fonts gave the possibility to read with 
much less strain on her eyes. She also duplicated, to the 
largest extent possible, the apps she had on her iPad on her 
iPhone, thus making it possible to do homework truly any-
place, any-time. Stella was so engaged with the iPad, the 
principal of the school asked her to make an introductory 
video presentation of the iPad for education that was to be 
shown to the next generation of students. At the end of the 
semester she was still using her iPad for the school work, but 
a change occurred. When it came to leisure use, the PC was 
still necessary to satisfy her needs. To update the iPhone 
with iTunes or to see movies, the iPad did not function 
optimally. She tried some workarounds with mixed results. 
The end result was the use of the iPad for education and of 
the PC for leisure. She told us that this was actually her 
impression for the rest of the class too:  
”I got the impression that most of the students do not use 
the iPad for leisure. This is particularly true for those that 
play games a lot.”  
During other interviews at the end of the semester the 
rest of the students confirmed Stella’s statement; the use of 
the iPad was marginalized to school work only. As reasons 
for this “go back” effect, students had problem to explain 
what motivated them to do so. One girl, deeply reflecting 
over the issue, managed to say the following:  
“Maybe this is so for me because I am old fashioned. For 
me, the laptop is better than the iPad. At the start, the iPad 
was really cool, but now, it is so related to school work and 
learning. Thus, I prefer the laptop since I do not use it at 
school. When I use it, I know that it is for fun”.  
 
          
 
Figure 4.  A portion of iThought map for Stella’s  social science class. 
 
The results of the end of the semester survey supported 
this finding:  only 1 out of 10 respondents said that he/she 
uses the iPad more than needed for school work, 2 did not 
know what the distribution of hours between school and 
home use was. The remaining respondents said that their 
school use equals their total use, Fig. 5.  
   
 
Figure 5. Total time of iPad use per day vs. the time for school work. 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The most interesting finding from this case study was the 
emergence of the need for separating the educational and 
leisure use of the iPad. Students had some issues against the 
use of the same technology in the educational and in the 
leisure contexts.  We have observed the same phenomena in 
our elementary school study [10, 13] with 5th and 6th grade 
students. The effect though, was a reverse one: they all used 
the iPads for play and leisure, while at school, the iPads 
ended up on the classroom shelves, unused. The reasons for 
this reversal may be many, for us, it suffices to note that the 
separation of use spheres occurred in both studies. 
Other studies [6, 15, 18] have also revealed a possible 
resistance students may have against personalization and 
appropriation of technology that supports their learning.  
Hossein [15] also points out a possible reason for this 
defiance students may have against the personalization of 
learning technologies: “Younger students may see this as an 
encroachment into their recreation and resent the 
educational provider for taking over their space unless the 
technology can seamlessly be integrated and be seen by the 
students as a hybrid of a recreational and study tool.” Our 
findings support this understanding. For instance Stella says 
in one of the interviews: “It (iPad) has applications for 
everything your PC has. Well, almost everything. At least, it 
is certainly enough to work with it effectively at school, and 
that is what it should mainly be used for.”  
Next, we consider the identity and reflexivity issues and 
their influence on this split. This discussion is followed by 
the discussion of the influence of coolness. 
A. Indetity and reflexivity 
Our findings support the need to define the identity of the 
users in the context of new technologies, both in an 
educational context and in the private sphere. 
We have mentioned the “second self” as a possible 
approach to understanding the dynamics in the behavior of 
the students. From Turkle’s ’80 representation until today, a 
major change has occurred; our identity is more and more 
placed in the cloud. Facebook, Twitter and other services are 
indirectly a representation of ourselves, our second self, and 
the iPad is one of many windows into that world. Turkle 
made also a new edition of the book twenty years later [28] 
and she adds an important observation: 
“In 2004 the cultural message of digital technology is 
not about simplicity but complexity, not about transparency 
but opacity”.  
This description is representative for the problems users 
may have to deal with, when relating to this second self. 
Complexity and opacity can be factors the iPad amplify 
using a world of apps that filter and represent the content in 
a new wrapping, re-sorted and re-made. The user then must 
take a stand to choose if this new reality is better than the 
original.  
  The iPad can act as a projective medium, requiring the 
user to accept the reflexive effect and deal with this new 
changed representation of identity. The students in our study 
selected the option of putting aside the iPad in their spare 
time. We may understand this behavior as an act of 
avoidance to deal with this “second self” on the iPad.  
It is interesting to note that, connectivity, a need of this 
Net generation to be online with others present at all times, 
was not satisfied through schools new social network, called 
Connect. Connect functions much like the Facebook, except 
that all interaction is stored on a local server. However, 
Connect could not replace the Facebook, and was used, 
again, only to discuss educational issues, not for connecting 
with peers. The “second selves”, the cloud identities of our 
students “preferred” PCs and the “original” social media. 
B. Coolness  
Coolness alone was not enough to make the iPad 
indispensable in both educational and private use. Even 
when the important attributes such as usefulness, fun and joy 
in use were all present.  
Even though the iPad definitely had a “cool” status 
according to the data we collected through interviews and the 
first survey, the iPad did not reach the “I can’t go back” 
point [16]. While the students could not even imagine going 
back from the iPod to the “Discman” or the “Walkman”, 
they had no problems going back from the iPad to the laptop 
for their entertainment and “connectivity” time. Moreover, 
this going back to the laptop happened in a short period of 
time. Why is the iPad then still considered to be cool? 
 One could argue from our data that usefulness, fun and 
enjoyment in use were more dominant in educational, that 
the iPad was a cool tool to use at school. We further assume 
that the coolness from one context of use (the school) is then 
transferred to the device itself (and thus the device is still 
considered as cool by a large majority of students). 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the classroom, the iPad came to be viewed by the 
students as a tool for self-improvement in the educational 
arena. At the start of the study, the iPad was also used for 
private purposes, connectivity and self-representation in 
social media, but this route was quickly abandoned. It seems 
that students have a need to separate the educational and the 
personal use of the iPad.   
On the other hand, the educational goal of the private 
school was reached; the migration from the laptop to the iPad 
was successful and many positive effects in the learning 
arena were experienced. A period of time will be necessary 
for the teachers and schools to adapt the curriculum to these 
new ways of using the device involving images, text and 
audio. The potential is, according to both teachers and 
students, large. Future research should focus on deeper and 
broader investigation of reasons for separating the personal 
and the educational use of tablets, as well as its implications.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Apple. An Apple product for every student. Retrieved January 
20, 2013, from http://www.apple.com/education/labs/. 
[2] R. Anderson, Social Diffusion of iPhone Technology. 
Retrieved January 20, 2013, from http://thesocietypages.org 
/eye/2008/07/. 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[3] J. Baudrillard, Symbolic exchange and death. London: Sage, 
1993. 
[4] N. O. Bernsen. Multimodality theory. In Dimitrios Tzovaras, 
editor, 
Multimodal 
User 
Interfaces, 
Signals 
and 
Communication Technology, pp. 5–29. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2008. 
[5] G. Brown-Martin, 2010. Game Changer: Is it iPad?. Retrieved 
January 20, 2013 from: http://www.handheldlearning.co.uk 
/content/view/64. 
[6] L. Corrin, L. Lockyer, and S. Bennett, "Technological 
diversity: an investigation of students’ technology use in 
everyday life and academic study," Learning, Media and 
Technology, 2010, vol. 35(4), pp.387-401.  
[7] M. Csikszentmihalyi and R. Wolfe, “New conceptions and 
research approaches to creativity: Implications of a systems 
perspective for creativity in education,” International 
handbook of giftedness and talent, vol. 2, pp. 81–91, 2000. 
[8] L. Cuban, Oversold and Underused: Computers in the 
Classroom. Harvard University Press, 2003. 
[9] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, "Situated Techno-Cools: 
factors that contribute to making technology cool in a given 
context of use," PsychNology Journal, 2012, vol.10, 2, pp. 
117-139. Retrieved Jan 20, 2013 from www.psychnology.org. 
[10] A. L. Culén and Gasparini, A. A. “When is a Student-
Centered, Technology Supported Learning a Sucess? 
International Journal of Digital Information and Wireless 
Communications (IJDIWC) 2, 3, 2012, pp. 256–269. 
[11] A. L. Culén, B. K. Engen, A. Gasparini and J. Herstad, "The 
use of iPad in Academic Setting: Ownership Issues in 
Relation to Technology (Non)Adoption," Old Meets New: 
Media in Education: Proceedings of the 61st International 
Council for Educational Media and the XIII International 
Symposium on Computers in Education, 2011, pp. 555-563.  
[12] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, "iPad: A New Classroom 
Technology? A Report From Two Pilot Studies", Information 
Sciences and e-Society, 2011, pp. 199 – 208.  
[13] A. Gasparini and A. L. Culén, "Acceptance factors: an iPad in 
Classroom Ecology", The International Conference on E-
Learning and E-Technologies in Education (ICEEE), 
September 2012, Lodz, Poland. 
[14] M. Gauchet, "Le Livre, le numeriquè," Le débat, 2012, vol. 
170, pp. 1-192.   
[15] A. Hosein, R. Ramanau, and C. Jones, "Learning and living 
technologies: a longitudinal study of first year students’ 
frequency and competence in the use of ICT," Learning, 
Media and Technology, 2010, 35, 4, pp.403-418. 
[16] K. Holtzblatt, "What makes things cool?: intentional design 
for innovation," Interactions, 2011, vol. 18, 6, pp. 40-47.  
[17] C. Jones, Networked Learning, Stepping Beyond the Net 
Generation and Digital Natives. In Exploring the Theory, 
Pedagogy and Practice of Networked Learning. In L. 
Dirckinck-Holmfeld, V. Hodgson & D. McConnell (Eds.), 
(pp. 27-41): Springer New York. 2012. 
[18] G. E. Kennedy, "First year students' experiences with 
technology: Are they really digital natives," Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, 2008, vol.24, 1, pp.108. 
[19] C. Nancarrow, P. Nancarrow, J. Page, "An analysis of the 
concept of cool and its marketing implications," Journal of 
Consumer Behaviour, 2002, vol.1, 4, pp. 311-322. 
[20] C. Norris, T. Sullivan, J. Poirot, E. and Soloway, "No access, 
no use, no impact: Snapshot surveys of educational 
technology in K-12, " Journal of Research on Technology in 
Education, 2003, vol.36, 1, pp. 15-28. 
[21] K. A. O’Donnell and D. L. Wardlow, "A theory on the origins 
of coolness. Advances in Consumer Research," 2010, 
vol.27,1, pp. 5. 
[22] D. G. Oblinger, and J. L. Oblinger, Educating the net 
generation. Boulder, Colo.: EDUCAUSE, 2005. 
[23] D. Pountain, and D. Robins, Cool rules : anatomy of an 
attitude. London: Reaktion Books. 2000. 
[24] J. Read, D. Fitton, B. Cowan, R. Beale, Y., Guo, and M. 
Horton, "Understanding and designing cool technologies for 
teenagers," Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference 
extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, 
ACM, 2011, pp. 1567-1572. 
[25] J. Sneller, "The Tablet PC classroom: Erasing borders, 
stimulating activity, enhancing communication, " Frontiers In 
Education Conference - Global Engineering: Knowledge 
Without Borders, Opportunities Without Passports, 2007.  
[26] P.N. Stearns, American cool : constructing a twentieth 
century emotional style. New York, NY [u.a.]: New York 
Univ. Press.1994. 
[27] T. Teo, Technology Acceptance in Education: Research and 
Issues. Sense Publishers, 2001. 
[28] S. Turkle, The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. 
Simon & Schuster, 1984. 
 
 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

