Young and Creative -  
a Designerly Approach to Enhance Interventions in the Public Space 
Andrea Alessandro Gasparini 
Department of Informatics and University of Oslo Library   
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
E-mail: a.a.gasparini@ub.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract— The public space is often offset for young people, 
where bold and complex routines usually may result in more or 
less functional solutions, sometimes even in unpleasant design. 
More than ever the future depends on the engagement of youth 
in the public arena, and as a counterweight to unpleasant 
design, youth creativity may have in some case an extremely 
powerful effect in urban environments. On the other hand, it is 
questionable how their surroundings are prepared and willing 
to learn and absorb their inputs. The concept of divergent and 
convergent thinking is used as a viable framework to address 
and understand youth creativity in public spaces. Using data 
gathered over several years from a group of skaters, the paper 
gives new insight in how they learn, create and share new 
knowledge and how they envision the possibility to design and 
change their surroundings. Finally, this paper argues for using 
a designerly supported framework to enhance youth’s 
creativity and design in public spaces, based on collaboration 
and co-creation across technology, space and grounded on 
their creative mindset. 
Keywords-creativity; design thinking; divergent thinking;  
convergent thinking; public space. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Why does youth interact with their surroundings in 
unpredictable ways? How can all the stakeholders who 
belong to the public space ecology be prepared and willing to 
learn and absorb their inputs? Skateboard, snowboard, punk 
milieu are some examples of youth searching for expression 
outside normal social boundaries. Their dialogue and 
narrative is often strong and visual (see Fig. 1), in some 
occasions addressing inequity in the society, problems with 
environment, urbanism and sustainability [1], but also 
pointing out new ways of defining and creating the way they 
want to live in the modern society.  Their actions sometimes 
evolves and becomes fine art, where Banksy is a well known 
example of interventions in the public space [2]. The need of 
interventions and redesign in public space can also be argued 
as a reaction to unpleasant design, where the blue light in 
public toilets or public bench where it is impossible to lay 
down (also named anti-homeless) are some examples [3]. 
Even though youth’s explorative efforts sometimes may be 
perceived as provocations, using a designerly perspective 
when understanding the way they wish to communicate in 
public urban space, may give new insight. On the other side 
of the provocative scale, for some group of less explorative 
western youth, Social Media (SoMe) has given them the 
possibility to meet, discuss and share in a digital space, in 
ways unthinkable a decade ago. Their discourses are often 
hidden from the public space or, at least they believe that, 
and therefore giving them the possibility to bring their voice 
to an arena more visible in the public space [4], may help 
who among them is not already engaged with creative 
activity in the public space. Defining youth require an 
adequate correctness difficult to achieve in this paper, 
therefore we choose to loosely address them as more or less 
provocative. Another reason to use a simplified scale is 
argued by the fact that using qualities to define youth ranging 
from kindness and rule-following attitudes, to risky behavior 
and disobedience [5], often accommodate only the adult 
world. How youth perceive themselves is often unclear and 
different for those outside, making it more difficult to 
develop solutions that may help them. This paper argues for 
a designerly based framework to enhance youth’s creativity 
and design in public spaces, based on collaboration and co-
creation across technology, space and grounded on their 
creative mindset.   
 
 
Figure 1. Intervention in the public space. Photo by Gasparini. 
 
The structure of the article is as follows: Section II 
presents a framework of creative thinking in the light of 
convergent and divergent thinking. Section III uses a 
designerly approach when the core of creativity is addressed. 
Section IV contains the results of observations and 
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer -Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-61208-468-8
44

interviews conducted with a group of skaters. Section V 
presents an enhanced framework, Section VI contains an 
analysis of the findings and argues for the use of a 
framework to enhance youth’s creativity and design in public 
spaces, while Section VII concludes the paper. 
II. 
A FRAMEWORK FOR CREATIVE THINKING 
Several different theoretical approaches are possible in 
order to understand the human act of creativity. This 
pluralism of theories includes ten different main approaches 
[6], ranging from developmental and cognitive to problem 
finding and problem solving. Creativity as an act must be 
self-discovered and self-disciplined [7], while how a person 
is more or less “sensitive to problems” [8] is a critical factor 
when a problem needs to be found and solved. As a viable 
framework to address and understand youth’s creativity in 
public spaces, the use of the concept of divergent and 
convergent thinking is interesting. In fact, both types of 
thinking are required if creativity shall be obtainable [9]. 
Table I shows attributes needed for divergent thinking [9], 
while Table II for convergent thinking. 
TABLE I.  
DIVERGENT THINKING 
Divergent thinking 
1 
Being unconventional 
2 
Seeing the known in a new light 
3 
Combining the disparate information 
4 
Producing multiple answers 
5 
Shifting perspective 
6 
Transforming the known 
7 
Seeing new possibilities 
8 
Taking risks 
9 
Retrieving a broad range of existing knowledge 
10 
Associating ideas from remote fields 
 
 Overall, the ten attributes in Table I describes the 
thinking phases needed for a person to think outside their 
safe boundaries in life and thus change their perspective. 
This willingness to open to a broader understanding of the 
problem area and get more insight is crucial to produce 
unexpected combinations of the known. Table II shows the 
needs that are required to complete a creativity process, 
where the act of converging into a narrowed path and 
constrains are mandatory and help toward a viable solution 
of a problem or innovative result.  
Creativity in groups also needs to be addressed when 
analyzing all the attributes in Tables I and II. For example,  
social loafing in creatives groups is a common problem 
[10], and in addition another undesired effect can emerge as 
risky and creative ideas tend to not be shared as they can be 
misunderstood [10]. This tension may result in conventional 
and polite exchange of ideas, often resulting in incremental 
changes only.  
TABLE II.  
CONVERGENT THINKING 
Convergent thinking 
1 
Recognizing the familiar 
2 
Combining what  “belongs” together 
3 
Being logical 
4 
Homing in on the single best answer 
5 
Reapplying set techniques 
6 
Preserving the already known 
7 
Achieving accuracy and correctness 
8 
Playing it safe 
9 
Sticking to a narrow range of obviously relevant 
information 
10 
Making associations from adjacent fields only 
 
III. 
DESIGNERLY PERSPECTIVES ON CREATIVITY 
A framework able to enhance youth’s creativity and 
design in public spaces needs to address divergent and 
convergent thinking. Design Thinking (DT) [11], [12] may 
help find a suitable framework since both divergent and 
convergent thinking are two of the main factors in a DT 
process. The power of DT as an approach is the use of design 
methods to define more precisely the problem and, at the 
same time solve it. The elaborative forces present in a DT 
process are rapid prototyping, abductive thinking and 
empathy for the user perspectives. The result of an abductive 
thinking 
process 
is 
the 
problem-solving 
process 
aforementioned, which is based on an educated guess. In the 
DT process one uses actively the divergent thinking to bring 
inside the creative process as much insight as possible. This 
is especially necessary when one is creative in the rapid 
prototyping phase. This type of thinking is interesting in 
regards to the attributes in Table I row 6, 9 and 10, where 
knowledge is an important factor. One could derive from this 
designerly perspective that youth may gain substantial 
support if a new framework may give them access to more 
tailored knowledge. In a DT process, an emphatic relation to 
the users perspective is mandatory [13], even in Tables I and 
II this perspective is not explicitly defined. In regards to 
youth a further analysis on their emphatic behavior could 
gain better insight and define its role properly. During the 
DT process, numerous prototypes are produced, and the best 
one is chosen, based on an educated guess. This process can 
be explained as follow: the definition of the problem 
emerges simultaneously with the solution. In the convergent 
thinking process this fits with row 4 in Table II, “Homing in 
on the single best answer”. Findings in [14] supports this 
view when youth is interacting with their surroundings, are 
framing questions and producing answers and solutions: 
"Comparisons indicated that the adolescents generated 
significantly more responses to the discovered problems than 
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer -Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-61208-468-8
45

the presented problems.”.  This is in line with a DT approach 
and may give a stronger support for a designerly perspective 
on how divergent and convergent thinking are tightly linked 
with DT, and why perspectives from young people in this 
context may be relevant to look into.  
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
Skaters as a group are interesting as they interact with 
their context in various ways, always looking for new arenas 
to use and explore and a willingness to the recuperation of 
existing material [15] to construct skateboarding locations. 
The data used to analyze the framework was gathered in 
short periods of observation in vivo, throughout several 
years, using informal discussions and interviews of a group 
of five skaters living outside a large city in Scandinavia. The 
group of skaters in this case study was only male, a very 
typical composition of groups in the skating milieu. The 
boys also had a quite normal distribution of character, 
ordinary and polite youth from middle-class families. The 
observation of this group started in 2010 just at the 
beginning of their interest in the skate milieu. All five were 
around twelve years old, and had other sports activities 
beside the practice of skating. Their interest bloomed fast 
and after a short period, they were often visiting skateboard 
parks in their living area. They also used the skateboard as a 
means of transportation to the nearby school, which they 
attended. After a while, the municipality and a local sports 
organization built a large skate ramp outside the school. The 
group also used to make their own smaller ramps and used 
part of streets, sidewalk, and small stairs to train in the art of 
skating. As a reason for choosing the path into the world of 
the skaters, coolness [16] was the most prevalent. The parks 
in the surrounding area were of different type and build. 
One was of concrete inside an old plastic storage hall, 
turned communal, without any adult supervision, while 
others were more bureaucratically organized. The latter type 
of skateboard park was, of course, larger and had several 
demanding ramps, usually made of woods. The storage hall 
skating park, not far from their home, consisting of concrete 
ramps and obstacles both outside and inside the hall, was 
the preferred one by this group of youth, and when visiting, 
sharing ideas and tricks with other skaters were common. 
Skating to the nearby grocery store and eating together did 
not require great effort; neither did asking for tips and tricks, 
and the other skaters always replied positively. The social 
context and the feeling of being part of the milieu were as 
well important.  
Inventing or reinventing unusual types of games was 
also part of the skate life they adhered to, an example was  
“The skate”, where one skater of the group made a trick and 
the rest had to copy. The peculiar part was the type of tricks, 
it could be new ones, or just invented there and then. 
Another interesting point they mentioned was the dynamics 
inside the group, as they used it as a platform to socialize 
between them. A revealing observation for the author was 
the act of buying skateboards. The effort and engagement in 
the discussion about the quality of wheel, the form and 
quality of the wood board and the colorful design 
underneath, was crucial of being part of the group and a 
strong socialization force and a symbol of group expression. 
The skating interest also affected their preference regarding 
the type of games on the game console everyone had at 
home, and what kind of movie to watch on television and 
online on the YouTube platform. Observations revealed 
other interesting aspects of how they had built up a social 
context around their living. Driven by the success of 
international skaters, their plans for the future were also 
affected, and making “a world of their own”, they could 
interact with the surroundings based on its own terms and, 
as they pointed out, it allowed them to combine ideas and 
meaning from the group in a fruitful way.  
After some years, one by one, stopped being part of the 
skate group although they hung together in other contexts, 
like sport or online gaming. As a reason for dropping out, 
they explained, that after a longer period of skating, some of 
them had difficulty to catch up with the most endowed 
among them. As this article is being written also the last one 
has partially given up being a professional skater. The last 
discussion with members of the group was performed this 
year, and dealt with their participation in the skate milieu, 
how they first became interested and how, in retrospect, the 
knowledge about tricks and movement was learned among 
them.  
The focus was changed now, more in the direction of 
how they perceived what happened, what was the dynamic, 
and what they learned from their skating period. What they 
remembered and praised now was the positive socializations 
they had and the willingness to share competence and 
cooperate when working with new tricks and ideas. One 
trick question the author managed to ask them was what 
adults could learn from the skating milieu and how to 
implement this insight in real life. They explained the 
necessity of sharing the nice experiences one finds when 
being part of a group so including as the one they were part 
of. Values like openness and belonging were the ones 
mostly rewarded. In regards to implementing their wishes of 
a more inclusive community and public space, they had 
some adequate plans. Building places for youth to meet and 
share their common interest, make it easier for youth to 
participate in sporting activities and bring more people on to 
the street to make the urban space less frightening, were 
good ideas of intervention and redesign in public space.   
V. 
AN ENHANCED FRAMEWORK 
Using observations and data presented in the case study 
and additional insight from several studies of youth made by 
the author in the context of school when adapting new 
technologies and their response to coolness in the learning 
context [16]–[18], an enhanced framework for divergent and 
convergent thinking is presented. The framework defines 
possible behaviors for both the provocative and the less 
provocative youth in Tables III and IV. Each attribute may 
give relevant knowledge about what we can learn from both 
the more or less provocative youth, how to support them, 
and eventually how to transfer this creative mindset to youth 
not already engaged in creativity and design efforts in public 
spaces. Row one (Being unconventional) in Table III fits 
well when addressing youth acting outside their boundaries, 
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer -Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-61208-468-8
46

and seeing the known in new light, from row two, was 
present in the group of skaters in the case study, as they 
always were out searching and hunting for new experiences 
and  finally elaborating them into novel skating competence.  
TABLE III.  
DIVERGENT  THINKING IN YOUTH 
 
Divergent thinking 
Tendency for 
behavior among 
provocative 
youth 
Tendency for 
behavior among less 
provocative youth 
1 
Being 
unconventional 
Often in place 
Difficult  
2 
Seeing the known in 
a new light 
Often in place 
Difficult 
3 
Combining the 
disparate 
information 
Difficult 
Often in place 
4 
Producing multiple 
answers 
Possible 
Possible 
5 
Shifting perspective 
Often in place 
Difficult 
6 
Transforming the 
known 
Possible 
Possible  
7 
Seeing new 
possibilities 
Possible  
Difficult  
8 
Taking risks 
Often in place  
Difficult  
9 
Retrieving a broad 
range of existing 
knowledge 
Difficult 
Possible  
10 
Associating ideas 
from remote fields 
Difficult   
Possible  
 
For the provocative youth, row 3, 9 and 10 in Table III 
have in common a need for retrieving enough and relevant 
knowledge to accomplish a creative task and a possible 
indication that they may have problems in achieving that 
goal. Although observations from the case study show that 
the youth in the skate group often used several digital 
channels, peers and older participants of the milieu they 
belong to, to get information, the question is whether this 
effort is adequate. The area of interest, in this case skating, 
may be niche based and the attribute “Associating ideas 
from remote fields” (row 10) seems to require additional 
perspectives outside their range.  
For the less provocative youth, the attributes in row 3, 9 
and 10 may be more often in place, and a timely question 
could be if a cooperation between the less and more 
provocative youth could help the latter achieve their goal. 
Table IV, presenting attributes contributing to convergent 
thinking [9], is also interesting as the attributes seems to be 
more difficult for provocative youth to achieve, as the 
thinking phases are more close to a mature mindset. In fact, 
the final goal in schools is the concretization of the learning 
process in tests and exams, requiring primarily convergent 
thinking [19], and this paper addresses also the necessity to 
find out how youth manages to perform this form of 
thinking, as it is mandatory to accomplish creativity [9]. 
Rows 6, 9 and 10 in Table IV can be related to how the 
knowledge and the competence of a person need to converge 
and to be closely related to the problem area. Therefore this 
tension between the different tendencies the more or less 
provocative youth has, may have a specific  effect especially 
in rows 6, 9 and 10, as it seems that a cooperation between 
them has fruitful results.  
Finally, the attribute in row 8, (Playing it safe), is the 
only one with an obvious opposite value between the two 
different types of youth behavior, and have the inverse value 
in Table III (Taking risk). This attribute is quite interesting as 
it has an enormous impact, and implies that collaboration 
between youth with different behavior has to occur for 
creativity to take place. 
TABLE IV.  
CONVERGENT THINKING IN YOUTH 
Convergent thinking 
Tendency for 
behavior among 
provocative youth 
Tendency for 
behavior among 
less provocative 
youth  
1 
Recognizing the 
familiar 
Often in place 
Often in place 
2 
Combining what  
“belongs” together 
Often in place 
Often in place 
3 
Being logical 
Possible   
Possible 
4 
Homing in on the 
single best answer 
Often in place  
Often in place  
5 
Reapplying set 
techniques 
Often in place  
Often in place  
6 
Preserving the 
already known 
Difficult 
Often in place  
7 
Achieving 
accuracy and 
correctness 
Possible 
Possible 
8 
Playing it safe 
Difficult 
Possible   
9 
Sticking to a 
narrow range of 
obviously relevant 
information 
Difficult 
Possible   
10 
Making 
associations from 
adjacent fields only 
Difficult  
Possible  
 
In fact, collaboration and co-invention between youth 
with opposite provocative behavior has some testimonial 
stories in company start-ups like Apple, Google, and 
Facebook. Even today, innovative companies seems to be 
governed by a mindset rather than management rules.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION  
The introduction of the paper has pointed out several 
examples of motivation to support and enhance youth’s 
creativity and design in public spaces. As mentioned youth 
often interact with their surroundings in unpredictable ways, 
while today’s society is not prepared or willing to learn and 
absorb their inputs. One can observe youth staying and 
hanging out on the outside of stores or inside malls, or skate 
communities using concrete, wood and more to construct 
new infrastructure and reshaping the public space as a way to 
comment and address more or less functional solutions in 
urban life. Artists have also used the urban and public space 
as 
an 
arena 
to 
communicate 
their 
narrative 
and 
understandings of today’s living in visual ways (Fig. 2) [20].  
One relevant question to ask is, if the urban living of 
today is the one we need and wish for? Allowing 
interventions and creativity in the public space to be an 
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer -Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-61208-468-8
47

accepted form of communication and not a counterculture, 
seems not so easy. A current example is how easily even 
Banksy interventions in the public space have gotten 
censored when addressing the unpleasant reality of the 
European refugee politics (see Fig. 3) [21].  
 
 
Figure 2. Companie Willi Dorner, Bodies in Urban Spaces [1][20]. 
 
Exclusion is also a form of censoring, with countless of 
examples and reducing the possibility young people have to 
intervene in the public urban space, represented by an 
example from a restriction of skaters in the Metro stations in 
Oslo (see figure 4). A final example of negative intervention 
in the public space is the attempt by a cultural institution in 
the Italian city of Bologna to dismantle different graffiti 
artwork and move them into an exhibition, often without  
permissions [22].   
 
 
Figure 3. Banksy urban intervention being censored in London [21]. Photo 
from a news report by the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation [23].  
 
The group of skaters in the case study lived and 
perceived the public and social space from a creative stand. 
For them, the environment was linked to the attributes of 
divergent and convergent thinking as part of a creative effort, 
where the Design Thinking approach gives a sound 
understanding. One of the tension between the interventions 
of the skaters and creativity in the public space is the 
temporal use of the space, while this volatile attribute is 
difficult to monitor the effects of [15]. Addressing the 
different elaborative forces in Design Thinking may have 
good perspectives to give youth a framework consisting of a 
platform to cooperate on and enhance creativity, bringing 
together the physical and digital world where youth act in, 
and finally to take advantages of their willingness to make 
changes in a creative way. This way of interaction can also 
resolve the issue with the temporal use of space.  
A platform for digital interventions may be consisting of 
a group of services included in the SoMe sphere to allow 
them to meet, discuss and share, after all, the majority of 
youth has smartphones, and using those services in the 
public space should be quite normal. The platform should 
also support a bridge between the physical and digital space 
based on the Internet of Things (IoT) where light, sound, 
smell and the narrative of living in form of pictures, text and 
drawing, could act as a catalyst for interventions. In regards 
to technology, every day new tools, gadget and services are 
entering the SoMe and IoT market, and youth often tries to 
redesign them in unpredictable ways, and in unthinkable 
areas, for instance like libraries [24]. The Internet of Things 
has already opened new frontiers in regards to interaction in 
the public area, from controllable street lights in the aim of 
the sustainable city, to city art, as in the use of light drones in 
Austria [25].  
 
 
Figure 4. Restrictions in the Oslo Metro stations. Photo by Gasparini   
 
A holistic approach to both SoMe and the IoT using Design 
Thinking gives a deeper understanding of how divergent and 
convergent thinking can be fully enhanced to support 
creativity among youth wishing to be engaged in civic 
matters. The case study shows their interest in contributing, 
whilst they did not have an easy platform to use.  
However some new trend seems promising. Geo tags, 
Google street presents the public space with an augmented 
reality [26], and in this context the users has already allowed 
their own privacy be more open. The trend represents a 
willingness to share their locations. The use of Tinder, 
Facebook and others applications are examples of urban 
living connect with the digital word, and can be seen also as 
a digital layer that can be modelled and designed, and 
therefore promising for new solutions and possibility. 
The elaborative forces of Design Thinking, for instance 
rapid prototyping, may take advantages of the tension in the 
creativity act when performed by the more or less 
provocative youth. Tables III and IV show they both need 
mentoring as it seems necessary in regards to knowledge 
acquisition, and knowledge transfer between them as the 
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer -Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-61208-468-8
48

approach to gathering the correct insight is quite different. A 
platform to help them cooperate and enhance creativity 
should support a service where youth could get access to 
knowledge in an easy way. Using the possibility the Internet 
of Things and SoMe gives, the solution could function by 
using libraries, youth clubs, sports groups, schools, malls and 
more as an intersection between youth and access to 
knowledge, based on their creative mindset.     
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS  
The paper proposed the use of a designerly based 
framework to enhance youth’s creativity and design in 
public spaces, based on collaboration and co-creation across 
technology, space and grounded on their creative mindset. A 
platform where youth can share their interests and 
willingness in defining the way they want to live in the 
modern society should address how their divergent and 
convergent 
thinking 
functions. 
How 
skaters 
share 
information among them and their vision of the public space 
is an example of how young people are willing to share their 
insight and change their surroundings while the public space 
has a lack of platforms to engage them. Their willingness to 
make changes should be taken seriously and finally take the 
advantages of the impact they may have.    
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was inspired by the workshop on Youth 
Participatory Cultures: a CSCW Perspective, held as part of 
the ECSCW 2015 conference and was writen under the EU 
Creative Europe project “The People’s Smart Sculpture”, 
grant number EC-EACEA 2014-2330. Furthermore, the 
author is grateful to the skaters and their parents for 
allowing observations and interviews, and to Ivan Gasparini 
for reading and commenting. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Klanten and M. Hübner, Urban interventions : personal 
projects in public spaces. Gestalten, 2010. 
[2] W. Ellsworth-Jones, Banksy : The man behind the wall. 
London, 2012. 
[3] G. Savičić and S. Savić, Unpleasant Design. Belgrade: 
G.L.O.R.I.A, 2012. 
[4] X. Lin, J. Hu, and M. Rauterberg, “Review on Interaction 
Design for Social Context in Public Spaces,” in Cross-
Cultural Design Methods, Practice and Impact, P. L. P. Rau, 
Ed. Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 328–338. 
[5] P. C. Rodkin, T. W. Farmer, R. Pearl, and R. V. Acker, 
“They’re Cool: Social Status and Peer Group Supports for 
Aggressive Boys and Girls,” Soc. Dev., vol. 15, no. 2, May 
2006, pp. 175–204. 
[6] A. Kozbelt, R. A. Beghetto, and M. A. Runco, “Theories of 
Creativity,” in The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity, 2010, 
pp. 20–47. 
[7] M. F. Shaughnessy, “An Interview with E. Paul Torrance: 
About Creativity,” Educ. Psychol. Rev., vol. 10, no. 4, 1998, 
pp. 441–452. 
[8] P. J. Guilford, “Creativity,” Am. Psychol., vol. 5, no. 9,  
1950, pp. 444–454. 
[9] A. Cropley, “In Praise of Convergent Thinking,” Creat. Res. 
J., vol. 18, no. 3, 2006, pp. 391–404. 
[10] M. A. Runco, “Divergent thinking, Creativity, and Ideation,” 
in The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity, Cambridge 
University Press, 2010. 
[11] T. Brown, Change by design: how design thinking transforms 
organizations and inspires innovation. New York: Harper 
Business, 2009. 
[12] T. Brown, “Design Thinking,” Harward Bus. Rev., vol. 86, 
no. 6, 2008. 
[13] A. Gasparini, “Perspective and Use of Empathy in Design 
Thinking,” presented at the ACHI 2015, The Eighth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, 2015, pp. 49–54. 
[14] M. A. Runco and S. M. Okuda, “Problem discovery, 
divergent thinking, and the creative process,” J. Youth 
Adolesc., vol. 17, no. 3, 1988, pp. 211–220. 
[15] G. M. Gutiérrez, “IDENSITAT: A Hybrid Anthropology of 
Identity, Creativity, and Intervention in Public Spaces,” Am. 
Anthropol., vol. 115, no. 2, 2013, pp. 313–316. 
[16] A. Culén and A. A. Gasparini, “Situated Techno-Cools: 
factors that contribute to making technology cool in a given 
context of use,” PsychNology J., vol. 10, no. 2, 2012, pp. 
117–139. 
[17] A. L. Culen and A. Gasparini, “iPad: a new classroom 
technology? A report from two pilot studies,” in Information 
Sciences and e-Society, 2011, pp. 199–208. 
[18] A. Gasparini and A. L. Culen, “The iPad in a Classroom: A 
Cool Personal Item or Simply an Educational Tool?,” in The 
Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions, Nice, France, 2013, pp. 204–209. 
[19] M. A. Runco, “Creativity,” Annu. Rev. Psychol., vol. 55, no. 
1, 2004, pp. 657–687. 
[20] “Cie.W.Dorner 
- 
Studio 
70.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ciewdorner.at/index.php?page=start. 
[Accessed: 
27-Jan-2016]. 
[21] H. Ellis-Petersen, “Banksy’s new artwork criticises use of 
teargas in Calais refugee camp,” The Guardian, 24-Jan-2016. 
[22] M. Smargassi, “Bologna, Blu cancella tutti i suoi murales: 
‘No alla street art privatizzata,’” Repubblica.it, 12-Mar-2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://bologna.repubblica.it/cronaca/2016/03/12/news/bologn
a_graffiti-135303806/. [Accessed: 17-Mar-2016]. 
[23] “NRK.no – Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation,” NRK. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.nrk.no/. [Accessed: 27-Jan-
2016]. 
[24] W. Evans, Building Library 3.0: Issues in Creating a Culture 
of Participation. Elsevier, 2009. 
[25] “Spaxels | The Ars Electronica Quadcopter Swarm.” . 
[26] P. Oswalt, Urban catalyst : the power of temporary use. DOM 
Publ, 2013. 
  
  
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer -Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-61208-468-8
49

