Serious Games with Serious Aims
The Design and Development of a Serious Game
for Construction Based Learners
Lauren Maher
Department of Informatics
Technological University Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
Email: seriousgamesresearcher@gmail.com
Shaun Ferns, Matt Smith, Mark Keyes
Technological University Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
Email: {shaun.ferns, matt.smith, mark.keyes}@tudublin.ie
Abstract— For the purpose of this study, a serious game
prototype has been designed and is currently being developed
and tested with construction-based learners, to discover the
effectiveness of serious games as educational tools within the
industry. Serious games are commonly described as computer
and video games that are intended to entertain learners while
achieving a primary goal of education and training. Many
studies and experiments have been carried out in order to test
whether serious games have made it possible to play and learn
simultaneously. Although the effectiveness of serious games as
teaching and training tools is well established in the literature,
some gaps have been identified. These include frameworks to
transform traditional learning outcomes to game systems,
serious game adoption and data collection, their relevance for
affecting attitudinal change and the effectiveness of serious
games in the construction sector. This study explores the
effectiveness of upskilling training being delivered through the
use of serious games rather than with traditional methods. In
addition, there is a focus on the training of construction skills
and the capacity for effecting attitudinal change within the
construction industry. The research explores the opportunities
provided
by
serious
games
to
align
with
the
learning
characteristics of construction workers and to optimise the
development of resources that achieve learning objectives
effectively for this cohort.
Keywords- Serious Games; Education; Training; Low-
Energy; Construction; Data-Collection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The overarching aim of this study is to explore the
possibilities of whether upskilling training can be delivered
more successfully through the use of serious games than with
traditional methods. This research is specifically interested in
the effectiveness of using serious games for the training of
construction skills and the capacity for affecting attitudinal
change. This paper outlines the initial stages and steps taken
to
design
and
develop
the
serious
game
prototype,
additionally, it describes the preparation process of our
primary study, taking place in mid-2020.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section Ⅱ 
begins by stating the project background and motivation.
Section Ⅲ reviews current literature surrounding serious 
games and their effectiveness as educational and training
tools. Section Ⅳ illustrates the methodology and data 
collection tools, chosen and utilised, in aid of this project.
This section also demonstrates the results from the initial
game design and development session and states the current
stage of the project. Section Ⅴ prepares for the next stage, 
which aims to test the serious game prototype with
participants
from
our
target
audience.
The
potential
challenges of future studies and how we plan to overcome
these challenges are also presented within this section.
II.
PROJECT BACKGROUND
In 2012, the European Union (EU) funded Build Up
Skills Ireland (BUSI) [1] project conducted a skills-gap
analysis of the Irish construction sector in relation to the
capacity
of
the
workforce
for
delivering
low-energy
buildings. One of the most significant conclusions of the
report was an identified need for an introductory course on
the principles of low-energy buildings for all building
construction workers [2].
Build UP Skills QualiBuild (2013-2016), the follow-on
project to BUSI, developed a Foundation Energy Skills
(FES) course, with over 200 participants upskilled under a
QualiBuild national pilot [3]. The focus of this course was
knowledge of the underpinning principles of low-energy
buildings and reinforcing the message of a need for a
collaborative effort from all involved in the building
construction process towards the achievement of quality
standards. The FES programme focused on a pedagogical
approach that would best address the identified knowledge
gaps and need for attitudinal change amongst construction
workers, which also considers the challenges, such as cost,
equipment, space and time restrictions.
For the specific challenges of QualiBuild FES training, in
upskilling an entire workforce, utilising serious games
alongside
traditional
delivery
methods
offers
greater
flexibility of time and place. The potential contribution of
serious games in construction skills training has not been
explored in an Irish context to date. This study explores this
potential for QualiBuild training and beyond.
III.
REVIEW OF SERIOUS GAMES
Serious games include mixed media/reality and virtual
environments created to meet user needs, through an
interactive and engaging environment [4]. The significance
of serious games has increased rapidly in recent years, with
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

an inclination of technological aptitude, from people of all
ages [4]. In any instance, when a video game purpose is
learning rather than entertainment, it is typically referred to
as digital game-based learning or serious games [2]. Serious
games have become a growing market in the video games
industry [4] as well as a field of academic research [5]. The
serious games industry is constantly evolving to tailor user
needs and is currently a multi-billion-dollar market [6],
which uses video games, simulations, extended reality
environments, and mixed reality/media as training and
educational tools for a variety of industries such as military,
healthcare, and aviation [7]. In response to the recent desire
for serious games to be implemented as a new training and
learning tool [8], we need to further understand the ability,
advantages, and disadvantages of using serious games as an
aid to learning. The aim of serious games being used as a
teaching and training tool is not to replace classroom
teaching, but to add an alternative option to help learners
understand a subject in new ways [9]. Recent studies have
shown that many students prefer to learn by doing, rather
than listening and trying to take in information traditionally.
One study published shows that “though students felt as if
they learned more through traditional lectures, they actually
learned more when taking part in classrooms that employed
active-learning strategies” [8]. It has been demonstrated that
serious games can simulate a variety of working conditions
and
scenarios
while
avoiding
potentially
dangerous
situations and costly field training [10].
Recently, serious games have been compared and
evaluated against written texts, regarding their ability to
convey knowledge [9]. A primary advantage of serious
games when compared to written texts is that serious games
illustrate a virtual world that visualizes the subject matter
and uses real-life situations in a learning environment.
These components help the user to learn, remember and
understand [10]. Serious games may enable students to
bridge the gap between theory and practice. However, they
are not without their concerns. Teachers can make learning
engaging and interactive for the learner, but textbooks and
printouts
cannot
[8].
Additionally,
few
studies
have
identified the negative aspects of utilising serious games,
stating that exposure to high fidelity entertainment video
games leads users to prefer serious games to be as visually
realistic as possible [11]. As a result, when entertainment
video game users hear the term “game”, it could create
unrealistic expectations in the learners [12], resulting in
negativity during gameplay. Serious games often refer to the
use of game design approaches when designing and
developing
a
game
[13].
Examples
of
this
include
incorporating a rewards system into the game to improve
player motivation and enjoyment.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
Our methodology has two
goals: 1) to ease the
comparison of serious games versus traditional learning
methods and 2) to provide a systematic way to assess the
effectiveness of using serious games as a teaching and
learning tool. To achieve these goals, our approach covers
the complete process of creating a serious game (Figure 1).
The target audience for this project is construction-based
learners. Their age, gender, and experience within the
industry are not necessarily contributing factors, as low-
energy
building
training
must
be
delivered
to
all
construction workers regardless of these demographics.
However, it should be noted that a large number of the
construction worker demographics in Ireland are males,
with an average age of 42 [14], therefore, our primary target
audience is made up of males, aged 35-50. Our secondary
target audience is construction-based learners of any age.
This study applies a dual methodology process. One of the
primary
methodologies
chosen
for
the
design
and
development of this project was an iterative design process.
Iterative design is an adaptive process, whereby designers
move through multiple cycles of conceiving an idea, creating
a prototype that embodies the idea, running playtests with the
prototype to see the idea in action and then evaluating the
results. Based on those results, changes and refinements are
made. The game is currently nearing the end of the Create
Prototype Stage (Stage 3, Figure 1) and, in the coming
weeks, will enter the first round of testing. Whilst developing
the game, individual playtests are being carried out regularly,
with participants of the same demographic as the target
audience. Individual playtests provide initial data collection
regarding the functionality of the game mechanics, to allow
for refinement before the official playtest session takes place
with the group of construction-based learners.
Figure 1. Iterative Design Process for Serious Game.
The second methodology chosen for the design and
development of this project is a case study methodology. A
case study was selected to determine the effectiveness, of
using serious games to teach low-energy building principles
and influence attitudinal change. At the end of the final
playtest session, a set of two questionnaires will be presented
to the participants. One questionnaire will focus on player
demographics and personal details such as age, experience in
the industry and experience with video games. The second
questionnaire will gauge their knowledge and attitudes,
related
to
the
construction
industry
before
and
after
gameplay. This method will allow the researcher to discover
the success and failures of using serious games to teach
construction-based learners low-energy building principles
and allows comparison with current teaching and training
methods.
The project in its entirety requires 3 sessions with our
target
audience.
The
initial
fact-finding
session,
also
referred to as Stage 1 (Figure 1), is used to determine the
characteristics required for the game. Two additional
playtest sessions will take place after game development.
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

These sessions will be used to assess the functionality and
usability of the game and later will be used to test the
success and failures of using serious games to teach low-
energy building principles and their potential influence on
attitudinal change within the industry.
Future studies in aid of this project, will test and evaluate
the serious game with our target audience, to gather data
regarding the effectiveness of using serious games to teach
low-energy building principles and the potential impact of
player attitudes. The playtest session, scheduled to take
place towards the end of the project, will be evaluated by
splitting the participant group in half. One half of the testing
group will learn low-energy building principles using
traditional methods, such as reading texts and attending a
lecture. The other half of the participants will play the
serious game with no additional help. This will enable the
researcher to discover the possibilities of teaching low-
energy building principles,
using serious games over
traditional methods. Both learning methods will be utilised,
to try to deliver the same knowledge to all participants.
Afterward, based on the data collected from the in-game
data collection application and via questionnaires completed
by the participants. User attitudes and knowledge obtained
through the game can be measured and compared to prior
knowledge and attitudes related to the construction industry.
The use of mixed-methods for the study will include,
secondary analysis of existing literature and data and
collection of primary quantitative and qualitative data.
Proposed data collection tools to be used in aid of this study,
are game testing sessions, an in-game data collection
application, and participant questionnaires. The in-game data
collection application tracks player data such as: how long
the
user
spends
in
each
level,
interactions
between
characters, when a ‘help’ button is clicked and when a task is
completed. Participants will be tested within the game in a
variety of ways, these include, through decisions made by
the user during gameplay, by having the player work
through various scenarios within the game and through
measuring player motivation and their desire to continue
with the serious game. These methods of data collection
have been chosen above others, as they are commonly used
in game design and development. Previous studies, which
have employed these tools have returned valuable results
concerning serious game development and evaluation [8]
[12]. These data collection tools, provide an opportunity to
evaluate player responses in regards to the serious game. The
use of these tools will ensure the game design and
functionality meets the needs of the end-user and allows the
research question to be answered.
A.
Stage 1 – Brainstorm Session
An initial prototype design and development session,
(‘brainstorming’) has been used as a way to connect with the
target audience and discover their needs and wants regarding
the serious game. The prototype design and development
session took place, with a group of 8 male construction-
based
lecturers,
aged
35-45.
The
participants
have
experience working and teaching in the area of low-energy
buildings
and
have
contributed
to
the
FES
Learners
Handbook.
Their
involvement
within
the
construction
industry
greatly
influenced
the
decision
of
what
characteristics
the
game
should
include.
Initially,
questionnaires
were
distributed
and
data
collected
highlighted a clear vision of the type of interaction to be
included within the game, which topics would benefit from a
more hands on approach and what type of graphics
(realistic/cartoon) would appeal. Through this interaction, the
following results were collected:
1)
The
common
areas,
concepts,
and
skills
that
construction workers struggle most with are as follows:
continuity of insulation, the effects of badly installed
insulation,
thermal
bridging,
effective
airtightness
and
systems thinking (Figure 2).
2) Topics identified concerned Unit 3 of the QualiBuild
Foundation Energy Skills Training Handbook (building
fabric, air-tightness, and wind-tightness) (Figure 2).
3) It was decided a realistic narrative-based game would
best suit our desired learning objectives. Through creating a
narrative style serious game, the user can decide on the
character they wish to be and can interact with the other
characters within the game to give them a sense of
perspective and empathy.
Figure 2. Results of Brainstorm Questionnaire
B.
Stage 2 – Create Components
Through the collection of data, regarding areas that
construction workers struggle with, it was made possible to
determine the required learning outcomes for the serious
game and to begin game design and development. Many
elements within the game, were developed of which employ
a multimodal approach to the presentation of course material,
i.e., a combination of text, visuals, video, 2D drawings, and
narration. A multimodal approach has been chosen as it
creates a dynamic learning experience for the students. A
multimodal approach was designed to help each student to
achieve academic success in their way. Software and
technologies were taken into consideration before the
development of the game to ensure that it would be easily
accessible and readily available for educational practitioners
to continue using and adopting in the future.
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C.
Stage 3 – Create Prototype
Based on the data collected, the serious game prototype
has been designed and is currently under development. The
current game prototype allows the user to switch back and
forth between first and third-person views and to interact and
engage with different elements throughout the game (Figures
3 and 4). Examples of this include navigating and interacting
with the 3D environment, entering the home, locating
various
documents
and
other
interactive
objects
and
engaging with family members within the home. The
prototype allows the user to observe and interact with the
learning objectives specified in section three of the FES
Learners Handbook. The game enables the player to have
interactive dialogues with other characters/ family members
in the house, track user actions, allows the user to view the
current score, hide and reveal window components such as
walls, insulation, and cavities and locate problems from the
pop-up checklist. It provides the user with an option to
request help at any time by clicking on the ‘help’ button
when clicked on, a pop-up builder appears to assist by filling
in the knowledge gap required to continue with the game.
...
Figure 3. Gameplay First Person View
Figure 4. Gameplay Third Person View
V.
FUTURE CHALLENGES
Stage four of the iterative design process for this project
(Figure 1) will be held to collect and analyse data regarding
the usability and functionality of the game. Using this data
the game mechanics can be evaluated (Stage 5, Figure 1) and
re-defined depending on the user experience and feedback.
The next stage involves assessing future challenges, which
may occur during the testing stage of this study. Potential
challenges for future studies include time management, to
ensure the game has been adequately tested and is ready for
the future study/ playtest with the target audience. Another
potential challenge is incentivizing participation, there is a
known obstacle of finding enough construction student
participants to warrant a sound, evidence-based research
project. A final, potential challenge is the experience and
emotional responses, of participants using entertainment
video games. If the participants are frequent video game
users, they may find the game uninteresting compared to
entertainment video games. However, if the user has no
prior video game experience, it might prove difficult for
them to grasp navigating and playing at first instance. This
challenge has been anticipated by the developer and
therefore a ‘walk through’ level at the beginning of the
game has been incorporated, to help the user to navigate
through the game and use command keys in an easy, non-
treating environment.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, it has been shown in the literature that the
significance
of
using
serious
games
as
training
and
educational tools has increased rapidly in recent years.
Through
reviewing
current literature regarding
serious
games
in
different
learning
contexts,
their
potential
effectiveness and how they are designed and developed, it is
clear that serious games for teaching and educating are a
valued pedagogical method. However, in order to implement
game-based learning as a successful training and learning
tool, there is a need to further understand the opportunities
and
constraints.
Gaps
within
the
literature
include
frameworks to transform traditional learning outcomes to
game systems and data collection regarding the effectiveness
of serious games in the construction sector and their
relevance for effecting attitudinal change.
A serious game prototype has been designed and is
currently being developed and tested using an iterative
design process. An initial prototype design and development
session has taken place and data collected throughout this
session has been evaluated and analysed to discover the
needs and wants, regarding the serious game design. Prior
involvement of the brainstorm participants, within the
construction industry, greatly influenced the decision of
which characteristics should be included within the game.
Through data collected via questionnaires, it was evident
which interaction types are needed within the game. These
characteristics include a narrative, a family living in the
home, intractable characters and issues that need resolving.
Results from this session also included, which topics would
benefit from a more hands approach and what type of
graphics would appeal.
The next stage of this project is to complete the working
prototype and begin testing with a group of construction-
based students to successfully discover the effectiveness of
using serious games to teach construction workers low-
energy building principles and their capacity for effecting
attitudinal change within the industry.
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

REFERENCES
[1]
Build Up Skills Ireland “Analysis of the National Status
Quo”.
IEE/11/BWI/460/S12-604350,
available
from:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/intelligent/projects/sites/iee-
projects/files/projects/documents/build_up_skills_ie_status_q
uo_analysis_en.pdf, 2012
[2]
A. D. Coster, “Final Report on the Assessment of the BUILD
UP
Skills
Pillar
II”,
Brussels:
European
Commission
Available
from:
https://www.buildup.eu/sites/default/files/content/bus-
d4.4finareport_on_assessment_april_2018_0.pdf, 2015.
[3]
M.
Keyes
and
S.
Walsh,
“Foundation
Energy
Skills
Evaluation Report,” QualiBuild, Retrieved Febuary 2020
from:http://www.qualibuild.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/D3.3-QualiBuild-FES-Pilot-
Evaluation-Report-Final_PU.pdf , 2016.
[4]
J. Alvarez, J. Jessel and O. Rampnoux 'Origins of Serious
Games' In Serious Games and Edutainment Applications,
Springer London, 2011.
[5]
U. Ritterfeld and R. Weber, “Video games for entertainment
and education”. In P. Vorderer, & J. Bryant (Eds.), Playing
video games: Motives, responses and consequences, pp. 399-
413, 2006.
[6]
B.P. Bergeron, ‘Developing Serious Games’ Hingham, MA:
Charles River Media; 2006.
[7]
A. De Gloria, F. Bellotti and R. Berta, “Serious Games for
education and training,” International Journal of Serious
Games, 2014.
[8]
L. Deslauriers, L.S McCarty, K. Miller, K, Callaghan and G.
Kestin,
'Measuring Actual
Learning Versus Feeling of
Learning in Response to being Actively Engaged in the
Classroom'.
Proceedings
of
the
National
Academy
of
Sciences of the United States of America, 2019.
[9]
S. deFreitas and F. Liarokapis, “Serious Games: A New
Paradigm
for
Education?”,
in
Serious
Games
and
Edutainment, Springer London, 2011.
[10] A. De Gloria, F. Bellotti and R. Berta, 'Serious Games for
Education and Training'. International Journal of Serious
Games, Vol. 1, 2014 .
[11] R. Hunicke, M. LeBlanc and R. Zubek “MDA: A Formal
Approach to Game Design and Game Research”, AAAI
Workshop, Technical Report. 1, 2004.
[12] I. Roslina, and J. Azizah, Educational Games (EG) Design
Framework: Combination of Game Design, Pedagogy and
Content
Modeling.
2009
International
Conference
on
Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Selangor, Malaysia.
2009.
[13] R.E. Ferdig, 'The Design, Play and Experience Framework' In
Handbook of Research on Effective Electronic Gaming in
Education, Anonymous : IGI Global, pp.1010-1024, 2008.
[14] T. Conefrey and T. McIndoe-Calder “Where are Ireland's
Construction Workers?” Quarterly Bulletin, Central Bank of
Ireland
Ireland,
Available
from:
https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-
source/publications/quarterly-bulletins/quarterly-bulletin-
signed-articles/where-are-ireland-s-construction-workers-
(conefrey-and-mcindoe-calder).pdf?sfvrsn=4, 2018.
[15] M. Keyes, S. Ferns, R. Hickey, R. Ryan, J. Cussen, and D.
Hynes, QualiBuild Train the Trainer: Lessons Learned from
the Development of a Program for Training Trainers of
Construction
Workers
in
Ireland.
Higher
Education
in
Transformation Symposium, Oshawa, Ontario, Canada, 2016.
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

