Persona Usage in Software Development: Advantages and Obstacles 
Jane Billestrup, Jan Stage 
Research Centre for Socio-Interactive Design
Department of Computer Science
Aalborg University, Denmark
{jane, jans}@cs.aau.dk
Lene Nielsen, Kira S. Hansen
Center for Personas Research & -Application
Games & Interaction Design
IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark
{lene,kist}@itu.dk
Abstract—The  Personas  technique  has  been  promoted  as  a 
strong  tool  for  providing  software  developers  with  a  better 
understanding of the prospective users of their software. This 
paper reports from a questionnaire survey regarding knowledge 
about  Personas and  their  usage  in  software  development 
companies. The questionnaire survey was conducted in a limited 
geographical  area  to  establish  the  extent  of  Personas  usage  
within  all  companies  in  the  chosen  region  and  determine 
whether software development companies used Personas during 
the  development  process.  Several  issues  were  identified  as 
reasons for either not using the technique or for poor application 
of it. The study showed that 55% of the respondents had never 
heard about Personas. Among those who had heard about the 
Personas technique, the following obstacles towards usage of the 
technique were identified: Lack of knowledge of the technique, 
lack of resources (time and funding), Sparse descriptions – when 
applied and Personas not being integrated in the development.
Keywords—Personas,  software  development,  questionnaire 
survey, grounded theory 
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
The common understanding of the Personas  technique 
is, that a Persona is a description of a fictitious person [6, 
21] based on data. The main way to represent a Persona is 
as a text describing the fictional user and a photo depicting 
the fictional user. 
Looking at the related work four issues stand out: 1) it is 
reported  that  software  developers  lack  knowledge  and 
understanding of their users, their work, and goals [1], [3] 2) 
the Personas technique has been promoted as a strong tool 
for  providing  the  software  developers  with  a  better 
understanding of the potential users [7] 3) several papers 
conclude that the use of Personas has been a success [10], 
[12]  4)  the  Personas  technique is  not  necessarily  an 
incorporated part of the toolbox in the software development 
industry [15] and the industry might have problems using 
Personas [2]. Our study will be related to these four issues in 
the discussion.
The literature provides several examples about what will 
happen if the Persona technique are used to its full potential. 
However, there are still unanswered questions about what it 
means if developers are not using Personas to represent their 
user  groups.  Could this lead  to:  1) software  developers 
being  unfamiliar  with  the  user  groups'  actual  needs  2) 
software without relevant features 3) less profit than if the 
software was developed to its full potential. Unfortunately, 
the literature does not provide much information about these 
speculations.  Other  aspects  of  Persona  usage  are  also 
unexplored as so are  whether other techniques are used 
instead of Personas. 
The purpose of this paper is to explore to what extent 
software development companies use Personas and whether 
the industry uses the technique as proposed in the literature. 
The  paper  reports  from  a  study  in a  defined  region  in 
Denmark and is part of a larger study on how the Personas 
technique is  applied  by software  developing  companies. 
This paper reports if companies in this defined region have 
had success using Personas and incorporating the technique 
as  a  part  of  their  development  toolbox.  The  greatest 
advantage of using one defined region is that it is possible to 
establish contact with all companies located in the region, 
which  gives  a  more  complete  picture  than  picking  out 
companies located in several regions or countries.  
The following section presents a more detailed description 
of the work related to this study. It describes how Personas 
are constructed and used, including the pitfalls to avoid. 
Section 3 presents the methods used for data collection, 
which consisted of an online questionnaire with both open 
and closed questions. Grounded theory and coding were used 
for analysing the qualitative content of the questionnaire. 
Section 4 presents the results from the questionnaire. Section 
5 provides a discussion of the results in a broader context. 
Finally, section 6 provides the conclusion. 
II.
 RELATED WORK 
The literature offers four different perspectives regarding 
Personas  [18]:  1)  Cooper’s  goal-directed  perspective  2) 
Grudin, Pruitt and Adlin’s role-based perspective 3) The 
engaging perspective, which emphasises how the story can 
engage the reader. These three perspectives agree that the 
Persona descriptions should be founded on data. However, 4) 
the fiction-based perspective, does not include data as a basis 
for  Persona  description,  but  creates  Personas  from  the 
designers’ intuition and assumptions. Even though the 
359
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Personas technique has been around for more than a 
decade, when comparing the four perspectives, it is still 
unclear what and how much background material is required 
to create Personas [17]. The common perceived benefits of 
Personas  are  two-fold:  1)  when  designing  products  the 
technique facilitates that designers remember that they differ 
from the end-users and 2) the technique enables designers to 
envision the end-user’s needs and wants. Furthermore, in 
the design process the Personas increase the focus on users 
and  their  needs.  The  technique  is  an  effective 
communication tool, which uses the Persona description to 
acquire direct design influence and lead to better design 
decisions and definition of the product’s feature set [6], [7], 
[12], [13], [14], [16], [21]. 
Problems  have  been  reported  regarding  creation  and 
distribution  of  the  developed  Personas  [2],  [22].  The 
descriptions have been perceived as unreliable and not well 
communicated.  Also  developers  lacked  understanding  of 
how to use the Personas [2], [21], [22]. The technique itself 
is criticised for being too founded on qualitative data and as 
a consequence of that - being non-scientific, being difficult 
to implement, not being able to describe actual people as it 
only portrays characteristics, and for preventing designers 
from  meeting  actual  users  [1].  Moreover,  the  unsolved 
question about how many users one Persona can represent is 
perceived as problematic [5].
Some have tried to prevent poor use of the Personas 
technique, e.g. Faily and Flechais [11] describes regularly 
sending  information  about  the  Personas  to  the  team,  to 
ensure  that  the  designers  and  developers  consider  the 
Personas in the design process. They s suggested that the 
creators should hand over instructions and provide tools that 
support the developers’ usage [11]. Problems in application 
are  reported  as  also  incorporating  the  mindset  of  the 
developers, which is documented by both Blomquist and 
Arvola [2] and Pruitt and Adlin [21]. 
In line with this, Matthews et al. [15] focussed mainly 
on designers and user experience professionals who had 
some training in Personas creation and had done extensive 
work with Personas used them as described by others  [6], 
[21]. These designers had a very positive attitude towards 
the technique. Those who had done minor use of Personas 
had a moderate or neutral opinion regarding Personas, and 
those  who  had  not  worked  with  Personas  at  all  had  a 
negative or indifferent opinion regarding the technique. 
III.
 METHOD 
In order to study the usage of Personas we conducted a 
questionnaire  study  in  60  companies  in  a  limited 
geographical area.  We chose to focus on a well-defined 
geographical area in order to allow us to do as complete a 
survey  with  as  many  companies  as  possible.  We  made 
considerable efforts to identify and contact all companies in 
the area. Had we chosen a larger area, the selection of 
companies would be more random.  The aim of the study 
was to identify the level of knowledge about the Personas 
technique in a large proportion of the software companies in 
that area.
A.
Participants
We focused on companies that were developing software, 
either  for  internal  or  external  use.  We  ended  up  with 
software companies with the following characteristics:
The company develops software with a graphical  user 
interface (e.g., mobile phones, games, web applications, PC 
or  PDA  software).  The  company  develops  software  for 
customers or for internal use and is geographically located 
within a limited geographical area. The company employs 
more than a single person and it is not a hobby company. 
To  obtain  a  list  with  as  many  software  development 
companies  as  possible  we  acquired  two lists  containing 
software companies located in the chosen region. These lists 
were from a previous study of companies and an industry 
network. This was followed by a search on Linked-In to 
include companies that  only had a smaller  development 
department in the region and had their headquarters located 
either  in another  region  or in another  country. Table 1 
shows the process of obtaining the total amount of 134 
software companies in the region, which was within the 
scope of this study. 
TABLE I: OBTAINING A LIST OF RELEVANT COMPANIES
Companies 
Lists to find the 
companies
Total 
number of 
companies 
on list
Out of scope or 
gone out of 
business
Applicable 
companies
List 1
77
-35
42
List 2
139
-63
76
Linked-in
16
0
16
Total number of 
applicable 
companies
134
B.
Data Collection
We  created  an  online  questionnaire  using  the  tool 
SurveyXact [26]. The first part of the questionnaire was 
made to gain more information about the respondent and his 
or her place of employment (e.g. job function, business, 
number of employees in the company and line of business, 
within  software  development).  The  second  part  was 
designed to acquire knowledge of if respondents knew what 
a Persona was and what it was used for. The third part was 
about the use of Personas in the companies. This part was 
only filled out by the people who answered that they knew 
of, and worked with, Personas. The questionnaire consisted 
of 35 questions, but only respondents who knew of- and 
360
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

who is working with Personas in their current employment 
got to answer all 35 questions. The questionnaire consisted 
of both open and closed questions. 
The distribution of the questionnaire was done in two 
ways. First, 43 companies in which we had a known contact 
person was contacted by phone. Then the remaining 91 of 
the  134  companies  were  contacted  to  acquire  a  contact 
person. This ended in 112 emails being sent out with a link 
to the questionnaire. Of the 22 companies that we did not 
send an email, eight had declined to participate and for the 
rest we could not locate a viable phone number or email 
address. The recipients were given three weeks to fill out 
the  questionnaire  survey.  The  data  collection  process 
resulted in 69 responses in total or a response rate of 51.5%. 
Of the 69 respondents nine did not finish the questionnaire, 
leaving us with 60 completed responses. 
C.
Data Analysis
Grounded  Theory  was  chosen  as  analysis  method 
because of its ability to help building theory, meaning that 
we could focus on keeping an open mind during the data 
collection process.. 
The aim of grounded theory is described as “building 
theory, not testing theory” [20]. This means that theory 
should emerge while the analysis takes place and should not 
be used to prove an already existing theory. Data analysis 
was conducted continuously while the questionnaire was 
still open for submissions, as described by Urquhart [24]. 
When the questionnaire was closed, the data was updated 
with the results from the latest incoming questionnaires. In 
the questionnaire we used both open and closed questions. 
To  quantify  the  open  questions,  the  grounded  theory 
approach, as described by Corbin and Strauss [8], Urquhart 
[24]  and  Urquhart  et  al. [25],  was  used  as  an  analysis 
method. All responses to closed questions was analysed 
quantitatively.  
1)
Open Questions
Coding was used to analyse the open questions. One 
question was: “How would you explain what a Persona is 
and how it is used?”. For this question the following coding 
categories were assigned: technique (for creating Personas), 
finding target user group, when in the process the Personas 
are used and how they are used. Grounded theory coding 
was not used for other open questions since the respondents 
mainly answered in very short sentences and they were sent 
directly to the end of the questionnaire when they answered 
“No”.  E.g.  “Have  you  ever  heard  about  Personas?”  or 
“Have you ever worked with Personas?” meaning that the 
number of respondents dropped for every question. As it 
makes no sense to ask a respondent about their knowledge 
about the use of Personas if they have already indicated they 
have never heard about Personas. 
2)
Closed Questions
Statistics was conducted directly from the closed questions. 
Results from  both open  and  closed  questions are  being 
described in the following section. 
IV.
 RESULTS 
This section presents the results. The section is divided 
into  two  sub-sections.  Knowledge  about  the  Personas 
technique is referring to the first part of the questionnaire. 
This subsection reports if the Personas technique has been 
adopted  by  the  software  developing  companies  in  the 
defined region. The second subsection The understanding of 
Personas and their use is dividing the obstacles of Personas 
usage into four main areas.
A.
Knowledge about the Personas technique
The results of the questionnaire indicate that 27 out of 60 
respondents, or 45%, have heard about Personas. Fifteen 
respondents out of 60 have worked with Personas. Seven 
respondents out of 60 are using Personas as a development 
tool  in  their  current  job.  Meaning  that  11.5%  of  the 
responding companies are  currently using Personas as a 
development tool and 55% of the respondents have never 
heard about the technique. The distribution across different 
sizes of companies is shown in Table 2. In this table the 
dispersion  across  company  size  and  the  number  of 
respondents familiar with Personas.
TABLE II: DISTRIBUTION ACROSS COMPANIES' SIZE
Number of employees 
Number of companies 
1-10
11-50
51-
200
>200
Total
Using Personas
 1 
3
1
2
7
Not using Personas
23
16
8
6
53
Total 
24
19
9
8
60
In Table 3 the 53 responding companies that do not use 
Personas have been grouped. It shows that 33 respondents 
have never heard about Personas. Three of the organisations 
did use Personas at some point but stopped.
TABLE III: RESPONDENTS' KNOWLEDGE ABOUT Personas – 
FROM COMPANIES THAT DOES NOT USE THEM.
Number of employees 
Knowledge about  Personas
1-10 11-
50
51-
200
>200
Total
Never heard about Personas
18
7
6
2
33
Have used Personas, but 
stopped
2
1
0
0
3
Heard about Personas, but 
don't use them
4
5
2
2
13
Worked with Personas in other 
employment or while studying
1
2
0
1
4
Total 
25
15
8
5
53
361
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

One respondent stated they used Personas in a project 
where they collaborated with a group of university students, 
but did not find the Personas  technique useful for other 
projects.  The  other  two  respondents  stated  that  their 
respective companies stopped using Personas because they 
did not find the developed Personas applicable in their line 
of development. 13 respondents stated they had heard about 
the Personas technique but had never worked with creating 
Personas themselves and four respondents had worked with 
creating  Personas  in  an  earlier  employment  or  while 
studying. 
B.
Understanding of Personas and their use
An  open  question  in  the  questionnaire  was  applied 
coding  to  reveal  all  the  participating  companies' 
understanding of the term “Persona”. “Personas being an 
imaginary user”, were expressed by 22 respondents. e.g. “a 
fictitious user of the system you are developing”. “Personas 
are used as a validation of the design”, were expressed by 
17 respondents. e.g. “making sure user needs are met by a 
given design”.  
A  Persona  “being  a  representation  of  a  larger  user 
segment”  was  expressed  by  13  respondents,  e.g. 
“description of a set  of  characteristics characterizing a 
certain group of users' behavioural patterns”. And Personas 
“being a tool for making sure to keep the users and their 
needs in mind all the way through the development process” 
were recognised by four respondents. e.g. “...the Personas 
are used as focus points for planning the entire product life  
cycle”. This means that Personas by far are recognised as 
fictionalised  users  used as  a tool  for designing features 
requested by users and user segments. On the other hand no 
more than four respondents expressed that Personas should 
be used through the entire development cycle. This means 
that the common idea seems to be that Personas are mainly a 
tool for identifying some aspects of the user group and not 
so much a tool to be used during the entire development 
process.  
1)
Lack of Knowledge (of the technique)
Lack of knowledge about the Personas technique seems 
to be a major obstacle regarding usage of Personas as shown 
in table 3. The analysis showed that 55% of the respondents 
had never heard about the concept or  technique. Of the 
respondents who had never heard about Personas, 10 people 
were CEOs, owners or partners (primarily in micro- or small 
sized  companies),  five  were  managers  in  IT  and  three 
worked  as  sales  managers  (all  three  in  medium  sized 
companies). In table 4 the respondents job titles has been 
divided into smaller groups based on whether the company 
is currently working with Personas, or not. 
 This indicate that the chance of allocating resources to 
Personas  development  might  be  slim.  One  respondent 
indicated that the company did not recognise the importance 
for any communicative tools. “The company has downsized 
and has eliminated the communications position since it is 
primarily  a  production  company  and  they  don't  really 
understand the importance of e.g. Personas, ambassadors, 
first  movers,  e.g.  or communication in general  for that 
matter”. This means that in these companies the knowledge 
about  the  Personas  technique will  not  come  from 
management, and even if employees bring the knowledge 
about Personas into the companies funding will probably 
not be allocated. On the other hand as seen in table 4, in the 
seven  companies  currently  working  with  Personas  four 
respondents was CEO, CTO or owner. 
TABLE IV: DISTRIBUTION OF JOB TITLES OF RESPONDENTS
Job function of 
respondents
Not working with 
Personas in 
current 
employment
Company 
currently working 
with Personas 
CEO, CTO, Owner
12
4
System Developer / 
Consultant
11
1
Project / Product / Sales
Manager
16
0
Business architect / 
Communication and PR
8
0
UX / Web 
Designer / Manager
6
2
Total
53
7
2)
Lack of Resources (time and funding)
The analysis found that Personas are mainly created if a 
need has been localised for a specific project and “cutting a 
corner” when using Personas seems to be the general idea. 
Some only use Personas to the point  that  they think it 
creates value for the customer and thereby, profit for the 
company.  Also,  when  asked  in  the  survey  how  much 
resources were allocated to develop Personas, the general 
answer was zero. 
3)
Sparse descriptions
When a Persona is created too superficially the Persona 
will lack the depth that would normally be the strength of 
the  technique,  making  the  Personas  untrustworthy  and 
unusable. This contradicts with what helps making Personas 
useful tools that lead to better design decisions [6], [13], 
[14], [16], [21]. When a Persona is created with much detail 
and described as a whole character, and not a stereotype, it 
will support the design and innovation process. 
One respondent indicated difficulty in finding a suitable 
template for the descriptions and that they wanted to create 
short descriptions instead of detailed character descriptions. 
“It is hard to find good templates for constructing Personas. 
We ended up with a few lines in bullets describing each  
Persona, which could be used as a fast reference. Instead of 
a large scheme describing lots of details nobody wanted to 
read anyway”. This corresponds with the descriptions of 
362
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Personas by some respondents answering the questionnaire. 
These descriptions  were  quite  superficial  and  did  not 
describe individual Personas but mainly a job role  and a use 
situation. 
4)
Not integrated in the development
This ties-in with the finding of lacking resources. The 
superficial Personas are created to be used in the design 
process. The descriptions are not meant to be used in any 
other stages of the design process. Furthermore, they are not 
used to keep reminding neither developers nor designers 
about the end-user’s and their needs. This means that the 
potential of the Personas technique is not explored. 
C.
Advantages of using Personas
The respondents currently using Personas described why 
their companies are using Personas as follows: “to support 
the development  of a system that is easy to use for types of  
user...It is very important for us that the system will be very  
easy to use, which is why a mapping of the various user 
groups  is  important”.
 Another  respondent  stated: 
“Internally  in  the  company  Personas  are  used  to 
communicate characteristics of the customer segments that 
we want to focus on especially.  Yet another respondent 
stated that Personas are primarily used for “optimizing the 
product”.
 These  advantages  corresponds  with  the 
advantages identified in the related work section. 
V.
 DISCUSSION 
Next, the results will be discussed in relation to the four 
issues located in the related work: 1) software developers 
lack knowledge and understanding of their users, their work, 
and  goals  [1],  [3]  2)  the  Personas  technique  has  been 
promoted  as  a  strong  tool  for  providing  the  software 
developers with a better understanding of the potential users 
[7] 3) several papers conclude that the use of Personas has 
been a success [10], [12] 4) the Personas technique is not 
necessarily  an  incorporated  part  of  the  toolbox  in  the 
software development industry [15] and the industry might 
have problems using Personas [2].
A.
Lack of knowledge and understanding of the users
Software developers lack knowledge and understanding 
of their users, e.g. their work and goals [1], [3]. Among our 
findings was poor application of the technique. This relates 
perfectly  to  the  first  point  about  developers  lacking 
knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  users,  since  the 
Personas' descriptions, if applied, are made sparse and only 
used  in  a  very  narrow  time  frame  of  the  development 
process. One of our findings was that the development of 
the  Personas  lacked  resources,  since  none  of  our 
respondents  had  a  budget  allocated  specifically  for  the 
Personas development. This goes against the related work 
stating that Personas can lead to better design decisions [6], 
[12], [13], [14], [16], [21]. 
B.
Personas can help developers understand users
The Personas technique has been promoted as a strong 
tool  for  providing  software  developers  with  a  better 
understanding of the potential users [7]. In our questionnaire 
and the section in this paper describing the advantages of 
using Personas, it was indicated that the most useful thing 
when using the Personas technique was that Personas helped 
the team share a specific and consistent understanding of 
several, different user groups. Which can lead to another 
advantage of product optimization. 
C.
Personas used as a successful tool
Several papers conclude the use of Personas has been a 
success [10], [12]. This corresponds with the experiences of 
our  respondents  who  are  using  Personas.  The  tool  is 
described as useful to help developers understand the users 
and their needs, especially if the system needs to be usable 
for several different types of end users. Some respondents 
that  are  using  Personas  identified  mos  challenges  for 
creating Personas. e.g. “it can be hard to find templates for 
creating Personas.” another respondent stated that “it is a 
challenge  to  map  all  user  groups  without  asking  all 
costumers”.  These  obstacles  has  to  be  solved  before 
Personas can be applied as a useful tool.  
D.
Personas are not incorporated in the industry
The  Personas
 technique 
is  not  necessarily  an 
incorporated  part  of  the  toolbox  in  the  software 
development industry and the industry might have problems 
using Personas [2]. Since only 44% of our respondents have 
even heard about the Personas technique and less than 12% 
have worked with creating Personas, it is fair to say that 
Personas  are  not  an  integrated  tool  in  the  software 
development industry in this region. Also, we found that 
only four respondents indicated that Personas should be 
used through the entire development process, meaning that 
even if Personas are used, they are not necessarily used to 
their  full  potential.  In  companies  using  Personas,  the 
technique is used mainly to identify types of users or use 
cases. 
The Personas are kept to a minimum and not focused on 
describing whole characters.  As in the related work we 
found  developers  lacking  understanding  of  how  to  use 
Personas to gain most from their usage [2], [7], [22]. The 
reasons for that could be a combination of several aspects. 
We found that resources are not allocated specifically for 
creating  Personas,  which  corresponds  with  the  area  of 
usability in general [1], [22], [23].  
The full potential of Persona usage does not seem to have 
caught on in the industry. Matthews, Judge and Whittaker 
[15]  found  a  connection  between  on  the  one  hand  the 
perception of Personas and on the other hand to what extent 
the  technique was  used and  the  amount  of training the 
developers had had using Personas.  
363
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VI.
 CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this paper was to explore to what extent 
Personas were used by software development companies in 
a limited geographical area and whether they used Personas 
as  proposed  in  the  literature.  To  accomplish  this,  we 
conducted  a  questionnaire  survey  with  usable  responses 
from 60 software development companies. 
The study showed that only 7 out of the 60 software 
development companies used Personas. The results from the 
questionnaire  also  uncovered  four  issues.  Lack  of 
knowledge of the technique as such and lack of resources 
both related to companies not using the Personas technique. 
Sparse or badly designed descriptions or not being part of 
the development process both related to poor application, 
when using the technique.
Our findings are well linked to other studies described in 
the related work section. Yet our study contributes with a 
new angle by focusing on making a complete study within a 
limited geographical area we now have a pretty good idea 
about  if the Personas technique  is an integrated tool  in 
software development in this geographical area. We have 
not been able to find related work that has done a similar 
study in another country. This means that this paper is the 
first  paper  indicating  whether  Personas  are  used  for 
developing software at the industry.
The main limitation on our results is that we focussed on 
a limited geographical area. This was necessary to achieve a 
high level of coverage of all companies in that area. The 
alternative would have been less coverage by including the 
same number of companies but from a larger geographical 
area. As future work it would be interesting to learn more 
about the advantages of using Personas. This area still needs 
further  study  even  though  some  advantages  have  been 
identified in this paper, also it would be interesting to learn 
if companies that do not use Personas are using another tool 
instead. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the companies and employees 
that participated in our questionnaire survey and Infinit for 
supporting the research.
REFERENCES 
[1]
J. Bak, K. Nguyen, P. Rissgaard and J. Stage, “Obstacles to 
usability  evaluation  in  practice:  a  survey  of  software 
development organizations”,  Proc. of NordiCHI, 2008, pp. 
23-32. 
[2]
Å.  Blomquist  and  M.  Arvola,  “Personas  in  action: 
Ethnography  in  an  Interaction  Design  Team”,  Proc.  of 
NordiCHI, 2002, pp. 197-200.
[3]
A.  Bruun  and  J.  Stage,  “Training  software  development 
practitioners in usability testing: an assessment acceptance 
and prioritization”, Proc. of ozCHI, 2012, pp. 52-60.
[4]
Y. Chang, Y. Lim and E. Stolterman, “Personas: From Theory 
to Practices”, Proc. of NordiCHI, 2008,  pp. 439-442.
[5]
C. N. Chapman and R. Milham, “The Personas' new Clothes: 
Methodological and Practical Arguments Against a Popular 
Method, Proc. of HFES, 2006,  pp. 634-636,.
[6]
A. Cooper, “The inmates are running the asylum: Why High-
Tech  Products  Drive  Us  Crazy  and  How  to  Restore  the 
Sanity”, Sams Publishers, 1999.
[7]
A. Cooper and R. Reimann, “About face 2.0: The Essentials 
of Interaction Design”, Wiley Publishing, 2003.
[8]
J. Corbin and A. Strauss, “Basics of Qualitative Research. 
Techniques  and  Procedures  for  Developing  Grounded 
Theory”, 3rd edition, Sage Publications, 2008.
[9]
H. W. Desurvire, “Faster, Cheaper!! Are Usability Inspection 
Methods as Effective as Empirical Testing?”, John Wiley & 
Sons, 1994, pp. 173-202.
[10] A.  Dotan,  N.  Maiden,  V.  Lichter  and  L.  Germanovich, 
“Designing with Only Four People in Mind? - A Case Study 
of Using Personas to Redesign a Work-Integrated Learning 
Support System”, Proc. of INTERACT, 2009  pp. 497-509.
[11] S. Faily and I. Flechais, “Persona Cases: A Technique for 
Grounding Personas”, Proc. of CHI, 2011 pp.  2267-2270.
[12] J. Grudin and J. Pruitt, “Personas, Participatory Design and 
Product Development: An Infrastructure for Engagement”, 
Proc. of PDC. 2002 pp. 144-161.
[13] F. Long, “Real or Imaginary - the Effect of Using Personas in 
Product  Design.”  In  IES  Conference,   Dublin:  Irish 
Ergonomics Review, 2009 , pp. 1-10. 
[14] J.  Ma,  and  C.  LeRouge,  “Introducing  User  Profiles  and 
Personas into Information Systems Development”, AMCIS . 
Vol.  237, 2007.
[15] T. Matthews, T. Judge and S. Whittaker, “How Do Designers 
and User Experience Professionals Actually Perceive and Use 
Personas?”, Proc. of CHI, 2012 pp. 1219-1228.
[16] T. Miaskiewicza and K. A. Kozarb, “Personas and User-
Centered Design: How Can Personas Benefit Product Design 
Processes?”, Design Studies 32, 5. 2011, pp. 417–430. 
[17] L.  Nielsen,  “Personas.  In  The  Encyclopedia  of  Human-
Computer  Interaction”,  2nd  Ed.,  Aarhus,  Denmark:  The 
Interaction  Design  Foundation,  http://www.interaction-
design.org/encyclopedia/Personas.html,  2013. 
(November 
15th 2013) 
[18] L.  Nielsen,  “Personas  -  User  Focused  Design”,  Human-
Computer Interaction. Springer, 2012.
[19] L. Nielsen and K. S. Nielsen, “Usage of Personas in Danish 
Companies”  –
 http://Personas.dk/wp-content/Brugen-af-
Personas-hos-virksomheder-i-Danmark-20131.pdf,
 
2013. 
(November 1st 2013) 
[20] S. Pace, “A Grounded Theory of the Flow Experiences of 
Web Users”, Proc. of IJHES, 2003, pp. 327-363.
[21] J.  Pruitt  and  T.  Adlin,  “The  Persona  Lifecycle:  Keeping 
People  in  Mind  Throughout  Product  Design”,  Morgan 
Kaufman, 2006.
[22] J. Pruitt and J. Grudin, “Personas: Practice and Theory”, Proc. 
of DUX, 2003, pp. 1-15.
[23] D. Svanæs, and J. Gulliksen, “Understanding the Context of 
Design  –  Towards  Tactical  User  Centered  Design”, 
NordiCHI, 2008, pp. 353-362.
[24] C. Urquhart, “Grounded Theory for Qualitative Research: A 
Practical Guide”, Thousand Oaks, California: Sage, 2013.
[25] C. Urquhart, H. Lehmann and M. D. Myers, “Putting the 
Theory Back Into Grounded Theory”, guidelines for grouned 
theory studies in information systems”. Info Systems J 20, 
2010, pp. 357-381.
[26] www.survey-xact.c
 
 om
364
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

