 
User Experience with Intelligent Proactive Technology in Automotive: A 
Longitudinal Study in Context 
 
Mathilde Duczman, Aurélie Thévenin 
Dept. Research & Innovation, UX Design 
Renault 
Guyancourt, France 
e-mail: mathilde.duczman@gmail.com, 
aurelie.thevenin@renault.com 
Eric Brangier 
Université de Lorraine, PErSEUs EA 7312, User-Lab 
Faculté des sciences humaines et sociales 
Metz, France 
e-mail: eric.brangier@univ-lorraine.fr
 
 
Abstract— In the next few years, cars will tend to be smarter 
and provide more intelligent services, better connected and 
better adapted to user’s habits than ever. Information system 
will be able to learn about behavior and then display 
personalized content in a proactive way. In order to develop 
user oriented car systems, the goal of our research is to study 
user experience related to the use of a learning and proactive 
application in automotive sector. We collected quantitative and 
qualitative data by observing evolution of driving style and by 
interviewing 13 end-users. Our results show that the learning 
and proactive application (a) negatively impacted driving 
safety; (b) did not really help users to anticipate dangerous 
events; (c) did not really help users to plan a new route; but (d) 
was considered as interesting to personalize their driving 
experience, with parameters related to real-time, privacy, 
transparency, unobtrusiveness and personalization. Based on 
our findings, we discuss essential aspects to consider learning 
and proactive informational systems as a gamified user 
experience.  
Keywords-User 
Experience; 
intelligent 
car; 
proactive 
information system; gamification. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the last decades, the automotive sector has emerged as 
a key player in the development of innovating services 
through 
connected and autonomous 
car. Embedded 
technology is improving day after day, in order to provide 
more enjoyable and satisfying experience to their user by 
being more attractive, adaptive and intelligent. All of these 
new technologies present a same objective: improving safety 
and global driving experience. Most of the existing vehicles 
are already integrating smart and connected services, such as 
advanced driving assistance systems that help drivers to detect 
dangerous events, anticipate situations and help in overall 
decision making process. Some of them present more 
intelligent behavior by even taking decision and directly 
acting for the drivers. In one word, technology tends to be 
more proactive. Proactivity is defined [1][2] as the ability of 
device to act on its own initiative, on behalf of user needs and 
intentions, in order to help him/her to realize his/her tasks. The 
particularity of proactive technologies is working in an 
autonomous way, and proposing personalized information at 
the appropriate moment, regarding to user’s activity [3][4]. In 
the next few years, these smart technologies will be able to 
send more and more relevant information and personalized 
suggestion to the driver by integrating learning abilities.  
But what would be the effects on the driver and on his/her 
experience of driving? In a context where the industrial 
operates to offer better service by deploying technology, user 
needs and requirements need to be intently studied and took 
into account in a design process. In this research, we then 
specifically study user experience with a learning and 
proactive application. User experience refers to users’ 
perception of one product qualities and to his responses 
towards this product such as emotional or physical reactions 
[5]. The aim of this article is then to study effects of a learning 
and proactive application on users’ perceptions and reactions 
by focusing on their real driving activities and lived 
experience. 
In this study, research questions are:  
 What are the effects of a learning and proactive 
information system on driving activity and user 
experience? 
 What features of a learning and proactive information 
system could influence the user experience?  
 What recommendations of interaction design can be 
addressed? 
In Section 2, we will describe the context and 
methodology of our study. Section 3 will present our main 
findings that we will then discuss in section 4. 
II. 
ERGONOMIC EVALUATION OF PROACTIVE 
TECHNOLOGY: METHODOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS 
This section describes context and methodology. We first 
present the assessed application and then describe method that 
we have set to answer our research questions.  
A. Context 
Renault research teams have recently developed a first 
version of a learning and proactive driving information 
application, named as “Driving coach” (Fig. 1 and 2). It aims 
at assisting drivers in their daily trips by helping them to plan 
their route and to anticipate dangerous events on their usual 
routes. In a contextually and autonomous way, the application 
is proactive: it displays personalized content to the user 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
without any request of him. The application presents two main 
proactive functionalities for the driver: 
 
Predictions of Destination: It aims at helping the user to 
plan his route before a trip by displaying address of usual 
destination. This functionality allows the user to be 
directly guided to that destination with optimized routes, 
with few physical operations. 
 
Predictions of Dangerous Spots (PDS): PDS are defined 
by specific places where the user needs to make (1) hard 
braking, (2) hard acceleration or (3) hard cornering in 
bends on his usual routes. More the driver is making trips, 
more the application is able to recognize places that might 
be dangerous for him. The aim of the functionality is to 
predict PDS and then warn the user 500 meters before 
PDS, in order to help him to anticipate these spots and to 
control them by not making hard breakings, hard 
accelerations or hard bends.  
Two modes are also proposed to the user for interacting 
with Driving Coach application: Challenge Mode and 
Companion Mode. Both present the same functionalities, 
except that Challenge Mode is offering more gamified means 
and procedures such as rewards to collect and challenges to 
take up. These game design elements aims at providing more 
enjoyable interactions and inducing user’s behaviors [6].  
Considering both these gamified aspects and abilities to 
display personalized content in a proactive manner, we can 
then wonder what are the overall effects of such an intelligent 
and personalized application on the user experience? 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of the proactive functionality “Predictions of 
Destination” in Driving Coach application 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshots of the proactive functionality of “Predictions of 
Dangerous Spots” in Driving Coach application 
B. General orientation 
This research follows a first work that had inspected the 
ergonomics of the system with ergonomic criteria based on 
accessibility, usability, emotionality and persuasiveness [7]. 
But this heuristic inspection does not assess the effects of 
proactivity over a long period of use. To do that, a longitudinal 
study is needed. Indeed, according to the literature, more the 
system is able to learn about user’s habits and preferences, 
more it will be able to send personalized and relevant content 
to the user. Nevertheless, before being able to send relevant 
content can also depend of time and frequency of using the 
system. For these reasons, users may wait for several days 
before receiving information, which can affect user 
experience. To answer our research questions, we have 
conducted a study over a period of 6 weeks to assess how user 
interact with a proactive information system. 
C. Recruiting  
15 persons employed in Renault society have been 
recruited to participate to this study (12 males and 3 females). 
Participants were recruited according to the following 
conditions:  
 Being familiar to the R-Link environment (Renault 
multimedia device embedded in cars), 
 Having connectivity in car for being able to install and use 
the application “Driving coach”, 
 Not sharing the car with another driver, 
 Realizing every journey with the same car on which 
Driving coach” would be installed. 
Users were also asked to inform the examiners of their 
driving habits in order to constitute heterogeneous sample of 
participants having different types of journey, short, medium 
and long distance.  
In order to collect heterogeneous and complementary data 
about how the persons were using the Driving Coach 
application and how they were feeling during this using 
period, observations had been conducted within two different 
manners. Indeed, our sample was divided in two groups:  
 
Group 1 was constituted of 6 participants. They were 
asked to use the application and to make a daily report on 
both troubling and pleasant aspects they observed and 
how they felt in these situations. They were interviewed 
every two weeks in order to collect their verbalization 
towards the main functionalities over time. At the end of 
the six weeks period, they were interviewed about their 
global satisfaction while using the application.  
 
Group 2 was constituted of 9 participants. They were 
asked to freely use the application, with no obligation to 
make a daily report or even to use the application. They 
were only interviewed at the end of the test to collect their 
feedback and reactions about the application.  
D. Material and Equipement  
Experiment material is composed of:  
 “Driving Coach” application, installed in every car for 
each user of Group 1 & Group 2; 
 Smartphone with a “recording” application for each user 
of Group 1. They were asked to make vocal comments for 
each troubling or pleasant situation they encountered 
during the six weeks test; 
 Smartphone car charger with lighter socket for users of 
Group 1. 
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
E. Longitudinal using test  
As seen, it might take a long time for the user to get 
personalized information and suggestions, according to his 
habits and journeys frequency. For this reason of time delay, 
using tests had been conducted over a period of 6 weeks (Fig. 
3). We considered this period as sufficient for the user to both 
familiarize with the learning and proactive driving 
information application, and to get personalized content 
throughout the proactive functionalities.  
 
Figure 3. Scheme of the experiment proceeding 
 
F. Quantitative data collection  
Monitoring of driving activity was about observing what 
would be the impact of the application on the way of driving 
of the users. As we said previously, the objective of the 
application was to help users to adapt their driving style to 
proactive functionalities aiming at help them to anticipate 
dangerous events and to plan their journey: In other words, 
studying the impact of the application on driving activity 
correspond to study efficacy. Efficacy can be defined as the 
capacity of a system to reach a specific objective [8]. Efficacy 
refers to the expected effect and deals with the performance of 
a user to successfully reach a goal thanks to a system’s 
features. In our case, measuring efficacy of the application 
“Driving Coach” aims at assessing pragmatic aspects of the 
application. That is to say, does the application really help 
users to plan their route and to anticipate dangers? We then 
focused on three data:  
 Data to describe overall driving style evolution, by 
observing vehicle data of the participants to assess if the 
Driving Coach application would be useful and helpful to 
improve user driving style.  
 Data to describe the success of PDS predictions; by 
observing if the users were adapting their driving style 
when they received personal suggestions to be careful on 
dangerous spots. To measure success of PDS predictions,  
 Data to identify the success of destination prediction; by 
observing selection rate of the predicted destination. 
G. Qualitative data collection  
Lived experience with the Driving Coach application was 
studied by conducting explicitation interviews with users 
during and after the longitudinal test. This method aims at 
helping the users to remember specific situation, be aware of 
their actions and describe their lived experience [9][10][11]. 
Through 
specific 
techniques 
such 
as 
non-directive 
questioning and revivals, the interviewers establish a state of 
evocation for making the participant describe actions through 
verbalizations [12]. Explicitation interviews helped us to get 
the participants remember the most precisely the situation in 
which they were while using the application and how they 
were feeling at these moments. The 13 users that participated 
to the full period of test were asked to express their feelings 
and interest towards the application and if the application 
helped them to change their driving style. The aim was to 
identify, through user verbalizations, critical aspects in the 
application that can impact overall experience with such 
intelligent product. To analyze our results about the lived 
experience, we classified positive and negative comments in a 
smartsheet according to the overall application and its 
proactive functionalities. With this classification, we could 
then identified comments related to perceived utility, 
satisfaction/dissatisfaction and sources of satisfaction that we 
consider as crucial aspects of the learning and proactive 
application impacting the lived experience. In our study, we 
define satisfaction as the level of comfort that the user is 
feeling when he uses a product [8]. Satisfaction results from a 
subjective evaluation of the user, considering further aspects 
than just efficacy, such as aesthetics, need of the product or 
pleasure towards the product.  
III. 
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 
During the first week, 2 users had stopped the test because 
of robustness and compatibility problems with their driving 
habits. We then focused on the results collected about the 13 
other users. 
A. Record analysis during driving activity 
The main objective of the application was to help drivers 
to realize their daily trips by first helping them to anticipate 
dangerous driving events on their usual routes, and also help 
them to choose a route for going to their daily destinations. To 
assess the efficacy, we first decided to focus on the evolution 
of user’s driving style along the 6 weeks period of test. We 
then observe how the users succeeded to master dangerous 
spots which were predicted on their usual routes and to finish 
how they could be helped to choose a route to go to their daily 
destination.  
1) Impact on driving style evolution 
For measuring driving style evolution of the participants, 
we have first calculated an index for each participant based on 
dangerous events that could happen during their test (sharp 
braking, sharp acceleration, sharp cornering) and based on the 
distance they travelled. This index is named as “Unsafety 
index”, which is a ratio calculated as following:  
Sum of dangerous events per one user 
(sharp braking, sharp accelerating, sharp cornering) 
Distance travelled 
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
The higher the Unsafety Index is, the riskier the driving 
style of one user is. Unsafety index was calculated for each of 
the 13 users, at 3 steps during the 6 weeks period: after 1 week, 
3 weeks and 6 weeks of using.  
In our data analysis of the overall driving style evolution, 
we first observe an overall constant worsening during the 
using test period  Indeed, results are showing an average 
deterioration of the Driving style along the test period (Table 
1 and Fig. 4). According to these data, as long as the 
participants are using the application, they are realizing more 
dangerous events such as braking, acceleration, bends while 
they are supposed to realize less dangerous actions.  
TABLE I. DANGEROUS INDEX FOR EACH USER AFTER 1 WEEK, 3 WEEKS 
AND 6 WEEKS OF TEST 
However, analysis of results for each participant also show 
4 main types of variations in their driving style evolution 
along the test period (Fig. 4):  
 Five users got a constant worsening during the 6 weeks 
period. 
 Five users got improved in the middle of the test before 
getting worse at the end of the test than in the beginning. 
 Three users got worse in the middle of the test. 
 Only one user got improved at the end of the test period, 
compared to the beginning. 
Figure 4. Graphic of driving style evolution for each participant 
according to their Unsafety index at the three periods of using 
 
 
Ten users had deterioration in their driving style while 
using the application. This can be explained by the fact they 
were tempted to test the limits of the application and observe 
how it behaved by adjusting their driving style in an 
intentional way.  What we finally observe in results analysis 
is that that no one of the participants got a constant 
improvement during the test period while the application was 
supposed to help the drivers to adopt a better way of driving.  
 
2) Impact on ability to master predictions of Dangerous 
Spots 
The first functionality of the Driving Coach application 
was about predictions of personal dangerous spots on usual 
routes of the users. Among the displayed information, only 61 
percent of the predicted dangerous spots were passed by users. 
This means that in 39 percent of cases in which users were 
alerted of a personal dangerous spot on their route, the 
functionality was not efficient because users were not 
adapting their driving style and though did not succeed to 
master the predicted dangerous spots (Table 2). 
TABLE II. OVERALL NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF PASSED PDS BY USERS 
FOR EACH PDS PREDICTION RECEIVED 
 
According to us, two assumptions can explain these 
results:  
 Users could not pay attention to the information they 
received because it appeared too late on the screen, after 
they received information. According to a previous study 
that we have conducted with inspection methods [7], we 
indeed observed problems of robustness which negatively 
impacted real-time information display.   
 Users did not even tried to master the predicted dangerous 
spots because they did not care about information they 
received and did not perceived any utility of these 
information in the context they were driving. 
Impact on ability to plan routes with destination prediction  
Among the 13 users, 10 have received at least one 
prediction of destination at the beginning of trips they made 
during the test period. In 41 percent of the cases in which the 
users received these predictions, we observe they did not 
accept to display the predicted route for going to their 
destination. We consider this percentage too low to say that 
the application was efficient and able to assist the user in their 
route planning.  
B. Analysis of the interviews focused on lived experience  
Results about overall lived experience with the learning 
and proactive application “Driving Coach” were analyzed by 
classifying positive and negative comments obtained during 
explicitation interviews with the 13 users in a smartsheet. 
From verbalizations, we first identify comments related to 
perceived 
utility, 
satisfaction/dissatisfaction 
and 
then 
highlighted main sources of satisfaction/dissatisfaction.  
1) Perceived utility  
During explicitation interviews, each participant was 
wondered to express about their feeling of improvement on 
their driving style. Among the 13 participants, 11 consider 
they did not improve their driving style: “I don’t think that I 
changed my way of driving”; “I already had a soft driving”; 
“To be honest, I did not radically change my driving habits”.  
The application is even perceived as useless: “it doesn’t 
present a lot of interest”; “I don’t need it, it doesn’t provide 
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
me anything”; “on a regular trip, it is less relevant because we 
know it” ; « I’ve made a trip into Paris last week-end, it didn’t 
tell me anything whereas I don’t know Paris. I would have 
appreciated to get information for helping me to anticipate 
things ».  
2) Satisfaction/Dissatisfaction comments  
 In spite of the lack of perceived utility, all participants 
agreed about 2 main positive aspects of the proactive 
behavior of the “Driving Coach” application: The 
application is seen as a way of being aware of the way of 
driving, provided that the information is displayed in a 
real-time manner: « I’ve been sensitized to my way of 
driving but it did not make me change »; “it is more an 
application which helps you to stay watchful, than 
teaching you to drive differently and helping you to 
anticipate”; “it confirms for me that I have a manner to 
drive too sharply and too fast, that’s it”. 
 The proactive functionality of destination prediction has 
been appreciated because of minimization of offered 
tactile commands: « it avoids to handle the app »; “it is 
simple because we don’t need to look for the information 
into the device”; “I found that it was clever to recognize 
my trips, it is something convenient. It is reassuring”. 
All participants are nevertheless expressing negative 
feelings about the learning and proactive behavior of the 
intelligent informational system. We then distinguish many 
feelings of frustration and discomfort related to the 
application: “it didn’t get any interest” ; “I didn’t feel secure 
at all” ; “it made me nervous” ; “some messages for being 
cautious are unfair, you just want to slap it!” ; “Once, the app 
told me to prepare to brake in 500 meters whereas I was 
stopping. We feel embarrassed because the app is telling 
something wrong”. 
3) Sources of Satisfaction/Dissatisfaction comments  
Among the negative comments that we collected through 
the explicitation interviews, we could identify 5 main sources 
of dissatisfaction of the application that need to be improved:  
 Robustness of the application: “When you go out of an 
alert zone, it says there is less than 50 meters after 3 km, 
this is painful”; “it can be interesting but it has to start 
immediately, it needs to be quick, instant”; “the problem 
is that it is very long to be launched but when we start the 
car, we usually want to launch the navigation 
immediately, and in that situation, this can be already too 
late for some users”. 
 Temporal compatibility with the driving task, which 
means delivering proactive messages at the good time : “If 
I receive information about being careful to the next bends 
whereas I’m already into it, I won’t pay attention anymore 
to the messages because things already happened”; “if the 
information is given into the 10 seconds before the area, 
this might be interesting”. ; “there is some places where 
we cannot brake like we would like to do it”. 
 Level of comprehensibility of the messages, which means 
that the user needs to know and understand why he gets a 
proactive message in a situation. This might be with 
explanations if the information is not displayed in a logical 
way during his activity : “Why in the morning it considers 
I’m going to work?”; “I got the messages twice and then 
I’ve never seen it anymore, I’ve never understood why?” 
; “I got the message only once, I didn’t understand why it 
didn’t warn me each time” ; “sometimes, with exactly the 
same way of driving, the application didn’t tell me 
anything and sometimes it got woke up and kept saying be 
careful; I didn’t understand why?”. 
 Mental workload, legibility and unobtrusiveness regarding 
to the driving activity : “When you get a suggestion, you 
might pay less attention to your driving situation, it can be 
risky” ; “It is good because he directly proposes to go at 
my place with only two steps”; “it is an easy way to 
display GPS, it avoids to look for a destination”; “I saw 
at a certain point that he suggested me to go at that place 
and it helped me , it is good, it spares me to handle the 
device and look for the information”. 
 Privacy, which means respecting data which can be 
estimated as confidential according to the user: “It’s ok 
because I’m alone in my car. If something else is with me, 
and I don’t want him to know where I’m used to go, this 
might be embarrassing”; “it was surprising about that 
and was wondering how it knows that? 
 Personalization, which means offering means to the user 
to personalize the way he can receives proactive 
information: “Maybe it can display something that you 
can personalize, it would be more user-friendly” 
IV. 
DISCUSSION - CONCLUSION 
This research is about a longitudinal evaluation of users 
experiences with a learning and proactive information system 
in car. The information system that we assessed aims at 
display personalized information in a proactive way, without 
any request of the user. 
Our objective was twofold: to assess the impact of a 
learning and proactive system on driving style; and to study 
the lived experience by conducting explicitation interviews 
with the drivers sample.  
The main functionalities were to help users to anticipate 
personal dangerous driving events and also to help them 
planning their routes to their usual destinations. Longitudinal 
tests have been conducted with 15 participants during 6 weeks 
in order to study the effects of a driving proactive information 
system on the user’s behavior and feelings. In our 
methodology, qualitative data obtained by explicitation 
interviews helped us to understand how the users behave with 
the application and to explain what aspects negatively 
impacted driving activity and overall lived experience with the 
application. 
The results of this study emphasize the fact that the 
learning and proactive information system assessed leads to 
low efficiency, reduced satisfaction and sometimes frustration 
and misunderstanding.  
 Success percentages that we obtained were considered too 
low to talk about efficacy of the application to help users 
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
to anticipate dangerous driving events and to plan their 
route for going to their usual destinations.  
 Plus, results have showed that using the application during 
6 weeks negatively impacted the driving activity over the 
test period. We observed an overall deterioration of the 
driving style, while the application was supposed to help 
the driver to anticipate dangerous events and to plan their 
route.  
 According to explication interviews results, we could 
identified six crucial aspects of the learning and proactive 
behavior of the application that could explained its 
negative impact on the overall activity and experience. In 
the verbalizations of the users, we had identified problems 
of robustness, temporal compatibility (relevance regarding 
to 
the 
driving 
task 
and 
real-time 
feedback), 
comprehensibility of information (lack of explanation and 
transparency), mental workload (lack of legibility and 
obtrusiveness), privacy (lack of respect with confidential 
and personal data), and personalization (means offered by 
the application to personalize the way that information are 
displayed). Some of these aspects, such as relevance, 
transparency, obtrusiveness were also mentioned in 
previous research work as key factors in human-interface 
interaction in the way it can impact acceptance of 
proactive information system [3]. For the future steps of 
the ergonomic design process of information proactive 
system, we must conduct further research work to 
formulate appropriate guidelines that take into account 
these human factors considerations.  
In spite of the overall lack of interest and perceived utility 
according to our sample of users, proactive behavior of an 
automotive information system can be interesting added value 
to the user in the way it provides personalized content without 
requesting, handling or searching anything in the multimedia 
device. In our study, results show that users were mostly 
disturbed by robustness aspects of the application which also 
negatively impacted relevance of the information, due to 
technical incompatibility that is currently being improved. 
The six crucial aspects that have been mentioned as critical 
points in user interface interactions need to be confirmed by 
conducting further experiment on bigger samples, with 
experimented and also novice users. Plus, these results have 
been obtained with R-Link environment. Additional 
experiment on another kind of automotive environment would 
also be useful to confirm our results. Finally, further studies 
need to be conducted, such as participatory design to involve 
users in the design process and decide how to improve the 
current interfaces and interactions. Brainstorming, design 
studio, personas or focus group could help to answer these 
central questions in a design process of a learning and 
proactive information system: When, why and what 
information should be presented during activity to enhance 
and enlarge the foreseen part of driving experience? 
With this point of view, evaluation is not enough! Collect 
future expectations and future requirements of users are 
needed. Indeed, the anticipation of human needs and activities 
is based on the analysis of numerous factors and data, and on 
scenario planning as it is done in prospective. Prospective 
ergonomics [13][14][15] emphasizes the investigation of the 
use of artifacts to discover their strengths and flaws, and 
sources of satisfaction and dissatisfaction that could lead to 
the design of innovative artifacts. Prospective ergonomics, 
and not only corrective or preventive, will be the next step of 
this research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank all participants and project 
partners for their contribution to the experiment.  This work 
was supported by Renault innovation and research team, 
Cloudmade society and University of Lorraine. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Tennenhouse, “Proactive computing,” Communications of the 
ACM, vol. 43, pp. 43-50, 2000. 
[2] A. Salovaara and A. Oulasvirta, “Six modes of proactive resource 
management,” Proceedings of the third Nordic conference on Human-
computer interaction (NordiCHI 2004), 2004. 
[3] R. Bader, "Proactive Recommender Systems in Automotive 
Scenarios", DR, Technische universität München, 2013.  
[4] K. Myers and N. York-Smith, “Proactive behavior of a Personal 
Assistive Agent. Metareasoning in Agent-Based Systems,” Proc. 
AAMAS Workshop on Metareasoning in Agent-Based Systems, 2007, 
pp.31-45. 
[5] M. Thüring and S. Mahlke, “Usability, aesthetics and emotions in 
human-technology 
interaction,” 
in 
International 
Journal 
of 
Psychology, vol. 42,pp.253-264, 2007. 
[6] C. Marache-Francisco and E. Brangier, “Gamification and human 
machine interaction : a synthesis,” Le travail humain, vol. 78, n°1, pp. 
165-190, 2015. 
[7] M. Duczman, E. Brangier and A. Thévenin, “Criteria based approach 
to assess the user experience of driving information proactive system: 
integration of guidelines, heuristic mapping and case study,” in Human 
Factors in Transportation., 2016. 
[8] E. Brangier, J. Barcenilla, “Designing a product easy to use: adapting 
technologies to human” (“Concevoir un produit facile à utiliser: 
Adapter les technologies à l’homme”). Paris, France : Éditions 
d’Organisation, 2003.  
[9] P. 
Vermersch,“The 
explicitation 
interview” 
(“L’entretien 
d’explicitation”). Paris, France : ESF, 1994. 
[10] B. 
Cahour, 
“Affects 
in 
cooperative 
interaction 
situation: 
methodological proposition” (“Les affects en situation d’interaction 
coopérative : proposition méthodologique”). Le travail humain, vol. 
69, pp. 379-400, 2006. 
[11] C. Petitmengin, A. Remillieux, B, Cahour and S. Carter-Thomas, “A 
gap in Nisbett and Wilson’s findings? A firstperson access to our 
cognitive processes,” Consciousness and Cognition, vol. 22, pp. 654–
669, 2013. 
[12] A. Light, “Adding method to meaning. A technique for exploring 
people’s experience with technology,” Behaviour and Information 
Technology, vol. 25, pp. 175-187, 2006. 
[13] E. Brangier, J-M. Robert, “Prospective ergonomics : basis and issues” 
(“L’ergonomie prospective : fondements et enjeux ”),  Le Travail 
Humain, vol. 77, pp. 1-20,  2014. 
[14] J-M. Robert, E. Brangier, “What is prospective ergonomics? A 
reflection and position on the future of ergonomic,” Ergonomics and 
Health Aspects (HCI 2009) LNCS, 2009, pp. 162–169. 
[15] J-M. Robert, E. Brangier, Prospective ergonomics : origin, goal, and 
prospects. Work, vol. 41, pp. 5235-5242, 2012. 
 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

