Design Guidelines for Educational Games Targeting Children 
 
 
Emma Nilsson, Åsa Cajander 
Uppsala University  
Uppsala, Sweden 
e-mail: emmalaura.nilsson@gmail.com, 
asa.cajander@it.uu.se 
 
Marie Sjölinder, Olov Ståhl, Erik Einebrant 
RISE – Research Institutes of Sweden 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: marie.sjolinder@ri.se, olov.stahl@ri.se, 
erik.einebrant@ri.se 
 
 
Abstract—There exists a wide range of frameworks with design 
guidelines within child-computer interaction and educational 
games. However, hardly any frameworks can be found that 
combine both these areas. This work aims to develop accessible 
and easily applicable design guidelines aimed towards 
educational games for children. A literature review was 
conducted within the areas of games, educational games, and 
child-computer 
interaction. 
From 
the 
publications, 
42 
guidelines within educational games and child-computer 
interaction were elicited. The guidelines were applied and 
tested on a healthcare application. Based on the outcome of the 
evaluation, formulations of the guidelines were updated and 
resulted in a new, more easily applicable compact version of 
the framework, named the Educational Games for Children 
(EGC) framework, presenting 24 guidelines within educational 
games for children. 
 
Keywords - educational games; child-computer interaction; 
design guidelines; game design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Applications aiming at educating and preparing children 
require consideration of several design aspects. When 
designing educational games, both motivation to use, and 
achievement of intended learning goals are important 
aspects. While guidelines regarding games, educational 
games and child-computer interaction are all well 
documented areas [1]-[5] it is more difficult to find 
guidelines that combine these areas, all relevant when 
developing and designing educational games for children. 
Guidelines and recommendations in the academic literature 
are also often complicated for practitioners to access and 
there is a need for accessible easy to use guidelines in the 
area [3]. 
The aim with this work was to define a framework for 
guidelines when developing and designing educational 
games for children. This work was a first explorative step 
towards developing a tool that easily can be used by 
designers of educational games. The work was conducted in 
an iterative way alongside with the development of an 
educational game for children. Initially, a literature study 
within the areas of games, game-based learning (educational 
games) and child-computer interaction was conducted. 
Based on the literature study, a first draft of a framework for 
guidelines was created. In the next step, this first version of 
the framework was tested on the COSMO@HOME project, 
an ongoing project that develops a healthcare educational 
game to prepare children for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI) procedures. Based on an evaluation and interviews 
with game designers in the COSMO@HOME project, the 
guidelines were modified, and a final version of the 
framework was created. 
The paper starts by presenting the results from the 
literature study, describing the area of game-based learning 
and education (Section 2), followed by a section about 
child-computer interaction (Section 3). Section 4 elaborates 
on existing frameworks and their advantages and 
disadvantages, in relationship to the suggested framework. 
In Section 5, a first version of the suggested framework is 
described. In Section 6, insights from evaluating the 
framework are presented and applied to create an updated 
version of the guidelines. Lastly, Sections 7 and 8 comprise 
a discussion, conclusion, and future work.  
II. 
GAME-BASED LEARNING AND EDUCATIONAL GAMES 
Since the beginning of 1980, computer games and TV 
games have been used not only for entertainment but also 
for learning, and during the early 1990s, games were 
brought to academia to be researched as beneficial. The area 
of educational games is still discussed today, and was 
questioned from its early beginnings due to the detrimental 
impact computer and TV games in general were considered 
to have on children. Opinions such as waste of time and 
money were common, but so were the cognitive effects 
games were thought to have on children [6]. These might 
well be opinions that we still can hear today, but the views 
on games are nowadays more nuanced, and the area of 
games has become a popular research topic. Researchers 
have argued that games are a unique way to engage and 
motivate people in learning and education [7][8].  
To understand how a game can be a tool for learning, we 
first need to define the concept of a game and the different 
parts that build it. Kapp [9] defines a game in the following 
way:  
 
370
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

“A game is a system in which players engage in an abstract 
challenge, defined by rules, interactivity, and feedback, that 
results in a quantified outcome often eliciting an emotional 
reaction.” 
 
Through feedback and interaction, coupled with 
challenge, the player will interact and engage with the game. 
The game, that is defined by the rules of its system, and that 
is designed as an abstract version of a larger system, will 
result in a quantifiable outcome that in turn will give rise to 
an emotional reaction from the player. These are, according 
to Kapp, the factors that will promote learning and 
engagement [9]. The concept of gamification uses these 
elements to bring further meaning and motivation for a 
certain task. Kapp [9] defines the term as: 
  
“Gamification is using game-based mechanics, aesthetics 
and game thinking to engage people, motivate action, 
promote learning, and solve problems.” 
  
As in learning, games also use typical techniques that 
can be found in educational psychology. Techniques, such 
as giving points, feedback, and encouragement to 
collaborate are common practice for teachers as well as 
typical elements of a game. What gamification adds to 
learning is, according to Kapp [9], another layer of interest 
that both engages and motivates the player to learn. 
Appreciation sounds given after completed tasks can be an 
effective way of encouraging the user [10], as well as points 
and badges [3][10][11].  
There are several advantages of using games for 
learning. As a game can be used to model parts of the real 
world it makes it possible for people to play around with 
and visit an abstract reality of a real life setting or place, but 
in a simplified form [9]. However, many aspects of real life 
are complex and do not necessarily enrich the experience of 
a game. The concept of purchasing different artifacts is, for 
example, a common act a player can perform in games, and 
being able to acquire better tools etc can enrich the game for 
players. Yet other actions associated with the concept of 
buying, such as standing in line, counting your money, and 
packing your goods do not enrich the experience. These 
kinds of real-world concepts can both make the game less 
interesting and overwhelming [9]. Other educational settings 
that games can be used for is to understand the effects of 
one's actions, since the player can get immediate feedback 
during play [9]. In this way, players can learn about 
concepts in the real world and how their actions can result in 
certain outcomes.  
A. Motivation and Learning 
Winn [2] states that the intended learning goals should 
be central and primarily set clear as the development of a 
game is started. Setting these goals can then help the 
designer throughout the development phase as they provide 
a practical way of measuring the intended learning outcome. 
A significant motivation for using educational games in 
learning is the engagement and joy they bring to the user 
[11]. Motivation is crucial for engagement and is fostered 
by several factors in games, such as challenges and 
feedback but is also connected to other elements such as 
graphics and the storyline of the game. Provision of good 
audio and sound quality are also important within 
educational games [5]. A study conducted by Linek [5] 
showed that lack of good sound quality can cause a greater 
degree of disruption than poor image quality. Kapp [9] 
discuss the concept of internal and external motivation 
which is referred to as intrinsic motivation and extrinsic 
motivation. Extrinsic motivation is experienced when the 
focus is put on the reward or the outcome of a certain task. 
Intrinsic motivation on the other hand, is when the activity 
is the main purpose and not the reward upon completion 
[12]. 
Providing choice is another way to create motivation [5]. 
Choice makes the player feel powerful in the game-situation 
and is a way of engaging the player even more. Further, 
Chiasson and Gutwin [13] imply that providing the feeling 
of control has been seen as a good way of enhancing 
engagement. Choice can be incorporated in many ways, 
such as selecting game paths, but also through the ability to 
customize avatars, items, and other appearances of the game 
[3][11]. Winn [2] implies that it is important to balance the 
number of available choices, so as not to overwhelm the 
player early in the game. Choices within games should 
progress during the game as the player is learning and 
becoming more comfortable with it. 
Role-playing games have also been seen as beneficial for 
learning as they are a way to address engagement [11]. By 
letting the player take on a role, for example through an 
avatar, the player becomes more involved in the game-play 
and emotional engagement and motivation is created. 
B. Feedback and Rewards 
Clear goals and rules within the game are important for 
the player, and are also important for creating intrinsic 
motivation [5]. If the player does not know what to do or if 
the goals of the game are unclear, it creates frustration and 
becomes unmotivating. Feedback is an important tool for 
learning through games and it can optimize learning by 
directly giving the player tips and tricks with respect to the 
performance and actions within the game [5]. Feedback can 
be incorporated in many ways, one of which is by using 
pedagogical characters often referred to as animated agents 
[3][13]. According to the Touchscreen Interaction Design 
Recommendations for Children (TIDRC)-framework and 
research done by Chiasson and Gutwin [3][13], this can 
improve learning outcomes, even though it is important to 
ensure they are not too intrusive [13]. 
Rewards are typical components of games and are a 
good way of encouraging and motivating the player 
[3][11][13]. Winn [2] implies that is important to balance 
the number of awards to better maintain player motivation. 
371
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This work suggests that rewards should be given more 
frequently when the challenge is greater, or when the 
learning curve is steeper. Further, the TIDRC-framework 
recommends being careful with the frequency of rewards 
given as this can rule out the intrinsic motivation of users 
[3] 
C. Challenge 
One of the challenges when creating a game for a 
broader user group is to find the right level of challenge that 
will keep players with different skills entertained. One way 
to handle this is to use levels that change during gameplay 
according to the skills of the user [9]. Either the level can be 
set for the whole game beforehand, or it can be used and 
evolved throughout the game until the end. Kapp [9] points 
out that levels can help the user to learn certain skills that 
are required to achieve the main goal. For example, to slay a 
dragon requires skills such as swinging a sword or dodging 
attacks from an enemy. These and other skills can be 
practiced by using the concept of levels. When creating 
educational games, Kapp [9] suggests creating three levels 
of interaction: easy, intermediate, and difficult. Linek [5] 
also points out the importance of adapting the level of 
challenge to optimize learning. If a user finds a game too 
easy to play it can quickly become unchallenging and 
unmotivating. Additionally, lack of motivation can also 
appear if the player instead finds the game too challenging 
and difficult to master [5]. Another way for the player to test 
and practice skills is to master obstacles and quests [11]. 
Abdul [11] implies that these moments of challenge 
improve learning since the player is forced to employ skills 
that they have already been trained in. 
III. 
CHILD-COMPUTER INTERACTION 
Children’s media usage is increasing [14]. The time 
exposure to media, such as computers, is a general concern 
at the same time that computers creates opportunities for 
children to learn and experience things in a new way [4]. 
Gelderblom and Kotzé [15] found that computers even 
supported children’s development in writing, verbal 
creativity, mathematics, and language, among others. The 
use 
of 
computers, 
given 
that 
the 
experience 
is 
developmentally appropriate, could benefit construction of 
knowledge, as they encourage children in active learning. 
The use of computers could also be an opportunity to 
experience virtual environments where children can learn 
and acquire knowledge in other contexts at the same time as 
being provided with challenge and fantasy, which creates 
curiosity. By using the interactive opportunities of 
computers, children can effectively be given feedback, 
which can speed up their development in learning new 
things [15].  
Designing interfaces for children creates different 
challenges to designing for adults. Children, as they are in 
their developmental stage, have different cognitive, social, 
and physical needs and skills than adults. These are the three 
main aspects in which children's development can be 
divided and categorized [10] and all of them need to be 
considered when creating technology for children [10]. 
Cognitive abilities of children usually cover reading and 
understanding, but also their attention skills. Physical 
abilities in the area of human-computer interaction usually 
refer to the fine motor skills needed when interacting with 
different devices such as computers, video games, or 
smartphones. Socio-emotional abilities in this context are 
connected to social-sharing and customization [3].  
A. Cognitive Abilities 
Using technology requires mental processing, such as 
perception, attention, information handling, and decision 
making, and is tightly coupled with the area of cognition 
[4]. As children have different needs and skills to adults, 
designers for children’s technology should be aware of the 
differences between child and adult users. 
Reading knowledge: In many applications and games, 
instructions are given in text. Menus and choices available 
are commonly written in text, which can clearly be a 
challenge for children of pre-reading age. Navigating 
through menus can also be challenging for younger children 
as it may still be an unknown and abstract concept for them 
[10]. Even older children may experience written 
instructions as challenging, which is why audio and 
animation can be a useful tool to support their understanding 
of instructions. Due to the limitations of children’s reading 
capacity, it cannot be expected that games can be learnt 
through text instructions unless they are easy enough to 
follow and understand. Further, it has been suggested that 
in-app tutorials should be avoided, since there is a tendency 
that children may not read or remember instructions given in 
this way. A better solution is to provide guidance whereby 
the user can be active [3]. Further, Chiasson and Gutwin 
[10] also suggest that the interface should be intuitive 
enough to be used without instructions, or that child-users 
are given guidance until the intended task is understood. 
This is usually referred to as scaffolding [10]. 
Graphics: An alternative to written text and instructions 
is graphical metaphors and interfaces where minimal use of 
text is required, especially for the youngest users. Giving 
instructions in speech with corresponding pictures and 
animations can also help the users to both remember and 
understand the instructions. This is also a good way of 
catching the attention of the user [10]. As children usually 
have less experience with computer interfaces than adults, 
many of the typical visual representations and symbols are 
not yet common knowledge for child-users. Icons such as 
“stop” or “play” can be abstract for a novice user and should 
not be expected to be familiar icons for a child [3][10]. 
Therefore, icons and symbols should be represented by 
pictures and concepts recognizable and intuitive for 
children. Gelderblom and Kotzé [4] also formed a guideline 
of this based on Piaget’s theory of Cognition. This states 
that children’s knowledge is structured in schemes which 
372
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

can be reorganized and adapted to environmental change as 
the child becomes older. To understand and acquire a new 
skill, therefore, demands that prior schemes and knowledge 
fit the presented information. Due to this, it is also important 
for designers to consider and acknowledge the existing 
schemes and knowledge of the intended user. Interactive 
components such as buttons should also be designed in a 
way that show that they are clickable. One way is to give 
buttons a 3D-looking design [10]. Another way to 
differentiate certain items is to make them stand out from 
the background using distinct outlines, colours, and 
backgrounds. Another recommendation within the TIDRC-
framework is to avoid too-complex backgrounds as these 
may confuse the child integrating with the system [3].  
B. Physical Abilities 
Several design choices have to be considered when 
forming the more practical components and possible 
interactions within software for children. Children’s 
developing physical and motor skills put other requirements 
on the usual gestures used when integrating with a device. 
Chiasson and Gutwin [10] found that touch screen devices 
rather than computers are better and more appropriate tools 
for children. Even though touchscreen devices are a good 
choice for child users, there are limitations to these. As 
mentioned, the interaction of these devices is often limited 
by the motor skills of a child and thereby not all available 
touchscreen gestures can be implemented.  
Primarily, the gestures used within the interface should 
be consistent throughout the game [10][11][16]. Typical 
gestures such as drag-and-drop, rotate, pinch, double-tap, 
and spread should be avoided [3], as well as gestures that 
require an object being dragged a longer distance. Ways to 
overcome some of the challenges that may come with these 
gestures are to allow partial gesture completion, accepting 
both single and multi-touch, and increasing the time 
between taps in the double tap gesture [3][10]. Another 
aspect to consider when designing interfaces for children is 
to avoid targets being too small and also ensure that the 
distance between targets are long enough to deal with 
outbound touches. Another good solution is to increase the 
active area of targets [3]. 
IV. 
EXISTING FRAMEWORK AND GUIDELINES 
The MDA-framework, from 2004, is one of the earlier 
formal approaches to describe how games are built and, 
thereby, how they can be understood and evaluated. MDA 
stands for Mechanics, Dynamics, and Aesthetics which 
represent different game layers, from hard coded objects and 
components (mechanics) to all actions a player can perform 
within the game and with the objects (dynamics). These two 
concepts give rise to different feelings and impressions that 
the player gets from playing the game (aesthetics) [17]. The 
MDA-framework has become one of the most widely used 
and accepted theories within game design for decomposing 
and evaluating games [1]. While the theory has been 
popular and appreciated, it has also become a topic of 
discussion.  
Walk et al. [1] found two main aspects of weaknesses 
within the MDA-framework as discussed in the academic 
literature. Primarily, they questioned the absence of visual 
design aspects of games as the MDA-theory merely focuses 
on mechanics. Because of this, the authors found that the 
theory is not applicable to gamified content or experience-
oriented design as it focuses more on functionality. Further, 
Walk et al. [1] found that the framework is barely applicable 
to narrative designs as those components are hard to break 
down into the main concepts of MDA. Instead, the authors 
[1] suggested a new, updated version of MDA to address its 
weaknesses, namely, the DDE-framework, which stands for 
Design, Dynamics, and Experience. The DDE-framework 
was an attempt to further define the concepts within the 
MDA theory. 
Another alternative to the MDA-framework was 
presented by Winn [2], who also found weaknesses with the 
MDA-framework. He argued that the framework was 
difficult to apply on serious games that have requirements 
other than just entertainment. Optimizing fun within a 
serious game can be challenging as it also needs to fulfil 
requirements for more serious outcomes. To address these 
weaknesses of MDA and to create a framework more 
suitable for serious games, Winn suggested an extended 
version of MDA called the DPE-framework. DPE stands for 
Design, Play, and Experience. These three main concepts 
are built on sub-categories or “layers” within learning, 
storytelling, gameplay, and user experience.  
With respect to design recommendations for children, 
Soni et al. [3] created a set of guidelines – the TIDRC-
framework. Building on evidence-based studies, the authors 
created 
their 
own 
framework 
consisting 
of 
57 
recommendations 
elicited 
from 
the 
literature. 
The 
recommendations were grouped into categories important 
within the field of child development: cognitive, physical, 
and socio-emotional abilities, considering children in the 
age-span 2 to 11 years.  
V. 
DEVELOPING A NEW FRAMEWORK TARGETING 
EDUCATIONAL GAMES FOR CHILDREN 
Guidelines regarding games, game-based learning, and 
child-computer interaction are all well documented areas. 
Yet, it is more difficult to find guidelines that combine these 
areas, which are all relevant when developing and designing 
educational games for children. The early and frequently 
used game theories MDA [17], DDE [1], and DPE [2] work 
well for breaking down game elements to understand their 
components and functions [2]. The game-design part of the 
guidelines in this work is mainly inspired by the DDE- and 
DPE-frameworks. Other important insights have been 
obtained by analyzing guidelines for educational games and 
game-based learning, which narrows down the general 
game-design principles even more. Designing for children 
is, however, different to designing for adults [17]. 
373
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Therefore, it was also of interest to examine the literature 
about child-computer interaction.  
Guidelines from the literature were collected continually 
into a 3x4 table. The guidelines were structured into specific 
columns based on the area to which they belonged, either 
game-based learning or child-computer interaction. Further, 
these columns were separated by rows to sort the guidelines 
into specific aspects of game design. The left-most column 
categorizes the guidelines into game design within the areas 
of Design, Dynamics, and Experience [10]. This column, 
describing 
educational 
games, 
suggests 
guidelines 
specifically elicited from game-based learning theory. The 
column named child-computer interaction suggests design 
recommendations specifically aimed for children as users. A 
compressed version of the constructed framework is 
presented in Table 1 below. 
TABLE I.  
COMPRESSED VERSION OF THE THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
OF DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR EDUCATIONAL GAMES AND CHILD-COMPUTER 
INTERACTION.  
 
Design: The first row describes all components and 
design choices implemented in a game that are under direct 
control of the designer. Examples of such components are 
colours, characters, and story elements incorporated in 
quests and obstacles. 
Dynamics: In the second row of the table, guidelines 
within dynamics and interaction are given. Dynamics within 
a game refer to the runtime behaviour of the implemented 
design-components when input is given from a player. One 
common example in games is when the player can collect 
money or select clothes for its avatar. 
Experience: The last row provides guidelines within the 
area of Experience within game design. As other game 
design researchers [1][2][17] have renamed the “Aesthetics” 
area of MDA in their framework, the same adjustment has 
also been implemented in this framework. Experience in this 
framework stands for, as the title implies, the experience 
and reactions of the player.  
VI. 
EVALUATING THE FRAMEWORK 
Within an ongoing project, an application for children to 
be used before undergoing an MRI-scanning procedure was 
developed. 
By 
preparing 
children 
in 
their 
home 
environment, the amount of sedation can be lowered and 
through that, the discomfort of patients is reduced, as well 
as the costs associated with preparing and sedating children. 
The application COSMO@HOME consists of games and 
interactive exercises to prepare the children, and to convey 
important learning goals. For example, increase the 
understanding of the size of the MRI-scanner and its sounds, 
the need for lying still for a long period of time, and 
information about not being allowed to bring metal objects 
into the MRI-scanner.   
The framework was evaluated and tested on the 
COSMO@HOME application to investigate how useful and 
usable the framework was. A walkthrough of the application 
was conducted by an expert by reviewing and comparing the 
application with the guidelines. User testing with children 
was continually made within the COSMO@HOME project. 
In April 2020, user testing was conducted by the project 
group at the University Hospital Leuven (KU Leuven). 
Eight children participated in the user tests, ranging from 
four to nine years old. The average age of the children was 
6.5 years. Results from the tests have been examined to 
detect possible similarities between the findings from the 
walkthrough and experiences from the user tests. Finally, 
interviews with two game designers/developers within the 
COSMO@HOME project were made to obtain further 
insights about the framework.  
To highlight the implications, that the evaluations had on 
the framework, the outcome of the evaluations is presented 
in relationship to the different aspects of the framework. 
Topics that were brought up during the interviews were 
mainly in the areas of designing for children and learning 
through games. The interviewees also evaluated the 
framework and provided feedback about structure and 
applicability. Based on the findings from the different 
evaluation methods, a new version of the framework was 
created to increase the usability of the guidelines. 
The experience from the walkthrough showed that most 
of the guidelines were applicable to the application. 
However, some guidelines were easier to apply than others, 
which was also pointed out by the interviewees. The 
guidelines that had more concrete recommendations – for 
example, “Avoid too-small targets, especially on the edge 
of the screen” – were easier to identify with regard to 
whether the application met the recommendation or not. 
More abstract guidelines, such as “Incorporate a reasonable 
level of challenge; not too easy or too hard” or “Designers 
should be aware of individual differences and preferences”, 
were more challenging to apply. The perception of these 
guidelines can be both subjective and dependent on the 
intended user group; although it was possible to reason 
about the guideline with respect to the application, it was 
harder to clarify whether the recommendations were met or 
not.  
The experience of evaluating the application via the 
walkthrough was that written guidelines can be applied and 
used to reason about design choices in educational games 
for children, and that concrete recommendations are easier 
to apply. Although more abstract or generic guidelines can 
work as good reminders or aspects to reason about, it is 
harder to answer whether such a recommendation is met or 
not.  
To create a framework of guidelines that can be used in 
an easy and accessible way by designers was also an 
374
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

important aim of this study. By applying the framework to 
the application, important indications were given about 
which design choices of the framework and updates of 
guidelines should be made to make them easier to use.  
The first version of the guidelines consisted of 17 
guidelines within educational games and 25 guidelines 
within child-computer interaction, to give a total number of 
42 guidelines. The guidelines were divided into two 
columns in the two research areas. The number of 
guidelines and the distribution of these into two columns, 
which spanned over three pages, were not favourable for 
giving a good overview of the framework. To create a more 
usable and accessible framework, some guidelines were 
excluded, and some were pulled together to compress the 
first version of the framework.  
The columns in the framework worked well to clarify 
which guideline corresponded to which research area – 
either educational games or child-computer interaction. 
However, many of the guidelines acknowledge similar 
aspects, and the benefit of dividing the guidelines in the 
framework was not particularly useful when applying to the 
evaluation. Therefore, another improvement for the updated 
framework was to merge the current columns into one. The 
order in which the guidelines were presented by the game 
design components: design, dynamics, and experience was 
changed to start with recommendations that were more 
abstracts or generic, and end with more specific guidelines. 
The new version of the guidelines instead followed the 
order: experience, dynamics, and design. To summarize, 
updates regarding the design and formulations of the 
guidelines for the second version were: 
• 
New order of game design components into 
experience, dynamics, and design. 
• 
A merging of the two columns and presenting the 
guidelines together. 
• 
Grouping of similar guidelines near each other to 
improve the structure of the framework. 
• 
Summary of recurrent guidelines to shorten the 
framework and not to repeat concepts. 
• 
Reformulation of some of the guidelines to provide a 
better understanding. 
• 
New layout of the framework to improve the 
overview. 
Changes according to the bullets mentioned above 
resulted in a new version with 24 guidelines presented as the 
Educational Games for Children (EGC) framework; see 
Figure 1. 
VII. DISCUSSION  
In this work, theories and guidelines from 16 peer 
reviewed publications within the field of games, game-
based learning, and child-computer interaction were 
combined into a new framework in the specific field of 
educational games for children, called the EGC-framework. 
The final product presents 24 guidelines in an accessible 
format, concerning important aspects to consider for 
educational games with children as users. 
One of the main challenges was to combine and design a 
framework that incorporates the three different research 
fields that are all relevant for educational games targeting 
children. To make the framework easy to use and follow, it 
was decided not to group the guidelines with respect to their 
research fields, but rather to which aspect within a game 
they refer to.  
It is important to keep in mind that the framework is not 
intended to be used as a checklist but rather as a means to 
reflect and be aware of aspects to consider when developing 
educational games for children. However, it can give an 
indication 
of 
how 
well 
a 
game 
meets 
these 
recommendations, and detect which aspects could be given 
further consideration. The guidelines are intended to give 
advice based on previous research, and it is possible to 
apply them before, after, or during game development.  
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, this work suggests that it could be 
beneficial to combine guidelines and theories from different 
areas. The walkthrough showed that it worked well to apply 
the framework of design guidelines in the development of 
an educational game for healthcare, and that it was also 
possible to evaluate how well the game met the 
recommendations.  
Moreover, findings from the user tests conducted at the 
University Hospital Leuven supported several aspects and 
findings that were also acknowledged by the walkthrough. 
Through interviews with designers/developers within the 
COSMO@HOME project it was confirmed that the 
framework is able to provide insights and acknowledge 
aspects when developing an application within this 
particular field.  
One final important conclusion is that the framework 
should not be seen as a checklist but rather as a way in 
which to reflect and acknowledge important aspects within 
game-based learning and child-computer interaction.  
A next step is to evaluate the framework based on the 
field trials with the children in the COSMO@HOME 
project. Another next step to further develop the framework 
is to systematically review it in future projects. This could 
be done by letting developers use the framework when 
designing a game within the field, and continuously evaluate 
the usefulness and usability of the framework. Interviews 
could be conducted to get concrete feedback, and after being 
updated, another usability test of the framework could be 
performed. Future research within the field of educational 
games 
for 
children 
can 
contribute 
with 
further 
recommendations, but also broaden the field by including 
different aspects, for example, regarding research about 
socio-emotional needs in relationship to social interaction 
and social sharing. 
375
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The updated version of the guidelines – the Educational Games for Children (EGC) framework
376
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The COSMO@HOME project was funded by EIT health. 
The authors would like to thank all project members and 
participants in the COSMO@HOME project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Wolfgang, M. Barret, D. Görlich, “Design, Dynamics, 
Experience (DDE): An Advancement of the MDA 
Framework for Game Design,”, pp. 27-45, 2017, DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-319-53088-8_3. 
[2] B. Winn, “The Design, Play, and Experience Framework,” 
vol. 2, pp. 1010-1024, 2009, DOI: 10.4018/978-1-59904-808-
6. 
[3] N. Soni, A. Aloba, K. S. Morga, and P. J. Wisniewski, “A 
framework 
of 
Touchscreen 
interaction 
design 
recommendations for children (TIDRC): Characterizing the 
gap between research evidence and design practice,” Proc 
18th ACM Int Conf Interact Des Child IDC 2019, pp. 419-
431, 2019. DOI: 10.1145/3311927.3323149. 
[4] H. Gelderblom and P. Kotzé, “Designing technology for 
young children: What we can learn from theories of cognitive 
development,” ACM Int Conf Proceeding Ser, pp. 66-75, 
2008 DOI: 10.1145/1456659.1456668. 
[5] S. B. Linek, “As you like it: What media psychology can tell 
us about educational game design,” pp. 606-632, 2011. 
[6] P. Felicia, Improving Learning and Motivation through 
Educational Games, Information Science Reference, 2011. 
[7] S. Kelle, R. Klemke, and M. Specht, “Design patterns for 
learning games,” Int J Technol Enhanc Learn, vol. 3, 2011, 
DOI: 10.1504/IJTEL.2011.045452.ß 
[8] A. Amory, “Game object model version II: A theoretical 
framework for educational game development,” Educ Technol 
Res Dev; vol. 55, pp. 51-77, 2007, DOI: 10.1007/s11423-006-
9001-x 
[9] K. Kapp, The gamification of Learning and Instruction. 
Pfeiffer, 2012. 
[10] S. Chiasson and C. Gutwin, “Design Principles for Children’s 
Technology,” vol. 7, 2005. 
[11] A. Abdul Jabbar and P. Felicia, “Gameplay Engagement and 
Learning in Game-Based Learning: A Systematic Review,” 
Rev Educ Res, vol. 85, pp. 740-779, 2015, DOI: 
10.3102/0034654315577210 
[12] T. W. Malone, “Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating 
instruction,” Cogn Sci; vol. 5, pp. 333-369, 1981, DOI: 
10.1016/S0364-0213(81)80017-1. 
[13] S. Chiasson and C. Gutwin, Design Principles for Children’s 
Technology, vol. 7, 2005. 
[14] Ofcom, The office of communication UK. Children and 
Parents: Media Use and Attitudes, pp. 5, 2020. 
[15] H. Gelderblom and P. Kotzé, “Ten design lessons from the 
literature on child development and children’s use of 
technology,” Proc IDC 2009 - 8th Int Conf Interact Des 
Child, 2009, DOI: 10.1145/1551788.1551798. 
[16] V. Celis, J. Husson, V. Vanden Abeele L. Loyez, L. Van den 
Audenaeren, P. Ghesquiére, A. Goeleven, J. Wounters and L. 
Geurts, ”Translating preschoolers’ game experiences into 
design guidelines via laddering study,” ACM int conf 
proceeding 
ser, 
2013, 
DOI: 
10.1145/2485760.2485760.2485772 
[17] R. Hunicke, M. Leblanc, and R. Zubek, “MDA: A formal 
approach to game design and game research,” AAAI Work - 
Tech Rep, 2004. 
 
377
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

