Navigation and Interaction in the Virtual Reconstruction 
 of the Town of Otranto in the Middle Ages 
 
 
Lucio T. De Paolis, Giovanni Aloisio 
Department of Innovation Engineering 
Salento University 
Lecce, Italy 
lucio.depaolis@unisalento.it 
giovanni.aloisio@unisalento.it 
Massimo Manco 
Engineering Faculty 
Salento University 
Lecce, Italy 
massimo.manco@unisalento.it 
 
 
Abstract— The main goal of the Human-Computer Interaction 
technology is to improve interactions between users and 
computers by making computers more usable and receptive to 
the user's needs. This paper focuses on an application of 
navigation and interaction in a virtual environment using the 
Wiimote and the Balance Board of Nintendo. The aim is to 
make the interaction easier for users without any experience of 
navigation in a virtual world and more efficient for trained 
users. The application has been developed for the navigation 
and interaction in the virtual environment of the MediaEvo 
project. The MediaEvo Project aims at developing a multi-
channel and multi-sensory platform for edutainment in 
Cultural Heritage. 
Keywords-component; 
user 
interface, 
cultural 
virtual 
heritage, Nintendo WiiMote, Nintendo Balance Board 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Edutainment, a neologism created from the combination 
of the words education and entertainment, refers to any form 
of entertainment aimed at an educational role. The 
videogame is one of the most exciting and immediate media 
of the edutainment applications because the game enables a 
type of multisensory and immersive relationship of the user 
through its interactive interface; moreover, the cyberspace 
of the videogame is a privileged point of sharing and 
socializing among players. 
Edutainment is an up-and-coming field that combines 
education with entertainment aspects; thus, it enhances the 
learning environment and makes it much more engaging and 
fun-filled. 
One of the most important applications of edutainment is 
undoubtedly the reconstruction of 3D environments aimed 
at the study of cultural heritage; the use of Virtual Reality in 
this field makes it possible to examine the three-dimensional 
high-resolution 
environments 
reconstructed 
by 
using 
information retrieved from the archaeological and historical 
studies and to navigate in these in order to test new 
methodologies or to practically evaluate the assessment. 
Virtual Reality (VR) technology makes it also possible to 
create applications for edutainment purposes for the general 
public and to integrate different learning approaches.  
The building of three-dimensional renderings is an 
efficient way of storing information, a means to 
communicate a large amount of visual information and a 
tool 
for 
constructing 
collaborative 
worlds 
with 
a 
combination of different media and methods. By recreating 
or simulating something concerning an ancient culture, 
virtual heritage applications are a bridge between people of 
the ancient culture and modern users. 
One of the best uses of the virtual models is that of 
creating a mental tool to help students learn about things 
and explore ancient cultures and places that no longer exist 
or that might be too dangerous or too expensive to visit. In 
addition, it allows students to interact in a new way, using 
many possibilities for collaboration. A very effective way to 
use VR to teach students about ancient cultures is to make 
them enter the virtual environment as a shared social space 
and allow them to play as members of that society. 
The development technologies of video games are today 
driven by strong and ever-increasing request, but there are 
very few investments related to teaching usage of such 
technologies, they are still restricted to the entertainment 
context. Several VR applications in Cultural Heritage have 
been developed, but only very few of these with an 
edutainment aim. 
The Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) technology is 
concerned with methodologies and methods for designing 
new interfaces and interaction techniques, for evaluating 
and comparing interfaces and developing descriptive and 
predictive models and theories of interaction. 
The HCIs improve interactions between users and 
computers by making computers more usable and receptive 
to the user's needs. 
Researches in HCI field focus on the developing of new 
design methodologies and new hardware devices and on 
exploring new paradigms and theories for the interaction. 
The end point in the interface design would then lead to a 
120
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

paradigm in which the interaction with computers becomes 
similar to the one between human beings. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORKS 
The 
techniques 
for 
navigation 
within 
virtual 
environments have covered a broad kind of approaches 
ranging from directly manipulating the environment with 
gestures of the hands, to indirectly navigating using hand-
held widgets, to identifying some body gestures and to 
recognizing speech commands. Perhaps the most prevalent 
style of navigation control for virtual environments is 
directly manipulating the environment with gestures or 
movements of part of the user’s body.  
Some developed systems are based on a head-directed 
navigation technique in which the orientation of the users 
head determines the direction and speed of navigation [1]. 
This technique has the advantage of requiring no additional 
hardware besides a head tracker, but has the disadvantage 
that casual head motions when viewing a scene can be 
misinterpreted as navigation commands. In addition, a 
severe drawback of this and other head-based techniques is 
that it is impossible to perform the common and desirable 
real-world operation of moving in one direction while 
looking in another. 
Another direct body-based navigation technique is found 
in some systems that use sensors to measure the tilt of the 
user’s spine or the orientation of the user’s torso in order to 
determine the direction of the motion and to enable the 
decoupling of the user’s head orientation from their 
direction of movement [2]. 
Another category of techniques for motion control is 
based on speech recognition. Speech allows a user to 
indicate parameters of navigation and can often be used in 
conjunction with gestures to provide rich, natural immersive 
navigation controls [3]. Speech controls should play a role 
in virtual environment navigation, but it is also critical to 
support an effective navigation based on speech-free 
techniques. 
In the last few years, systems based on locomotion 
interfaces and on control navigation by walking in place for 
the navigation in a virtual environment have also been 
developed. 
String Walker [4] is a locomotion interface that uses eight 
strings actuated by motor-pulley mechanisms mounted on a 
turntable in order to cancel the displacement of the walker. 
String Walker enables users to maintain their positions 
while walking in various directions in virtual environments 
because, when the shoes move, the strings pull them in the 
opposite direction and cancel the step. The position of the 
walker is fixed in the real world by this computer-controlled 
tension of the strings that can pull the shoes in any direction, 
so the walker can perform a variety of gaits, including side-
walking or backward walking 
The CirculaFloor [5] locomotion interface uses a group of 
movable floors that employ a holonomic mechanism in 
order to achieve omni-directional motion. The circulation of 
the floors enables users to walk in arbitrary directions in a 
virtual environment while their positions are maintained. 
The CirculaFloor creates an infinite omni-directional 
surface using a set of movable tiles that provide a sufficient 
area for walking and a precision tracing of the foot position 
is not required. This method has the potential to create an 
uneven surface by mounting an up-and-down mechanism on 
each tile. 
Powered Shoes [6] employs roller skates actuated by 
motors and flexible shafts and supports omni-directional 
walking, but the walker cannot perform a variety of gaits. 
Powered Shoes is a revolutionary advance for entertainment 
and simulation applications, because it provides the 
proprioceptive feedback of walking. 
III. 
THE MEDIAEVO PROJECT 
The MediaEvo Project aims to develop a multi-channel 
and multi-sensory platform in Cultural Heritage and to test 
new data processing technologies for the realization of a 
digital didactic game oriented to the knowledge of medieval 
history and society [7]. 
The game is intended as a means to experience a loyal 
representation of the possible scenarios (environments, 
characters and social roles) in the historic-geographical 
context of Otranto during Frederick Age (XIII century).  
We chose Otranto as an example town; Otranto is located 
in the easternmost tip of the Italian peninsula, in Puglia, in 
the so-called Italy’s heel,. Due to its geographical position, 
Otranto was like a bridge between East and West.  
Otranto was a Byzantine and a Gothic centre, later ruled 
by the Normans, Swabians, the Anjou and the Aragonese. 
After a long siege, on 14 August 1480 the town was caught 
and the inhabitants were massacred by the Turkish army. 
This mix of history can be seen in the enigmatic mosaic of 
the Cathedral, a Romanesque church built during the 
Norman domination in the 10th century on the axis that 
joined Rome to Byzantium. The mosaic, done by the monk 
Pantaleone in the 12th century, covers almost the entire 
floor of the Cathedral, for over 16 metres; its size is nothing 
compared to the complexity of images and references that 
mixes Biblical narration from the Old and New Testaments 
with some pagan elements and others of Eastern derivation. 
The implementation of an edutainment platform is 
strongly influenced by the definition of the scenery that is 
the world in which the framework is placed with the related 
learning objects and learning path, the characters, the 
scene’s objects, the logic, hence, the rules of the game, the 
audio content, the texts and anything related to its use. 
The framework will have features of strategy games, in 
which the decision capabilities of a user have a big impact 
121
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

on the result, which in our case is the achievement of a 
learning target. Nevertheless, the strategy and tactics are in 
general opposed by unforeseeable factors (provided by the 
game), connected with the edutainment modules, in order to 
provide a higher level of participation, which is expressed in 
terms of the ease with which it is learnt. The idea is to 
provide a competition between the players, during their 
learning. 
The system, on the basis of a well-defined learning target 
and eventually based on the knowledge of the user, will 
continuously propose a learning path (learning path 
composed by a sequence of learning objects), in order to 
allow the achievement of particular learning results.  
A Digital Terrain Model (DTM) that has been produced 
using ESRI ArcGIS, containing all historical information 
like sea level, rivers, etc. It has been saved in .dif format and 
imported in the game engine.  
For building and street modelling, we first used 
AutoCAD, 3ds Max, Cinema 4D. Characters and animation 
are made using 3ds Max. 
Once defined a list of modular elementary residential 
units, according to the local medieval unit system, we 
composed the urban landscape in which monuments, 
infrastructures and situations are located. 
For the building of the virtual environment we used the 
Torque Constructor editor of GarageGames in order to 
create 3D architectural contents for the Torque 3D engine. 
The choice of the Torque Constructor was prompted by 
technical considerations regarding the ability of software to 
perform a direct mapping of the files “.map”, the 
compatibility level with the Torque Game Engine chosen to 
develop the game, the immediacy and the usability of 
internal tools.  
The Torque Constructor has proved to be an efficient tool 
for the direct implementation of 3D graphics models. In 
particular, it has many geometrical tools for the graphic 
processing of the reality context and different controls to 
select the top of the structure or individual brush model. 
All units made in the Torque Constructor have been 
imported into the Torque Game Engine. The initial testing 
step revealed several problems of navigability of the objects. 
These problems were related to the incompatibility between 
the domains of collision associated with the objects 
imported into the three-dimensional environment and the 
avatar. 
Tests carried out have helped identify and solve these 
problems by setting the values associated to the collision 
domains and to the proportions between objects and avatars. 
At present, all units are properly imported and successfully 
navigated. 
In the context of computer graphics for cultural heritage, 
a stable algorithm has been implemented to import CAD 
objects into the Torque Game Engine platform and to ensure 
navigation into each graphic structure. This technique 
together with an efficient system for exporting textures and 
paintings will be used to realize graphic complex 
environments for the 2D/3D reconstruction in cultural 
heritage [8]. 
Figure 1 shows some areas of the virtual reconstruction of 
the town of Otranto in the Middle Ages. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Parts of the virtual reconstruction of the town of Otranto. 
IV. 
THE NINTENDO WII 
Wii is the last console produced by Nintendo; it was 
released in October 2006 and, according to official data of 
2010, has surpassed 70 million units sold. The reasons for 
this success can be undoubtedly found in the new approach 
that the gaming console gives the user in terms of 
interaction that effectively makes it usable and enjoyable by 
a large part of users. The secret of this usability is the 
innovative interaction system; the Wiimote (word obtained 
as a combination of "Wii" and "Remote") replaces the 
traditional gamepad controller type (with cross directional 
stick and several buttons) with a common object: the remote 
122
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

control.  
The Wiimote is provided with an infrared camera that can 
sense the infrared LED of a special bar (called "Sensor 
Bar") and it can interpret, by means of a built-in 
accelerometer, the movements of translation, rotation and 
tilt. 
The Wiimote has been equipped with a series of 
accessories that increase its potential, such as the Balance 
Board, that, by means of four pressure sensors at each 
corner, is able to interpret the movements of the body in 
order to control the actions of the user in a videogame. 
Figure 2 shows the interaction modalities of Wiimote and 
Balance Board. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Interaction modalities of Wiimote and Balance Board. 
Since the frequency of communication between the Wii 
console and the Wiimote/Balance Board are those of the 
standard Bluetooth, these devices can be used as tools to 
interact with any computer equipped with the same 
technology. Appropriate libraries have been realized in 
order to allow the interfacing between these devices and a 
computer. 
V. 
THE DEVELOPED APPLICATION 
This paper presents an application of navigation and 
interaction in a virtual environment using the Wiimote and 
the Balance Board of Nintendo. The aim is to make the 
interaction easier for users without any experience of 
navigation in a virtual world and more efficient for trained 
users; for this reason we need to use some intuitive input 
devices oriented to its purpose and that can increase the 
sense of immersion.  
Because we walk on our feet, controlling walking in 
Virtual Reality could be felt as more natural when done with 
the feet than with other modes of input. For this reason we 
used the Nintendo Balance Board as input device for 
navigation that offers a new and accessible way to gain 
input. It is a low-cost interface that transmits via Bluetooth 
the sensor data to the computer and enables the calculation 
of the direction the user is leaning to. 
In addition, in order to implement the control of different 
views and to change the point of view of the user, in our 
application we use the Nintendo Wiimote. 
A software layer that allows to use the Balance Board and 
the Wiimote as input devices for any application that runs 
on a computer has been realized. The aim is to allow to 
receive signals and commands from the Wiimote and the 
Balance Board and to translate these into commands for the 
computer in order to emulate the keyboard and the mouse. 
Figure 3 shows the use of Wiimote and Balance Board in 
the MediaEvo game. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Use of Wiimote and Balance Board in the MediaEvo game. 
The application, created to provide a new system of 
interaction in the virtual world of the MediaEvo project, can 
be coupled to any application of navigation in a virtual 
world. 
To run the application, it is first necessary to configure 
the keys able to emulate any type of movement, to set the 
sensitivity of the Balance Board and then to connect the 
device; the information on the data received from the device 
are displayed in real time. 
The interface that visualize the data received from the 
Wiimote and Balance Board is divided into two main 
sections: the left panels contain the control with all the data 
received via Bluetooth from the devices, whereas in the 
right side it is possible to set the associations among the 
command given to the device and the equivalent command 
simulated from the computer, the levels of sensitivity and 
threshold beyond which the interactions occur. 
For these operations the software uses two open-source 
libraries in C# and the WiimoteLib InputSimulator; the 
WiimoteLib is a library for interfacing the Nintendo 
Wiimote and other devices (such as the Balance Board) in 
an environment .NET [9].  The purpose of this library 
within the application is to simulate the use of a mouse and 
a keyboard starting from the properly interpreted and 
translated inputs received from the Wiimote and Balance 
Board. 
Regarding the interaction by means of the Wiimote, the 
aim is to simulate the mouse using two modalities of 
interaction. 
"Mode 1" uses the movement on the X and Y axes of the 
accelerometer to move the mouse (and, in the 3D 
environment, the user’s point of view) on the longitudinal 
123
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

and 
latitudinal 
axes; 
the 
value 
provided 
by 
the 
accelerometer is compared with the sensitivity set during 
configuration. 
"Mode 2", that is the default mode, allows to move the 
mouse (and, then, the user’s point of view) using the 
direction arrows of the Wiimote. 
Figure 4 shows the configuration interface of the Wiimote 
and Balance Board devices. 
Figure 4.  Configuration interface of the Wiimote and Balance Board. 
The modalities of interaction provided by the application 
involve the use of the Wiimote and Balance Board 
simultaneously. In particular, the user is able to move the 
avatar in the virtual environment by tipping the scales in the 
direction where he wants to obtain the move; an imbalance 
in forward or reverse leads a movement forward or 
backward of the virtual character, while the lateral 
imbalance corresponds to the so-called "strafe" in video 
games, where the movement is made on the horizontal axis 
while maintaining a fixed pointing direction of the gaze. 
The Wiimote, however, is used to impart the look 
direction of the character. 
Figure 5 shows a user during the navigation in the 
MediaEvo virtual environment using the Wiimote and the 
Balance Board. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents an application able to communicate 
with the Nintendo Wiimote and Balance Board and 
developed in order to provide a new modality of navigation 
and interaction in the virtual environment of the MediaEvo 
project. The aim of the MediaEvo Project is the 
development of a multi-channel and multi-sensory platform 
for the edutainment in Cultural Heritage. 
Possible 
future 
developments 
could 
include 
the 
conversion of the application in external library, by adding 
specific methods and attributes to be directly integrated into 
other applications, and the porting of the developed 
application in a multi-platform language in order to be used 
in different development environments. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Navigation in the MediaEvo virtual environment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Fuhrmann , D. Schmalstieg, and M. Gervautz, “Strolling through 
Cyberspace with Your Hands in Your Pockets: Head Directed 
Navigation in Virtual Environments”, the 4th Eurographics Workshop 
on Virtual Environments, Springer-Verlag, 1998, pp. 216-227. 
[2] 
P. R. Cohen, M. Johnston, D. McGee, S. Oviatt, J. Pittman, I. Smith, 
L. Chen, and J. Clow, “QuickSet: Multimodal interaction for 
distributed 
applications”, 
the 
Fifth 
International 
Multimedia 
Conference (Multimedia ’97), ACM Press, 1997, pp. 31-40. 
[3] 
D.A. Bowman, S. Coquillart, B. Froehlich, M. Hirose, and Y. 
Kitamura, “3D User Interfaces: Theory and Practice”, Boston, MA, 
Addison-Wesley, Pearson Education, 2005, pp. 342-344. 
[4] 
H. Iwata, H. Yano, and M. Tomiyoshi, “String Walker”, International 
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques ACM 
SIGGRAPH 2007,  August 2007, San Diego, California. 
[5] 
H. Iwata, H. Yano, M., H. Fukushima, and H. Noma, “CirculaFloor”, 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, Jan-Feb. 2005, Vol. 25 
pp. 64 – 67. 
[6] 
H. Iwata, H. Yano, M., and H. Tomioka, “Powered Shoes”, 
International Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive 
Techniques ACM SIGGRAPH 2006, Boston, Massachusetts. 
[7] 
L.T. De Paolis, M.G. Celentano, P. Vecchio, L. Oliva, and G. Aloisio, 
"Otranto in the Middle Ages: a Virtual Cultural Heritage 
Application", 10th VAST International Symposium on Virtual 
Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage (VAST2009), September 
22-25, 2009, Malta. 
[8] 
L.T. De Paolis, M.G. Celentano, P. Vecchio, L. Oliva, and G. Aloisio, 
" A Multi-Channel and Multi-Sensorial Platform for the Edutainment 
in Cultural Heritage", IADIS International Conference Web Virtual 
Reality and Three-Dimensional Worlds 2010, July 27-29, 2010, 
Freiburg, Germany. 
[9] 
WiimoteLib - Managed Library for Nintendo Wii Remote, November 
2008. Available: http://www.brianpeek.com. 
 
124
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

