Gamification of a Project Management System 
Darius Ašeriškis, Robertas Damaševičius 
Software Engineering Department 
Kaunas University of Technology 
Kaunas, Lithuania 
darius.aseriskis@ktu.lt, robertas.damasevicius@ktu.lt  
 
 
Abstract—Gamification is the use of elements of game design 
and mechanics in serious contexts for enhancing the value of a 
service or a product for its users. We describe psychological 
foundations and social motives for gamification, its principles 
and concepts, game rules (mechanics) and elements of game as 
well as techniques and patterns of gamification. As a case 
study, we analyze gamification of a Trogon Project 
Management System. For evaluation of gamified interface, we 
propose to use WCAG 2.0 rules, adapted for evaluating color 
contrast of game layer interfaces, and System Usability Scale 
(SUS) to evaluate usability of gamification. 
Keywords—gamification; game design; game mechanics, 
interface; usability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, gamification has emerged as a new trend in 
development of enterprise information and e-commerce 
systems.  Gamification is the use of elements of game design 
(game rules, game techniques, gamified interfaces) in non-
game contexts [1], such as marketing, employee performance 
and training, and innovation. The aim is to enhance the value 
of a service or business product beyond its face value, as 
well as to boost user engagement, loyalty, and satisfaction. 
Game elements such as badges, levels and scoreboards 
implemented on top of the actual business processes and 
combined with meaningful game rules that encourage 
competition between game players may help to achieve 
positive outcomes such as higher sales of a product, drive 
marketing or increase job performance. 
In a recent survey by Pew Research Center, 53% of 
people surveyed said that, by 2020, the use of gamification 
will be widespread [2]. A well know study of Gartner 
claimed that by 2015, more than 50% of organizations that 
manage innovation processes will gamify those processes 
[3]. Over 70% of Forbes Global 2000 companies plan to use 
at least some elements of gamification for product marketing 
and customer retention [4]. While some of the expectations 
of the spread of gamification may be overhyped, there are 
several examples of successful gamification, which include 
Idea Street [5], a social collaboration platform that uses 
game mechanics, Badgeville [6], a platform that enables 
businesses to apply gamification across their web and mobile 
experiences; and RedCritter Tracker [7], an Agile Project 
Management service with badges, rewards, leaderboards, and 
real-time Twitter-style feeds. These gamified systems have 
some common aspects: an attractive graphical user interface; 
strong emphasis on social competition; and an engaging 
award system. 
However, gamification still poses great challenges to 
software designers: 1) how to design meaningful and 
engaging game rules as well as integrate them with business 
rules, 2) how to create an attractive game interface, which 
integrate smoothly with a user interface of a serious system, 
3) how to evaluate success of gamification both in terms of 
its usability (aesthetic aspect) and customer retainment 
(pragmatic aspect).  
In this paper, we describe our experience in gamifying a 
Project Management System. We formally describe game 
rules formally, present its architecture and implementation of 
gamified user interface. Furthermore, we propose using 
quantitative 
(modified 
WCAG 
2.0 
(Web 
Content 
Accessibility Guidelines) [8]) and qualitative (SUS (System 
Usability Scale) based [9]) evaluation methods to evaluate 
gamified interfaces. 
The structure of the remaining parts of the paper is as 
follows. Section II discusses the related work. Section III 
describes psychological foundations and social motives of 
gamification as well as concepts and principles, rules and 
elements, techniques and patterns of gamification. Section 
IV describes gamification of a Project Management System 
Trogon. Section V proposes evaluating gamified interfaces 
using Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 
[8] guidelines and System Usability Scale (SUS) [9] as well 
as presents the results. Finally, Section V presents 
conclusions. 
Several cases of application of gamification are described 
in the literature in the context of enterprise information 
systems (IS) such as a generic platform for enterprise 
gamification [10], implemented using service oriented and 
event-driven principles and best practices; authentication 
games [11] for improving user’s behavior regarding security; 
and the demand dispatch system [12] with a special scoring 
system, leader boards and social competition aspects 
embedded into user interface. 
II. 
ANALYSIS OF GAMIFICATION 
A. Psychological and social foundations 
Primary motivation for gamification is a psychology-
based one, namely, to enhance user or customer motivation 
to do a job or to increase and retain addiction to a service or 
a product using a game as a tool.  
Gamification can be explained by Fogg Behavior Model 
(FBM) [13], which claims that both, motivation to perform 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and ability to perform, must converge at the same moment 
for a behavior to occur. Motivation must be supported by 
positive feedback from game mechanics that continuously 
triggers a user to perform specific actions and keeps him 
interested in the game. 
Psychological foundation of gamification has been 
elaborated further by Wu [14], who analyzes why and how 
gamification is able to drive actions, and by Gnauk et al. 
[12], who studied extrinsic and intrinsic motivation and 
analyzed its relationship with external incentives and 
rewards. 
Another 
motivation 
for 
gamification 
is 
social 
competition. Here, gamification is driven by the need to 
interact with other players and compare one’s results. Thus, 
gamification requires introduction of real-time multi-user 
games with complex rules of game that have some similarity 
to social networking platforms.  
B. Formal theory 
Formally, gamified systems can be described using a 
theory of multi-games. Multi-Games is a class of games 
when each player can allocate its resources in varying 
proportions to play in a number of different environments, 
each representing a basic game in its own right [15]. Each 
player can have different sets of strategies for different basic 
games. The actors are permitted to play multiple games 
simultaneously. This multiplicity means that the actor must 
take interactions among relevant games and other players 
into account [16]. Gamified IS can be interpreted as a multi-
game, i.e. a system of two games, where one game is a 
serious game (i.e., target IS) and another game is an 
entertainment game (i.e., gamification layer in target IS), 
where an action in the serious game leads to a reward in the 
entertainment game. 
Following Grunvogel [17], each game G  is a triple 

S M F
,
,
, where S  is a set that represents the states of the 
different game objects, M  is a monoid that represents an 
input of the players, and F  is an action of the monoid M on 
set S as follows: 
S
M
F S


:
.  
Then gamification can be described as a product of two 
games 
G1
and
G2
as 
follows: 

2 
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
,
,
F
F
M
S M
S
G
G





, where 
1
G is a serious 
(economical) game with tangible external actions and 
rewards, and 
2
G is a non-serious game based on top of the 
1
G with virtual actions and rewards. 
C. Elements and Rules 
According to Salen and Zimmerman [18], a game must 
have 1) Rules, 2) Players, 3) Struggle (artificial conflict), and 
4) Goals (quantifiable outcomes). While the general goal of 
each game is a win, where can be multiple ways or elements 
of a game to reflect the player’s path towards victory such as 
badges, which represent player achievements; leader-boards, 
which allow comparing one’s achievements among multiple 
players; and levels, which reflect the growth of player skill.  
Each game element can be described using the Frang [19] 
scheme as follows: Summary (visualization of an element 
with a proper description), Purpose, Ability, Motivation, 
Radoff's type(s) of fun (such as competition or exploration) 
[20], Dependencies with other game elements, and 
Importance. 
More abstractly, game elements can be specified using a 
XML-based Gamification Modelling Language (GaML) 
[21], which provides a mechanism for precise definition of 
gamification concepts that is suitable for exchange on game 
mechanics. Finally, game rules connect game elements into a 
game layer. Such game rules can be modeled using a Petri 
Net based Machinations visual modeling notation [22]. 
D. Models and patterns 
Several efforts exist at classifying and codifying 
recurring gamification practices and common techniques 
such 
as 
1) 
Mechanics-Dynamics-Aesthetics 
(MDA) 
framework [20], a conceptual model of game elements; 2) 
game design atoms [23]; 3) Game design patterns [24], 
commonly reoccurring parts of game design; 4) game 
mechanics [25]; and 5) Game interface design patterns, 
common successful game design components and solutions  
such as badges, levels, or leader boards [26]. 
E. Architectural design 
Gamification can be implemented using several 
architectural design methods:  
1) As a service: a separate gamification system is 
developed, which provides elements of gamification to other 
systems as a service (e.g., Mozilla Foundation OpenBadges 
[27]);  
2) As a module: a separate gamification module is 
developed that is integrated into a target system at a later 
stage of design (e.g., EcoDriving [28]);  
3) As a plugin: a full implementation of gamification is 
developed that is later added to a target system without any 
additional effort (e.g., Jira [29]);  
4) As a separate system: a gamification system and a 
target system are implemented separately and communicate 
with each other using messages (e.g., TaskVille [30]);  
5) As an integrated system: an integrated system is 
developed which combines both target functionality as well 
as game behavior/mechanics (e.g., RedCritter Tracker [7]). 
F. Integration with base system 
According to Neeli [25], gamification of a business IS 
can be performed at different levels with respect to business 
activities: 1) at superficial level, the game mechanics are 
used independent of business activity of being performed, 2) 
at integrated level, the game mechanics are integrated into 
the business activity being performed, and 3) at embedded 
level, the business activity is designed based on game 
mechanics. 
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
GAMIFICATION OF A PROJECT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
A. Base system 
We analyze gamification of a Project Management 
System (PMS) Trogon (see Figure 1), as an example of a 
business IS (Information System). 
B. Formal description 
Following Bista et al. [31], gamification of a Project 
Management System is a tuple: 
 
, , , , ,
, , ,
G
 J B R F P W T I D
  
(1) 
 
 
Figure 1.  Screenshots of Togon PMS 
where J – jobs which were entered into the PMS; B – 
badges defined in the PMS; R – ratings based on the number 
of finished jobs; W – registered workers; F – trees which 
represent jobs in the project forest; P – worker points 
received; I – month or week time interval; T – time 
represented in 15 minute time intervals; and D – a function 
to determine difficulty of jobs. 
The value of received points by a worker is a function 
 
 
















( )
0
,
0.1
count j
r
n
n
n
n
n
r
n
p
n
T
j
b j
y j
j
P j
D j
T
j
T
j

















 (2) 
Here,  
P j is the number of points received by a worker in 
time interval, 

b jn 
is a badge received by a worker, 


y jn ,
j is a function that maps badges to points; 


r
n
T
j
- 
time to complete the job 
nj , 


p
n
T
j
- planned time to 
complete the job, and 

D jn 
– difficulty of a job. 
The game rules are as follows: (1) Every job can have a 
badge b and planned work time  


p
n
T
j
. (2) Every worker 
has real work time 


r
n
T
j
. (3) Every job has its difficulty 

D jn 
. (4) Badge b is awarded if it is not withdrawn until 
the job status is „done“. Badge can be withdrawn by a 
project manager, if job quality is low or it took too long to 
finish. Quality assurance team members can remove the 
badge if there are many quality defects.  
The player ratings are computed as follows: 
1) A set of points is computed containing all 
employee points for considered time interval. 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
(3) 
2) The set P is sorted by descending point count. 
 
 
(4) 
3) Badge board sort order is computed like this: 
 
 
(5) 
4) Project forests are sorted by total forest size, which 
represents time it took to complete all jobs. 
C. Principles of gamification 
To gamify Trogon, a special solution was chosen 
combining the entire system with a gamification module. For 
this case study, a simple Project Management System was 
created with system gamification in mind. Gamification 
layer of Trogon PMS was encapsulated into a module. This 
gamification solution was chosen for several reasons: 
integration to an existing Project Management System is a 
too complex problem and can affect the quality of 
gamification; a full system implementation is necessary for 
the gamification module to be practically useful.  
For gamification of a system we used the following steps: 
1) Define game rules. 2) Allow players view all employee 
ratings. 3) Introduce badge system, which consists of several 
types of badges and a badge board. 4) Badge system was 
coupled with a level system. Every badge defines a skill and 
the more of the same type badges are collected the higher 
skill level received. 5) Special awards and bonuses are 
presented to most skilled employees as defined by the game 
rules. 
D. Elements and rules of a game 
The gamified Trogon PMS has a leaderboard, badge 
board and the project forest as main elements of 
gamification. Every element has its purpose. 1) The 
leaderboard 
creates 
competition 
between 
individual 
employees and allows to determine a game winner, which 
should be additionally awarded. 2) The badge board allows 
observing the skills of employees. In the badge board the 
employees are ordered by the total number of badges 
collected. Each badge (see Figure 2) represents a skill and 
has its own level. Progress between skill levels is displayed 
as a progress bar. 3) The project forest provided the element 
of scalability to represent the size of different projects.  
Project forest (see Figure 3) is a visualization of 
teamwork, which has three distinct areas: unoccupied plot 
means unfinished tasks, and areas with trees represent 
finished jobs. Every tree represents a different time interval it 
took to finish the job, while different type and complexity of 
a tree (Figure 4) shows that the job required more time to 
complete it. This creates a forest view where, which a project 
manager can use to visually evaluate and compare the 
complexity of jobs performed as well as the skill of the 
employee. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Game badges and badge levels. 
 
Figure 3.  Elements of project forest. 
 
Figure 4.  Project forest
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

E. Architecture of implementation 
The abstract architecture of Trogon PMS has three 
layers: 1) Website layer – this layer combines all visual 
elements into single system. Every website page is 
composed of one or more solutions from the solution layer. 
2) Solution layer – contains business level logic 
consolidated into specific solutions. Every solution targets a 
specific problem. 3) Database layer – this layer is the shared 
by all solutions. Database maps data objects to specific 
tables in the relational database schema. 
Gamification is one specific solution in the solution 
layer, and elements of gamification are used under multiple 
website pages. The class diagram (Figure 5) shows the 
division of solution into visual and logical parts. Visual and 
logical 
parts 
are 
connected 
by 
IGamificationDC 
(gamification data contract) and data object infterfaces 
(IUser, IProject, IUnit and IBadge). Gamification data 
contract allows us to map any system, which implements the 
gamification data contract. In implementation: IProject 
defines all project descriptive data; IUser defines all user 
descriptive data; IUnit defines a unit of work, which 
connects project, user and badge into a single system; and 
IBadge 
defines 
all 
badge 
descriptive 
data. 
IProjectExtensions 
and 
IUserExtensions 
introduce 
computational logic to IProject and IUser data objects. 
Computational logic is implemented as described in formal 
gamification description. BadgeBoard, LeaderBoard and 
ProjectBoard are visual elements, which generate the 
graphical user interface for the end user to interact. 
Game rules are formulated as follows. Tasks are 
registered and rewards for task fulfillment are assigned. 
Tasks are split into atomic jobs for which project manager 
can easily assign planned work time. Every job can hold a 
special skill badge. Employees enter information about their 
work results. Quality engineer/project manager checks 
completed jobs for defects, and awards badges. Employee 
points and badges become visible to all other employees. 
Every week best employee is selected to be awarded. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Gamification solution class diagram 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF GAMIFICATION  
Here, we describe the evaluation of gamified PMS using 
adaptation of WCAG 2.0 [8], and adaptation of System 
Usability Scale (SUS) [7] for gamified interfaces. 
A. Adapatation of WCAG 2.0 to Game Interface 
WCAG 2.0 [8] is a standard method for determining 
accessibility of a web interface. There are two ratings 
described in WCAG 2.0: the AA rating is assigned when 
contrast is >4.5, and AAA is assigned when contrast is >7. 
Usually the WCAG 2.0 requirements are used for text 
only, but in our case most of information is presented in 
images, therefore we extend these rules on graphical images. 
We use the following WCAG 2.0 evaluation scheme: 
1) If the number of colors conforming to WCAG 2.0 
contrast requirements is larger than the number of non-
conforming colors, the interface is WCAG 2.0 compliant. 
2) Else if the number of colors conforming to WCAG 2.0 
contrast requirements is less than the number of non-
conforming colors, but not by more than 50%, then interface 
has small problems, which, if resolved, would make the 
interface WCAG 2.0 compliant. 
3) Else the interface is considered to be non-compliant 
with WCAG 2.0. 
If interface is compliant with WCAG 2.0 then: 
1) If the AAA rating colors dominate then interface is 
WCAG 2.0 compliant. 
2) If the AA rating colors dominate then interface is 
WCAG 2.0 compliant. 
We use the following notation to describe interface 
compliance: 
 
WCAG 2.0 <X% AAA, Y% AA-, Z% AA> 
(6) 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Here, X, Y and Z are percentage value of the AAA, AA-, 
and AA rating complying colors. 
B. Results of Color Analysis 
In the color analysis part of the study, we have analyzed 
six images of the Trogon PMS interface: 
 
Dashboard page, which shows all unfinished tasks, 
system events and inner office communications.  
 
Tasks page, which displays all tasks registered in the 
system. 
 
Employee task page, which displays all tasks 
assigned to the employee in a Gantt graph.  
 
Monthly 
ratings 
page, 
which 
displays 
the 
employee’s ratings for the current month. 
 
Monthly badge page, which displays a sorted list of 
all employees and their badges with skill levels.  
 
Monthly project forest page, which displays all 
project forests, which had activity under this month.  
We analyze screenshots (JPG images) of the game layer 
interfaces. For our analysis we use ImageMagick to 
manipulate images, Lea Verou color contrast tool to compute 
color contrast and define WCAG 2.0 rating, and custom 
script to automate the experiment. 
Experiment consists of such steps: 1) We register the 
image of interface. 2) Using ImageMagick we generate 
image color histogram. 3) Using Lea Verou tool we check 
contrast of all colors against background color.  
The tool returns one possible ratings: 
 
None is received when color pair is not WCAG 2.0 
compatible. 
 
AA- is received when color pair is WCAG 2.0 AA 
compatible only for large elements. 
 
AA is received when color pair is WCAG 2.0 AA 
compatible. 
 
AAA is received when color pair is WCAG 2.0 
AAA compatible. 
The results of WCAG 2.0 evaluations are as follows. 
1) Monthly badge board is WCAG 2.0 compliant. 
 
WCAG 2.0 <AAA(48%), AA(23%), AA-(29%)> 
(7) 
2) Monthly project forest is WCAG 2.0 compliant. 
 
WCAG 2.0 <AAA(20%), AA(36%), AA-(44%)> 
(8) 
3) Monthly leaderboard is not WCAG 2.0 compliant 
but with small changes compliance could be 
achieved. 
4) Employee’s task page is not WCAG 2.0. 
5) Dashboard page is not WCAG 2.0. 
6) Task page is WCAG 2.0 compliant. 
 
WCAG 2.0 <AAA(69%), AA(13%), AA-(19%)> 
(9) 
C. Adaptation of SUS 
To rate usability of gamification we use System Usability 
Scale (SUS) [8] methodology. SUS already could be 
considered an industry standard for rating system or product 
usability. The main benefits of using SUS are as follows. 1) 
A very small number of respondents. Even with small 
number of respondents accurate results can be achieved. 2) 
Small number of questions allows a fast and efficient way to 
gather opinions. 3) Questionnaire can be used for system, 
product or module usability assessment. Drawback of using 
SUS is that it focuses on pragmatic quality. 
Normally SUS consists of ten questions (statements), 
which are divided into five question (statement) pairs. In a 
pair both questions ask the same question, but one from 
positive side and the other from negative side. The SUS 
score is computed using such methodology: Every answer 
scores from 0 to 4 points. Point scale is from 1 to 5. Every 
question points are computed by subtracting 1 from chosen 
scale value. Score scale of odd questions 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 is 
from 0 to 4. Score scale of even questions 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 is 
from 4 to 0. The final score is obtained by multiplying score 
by 2.5. The total SUS score is from 0 to 100. 
For evaluating usability of Trogon PMS, questionnaire 
consists of evaluation of game elements in Project 
Management System; data tables; first and second round 
views (ratings, badges and project forest). 
The respondents are asked to respond to such statements. 
 
1. 
I think what most people easily would learn game rules. 
2. 
For me game rules looked too difficult. 
3. 
For me gameplay elements looked easy to understand. 
4. 
I think what I would need an experts help to fully 
understand gameplay elements. 
5. 
I would like to have the possibility to always view 
leaderboard. 
6. 
The leaderboard looked too complex for me. 
7. 
I easily understand the role of badge board in this system. 
8. 
I would need a lot of learning before I fully understand 
badge board role in this system. 
9. 
I think what project forest is easy to understand. 
10. 
I think what project forest has a lot of imprecisions. 
 
Every pair of questions evaluates part of system 
gamification and whole questionnaire evaluates usability of 
entire system. Every pair of questions evaluated different 
parts of game elements: Statements 1-2 ask for usability 
evaluation for game rules. Statements 3-4 ask for evaluating 
gameplay elements. Statements 5-6 ask for evaluating 
leaderboards. Statements 7-8 ask for evaluating badge board. 
Statements 9-10 ask for evaluating project forest. 
Questionnaire also asks to provide information about the 
respondent: 
1. 
Your gender. 
2. 
Your age. 
3. 
Do you specialize in IT sector? 
4. 
Comments. 
D. Results of SUS survey 
60 participants were asked to participate in the survey, 
and 30 participants have filled the questionnaire form. The 
main group of respondents was from 18 to 35 years. This 
age interval is best suited for gamification questionnaire, 
because their age group is considered to be the largest 
player group. The questionnaire included 22 men and 8 
women participants. 23 of 30 participants work directly with 
Information Technology (IT) systems. 
Every SUS question is evaluated from 0 to 10 points and 
every element is covered by two questions. Therefore, every 
gamification element can receive from 0 to 20 points. The 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

gamification of entire system can receive from 0 to 100 
points. To evaluate gamification qualitatively, we introduce 
the following intervals: 
 0-30 points – gamification is unusable. 
 31-50 points – gamification usability is poor. 
 51-70 points – gamification usability is average. 
 71-90 points – gamification usability is good. 
 91-100 points – gamification usability is excellent. 
 
Figure 6.  Gamification usability evaluation by user gender 
In Figure 6, we present the results of SUS evaluation by 
gender. Gamification usability by genders has only small 
difference between women and men. The average difference 
is 3.5 points. We can assume what gender has almost no 
effect on gamification usability. Therefore, gamification of 
Trogon PMS is understood and evaluated pretty much 
without any differences between women and men. 
In Figure 7, we can see large difference between 
evaluation gamification usability based on the experience of 
users working with IT systems. The difference in this case is 
of 17 points. The IT professionals have rated the 
gamification of Trogon PMS at 75 points, which is 3.9 % 
higher than the average rating. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Gamification usability evaluation by user specialization in IT 
The entire gamified Trogon PMS has been rated at 71 
points from 100 points. Therefore, it has obtained “good” 
evaluation of gamification usability.  When analyzing 
usability evaluations of specific elements, leaderboards were 
evaluated as easiest to understand, while game elements 
were hardest to understand.  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSSION 
Gamification is a methodology that seriously enhances 
the systems with game mechanics and game design. In this 
paper, we have introduced the Trogon Project Management 
System (PMS) based on the three-layer architecture. Trogon 
PMS has been gamified by adding the additional game layer 
to it. The implementation of the gamification solution 
consists of two parts – data classes and visualization classes. 
This model of gamification can be applied to any system 
that implements the gamification data contract.  
When gamifying systems there are many possible 
problems; so it is very important to do risk assessment as 
soon as possible in order to prevent against problems arising 
after the release of the gamified product such as user refusal. 
It is very important before launching gamified Project 
Management System into company business environment to 
convince employees to accept such change in companies’ 
policy. Trogon PMS tries to avoid such problem by 
introducing gamification that would not disrupt normal 
company workflow.  
In gamified systems, the factor of motivation usually 
decreases over time. Furthermore, over time even the 
greatest games start losing attraction and pleasure they 
provided to their users. In Trogon PMS, we leave this 
problem for project manager to solve, because he is the 
game master. His goal is to distract from monotony and to 
retain motivation over time. Project manager has such tools 
like game prizes and gameplay elements to adjust game 
scenarios. For example, project manager can award best 
project team or organize the contest of finest forest. Short 
intervals of game play in Trogon PMS help to counter 
monotony, because long running games usually lead to 
motivation loss. A competition environment, which if not 
carefully monitored may lead to teamwork problems. This 
challenge is solved by not showing concrete jobs done by an 
employee in the team’s forest. Forest is the result of the 
teamwork. To avoid the problem of employees being judged 
by their contributions because of increased company 
transparency, we use information hiding to make specific 
job data more difficult to read. 
For example, the leaderboard shows no concrete numbers 
but only differences between players. It allows to see only 
the best worker. The project forest does not actually show 
any concrete results for judging employees. Information is 
displayed only in short periods, so again you cannot judge 
employees. To solve a problem like tasks being not 
adequate, we split tasks into small concrete jobs, which are 
more adequate.  
The experimental validation of gamification was made 
using quantitative and qualitative evaluation of game layer 
interfaces. Quantitative evaluation was made using color 
analysis of interfaces and its evaluation using WCAG 2.0 
contrast ratio requirements for accessibility, which were 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

transferred from web page domain to game interface 
domain. We have proposed a new method for evaluating 
color contrast ratio requirements of gamification interfaces 
using screenshot images. The method allows to identify 
interfaces that are designed poorly in terms of color contrast 
and therefore, may not be acceptable to their users. 
Qualitative assessment of gamification usability was done 
based on using System Usability Scale (SUS), which has 
been extended and adapted for evaluation of gamification 
usability. Our study shows that the developed system is 
evaluated as having good usability (71 out of 100 points). 
There were no usability differences between men and 
women. However, there were differences in evaluation of 
gamification usability results based on user knowledge and 
experience in working with Information Technologies (IT). 
The study has found that consumers, which were not 
specializing in the IT sector, have assigned a lower usability 
score for the Project Management System.  
Future work will deal with solving the problem of 
integration between business logic rules and game rules, and 
modeling the relationship and mechanics of game elements. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The work described in this paper has been carried out within the 
framework of the Operational Programme for the Development of 
Human Resources 2007-2013 of Lithuania „Strengthening of 
capacities of researchers and scientists” project VP1-3.1-ŠMM-08-
K-01-018 „Research and development of Internet technologies and 
their infrastructure for smart environments of things and services” 
(2012-2015), funded by the European Social Fund (ESF). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Deterding, “Gamification: designing for motivation”, 
Interactions 19, 4 July 2012, pp. 14-17. 
[2] J. Anderson and L. Rainie, The Future of Gamification. Pew 
Research Center, May 2012. 
[3] Gartner, “Gartner Says by 2015, More Than 50 Percent of 
Organizations That Manage Innovation Processes Will 
Gamify 
Those 
Processes”, 
2001, 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1629214, 
[retrieved: 
October, 2013] 
[4] J. 
Van 
Grove, 
“Gamification: 
How 
Competition 
Is 
Reinventing Business, Marketing & Everyday Life”, 
Mashable, 28 July 2011. 
[5] Gartner, “DWP Case Study”, http://i360institute.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/10/Gartner_DWP_Case_Study.pdf, 
[retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[6] “Badgeville”, http://badgeville.com, [retrieved: February, 
2014]. 
[7] “RedCritter 
Tracker”, 
http://www.redcrittertracker.com, 
[retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[8] L. G. Reid and A. Snow-Weaver. “WCAG 2.0: a web 
accessibility standard for the evolving web”, Proc. of the 2008 
Int. cross-disciplinary conference on Web accessibility (W4A 
'08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 109-115. 
[9] J. Brooke, “SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability 
evaluation in industry, 1996, pp. 189-194. 
[10] P. Herzig, M. Ameling, and A. Schill, “A Generic Platform 
for Enterprise Gamification”, Proc. of the 2012 Joint Working 
IEEE/IFIP Conf. on Software Architecture and European 
Conference on Software Architecture, 2012, pp. 219-223. 
[11] C. Kroeze and M. S. Olivier, “Gamifying authentication”, 
Proc. of Information Security for South Africa (ISSA) , 2012, 
pp. 1-8. 
[12] B. Gnauk, L. Dannecker, and M. Hahmann, “Leveraging 
gamification in demand dispatch systems”, Proc. of the 2012 
Joint EDBT/ICDT Workshops 2012, pp. 103-110. 
[13] B. J. Fogg, “A behavior model for persuasive design”, Proc.of 
the 4th Int. Conference on Persuasive Technology (Persuasive 
'09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2009, Article 40 , 7 pages. 
[14] M. Wu, “Gamification from a company of pro gamers” 
Lithium Lithosphere, 2011. 
[15] A. Edalat, A. Ghoroghi, and G. Sakellariou, “Multi-games 
and a double game extension of the Prisoner's Dilemma” 
arXiv:1205.4973. 
[16] D. L. Sallach, M. J. North, and E. Tatara, “Multigame 
Dynamics: Structures and Strategies,” Proc. of the 11th Int. 
conference on Multi-agent-based simulation MABS, 2010, 
pp. 108-120. 
[17] S. M. Grünvogel, Formal models and game design, Game 
Studies 5 (1) , 2005, pp. 1-9. 
[18] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, Rules of Play: Game Design 
Fundamentals. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2004. 
[19] K. Frang and R. Mellstrand, Enterprise Gamification of the 
Employee Development Process at an Infocom Consultancy 
Company. LTH, 2012. 
[20] R. Hunicke, M. LeBlanc, and R. Zubek, “MDA: A Formal 
Approach to Game Design and Game Research”, Proc. of the 
Challenges in Game AI Workshop, 19th National Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI '04). AAAI Press, 2004. 
[21] P. Herzig. Gamification Modeling Language (GaML), 15 
August 
2013, 
http://www.enterprise-gamification.com/, 
[retrieved: October, 2013] 
[22] J. Dormans. Engineering Emergence: Applied Theory for 
Game Design. Universiteit van Amsterdam, 2012. 
[23] B. Brathwaite and I. Schreiber. Challenges for Game 
Designers. Charles River Media, Boston, Ma, 2008. 
[24] E. Adams and J. Dormans, Game Mechanics: Advanced 
Game Design, New Riders Publishing, 2012. 
[25] B. K. Neeli, “A Method to Engage Employees Using 
Gamification in BPO Industry,” Proc. of 3rd Int. Conference 
on Services in Emerging Markets (ICSEM), 2012, pp. 142-
146. 
[26] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke, “From 
game 
design 
elements 
to 
gamefulness: 
defining 
"gamification", Proc. of the 15th Int. Academic MindTrek 
Conference: 
Envisioning 
Future 
Media 
Environments 
(MindTrek '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 9-15. 
[27] “OpenBadges”, http://openbadges.org, [retrieved: February, 
2014]. 
[28] “Jira 
Hero 
plugin”, 
https://marketplace.atlassian.com 
/plugins/com.madgnome.jira.plugins.jirachievements, 
[retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[29] J. N. Barkenbus, "Eco-driving: An overlooked climate change 
initiative.", Energy Policy, 2010, pp. 762-769. 
[30] S. Nikkila, et al., "Playing in Taskville: Designing a Social 
Game for the Workplace.", CHI 2011 Workshop on 
Gamification: Using Game Design Elements in Non-game 
Contexts, 2011. 
[31] S. K. Bista, S. Nepal, N. Colineau, and C. Paris, “Using 
gamification in an online community”, CollaborateCom 2012, 
pp. 611-618. 
 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

