A Comparative Study between Younger and Older Users  
on Mobile Interface Navigation  
Qingchuan Li and Yan Luximon 
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hung Hom, Hong Kong 
e-mails: qingchuan.li@connect.polyu.hk, yan.luximon@polyu.edu.hk 
 
 
Abstract— Mobile interface navigation is an important aspect 
when directly manipulating the mobile technologies, yet the 
navigation behavior is not well understood at the level of visual 
presentation of navigation elements and task complexity for 
users among different age groups. This comparative study 
utilized an experiment to compare the mobile interface 
navigation between younger and older user groups, by 
examining three types of visual presentations and three levels 
of task complexity. The results showed that there were 
significant differences between age groups in navigation 
efficiency, effectiveness and subjective evaluation. In addition, 
the navigation performance was significantly lower when the 
task required more information sources to be remembered and 
integrated, especially for older users. However, no significant 
effect of visual presentation was reported on the navigation 
performance and subjective evaluation. Understanding the 
mobile interface navigation behavior among different age 
groups will assist in designing appropriate visual presentation 
of navigation elements and keeping task complexity to an 
accepted level for targeted user groups. 
Keywords- age; mobile interface; navigation; task complexity; 
visual presentation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the prevalence of mobile technologies, navigation 
through mobile interfaces is becoming an important aspect to 
search for the contents and utilize relevant functions 
provided by the mobile websites or applications [1]. Instead 
of interacting with the mouse and keyboard, mobile 
technologies generate their specific mobile navigation 
patterns due to the different interactive mode, limited 
interface space, and complex information architectures. Thus, 
it poses a considerable challenge of how to improve the user 
experience of mobile interface navigation for diversified user 
groups. 
In particular, the direct user interface allows users to 
navigate through the applications by directly pointing or 
clicking the navigation elements on the interfaces, such as 
touch-screens [2]. The well-designed navigation elements 
can help users accomplishing tasks efficiently and effectively 
[3]. For instance, the menu navigation is a typical and 
popular way of representing the mobile application structures 
and functions [4]. Users can navigate their way to the desired 
target by selecting navigation elements (i.e., icons, 
hyperlinks, and buttons). In this way, the visual presentation 
of navigation elements is recognized as an important design 
consideration that helps users to better use navigation 
elements to find relevant information and complete tasks [5]. 
To fulfill the functional goals of the application or 
website, the designers may start from collecting specific 
navigation elements, to further grouping or arranging them 
into different hierarchies or categories. Also, designers could 
use these visual presentations to guide users’ navigation 
patterns [6]. In fact, there is a long history examining the 
visual presentation in terms of icon characteristics on 
computer tasks [7][8]. They mainly emphasized the 
importance of icon characteristics on visual searching, such 
as concreteness, semantic distance, color quality, size, shape 
and location arrangement. However, most of the previous 
studies were mainly considered within the context of visual 
recognition and function matching tasks. It is still unknown 
how the visual presentation of navigation elements matters in 
the mobile navigation tasks. 
Currently, an increasing number of older users are using 
mobile technologies for health management and social 
interactions, which involves information searching, decision-
making, and problem-solving tasks [9]. Thus, the mobile 
interface navigation should also be concerned with the task 
complexity [10]. Task complexity, as defined by Campbell 
[11], lies in the nature of multiplicity, and deals with the 
collections of paths needed to reach the directions and even 
conflicts between the paths and expected results. Specifically, 
navigation task is concerned with how to organize the 
sequences of actions to search for desired information in 
order to achieve the task goals [12]. 
Previous studies normally defined the task complexity 
based on the page complexity and path complexity [13] [14], 
which concerned the number of navigation elements on the 
pages, the difficulty of judging the relevance of these 
elements and task goals, as well as the total steps and depth 
to gain the target information. Yet, we think it is also 
important to consider the task complexity based on the 
cognitive load and mental work needed. If the more complex 
a task is, the more information resources users need to 
remember and integrate, thus acquiring for more working 
memory and information processing. Therefore, this study 
examined the task complexity with the number of 
information sources needed to be remembered or integrated 
during the whole task. 
Although strides have been made in studying web 
navigation, little investigation existed about the user 
experience of mobile interface navigation. This study was 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Interface design for menu navigation page (left) and sub-page: 
medication (right). 
conducted as the first phase of a larger study to investigate 
the possible effects of visual presentation of navigation 
elements and task complexity on the mobile interface 
navigation. In order to include a diverse group of users, this 
study examined the differences of mobile interface 
navigation between age groups. The user experience of 
navigation was highlighted by aspects of task performance 
and subjective evaluation [15].  
Overall, this study aims to contribute to a better 
comprehension of the user experience with mobile interface 
navigation among different age groups. It will assist 
designers in choosing the appropriate visual presentation of 
navigation elements and keeping the number of information 
sources to an accepted level of task complexity for targeted 
user groups. The organization of this article is as follows. 
Section II describes the details of participants recruitment 
and experiment design. Section III outlines the results of 
participants’ 
navigation 
performance 
and 
subjective 
evaluation, with relevant correlations analyzed. Then, the 
section IV detailed discusses and interprets the results with 
some previous literatures. Finally, the section V presents the 
main conclusions, discusses the major limitations, and points 
out the possible directions to be explored in the future. 
II. 
METHODS 
The method of experiment was employed in present 
study to investigate participants’ navigation performance and 
subjective evaluation.   
A. Participants 
A total of 15 participants were involved in this study. The 
majority of the participants were recruited from local 
universities and elderly centers. All the participants were in 
good physical and cognitive conditions, and had the ability to 
read Chinese characters. The participants were divided into 
two age groups: the younger group with an average age of 
28.63 years old (SD= 4.60; age range: 24-38); and the older 
group with an average age of 69.57 years old (SD=11.62; 
age range: 52-81). 
 
B. Experimental Design 
In order to test the effects of visual presentation of 
navigation elements and task complexity on navigation 
performance and subjective evaluation, 9 tasks were planned 
with a 3 (visual presentation of icon-text, icon-only, and text-
only) × 3 (level 1, level 2 and level 3) factorial design.  
As shown in Figure 1, a simulated iOS mobile 
application that used to remind users to take medicine was 
implemented by Unity: users could browse the four sub-
pages through a menu navigation page. A total of 8 real size 
navigation elements were presented in the menu navigation 
page, in which, 4 of them can be clicked to direct users to the 
4 sub-pages: patient, medication, dose and time. In each of 
the four sub-pages, participants needed to choose the 
answers according to different task instructions. There was 
also some relevant information provided in the sub-pages. 
1) Visual presentation manipulation: Three kinds of 
visual presentations were used for the menu navigation page: 
icon-text, icon-only, and text-only. The visual presentation 
followed the principles of applying concrete, semantic-
closed, simple colored, and uncomplicated shapes for icons 
and text with dynamic hit provided [8]. The sizes of icon 
and text were controlled to be exactly the same. The 
positions of navigation elements were randomly presented 
for each task. 
2) Task complexity manipulation: Three levels of task 
complexity were manipulated in this study. At the 
complexity of level 1, participants were asked to choose the 
answers directly following the task instructions, which 
didn’t require any memory load or information integrating 
(e.g., please remind Awen to take one piece of aspen after 
lunch). At the level 2, the task instruction was as similar as 
level 1; whereas, the task instruction disappeared after the 
task began. Thereby, it required a memory load to remember 
the task instructions. At the level 3, participants were asked 
to choose the answers based on both of task instruction and 
the relevant information provided by each sub-page. The 
process required users to remember task instructions and 
integrate relevant information across all the sub-pages (e.g., 
please help Awen who got cold to make the medication 
plan). 
C. Measurement 
Navigation performance was measured using data that 
automatically recorded by the background system. It was 
assessed based on the efficiency, effectiveness, and the 
number of return steps and incorrect clicks. Specifically, 
efficiency was measured by the completion time, which was 
the seconds the participants required to finish each task. 
Effectiveness was measured by the correctness of answers, 
which was the percentage of correct answers chosen for each 
task. The number of returns was defined as the number of 
returning to previous sub-pages. The number of click was 
defined as the number of incorrect click of the navigation 
elements on the main menu page.  
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2.   Navigation performance of younger users with different visual 
presentation and task complexity. 
Figure 3.   Navigation performance of older users with different visual 
presentation and task complexity. 
Subjective evaluation was measured by the 5-point Likert 
scales based on five aspects of ease-of-use, disorientation, 
effort needed, helpfulness, and satisfaction [16] [17]. For the 
first three questions of ease-of-use, disorientation and effort 
needed, it scored 1-5 from a rating of very agreed to very 
disagreed. Specifically, the ease-of-use was evaluated by 
whether the application is hard to learn; the disorientation 
was asked by whether it is easy to get lost and disorientated; 
the effort needed was assessed by whether a lot of efforts 
were needed to fulfill these tasks. In addition, the last two 
questions of helpfulness and satisfaction were used to 
examine users’ overall feelings from the rating of very 
dissatisfied to very satisfied (1-5). 
D. Procedure 
The experiment was conducted in a separated and quiet 
room, with one participant and two experimenters there at 
one time. Before the experiment, the experimental 
instruction and consent form were given to the participants. 
Each participant was allowed to free explore the 
experimental application for 5 minutes. At the same time, the 
experimenters provided the task description document with 
the participants and instructed them how to use this 
application. Following that, participants completed three 
trials to familiarize himself or herself with the experiment 
without the task description document. After a 2-min rest, 
the experiment began. Each participant was given 9 tasks to 
complete. Following each task, the subjective evaluation was 
collected respectively. The whole interactions between users 
and application will be recorded by the background system 
and the whole process for each participant was controlled in 
one hour.  
E. Data analysis 
Normality test was first performed to assess the 
normality of the data. Since the data were collected from 
only 15 participants, it is unsurprised that they were not 
normally distributed. The non-parametric testing was then 
utilized to analyze the results in SPSS. Specifically, the 
Mann-Whitney test was employed to compare the 
differences of navigation performance and subjective 
evaluation between the younger and older user groups. The 
Friedman test was utilized to test for differences in 
navigation performance and subjective evaluation when 
participants were measured at different visual presentations 
and task complexities. Based on the results from the 
Friedman test, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was further 
used to compare the differences between each of the two 
measurements from the same participants. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The experiment compared the navigation performance 
and subjective evaluation between age groups. The possible 
effects of visual presentation and task complexity were also 
investigated. 
A. Navigation performance 
The descriptive data of navigation performance between 
younger and older user are shown in graphical forms in 
Figure 2 and Figure 3, including the completion time, 
correctness of answers, and the number of return steps and 
incorrect clicks. 
1) Comparison between age groups: Analysis of Mann-
Whitney test was used to compare the difference of 
navigation performance between age groups. In terms of the 
completion time, the results revealed that younger users 
completed the tasks significantly faster than older users with 
all the visual presentations of icon-text, icon-only and text-
only when the task complexity was level 1 (U = 4.00, p = 
 
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4.   Subjective evaluation of younger users with different (a) visual 
presentation and (b) task complexity (C1: ease-of-use; C2: disorientation; 
C3: efforts; C4: helpfulness; C5: satisfaction).   
Figure 5.   Subjective evaluation of older users with different (a) visual 
presentation and (b) task complexity (C1: ease-of-use; C2: disorientation; 
C3: efforts; C4: helpfulness; C5: satisfaction).   
 
 
0.004; U = 1.50, p = 0.001; U = 1.00, p = 0.001), and level 2 
(U = 0.00, p = 0.000; U = 0.00, p = 0.000; U = 0.00, p = 
0.000). The same results were found for the visual 
presentations of icon-text and text-only when the task 
complexity was level 3 (U = 6.00, p = 0.009; U = 0.00, p = 
0.000).  
The correctness was found no significant difference 
between age groups, except for the visual presentation of 
icon-text at the task complexity of level 3 (U = 4.00, p = 
0.004), in which younger users had a significant higher 
correctness of answers. Similarly, no significant difference 
was found for the number of return steps and incorrect clicks 
between age groups. 
2) Effects 
of 
visual 
presentation 
on 
navigation 
performance: 
a) The younger group of users: Analysis of Friedman 
test was firstly employed to examine the statistical 
differences between navigation performances of 9 tasks. The 
results reported significant differences in completion time (χ2 
(2) = 44.228, p = 0.000) and the number of return steps (χ2 (2) 
= 27.591, p = 0.001). Then, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test 
was used to test where the differences actually occurred. 
However, the results did not reveal significant differences of 
completion time and the number of return steps between 
different visual presentations for all of three levels of task 
complexity. 
b) The older group of users: Friedman test also 
reported significant differences in older users’ completion 
time (χ2 (2) = 20.086, p = 0.010), the correctness of answers 
(χ2 (2) = 16.597, p = 0.035), and the number of return steps 
(χ2 (2) = 15.504, p = 0.050). Nevertheless, in the further 
analysis of Wilcoxon signed-rank test, no significant 
difference was found in terms of navigation performance 
between different visual presentations across all the levels of 
task complexity. 
3) Effects of task complexity on navigation performance:  
a) The younger group of users: Followed the previous 
Friedman test, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test was also used to 
examine the effects of task complexity on navigation 
performance among younger users. The results reported 
statistically significant differences in navigation performance 
between different levels of task complexity. Specifically, it 
indicated there were significant differences of completion 
time between the task complexity of level 1 and 3 (icon-text: 
Z = -2.524, p = 0.012; icon-only: Z = -2.524, p = 0.012; text-
only: Z = -2.521, p =0.012), as well as level 2 and 3 (icon-
text: Z = -2.533, p =0.011; icon-only: Z = -2.521, p = 0.012; 
text-only: Z = -2.521, p = 0.012), in which the task 
complexity of level 3 induced longer completion time. The 
same results were also found in the number of return steps 
between the task complexity of level 1 and 3 (Z = -2.207, p = 
0.027), level 2 and level 3 (Z = -2.207, p = 0.027), in which 
the task complexity of level 3 elicited more return steps, but 
only for the visual presentation of icon-only. 
b) The older group of users: Based on the previous 
Friedman test’s results of older users, the Wilcoxon signed-
rank test was conducted. Significant longer completion time 
was reported at the task complexity of level 3 when 
comparing with level 1 (Z = -2.371, p = 0.018; Z = -2.028, p 
= 0.043) for the visual presentation of icon-text and icon-
only, and level 2 for the visual presentation of text-only (Z = 
-2.028, p = 0.043). The same results were found in the 
correctness of answers between the task complexity of level 
1 and 3 (Z = -2.220, p = 0.026), level 2 and 3 (Z = -2.041, p 
= 0.041) for the visual presentation of icon-text.  
B. Subjective evaluation 
1) Subjective evaluation between age groups: Analysis 
using Mann-Whitney test revealed that older users evaluated 
significantly higher in the aspect of helpfulness compared 
with younger users when the task complexity was level 1 
(icon-text: U = 10.00, p = 0.040; text-ony:  U = 6.00, p = 
0.009), level 2 (icon-only: U = 10.50, p = 0.040), and level 3 
(icon-text: U = 6.50, p = 0.009; icon-only: U = 4.00, p = 
0.004; text-only: U = 10.00, p = 0.040). The same result was 
also found in the evaluation for the satisfaction when the task 
complexity was level 1 (icon-text: U = 10.00, p = 0.040; 
icon-only: U = 10.00, p = 0.040; text-ony:  U = 5.00, p = 
0.006), level 2 (icon-only: U = 9.50, p = 0.029), and level 3 
(icon-text: U = 10.00, p = 0.040; icon-only: U = 5.00, p = 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

0.006). 
2) Subjective evaluation on visual presentation and task 
complexity: To further analyze the differences between 
subjective evaluations of 9 tasks, Friedman test was used. 
Nevertheless, there were no significant differences in 
subjective evaluation between different visual presentations 
and task complexities. The descriptive data of subjective 
evaluation from younger and older users were shown in 
Figure 4 and Figure 5.  Generally, for younger users, the 
visual presentation of text-only and icon-only resulted in the 
feelings 
of 
less 
disorientation 
and 
efforts 
needed. 
Nevertheless, the other aspects of subjective evaluation 
between different visual presentations and task complexities 
followed quite a similar pattern.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Mobile interface navigation is an important aspect when 
interacting with mobile technologies to complete different 
tasks. In contrast to previous studies focusing on menu item 
searching [18] [19], or specific digital tasks [20] [21], this 
study obtained a unique perspective of simulating different 
levels of task complexity for mobile navigation tasks. One 
question of interest for the present study was whether the age 
matters for navigation performance as well as subjective 
evaluation. Also, the effects of visual presentation and task 
complexity were concerned.  
A. Comparison of mobile interface navigation between age 
groups 
Consistent with the previous findings within the context 
of information finding [19] and menu navigation tasks [22], 
older users indicated poorer navigation efficiency in our 
studies. They averagely spent twice the length of younger 
users’ completion time. There are also some differences 
between their navigation strategies. The younger users 
tended to make more return steps and incorrect clicks when 
the task complexity is high. On the other hand, the older 
users tended to be consistent with their navigation paths.  
The fatigue issue should also be considered for older users in 
this experiment. Older users were not consistent with their 
performance between tasks because they were easier to feel 
tired. 
However, to some extent, older users showed a positive 
attitude towards digital tasks. Despite of lower navigation 
efficiency, older users reported a higher rating of helpfulness 
and satisfaction towards their navigation experience. The 
reason could be that older adults normally show positive 
feelings of experience [23]. In this way, we suggest rather 
than only relying on analyzing user’s subjective feelings, 
tasks and experiments could help to enhance the 
comprehension of what happened in the real world. 
B. Effects of visual presentation of navigation elements   
Navigation tasks involve a lot of visual exploration and 
searching actions; thereby, it emphasizes the design of visual 
presentation for navigation elements. However, the present 
study found no statistical and significant differences between 
three kinds of visual presentations, i.e., icon-text, icon-only 
and text only. On the one hand, the possible reason is that the 
duration of searching for specific navigation element in the 
menu navigation page only accounts for a quite small portion 
of the whole task completion time. On the other hand, the 
navigation element used in this study was quite different 
with each other, which didn’t cause many efforts in 
searching and recognizing processes. 
Little evidence in previous studies exists in examining 
the effects of visual presentation of navigation elements on 
mobile interface navigation. Although there was no 
significant result reported in this study, the pattern of 
different visual presentations could be preliminarily deduced 
from this study.  For younger users, in agreement with the 
previous study [24], the visual presentation of text-only 
seemed to have better navigation performance when the task 
complexity was high; whereas the icon-only design induced 
a lot of return steps and incorrect clicks.  
C. Effects of task complexity  
Task complexity is a broad-defined concept in navigation 
tasks. This study took a specific perspective from the task 
requirements for remembering and integrating different 
numbers of information sources. As expected, the higher 
level of task complexity led to the lowest navigation 
efficiency both for the younger and older groups. 
Nevertheless, the younger users still kept high navigation 
effectiveness when the task complexity was high compared 
with the older users. 
Previous studies stated that user’s visual ability of 
scanning and searching largely influence the number of 
navigation elements that should be displayed [25]. 
Nevertheless, to fulfill the specific functional goals, users 
also need to remember a lot of information that generated 
from the task itself, as well as integrating information from 
some other sources. Consistent with the previous study 
examining mobiles’ complexity levels [26], the present study 
also found that older users performed worse than younger 
users when the task complexity was higher, however their 
performance was similar to younger users when the task 
complexity was lower. Specifically, this study shows that the 
navigation performance could not be affected when the 
memory load is low, such as remembering one-sentence task 
description. However, the navigation performance could be 
significantly affected when the users are required to integrate 
a lot of information sources at the same time.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study compared the differences of mobile interface 
navigation between younger and older groups with three 
types of visual presentations of navigation elements and 
three levels of task complexity. Firstly, it can be concluded 
that navigation performance and subjective evaluation were 
significantly different between age groups. Secondly, the 
navigation performance was significantly lower when the 
task requires users to remember and integrate a lot of 
information sources. This occurs more often for older users. 
However, no significant effect of the visual presentation of 
navigation elements was found in present study. Thus, in 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

extending the finding in improving the user experience of 
mobile interface navigation, we suggest that the task 
complexity could be important design considerations 
especially for older users. 
This study should also be considered in the light of 
limitations. For instance, the age of older users varied a lot in 
present study. Thereby, their navigation performances were 
quite different with each other. For future research, more 
participants will be recruited to cover more age groups, and 
the demographics factors and technology experience will 
also be investigated. Furthermore, it is better to employ a 
better evaluation method (e.g., task analysis) to investigate 
participants’ mobile navigation behavior in details. For 
example, it is interesting to examine how long the user 
spends on each section of tasks including information 
searching, decision-making and checking.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Research Grants 
Council for the UGC Funding Scheme from the Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. J. Garrett, Elements of user experience: user-centered 
design for the web and beyond. Berkeley, CA: Pearson 
Education, 2010. 
[2] R. Michalski, J. Grobelny, and W. Karwowski, “The effects 
of graphical interface design characteristics on human–
computer interaction task efficiency,” International Journal of 
Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 36(11), pp. 959-977, 2006. 
[3] N. Yu and J. Kong, “User experience with web browsing on 
small screens: Experimental investigations of mobile-page 
interface design and homepage design for news websites,” 
Information Sciences, vol. 330, pp. 427-443, 2016. 
[4] E. P. dos Santos, S. de Lara, and W. M. Watanabe, R. P. 
Fortes, “Usability evaluation of horizontal navigation bar with 
drop-down menus by middle aged adults,” Proc. the 29th 
ACM international conference on Design of communication, 
ACM, pp. 145-150, 2011. 
[5] M. C. Puerta Melguizo, U. Vidya, and H. van Oostendorp, 
“Seeking information online: the influence of menu type, 
navigation path complexity and spatial ability on information 
gathering tasks,” Behaviour & Information Technology, 
vol31(1), pp. 59-70, 2012. 
[6] M. S. Chen, M. C. Lin, C. C. Wang, and C. A. Chang, “Using 
HCA and TOPSIS approaches in personal digital assistant 
menu–icon interface design,” International Journal of 
Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 39(5), pp. 689-702, 2009. 
[7] C. J. Kacmar and J. M. Carey, “Assessing the usability of 
icons in user interfaces,” Behaviour & Information 
Technology, vol. 10(6), pp. 443-457, 1991. 
[8] R. Leung, J. McGrenere, and P. Graf, “Age-related 
differences in the initial usability of mobile device icons,” 
Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 30(5), pp. 629-
642, 2011. 
[9] Q. Li and Y. Luximon, “Older Adults and Digital Technology: 
A Study of User Perception and Usage Behavior,” in 
Advances in Physical Ergonomics and Human Factors, R. 
Goonetilleke and Q. Karwowski, Eds. AG Switzerland: 
Springer International Publishing, pp. 155-163, 2016. 
[10] J. Gwizdka and I. Spence, “Implicit measures of lostness and 
success in web navigation,” Interacting with Computers, vol. 
19, pp. 357–369, 2007. 
[11] D. J. Campbell, “Task complexity: A review and analysis,” 
Academy of management review, vol. 13(1), pp. 40-52, 1988. 
[12] J. Gwizdka and I, Spence, “What can searching behavior tell 
us about the difficulty of information tasks? A study of web 
navigation” The 69th annual meeting of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology (ASIS&T 2006) 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
vol. 43(1), pp. 1-22, 2006. 
[13] M. C. Puerta Melguizo, U. Vidya, and H. van Oostendorp, 
“Seeking information online: the influence of menu type, 
navigation path complexity and spatial ability on information 
gathering tasks,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 
31(1), pp. 59-70, 2012. 
[14] P. Van Schaik and J. Ling, “A cognitive-experiential 
approach to modelling web navigation,” International Journal 
of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 70(9), pp. 630-651, 2012. 
[15] H. Petrie and N. Bevan, “The evaluation of accessibility, 
usability and user experience,” in The universal access 
handbook, C. Stepanidis Eds, Florida, USA: CRC Press, PP. 
10-20, 2009. 
[16] J. S. Ahuja and J. Webster, “Perceived disorientation: an 
examination of a new measure to assess web design 
effectiveness,” Interacting with computers, vol. 14(1), pp. 15-
29, 2001. 
[17] S. Leuthold, P. Schmutz, J. A. Bargas-Avila, A. N. Tuch, and 
K. Opwis, “Vertical versus dynamic menus on the world wide 
web: Eye tracking study measuring the influence of menu 
design and task complexity on user performance and 
subjective preference,” Computers in human behavior, vol 
27(1), pp. 459-472, 2011. 
[18] I. Etcheverry, T. Baccino, P. Terrier, J. C. Marquié, and M. 
Mojahid, “Age differences in information finding tasks: 
Performance and visual exploration strategy with different 
web page layouts,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 28(5), 
pp. 1670-1680, 2012. 
[19] A. C. de Barros, R. Leitão, and J. Ribeiro, “Design and 
evaluation of a mobile user interface for older adults: 
navigation, interaction and visual design recommendations,” 
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 27, pp. 369-378, 2014. 
[20] S. Sayago and J. Blat, “Telling the story of older people e-
mailing: An ethnographical study,” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 68(1), pp. 105-120, 2010. 
[21] D. Castilla, A. Garcia-Palacios, I. Miralles, J. Breton-Lopez, 
E. Parra, S. Rodriguez-Berges, and C. Botella, “Effect of Web 
navigation style in elderly users,” Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol. 55, pp. 909-920, 2016. 
[22] C. Gatsou, A. Politis, and D. Zevgolis, “Text vs visual 
metaphor in mobile interfaces for novice user interaction,” 
Information Services and Use, vol. 31(3-4), pp. 271-279, 
2011. 
[23] H. Sayers, “Desktop virtual environments: a study of 
navigation and age,” Interacting with Computers, vol. 16(5), 
pp. 939-956, 2004. 
[24] S. Schröder and M. Ziefle, “Making a completely icon-based 
menu in mobile devices to become true: a user-centered 
design approach for its development,” Proc. the 10th 
international conference on Human computer interaction with 
mobile devices and services, ACM, pp. 137-146, 2008. 
[25] L. Rosenfeld and P. Morville, Information architecture for the 
world wide web. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly & Associates, Inc, 
2002. 
[26] M. Ziefle and S. Bay, “How older adults meet complexity: 
aging effects on the usability of different mobile phones,” 
Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 24(5), pp. 375-
389, 2005. 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

