A Planning Pipeline for Large Multi-Agent Missions
Meghan Chandarana
Autonomous Integrated Systems
NASA Langley Research Center
Hampton, VA, USA
meghan.chandarana@nasa.gov
E. L. Meszaros
Dept. of Egyptology and Assyriology
Brown University
Providence, RI, USA
e.l.meszaros@brown.edu
B. Danette Allen
Autonomous Integrated Systems
NASA Langley Research Center
Hampton, VA, USA
danette.allen@nasa.gov
Abstract—In complex multi-agent applications, human operators
are often tasked with planning and managing large heterogeneous
teams of humans and autonomous vehicles. Although the use
of these autonomous vehicles broadens the scope of meaningful
applications, many of their systems remain unintuitive and
difﬁcult to master for human operators whose expertise lies in
the application domain and not at the platform level. Current
research focuses on the development of individual capabilities
necessary to plan multi-agent missions of this scope, placing
little emphasis on the integration of these components in to
a full pipeline. The work presented in this paper presents a
complete and user-agnostic planning pipeline for large multi-
agent missions known as the HOLII GRAILLE. The system
takes a holistic approach to mission planning by integrating
capabilities in human machine interaction, ﬂight path generation,
and validation and veriﬁcation. Components – modules – of the
pipeline are explored on an individual level, as well as their
integration into a whole system. Lastly, implications for future
mission planning are discussed.
Keywords–pipeline; multi-agent; mission planning; human-
machine interaction; validation and veriﬁcation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As autonomous robotic vehicles grow increasingly ubiq-
uitous, their use in applications like search and rescue and
science data collection increases. As a result, the expertise
of human operators shifts from that of system level domain
experts to that of application level experts. In complex multi-
agent missions these application level experts are human op-
erators who are tasked with planning and managing heteroge-
neous teams of agents composed of humans, Uncrewed Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs), ground rovers, etc. The use of autonomous
vehicles as tools increases the ability of operators to perform
tasks that are beyond their current capabilities, yet these tools
remain difﬁcult to operate as they are based on unintuitive
existing systems. Fixing this, however, requires the generation
of a user-agnostic and comprehensive mission planning tool
that allows for intuitive mission speciﬁcation by any human
operator.
Prior research has focused on optimizing or instantiating
many individual components of this mission planning pipeline,
but often fails to take into account the components as a whole
and their integration into a complete pipeline. Existing work
on this topic is also published across a number of different
disciplines, making the process of integrating these individual
components more difﬁcult. This project focuses on the need
for a cohesive pipeline that uniﬁes individual components,
allowing for successful and trusted mission planning by human
operators in multi-agent teams. By demonstrating the feasibil-
ity of a full pipeline, this work innovates on advancements
made to individual components.
This paper evaluates the full pipeline by which a human
operator would plan a mission and deﬁne objectives, thereby
allowing the system to interpret this into actionable directions.
The current instantiation of this pipeline is HOLII GRAILLE:
Human Operated Language Intuitive Interface with Gesture
Recognition Applied in an Immersive Life Like Environment.
By presenting individual components, this paper proposes a
system capable of both mission planning and supervisory con-
trol during execution. We speciﬁcally focus on UAV mission
planning where operators are tasked with deﬁning vehicle
ﬂight paths.
Current research in to the development of individual com-
ponents necessary to build a mission planning pipeline are
outlined in Section II. Planning tools and methods for elicit-
ing desired information from human operators are examined
as a necessary component of an optimal mission planning
pipeline (Section III). Different modalities of interaction are
also considered for accurately capturing the intent of mission
speciﬁcation and general usability. A planning tool aid for
determining mission parameters, such as swarm size, is out-
lined in Section IV. The captured data are then fused with
dynamic environmental information to produce an accurate
and ﬂyable plan, as described in Section V. Section VI
presents how ﬂight paths are displayed to the human operator
using virtual or augmented reality tools, allowing for iterative
modiﬁcation and veriﬁcation methods. Once plans have been
fully veriﬁed, agents can leverage established behaviors to
carry out the prescribed goals. To realize a fully successful
system performance, all of these individual components must
partner synergistically for the creation of a cohesive mission
pipeline, or the HOLII GRAILLE of mission planning systems.
The full pipeline is tested on a scaled-down indoor mission
in Section VII, and its implications are further discussed in
Section VIII. Suggestions for continued research efforts that
build upon this holistic design are considered in Section IX.
II.
BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
Current research efforts in multi-agent planning primarily
focus on the low level vehicle planning. These methods
range from manual interfaces that require human operators
to explicitly deﬁne the paths of each vehicle individually
to fully autonomous interfaces that calculate the vehicle tra-
jectories automatically using mission parameters. Common
autonomous planning frameworks include Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) [1], game theoretic frameworks [2] and
integer programming frameworks [3], and typically use reward
functions to shape the solution.
In addition to vehicle path planning, numerous research
efforts have focused on mission planning interfaces. A large
number of these choose to adopt gesture and speech input
74
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

modalities. These modalities are used to mimic natural human-
human communication patterns and thereby reduce operator
workload [4]. Cauchard et al. showed that human operators
prefer to interact with autonomous agents in the same way
they would with another human [5]. Ng and Sharlin explored
a gesture interface for collocated vehicles [6]. In [7] and
[8], users deﬁned ﬂight paths directly using a speech-based
and 3D spatial interface respectively. Gesture-based interfaces
often rely on full body movements [9] or static hand poses to
program by demonstration [10]. Bolt et al. use a multimodal
interface to manipulate a graphical user interface [11]. Su´arez
Fern´andez et al. designed a ﬂexible multimodal interface
framework which allowed users to choose the input modality
based on their application [12]. These methods failed to
examine how multimodal interfaces could be adapted for multi-
agent mission planning. In addition, previous methods failed to
explore more simplistic, unmounted sensors for gesture input.
Further focus has been placed on verifying and validating
autonomous systems, which can often be difﬁcult due to com-
plex and non-deterministic behavior. Emphasis has been placed
on ensuring the safety of not just the individual components
of a system but their intricate interactions as well, further
complicating the process [13]. Kamali et al. describe a method
of verifying models of a system’s behavior and interactions to
complement a model checker algorithm to verify a system [14].
Li et al. developed a game theoretic approach to modeling
autonomous vehicles for veriﬁcation [15]. With the spread
of autonomous systems, any methods for veriﬁcation and
validation have focused on incorporating measures of trust
and trustworthiness as well. Though not explicit certiﬁcation
measures, aspects of trust inform how well the system will
be utilized by human operators and are therefore crucial for
evaluation. Lyons et al. lament that current veriﬁcation and
validation techniques do not take trust and trustworthiness into
account, making them outdated at best [13]. One method for
improving trust and working toward more robust veriﬁcation
and validation methods is through explainable AI (XAI), where
efforts are made to ensure the explicability of outputs from
complex systems [16].
Despite extensive research in multi-agent path planning al-
gorithms, interfaces, and veriﬁcation and validation techniques,
little emphasis is placed on the design of a complete planning
pipeline. Individual components are built without the full
pipeline in mind. As a result, the complexities and additional
requirements of pipeline integration are often neglected.
III.
HUMAN MACHINE INTERACTION
To effectively plan large scale multi-agent missions (i.e.,
large number of agents), human operators must begin by
specifying both the high level mission objective(s) and nec-
essary vehicle speciﬁcations (e.g., vehicle ﬂight paths and/or
collaborative behavior). Regardless of what the mission is and
what tools are being exploited to carry it out, the system
design must address two basic questions: how will necessary
information be requested from the user, and through what
means will the user be allowed to provide that information?
These questions must be addressed in order for the eventual
mission to be a success, but they can be addressed at an abstract
level, regardless of how the multi-agent mission is instantiated.
The methods by which operators provide information to
the system have been the focus of much second-wave hu-
man/computer interaction research, and available options are
Figure 1. Human operator using the multimodal interface to deﬁne a mission.
as varied as they are ubiquitous, ranging from touch-interfaces
on smart phones and voice recognition on electronic assistants
to simple point-and-click computer interfaces. Recent research
suggests that using intuitive interfaces that make use of natural
communication techniques helps to increase usability. Making
an operator learn not just how to use a system but how to inter-
act with that system in order to use it adds an additional barrier
to use. Intuitive user interfaces often eschew the metaphorical
interfaces with which many users are now familiar, such as the
point-and-click and even the touch interfaces. Such interfaces
provide a metaphorical extension of the ﬁnger or hand into the
metaphorical desktop/page/window structure of the computer.
As computing systems have evolved, this underlying metaphor
has remained constant [17]. A switch to intuitive methods of
communication that rely on human/human interaction models
should relieve the user of extra training.
Most current research, however, focuses on natural lan-
guage as a way of tapping into intuitive human/human com-
munication strategies. Verbal and even gestural interfaces are
examined for their ability to allow operators to talk to systems
in an intuitive manner. More intuitive, however, are multi-
modal interfaces that allow for a combination of different
input types [18]. Combining different input modalities allows
a system to account for characteristics that are difﬁcult to
identify with one modality of input – vehemence, intonation,
sarcasm, etc.
The HOLII GRAILLE project used a multimodal interface
comprised of speech and gesture modalities [19][20][21].
Users were able to provide necessary information by communi-
cating to the system as they would another human counterpart,
augmenting gestural information with spoken details and vice
versa (Figure 1). Human operators used gesture inputs to
specify the shape of trajectory segments, while speech inputs
deﬁned additional geometric information (e.g., length, radius,
height). The gesture interface used a Leap Motion controller
relying on three infrared cameras to track the motions of the
user’s palm. Users gestured over the controller in a set of
deﬁned motions that represented ﬂight path segments. Simulta-
neously, operators voiced their commands into a headset, pro-
viding additional distance information to augment the gestured
trajectory. These commands were translated into text using
the CMU Sphinx speech recognition software and interpreted
into additional ﬂight data. All trajectory segments were then
combined by way of the fused gesture and speech input
data (Section V). This multimodal approach allowed HOLII
GRAILLE a means of error checking; whenever data from the
speech and gesture interface provided conﬂicting information,
the system was able to determine identify and compensate
75
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2. Example of predicted relationship between swarm size and the
expected number of dropped jobs.
for the problem [21]. Future iterations of such multimodal
interfaces can examine conﬁdence levels in data coming from
each interface in order to dynamically determine which one
to trust in the case of discrepancy, and incorporate additional
communication modalities within the multimodal interface.
IV.
MISSION PLANNING TOOLS
When planning large multi-agent missions, human oper-
ators are often tasked with deﬁning additional system pa-
rameters such as the number of vehicles (i.e., the swarm
size). In many multi-agent – swarm – missions, vehicles must
service jobs of various types as they are sensed. For a myriad
of applications these jobs must be immediately serviced or
risk negative consequences. For example, failing to inspect
a compromised bridge after a natural disaster may limit the
evacuation routes out of a city. To successfully service the
jobs, a small group of vehicles must break off from the main
group for a speciﬁed amount of time. Each job type requires
a different number of vehicles and service time to complete it.
Typically, the expected job types and their associated resource
requirements are known by the operator. However, in general,
only the expected number of jobs of each type is known and
not the explicit locations. This uncertainty poses an extremely
challenging planning problem to human operators. Therefore,
mission planning tools that can provide a predictive model
of the steady state system performance must be developed.
These models, when used as a reference, will allow human
operators to effectively ﬁnd a balance point in the complex
trade-offs between mission parameters such that the desired
system performance is met.
One method for modeling complex multi-job type missions
is to leverage algorithmic queuing theory. If we assume that the
swarm is analogous to a pool of servers, then the sensed jobs
can be thought of as arriving customers. In this case, since the
swarm itself is moving and the jobs are stationary, the arrival
rate for jobs of each job type is simply the expected time
between sensing new jobs of that type. Assuming a constant
search velocity, the time is equated to the expected average
distance between jobs. Jobs are assumed to be randomly and
uniformly distributed throughout the search area and thus
arrive according to a Poisson distribution. The steady state
performance of the system can then be analyzed using an
M/M/k/k queuing system, where there are k servers (i.e.,
vehicles in the swarm) and the allowed size of the queue is k
Figure 3. Example data that is fused together using the interpreter module.
(i.e., if not enough vehicles are left in the swarm to service
a job the job is dropped). In [22] we show that the M/M/k/k
model is able to accurately model multi-job type missions.
An M/M/k/k model is used to ﬁnd the relationship between
swarm size and expected number of dropped jobs given a set of
job types and their associated parameters (i.e., required number
of vehicles for service and service time). Figure 2 shows an
example of the predicted relationship. The blue points show
the analytical solutions, while the red line indicates the ﬁtted
curve. Depending on the application area, operators deﬁne
different cost values associated with various parameters of
the mission (e.g., vehicle cost, dropped job cost, etc.). These
cost values allow operators to pinpoint where along the trade-
off curve they should be to accomplish their desired system
performance. By incorporating these prediction models as
planning tools, systems like HOLII GRAILLE can reduce the
workload on their operators while simultaneously improving
overall system performance.
V.
MISSION GENERATION
Once a human operator has deﬁned the mission objectives
and parameters, the planning pipeline is tasked with using the
high level mission speciﬁcations to deﬁne the low level vehicle
commands required to successfully complete the mission. This
is accomplished in two stages. First, all inputs given by the hu-
man operator are interpreted and fused together (Section V-A).
The fused data is then sent to a trajectory generation module
which uses the general mission speciﬁcations pertaining to the
ﬂight path to generate smooth and ﬂyable (i.e., realizable with
the vehicle controller) trajectories (Section V-B).
A. Interpreter
An interpreter module is used to fuse the gesture and
speech data together for each trajectory segment that is de-
ﬁned using the multimodal interface. This is done by ﬁrst
synchronizing the data from the two input modalities. The data
input order is preserved from each source by way of a stacked
priority queue. Matched shape and geometric data are then
paired by popping data off of their respective queues at the
same time (Figure 3).
In HOLII GRAILLE’s current instantiation of the inter-
preter module, when conﬂicting data is received from the
gesture and speech inputs the priority queue framework allows
the system to choose which input to take as true. This
eliminates the possibility of any conﬂicting data being sent
to the trajectory generation module. Future iterations of the
interface can produce conﬁdence values associated with the
recognition of each input. The interpreter module would then
use the conﬁdence values to make a more informed choice
76
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. Example trajectory generated using human operator input combined with the expected risk map of the mission environment.
between the conﬂicting inputs. A weighted combination of
the two inputs can also be used to improve overall system
interpretation accuracy. If additional clarifying information is
needed from the operator, the validation and veriﬁcation step
can be used to prompt the operator for this information. For
example, if a conﬂict arises and the gesture input is chosen as
the correct input, an operator may need to input the geometric
information with the speech interface again so that the data
collected matches the trajectory segment type that was deﬁned
using the gestures.
B. Trajectory Generation
Once the input data for each segment is fused together
by the interpreter module, the trajectory generation module is
then able to use the data to deﬁne the control points required to
represent the segment with a B´ezier curve. Each B´ezier curve
is a polynomial whose ﬁrst and last control points are the start
and end points of the curve. Therefore, the complete ﬂight
path is built in a piecewise manner by placing the individual
curves in such a way as to ensure that the last point of the
ﬁrst curve is the same as the ﬁrst point of the next curve. This
also ensures at least C0 continuity across the ﬁnal combined
curve. By extension C1 and C2 continuity can be guaranteed
by placing the ﬁrst and last two or three control points of each
B´ezier curve aptly. The details of this method for generating
full piecewise B´ezier curves is detailed by Mehdi et al. in [23].
In addition to generating realizable ﬂight paths with guar-
anteed continuity, the HOLII GRAILLE framework leveraged
known risk maps of the mission environment to ensure trajec-
tories deﬁned by human operators maintained a minimum risk
level. If need be, the trajectory generation module modiﬁes
human operator generated ﬂight paths to ensure that the level
of risk for the mission stays below an allowed threshold. The
risk maps used included areas with varying levels of risk
(Figure 4). Risk values are shown as a color gradient from red
to green. Red areas indicate no ﬂy zones, while green areas
represent areas of low risk. Blue areas on the map indicate no
risk areas. A ﬂyable trajectory with acceptable risk is shown
in magenta. In this example mission, the human operator
designed a trajectory which moved a UAV diagonally to a
new point of interest and then moved the UAV in an upward
spiral so that ozone measurements could be taken at varying
altitudes over an area of interest. The trajectory generation
Figure 5. User models the VR headset used for veriﬁcation and validation.
module modiﬁed the diagonal segment to curve around the
higher risk area shown in green.
VI.
VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION
After the interface collects information and the necessary
trajectories are calculated, the ﬁnal stage in the pipeline is
validating and verifying the results. Displaying the developed
ﬂight path against a map of the environment and terrain can
help the user evaluate whether obstructions have been properly
avoided, and incorporating risk information about the environ-
ment allows the user to visualize if further avoidance measures
should be implemented. A critical aspect of a functioning full
system pipeline is the ability for the user not only to verify
mission plans but, if necessary, to adjust them. Displaying
collected and calculated information back to the user allows
them an opportunity to correct for any errors and adjust for
any new knowledge to be added into the system.
The HOLII GRAILLE pipeline displayed the calculated
ﬂight path through Virtual Reality (VR). Donning an Oculus
headset and controllers, users were able to view the ﬂight
path in relation to the geographical environment, as well as
risk maps, ensuring that the ﬂight path stays within necessary
physical parameters (see Figure 5). Moreover, the VR environ-
ment allows the ﬂight path to be viewed from many different
angles not limited to standard physical constraints. Similar
functionality could be gained using augmented reality (AR),
allowing the user to view the simulated ﬂight path against
77
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 6. Human operator modifying vehicle trajectory using the VR headset
in the veriﬁcation and validation step [24].
a backdrop of reality, though this method requires physical
presence in the geographical location of the mission. For ease
and extension of use, VR was chosen in favor of AR modeling
methods.
Ideally, VR environments also allow for easy and intuitive
manipulation of the calculated ﬂight path. Interacting with
parameters of the mission as if they were physical objects
within a shared environment means that the user can grab,
pull, push, and stretch elements of a ﬂight path in order to
alter them, mirroring the gestural input modality used with
the initial system interface (Figure 6). Not only does such
manipulation make use of effective VR interactive strategies
(see [25]) but it also allows for a continuation of input modality
across the mission planning pipeline. Reliance on intuitive
interaction strategies increase the general usability of this
veriﬁcation and validation system and suggest a potential broad
user base for the end product.
VII.
RESULTS
The HOLII GRAILLE pipeline incorporates all of these
individual components, generating the ﬁrst complete pipeline
for full mission management. To demonstrate its value, an in-
door scaled-down demonstration of resulting trajectory formed
using the complete HOLII GRAILLE pipeline was conducted
(Figure 7). In the demonstration a human operator used the
multimodal interface to deﬁne a desired trajectory and mission
for the a UAV vehicle. The data was then sent to the interpreter
module, which fused the data together. The trajectory genera-
tion module then utilized the risk map and the fused data to
build a smooth and realizable ﬂight path for the vehicle. After
the ﬂight path was created, the human operator was able to
review the ﬂight path using the VR headset. Once the operator
had veriﬁed and accepted the generated trajectory, it was sent
to the controller on board the vehicle.
During the demonstration, the risk map was projected
using two overhead projects on the ground. A quadcopter
was used to ﬂy the scaled-down ﬂight path over the projected
environment – being sure to stay clear of the high risk areas.
The ﬂight path followed by the vehicle is shown in magenta.
This demonstration indicated the value of a full, integrated
pipeline, allowing non-expert users to easily take all the actions
necessary to put autonomous vehicles to use.
Figure 7. Scaled-down demonstration of a complete mission generated using
the complete HOLII GRAILLE pipeline.
VIII.
DISCUSSION
Each individual component of the HOLII GRAILLE
pipeline was designed with the human operator and full
integration in mind. In doing so, the inputs and outputs of each
component were easily identiﬁed. This also provided guidance
on the internal design of the components. Additionally, by
considering the human machine interaction from the start the
system as a whole can push towards an increased level of
trustworthiness with the human operator. HOLII GRAILLE
may provide a path forward for increasing the usability of
UAVs in critical domains as well as for establishing the basis
for trust in and trustworthiness of these systems.
The HOLII GRAILLE pipeline is mission application ag-
nostic, thereby allowing human operators to interact with the
system in the same way regardless of their mission’s objectives.
The ease-of-use of the multimodal interface establishes a base-
line for future execution interfaces. While this initial pipeline
focuses on relatively straightforward mission speciﬁcations,
the HOLII GRAILLE pipeline provides an initial design that
can be modiﬁed in future iterations for more complex mission
management. The interaction framework can be leveraged to
develop mission modiﬁcation capabilities. These execution
interfaces will rely on the design and implementation of
appropriate monitoring strategies that reduce the operator’s
overall workload [26]. In addition, for applications like search
and rescue, to realize successful multi-agent missions on
autonomous platforms additional behaviors, such as small team
deployments, must be developed [27].
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Having established a need for an intuitive, usable, and
successful mission management tool, this paper discusses
HOLII GRAILLE as one example of a full pipeline tool.
With individual components working to increase usability and
transparency of information, this mission management tools
can work toward increasing successful interaction between
application level experts and machines, as well as leading
toward increased human operator trust in the system. By
creating the pipeline from veriﬁed or veriﬁable components,
the mission management tool provided a way to increase the
overall trustworthiness of the system.
Future instantiations of a VR validation environment could
make use of persistent simulations that continue to process
information even when the user is not currently logged in [28].
Such a persistent environment could continue to recalculate
risks, update information on weather, and process input from
other users that would all contribute to an accurate modelling
environment for the developed UAV ﬂight path. Moreover,
this environment does not have to rely on local information
only and can incorporate data from a distributed network
of users and inputs, further broadening the user base and
78
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

increasing access to ﬂight path veriﬁcation and validation [24].
With location-agnostic multiple user access, more users can be
involved in the process of ensuring the ﬂight path is ﬁt and
making modiﬁcation if necessary.
Lastly, future iterations must take into account how the
system lets the user know what information it needs. While
methods of information elicitation were not examined as part
of the HOLII GRAILLE pipeline, understanding how to elicit
information from a human operator was looked at as part
of the HINGE project [29]. While information elicitation
is a moderately nascent focus for investigation, it is often
incorporated in studies focused on situated human computer
interaction and should be a focus for future pipeline iterations
[30] [31].
Building upon these areas can allow future pipelines to
address the management of more complicated missions. While
HOLII GRAILLE provides an example multi-agent mission
planning pipeline, future work focusing in these areas can help
improve usability and lead to increased mission success.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the additional members of
the HOLII GRAILLE team – Angelica Garcia, Lauren Howell,
Jeremy Lim, and Javier Puig-Navarro – as well as the members
of the Autonomy Incubator who contributed to the project.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Guestrin, D. Koller, and R. Parr, “Multiagent planning with factored
mdps,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2002,
pp. 1523–1530.
[2]
G. Arslan, J. R. Marden, and J. S. Shamma, “Autonomous vehicle-
target assignment: A game-theoretical formulation,” Journal of Dynamic
Systems, Measurement, and Control, vol. 129, no. 5, 2007, pp. 584–596.
[3]
D. Bertsimas and R. Weismantel, Optimization over integers. Dynamic
Ideas Belmont, 2005, vol. 13.
[4]
L. Borin and J. Edlund, “Language technology and 3rd wave hci:
Towards phatic communication and situated interaction,” in New
Directions in Third Wave Human-Computer Interaction: Volume 1-
Technologies.
Springer, 2018, pp. 251–264.
[5]
J. R. Cauchard, J. L. E, K. Y. Zhai, and J. A. Landay, “Drone & me: an
exploration into natural human-drone interaction,” in Proceedings of the
2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing.
ACM, 2015, pp. 361–365.
[6]
W. S. Ng and E. Sharlin, “Collocated interaction with ﬂying robots,” in
2011 RO-MAN.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 143–149.
[7]
M. Quigley, M. A. Goodrich, and R. W. Beard, “Semi-autonomous
human-uav interfaces for ﬁxed-wing mini-uavs,” in Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS). Proceedings. 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
ference on, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2004, pp. 2457–2462.
[8]
N.
Li,
S.
Cartwright,
A.
Shekhar
Nittala,
E.
Sharlin,
and
M. Costa Sousa, “Flying frustum: A spatial interface for enhancing
human-uav awareness,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Confer-
ence on Human-Agent Interaction.
ACM, 2015, pp. 27–31.
[9]
S. Waldherr, R. Romero, and S. Thrun, “A gesture based interface for
human-robot interaction,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 9, no. 2, 2000, pp.
151–173.
[10]
J. Lambrecht, M. Kleinsorge, and J. Kr¨uger, “Markerless gesture-based
motion control and programming of industrial robots,” in Emerging
Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA), 2011 IEEE 16th Confer-
ence on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[11]
“Put-that-there: Voice and gesture at the graphics interface,” vol. 14,
no. 3.
New York, NY, USA: ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics,
1980, pp. 262–270.
[12]
R. A. S. Fern´andez, J. L. Sanchez-Lopez, C. Sampedro, H. Bavle,
M. Molina, and P. Campoy, “Natural user interfaces for human-drone
multi-modal interaction,” in Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS),
2016 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1013–1022.
[13]
J. B. Lyons, M. A. Clark, A. R. Wagner, and M. J. Schuelke, “Certiﬁable
trust in autonomous systems: Making the intractable tangible.” AI
Magazine, vol. 38, no. 3, 2017, pp. 37–49.
[14]
M. Kamali, L. A. Dennis, O. McAree, M. Fisher, and S. M. Veres,
“Formal veriﬁcation of autonomous vehicle platooning,” Science of
Computer Programming, vol. 148, 2017, pp. 88–106.
[15]
N. Li et al., “Game theoretic modeling of driver and vehicle interactions
for veriﬁcation and validation of autonomous vehicle control systems,”
IEEE Transactions on control systems technology, vol. 26, no. 5, 2018,
pp. 1782–1797.
[16]
N. Alexandrov, “Explainable ai decisions for human-autonomy interac-
tions,” in 17th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations
Conference, 2017, p. 3991.
[17]
S. A. Brasel and J. Gips, “Tablets, touchscreens, and touchpads: How
varying touch interfaces trigger psychological ownership and endow-
ment,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, vol. 24, no. 2, 2014, pp. 226–
233.
[18]
E. L. Meszaros, M. Chandarana, A. Trujillo, and B. D. Allen, “Compen-
sating for limitations in speech-based natural language processing with
multimodal interfaces in uav operation,” in International Conference on
Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics. Springer, 2017, pp. 183–194.
[19]
M. Chandarana, E. L. Meszaros, A. Trujillo, and B. D. Allen, “Anal-
ysis of a gesture-based interface for uav ﬂight path generation,” in
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2017 International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 36–45.
[20]
E. L. Meszaros, M. Chandarana, A. Trujillo, and B. D. Allen, “Speech-
based natural language interface for uav trajectory generation,” in
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2017 International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 46–55.
[21]
M. Chandarana, E. L. Meszaros, A. Trujillo, and B. Danette Allen,
“Natural language based multimodal interface for uav mission plan-
ning,” in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
Annual Meeting, vol. 61, no. 1.
SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los
Angeles, CA, 2017, pp. 68–72.
[22]
M. Chandarana, M. Lewis, K. Sycara, and S. Scherer, “Determining
effective swarm sizes for multi-job type missions,” in Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on.
IEEE, 2018.
[23]
S. Mehdi et al., “B´ezier curves for safe cooperative atmospheric
missions with multiple heterogeneous uas,” in 16th AIAA Aviation
Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, 2016, p. 4229.
[24]
B. N. Kelley, R. A. Williams, J. L. Holland, O. C. Schnarr, and B. D.
Allen, “A persistent simulation environment for autonomous systems,”
in 2018 Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference,
2018, p. 4015.
[25]
S. Jang, J. M. Vitale, R. W. Jyung, and J. B. Black, “Direct manipu-
lation is better than passive viewing for learning anatomy in a three-
dimensional virtual reality environment,” Computers & Education, vol.
106, 2017, pp. 150–165.
[26]
P. Walker, “Improving operator recognition and prediction of emergent
swarm behaviors,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, July
2017.
[27]
M. Chandarana, M. Lewis, K. Sycara, and S. Scherer, “Decentralized
method for sub-swarm deployment and rejoining,” in Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC), 2018 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE,
2018.
[28]
B. D. Allen, “Serious gaming for building a basis of certiﬁcation for
trust and trustworthiness of autonomous systems,” in 2018 Aviation
Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, 2018, p. 3844.
[29]
E. L. Meszaros et al., “Evaluating communication modality for im-
proved human/autonomous system teaming,” in 2019 AIAA Science
and Technology Forum and Exposition.
AIAA, 2019.
[30]
R. Banerji, “De-instrumentalizing hci: Social psychology, rapport for-
mation, and interactions with artiﬁcial social agents,” in New Directions
in Third Wave Human-Computer Interaction: Volume 1-Technologies.
Springer, 2018, pp. 43–66.
[31]
Y. Candau, T. Schiphorst, and J. Franc¸oise, “Designing from embodied
knowing: Practice-based research at the intersection between embodied
interaction and somatics,” in New Directions in Third Wave Human-
Computer Interaction: Volume 2-Methodologies.
Springer, 2018, pp.
203–230.
79
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

