Usability Evaluation of Augmented Reality as Instructional Tool in Collaborative 
Assembly Cells 
 Lea M. Daling, Anas Abdelrazeq, Max Haberstroh, and Frank Hees 
Chair of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering (IMA) 
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
lea.daling@ima-ifu.rwth-aachen.de 
 
Abstract—The increasing digitalization and customization of 
the production sector, which is commonly referred to as 
Industry 4.0, poses new challenges for the qualification of 
employees. The integration of Augmented Reality (AR) as an 
instructional tool provides new opportunities to support 
learning processes close to the workplace. Even though the use 
of this technology seems promising, there is still little 
empirically founded knowledge about the performance and fit 
of the system for collaborative assembly processes. This paper 
presents an empirical approach for the usability evaluation of 
a developed AR application, which can be used to assess 
software and hardware factors separately. In a pre-study, this 
catalogue was tested in combination with an experimental 
study design. First results for the evaluation of the developed 
AR solution and the suitability of different media are 
presented. 
 
Keywords-Usability Criteria; Augmented Reality; On the Job 
Training; 
Industry 4.0; 
Human-Robot-Collaboration 
(key 
words). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The distribution of digitalization and networking within 
the field of ‘Industry 4.0’ is associated with increasingly 
individualized and highly flexible production [1]. Thus, fast 
and efficient training processes will be necessary to prepare 
both experienced and temporary workers for the respective 
assembly processes. This becomes particularly important 
when assembly processes are neither completely manual nor 
fully automated and take place in cooperation between 
human and robot [2].  
In order to increase the efficiency of training processes, 
the integration of new technology and digital learning 
formats is needed to guide employees step by step through 
assembling processes and to train them flexibly for new use 
cases. The use of Augmented Reality (AR) as instructional 
assistant tool is widely expected to be a success factor of 
digital training programs [3]. However, its adequacy is not 
yet sufficiently empirically proven [4] .  
Since a high degree of usability can be seen as a 
prerequisite for further performance measures such as 
increasing effectiveness and reducing the error rate, the aim 
of our current research is to test the usability of AR in an 
Industry 4.0 use case [5]. Thus, the presented AR application 
is designed for the instruction of a collaborative assembly 
process between human and robot. In Section 2, a brief 
introduction of the basic functions and application 
possibilities of AR in the manufacturing context are given. 
Furthermore, the use case of AR as an on the job 
instructional tool in a collaborative assembly cell is 
presented. In Section 3, the methodological approach is 
presented. We present an overview of relevant usability 
criteria and our empirical approach to measure usability of 
an AR application using different instructional media. 
Finally, section 4 gives an overview of the first results and an 
outlook on further research. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
The following paragraph gives a brief introduction of the 
basic functions and application possibilities of AR in 
manufacturing and the use of AR as an on the job 
instructional tool in a collaborative assembly cell. 
A. AR in the Manufacturing Context 
An AR system adds virtual objects to the real world, in a 
way that both virtual and real components homogeneously 
appear in the user perception. An AR system “combines real 
and virtual objects in a real environment; runs interactively 
and in real time and registers (aligns) real and virtual objects 
with each other”[6]. It can therefore be said that AR systems 
overlay computer generated objects onto a real world setting, 
in real time [7].  
Within the last 10-15 years, AR systems have shown 
great improvement and an ability to create solutions to 
various problems [8]. Using AR, for example, innovative and 
effective methods can be developed to answer important 
needs in simulation, assistance and improvement of 
manufacturing processes. Volvo, for example, is utilizing the 
Microsoft HoloLens to enable production line workers to 
digitally view assembly instructions in real-time while 
working to put together parts of the vehicle [9]. Through 
such innovative uses, one can minimize the need for 
improvement iterations, re-works and modifications by 
‘getting it done the right way’ from the start. The use of AR 
in the current state promises many positive effects, such as 
constant access to information, lower error occurrences, 
improved motivation and a synchronized training and 
performance [10]. For instance, a comparison between paper 
instructions and AR instructions on a Head Mounted Display 
(HMD) showed that, although the use of AR in the assembly 
process gives little “time-advantages”, it reduces the 
assembly errors significantly [10]. 
Nevertheless, AR systems still face a couple of 
challenges that prevent the direct implementation of AR 
solutions in real world problems. The current status, e.g., in 
display and tracking technology, as well as calibration 
techniques, still faces many difficulties [10]. Even with those 
challenges conquered, other questions still arise, like whether 
or not the implementation of such systems would lead to 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

other problems affecting the overall performance. An over-
reliance on the AR generated signals and indications can for 
example have negative implications on the performance of 
the user, by disrupting the attention or focusing it all in one 
direction, leading it away from the surrounding context [11]. 
Further research and evaluation of the technology is 
therefore necessary to solve existing problems and expand 
the spectrum of applications. In the following, an exemplary 
use case is presented in which AR is to be used as an on the 
job instructional tool for collaborative assembly processes. 
B. AR as On the Job Instructional Tool 
Since AR is used to add real-time information to a real 
(working) environment, we expect it to enable “learning on 
demand” in an on the job training session. To date, there are 
several approaches that combine learning measures at the 
workplace with the benefits of new technologies [3]. These 
on the job learning approaches connect theoretical 
knowledge with practical application [12]. Further, they 
provide tailor-made learning processes and can be used time- 
and learning pace-independent [3]. The use case in which 
AR is used to enable on the job training consists of a 
collaborative assembly cell equipped with a robot.  
During the assembly process, man and robot are working 
together to assemble a small gear drive. In collaboration with 
the UR-5, the participants put together three plates with gear 
wheels. The human operator performs five steps, while the 
robot performs a total of four steps. Once the participant has 
familiarized himself with the cell, he is instructed to position 
a base plate and rear plate in a holder. The robot inserts four 
hexagon socket screws and positions the back plate on the 
base plate, while the human operator assembles two sets of 
gear wheels. In the final step, these are mounted on the pre-
assembled base plate presented by the robot. Previously, the 
assembly task was guided by a fixed touchscreen with 3-D 
animations. The use of AR offers the added value of 
displaying information and work steps directly at the 
workspace or at the tool required for the respective assembly 
step. The instructions for the AR application were developed 
on the basis of the existing work steps and supplemented by 
virtual objects with real-time animations. Based on 
fundamental usability heuristics (e.g., visibility of the system 
status, consistency, aesthetics) [13], we decided to use a 
minimalistic design, small work steps and an avatar to guide 
the test persons through the assembly process, which can be 
seen in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Layout of the AR Application. 
However, before the effectiveness of AR and its 
appropriateness for the use case of human robot 
collaboration can be tested in an experimental setting 
collecting quantitative data, the present qualitative pre-study 
aims at deriving basic implications on the usability of the 
developed AR application. The evaluation is intended to not 
only provide feedback on the AR-capable hardware, but also 
on the AR application software itself. Thus, two AR-capable 
see-through devices (tablet and Microsoft HoloLens) are 
used as hardware to test the AR application (software). Using 
the Microsoft HoloLens as HMD, we intended to enable a 
hands-free assembly process. Figure 2 shows that the use of 
the tablet is supported by a desk mount tablet arm. The study 
design explained below aims to derive implications of the 
usability of both the respective media and the AR 
application. For this purpose, relevant usability criteria are 
evaluated, which are explained in more detail below. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  AR as Instrcutional Tool for HMD and Tablet. 
C. Usability Aspects 
Since 1997, DIN EN ISO 9241 has been an international 
series of standards that defines usability as the extent to 
which a technical system can be used by certain users in a 
certain usage context in order to achieve certain goals 
effectively, efficiently and satisfactorily [5]. Sarodnick and 
Brau emphasize that usability particularly considers the fit of 
system, task and user, taking into account the quality of goal 
achievement perceived by the user [5]. For this reason, it is 
essential to involve potential users in the evaluation process 
at an early stage.  
Within a survey of Gabbard and colleagues [14] , it was 
found that in a total of 1104 articles on augmented reality, 
only 38 (~3%) addressed some aspect of human computer 
interaction, and only 21 (~2%) described a formal user-based 
study. Since, as mentioned, the involvement of users in the 
evaluation process is crucial for the successful development 
of a product, a user-centered mixed-method approach will be 
presented in the following.  
The most widely used inductive approach, which is 
characterized by the analysis of early versions and 
prototypes, may be the so called thinking aloud method [5]. 
Here, test subjects are encouraged to express their cognitions 
verbally during the test. The advantage of this approach is 
the explorative acquisition of qualitative data to receive 
feedback on design and improvement. However, it should be 
critically noted that the double load of task processing and 
loud thinking reduces the processing speed. For this reason, 
this method should not be used in conjunction with a 
performance measurement. Furthermore, the test conditions 
in the execution are often few standardized.  
Deductive methods, on the other hand, capture the user's 
perspective on an already developed product. At this point, 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

however, changes and corrections of a system are often time-
and cost-consuming. Established evaluation concepts (e.g., 
IsoMetrics; Isonorm [15]), often make use of the classical 
questionnaire methodology, which ensures the fulfillment of 
the quality criteria (validity, reliability, objectivity) to a large 
extend. The aim of this paper is to combine the advantages of 
both methods in order to generate feedback on the usability 
of the AR application based on empirical user surveys - 
extended by open questions. The thinking aloud method was 
further used to verbalize and record the impressions, 
reactions and cognitions of the participants during the work 
process. The composition of these approaches will be 
presented in the following. 
III. 
METHOD 
The aim of the present usability evaluation is to collect 
feedback on an AR application prototype that is tested on 
different media. The chosen mixed-method approach 
combines inductive qualitative methods with deductive, 
quantiatively oriented approaches of data acquisition. In 
1993, Nielsen stated that a number of 5-6 test subjects were 
sufficient to detect significant problems [16]. Since not only 
the AR application but also the usability of the three media 
used is to be evaluated, we aimed at a minimum N of 15 
persons. According to Faulkner, at least 90% to 97% of all 
known usability problems can be detected with a number of 
15 people [17]. Therefore, we decided on a within-subject 
design in which every test person performs tests on every 
medium. The study design, the description of the sample and 
the used questionnaires will be presented in the following 
section.  
A. Study Design and Procedure 
In addition to the evaluation of the AR application, the 
usability of the respective instructional media should also be 
evaluated. Thus, we have set up a within-subject test design, 
where the participants have to perform three rounds on the 
assembly cell. Each round was instructed by different 
instructional media: The AR application is used by two 
media (the tablet and the HoloLens), so that the evaluation of 
the AR application can be carried out independently of the 
medium used. In order to compare these media with 
previously used media, the touchscreen is also included in 
the testing. It uses text- and animation-based instructions but 
is not AR-capable and therefore limited to the dimensionality 
of the screen. In order to control for repetition and learning 
effects [18] as far as possible, the order of the instruction 
media was randomized. 
Each participant completed a pre-test questionnaire at the 
beginning in a paper-pencil format. They were then asked to 
familiarize themselves with the workstation of the assembly 
cell. Depending on the randomized condition, the first 
assembly was instructed by either the tablet, the HoloLens or 
the touchscreen. The participants had the opportunity to ask 
the test supervisor for help at any time, but were encouraged 
to carry out the assembly themselves. After each assembly 
process, which was completed as soon as the fully assembled 
gear drive was placed in a box by the robot, there was a post-
test questionnaire referring to the medium used. During all 
three sessions, the subjects were encouraged to express their 
thoughts aloud. The statements were recorded with a voice 
recorder. After the third assembly has been completed, 
participants were asked to fill out the third part of the 
questionnaire referring to the AR-application itself. The 
study took about 60 minutes to complete.  
B. Participants 
A total of 8 men and 7 women took part in the study (N = 
15). The mean age of the study participants was 25 years 
(MW = 25.07, range = 20 - 32). The sample consisted of 
eleven students and four working persons. Seven participants 
indicated to have high school graduation and/or the general 
university entrance qualification as highest education degree, 
the remaining eight already have an academic degree 
(nBachelor = 4, nMaster = 3, nPhD = 1). Twelve participants 
have never worked with a robot, the other three have rarely 
worked with a robot. Only one person had already 
participated in a study on the collaborative assembly cell.  
C. Questionnaires 
In the following paragraph, the pre- and post-test 
questionnaires for both “Instructional Media” and the “AR 
application” are presented. 
1) Pre-Test.  
In addition to the demographic data already reported, 
the participants were asked about their affinity for 
technology with five items (e.g., ”My enthusiasm for 
technology is...”) on a six-level scale ranging from "very 
low" to "very high". To complete the data on the participants, 
we also asked which media (e.g., laptop, smartphone, tablets) 
are available to them, how often they use them and how easy 
it is to use the respective medium. In addition, we used the 
“locus of control for technology” questionnaire (KUT) to 
assess general control beliefs while dealing with technology 
[19]. With its eight items (e.g., “Most of the technological 
problems that I have to face can be solved by myself”) on a 
six-level scale ranging from "not true at all" to "absolutely 
true" the German questionnaire has a reliability of α = 0.89 
[19]. 
2) Post-Test – Instructional Media.  
The assessment of the usability of the instructional media 
used is carried out separately from the evaluation of the AR 
application. Thus, it is possible to separate the findings on 
software and hardware more clearly. Based on existing 
usability literature [5]][13][15][20], we decided to select 
relevant and quantifiable criteria for the task with regard to 
their face validity in order to determine the suitability of the 
chosen instructional media.: a) task load, b) perceived 
usefulness, c) media self-efficacy, d) perceived enjoyment, 
and e) perceived ease of use.  
a) Task load. The task load was measured by the “NASA 
Task Load Index (NASA TLX)”. It measures subjectively 
experienced demand using a multidimensional scale that 
differentiates, for example, between physical and mental 
strain [21]. The German short version contains six 
dimensions, 
namely, 
mental, physical 
and 
temporal 
demands, as well as performance, effort and frustration. The 
original scale has 20 gradations from “very low” to “very 
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

high”. Adapted to the German version, we used a 10-step 
scale with the poles “little” and “much”. Criteria on 
reliability have been satisfactorily reviewed (Cronbachs α = 
.68 - .83).  
b) Perceived usefulness. The factor perceived usefulness 
arises from the widespread and empirically well-founded 
“Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)”[22], which has 
been incorporated into the development of the usability 
catalogue. The TAM, currently in its third version, aims at 
predicting the usage behavior and acceptance of information 
technologies. To represent the construct, we used four items 
on a scale from one (strongly disagree) to seven (strongly 
agree) and adapted them to our application (e.g., “using the 
instruction medium would improve my work performance”). 
Cronbach's alpha showed a satisfactory value of α = .91 -.93. 
c) Media self-efficacy. Four items from TAM 3's original 
"Computer Self-Efficacy" scale were used and adapted (e.g., 
“I would be able to use the instructional medium to do my 
work if no one were present to tell me what to do”). Since 
two of these items - presumably due to a misleading 
formulation – showed a high standard deviation, they were 
excluded from further analysis. The remaining two items 
reached a Cronbach's alpha of α = .85 - .95. 
d) Perceived enjoyment. This construct is composed of 
three adapted items from TAM 3 (perceived enjoyment; e.g., 
“I would enjoy using the instructional medium.”) and three 
other items from the “Modular Evaluation of Key 
Components of User Experience“(meCue2.0; e.g., “The 
instructional medium frustrates me.”). This questionnaire is 
based on the analytical “Components of User Experience” 
model by Thüring and Mahlke [20]. This model 
distinguishes between the perception of task-related and non-
task-related product qualities and includes user emotions as 
an essential and mediative factor of certain usage 
consequences. Internal consistency criteria are satisfied for 
the scale composed in this way (Cronbachs α = .66 - .92).  
e) Perceived ease of use. The construct consists of four 
adapted items from TAM 3 (e.g., "I think the handling of the 
instructional medium would be clear and understandable for 
me.") and two further items from the IsoMetrics 
questionnaire 
(e.g., 
"The 
operating 
options 
of 
the 
instructional medium support an optimal use of the 
application."). IsoMetrics was designed for use during the 
software development process [15]. The focus is set on seven 
scales, which constitute an operationalization of the seven 
criteria of the European Committee for Standardization. Here 
the scale controllability was used to supplement the items 
from the TAM. Due to its high standard deviation, one item 
of the IsoMetrics had to be excluded from the analysis. The 
remaining four items reached a satisfactory internal 
consistency of Cronbachs α = .56 - .89.  
The Post-test on instructional media also contains open 
questions: “What did you particularly like about the 
instructional medium you used?”, “What would need to be 
changed in the instruction medium to make the assembly 
process even easier?”, and “Please create a ranking of the 
instructional media, where 1 is your strongest preference, 2 
is your second choice, etc. Please give reasons for your 
decision.” 
3) Post-Test – AR application.  
The assessment of the usability of the AR application 
itself was measured by five parameters selected with regard 
to their fit in terms of early stage evaluation: (a) perceived 
usefulness, (b) aesthetic and layout, c) appropriateness of 
functions, as well as d) terminology and terms. 
a) 
Perceived 
usefulness. 
To 
measure 
perceived 
usefulness, the same four items were used as in the 
instructional media post-test. Only the terms were adapted 
(e.g., "Using the AR application would improve my 
performance."). Cronbach's alpha showed a satisfactory 
value of α = .96. 
b) Aesthetic and layout. In order to comprehensively 
depict this construct, four items from the “Visual Aesthetics 
of Websites Inventory – Short (VisAWI-S)“ were used in the 
field of aesthetics [23]. The VisAWI-S records how users 
subjectively perceive the aesthetics of graphical interface. 
The used short version represents the general aesthetic factor 
[23]. We adjusted the items in terms of terminology (e.g., 
“Everything matches within the application”) and further 
added one item from IsoMetrics (“The layout complicates 
my task processing due to an inconsistent design.”) and 
another from the “Questionnaire for User Interface 
Satisfaction (QUIS)”, which was first published in 1987 to 
ensure feedback on the font as well [24]. This composed 
scale reached an internal consistency of Cronbachs α = .60, 
which is critical for the analysis of this overall scale. 
c) Appropriateness of functions. This scale is based on 
the Task Adequacy Scale of IsoMetrics and with four items 
(e.g., "The information necessary for task processing is 
always in the right place on the screen") reaches a 
Cronbach's alpha of α = .72. 
d) 
Terminology 
and 
terms. 
To 
illustrate 
how 
understandable the terms and instructions used were, we 
used four items from QUIS (e.g., "On-screen prompts were 
confusing.")[24]. Furthermore, the transparency of the 
robot's activities was queried ("The application always 
informed me about what the robot does."). Two further items 
(e.g., “Within the AR application, easily understandable 
terms, descriptions or symbols (e.g., in masks or menus) are 
used.”) for this parameter are taken from the Isonorm 
questionnaire published in 1993 [15]. Like IsoMetrics, 
Isonorm is based on the criteria of the European Committee 
for Standardization and therefore uses the same seven 
factors. This scale reached in total a Cronbachs alpha of α = 
.65.  
Similar to the instructional media post-test, the post-test 
for the AR application also contains open questions: “What 
did you particularly like about the AR application?”, “What 
would need to be changed in AR application to make the 
assembly process even easier?” Finally, the test persons 
should decide whether and why they would prefer the AR 
application to traditional manuals. 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

D. Analysis 
The analysis of the collected data was conducted using 
SPSS. Open questions and the analysis of recorded 
comments was done using MAXQDA software. Since this is 
still work in progress, the following is a first insight into the 
results with a short outlook on qualitative findings. An 
inferential statistical comparison of the groups is carried out 
exploratory subsuming the individual test conditions to the 
media used. Thus, the comparison groups "tablet", 
"HoloLens" and "touchscreen" are used for the calculations. 
Due to the small sample, Friedman's ANOVA [18] as a non-
parametric test procedure provides an insight into existing 
group differences, which are further investigated with the 
help of a post-hoc analysis according to Dunn-Bonferroni 
[18]. 
IV. 
FIRST RESULTS 
Section 4 gives an overview of the first results for pre-
and post-test questionnaires as well as results of the open 
questions 
on 
“Instructional 
Media” 
and 
the 
“AR 
Application”. 
A. Pre-Test 
The participants have a mean technical affinity of 4.61 
(min = 3.4; max = 5.60; SD = 0.71). General control beliefs 
while dealing with technology is ranging between min = 3.00 
to max = 5.75 (mean = 4.73; SD = 0.72) within the sample. 
Media as PC (n = 7), Laptops (n = 11) and Smartphones (n = 
15) are used daily by the majority of the test persons, while 
HoloLens (n = 12) and the Oculus Rift (n = 13) are used 
almost never. Only three participants already used the 
HoloLens before this study.  
B. Post-Test – Instructional Media 
a) Task-load. Descriptive results of the task load (N = 15; 
Scale: (0) = „low “to (10) = „high“) can be seen in Figure 3, 
where means of each scale are shown as percentages for each 
media. The mean level of frustration over all tasks and media 
is 41%, and the highest mean level is reached by the 
HoloLens with 47%. The lowest mean frustration level is 
31% while using the touchscreen. The participants reported 
to achieve their goal on a mean of 67% and the highest 
performance was achieved using the touchscreen (73%). On 
average, 40% effort was needed to fulfill the assembly task. 
The mean temporal demand ranges from 36% (touchscreen) 
to 42% (HoloLens). The highest mean of physical demand 
was reported using the tablet (53%), the highest mean of 
mental demand was reported using the HoloLens (61%). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Task Load of Insstructional Media. 
b) Perceived usefulness. All descriptive statistics of the 
following scales can be seen in Table. I. Within Friedman’s 
ANOVA, it is always assumed as null hypothesis that there 
is no difference between the groups. However, the analysis 
for perceived usefulness shows a statistically significant 
difference between the groups (x2r (2) = 10.67, p = .005, n = 
15). The subsequently performed Dunn-Bonferroni tests with 
a corrected alpha = .017 show that both the perceived 
usefulness between tablet and touchscreen differ statistically 
significantly (z = -2.641, p = .008), as well as the perceived 
usefulness between HoloLens and touchscreen (z = -2.548, p 
= .011), indicating that HoloLens and tablet are perceived as 
less useful as the touchscreen. HoloLens and tablet are not 
significantly different. 
c) Media self-efficacy. Neither mean values nor 
Friedman's ANOVA show any statistically significant 
difference between the groups (x2r (2) = 4.545, p = .103, n = 
15).  
d) Perceived Enjoyment. As in the previous scale, neither 
mean values nor Friedman's ANOVA show a significant 
difference between the groups with regard to the perceived 
enjoyment (x2r (2) = 2.980, p = .225, n = 14). 
e) Perceived ease of use. Both mean values and 
Friedman’s ANOVA indicate a statistically significant 
difference between the groups with regard to the perceived 
ease of use of the media (x2r (2) = 21.088, p < .000, n = 15). 
The subsequently performed Dunn-Bonferroni tests with a 
corrected alpha = .017 show that both the perceived ease of 
use between tablet and HoloLens differ statistically 
significantly (z = -2.841, p = .005), as well as the perceived 
ease of use between HoloLens and touchscreen (z = -3.425, p 
=.001). Tablet and touchscreen also differ statistically 
significantly (z = -2.522, p = .012). The results raise an 
indication that the HoloLens is considered to be the least 
easy to use, while the touchscreen reaches its highest value. 
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS – INSTRUCTIONAL MEDIA 
 
Within the ranking of the instructional tools the 
touchscreen was chosen ten times as a first choice, the 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

HoloLens three times, and the tablet two times as a first 
choice.  
The evaluation of the verbal expressions and written 
comments was done by categorizing them into positive and 
negative comments for each medium. Individual entries were 
coded several times. In the following, a brief overview of the 
most frequently mentioned is given. 
Overall, there were 69 positive comments on the media. 
33 of these referred to the touchscreen, which was perceived 
as easy to use and clearly arranged. With the tablet (n = 18) it 
was positively evaluated that the animations can be viewed 
on demand. The HoloLens was 18 times positively evaluated 
- most frequently the intuitive operation and the innovative 
character were mentioned. In addition, there were 68 
negative remarks, 54 of which were verbal and 14 written 
comments. 38 of these were related to the HoloLens and the 
lack of wearing comfort or limited vision, e.g., "The 
HoloLens impairs vision". There were 28 negative comments 
about the tablet, mainly relating to the difficult positioning of 
the tablet arm and the resulting limited view of the work 
surface. The touchscreen had only two negative annotations, 
namely ‘the fixation does not provide orientation at the 
workstation’ and ‘animations are not displayed on the work 
surface’. 
C. Post-Test – AR Application 
All descriptive statistics of the following scales can be 
seen in Table. II. The perceived usefulness of the AR 
application is on a mean of 4.40 which corresponds to an 
assessment between ‘rather agree’ and ‘agree’. Aesthetics 
and Layout and Appropriateness of functions (mean = 3.97) 
corresponds to an assessment of ‘rather agree’. Terminology 
and terms corresponds to an assessment between ‘rather 
agree’ and ‘agree’ with a mean of 4.29. 
TABLE II.  
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS – AR APPLICATION 
 
 
 
 
 
On the question of whether participants would prefer 
learning via AR to traditional manuals, 13 out of 15 people 
said they would prefer AR. Main reasons given were, for 
example, the active learning process, the small steps, the 
high degree of interaction, the simplicity of use and the 
perceived fun. In contrast, comments against included the 
perceived external control of the technology and the 
possibility of browsing through manuals at one's own pace. 
Open questions and comments. There were a total of 85 
positive comments on the AR application. The detailed and 
vividly visualized animations were mentioned particularly 
frequently here (29 entries) and are accompanied by the 
clearly perceived instructions (13 entries). The fun and 
excitement (20 entries) in the process and the active, goal-
oriented learning process (7 entries) were also mentioned. In 
the 182 negatively coded expressions, there are often 
remarks about the lack of correspondence between reality 
and displayed animations (e.g., in color, degree of detail, or 
positioning; 34 entries), such as: "it’s hard to stay focused 
while the animation moves continuously in the back". In 
addition, the text instructions were sometimes perceived as 
cumbersome: "I find it annoying that I always have to read 
so much text". 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK 
The study reveals first results for the separate evaluation 
of the usability of different instruction media as well as the 
developed AR application using a tailor-made usability 
catalogue. In general, the composition of the usability 
catalogue from inductive and deductive methods was proven 
to be a successful approach. A high degree of objectivity 
could be achieved through the questionnaires. The individual 
results of the scales could be explained in detail by open 
comments and verbal statements and were thus made 
comprehensible afterwards. However, the validation of 
scales in a larger sample should precede further studies. 
The results of the evaluation of the instructional media 
shows that a high level of frustration occurs when processing 
the task with the HoloLens, which goes hand in hand with a 
high cognitive demand. Here, possible connections between 
the ease of use of the media and the perceived cognitive 
demand could be an interesting starting point for further 
research. The touchscreen on the contrary causes a low 
frustration and is evaluated with the highest performance. 
The tablet's evaluation usually lies between the other media, 
but shows the highest physical demand. These findings are 
supported by the assessment of the usability scales. Here it 
becomes apparent that HoloLens and tablet are rated with a 
lower usefulness than the touchscreen. In terms of media 
self-efficacy and perceived enjoyment, there is no difference 
between the media tested. In future studies, the possible 
influence of the high technical affinity of the sample on these 
variables should be clarified. Both the open questions and the 
ranking support the impression that the touchscreen 
convinces users with its simple operation. In addition, it 
becomes clear that the innovative character of the HoloLens 
is perceived as enjoyable. Above all, the overlapping of 
animations with reality still poses a problem, which can be 
prevented, for example, by using the tablet and moving the 
holder. 
In the evaluation of the AR Application it becomes clear 
that AR is generally assessed with a relatively high 
usefulness, which is also supported by the open comments. 
This shows that especially the clear and small step 
instructions are perceived as useful. The aesthetics and 
layout of the application, as well as the appropriateness of 
functions should be worked on in the further course. It 
should be considered that images and animations are 
perceived as helpful, whereas text descriptions are 
sometimes described as obstructive or misleading. 
A main restriction of the study refers to the high 
academic degree and the young average age of the sample, 
which is accompanied by a comparatively high affinity for 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

technology. In addition, almost all participants are novices in 
the 
field of 
assembly, 
which 
severely 
limits 
the 
transferability of study results. Another limitation refers to 
the laboratory setting of the study, where no real working 
conditions (e.g., lighting, noises) occur. The results achieved 
by such a small number of participants should not be 
interpreted without caution. Conclusions on the quality of the 
questionnaire used should not yet be derived, as this requires 
a larger sample. The items and constructs used here were 
selected on the basis of the specific use case which limits the 
transferability of this selection. Further, we only used already 
established questionnaires and the thinking aloud method but 
did not include any other usability instruments (e.g., usability 
cards). 
The first impressions of the study should be examined in 
a real use case within further research. In order to generate a 
better transferability of the results, a survey of assembly 
workers is planned for the further course of our 
investigations. After the revision of the detected usability 
problems, following studies will be carried out referring to 
the effectiveness of the use of AR. Hereby, the influence of 
AR on the general performance, error rate and satisfaction 
with the work process should be examined. Furthermore, the 
influence of AR on the acceptance of robots should be 
investigated within the context of collaborative workspaces. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research and development project is funded by the 
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
(BMBF) 
within 
the 
“Innovations 
for 
Tomorrow’s 
Production, Services, and Work” Program (funding number 
02L14Z000) and implemented by the Project Management 
Agency Karlsruhe (PTKA). The author is responsible for the 
contents of this publication. 
REFERENCES 
[1] acatech - Deutsche Akademie der Technikwissenschaften in 
Kooperation 
mit 
Fraunhofer 
IML 
& 
equeo, 
Ed., 
Kompetenzentwicklungsstudie Industrie 4.0: Erste Ergebnisse 
und Schlussfolgerungen (Industry 4.0 Competence Development 
Study: First Results and Conclusions). München, 2016. 
[2] S. L. Müller, S. Stiehm, S. Jeschke and A. Richert, “Subjective 
Stress in Hybrid Collaboration”, in vol. 10652, Social Robotics, 
A. Kheddar et al., Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
pp. 597–606, 2017, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-70022-9_59. 
[3] Q. Guo, “Learning in a Mixed Reality System in the Context of 
Industry 4.0,” Journal of Technical Education, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 
92–115, 2015. 
[4] M. Funk, T. Kosch and A. Schmidt, „Interactive worker 
assistance“, in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM, 2016 UbiComp, 
pp. 934–939. doi: 10.1145/2971648.2971706. 
[5] F. Sarodnick and H. Brau, Methoden der Usability Evaluation 
(Methods of Usability Evaluation), (2nd. ed). Hans Huber, 
Hogrefe AG, Bern, 2006. 
[6] R. Azuma, Y. Baillot, R. Behringer, S. Feiner, S. Julier and B. 
MacIntyre, “Recent Advances in Augmented Reality”, Naval 
Research Lab, Washington DC, pp. 34-47, 2001, doi: 
10.1109/38.963459. 
[7] B. Furht, Ed., Handbook of Augmented Reality, Springer Science 
& Business Media, 2011, doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0064-6. 
[8] A. Y. Nee, S. K. Ong, G. Chryssolouris and D. Mourtzis, 
“Augmented Reality Applications in Design and Manufacturing”, 
CIRP Annals-manufacturing technology, 61(2), pp. 657-679, 
2012, doi: 10.1016/j.cirp.2012.05.010. 
[9] A. Little, How Automotive Manufacturers are Utilizing 
Augmented Reality, August 2018, retrieved January, 08, 2019 
fromhttps://www.manufacturingtomorrow.com/article/2018/03/how-
automotive-manufacturers-are-utilizing-augmented-reality-/11117. 
[10] M. Akçayır and G. Akçayır, “Advantages and Challenges 
Associated with Augmented Reality for Education: A systematic 
review of the literature”. Educational Research Review, (20), pp. 
1-11, 2017, doi:10.1016/ j.edurev.2016.11.002. 
[11] A. Tang, C. Owen, F. Biocca and W. Mou, “Comparative 
effectiveness of augmented reality in object assembly”, 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing 
systems, pp. 
73-80, 
ACM, 
April 
2003, 
doi:10.1145/642611.642626. 
[12] A. Ullrich and G. Vladova, “Qualifizierungsmanagement in der 
vernetzten Produktion - Ein Ansatz zur Strukturierung relevanter 
Parameter,” (Qualification Management in Networked Production 
- An Approach to Structuring Relevant Parameters) Lehren und 
Lernen für die moderne Arbeitswelt, pp. 58–80, GITO, 2015. 
[13] J. Nielsen, Enhancing the explanatory power of usability 
heuristics. in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 152-158, ACM. 1994, doi: 
10.1145/191666.191729 
[14] L. Gabbard, J. E. Swan II, D. Hix, S,-J. Kim and G. Fitch, 
“Active Text Drawing Styles for Outdoor Augmented Reality: a 
User-based Study and Design Implications”, in Virtual Reality 
Conference 
VR'07, 
IEEE, 
pp. 
35-42, 
2007, 
doi: 
10.1109/VR.2007.352461.  
[15] K. Figl, Deutschsprachige Fragebögen zur Usability-Evaluation 
im Vergleich (German-language questionnaires for usability 
evaluation in comparison), Zeitschrift für Arbeitswissenschaft, 4, 
pp. 321-337, 2010. 
[16] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering. London: AP Professional Ltd., 
1993. 
[17] L. Faulkner, Beyond the five-user assumption: Benefits of 
increased sample sizes in usability testing. Behavior Research 
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 35 (3), pp. 379-383, 2003. 
[18] A. Field and G. Hole. How to design and report experiments. 
Sage, 2002.  
[19] G. Beier, Kontrollüberzeugungen im Umgang mit Technik: ein 
Persönlichkeitsmerkmal mit Relevanz für die Gestaltung 
technischer Systeme (Control Control beliefs in dealing with 
technology: a personality trait with relevance for the design of 
technical systems), Ph.D. Dissertation, Humboldt-Universität zu 
Berlin. 
Available 
from 
GESIS 
database, 
Record 
No. 
20040112708. 
[20] M. Thüring, and S. Mahlke, Usability, Aesthetics and Emotions 
in Human–Technology Interaction,  International Journal of 
Psychology, 42(4), 
pp. 
253-264, 
2007, 
doi: 
10.1080/00207590701396674. 
[21] S. G. Hart, NASA-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX); 20 Years 
Later. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society 50th Annual Meeting, Santa Monica: HFES, pp. 904-908, 
2006, doi: 10.1177/154193120605000909. 
[22] F. D.  Davis, A Technology Acceptance Model for Empirically 
Testing New End-user Information Systems: Theory and Results, 
Ph.D. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1985. 
[23] M.  Moshagen, and M. T. Thielsch, “A Short Version of the 
Visual Aesthetics of Websites Inventory”, Behaviour & 
Information Technology, 32 (12), pp. 1305-1311, 2013, doi: 
10.1080/0144929X.2012.694910.  
[24] J. P. Chin, V. A. Diehl and K. L. Norman, “Development of a 
Tool Measuring User Satisfaction of the Human-Computer 
Interface”,In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
factors in computing systems, pp. 213-218. ACM, 2018.
 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

