User Experience Design of Smart Headwear for Bike User  
  
Jae-hyun Choi, Sung-soo Bae, Juhee Kim, Sangyoung Yoon, Soon-won Chung 
U2 System, Inc.,  
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: choi2000@u2system.co.kr, ssbae@u2system.co.kr, kjh@u2system.co.kr, syyoon@u2system.co.kr, 
soonwonchung@u2system.co.kr 
 
 
Abstract—With the recent development of technology for 
wearable devices, user experience design is considered as the 
important design strategy. The purpose of this study is to 
conduct practical user experience design for smart headwear 
for bike user. To find smart headwear contents, the user needs 
and pain points were extracted from the user research. In 
developing the user experience (UX) design elements, persona 
and user journey map were created to provide differentiated 
experience contents for bicycle user. In this study, smart 
headwear through UX design process could provide the 
guidance for route during the cycling, coping with accidents, 
and bicycle trip. The smart headwear development with UX 
design process could suggest the UX content direction and the 
business success model. This study could be helpful to establish 
the UX strategy for smart devices for bicycle users.  
Keywords-user experience; smart headwear; wearable 
device; bicycle user; user interface. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The technologies of wearable devices and digital life 
have been developed last decade. Smart glasses gained 
interests since the Google Glass was launched in 2013 and 
other manufacturers put various models on the market. 
However, it is difficult to find examples of effective usage 
on everyday life or profitable cases.  
Recently, the services and contents for cycle users were 
developed with the smartphone and wearable device. Volvo 
and Strava introduced new alert system to reduce chances of 
collisions between cars and cyclists using global positioning 
system (GPS) information data [1]. Moreover, increase of 
the cycle users and success on cycle tourist could boost the 
wearable device industry. Jung reported the usage of cycle 
increased sharply in nine cities in North America and the 
transportation rate of cycle increased to 5.8% in 2009 from 
1.1% in 1990 [2]. Successful cycle tour business could be 
found in France. In 2007, 7.3 million people, 3.5% of tourists 
who visited France, used bicycle tour and 0.8 million people, 
3.0% of tourists who visited Paris, used bicycle tour [3]. 
The aim of this study is to introduce practical user 
experience design process from exploiting user experiences 
to applying the user experience (UX) concepts to wearable 
device. Focus group discussion and in-depth interview to 
exploit users’ needs and pain points were described in 
Section 2. Development of personas and journey map and 
workshop in order to provide a differentiated service were 
described in Section 3. In Section 4, all findings were applied 
to wearable device for bicycle users. 
II. 
USER EXPERIENCE RESEARCH 
A. Methods 
Focus group discussion and in-depth interview are good 
methods to collect broad and clear user experiences. Nine 
bicycle users separately recruited from three groups, such as 
daily leisure bicycle users, expert road bike users, and 
wearable device users. Daily and expert users participated in 
focus group discussion and wearable device users 
participated in in-depth interview.  
Awareness and behavioral characteristics of bicycling, 
bicycle usage experience and objects of bicycle usage were 
collected from daily and expert user groups. And behavioral 
characteristics related with smart devices and smartphone 
during bike-touring were collected through an interview with 
the wearable device users (Figure 1). 
B. Results 
Needs and pain points were categorized into three riding 
tour phases. First, few information on difficulties on the 
riding course, and issues related with safety likes 
maintenance and protection of robbery were raised during 
preparation phase of riding tour. Second, problems on safety 
and accident were main concerns including communication 
with riding members during phase of riding tour. Lastly, 
after riding, major interests were riding photos and data 
related with riding likes riding distance and average velocity. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Major interview contents for bicycle users 
 
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Cycle users hoped the wearable device for cycling could 
provide the precise information on riding and exercise, 
information on riding course and surroundings and cautions 
on risky conditions. However, the short battery time of 
device and interference of calling and listening music caused 
by a wind were major concerns.  
Consequently, the concepts of wearable device for 
cycling could be summarized into “safety motivation”, 
“social activities with self-motivation”, “tour assistant” and 
“health monitoring”. 
III. 
BUILDING UX CONCEPT 
A. Persona and User Journey 
Collected user opinions and comments were refined and 
used for creation of personas and journey map that were 
suggested by Alan Cooper [4], software designer and 
programmer. These methods could be effective and give 
easier way for understanding users. For creating personas, 
democratic variables, objectives of bicycle riding, inherent 
tendency of bicycle usage were considered and classified 
into similar personal characteristics.  
There were two common negative emotions on four 
personas. The bike user concerns about safety and accidents 
took great portion during cycling. The expert bike rider who 
is more than six road bikes a week, and the persona needs for 
riding courses, objective riding data, and navigation 
functions. When riding for travel, there were requirements 
for movement such as navigation and route information. In 
the case of commuting bike rider had the needs for 
contemplating about accidents and requirements on crossway 
in urban area. For a riding bicycles for health care, the main 
focus has been on the need for information on living 
conditions, exercise and personal training functions, and 
achievement of goals, mainly on track records and on 
compensation and motivation.  
The user journey map was developed based upon 
characteristics shown in Table 1. Journey map was 
composed after each persona’s bicycle usage phase was 
settled and was defined behavioral criteria for each phase, 
such as emotional variance, needs, and user requirements.  
 
TABLE I.  
GOAL FOR PERSONA 
Persona 
Goal 
Expert bike rider 
To renewal own record for preparing 
competition 
Traveling bike rider 
To find a bicycle course for traveling 
commuting bike rider 
To commute and use bike as a form of 
transportation 
Bike rider for healthcare 
To care about health from cycling 
 
Four personas were consequently created, such as expert 
bike rider, Traveling bike rider, commuting bike rider, Bike 
rider for healthcare. Figure 2 present the hallmarks, pain-
points and needs of each persona and the output example. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Persona & User Journey map 
 
B. User Experience Concept 
The workshop was carried out for extracting the UX 
concept, shown in Figure 3. Collected data were classified 
into safe riding, bicycle information, navigation, sharing 
route and information, bike accessory, record and feedback. 
Idea generating process was discussed in order to solve the 
pain points and needs of each persona. UX concept and 
strategy were drawn during idea workshop.  
Finally, values and experiences that a wearable device 
could provide to bicycle users were summarized into four 
key UX contents: safety, tour, social, and health. Figure 4 
displays key UX contents.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Idea workshop and affinity diagram 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Key UX contents 
 
276
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This study drew concrete ideas to enhance the user 
experience through the headwear with four main contents 
drawn. First of all, the safety function is that prevents 
dangerous accident and helps cope with it after an accident, 
which helps the users ride safely by providing alarms for 
speeding bumps and places where accidents occur frequently 
so that the users can let others know that through emergency 
call and quickly cope with it.  
Secondly, the social feature makes the user experience 
of riding the bicycle more pleasant by the function of saving 
and sharing own driving records and routes and the function 
of motivating for riding through competitions and games.  
Thirdly, the features for tours are to provide the 
information and navigation about the area where the user is 
cycling. Users can easily get the information about the area 
and can find the correct tour route even if the user is not 
familiar with the area.  
Last, the health care function provides exercise state 
information while driving such as exercise status monitoring, 
exercise goal-setting and achievement rate display, so that 
the user can effectively control user pace, monitor the 
physical condition through body temperature and heart rate 
measurement, and prevent Glycogen depletion by informing 
the user of time for food and water intake. 
IV. 
APPLICATION TO SMART DEVICE 
A. User Interface Design 
With the derived key contents, an application for mobile 
and headwear was designed. Each function was defined, and 
a screen considering the user’s gaze was designed. 
Experiment was conducted for inspecting the relationships 
between 
eye 
dominance 
and 
the 
user’s 
cognitive 
performance before user interface design. A total of 36 
bicycle riders who have been cycling consistently were 
recruited and participated in the experiment. Recognition 
time, error rate and user preference scores were measured 
during riding a bicycle on a stationary stand for safety 
reasons. As a results, quantitative experiment with eye 
tracker showed that recognition time had 20% delay and 
error ratio increased almost 10% when the device was 
located on non-dominant eye. The interaction effect of 
ocular dominance and age group was significant with 
respect to recognition time and error ratio. The recognition 
time of the users in their 40s was significantly longer than 
the other age groups when the display was placed on the 
non-dominant eye, while no difference was observed on the 
dominant eye. Error ratio also showed the same pattern. 
Although no difference was observed for the main effect of 
ocular dominance and bike usage, the interaction effect 
between the two variables was significant with respect to 
preference score. 
Headwear display screen connected to a mobile device 
is divided broadly into Event Area and Information Area as 
Figure 5. The part of the screen which is most noticeable 
visually was assigned to the Event Area and it was designed 
so that information checked continuously such as current 
speed and mileage would be positioned in the Information 
Area. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Smart Headwear display layout 
 
In order to seek interaction to provide the users with an 
emotional new experience while they are riding the bicycle, 
four visual concepts were proposed and this study went 
through a user verification process. Like shown in Figure 6, 
designs were provided as follows: the design that forms 
honeycomb-shape in which multiple contents are connected 
based on the hexagon shape, the design in which each 
content has a bubble-shaped module and each information 
appears like soap bubble spreads, and the past information 
disappears as the bubble bursts, the design of sunflower 
concept in which contents appear round and turn like petals, 
which provides interaction centered around directions 
contents; and design of Bi-Circle, which embodies circle 
shape in bicycle mode, and provide visual information 
simply using two big circles. 
In the detailed visual design, it was embodied by 
choosing Bi-circle as the most highly preference from the 
survey about four concepts corresponding to the headwear 
display.  
 
 
 
Honeycomb module                         Water bubble 
 
Sunflower                                       Bi-Circle 
 
Figure 6. Visual design concept 
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
B.  Visual Design 
When the headwear device is turned on, the first screen 
is displayed in the wearable device. Figure 7 shows the 
connection attempt screen.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Connecting screen on Headwear display 
 
The main feature is that the contents are not arranged on 
the left part during ordinary bicycling so that the sight could 
be less disturb. When navigation shows in the screen that the 
direction is indicated on the left side, the state of battery is 
displayed with rounded shape and the POI (point of interest) 
information is displayed on the center (Figure 8). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Riding Screen on Headwear display 
 
This application provides the state on the display and 
rings a warning sound if the user's body temperature gets out 
of the normal range, through the body temperature sensor on 
the headwear while on the bicycle (Figure 9). In addition, it 
alerts a dangerous situation by blinking the translucent red 
background and automatically sends an SOS message to a 
preset acquaintance, if such a situation lasts for over 3 
seconds. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Warming Screen on Headwear display 
 
C. Prototype Creation 
Prototype was made as a video type for verifying design 
of Headwear in detailed visual design. The background 
animation provided real situation for cycling as the Figure 10.  
 
 
 
Figure 10. Video prototype screen 
   
V. 
DISCUSSION 
 
This study introduced the practical UX process with 
single-lens wearable device for cycle users.  
Overall, the expectation was met from the output for the 
new headwear application. Despite the project interest in the 
UX design process, it was not easy to analysis the large 
amount of collected data from user because it was needed to 
be concerned about the related interaction between the App 
and device. It was not easy to analyze the data of cycle users 
during FGD and to extract the most needed contents for 
wearable device. First, numerous concept meeting was 
placed to resolve the needs and pain points during cycling. 
Smart headwear could give limited functions technically, so 
there were a lot of troubles how to enhance the user 
experience during cycling. Especially, safe cycling to 
prevent accidents and information on route and local area 
were discussed intensively. In addition, there were many 
suggestions how to give natural interaction between 
headwear and smartphone and how to offer emotional 
experience. In order to clearly define target user, major 
grouped needs and pain points were classified, and personas 
were created. 
This study considered the effect of ocular dominance 
when the user gazed the display of wearable device. Most 
popular single-lens smart device, Google glass, were 
recommended to locate on user’s dominant eye. Moreover, 
this study empirically identified that cognitive performance 
could be decreased when the device was placed on non-
dominant eye, cognitive performance could be decreased. 
Results showed that the recognition time and error ratio 
increased significantly. This study developed the smart 
device for the right-eye dominant only, however, experiment 
results proposed the necessity of device for left-dominant eye 
users for safe cycling.  
Besides ocular dominance, small display size was also a 
problem to address. Optimized contents and layout of 
information were determined not to disturb user’s front view.  
Another problem was that the user wearing the device 
could not see the information on the display of device in 
sunny day condition. This problem should be settled down, 
considering the cycling condition.  
This study is progressing. The central concern has been 
for personal device associated with information on safe 
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

cycling and navigation for more emotional experience. There 
are some aspects tour and social network service that it can 
be concerned about future works.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
This study tried to apply UX approach to develop the 
headwear that could enhance the bicycle user experience. In 
order to achieve the goal, massive data were collected from 
many cycle users, then persona and journey map were 
created for more understanding users. Working prototype 
was developed and was tested in laboratory experiment.  
For further research, specific feature should be 
implemented on Smart Headwear to build a new business 
model. It is significant that this study can provide insight as a 
UX design approach about new wearable services for cycling 
user. It is necessary to embody the function development 
implementation and related services provided from the 
extension of this study which is ongoing. Results of the study 
could provide the UX approach and apply to wearable device.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project was supported by the Sports Fund 
of Seoul Olympic Sports Promotion Foundation from 
Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cycling Weekly, Could Volvo’s new alert system help prevent 
collision 
with 
cyclists? 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/ [retrieved: 2017.2.22] 
[2] I. Jung, “Study on Ordinary life bicycle in Metrocity”, 
Technical Report of Ministry of the Interior, pp. 22-24, 2013. 
[3] S. Hong, “Policy for the bike tourist in Seoul”, SDI Policy 
Report, 2011. 
[4] A. Cooper, The Inmates are Running the Asylum: Why High 
Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity, 
Indianapolis: Sams Publishing, 1999. 
 
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

