 
 
What Should a Robot do for you? - Evaluating the Needs of the Elderly in the UK  
 
      Hagen Lehmann, Dag Syrdal, Kerstin Dautenhahn, Gert Jan Gelderblom★, Sandra Bedaf★ and Farshid 
Amirabdollahian  
 
         
                     
 
 
University of Hertfordshire 
h.lehmann@herts.ac.uk 
d.s.syrdal@herts.ac.uk                
k.dautenhahn@herts.ac.uk 
f.amirabdollahian@herts.ac.uk 
 
Zuyd University★ 
gertjan.gelderblom@zuyd.nl 
sandra.bedaf@zuyd.nl
 
 
 
  
 
 
Abstract—The increasing interest in the use of robotic 
assistive technologies in elderly care for the UK makes it 
necessary for roboticists to evaluate the needs, problems 
and demands of possible end-users of such technologies. 
Users of these technologies can be divided into three 
groups: informal caregivers (family members and friends), 
formal caregivers (medical staff, social workers, home-
help), and the elderly themselves. In this paper we present 
the results of a series of focus groups conducted between 
March and May 2012. We used the metaplan method to 
evaluate the opinions and needs of each of the three 
different potential user groups mentioned above. In these 
discussions we extracted a variety of problem dimensions 
and their interconnections in order to understand in which 
parts of everyday life assistive technology could help, and is 
needed the most. 
Keywords-elderly care; evaluation of needs; robotic 
assistive technology 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The general aim of the work presented in this article is to 
develop scenarios and socially acceptable behaviours for 
a service robot that can be used for home assistance for 
elderly people, to facilitate longer independence for 
them at their own homes. In order to evaluate what a 
robot in such a setting should or should not do and how 
it should behave towards the users, we involved different 
potential user groups right from the beginning of the 
project. Our user-centred approach will help to make 
sure that the results will realistically reflect the everyday 
experience and needs of the potential end-users of 
assistive robotic technology.  
 
This work was undertaken as part of the EU FP7 Project 
ACCOMPANY (Acceptable robotiCs COMPanions for 
AgeiNg Years) [1]. The goal of this project is to create a 
system in which a robot companion is integrated within 
a smart-home environment in order to facilitate 
independence at home. 
 
We will start our paper by giving an overview of the 
motivation for this research, based on the demographic 
changes in the western population and a description of 
the ACCOMPANY project. This will be followed by a 
description of the metaplan method and the experimental 
structure we used. At the end of the paper we will 
present our results and discuss their implications for the 
design process of robot home companions. 
 
 
II. MOTIVATON 
 
The demographic shift presented by falling birth-rates 
and increasing life-spans is leading to an ageing 
population worldwide [2]. In the United Kingdom it is 
expected that by 2050 one person in four will be above 
the age of 65, and one person in twenty above the age of 
85 [3]. These changes are presenting challenges to the 
way that geriatric care is provided.  
 
Many researchers are suggesting that a serious 
consideration in how such care is provided and 
organised is needed [4]. This will necessarily involve 
further adoption of technological solutions, tele-care, 
along with smart-home sensor environments which are 
already proving to be an effective means for people to 
maintain independent living for longer [5]. Robotics 
technology is particularly attractive as it allows for 
physical interactions and practical assistance within the 
home environment. Roy et al. [6] argue that, from a 
technological perspective, the falling cost of sensor 
technologies and computing power increasingly bring 
personal robotics in eldercare into the realm of 
feasibility and also highlights a series of applications 
that a personal service robot may have. 
 
Within the ACCOMPANY project we have defined 3 
groups of users. (1) Professional caregivers, such as 
nurses, social workers, home helpers and care assistants, 
(2) informal caregivers, such as relatives, spouses, 
neighbours and friends, and (3) the elderly themselves. 
Recognising that these three groups may represent three 
distinct experiences of the issues facing the elderly, we 
realise that there is a need to consider all three groups. 
Previously, researchers in robotics have examined these 
perspectives from a more general point of view. Tsui 
and Yanco [7] examined applications and attitudes 
towards robots in healthcare amongst professionals, and 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
found that this user group primarily saw robots as work-
tools that could be used by the carer to aid in the 
performance in specific tasks, like lifting tools, 
deliveries and for information sharing. When examining 
the views of the elderly, Cesta et al. [8] found that, while 
their preferred usage-scenarios addressed the realities of 
their everyday life, it was challenging to relate them to 
the realities of the available robotic platform, reducing 
direct applicability of these to the developers of an 
assistive robotic system. Harmo [9] also recognises the 
distinction between carers and the elderly, and their 
findings echo those of Tsui and Yanco in terms of how 
professional carers viewed the role of an assistive robot. 
Harmo also highlights the importance of directly relating 
findings from potential users to possible technical 
solutions.  
III. APPROACH 
We are aiming to examine user needs and translating 
these into specific usage-scenarios using an iterative 
process in which the findings arising from consultation 
with potential users are tied directly to the technical 
development within the ACCOMPANY project in a 
manner similar to that which we have done previously 
with other types of user-groups [10]. This iterative 
approach allows for meaningful user involvement at all 
stages in the development of the system.  
In order to evaluate the perspectives of the three user 
groups mentioned above, we organised a first set of 
focus groups using the metaplan-method [11].  The 
metaplan-method aims at defining different problem 
dimensions in a moderated discussion amongst group 
members. The idea is to use the creativity and 
interaction dynamics of the group members to extract 
ideas from the group, ideas that single members might 
not have been aware before the brainstorming. To create 
this kind of group dynamics the minimal size of the 
group should be 4 or more. 
We used a three-step approach. We started by having 
each group member write down the issues and specific 
problems they think are important independently on 
post-it notes. Second, all these notes were put on a white 
board and then organised in a discussion by the group 
members into problem clusters, which were then defined 
as different problem dimensions. The last step was to 
rate these problem dimensions, and discuss possible 
connections between them. The professional caregiver 
group consisted of 4 women, in the group of the 
informal caregivers were 5 women and in the elderly 
people group were 2 women and 3 men. The average age 
of the elderly participants was 76.2 years, ranging from 
70 to 83 years. An actual robot was not mentioned in the 
focus groups, instead the more general question “What 
everyday problems threaten independent living for 
elderly people?” was asked. 
IV. RESULTS 
A. Problem dimensions 
In a first step different problem dimensions were 
identified in each of the user panels. Most of these 
general problem spaces were similar between the 
groups. Yet some of them differed, depending on the 
priorities and perspectives of the groups. 
B. Professional caregivers 
In order to fully explore the insights the professional 
caregivers have into the issue, we used a two-step 
approach with this group. We conducted a metaplan 
focus group at the University and then used the findings 
of this user panel to inform a second discussion with 
employees directly at a local care facility. During focus 
group discussion the formal caregivers agreed on 7 main 
problem dimensions - Environment, Physical Health, 
Mental 
Health, 
Communication, 
Society/Family, 
Personal Traits and Self-confidence.  
Each of these dimensions was discussed in detail and for 
each a list of specific problems and subcategories of 
problems was given. The environment dimension was 
specified as problems with modern living, finances, 
access to services and lack of family and friends. As 
specific problems for physical health, the nutritional 
status, complicated medical treatment, incontinence, not 
being able to cook anymore, inability to manage house, 
loss of senses (mainly sight, touch, hearing), fear of 
falling, inability to dress, immobility and loss of 
strength, as well as dexterity were given. Mental health 
problems 
were 
named 
as 
inability 
to 
retain 
instructions/guidance, Alzheimer/dementia, loss and 
bereavement resulting in depression and anxiety, 
forgetting to eat and memory loss. According to this 
group, examples of problems with communication are 
the inability to understand the jargon used in IT and the 
Internet, as well as by doctors and nurses. Examples of 
problems with family and friends, which could challenge 
everyday independent living, were defined as isolation, 
loneliness, the fact that the family cannot cope with the 
situation, a lack of support, and problems with managing 
the personal financial situation. Personal traits that could 
be a problem for independent living were specified as 
the inability to recognise the need for help, not to want 
help in general, low frustration tolerance ("I can't do it, 
so I won't anymore") and the opinion that one doesn't 
want to be a burden.  
At the end of the discussion we asked the group 
members to specify the interactions between each of the 
problem dimensions. In the case of the professional 
caregivers the resulting structure was very interesting. 
We found that they defined almost all dimensions as 
being in interaction with each other, and that the lack of 
confidence is the central issue that threatens independent 
living of elderly people in everyday life most (Figure 2). 
C. Informal caregivers 
For the informal caregivers we held the focus group at 
the University. This group contained people who were 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
caring for one or more relatives at their home. The focus 
group uncovered 9 primary problem dimensions - 
Emotional Situation, Physical Decline, Cognitive 
Decline, Economic Situation, Infrastructure, Reluctance 
to use Technology, Security, Family and Society/Public 
Attitude/Policy.  
As in the professional caregiver group, each of these 
dimensions was illustrated by a list of specific problems. 
The problems defining the emotional situation were 
specified as fear of the future, fear of family 
interference, negative moods (e.g. anger, irritation, etc.), 
resistance to appropriate help from others, resistance to 
helpful adaptations, a lack of subtleness and/or 
sensitivity on the caregivers’ side, frustration not be able 
to do things independently, having to wait until someone 
can do things for you, and the perception that time 
passes slowly when one cannot leave the house. The 
physical decline dimension was defined by mobility 
problems, loss of senses (mainly sight, hearing, touch), 
incontinence, loss of dexterity, poor arm strength and 
flexibility, as well as balance issues. Problems 
constituting the cognitive decline were given as memory 
loss, inflexibility of ideas, dementia and suspiciousness 
increasing with the age. Problems in the economic 
situation were defined as caused by an insufficient 
income to pay the type of help wanted, and income 
issues in general. According to this group, they would 
result in problems with shopping and eventually eating. 
Infrastructure was another problem dimension, specified 
as the lack of transport and accessibility of the public 
space, poor and unsuitable housing conditions, as well as 
limited access to hospitals. 
The reluctance to use technology was specified as a 
dislike of "modern gadgets", unfamiliarity with the 
proper use of new technology, and timidity about using 
technology. According to the informal carers, security 
problems have two aspects. 
 
Figure 2: Problem dimension space for “Professional 
Caregivers'' 
One is the individual feeling of being insecure about 
moving around in the house (e.g. fear of falling), and the 
other is the fear of intruders. Issues with family and 
friends could be that they live too far away, that the 
caregiver wants to organise and control the person, that 
the person hides things from the caregiver for fear of 
being put into a home, and that the caregiver does not 
want the person to be aware of the fact it is hard to care 
for her. The last two problems can be summarised as an 
atmosphere of secrecy between family members. These 
problems are closely related to what was described as 
the society/attitudes/policy dimension. According to the 
unofficial caregivers, its main factors are isolation, the 
feeling of loneliness, the attitude of other age groups 
towards older people, and the need to find various 
professionals  (e.g. gardener, hairdresser, etc.) to come 
to the home.   
The interaction structure of the problem dimensions 
differed significantly from the one given by the 
professional caregivers. The informal caregivers did not 
connect all the dimensions with each other and also did 
not assign a central role to any of the dimensions. The 
emphasis for them was on the emotional situation of the 
elderly person, which, according to them, was 
influenced by, and influenced most of the other problem 
dimensions (Figure 3). 
C. Elderly people 
The focus group for the elderly was arranged at the 
University as well. The participants were on average 75 
years old and not younger than 65. For this group we 
found 12 different main problem dimensions - Physical 
Health, Emotional Health, Family/Friends, Mobility, 
Security, New Technologies, Communication, Services, 
Transport, Public Finance Control, Personal Finance and 
Lack of Trust in General. 
 
Figure 3: Problem dimension space for “Informal  Caregivers'' 
The deterioration of physical health was the problem 
discussed by the elderly in most detail. A lot of 
examples were given to specify the general issue of 
becoming old and less able to do things: the loss of sight 
(limiting reading for any length of time as well as other 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
similar tasks), problems with knees, hips and other joints 
(making it difficult to get out of bed, impairing seating 
positions, making it difficult to kneel down, to climb 
stairs, to carry heavy things, like shopping bags around 
the house), difficulties of getting up from low lavatory 
seats or chairs without arms, the fact that arthritis makes 
gardening and housekeeping difficult and that cooking 
becomes problematic. These problems are closely 
related to the dimension of services and carers. The 
elderly find it problematic to hire someone to help with 
general housekeeping and gardening. Getting this sort of 
help usually implies to let someone unfamiliar into the 
house, and thus creates a feeling of insecurity for the 
elderly.  
The problems for emotional health were defined as the 
worry about how to cope with the potential necessity of 
downsizing or going into a care home, the fear of how to 
cope with the death of the partner and the reliance on 
home care. As the main problem with family and 
friends, they indicated the absence of their proximity. 
Mobility was specified as another problem dimension: 
difficulties with stairs, impossibility to drive a car and 
the related restricted travel possibilities in small villages, 
the loss of general physical mobility. Issues with public 
transport were identified as closely related to these 
problems. The lack of an efficient public transport 
system, and the general limitations of public transport 
were named as main issues. The problem of security was 
described as the general concern of the criminal element. 
For the elderly new technologies represent another 
aspect of everyday life that causes problems with 
independent living. The reliance on computers in the 
public domain, and the limited knowledge they have of 
these devices, causes the elderly to worry. As an 
example, they pointed out the difficulty of scheduling a 
GP appointment online. Problems with communication 
with official entities due to a incomprehension of 
specialised language was named as another issue 
potentially limiting independent living. For example, the 
use of pro-forma letters without a specific point was 
mentioned. Another problematic aspect pointed out by 
the elderly was the financial situation. This problem 
dimension was defined as two-sided. On the personal 
finance side, problems were considered to arise due to 
changes of pensions and the resulting insufficient 
funding. On the public finance side, the two big 
problems mentioned were the feeling of not being in 
control of ones own finances and the need for a better 
health system. The last important point mentioned 
during the elderly group discussion was their perception 
that it has become increasingly difficult to trust 
someone, due to developments in the society.  
The specific interaction structure given by the elderly 
between the problem dimensions was more similar to the 
one given by the informal caregivers than to the one 
given by the professional caregivers. Despite the fact 
that they did not connect all dimensions with each other, 
and did not assign a central role to one of the 
dimensions, they also did not emphasize one of the 
problems (Figure 4).  
 
Figure 4: Problem dimension space for the “elderly'' 
D. Similarities and differences 
There are five main problem complexes, which were 
mentioned by the three user groups. These are the 
decline of [1] physical health, [2] the economic 
situation, [3] family and friends and [4] transport, 
mobility and infrastructure.  
Both the informal and the professional caregivers 
additionally mentioned the cognitive decline or mental 
health, and attitudes in the society in general. For the 
informal caregivers, as well as for the elderly, the 
emotional situation, security issues and the need to find 
service persons like hairdressers or gardeners to come 
into the home are substantial problems. The professional 
caregivers and the elderly mentioned the inability or lack 
of communication as one of the most important factors 
threatening independent living in everyday life. Some of 
the problem dimensions were only mentioned by one of 
the user groups. The professionals mentioned personal 
traits as a problem, and emphasised on self-confidence 
as a central issue. The informal caregivers singled out 
the reluctance of the elderly to use modern technology as 
a central issue. The elderly focussed on the lack of trust 
in contemporary society, a general fear of the criminal 
element and the use of new technologies in society.  
In general it can be said that physical health and the 
problems related to limited physical mobility are the 
biggest and most important problematic dimensions. 
Issues in house keeping and personal care related to 
arthritis, loss of dexterity, joint pain and the loss of 
senses are the most prominent specific problems 
mentioned. This is closely related to the absence of 
friends or family, which were also mentioned by the 
three user groups. This is not very surprising, but 
strengthens the point that special robotic home 
companion technology can be a great help in assuring 
independent living of the elderly.  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
The most interesting differences are that for the group of 
elderly people there is an emphasis on trust towards 
unknown people and uncertainty about personal safety 
with regard to the criminal element in society. It seems 
that older people feel more threatened by their 
environment. Another point is that the elderly are seeing 
the existence and the widespread use of new 
technologies as one of the major problems, whereas the 
informal caregivers see the reluctance on the side of the 
elderly to use new technologies as the problem. These 
findings are consistent with several results of studies and 
surveys concerned with the “grey” digital divide [12, 
13]. The formal carers on the other hand put a lack of 
self-confidence elderly people have about their abilities 
in general in the centre of their thoughts. In their opinion 
all other dimensions are influenced by this factor.  
In general most of the specific problems mentioned by 
all three groups are similar and differ only by in their 
categorisation. For example, the financial situation was 
categorised as a society issue by the professional 
caregivers, but for the informal caregivers and for the 
elderly it was an independent problem dimension. These 
categorisation differences reflect the importance given to 
the problem by the corresponding user group. 
V. DISCUSSION 
The 
problems 
immediately 
relevant 
to 
the 
ACCOMPANY project are the issues in house keeping, 
arising from limited mobility and decreased dexterity 
due to deteriorating health, as well as security, 
communication, the reluctance to use new technologies 
and psychological problems arising from being lonely. 
 
Current service robots are developed towards achieving 
functions such as safely navigating around the home and 
helping with some tasks in the house, reminding users to 
take medicines and to eat regularly, helping with some 
kitchen work and serving, and potentially helping with 
mobility issues, e.g. opening doors. Note, in particular 
those activities that involve the robot carrying out 
complex manipulations of objects are still highly 
challenging from a technological perspective. These 
abilities, if implemented efficiently and for safe 
operation, could potentially aid everyday life and thus 
improve the life quality of elderly people.  
 
Among different robotic platforms, for example the 
Care-O-bot® 3 represents a potential possibility to be 
used as a companion in a domestic environment [14]. It 
can draw on a sophisticated set of sensors, enabling it to 
detect people, detect and recognise some objects in its 
environment, as well as safely navigate in environments 
where it has to co-exist with humans.  
 
At the University of Hertfordshire Robot House [15], 
these capabilities could be joined within an ecologically 
valid testing environment, which allows for the detection 
of activities through different sensors situated in the 
house itself. Together, these features would potentially 
allow for a wide set of functionalities and usage-
scenarios. 
 
The integrated nature of the robot house sensor 
networks, and their ability to communicate with the 
robot itself, implies that it can collate a substantial 
amount of information and to utilise this information for 
the benefit of different user groups. In other words, it 
can alleviate a considerable amount of stress that the 
informal carers expressed regarding not knowing how 
much help the assisted elderly actually needs, and 
potentially address some of the security issues [6] 
mentioned by the informal caregivers. Of course there 
are serious ethical concerns associated with this type of 
information sharing with third parties [16], which we 
aim to address in subsequent user studies.  
 
A robot companion can also help with problems of 
loneliness, especially when equipped with individual 
features, which allow the user to identify themselves 
with their robot. One possibility to achieve this would be 
to enable robot customisation. Results from studies with 
the Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner illustrate that 
people start to describe the robot in aesthetic and social 
terms [17]. Additional the use of tele-presence robots 
has shown that people intuitively start to individualise 
the robot they are interacting with. Ethical issues arising 
from a potential emotional attachment to a machine will 
also have to be examined and evaluated carefully in 
structured user studies.  
 
Ultimately, a combination of smart sensors and a robot 
companion would be helpful in the context of care. Our 
evaluation has shown that we need to take three different 
perspectives into consideration and not only focus on the 
needs of the elderly, but to address the needs of 
professional and informal caregivers, as they also play 
an important role in the integration of robotic assistive 
technology into elderly care. The differences in the 
problem dimensions we have found in our evaluation 
illustrate this very clearly. Any new technological 
development needs to be accepted by the key stake-
holders involved. This is a key element, in addition to 
e,g. cost effectiveness and service delivery models, for 
bringing these systems into the real world. 
 
Since both the informal caregivers and the elderly 
mentioned the reluctance or inability to use new 
technologies as a significant problem, it seems that 
improving the elderly people’s acceptance of robotic 
companions is going to be one of the immediate issues, 
if an integration of robot companions into the elderly 
care process is going to be successful. To address this 
particular problem, we plan to involve potential users in 
extensive Human-Robot Interaction studies in the robot 
house at the University of Hertfordshire as part of the 
later stages of the of the ACCOMPANY project. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
The results reported in this article represent the first step 
of the design cycle, whereby the described user panels 
were conducted with different stakeholders, without any 
information given about possible concrete robots to be 
used in this work, so as to avoid a bias of their views and 
attitudes due to the technology. Further rounds of user 
panels will follow to refine the tasks and scenarios 
throughout the duration of the project. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research leading to these results has received 
funding 
from 
the 
[European 
Union's] 
Seventh 
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant 
agreement n°[287624]. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
ACCOMPANY. (16.01.2013) ACCOMPANY         
website, url: http://accompanyproject.eu 
 
[2] 
United Nations. (2002) World Population Ageing 
1950-2050 .United Nations, New York. 
 
[3] 
Cracknell, R. (2010) The Ageing Populaton. "Key 
Issues for the New Parliament 2010”. House of 
Commons Library Research. pp. 44 - 46. 
 
[4] 
 Kovner, C.T., Mezey, M. & Harringdon C. (2002) 
Who cares for older adults? Workforce implications 
of an ageing society. Health Affairs. 21(5), pp. 78-89 
 
[5] 
Magnusson, L., Hanson, E. & Borg M. (2004) A 
literature 
review 
study 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology as a support for frail 
older people living at home and their family carers. 
Technology and Disability. 16(4), pp. 223-235 
 
[6] 
Roy, N., Baltus, G., Fox, D., Gemperle, F., Jennifer 
Goetz, J., Hirsch, T., Margaritis, D., Montemerlo, 
M., Pineau, J., Schulte, J. & Thrun, S. (2000) 
Towards Personal Service Robots for the Elderly. 
2000 
Workshop 
on 
Interactive 
Robots 
and 
Entertainment, 
April 
30, 
2000, 
Pittsburgh 
Pennsylvania, pp. 184   
 
[7] 
Tsui, K. & Yanco, H. (2007) Assistive, Surgical, and 
Rehabilitation Robots from the Perspective of 
Medical and Healthcare Professionals. Proceedings 
of the AAAI Workshop on Human Implications of 
Human-Robot Interaction, at AAAI-07, July 22-26, 
2007, Vancouver, Canada.pp 34-39. 
 
[8] 
 Cesta, A., Cortellessa, G., Giuliani, M.V., Pecora, 
F., Scopelliti, M. & Tiberio, L. (2007) Psychological 
implications of domestic assistive technology for the 
elderly. PsychNology Journal. 5(3), pp. 229-252 
 
[9] 
Harmo, P., Taipalus, T., Knuuttila, J., Vallet, J. & 
Halme, A. (2005). Needs and Solutions - Home 
Automation and Service Robots for the Elderly and 
Disabled. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on  
Intelligent Robots and Systems 2005, 2-6 August 
2005,Helsinki, Finland, pp. 3201-3206 
[10] 
Robins, B., Ferrari, E., Dautenhahn, K., Kronreif, G., 
Prazak-Aram, B., Gelderblom, G.J., Bernd, T., 
Caprino, F., Laudanna, E. & Marti, P. (2010) 
Human-centred 
design 
methods: 
Developing 
scenarios for robot assisted play informed by user 
panels and field trials. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 68 
(12), pp. 873-898 
 
[11] 
Schnelle, E., Thiersch, M. (1979) The Metaplan-
Method: Communication Tools for Planning and 
Learning Groups. Quickborn, Hamburg 
 
[12] 
Kiel, J.M. (2005) The digital divide: Internet and e-
mail use by the elderly. Informatics for Health and 
Social Care. 30 (1), pp. 19-23 
 
[13] 
Morris, A., Goodman, J., Brading, H. (2007) Internet 
use and non-use: views of older users. Univ Access 
Inf Soc. 6 (1), pp. 43-57 
 
[14] 
Parlitz, C., Hägele, M., Klein, P., Seifert, J. & 
Kerstin Dautenhahn, K. (2008) Care-o-bot 3 - 
rationale for human-robot interaction design, Proc. 
of 39th International Symposium on Robotics (ISR), 
Seoul, Korea,  pp. 275-280  
 
[15] 
Koay, K.L., Syrdal, D.S., Walters M.L. & 
Dautenhahn, K. (2009) Five Weeks in the Robot 
House - Exploratory Human-Robot Interaction Trials 
in a Domestic Setting. Proc. Of Second International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interaction, ACHI 2009 February 1-7, 2009, 
Cancun, Mexico, pp. 219-226 
 
[16] 
Anderson, M. & Anderson, S.L. (2008) ETHEL: 
Toward a Principled Ethical Eldercare Robot, Proc. 
Robotic Helpers: User Interaction, Interfaces and 
Companions in Assistive and Therapy Robotics –  
Workshop at the Third ACM/IEEE Human-Robot 
Interaction Conference (HRI08), March 12-15,2008, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands, pp 33-39.  
 
[17] 
Forlizzi, J. (2007) How robotic products become 
social products: an ethnographic study of cleaning in 
the home, Proc. of the Second ACM/IEEE 
international 
conference 
on 
Human-robot 
interaction (HRI07), March 9-11, 2007, Washington 
DC, pp. 129-136. 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

