Improvement of the Feeling of Self-Affirmation 
by Using a Self-Reframing Diary System 
Kanayo Ogura, Rie Kimura 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Iwate, Japan 
e-mail: ogura_k@iwate-pu.ac.jp, g031t305@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Self-affirmation is the feeling of being able to affirm 
one's own value and meaning of existence. It is known that self-
affirmation among the Japanese is extremely low compared to 
that of other countries. Low self-affirmation is a negative 
influence in various aspects of daily life, and therefore, it is 
important to increase self-affirmation. We construct a self-
reframing diary system that enables users to perform a 
counseling method called reframing, in which they change the 
framework in which they look at things and see themselves from 
a different perspective, in order to enhance their self-
affirmation, and examine whether self-reframing can improve 
self-affirmation. The results of an experiment showed that 
although self-reframing was not effective in improving self-
affirmation for all participants, more than half of them 
improved their self-affirmation, and in particular, participants 
who originally had high self-affirmation could expect a further 
improvement in self-affirmation through self-reframing.  
Keywords; 
self-affirmation; 
self-reframing; 
counseling 
method; diary system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, a survey on self-esteem conducted by the 
Cabinet Office [1] showed that the self-affirmation of 
Japanese people is overwhelmingly lower than that of other 
countries. The survey covered men and women from seven 
countries, and the percentage of respondents who answered 
that they were "satisfied with themselves" was the lowest in 
Japan. Self-affirmation refers to the feeling of being able to 
affirm one's own value and meaning of existence. People with 
a high sense of self-affirmation tend to see things with a 
positive attitude and are able to honestly accept their own 
failures. Conversely, people with low self- affirmation often 
fear failure and find it difficult to take action or to accept 
praise. Thus, low self-esteem has a negative effect on various 
aspects of daily life, making it extremely important to improve 
self-affirmation. 
One method of improving self-affirmation is reframing, a 
technique used in counseling [2]. This is to change the 
framework in which we look at things and perceive them from 
a different point of view. For example, a personality that is 
easily bored can be viewed from a different perspective as 
being curious. In addition, "surgery with a 10% failure rate" 
and "surgery with a 90% success rate" both mean the same 
thing, but the impressions are completely different. 
Sano et al. [3] proposed a diary system that uses reframing 
to reduce self-reflection by having others give positive 
interpretations to negative content. Self-reflection is the act of 
focusing on oneself in a state of negative emotion. Repeated 
self-reflection can lead to negative thoughts and depression. 
Reducing self-reflection reduces negative views of oneself, 
which can lead to an increase in self-affirmation. The 
evaluation results of the proposed system by Sano et al. 
showed that self-reflection decreased in users of their diary 
system. This suggests the effectiveness of reframing. 
However, this study assumed that others who are not the diary 
writer reframe the diary, but it is not always the case that there 
are others who reframe diaries in daily life. In addition, if self-
affirmation is high, people can overcome negative attitudes 
and have confidence in themselves, and thus should be able to 
improve their self-affirmation on their own. 
In this study, we developed a diary system that allows self-
reframing, and examined whether self-reframing can improve 
self-affirmation, and whether there is a difference in the 
improvement of self-affirmation between self-reframing and 
reframing by others. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
reviews research on improving self-affirmation. Section 3 
reports the results of a survey on self-affirmation conducted 
by the authors among university students. Section 4 describes 
the diary system developed in this study to enhance self-
affirmation. Section 5 describes and discusses the 
experimental procedures and results of the diary system 
evaluation described in section 4.  Section 6 summarizes this 
paper and discusses future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
 This section reviews research on reframing and journaling, 
which are common methods for increasing self-affirmation. 
In addition, we introduce an approach to increasing self-
affirmation through the act of praise. 
A. Research on Reframing 
In counseling, reframing is a technique for changing the 
cognition and meaning-making of the person being counseled 
(hereafter referred to as the "client"). Yamamoto et al. [4] 
conducted an experiment in which 48 undergraduate and 
graduate students were divided into two groups, with those in 
one group acting as the counselor and those in the other acting 
as the client, to examine the emotional effects of reframing in 
a counseling situation. Psychological measures using the Self-
Esteem Scale [5] and Emotion Scale [6] were taken before and 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

after the experiment, and the results were analyzed for 
variance. The results showed that only the client's positive 
emotions were significantly higher after the experiment, and 
both the counselor and client's negative emotions were 
significantly lower after the experiment. This experiment 
revealed that reframing has an effect of altering the emotional 
state of the recipient of the reframing, making the recipient 
more positive.  
Sano et al. [3] proposed a diary system for reducing self-
reflection and depression. In an experiment to evaluate the 
system, the experimenter gave positive interpretations to the 
negative elements written in the diary by the system’s users, 
and verified the effects of the system on self-ruminations and 
depression of the system users. In the evaluation experiment, 
9 participants were classified into 3 personality traits (self-
ruminating trait, self-ruminating and self-reflection trait, and 
self-reflection trait) based on a preliminary questionnaire 
result about personality traits, and were divided into 3 groups: 
with intervention, without intervention, and without 
personality (details are described below.), so that the three 
personality traits would not overlap. The diary entries 
consisted of three items: "events," "feelings/behaviors," and 
"personality." The groups with and without intervention were 
asked to fill in all items, while the group without personality 
was asked to fill in two items: events and feelings/behaviors. 
Comparing the pre-experimental scores on the personality 
trait scale with the post-experimental scores, the scores of the 
group with the intervention decreased, while the scores of the 
other two groups increased. The results showed that the 
negative attitude was alleviated by providing a positive 
interpretation．This suggests that the positive interpretations 
given to the negative content allowed the users to learn new 
ways of thinking from perspectives they did not have, and 
helped alleviate their negative thoughts. On the other hand, the 
mean score of the Self-Introspection Scale increased the most 
in the group without personality, while there was no increase 
or decrease in the group with intervention. In Sano et al.’s 
paper, others need to do the reframing. However, it is not 
always possible to find others who can reframe. Therefore, our 
study examines whether it is possible to improve self-
affirmation by reframing by oneself. 
B. Research on Journaling 
  Journaling is the act of writing down one's feelings and 
thoughts. Some studies have shown that the incidence of 
stress-related illnesses varies greatly depending on whether 
or not a person confides in others about traumatic events 
experienced in the past [7][8]. Pennebaker et al. [9] checked 
whether describing past trauma, known as journaling, affects 
short-term and long-term health status. 46 university students 
participated in the experiment, journaling for 15 minutes each 
night for 4 days. The 46 students were divided into three 
groups: those who wrote about their feelings of the event 
without mentioning the trauma, those who wrote about the 
trauma without mentioning their feelings, and those who 
wrote about both the trauma and their feelings. After each 
writing session, the participants' heart rate, blood pressure, 
and physical condition were recorded. To examine the long-
term effects on their health, the participants completed 
questionnaires about their health status and whether or not 
they visited the hospital during the six months after the end 
of the experiment. The results of the experiment showed that 
all experimental participants had a significant decrease in 
blood pressure after journaling. In addition, the number of 
hospital visits increased in the group that wrote about their 
feelings about the event without mentioning the trauma and 
in the group that wrote about the trauma without discussing 
their feelings about the trauma. The group that wrote about 
both the trauma and their feelings reported fewer health 
problems than the other group. The diary system we are 
developing has a journal aspect, in which the participants 
write down daily events, so that daily journaling is conducted, 
in which they write down their feelings and thoughts. 
C. Research on the act of praise 
  Murao et al. [10] focused on the act of giving praise and 
developed an Social Networking Service to improve self-
affirmation through mutual praise within a group. Based on 
the hypothesis that indirect praise from others is more 
effective in improving self-affirmation than direct praise, 
they conducted a two-week experiment using two SNSs, one 
in which self-praise was not visible (experimental group) and 
the other in which self-praise was visible (control group), 
with 11 university students. To test the hypothesis, the degree 
of improvement in self-affirmation was measured three times 
before, during, and after the use of the system, using a self-
affirmation scale. In our study, we implemented a system that 
enables self-reframing so that self-affirmation can be 
increased without other people. 
III. 
CURRENT SURVEY ON SELF-AFFIRMATION 
    The target users of the experimental system developed in 
this study were undergraduate and graduate students at the 
authors’ university. In order to grasp the degree of self-
affirmation of the target users, we conducted a survey on the 
current status of self-affirmation in July 2022. The survey 
method was to send the URL to a survey form created by 
Google Forms to all undergraduate and graduate students 
affiliated with the authors by e-mail. On the survey form, we 
explained the handling of personal information and collected 
data at the beginning of the survey, and only those who 
understood the explanation at the beginning and answered 
that they could cooperate with the survey were asked to 
answer the survey questions. The Rosenberg Self Esteem 
Scale Japanese edition (RSES-J) [11], a measure of self-
affirmation, was used for the survey questions. The scale 
consists of 10 items, which are rated on a 4-point scale, and 
the total score of all items is used to evaluate the level of self-
affirmation. 
   As a general guideline for judging the level of self-
affirmation, a score of 20 or less is considered low, and a 
score of 30 or more is considered high. The average score for 
Japanese adults is around 25. 86 responses were obtained for 
this survey. The results showed that the average score was 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

23.87. About one out of three participants had low self-
affirmation (less than 20 points). From these results, we can 
conclude that most of the participants in this study did not 
have high self-affirmation, and that there is room for 
improving their self-affirmation. 
IV. 
SELF-REFRAMING DIARY SYSTEM 
 This section provides an overview of our system and 
describes how it is used. 
A. System Overview 
  The diary system we developed in this study aims to 
improve self-affirmation. Users of the system can enter 
events of the day and their feelings at the time, and they can 
reframe the entries themselves or have them reframed by 
others. The system is implemented as a web application and 
can be used from a PC or a smartphone. React.js was used for 
the front-end development, and Node.js for the back-end 
development. 
B. How to use this system 
   When logging into the system, each user uses his/her own 
google account. When logging in for the first time, they were 
redirected to the new registration screen, where they 
registered their nickname and reframing method (“your own” 
or “someone else's”). 
Figure 1: Diary System’s Home Screen. 
Figure 2: Diary submission page (left) and Reframing page (right). 
  To post a diary entry, the user clicks the "Post" button on 
the home screen (Figure 1), and is taken to the diary posting 
window (Figure 2, left). In this window, three items can be 
filled in: "What happened today," "What I felt at that time," 
and "My character that could be the reason why I felt ". If the 
third item is negative, our system users will reframe the diary 
when the system is used the next day. 
Clicking the "Reply" button at the bottom of the diary 
allows the user to reframe on the home screen (Figure 1), and 
the reframing window (Figure 2, right) will appear. Once the 
reframing is filled in, the user clicks the "Reply" button to 
complete the reframing. 
     A help page for reframing (Figure 2, right) is provided in 
case the user does not know what words to use when 
reframing, or if the reframing process does not proceed 
smoothly. This help page includes target words and examples 
of expressions after reframing (for example, "tenacious" and  
"single-minded" are examples of expressions for "reluctant to 
give up") on the reframing window. 
V. 
EXPERIMENT 
 In this section, we describe the outline of the experiment, 
the experimental procedure, and the experimental results. 
Also, we discuss the effect of self-reframing, which is the 
main point of this study. 
A. Outline of experiment 
   The purpose of the experiment was to confirm whether self-
affirmation improves when participants reframe the diary by 
themselves or by others. Participants kept a diary for two 
weeks using the diary system described in the previous 
section and reframed the diary by themselves or with the help 
of others. The participants were divided into two groups. 
Group A: 9 participants reframed the diary entries by 
themselves. 
Group B: Participants reframed the diary entries among 
themselves (5 pairs of 10 participants). 
    The reason for pairing up and reframing each other's 
diaries in group B is to avoid bias in the number of reframing 
sessions. 
B. Experimental procedure 
The experimental procedure was as follows. 
(1) The participants answered the questions of the RSES-J 
scale described in Section 3 as a preliminary questionnaire. 
(2) As a reframing exercise, participants listed 20 
disadvantages and rewrote them as advantages. 
(3) Participants started keeping a diary from the first day of 
the experiment and reframed the previous day's diary from 
the second day onwards. This process was continued for 14 
days. 
(4) After the 14 days of the experiment, the participants 
answered a questionnaire (RSES-J scale questions and 
questions about the experiment). 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Results of the experiment 
Tables 1 and 2 list the mean and standard deviations of the 
scores on the self-affirmation scale before and after the Group 
A and Group B experiments. We also calculated the effect 
size of the self-affirmation scale scores before and after the 
Group A (reframing by oneself) experiment and before and 
after the Group B (reframing by others) experiment. The 
results showed that the difference between the pre- and post-
experiment averages for Group A was small (Glass's Δ=0.26), 
while the difference between the pre- and post-experiment 
averages for Group B was almost negligible (Glass's Δ=0.14). 
 
TABLE I. SELF-AFFIRMATION SCALE SCORE MEANS AND STANDARD 
DEVIATIONS FOR GROUP A (N=9). 
 
Pre-experiment 
Post-experiment 
Mean 
23.33 
25.33 
SD 
7.20 
9.66 
 
TABLE II.  SELF-AFFIRMATION SCALE SCORE MEANS AND STANDARD 
DEVIATIONS FOR GROUP B (N=10). 
 
Pre-experiment 
Post-experiment 
Mean 
24.40 
25.40 
SD 
6.87 
6.81 
 
The participants in Group A and Group B had a mixture 
of low, average, and high scores on the self-affirmation scale 
before the experiment. The standard deviations in Tables 1 
and 2 indicate that the self-affirmation scores of the 
participants varied. The self-affirmation scores of all 
participants before and after the experiment are shown in 
Figures 3 and 4. The self-affirmation scores are out of 40 
points. 
 
Figure 3: Self-affirmation scale scores of Group A’s participants (P1-P9) 
pre- and post-experiment. 
 
Figure 3 shows that the number of Group A participants 
whose scores increased before and after the experiment was 
5 (the highest score range was 8), while the number of Group 
A participants whose scores decreased before and after the 
experiment was 4 (the lowest score range was 4). 
 
Figure 4: Self-affirmation scale scores of Group B’s participants (P1-P10) 
pre- and post-experiment. 
    
   Figure 4 shows that the number of Group B participants 
whose scores increased before and after the experiment was 
7 (the highest score range was 5), while the number of Group 
B participants whose scores decreased before and after the 
experiment was 1, and the number of Group B participants 
whose scores did not change after the experiment was 1. 
D. Discussion of the Effects of Self-Reframing 
As explained in the previous part, there was no significant 
difference in the mean scores on the self-affirmation scale 
before and after the experiment for the participants in Group 
A, the self-reframing condition. However, examining the pre- 
and post-experiment changes in the self-affirmation scale 
scores of the participants in Group A, the self-reframing 
condition, five of the nine participants in Group A increased 
their scores and four decreased their scores. In particular, 
more participants with high self-affirmation scores before the 
experiment increased their self-affirmation scores after the 
experiment than those with low self-affirmation scores before 
the experiment. These results indicate that although it cannot 
be said that self-reframing is effective in improving self-
affirmation for all participants in the experiment, more than 
half of them improved their self-affirmation, and in particular, 
those who originally had high self-affirmation could expect 
further improvement in self-affirmation through self-
reframing. Conversely, participants whose self-affirmation 
was low or average could either improve or decrease their self-
affirmation. 
We think that one of the reasons why some of the 
experiment participants' scores on the self-affirmation scale 
dropped after the experiment is related to their usual habit of 
keeping a diary. One of the participants said, "I usually do not 
spend much time in self-reflection, so my self-affirmation 
dropped when I conducted the reflection exercises during the 
experiment”. From this, we consider it necessary to reconsider 
the method of self-reframing, including methods other than 
diaries, as well as other methods of self-reframing. 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
    In this study, we constructed a self-reframing diary system 
in which users perform a counseling method called reframing, 
whereby they change the framework through which they look 
at things and see themselves from a different perspective, in 
order to improve their self-affirmation. The results of an 
experiment indicated that although self-reframing was not 
effective in improving self-affirmation for all participants, 
more than half of them improved their self-affirmation, and 
in particular, those who originally had high self-affirmation 
could expect further improvement in their self-affirmation 
through self-reframing. In particular, we concluded that 
system users with high self-affirmation can expect further 
improvement in self-affirmation through self-reframing. 
  In the future, we will reconsider how to implement self-
reframing, including methods other than diaries, in order to 
deal with participants who do not have the habit of keeping 
diaries and thus become more negative by writing down 
negative points when they reflect on themselves. We will 
continue to improve the system so that all of its users can 
improve their self-affirmation through self-reframing. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cabinet Office, Government of Japan. White Paper on Children 
and Youth, 2019 edition.  [Online]. Available from: 
https://www8.cao.go.jp/youth/english/whitepaper/2019/pdf/20
19.pdf  2022.05.09 
[2] T. Nakajima, A Textbook of Self-Affirmation. Textbook of 
Self-affirmation, SB Creative, 2019. (in Japanese). 
[3] F. Sano and M. Sasagawa, “Proposal of a Diary System to 
Reduce Self-Ruminations by Giving Positive Interpretations to 
Negative Contents”, IPSJ Research Report, Vol. 2022-HCI-
197, No. 43, pp. 1-8, 2022. (in Japanese). 
[4] M. Yamamoto, "An Experimental Study on the Effects of 
Reframing on Emotional Effects in Counselors and Clients", 
Kurume University Psychological Research, No. 7, pp. 29-34, 
2008. (in Japanese). 
[5] M. Yamamoto, Y. Matsui and Y.  Yamanari, “The Structure of 
Aspects of the Perceived Self”, The Japanese Journal of 
Educational Psychology, Vol. 30, No. 1. pp.64-68, 1982. (in 
Japanese). 
[6] O. Fukushima and Y. Takahashi, “Experimental study on the 
emotional effects of the assumed letter method Counseling 
Research”, The Japanese journal of counseling science, Vol. 36, 
No. 3, pp.231-239, 2003. (in Japanese). 
[7] J.W. Pennebaker and C.W. Hoover, Inhibition and cognition: 
Toward an understanding of trauma and disease. In R. J. 
Davidson, G. E. Schwartz, and D. Shapiro (Eds.), 
Consciousness and self-regula-tion, Vol. 4, pp. 107-136, 1986. 
[8] J.W. Pennebaker and R. C. O'Heeron, Confiding in others and 
illness rates among spouses of suicide and accidental-death 
victims, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 93, pp. 473-476, 
1984. 
[9] J.W. Pennebaker and S.K. Beall, Confronting a traumatic 
event: Toward an understanding of inhibition and disease, 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, Vol. 95, No. 3, pp.274-281, 
1986. 
[10] Y. Murao and K. Ogura: "Proposal of SNS focusing on the act 
of 'praise' to improve self-affirmation," Proc. of Interaction 
2021, pp. 372-377, 2021. (in Japanese) 
[11] T. Uchida and T . Ueno, "An examination of the reliability and 
validity of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale: Using the 
Japanese version translated by Mimura & Griffiths," Annual 
Report of the Graduate School of Education, Tohoku 
University, Vol. 58, No. 2, 2010. (in Japanese) 
 
 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

