A Simple System for the Complicated Cases? 
Using Service Design Methods to Visualize Work Practice 
Kathinka Olsrud Aspvin 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: kathino@ifi.uio.no 
Guri B. Verne 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: guribv@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a study of work practice at the 
Norwegian Agency for Quality Assurance in Education 
(NOKUT), a Norwegian agency working with recognition of 
foreign education. Through ethnographic field studies and 
methods from service design, we explore, analyze and visualize 
the steps of a digital case handling practice. We show how 
cases and case handling practice vary in complexity due to 
different circumstances, and how levels of complexity are not 
dependent on the type of case handling system used. Further, 
we discuss how this rich variety of cases would benefit from 
different levels of digital system support in order to support 
and not hamper the case handling process.  
Keywords- CSCW; Practice; Ethnography; Service Design; 
Visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Governments and the public sector are continually 
working on digitalization. Both external public services and 
internal systems supporting the work performed by 
employees are being digitalized, resulting in new information 
technology (IT) systems and work practices. This 
digitalization is affecting IT systems and government 
employees across agencies, such as labor and welfare, 
healthcare, taxes, customs and education [1]-[5].   
The Norwegian Agency for Quality Assurance in 
Education (NOKUT) is currently digitalizing their systems 
for case handling, an ongoing process since the agency 
digitalized case handling in 2016. NOKUT is “an 
independent expert body” under the Ministry of Education 
and Research. The agency’s work consists of accreditation of 
higher education in Norway, such as universities, university 
colleges and vocational schools. Additionally, NOKUT 
works with recognition of foreign education, making it 
possible for people with education from other countries to 
apply for recognition of their education in order to work or 
continue studies in Norway. The digitalized case handling of 
the Department of Foreign Education is the topic for this 
paper. 
Recognizing foreign education is cooperative work 
between the NOKUT case handler and an applicant, where 
the applicant is responsible for providing his or her 
certificates and diplomas and the case handler for providing 
and translating documents for assessing the qualifications the 
applicant claims to have. However, the case handlers’ work 
practice [6] varies considerably, mostly due to the 
circumstances involved for each application in retrieving 
documents and assessing education from foreign educational 
institutions. NOKUT’s case handling systems support both 
workflow and accountability of the case handlers’ work as 
they make the case handlers work and progress visible for 
colleagues and management [7]. Digital case handling often 
introduces more standardization and less flexibility for the 
case handlers, which necessitates negotiations and adaptions 
to fit the IT system with their use [4].  
Investigating and understanding actual work practice as a 
basis for designing computer support is a central interest for 
the field of computer supported cooperative work (CSCW) 
[8]. A work practice is a regularly occurring activity that is 
constituted by some rules and principles that will be adapted 
by the practitioner to the circumstances of the actual work 
situation [6]. Theoretical knowledge and practical work are 
united in the practice, and the knowledge involved in 
mastering a practice is what makes it possible to adapt the 
work to meet the changing circumstances in the actual work 
situation [6]. 
Digital 
interaction 
between 
case 
handlers 
and 
applicants/citizens is a topic for CSCW and related research 
fields [2][9]-[12]. Service design [13] offers a perspective for 
understanding case handling as a service and provides 
methods for describing the service as a customer journey. 
Such journeys traditionally focus on the citizen as the 
customer, using customer journey mapping to improve 
public services [14], both by mapping actual experience 
journeys, and by visualizing an ideal interaction with 
services [15]. Journey mapping can also be used to visualize 
other processes, such as case handling, which is the focus in 
this paper. Case handlers are not customers in a traditional 
sense. However, they are users of IT systems developed to 
support their work practices, and their processes are 
important for understanding case handling practice.  
This paper reports from a study of the case handling 
processes for digital applications to NOKUT, and how the 
case handling systems support the work of case handlers. 
Service design methods are used for analyzing the case 
handling practice. The case handling is explored through an 
ethnographic approach [16]. The research questions for this 
study are: 
RQ 1: What are the communalities and differences 
between the various case handling processes?   
RQ 2: How do the digitalized case handling systems 
support the case handlers’ processing of different cases? 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II 
describes the methodology and methods used. Section III 
describes NOKUT and the different case handling processes. 
Section IV discusses the results of the study. Section V 
suggests some implications for design for supporting the 
most complex case handling practice. The last section offers 
some concluding remarks.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY AND METHODS 
The study was conducted as an ethnographically inspired 
case study where the main methods for data collection have 
been participant observation, interviews and document 
studies. The fieldwork took place as weekly visits to 
NOKUT offices, with averagely one day a week over four 
months during the fall of 2019.   
We had free access to NOKUT employees and spent our 
time in their open office landscapes. We attended internal 
meetings, and shadowed and interviewed case handlers while 
they were performing their work. As such, we became part 
of the work environment, talking and socializing with 
NOKUT employees.  
The interviews with case handlers and section heads were 
carried out as informal, unstructured interviews of various 
length, often taking place spontaneously during the 
fieldwork. 
These 
conversations 
were 
focused 
on 
understanding case handling practice. The interviews were 
not recorded as such conversations were often impromptu. 
Instead, notes were taken with pen and paper. Finding and 
starting a recording device whenever a “promising” 
conversation started would have been disrupting for the 
contact established in the situation. This means that we have 
few verbatim quotes from the case handlers, although some 
particularly interesting quotes were memorized and written 
down as soon as possible. 
Document studies were carried out to understand 
NOKUT’s goals and responsibilities as well as their working 
plans.  
Methods from service design have been used for both 
describing the case handlers’ work and for analyzing the 
steps that the case handling consists of.  The service design 
method journey mapping was used to analyze case handling 
practice. Co-creating journey maps offers methods for 
analyzing the case handling for the different application 
types together with the case handlers. A visualization of the 
casework as a journey map is co-created to illustrate the 
differences and commonalities between the case handling for 
the different application types.  
The design methods “touchstone tours”, “contextual 
inquiry” and “journey mapping” were used to explore, 
describe and analyze different aspects of the work of the case 
handlers with the different application types. As these 
methods are rarely used as part of a case study, they are 
described in detail below. 
A. Touchstone Tour 
In order to understand the physical space in which the 
case handlers of the Department of Foreign Education 
perform their work, two walking touchstone tours [17] of 
NOKUTs offices were carried out. The first tour was with a 
section head, the second with a case handler. The aim of the 
tours was to gain insight into what a workday looks like for a 
NOKUT employee, focusing on what objects they interact 
with and the rooms they use for different activities. Both 
tours took 15-20 minutes from start to finish. Photos were 
taken during the tours, and we took notes using pens and 
paper. 
B. Contextual Inquiry 
Contextual inquiries involve the researcher taking on the 
role of novice, while the expert (in this case the case 
handlers) performs a task [18]. The novice asks questions in 
order to understand and clarify what is happening, and the 
two people together form a common understanding of the 
issues at hand. We focused on which IT systems were used, 
how they were used, what steps make up the actual 
application processing, which people were involved in 
specific decisions and what tools were used in order to give 
applicants a final answer. This method was employed over 
our four months at NOKUT, with seven different case 
handlers across the two sections, in sessions of varying 
lengths (30 min - 3 hours). Notes were taken with a pen and 
paper throughout the sessions. 
C. Co-creating Journey Maps  
Journey mapping is a service design method that presents 
events or touchpoints in chronological order to visualize a 
process [15]. In order to map the case handling practices, two 
case handlers from the different sections took part in co-
creating a journey map [13], based on the insights gathered. 
The journey map was drawn concentrating on the core steps 
of the practice. Post-it notes and markers were used on a 
whiteboard to simultaneously analyze the case handling 
practice for all three types of applications. The case handlers 
were asked questions during the mapping process in order to 
clarify statements and placements of post-it notes. The case 
handlers used the provided materials to analyze the journey 
an application takes from when it enters NOKUT’s digital 
application systems to when the applicant receives a reply. 
D. Ethics 
We signed a standard non-disclosure agreement with 
NOKUT, which they also use for external consultants. We 
did not collect personal data about the case handlers or 
managers as our focus was on collecting data about the case 
handling process and their use of system support in their 
work. 
In the fieldwork, we could observe applications to 
NOKUT, but did not collect any data about the applicants 
nor the applications. Pen and paper were used for interviews 
and observations. According to Norwegian rules for research 
ethics, this kind of data collection does not necessitate 
evaluation by an ethical board, as it does not involve 
personal data.  
Our introduction to the NOKUT employees took place in 
meetings, where we presented the project and discussed 
voluntary participation. The study was endorsed from the 
manager of one of the sections, and all participants in the 
study are NOKUT employees. We were given a work desk 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

in one of the sections, where we were free to contact the case 
handlers and other employees. As most interviews happened 
spontaneously, we did not use consent forms for each 
individual person interviewed. Consent for an interview was 
granted orally. We have no indication of any case handlers or 
section heads wanting to withdraw from the study.  
III. 
CASE HANDLING AT NOKUT 
NOKUT consists of five Departments: the Departments 
for Quality Assurances and Legal Affairs, Evaluation and 
Analysis, and Foreign Education work with accreditation and 
recognition 
of 
Norwegian 
and 
foreign 
education 
respectively. There are two administrative departments for 
Administration and Communication. NOKUT’s Department 
of Foreign Education is comprised of four Sections:  the two 
sections described here are the Section for Recognition of 
Higher Education and the Section for Recognition of VET 
and TVET, where VET stands for “Foreign Tertiary 
Vocational Education” and TVET for “Foreign Vocational 
Education and Training”. Additionally, the Department 
houses a Section for Interview-based Procedures and a 
Section for Information about Foreign Education. 
Three types of applications are managed at the 
Department for Foreign Education: 
• 
Recognition of Foreign Higher Education involves 
recognition of education from universities and 
university colleges. 
• 
Recognition of VET involves recognition of 
vocational 
education 
completed 
after 
upper 
secondary education; usually training that takes 
between 6 months and two years. 
• 
Recognition of TVET recognizes vocational training 
and education on levels comparable to Norwegian 
upper 
secondary 
education, 
and 
craft 
or 
journeyman’s certificates. This recognition is only 
available for applicants from five Eastern European 
countries and is limited to 17 professions. 
Applications for Recognition of Foreign Higher 
Education are processed at the correspondingly named 
section, while the Section for Recognition of VET and 
TVET 
processes 
both 
application 
types 
concerning 
vocational education.  
Two IT systems, ESAM and Public 360°, are used for 
supporting the case handlers’ work. ESAM is a custom-built 
case handling system developed by NOKUT’s section for 
information and communication technology (ICT) in 
cooperation with hired consultants. The system was first 
customized for applications for recognition of higher 
education and has since been expanded to include VET 
applications. NOKUT’s goal is that ESAM will be used for 
handling all applications, with a possible long-term goal of 
automating much of case handling. TVET applications are 
still processed using 360°; an off the shelf general case 
handling and archival system originally used for all case 
handling at NOKUT. 360° is still used as an archival system 
for all applications, but for TVET applications, it is the only 
digital case handling system.  
A. Case handling takes place in several sections 
The actual case handling of the applications varies a lot, 
from relatively simple and standardized, to very complicated 
and involving many steps. However, there are some key 
similarities between how applications are managed across 
the two sections of the Foreign Education Department.  
Case handlers mostly work alone on applications. They 
might ask co-workers for advice or discuss particularly tricky 
cases with others, but in general, each application has one 
case handler who works on the case alone. Managers and co-
workers are involved with quality assurance of the process 
and the resulting decision letter to the applicant.  
Not all case handlers work with all kinds of cases: both in 
higher education and in VET and TVET, there are area 
experts who have knowledge about education within a 
particular geographical area. Some areas are “easy” and can 
be managed by everyone, while some areas are only 
managed by area experts. Some case handlers in the Section 
for Recognition of VET and TVET only work with VET, 
some work only with TVET, some do both. No case handler 
works in both sections, so case handling for higher education 
and VET and TVET are completely separate. 
All applications are managed through one of the two IT 
systems, ESAM or 360°. Since 2016, case handling is 
digitized, and applicants are encouraged to apply through an 
online application portal. 
Apart from these key similarities, there is a lot of 
variation in the actual case handling practice. The main 
difference lies in how different types of applications have 
differing levels of complexity. Recognition of higher 
education relies heavily on international networks and 
databases comparing (usually) well-documented education. 
On the other hand, recognition of VET and TVET requires 
complicated evaluation of professional skills that are not 
related to international standards, such as ECTS-credits. 
Here, expert committees, old curriculum and translation of 
local documents are required parts of the case handling 
practice, increasing the level of complexity. This also results 
in widely different processing times: cases of recognition of 
higher education have an average processing time of 7.5 
hours, while a VET or TVET application can take anywhere 
from 21 to 329 days.  
In addition to the two sections that carry out case 
handling of applications, there are other departments and 
sections at NOKUT that are important to case handling, such 
as the Section of Interview-based Procedures, which the case 
handlers also refer to as “the Refugees Section”. They work 
with applicants who cannot document their education, or 
whose documents come from areas the Norwegian 
government “does not trust”. This mostly includes conflict 
areas like Yemen and Syria. Applicants who apply for 
recognition of higher education can be forwarded to this 
section, but not applicants within the VET and TVET 
systems. 
Another important collaborator is the Switch Board / 
Reception / Information Centre, where a collection of 
NOKUT employees handles direct contact with applicants 
and the general public. NOKUT case handlers are not 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

directly available to applicants through phone calls or 
personal e-mail, unless the case handler explicitly 
encourages this. Most communication with applicants goes 
through the online application portal, but some applicants 
still call NOKUT with various queries. The communication 
between case handlers and the employees who answer 
phone calls is therefore an important line of communication. 
B. Different steps for the different applications 
Some elements of the case handling are at the core of all 
application processing, while other aspects belong to edge 
cases. In the journey map workshop, the case handlers 
agreed on, and numbered, stages 1 through 4 as the common 
core stages for all application management: 
1. The application arrives in either ESAM or 360° and 
is selected by or given to a specific case handler. The 
application is looked through and the case handler 
makes sure all required documents are included. 
2. The actual evaluation of the education takes place. 
This includes different steps and levels of 
complexity depending on the circumstances and type 
of application. 
3. Quality assurance of the proposed outcome of the 
evaluation is performed, either by a co-worker, a 
manager or both. 
4. 
A decision letter is sent to the applicant. This could 
be a rejection of the application or an approval of the 
foreign education. Additionally, it could include a 
recommendation to apply for another type of 
recognition or the forwarding of the case to the 
Section for Interview-based Procedures. 
Figure 1 shows the result of the journey map that was co-
created together with the case handlers of the two sections, 
using post-its and markers on a whiteboard. 
Figure 1.  The first version of the journey map illustrating the steps of the 
case handling. 
This figure was re-worked for the final journey map 
shown in Figure 2. This re-worked journey map illustrates 
the differences and similarities between the case handling 
processes. There are three application handling processes for 
the three application types higher education, VET and 
TVET. The first step shows that the application is received 
and selected by a case handler. The document check is 
shown as a separate step, as it often resulted in 
communication back and forth with an applicant, or even the 
rejection of an application if the required documentation was 
not produced.  
The third section, evaluation and recognition, is the main 
part of the case handling, consisting of only one step for 
Higher Education applications, and up to four steps for 
TVET. The only step in this section that the three application 
types have in common is what the case handlers call “system 
evaluation”. This involves evaluation of the level, the scope 
and the duration of the education. For higher education 
applications, this is the only step. For VET and TVET, this is 
only the beginning. VET additionally recognizes the 
professional profile of applicants, while TVET applications 
must be checked against NOKUTs existing precedence 
database. If no similar cases have been processed previously, 
case handlers must obtain the foreign curriculum for the 
education. The curriculum then needs to be translated and 
processed before being evaluated by expert professionals, 
who decide whether the education can be equated to its 
Norwegian counterpart. 
The last step involves deciding on the case and includes 
quality assurance. The quality assurance step is usually more 
of a formality, as the outcome is rarely changed based on this 
feedback. Finally, a decision letter is dispatched to the 
applicant.  
C. Differences in complexity 
Case handling of applications for recognition of foreign 
higher education is, in most cases, straightforward. If 
applicants provide documentation of higher education, 
international standards for higher education, such as the 
European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS) 
from the Bologna process [19], makes recognizing 
equivalent education relatively easy. It requires mostly a 
recognition of credits, level of higher education (Bachelor’s, 
Master’s or PhD) and the amount of time spent on the 
studies. Online portals list accredited foreign education for 
most countries. Additionally, as most countries provide a 
service similar to NOKUT, recognition of foreign education 
can be standardized between neighboring countries, or 
regions with similar education systems. This highly 
regulated practice leaves less room for interpretation for case 
handlers and reduces complexity and processing time, which 
averages to only 7.5 hours for a case. 
Processing applications to VET and TVET shows greater 
variety and involves more steps. In order to recognize 
foreign vocational education and training, case handlers need 
to have the specific curriculum from the teaching institution, 
time period and qualification that the applicant has 
documented in their application. While applicants need to 
provide documentation of their education, they are not 
responsible for providing the documentation of their 
curriculum. Finding the curriculum can be challenging: case 
handlers describe visiting libraries and public archives in 
other countries and exploring old basements in public 
buildings looking for documents. There they would scan or 
take pictures of as much relevant documentation as possible. 
Finding curriculum also involves cooperation with people 
working in foreign libraries or archives, who can obtain 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2.  The final journey map illustrates the differences and similarities between the three case handling processes. 
“helpful” curricula without anyone from NOKUT needing to 
travel. In these cases, case handlers have a network of 
contacts who can be contacted via email or telephone. In 
some ex-Soviet states local- or state archives have been 
burned, making it impossible to find documentation of old 
curricula. In these cases, the education cannot be recognized. 
These steps add considerable variety and complexity to case 
handling and processing time. 
If a case handler manages to locate the curriculum, the 
documents need to be translated into Norwegian before 
experts can evaluate whether the qualification would equal a 
similar qualification in Norway. Some foreign curricula can 
be several hundred pages, while an equivalent Norwegian 
curriculum can be 3-5 pages. Recognition of TVET is not 
carried out by many other countries, meaning international 
standards, databases and networks are limited. Translation 
work followed by external professional expert evaluations 
without internal support further prolongs processing time and 
increase complexity, resulting in some TVET cases taking 
almost a year to process. 
While this case handling practice is complex, it is 
currently performed using a case handling system that offers 
zero system support. While ESAM provides extensive 
system support and is developed to closely “guide” case 
handlers through pre-defined steps in the application process 
for higher education and VET applications, 360° offers no 
such support. Case handlers for TVET use their well-
established practice and “know how” to process the 
applications as required, given the specific circumstances of 
each case. 
D. Levels of complexity in practice 
Several case handlers at the Section for Recognition of 
VET and TVET made comments along the line of “it’s not 
always like this” or “usually we would do it like that, but 
because of X we have to do it like this”, demonstrating how 
practice is not just “rule-following” [6]. The level of detailed 
understanding needed to know how to process an application 
showed great skill from the case handlers on when to follow 
the rules and when to adapt to circumstances, in line with 
Schmidt [6]. While the basic steps of case handling can be 
defined and followed, a lot of the practice builds on “know-
how” developed over time and through experience. The case 
handlers are aware of these differences in complexity. One 
newly hired case handler in the Section for Recognition of 
VET and TVET described how she had been instructed to 
focus on VET applications, to “get to grips with the basics”. 
When working with VET cases she would have the benefit 
of them being less complex, in addition to system support 
from the custom build ESAM system. 
The case handlers at NOKUT had such a “feel” for what 
decisions to make, which is not explicitly described in the 
“standard practice”. While some degree of complexity was 
present in all case handling practice, recognition of higher 
education was closer to “rule-following” than the VET and 
TVET applications. The journey map (Figure 2) visualizes 
case handling steps from the “simple” higher education 
recognition, through the more complex VET recognition and 
ending in the most complex TVET recognition. The extra 
case handling steps that are identified for VET and TVET 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

consist of the most varied case handling for this kind of 
education and visualize an increasing level of complexity. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Insight gained from ethnographic studies can be complex 
and come 
in many forms [16]. 
Deep 
situational 
understanding and learning is why the methodology lends 
itself to researching complex socio-technical environments 
and practices, but also makes findings difficult to synthesize 
or summarize. Deep insight into the use situation and the 
user’s actual work practices is a prerequisite for technology 
design within CSCW. Findings should be shared with fellow 
researchers, participants and other collaborators in order to 
better design technologies that support cooperative work [8]. 
In order to design such systems, both designers and workers 
need to understand and be able to communicate about 
practices relevant to the systems. By analyzing the case 
handling at NOKUT as a service, the practice of processing 
applications can be visualized as a series of activities with a 
fixed start- and endpoint. The benefit of visualization is to 
communicate different information about the steps and the 
complexity of the corresponding case handling process.  
Journey mapping is not the only way to visualize 
complexity. Methods such as giga-mapping [20] could lend 
itself to visualizing the complexity by mapping all relevant 
stakeholders or systems in a practice, but would not ease a 
reader's understanding of the different steps that make up the 
process. Service blueprints have been used for visualizing 
processes, including both organizational and customer 
perspectives [15], but would in our case show both 
NOKUT’s internal processes as well as frontstage events 
towards the applicants. The overall result can be cluttered 
and focus too much on existing systems to support the needs 
of case handlers. In contrast, by co-creating a journey map 
with the case handlers, their practice is the focus of the 
visualization. The co-creation helps both case handlers and 
researchers to understand and agree on what the practice 
looks like and can contribute to a shared language and 
understanding between them. Additionally, the relative 
simplicity of the visual expression of the journey map and 
the singular focus on case handling practice reveals 
complexities in the practice that are vital to designing 
appropriate systems.  
Schmidt [6] writes that “understanding work practices as 
a basis for systems design has become a practical necessity”. 
We argue that using service design methods in conjunction 
with an ethnographical approach can boost researchers’ 
understanding of a work practice, by providing a framework 
for visualizing it. In utilizing journey mapping, complexities 
in practice can be highlighted, providing further insights that 
are valuable for designing systems appropriate to supporting 
the practice. 
V. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE DESIGN OF CASE HANDLING 
SUPPORT 
The objective of CSCW research is to gain insight into 
actual work practices for designing better digital support [8]. 
NOKUT’s case handling process for higher education is 
relatively simple and is represented by fewer steps for 
evaluation and recognition than VET and TVET in Figure 2. 
The application handling processes can be ordered according 
to a level of complexity from low (higher education), to 
middle (VET) and high (TVET), mirrored in the number of 
steps in Figure 2 for each type of application. While the case 
handling processes for VET and TVET contain more steps 
than for higher education, the process still starts and ends 
with the same basic steps. When developing the new system 
for case handling, ESAM, the in-house developers started 
with higher education. The first version of the system could 
handle the “straight forward” applications and supported the 
steps that all applications go through. Later, the system was 
expanded to also include handling of VET applications. The 
case handling process of the TVET applications is however 
supported by using a general document archival system, 
360°, with no specialized process support.  
Thus, the most complex cases currently have the least 
amount of system support. Because these case handling 
processes have such varied steps and rules, and require very 
varied skills, such as nurturing international networks of 
helpful contacts to find a curriculum document in a basement 
archive in a foreign state, it would be almost impossible to 
design detailed system support for all possible steps in a case 
handling process. Such a system would risk being 
cumbersome and time-consuming in use as it would need to 
represent several possible steps and actions for a case 
handler to take, where many would be irrelevant in most 
cases. It could additionally hamper case handling as it may 
require navigating irrelevant choices and ticking off 
irrelevant boxes. In line with Røhnebæk [4], it would require 
negotiation and various workarounds [21] to use and we 
argue it would offer case handlers little real support for their 
work. 
We suggest instead that an expansion of ESAM to 
include management of TVET applications should mirror the 
current case handling practice, by providing a minimal 
structure of support to give case handlers “room” to process 
applications as best, based on the circumstances and 
complexity of the actual case. By keeping the support 
minimal, case handlers won’t be hampered by unnecessary 
steps when using the system. They have already proved their 
capability to manage applications with only generic archival 
system support, and we believe trying to create a system that 
closely supports all the possible circumstances of a TVET 
application would be too cumbersome and thereby 
unbeneficial. Case handlers of the most complex cases would 
benefit from a system where the steps that make up the work 
process are represented with more room for variety and 
minimal structured system support.   
However, if in the future, more countries change their 
practices and start recognizing VET or TVET educations, 
international resources and standards for such educations 
may develop. These new circumstances could affect 
NOKUT’s case handling practices by reducing the level of 
complexity for these cases. This again could affect the 
suitable level of system support.  
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Through field studies within an ethnography-inspired 
case study, supplemented with methods from service design, 
we explored, analyzed and visualized the case handling 
practices at NOKUT for recognizing foreign education. 
These visualizations show that the case handling processes 
for different types of educations contain almost similar steps 
in the beginning and end of the case handling process but 
vary for the central steps of evaluation and recognition, 
based on the circumstances and types of education 
recognized. 
We argue that service design can be complimentary to 
ethnographic studies in analyzing and visualizing complex 
practices, given that the practice lends itself to being 
explored as a service. By exposing variations and 
complexities, 
service 
design 
methods 
contribute 
to 
understanding actual work practices, which provide a sound 
foundation for systems design in CSCW.  
NOKUT receives applications for recognition through an 
online portal but uses different IT systems to manage the 
different types of applications. This use of different case 
handling systems does not fundamentally affect the steps of 
the case handling process. Applications processed within the 
same section (VET and TVET) do not have the same case 
handling practice, because the academic and professional 
assessments are not the same. Applications with complex 
academic and professional assessments have a longer 
average processing time. 
Applications 
with a 
less 
standardized case handling practice have more steps in the 
assessment process and have a longer average processing 
time. The level of complexity in the type of application 
processed, rather than the type of IT systems, is what affects 
the complexity of the case handling.  
When developing new system support for the most 
complicated cases, we suggest a design that provides a 
minimal structure of support to give case handlers “room” to 
process applications as best based on the case handlers’ 
experience and the rich variety and circumstances of the 
cases.  
We purpose this approach to systems design can be 
useful in other development of case handling systems, where 
designing system support for all circumstances and 
complexities in case handling practice would be both 
cumbersome, expensive, time-consuming and unnecessary.  
Future research on digitalization of work processes could 
include whether visualizing complexity of the case handling 
process could be important for assessing which case 
handling practices are eligible for automation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many thanks go to NOKUT for their cooperation in 
conducting this study, and for allowing us access to their 
offices and practices. We would like to thank all the case 
handlers and section managers for their time and patience. 
We would further like to thank Lars T. Moen for his 
encouragement and assistance in digitalizing the final 
journey map.  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Boulus-Rødje, “In search for the perfect pathway: 
supporting knowledge work of welfare workers,” Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 27, pp. 841-874, 
Dec 2018, doi:10.1007/s10606-018-9318-0. 
[2] N. G. Borchorst and S. Bødker, “You probably shouldn’t give 
them too much information – supporting citizen-government 
collaboration”, Proc. ECSCW 2011, pp. 173-192, 2011. 
[3] M. Grisot and P. Vassilakopoulou, “The Work of 
Infrastructuring: A Study of a National eHealth Project”, 
Proc. ECSCW 2015, pp. 205-221, 2015. 
[4] M. Røhnebæk, “Standardized Flexibility: The Choreography 
of ICT in Standardization of Service Work,” Culture 
Unbound, vol. 4, 2012, pp. 679-698.  
[5] G. Verne and T. Bratteteig, “Do-it-yourself services and 
work-like chores: on civic duties and digital public services”, 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 20, pp. 517-532, 
2016, doi:10.1007/s00779-016-0936-6. 
[6] K. Schmidt, “The concept of ‘practice’: what’s the point?”, In 
C. Rossitto, L. Ciolfi, D. Martin, and B. Conein (Eds.), Proc. 
COOP 2014, pp. 427-444, Springer International Publishing, 
2014. 
[7] J. Bowers, G. Button, and  W. Sharrock,  “Workflow from 
within and without: technology and cooperative work on the 
print industry shopfloor”. In H. Marmolin, Y. Sundblad, and 
K. Schmidt (Eds.), Proc. ECSCW 1995, pp. 51-66, Dordrecht, 
Springer Netherlands, 1995. 
[8] K. Schmidt, and L. Bannon, “Taking CSCW seriously: 
supporting 
articulation 
work”, 
Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW), 1992, vol. 1, pp. 7-40. 
[9] T. Bratteteig and G. Verne, “Conditions for Autonomy in the 
Information Society: Disentangling as a public service”, 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 2012, vol. 24, 
pp 51-72. 
[10] G. Verne and T. Bratteteig, “Do-it-yourself services and 
work-like chores: on civic duties and digital public services”, 
.Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 2016, vol. 20, pp. 517-
532. doi:10.1007/s00779-016-0936-6. 
[11] I. Lindgren, C. Ø. Madsen, S. Hofmann, and U. Melin, “Close 
encounters of the digital kind: A research agenda for the 
digitalization of public services”, Government Information 
Quarterly, 
2019, 
vol 
36, 
pp. 
427-436, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.03.002. 
[12] C. Ø. Madsen and P. Kræmmergaard, “The efficiency of 
freedom: Single parents' domestication of mandatory e-
government channels”, Government Information Quarterly, 
2015, 
 
vol. 
32, 
pp. 
380-388. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2015.09.008 
[13] M. Stickdorn, M. E. Hormess, A. Lawrence, and J. Schneider, 
This is service design doing, online companion, pp. 45-47, 
O’Reilly Media, Inc, 2018, [retrieved: Januar, 2020]. 
[14] R. Halvorsrud, M. Røhne, E.G. Celius, S.M. Moen, and F. 
Strisland, “Application of Patient Journey Methodology to 
Explore Needs for Digital Support, A Multiple Sclerosis Case 
Study”, Proc. SHI 2019, pp. 148-153, 2019. 
[15] R. Halvorsrud, K. Kvale, and A. Følstad, “Improving service 
quality through customer journey analysis”, Journal of service 
theory and practice, 2016, vol. 26, pp. 840-867. 
[16] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing Ethnographies, Sage 
Publications, 2007, pp. 132-133. 
[17] B. Hanington and B. Martin, Universal methods of design: 
100 ways to research complex problems, develop innovative 
ideas, and design effective solutions, Rockport Publishing, 
2012. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[18] J. Preece, Y. Rogers and H. Sharp,  Interaction Design: 
Beyond Human-Computer Interaction, John Wiley & Sons, 
2015, pp. 366 - 367. 
[19] European Higher Education Area and Bologna Process, 
http://www.ehea.info/index.php, [retrieved: January, 2020]. 
[20] B. Sevaldson, “GIGA-mapping: Visualisation for complexity 
and systems thinking in design”, Proc. NORDES 2011, 2011. 
[21] L. Gasser, “The integration of computing and routine work”, 
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 4, 1986, pp. 205-225, 
doi:http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/214427.21442.
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

