Development of Web based UX Diagnosis System  
for Small and Medium Sized Home Appliance Manufacturers in the IoT Era
Joohwan Park, Jiyoung Kwahk, Sung H. Han,  
Bora Kang, Mingyu Lee, Dong Yeong Jeong,  
Hyeji Jang, Dawoon Jeong 
Dept. of Industrial & Management Engineering 
POSTECH 
Pohang, Korea 
e-mail: {pkjhwan, kjy, shan, purple31, mk3215s2, 
comnet924, wdfokj, jdw0303}@postech.ac.kr 
Jungchul Park 
Dept. of Safety Engineering 
Korea National University of Transportation 
Chungju, Korea 
e-mail: jcpark@ut.ac.kr 
Jaehyun Park 
Dept. of Industrial & Management Engineering 
Incheon National University 
Incheon, Korea 
e-mail: jaehpark@inu.ac.kr 
Abstract — The purpose of the study is to develop a web based 
User eXperience (UX) diagnosis system that helps the small 
and medium sized home appliance manufacturers prepare for 
the opportunities of Internet of Things (IoT) era. To provide a 
UX diagnostic system that is compatible with various product 
types of the home appliance manufacturers, a total 109 
questionnaire items for UX evaluation were developed based 
on the UX design principles and design elements. The 
functional requirements of the proposed diagnosis system were 
constructed based on the needs and requirements that collected 
from the designers of the small and medium sized 
manufacturers though in-depth interviews. A UX diagnostic 
system was developed as a web based platform that supporting 
overall UX diagnosis process, from the questionnaire 
generation, survey distribution, user survey data collection, 
and visualization of the analyzed UX diagnosis result. The 
proposed system is designed to uncover various possible UX 
design flaws related to specific design elements and UX design 
principle. The proposed system provides both quantitative and 
qualitative diagnosis results, such as UX design scores and 
users' comments and opinions about the products. The 
usability, validity, and usefulness of the developed system were 
evaluated by the experts through case study. The developed 
system is expected to be useful for home appliance designers of 
the home appliance manufacturers by providing systems to 
evaluate the current state of their products and uncover the 
UX design issues through a web based survey. The following 
study will be focused to provide design elements, UX design 
principles, and questionnaire items for evaluation of the home 
appliances’ IoT features. 
Keywords- User experience; IoT; Home appliance; UX 
diagnosis system; Survey system 
I.
INTRODUCTION
 UX (User eXperience) became very popular and 
important concept to be considered by product designers to 
achieve competitive advantage in the market. The User 
Experience can be defined as a person’s overarching 
experience that consists of all aspects of users’ interaction 
with a product, system or service [1]-[3]. The detailed 
aspects that influence the UX satisfaction of the users may 
can be varied by the application domains and academic 
fields, however, usability [3]-[5], affect [3], and user value 
[3], [6]-[12] of the products are considered to be the most 
important criteria for UX evaluation by many researchers.  
Nowadays, 
designers 
of 
the 
home 
appliance 
manufacturers also started to consider the UX of their 
product to enhance the user satisfaction. Home appliance is a 
set of electronic devices that assisting household jobs. Home 
appliance manufacturers who have enough resources are 
trying to enhance the UX of their products by investing their 
resources to introduce state-of-art UX design techniques. 
However, the Small and Medium sized Enterprise (SME) 
manufacturers that taking a large portion of the Korean home 
appliance market usually does not have enough resources 
and tools for product UX enhancements. As the Internet of 
Things (IoT) technologies are leading trend of the home 
appliance market, gradually SME manufacturers are forced 
to develop new home appliances that have various new IoT 
features. As a result, it is needed to propose a UX diagnosis 
system that can reduce the risk of the failures that caused by 
design by supporting the development process of the SME 
manufacturers. The diagnosis system has to be afforded to 
SME manufactures and compatible to their various home 
appliance product spectrum. The purpose of this research is 
to develop a UX diagnosis system for designers of the SME 
home appliance manufacturers based on the requirements 
and needs that reported by the designers. This study is 
research that covers the UX diagnosis of traditional home 
appliance types before the extended research on the UX 
evaluation of the IoT features of home appliance. 
299
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In Section 2, research target home appliance products 
were defined and the requirement of the designers were 
explored and analyzed. In Section 3, the proposed diagnosis 
system was designed and developed. In Section 4, the 
architecture and interfaces of developed system were 
described. In Section 5, the case study was proceeded to 
validate the system’s usability. In Section 6 and 7, the 
discussion and conclusion were followed. 
II.
REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS ON 
HOME APPLIANCE PRODUCTS DESIGNERS
Currently, a lot of types of the home appliances are 
distributed on the market. The types of the home appliance 
product are varied as the number of the household jobs. This 
research covers the 6 categories and 27 sub-categories of the 
home appliance types (See, table 1). 
TABLE I. 
TARGET HOME APPLIANCES OF THE RESEARCH
The requirements of the UX diagnosis system were 
needed to be defined based on the demands of the designers. 
In-depth interview sessions were placed to collect the 
opinions and demands of the designers on the UX evaluation 
and diagnostic tools they have experienced. A total nine 
SME designers who take the role of operating designers, 
engineers, and Chief Executive Officers (CEO) of six SME 
home appliance manufacturers were participated in the 
interview. Designers shared their needs, pain-points, and 
episodes that they experienced during UX diagnosis or 
product design enhancement process. They also provided 
valuable opinions about the ideal concept and the role of the 
UX diagnosis system based on their experiences (See, table 
2). These opinions were translated into the system design 
requirements to reflect the designers’ demands of researchers 
III.
UX DIAGNOSIS SYSTEM DESIGN
The system was designed through following three steps. 
At first, the UX design principles and design elements were 
defined. And questionnaire items for UX evaluation were 
generated by combining the principles and design elements. 
At last, the web based diagnosis system was developed. 
A.
UX design Principles and Design Elements 
To define major criteria for evaluating UX satisfaction of 
the home appliance products, the UX related principles and 
evaluation criteria were collected through home appliance 
designer interview and literature review. The collected UX 
design principles were merged into 14 UX design principles 
and categorized into three UX aspects such as usability, 
affect, and user value (See, table 3).  
TABLE II. 
SME DESIGNERS DEMANDS ON UX DIAGNOSIS SYSTEM
TABLE III. 
UX DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR HOME APPLIANCES
Category 
Home Appliance 
Cleaner 
Vacuum cleaner, Robot vacuum, Handheld vacuum 
Kitchen 
Rice 
cooker, 
Electric 
kettles, 
Blender, 
Water 
filter/purifier, 
Electric 
range, 
Microwave 
oven, 
Electronic oven, Toaster, Dishwasher 
Laundry 
Iron, Washing machine 
Beauty 
Hair dryer, Hair straighteners, Electric shaver 
Heater/Air 
Conditioner 
Fan, Dehumidifier, Humidifier, Air purifier, Heater, 
Fan heater 
Health Care 
Hearing aid, Massager, Handheld massager 
Category 
Demands 
Accessibility 
 The system has to be easily accessible by 
external participants 
 Survey session needs to be around 15 minutes to 
reduce cognitive workload 
 Survey process and questionnaires have to be 
easy and simple 
Usability 
 Easy for participants to rate products 
 Easy for designers to use the system 
 Easy/clear terminologies need to be used 
User 
Characteristics 
 Demographic information of the user has to be 
analyzed  
 The answering tendency of the participants’ 
demographic characteristics towards each UX 
element is very important information for market 
segmentation and strategy 
Customizability 
 Designers may need to select, add, modify, 
remove questionnaire items 
 System need to provide customizability for 
designers 
Comments 
Analysis 
 User comments are also a very important source 
of the ideas, issues, opinions 
 It is needed to provide functions to collect and 
analyze user’s comments 
Comparison 
 Comparison 
between 
products 
are 
very 
important to provide understanding about 
current market’s UX levels and criteria for 
judgement 
Price Decision 
 The system may can provide the criteria for the 
pricing decision 
Pros/Cons 
Analysis 
 System need to provide information about 
current weak point and the strength of the 
product  
UX Aspect 
UX Design Principle 
Usability 
 Informativeness 
 Learnability 
 Efficiency 
 Physical suitability 
Affect 
 Attractiveness 
 Delicacy 
 Luxuriousness 
 Stability 
 Harmoniousness 
User Value 
 Safety 
 Hygiene 
 Durability 
 Performance 
 Functionality 
300
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Development Process of Questionnaire Items 
It is also important to investigate the source of the poor 
UX for design enhancement. Design elements of the home 
appliance were defined as the logical and physical 
components of products that can be designed by designers 
and influence the UX satisfaction of the users such as 
function, interface, and appearance of the product. The 
design elements of various home appliances that could affect 
to the UX satisfaction were collected from literatures, user 
reviews, and expert interviews.  
TABLE IV. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS OF HOME APPLIANCES
Category 
Design Element 
Function 
 Function 
Functional 
Module 
 Ventilation Opening 
 Filter/Dust Bag 
 Fan/Motor 
 Heat Source 
 Sensor 
 Handle/Grip 
 Wheel 
 Feet 
 Cover/Lid 
 Replaceable Module 
 Power Supply Cable 
 Battery 
 Bottle/Vessel 
User 
Interface 
 Visual Information/Display 
 Sound/Speaker 
 Haptic Stimulus 
 Control 
Appearance 
 Color/Painting 
 Texture 
 Shape 
A total number of 21 design elements were defined and 
classified into four categories, such as the function, 
functional module, appearance, and user interface elements 
(See, table 4). 
B.
Development of UX Evaluation Questionnaire Items 
It is important to develop detailed questionnaire items 
that could be related to various home appliance design flaws. 
The proposed system uses UX design principles as 
evaluation criteria and design elements as the targets to be 
evaluated. The questionnaire items were developed based on 
the combinations of these two factors. As fourteen UX 
design principles and twenty-one design elements were 
defined, a total of 294 combinations were available. 
To develop the questionnaire items based on the possible 
use scenarios related to design flaws, scenarios that could be 
happened during context of use were constructed and 
reviewed for each combination. Questionnaire items were 
developed based on the scenarios to ask users if the target 
product is appropriately designed to prevent the related UX 
problems. For example, combining a heat source with the 
safety principle, safety related problematic scenarios could 
be deduced and following questionnaire items were 
developed based on these scenarios (See, Figure 1). 
As a result, a total 109 questionnaire items were defined 
based the UX related principles and design elements of the 
home appliance types. Each questionnaire item was designed 
to be related to the specific UX design principle and the 
specific design element.  
C.
UX Diagnosis System Development 
The UX diagnosis system was developed as a web-based 
responsive survey system that running on Apache Tomcat. 
The system was designed to be web-based survey system. 
The system design followed the requirements that collected 
from the designers of SME designers by providing related 
functions to evaluate the home appliance and inspect 
possible design flaws. 
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2. UX Diagnosis System Architecture 
Figure 3. UX Diagnosis Process and Designers Tasks
IV.
RESULT: UX DIAGNOSIS SYSTEM
On the proposed UX diagnosis system, home appliance 
designers can follow four steps to generate, distribute, and 
read the result of the UX diagnosis survey (See, Fig. 2). The 
developed system provides questionnaire items and related 
functions to support home appliance designers through the 
UX diagnosis process (See, Fig. 3). 
The first stage is the product registration phase. SME 
designers can register the information about the product to be 
evaluated. The information about the product such as major 
functions and images were designed be presented to survey 
participants as supplemental information to provide better 
understanding about questionnaire item. 
The second stage is questionnaire development phase. 
The system generates questionnaire automatically based on 
the design elements consisting the target product. The 
designers can modify any questionnaire items to specify the 
terminologies to fit on the product components, and also 
remove any questionnaire items if they were considered not 
to be important (See, Figure 4). The designers can also add 
any questionnaire items to collect additional user opinions. 
The third stage is survey distribution. The UX diagnosis 
system generates a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) of the 
survey that can be distributed through email or message. The 
survey participants can access to the survey on any devices 
through internet connection by clicking the survey URL.  
Figure 4. Questionnaire Item Modification Interface 
During the survey, each questionnaire item was presented 
to participants with supplementary information such as 
images and related design element description. The 
participants were instructed to rate with 0 to 100 scale for 
(Auto-Generated Questionnaire Item)
(Manually Corrected Questionnaire Item)
(Modification)
(Delete)
(Modification)
(Save)
(Restore)
(Delete Selected)
(Reset)
(Number)
(Function)
(Functional Modules)
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

each questionnaire item (See, Figure 5). The participants can 
provide any comment or opinion to describe why they rate so 
through the survey process. 
Figure 5. Survey Questionnaire Interface for Participants (Translated) 
The last stage is the diagnostic result review. The web 
diagnosis system generates the diagnostic report for SME 
designers based on the survey participants’ responses. 
Designers can review which UX design principle or design 
element were evaluated high or low by participants with the 
proposed system. The diagnostic result contains visualized 
information about the response of each demographic group. 
The designers also can review the critical design issues and 
related opinions on the diagnostic report to get a hint for the 
further design enhancements.  
The system provides several distinct interfaces to 
visualize the products’ scores and participants’ responses. 
For examples, the product comparison function generates 
reports to visualize the UX diagnosis results of products 
through side-by-side view (See, Figure 6). This interface 
uses a bar - chart to visualize the scores of each product to be 
easily compared by the designers.  
Figure 6. Result: Product Comparison 
Figure 7. Result: Participants’ Responses on Specific Questionnaire Item 
The system also provides the interface to show the 
participants’ responses to each questionnaire item, such as 
rating score, gender, age, and comments (See, Figure 7). 
V.
CASE STUDY: SYSTEM USABILITY EVALUATION
To validate the usability of the proposed system for the 
realistic home appliance UX diagnosis purpose, the usability 
of the proposed system was evaluated by expert group 
consists of UX experts and SME designers. The UX expert 
group consisted of six UX experts who have a Doctor of 
Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree of UX related domains and nine 
industrial designers of the SME manufacturers. 
TABLE V. 
AVERAGE USABILITY EVALUATION RESULT
System Usability Scale (SUS) is usually used as a system 
usability evaluation questionnaire [13]. SUS is one of the 
most qualified and simple usability evaluation tools that uses 
ten questionnaire items for software usability evaluation. To 
verify the usability of the proposed system, experts reviewed 
SUS Questionnaire Item 
UX 
Exper
t  
SME 
Designe
r 
I think that I would like to use this system 
frequently.  
91.3 
77.2 
I found the system unnecessarily complex. 
88.9 
80.0 
I thought the system was easy to use. 
85.1 
83.9 
I think that I would need the support of a 
technical person to be able to use this 
system. 
81.9 
73.9 
I found the various functions in this system 
were well integrated. 
88.1 
76.7 
I thought there was too much inconsistency 
in this system. 
82.8 
82.2 
I would imagine that most people would 
learn to use this system very quickly. 
84.7 
85.6 
I found the system very cumbersome to use. 
82.3 
81.7 
I felt very confident using the system. 
87.2 
87.8 
I needed to learn a lot of things before I 
could get going with this system. 
81.7 
82.8 
Mean score 
85.4 
81.2 
(Questionnaire Items)
(User Interface for Rating)
(Comments)
(User Interface for Comments)
(Progress Bar)
(Previous Question)
(Next Question)
(Description of the Related Design Element)
(Product)
(UX Score)
(Usability)
(Affect)
(User Value)
(Score)
(Principles)
(UX Aspect)
(Usability)
(Age & Gender Filter)
(Selected Questionnaire Item)
(Collected Comments from Participants)
(Average Score of the 
Questionnaire Item)
(Responses on the Questionnaire Item from Participants)
(Export Result into Excel File)
(Print Result)
)
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the proposed system and evaluated the usability of the 
system. UX diagnosis results of nine home appliance 
products were collected from ten users and presented to 
experts as examples. The overall average SUS score was 
over 80 points on the both groups (See, table 5).  
VI.
DISCUSSION
Several survey participants reported that it is hard to 
perform objective evaluations on specific product design 
because of the lack of the expertise. As the psychophysical 
scale methods are used to quantify the users’ subjective 
judgement to measurable index, when users do not have 
enough experience it can be hard to quantify the subjective 
judgement on the product [14]-[16]. 
There was a concern that reported by SME designers 
about the bias caused by participant variability. Reliability of 
the rating score may differ because the relative indicators 
may change depending on the user's evaluation criteria. 
Some researcher pointed out the possible bias that based on 
the inter- and intra- subject variabilities [17]-[20]. The 
number of participants must be compensated at least ten and 
more participants are required to overcome the inter- and 
intra-subject variability when using the magnitude estimation 
technique [20]. 
As the home appliance industry is currently following the 
trend of the IoT, the proposed diagnosis system needs to be 
enhanced to compatible with the IoT home appliance 
products. The deduced UX design principles and design 
elements are developed based on the popular and 
representative products on the market, not based on state-of-
art IoT products. It means they are currently not sufficiently 
comprehensive to cover the various IoT based functions and 
IoT related functional modules that consisting IoT home 
appliance products. The future research is currently planning 
to expand provided system to support IoT home appliance 
products. 
The purpose of this research is to develop a UX diagnosis 
system for designers of the SME home appliance 
manufacturers based on the requirements and needs that 
reported by the designers. This study covers the UX 
diagnosis of basic home appliance types, and the extended 
research on the UX evaluation of the IoT features of home 
appliance will be followed. 
VII.
CONCLUSION
The developed system is designed based on the demands 
of the designers of the SME home appliance manufacturers. 
The developed system provides the systematic UX diagnosis 
system that is compatible and flexible to various home 
appliance types. The inspection and diagnosis result of the 
proposed system could be helpful for SME manufacturers to 
find design flaws of their product and hints for further design 
improvement. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Technology Innovation 
Industrial Program funded by the Ministry of Trade, industry 
& Energy (MI, Korea) [10054722, User experience 
evaluation system for consumer electronic products to 
enhance competitiveness of small and medium enterprises] 
REFERENCES
[1]
International Standardization Organization (ISO), “ISO 9241-210: 
2010, Ergonomics of human system interaction-Part 210: Human-
centred design for interactive systems,” International Standardization 
Organization (ISO), Switzerland, 2009.  
[2]
A. P. Vermeeren et al., "User experience evaluation methods: current 
state and development needs," Proceedings of the 6th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Extending Boundaries. 
ACM, 2010, pp. 521-530. 
[3]
J. Park, S. H. Han, H. K. Kim, Y. Cho, and W. Park, “Developing 
elements of user experience for mobile phones and services: survey, 
interview, and observation approaches,” Human Factors and 
Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries, vol. 23(4), pp. 
279-293, 2013. 
[4]
International Standardization Organization (ISO), “ISO 9241-
11:1998,” 
International 
Standardization 
Organization 
(ISO), 
Switzerland, 2012. 
[5]
D. Hix,  and H. R. Hartson, Developing user interfaces: ensuring 
usability through product & process. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1993. 
[6]
M. Hassenzahl, and N. Tractinsky, “User experience-a research 
agenda,” Behaviour & information technology, vol. 25(2), pp. 91-97, 
2006. 
[7]
F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user 
acceptance of information technology”. MIS quarterly, vol. 13(3), pp. 
319-340, 1989. 
[8]
M. Igbaria, S. J. Schiffman, and T. J. Wieckowski, “The respective 
roles of perceived usefulness and perceived fun in the acceptance of 
microcomputer technology,” Behaviour & Information Technology, 
vol. 13(6), pp. 349-361, 1994. 
[9]
V. Venkatesh, “Determinants of perceived ease of use: Integrating 
control, intrinsic motivation, and emotion into the technology 
acceptance model,” Information systems research, vol. 11(4), pp. 
342-365, 2000. 
[10] H. Van der Heijden, “Factors influencing the usage of websites: the 
case of a generic portal in The Netherlands,” Information & 
management, vol. 40(6), pp. 541-549, 2003. 
[11] S. J. Hong, and K. Y. Tam, “Understanding the adoption of 
multipurpose information appliances: The case of mobile data 
services,” Information systems research, vol. 17(2), pp. 162-179, 
2006. 
[12] A. Marcus, “Cross-cultural user-experience design”. In International 
Conference on Theory and Application of Diagrams, 2006, pp. 16-24. 
[13] J. Brooke, “SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability 
evaluation in industry, vol. 189(194), pp. 4-7, 1996. 
[14] D. Meister, Behavioral analysis and measurement methods. Wiley-
Interscience, 1985. 
[15] G. A. Gescheider, Psychophysics: the fundamentals. Psychology 
Press, 1997. 
[16] J. S. Dumas, and B. A. Loring, Moderating usability tests: Principles 
and practices for interacting. Morgan Kaufmann, 2008. 
[17] G. A. Gescheider, “Psychophysical scaling,” Annual review of 
psychology, vol. 39(1), pp. 169-200, 1988. 
[18] R. P. Hellman, “Stability of individual loudness functions obtained by 
magnitude estimation and production,” Attention, Perception, & 
Psychophysics, vol. 29(1), pp. 63-70, 1981. 
[19] A. W. Logue, “Individual differences in magnitude estimation of 
loudness,” Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, vol. 19(3), pp. 
279-280, 1976. 
[20] S. H. Han, M. Song, and J. Kwahk, “A systematic method for 
analyzing magnitude estimation data,” International Journal of 
Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 23(5), pp. 513-524, 1999. 
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

