 A Fuzzy Logic Approach for Dynamic User Interests Profiling 
 
Abd El Heq Silem, Hajer Taktak, and Faouzi Moussa 
Faculty of Sciences of Tunis, LIPAH LR11ES14 
University of Tunis El Manar, El manar1 
Tunis, Tunisia  
Email: {hakou.silem, taktakhajer, faouzimoussa}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— The user profile is the virtual representation of the 
user that holds a variety of user information such as personal 
data, interests, preferences, and environment. In literature, 
there are two different techniques for profiling user interests. 
The first one is based on the retrieval of text from the user 
browsing history; this technique has a high probability to 
generate a false interest from uninteresting websites. The second 
technique is based on user behavior (factors like scrolling speed 
or time spent) and navigation history. The proposed approach 
using the second technique does not use enough factors and 
calculates the weight of each factor via predefined ranges, which 
is not accurate for all users. This technique generates incorrect 
factor weight and false user interests. In this paper, we propose 
an approach that employs Fuzzy Logic with several factors 
(scrolling speed, time spent, and the number of visits) to 
automatically build and update the user profile from the user's 
browsing history. The target websites for this approach are 
websites that contain text content rather than visual content. 
This approach adapts the range of each factor according to the 
user habits using Fuzzy Logic, which improves accuracy and 
avoids a predefined factor range. Finally, we use an ontology-
based model to store the user profile. 
Keywords-Context-Awareness; Fuzzy Logic; Fuzzy Logic 
System; User Profiling; User Behavior. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Personalization systems are very important in computer 
science due to their ability to provide relevant content to the 
user and due to the growth of accessible information. The 
personalization system must act according to user 
preferences and interests (in other words, to provide content 
relevant to the user). To solve this problem, it is necessary to 
collect and store user personal information, preferences, and 
interests. This is called user profiling. 
The user profiling process has two significant challenges. 
The first challenge is the creation of the user profile, called 
the cold start (the system has no information about the user 
to be used in the personalization). The second challenge is to 
keep the existing information in the profile up to date 
according to the user changing preferences. In literature, 
there are three main approaches [1][2] about user profile 
information collection: 
• 
Explicit approach (static profiling): This approach 
collects data directly from the user using forms or 
surveys, which generate a very accurate profile at the 
beginning. This accuracy deteriorates over time, 
especially when the user does not fill in the new surveys. 
• 
Implicit approach (dynamic profiling): this approach 
infers information about the user without the user's 
intervention, based on the browsing history and 
behavior. The problem in this approach is the cold start 
and the accuracy of inferred information about the user. 
• 
Hybrid approach: combines the previous approaches to 
override their weaknesses and increase their benefits. It 
creates the profile of users using the explicit approach. 
Then, it maintains the profile updated using the implicit 
one. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, 
we discuss some of the related works. Section 3 presents the 
Fuzzy Logic system. In Section 4, we discuss the user profile 
model, and Section 5 concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In literature, there are three main user profiling methods: 
the content-based, the collaborative, and the hybrid method 
[2]. The content-based methods create the user profile 
according to the user’s behavior (detect interest from the 
behavior). Then, they select content with a strong correlation 
to the created profile. The collaborative methods are based on 
a similar rating of users. These methods create a profile for a 
group of users who have the same rating or similar taste and 
make a recommendation based on the group rating. The 
hybrid techniques combine the two previous methods to 
improve the strengths and overcome the weaknesses of each 
method. 
Tchantchou et al. [3] propose a multi-agent architecture 
for user interest profiling and an improved algorithm for 
mapping the Conceptual Clustering Concept (ICCC). The 
user profile contains both explicit and implicit interests. 
Implicit interests are derived from the user browsing history 
using the ICCC algorithm. The architecture extracts the text 
from the visited webpages, removes stop words, and reduces 
each word to its stem. Then, it assigns weights to those stems 
according to the stem position and occurrence and creates the 
term vector of each website. After that, the architecture will 
map each website to a concept based on the ICCC algorithm 
and an ontology that contains a set of concepts and websites. 
Finally, it updates the profile of users with the new weights. 
This architecture does not use user behavior to detect user 
interest. It only uses the text extracted from visited webpages, 
317
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

which does not differentiate between interesting and 
uninteresting websites and it will generate false interests (if 
the user visits a set of random uninteresting websites in a 
session). 
Moawad et al. [4] propose a multi-agent architecture for 
customization of Web search according to the user profile. 
The profile is built from the user’s explicit information and 
interests (collected explicitly). The architecture implicitly 
updates the profile by capturing the interaction and the 
browsing history of the user. First, it retrieves the stems from 
webpages like the precedent work [3] (the authors add user 
action, such as copying and bookmark, to calculate the 
weight). Using the Wordnet ontology [5] (Wordnet ontology 
is a lexical database of English), the architecture recovers the 
first common topic between all the stems (of the same 
webpage) and creates a triplet (stem, topic, and weight of 
stem). Finally, the topic weight is calculated based on the 
weight of all its stems and the number of stems. In this work, 
the authors rely only on two actions to determinate the 
interesting webpages. Bookmarking or copying text from a 
webpage does not always mean that the user is interested in 
this type of content and vice versa (in many cases, users do 
not bookmark or copy text from interesting webpages). 
Therefore, the results of this technique are misleading and far 
from being reliable. 
Singh et al. [6] propose a multi-agent architecture for the 
dynamic construction of the user profile according to user’s 
browsing history, the scrolling speed, time spent, and user 
behavior at the desktop (such as applications and files 
opened). The architecture is a client/server architecture where 
the client-side is responsible for collecting user information 
(desktop and browsing behavior). It analyses that information 
to create the user profile (estimation of user interests). The 
server-side maintains and updates the profiles of all users 
provided by the client-side. Then, it groups these users 
according to their interests and provides content based on 
these groups. In this work, the authors detect the user's 
interest in a webpage using two factors: the scrolling speed 
and the time spent. The weight of each factor value is 
calculated based on a predefined range (for example, when 
the scrolling speed is between x and y, the weight will be z). 
This transformation of the value into weight is not always 
accurate and excludes the diversity in user habits. 
Makvana et al. [6] and Wu et al. [7] extract user interest 
from the user’s query. The authors in [7] proposed an 
approach to solve the polysemy problem through query 
expansion. The approach collects keywords from the query, 
title, URL, content (snippets), and time spent of clicked 
websites (websites resulting from the query). Then, it 
computes the weight of each keyword using co-occurrence. 
Finally, the approach creates the user profile with the pairs 
(keyword, weight). The approach proposed by Hawalah et al. 
[9] represents the user interest in a model with a keyword and 
weight (Ki, Wi) pair vector. Each time the user enters a query, 
the approach extracts keywords and searches them in the 
profile. In the absence of a keyword, the approach adds it with 
a predefined weight (Wi); otherwise, the approach adds a unit 
score to Wi. The weights of all keywords decrease over time 
(current time (t) and last update time (t0)) by the following 
formula : 
Wi_new = Wi_old ×  where  = 𝑒log2
𝑡−𝑡0
30  
( 1 ) 
The two previous approaches [6][7] suffer from the same 
problems as the first approach [3], namely, they cannot 
distinguish between interesting and uninteresting keywords. 
The architecture described in [9] creates the user profile 
through three phases. In the first phase, the architecture 
collects information such as visited websites, their content, 
time of the visit, and the duration. After the collection is done, 
the architecture fetches text from the webpages, removes all 
noise data from it (like HTML tags), tokenizes it, and 
removes stop words. Finally, each term is transformed into 
its stem. The resulting text is called a document. In the second 
phase, the architecture computes the TF*IDF weight (TF is 
the Term Frequency in a document, and IDF is the Inverse 
Document Frequency, which represents the number of 
documents containing the term divided by the total number 
of documents) of each term and creates a vector space that 
contains terms with weights. In the last phase, using cosine 
similarity, the architecture maps each visited website to the 
appropriate concept in the reference ontology. TABLE I 
summarizes the existing approaches. 
 The behavior of each user may differ from the others. 
Each user has their own reading speed (e.g., scrolling speed 
and the time spent). Therefore, the use of static intervals as in 
[5][8] is not practical since it does not take into account the 
diversity of users' behaviors. For instance, older users may 
spend more time than younger ones. This does not necessarily 
mean that they are more interested in this type of content, as 
it may occur due to reading difficulties. On the other hand, 
the existing solutions do not use factors [3][6][7] or enough 
factors [4][10] to determine the degree of user interest in a 
specific topic, which, in the meantime, affects the whole 
determination process and generates a false user interest. 
To overcome this, we propose an approach that employs 
Fuzzy Logic. Instead of using a predefined range for all the 
users, each user's ranges will be calculated based on their 
browsing habits. We also introduce several factors to improve 
the detection process. Thus, this translates into high accuracy 
and adaptability. In this paper, we will consider the following 
aspects: 
• We collect the browsing history with several parameters 
(factors) about each visited website, such as the time 
spent, the number of visits, and the scrolling speed. 
• We apply the Fuzzy Logic in order to overcome the 
misinterpretation of factors weights and to provide better 
adaptability. 
318
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
THE FUZZY INFERENCE SYSTEM 
In this phase, we attempt to build a Fuzzy Logic system 
to predict the user interest degree and to solve the problem of 
misinterpretation of factors weights. 
Fuzzy Logic was proposed first by Lotfi Zadeh in 1994 
[10]. Unlike the binary logic, it does not use exact values to 
represent a situation (0 or 1, like or dislike, true or false). This 
type of logic represents the situation with a continuous value 
from 0 to 1, which gives the computer the ability to represent 
the unclear idea of humans, e.g., in the describing of a room 
brightness, instead of using a dark or a bright room (0 or 1), 
we can represent the degree of light and say little bright (0.6), 
little dark (0.4), very dark (0), very bright (1).  
The Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) transforms multiple 
independent inputs into one output using Fuzzy Logic, 
memberships function, and rules. FIS has four components, 
the fuzzifier, the inference engine, the rule base, and the 
defuzzifier, as shown in Figure 1 [11]–[17]. 
A. The Fuzzification 
The fuzzification is the first phase in a Fuzzy Logic 
system that decomposes the crisp values into fuzzy sets. The 
fuzzification process has a few parameters to define. First, we 
define one or more imprecise fuzzy sets that divide the crisp  
values. Then, we represent the fuzzy sets using a membership 
function defined as follows: 
(µ𝐴: 𝑋 → {0,1}| 𝑋 𝜖 [𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑥]) 
( 2 ) 
There are many membership functions, such as 
Triangular, Trapezoidal, Gaussian, and more. These 
functions assign the input value to one or more fuzzy sets 
with some degree of membership (Figure 2), e.g. if x = 40, 
the degree of membership of x is 0.3 in low and 0.3 in 
medium. 
The above-mentioned misinterpretation of factor weight 
is generated from the predefined ranges. To resolve this 
problem using Fuzzy Logic, we calculate the range 
dynamically based on user browsing habits. The browsing 
values (e.g., scrolling speed) will be sorted by ascending 
order. Then, these values will be divided into three fuzzy sets 
that will be represented by the linguistic terms “low,” 
“medium,” and “high.” These sets will generate three 
intervals, where each of them will range from the minimum 
value of the set to the minimum value of the next one.  
When users finish their browsing session, we extract the 
collected values (of those factors). Each value will be 
classified according to the previously generated intervals in 
order to determine the user interest degree in this type of 
content. These new values will be added to the previous ones 
and used to update the intervals, as shown in Figure 3. This 
allows the system to adapt to the user behavior and guarantee 
a high level of accuracy as compared to the existing solutions. 
Authors 
Method 
Profile constructed 
based on 
Factors 
Information collection 
approach 
Profilin method 
Tchantchou 
and Ezin [3] 
Multi-agent 
architecture 
Browsing history 
N.A 
Hybrid 
Content-based 
Moawad et 
al. [4] 
Multi-agent 
architecture 
Browsing history 
User  Behavior 
User 
Actions 
Hybrid 
Content-based 
Singh and 
Sharma [6] 
Client/server 
Multi-agent 
architecture 
Browsing history 
User  Behavior 
Scrolling 
speed 
Time spent 
Implicit 
Content-based 
Makvana et 
al. [7] 
Approach 
User queries 
User  Behavior 
Time spent 
Implicit 
Content-based 
Wu et al. [7] 
Approach 
User queries 
N.A 
Implicit 
Collaborative-based 
Hawalah 
and Fasli [9] 
Approach 
Browsing history 
User Behavior 
Time spent 
Implicit 
Content-based 
Defuzzifier 
Inference engine 
Fuzzifier 
Rule base 
 
Crisp input 
Crisp output 
Fuzzy input 
Fuzzy output 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF PROPOSED RESEARCHES. 
 
Figure 1. Fuzzy Logic system. 
Figure 2. Triangular membership function example (Time spent in a Web 
site). 
319
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This adaptation transforms the captured value into a linguistic 
term to represent the right weight of this value (the linguistic 
term is more accurate than the value itself), which ensures the 
right detection of the user interesting topics. For example, let 
us consider two different users. Table A in Figure 4 shows 
the ranges of each user generated from the browsing habits. 
Now, let us assume that the two users will have the same 
browsing values for each factor (Table B in Figure 4). By 
using the fuzzification process on each factor value, we 
obtain different weights for each user according to the user’s 
habits (Table C in Figure 4). 
B. The Inference Engine 
The Inference Engine is the core of the Fuzzy Logic 
system; this component is responsible for the calculation of 
one fuzzy output from a set of fuzzy inputs. The fuzzy output 
is calculated using a set of “IF…. THEN” rules built as 
follows: 
IF input1 is A AND input2 is B AND input3 is C THEN 
output is D 
The antecedent part of the rules contains the fuzzy inputs 
(input1 is A) obtained from the fuzzification process. A, B, 
and C represent one of the fuzzy sets of the first, second, and 
third variables, respectively (in our case, the variables are the 
factors such as scrolling speed, time spent, and the number of 
visits). 
The consequence part of the rules contains the fuzzy 
output (output is D), which belongs to one of the following 
three fuzzy sets: uninteresting (range from 0 to 0.3), likely 
interesting (from 0.3 to 0.7), and interesting websites (from 
0.7 to 1). The rules of the Fuzzy Inference Engine are 
presented in TABLE II (“I” represents Interesting, “LI” 
represents 
Likely 
interesting, 
and 
“UI” 
represents 
Uninteresting). 
The Fuzzy Inference Engine maps the fuzzy inputs to the 
fuzzy output through two phases: first, it calculates the 
activation degree of each rule based on the fuzzified inputs. 
If the antecedent of the rule has more than one input, the 
engine applies the Fuzzy Logic operator (replace the and/or 
operator with the min/max between the two inputs) and 
composes those inputs. In the second phase, the engine 
aggregates the output of all rules into one fuzzy output. The 
aggregation is the union of all rule’s outputs, which will be 
used in the next phase (the defuzzification). 
C. The Defuzzification 
The defuzzification is the inverse process of the 
fuzzification, which transforms the fuzzy output of the Fuzzy 
Inference Engine into a crisp value in order to make this result 
available to other applications. 
The defuzzification is performed based on a decision-
making algorithm that selects the best crisp value according 
to the fuzzy output. The two most used methods are the 
Center Of Gravity (COG), which return the center of the 
fuzzy output area and the Mean Of Maxima (MOM), which 
returns the crisp value or the mean of crisp values with the 
highest degree. In this paper, we used the COG function in 
the defuzzification process because the values generated by 
this function tend to change smoothly when there are small 
changes in the values of factors (the second produces two 
values that are far apart with slight changes in factors values). 
IV. 
USER PROFILE MODEL 
The user profile is an essential component in this 
approach, which is why we must use a well-defined model to 
store it. This model describes the structure and the semantic 
relation between all information that exists in the profile.  
There are several techniques to represent the user profile; 
we will discuss the more appropriate methods in our opinion 
based on the reviews of  [17]–[20]. First, the Graphical 
models use modeling languages like Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) and Object-Role Modeling (ORM) to build 
the model. Then, it implements it using Structured Query 
Language 
(SQL), 
Non-Structured 
Query 
Language 
(NoSQL), or eXtensible Markup Language (XML) language. 
These models have a clear structure that makes it easy to 
retrieve information using queries in small data (queries 
become very complicated when the model contains a massive 
amount of data). Besides, these models do not support 
reasoning or context inference. 
The Object-Oriented Models have the same principle as 
the Object-Oriented programming; they model the context 
and its relations with the others in a way similar to those (e.g., 
relations) between classes. The most important advantage of 
these models is the encapsulation (masks the context 
processing detail), and the reusability. However, it increases 
the number of needed resources and does not support 
reasoning. 
Figure 3. The adaptation process of intervals to user behavior. 
 
320
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The Logic-Based Models are based on binary logic. They 
use the facts, expressions, and rules to model the context 
(adds information as facts and removes/ modify it by rules). 
These models support reasoning and context inference. They 
have a very high degree of expressiveness and formality, and 
there are graphic tools for the development of this type of 
models. These models are heavily coupled with the 
application domain, which decreases their reusability. 
The last one is the Ontology-Based models. These models 
represent the context with description logic such as Resource 
Description Framework (RDF), RDF Schema (RDFS), and 
Web Ontology Language (OWL). Those languages offer a 
high degree of expressiveness in the modeling of context and 
the modeling of relations between contexts. The ontology 
supports reasoning and inference (using inference engine like 
pellet), as well as separates the knowledge from the 
application, which increases the reuse and the share of 
knowledge between applications. 
To model the user profile, we choose the ontology-based 
model for several reasons, such as the high expressiveness, 
many tools for implementation, the capability of reuse and 
share knowledge. Our ontology, represented in Figure 6, has 
two main classes:  
• 
User Interests: contain user interest websites. This class 
has five attributes: URL of the website, scrolling speed, 
time spent, number of visits, interest degree calculated 
by our approach. 
• 
Topic: represents the topic of the website. This class has 
only one attribute “Label” that represents the name of the 
topic (e.g., machine learning, sport). 
The user profile model (classes, attributes, and the relation 
between classes) is created manually using Protégé [22] (a 
visual application to create an ontology) and maintained up 
to date automatically using the algorithm in Figure 5. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The user profile contains information about the user that 
helps the customization systems to provide data or service to 
the user’s needs. In this paper, we propose an approach to 
automatically construct and update the user profile using a 
Fuzzy Logic system. This system solves the problem of factor 
weight misinterpretation and calculates the degree of interest 
of the user in specific topics. This paper contains the theory 
part of the system. This is a work in progress; the Fuzzy Logic 
system based on this approach is under development. As 
future works, we will develop the system, and perform the 
initial test with two users (we already have the data collected 
from those users) to prove the efficiency of this approach. 
Finally, we will discuss the possibility of increasing the 
number of factors. 
Figure 5. Algorithm to update the user profile. 
Inputs:  New_Site, Interest_degree; 
SS: Scrolling speed, TS: Time spent, NV: Number of visits 
Begin: 
Profile = Get_User_Profile (); 
IF (Profile.Site_Exist (New_Site)) { 
Old_Site = Profile.Get_Site (New_Site.URL); 
Profile.Update (Interest_degree); 
Profile.Update (New_Site.SS, Old_Site.SS); 
Profile.Update(Average (New_Site.TS, Old_Site.TS)); 
Profile.Update(Average (Old_Site.NV++)); 
IF (Profile.Missing_Topics (New_Site.Topics)) {  
Profile.Update_Attribute (New_Site .Topics); 
} 
} Else {Profile.Add (New_Site, Interest_degree);} 
End. 
Figure 4. Fuzzification process. 
321
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE II. FUZZY INFERENCE ENGINE RULES. 
Rule 
IF 
Then 
Scrolling 
speed 
Time 
spent 
Number 
of visits 
Degree of 
interest 
1.  
High 
High 
High 
I 
2.  
High 
High 
Medium 
I 
3.  
High 
High 
Low 
I 
4.  
High 
Medium 
High 
I 
5.  
High 
Medium 
Medium 
LI 
6.  
High 
Medium 
Low 
LI 
7.  
High 
Low 
High 
I 
8.  
High 
Low 
Medium 
LI 
9.  
High 
Low 
Low 
UI 
10.  Medium 
High 
High 
I 
11.  Medium 
High 
Medium 
I 
12.  Medium 
High 
Low 
LI 
13.  Medium 
Medium 
High 
I 
14.  Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
LI 
15.  Medium 
Medium 
Low 
LI 
16.  Medium 
Low 
High 
LI 
17.  Medium 
Low 
Medium 
LI 
18.  Medium 
Low 
Low 
UI 
19.  
Low 
High 
High 
I 
20.  
Low 
High 
Medium 
LI 
21.  
Low 
High 
Low 
UI 
22.  
Low 
Medium 
High 
LI 
23.  
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
UI 
24.  
Low 
Medium 
Low 
UI 
25.  
Low 
Low 
High 
UI 
26.  
Low 
Low 
Medium 
UI 
27.  
Low 
Low 
Low 
UI 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Kanoje, S. Girase, and D. Mukhopadhyay, “User Profiling 
Trends, Techniques and Applications,” vol. 1, no. 1, p. 6, 2015. 
[2] A. Cufoglu, “User Profiling - A Short Review,” Int. J. Comput. 
Appl., vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 1–9, Dec. 2014, doi: 10.5120/18888-
0179. 
[3] Y.-U. S. Tchantchou and E. C. Ezin, “An Improving Mapping 
Process Based on a Clustering Algorithm for Modeling Hybrid 
and Dynamic Ontological User Profile,” in 2017 13th 
International Conference on Signal-Image Technology & 
Internet-Based Systems (SITIS), Jaipur, India, 2017, pp. 1–8, 
doi: 10.1109/SITIS.2017.12. 
[4] I. F. Moawad, H. Talha, E. Hosny, and M. Hashim, “Agent-
based web search personalization approach using dynamic user 
profile,” Egypt. Inform. J., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 191–198, Nov. 
2012, doi: 10.1016/j.eij.2012.09.002. 
[5] “WordNet | A Lexical Database for English.” [Online]. 
Available: https://wordnet.princeton.edu/. [Accessed: 24-Feb-
2020]. 
[6] A. Singh and A. Sharma, “A Multi-agent Framework for 
Context-Aware 
Dynamic 
User 
Profiling 
for 
Web 
Personalization,” in Software Engineering, Springer, 2019, pp. 
1–16. 
[7] K. Makvana, P. Shah, and P. Shah, “A novel approach to 
personalize web search through user profiling and query 
reformulation,” in 2014 International Conference on Data 
Mining and Intelligent Computing (ICDMIC), Delhi, India, 
2014, pp. 1–10, doi: 10.1109/ICDMIC.2014.6954221. 
[8] X. Wu, Y. Fu, S. Tian, Q. Zheng, and F. Tian, “A hybrid 
approach to personalized web search,” in Proceedings of the 
2012 IEEE 16th International Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), 2012, pp. 
214–220. 
[9] A. Hawalah and M. Fasli, “Dynamic user profiles for web 
personalisation,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 2547–
2569, Apr. 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2014.10.032. 
[10] L. A. Zadeh, “Soft computing and fuzzy logic,” in Fuzzy Sets, 
Fuzzy Logic, and Fuzzy Systems: Selected Papers by Lotfi a 
Zadeh, World Scientific, 1996, pp. 796–804. 
[11] Y. Bai and D. Wang, “Fundamentals of Fuzzy Logic Control 
— Fuzzy Sets, Fuzzy Rules and Defuzzifications,” in 
Advanced 
Fuzzy 
Logic 
Technologies 
in 
Industrial 
Applications, Y. Bai, H. Zhuang, and D. Wang, Eds. London: 
Springer London, 2006, pp. 17–36. 
[12] H. R. Berenji, “Fuzzy logic controllers,” in An introduction to 
fuzzy logic applications in intelligent systems, Springer, 1992, 
pp. 69–96. 
[13] D. Veit, “Fuzzy logic and its application to textile 
technology,” in Simulation in Textile Technology, Elsevier, 
2012, pp. 112–141. 
[14] R. S. Jaiswal and M. V. Sarode, “An Overview on Fuzzy 
Logic & Fuzzy Elements,” Int. Res. J. Comput. Sci., vol. 3, 
no. 2, p. 6, 2015. 
[15] A. K. Nandi, “GA-Fuzzy Approaches: Application to 
Modeling of Manufacturing Process,” in Statistical and 
Computational Techniques in Manufacturing, J. P. Davim, 
Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 
145–185. 
[16] S. N. Mandal, J. P. Choudhury, and S. R. B. Chaudhuri, “In 
Search of Suitable Fuzzy Membership Function in Prediction 
of Time Series Data,” vol. 9, no. 3, p. 10, 2012. 
[17] P. Cingolani and J. Alcalá-Fdez, “jFuzzyLogic: a Java Library 
to Design Fuzzy Logic Controllers According to the Standard 
for Fuzzy Control Programming,” Int. J. Comput. Intell. Syst., 
Figure 6. User profile model. 
322
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

vol. 
6, 
no. 
sup1, 
pp. 
61–75, 
Jun. 
2013, 
doi: 
10.1080/18756891.2013.818190. 
[18] T. Strang and C. Linnhoff-Popien, “A context modeling 
survey,” in Workshop Proceedings, 2004. 
[19] C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, 
“Context Aware Computing for The Internet of Things: A 
Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 414–
454, 2014, doi: 10.1109/SURV.2013.042313.00197. 
[20] X. Li, M. Eckert, J.-F. Martinez, and G. Rubio, “Context 
Aware Middleware Architectures: Survey and Challenges,” 
Sensors, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 20570–20607, Aug. 2015, doi: 
10.3390/s150820570. 
[21] C. Bettini et al., “A survey of context modelling and reasoning 
techniques,” Pervasive Mob. Comput., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 161–
180, Apr. 2010, doi: 10.1016/j.pmcj.2009.06.002. 
[22] “protégé.” [Online]. Available: https://protege.stanford.edu/. 
[Accessed: 12-Mar-2020]. 
 
323
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

