Being a Reflexive Insider: The Case of Designing Maritime Technology 
 
Yushan Pan 
Faculty of Engineering, Ocean Operations Department 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Ålesund, Norway 
Email: yushan.pan@ntnu.no 
 
 
Abstract—This article reports a long-term, multiple-site 
ethnographic study in which the author cooperated with a 
heterogeneous group in designing remote-control systems for 
maritime operations since 2015. The paper reports how the 
participants were assembled in a network that represented 
their interests in balancing the relationship between a design 
and its use. The author asserts that if Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW) research aims to shed light on 
other disciplines, CSCW researchers should be reflexive 
insiders that first position themselves in such disciplines. 
Different from the first generation of CSCW researchers, 
members of the new generation are trained in multiple 
disciplines, and they have the ability to use their expertise in 
reducing the gap between CSCW research and engineering 
practices in various fields. Thus, through reflexive practice, 
CSCW researchers could connect communities of practice, 
thus 
narrowing 
the 
distance 
between 
humanity 
and 
engineering. The paper moves the historical debate on the 
relationship between ethnography and design toward a new 
focus on reflective insiders as a method used to support CSCW 
research outside the CSCW community. 
Keywords- CSCW; engineering design; reflectivity; practice–
research gap. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The literature shows that current maritime technology 
does not purely support cooperative work among operators 
on board [1]. The current design of operator–vessel 
interaction follows the principles of engineering design, 
including cognitive ergonomics and human factors [2]. The 
fundamental principle is to focus on the design applicability, 
the scope of the technical process, and the system structures 
to support the efficacy of machine use [3]. Operators are 
subjects in experimental work conducted to verify that a 
design is successful. However, the social aspects of human–
vessel interaction have been largely dismissed. Moreover, 
operators are not encouraged to articulate their requirements, 
and the system design team is composed of a variety of 
specialists acting in the capacity of consultants to the project.  
If the above are the facts, then how could CSCW 
researchers contribute to the design of maritime technology 
as a completely foreigner who shares few common interests 
with engineering designers? Shifting the focus from 
machines to humans challenges, the design of cooperative 
systems to support maritime operations, which is indeed how 
to position a CSCW researcher in the maritime field. 
However, very few previous studies have addressed how 
researchers could successfully conduct CSCW research 
outside the CSCW community. For example, scholars have 
tried to extend collaborative computing in a design approach 
to shaping the design processes to help users articulate their 
requirements with other specialists in systems design in both 
the aviation and maritime domains [4]–[6]. Thus, it was 
worthwhile discussing how CSCW could be extended 
beyond the classic discussion about the relationship between 
ethnography and design [7] to the collaborative effort of 
computer scientists and social scientists [8].  
This movement in CSCW research has been debated for 
several years [9]. Moreover, current CSCW design has 
moved beyond single disciplines, such as sociology and 
computer science to establish itself and well in a new field. 
However, in the key literature on the intervention of design 
in CSCW [9], little attention has been paid to intervention in 
CSCW research [9]. Even when intervention is addressed, it 
is not clear that how, when and what could be intervened. 
Although a few studies address how CSCW research could 
help in design technologies, mainly in the healthcare field, 
the difference is that the work practices of health workers 
require CSCW researchers to communicate with developers 
who, in most cases, share similar a background, such as 
computer science, software engineering, and so on.  
However, the story is changed if CSCW researchers 
work with people who have different background but focus 
on control engineering and automation. The priority is given 
to expertise outside CSCW, and interactive experiences of 
computation and cooperative work are less vital. Operators 
are affected by usefulness and usability issues in the given 
technology. Moreover, different priorities in the design 
process challenge CSCW researchers, who must design 
systems in cooperation with foreigners outside the CSCW 
world. In protecting his or her own academic interest CSCW 
researchers have to find ways to make sense of CSCW 
insights beyond their own discipline [1]. As a member of 
new generation of CSCW researchers, the author has 
multidisciplinary education, and he is interdisciplinary by 
training. This generation of CSCW researchers can reveal the 
design site and the object of study, and they play roles in 
supporting technology design. Thus, the research question of 
the present work can be formulated as: how to shorten the 
distance between CSCW research and its practice in 
engineering design in terms of CSCW researchers’ roles in 
engineering project?  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This article is structured as follows: first, in Section II, 
the case is presented – designing remote control systems as a 
fundamental background of the article. In Section III, 
reflexivity as theoretical basis and methods used are 
presented. In Section IV, the article describes how 
participants were recruited in designing remote control with 
respect to CSCW insights. In Section V, the author reflects 
on his own experience in conducting CSCW research in the 
maritime domain, which is relevant for maritime studies. In 
doing so, the author discusses contribution to CSCW 
research, which moves the historical debate on the 
relationship between ethnography and design toward a new 
focus on reflexive insiders as a method used to support 
CSCW research. The paper concludes in Section VI.  
II. 
THE CASE: DESIGNING REMOTE-CONTROL SYSTEMS  
Traditionally, maritime technology is designed in the 
fields of mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, 
electronic engineering, and even computer engineering. In 
these fields, the focus is on control systems, machinery, and 
the automation of maritime vehicles of any kind. The design 
process is purposeful, systemic, and iterative. Engineering 
designers conduct their work in various constraint conditions 
to find possible solutions for problems that are usually 
limited to the given scenarios. Engineering designers 
communicate with a small group of users, for whom the 
design follows a positivist paradigm with the intention to test 
a system. Design requirements are usually based on three 
principles: corporate, technology, and social [10]. The 
primary principle is that the corporation needs to generate 
design 
requirements 
in 
line 
with 
the 
company’s 
organisational structures, strategic vision, and available 
resources, based mainly on the knowledge and expertise of 
the engineering designers. This principle does not change 
until social aspects challenge the company’s frame through 
markets. The second principle, which Gershenson and 
Stauffer [11] termed technology, is the knowledge of 
engineering principles, material properties, and physical laws 
[3]. The user’s requirements are considered last. The 
requirements of the third principle are weighted to optimise 
the trade-off with the requirements of the first two principles 
and to align with the needs of the users, such as the “must-be 
need” and the “attractive need”.  
Thus, in line with the principles, engineering designers 
consider artefacts important for remote-control systems. In 
addition, engineering designers narrow design specifications 
to comply with reliability, ergonomics (i.e., human factors), 
manufacturability, control ability which similar to software 
engineers, who use models to automatically synthesise an 
executable code [12]. The philosophy underlying all 
solutions is technology-centred design. That is, using a 
certain algorithm to represent situational awareness [26] 
[29], systems are expected to represent information as 
accurately as possible in human decision-making [25][26]. 
The common sense that underpins these previous studies is 
the assumption that the systems will be well-designed to 
support human tasks, such as drawing patterns, creating 
models, and making sense of a machine’s actions. Through a 
well-structured technology-centred experiment, as in most 
engineering design work, engineering designers expect that 
human factor specialists [21][22] could investigate whether 
or not interfaces could be built to satisfy the operators. If so, 
what kinds of “human error” could be investigated? 
Hopefully, the results could be used to reform the systems 
according to a better vision. As a consequence of this 
approach, operators are expected, oddly enough, to be re-
trained in the skills needed in the autonomous future [18]. 
The rest, without protection against the failures, errors, and 
faults caused by technology, which cannot be called human 
errors, is treated as regulation and policy issues [24][25]. 
Politicians, societies and ship owners require clarification of 
potential liabilities introduced by autonomous technology, 
such as collisions [21].  
However, the cost of shipping may not be reduced as 
expected. Instead, it might increase significantly because of 
infinite maintenance and change in remote-control systems, 
which will displease operators. When changes are 
introduced, people quickly learn their characteristics and 
discover how to get the best from them. When autonomous 
technology and remote control are introduced, people react 
the same.  
III. 
THEORETICAL CONCEPT AND METHODS 
A. Reflexivity 
Calas and Smircich [27, p.240] define reflexivity as the 
‘constant 
assessment 
of 
the 
relationship 
between 
“knowledge” and “the ways of doing knowledge”’. Through 
‘reflexivity’ researchers could pay attention to ‘the way 
different kinds of linguistic, social, political, and theoretical 
elements are woven together in the process of knowledge 
development 
during 
which 
empirical 
materials 
is 
constructed, interpreted and written (p.9)’. In doing 
reflexivity study, interpretation is used as a tool to produce 
scientific knowledge 
[23]. 
Doing interpretation, we 
experience reflection ‘we become observers of our own 
practice [24]’. Reflexivity suggests a complexification of 
thinking and experience, or thinking about experience [24]. It 
is a process of exposing or questioning our ways of doing. In 
the discussion of third wave HCI, Bødker [25] calls a crucial 
and conventional understandings of reflexivity. Reflexivity, 
in her means, is unlike positivism. Instead, it is an 
intervention for data gathering and a chew how data 
gathering impacts the quality of the data itself. At the end, 
reflexive practices could find structural patterns in what they 
have observed, and in turn, to extend the theory they used. 
However, reflexivity has had difficulty found a place in HCI 
and in CSCW literature. Due to its subjectivity of the method 
use, it is hard for reflexivity researchers to open their work to 
future scrutiny. However, Geirbo [26] states reflexivity itself 
is important as methodological considerations which can 
guide researchers to entre a community, phenomenon or 
practice that are foreign to the researchers. In the present, it 
is possible for the researcher to share sensemaking between 
the practitioners and the ethnographer in terms of gaining 
performative knowledge of professional knowledge. The 
researcher has the capability to articulate and analyse that 
performative knowledge gained through an insider-role [27]. 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In this effort, it is possible to bridge the practice-research gap 
by enacting researcher-practitioner roles across community 
boundaries, developing and disseminating new knowledge, 
and engaging field professionals outside of CSCW 
community.  
Thus, in line with this specific theoretical concept, a 
CSCW researcher is able to be reflexive on how his/her 
ethnographic account will affect the research process. This 
action could help other CSCW peers gain a better 
understanding of the choice the researcher has made during 
the entire research process including the design, data 
collection, and interpretation phases. By reporting and 
discussing the theoretical struggles of interpretive empirical 
research could also help fulfil the principles of ‘dialogue 
[28]’ in between the fieldwork material with the reflectivity 
thinking and engineering design practice. As the core of 
‘dialogue’ interpretation is relating back to the experience in 
terms that the CSCW peers can understand what the 
researcher has seen, what the researcher has been 
experienced, and how evaluate that work. In turn, they could 
sense the socio-technical gap within CSCW research itself as 
well as the gap between humanity and engineering in 
general.  
B. Methods 
For a long time, the role of CSCW researcher in the 
maritime domain is questioned. The CSCW researcher 
struggled 
to 
answer 
this 
question 
because 
CSCW 
contributions might not remain in its own area, which is 
interpretive ethnography, but might extend to in a foreign 
context where the CSCW researcher would have to change 
his/her tone and voice so those living there could understand 
the researcher. Although the initial question in 2015 of the 
author’s research was “What is going on in designing 
maritime technology?” when he did fieldwork at sea, he 
asked questions about how maritime technology is produced, 
assembled, 
and 
maintained. 
Although 
remote-control 
systems are designed on land, the author sees himself not 
only as part of land-based maritime design teams that he 
observes and interviews, and then writes about. His 
fieldwork began from the first year when he was a doctoral 
student at the University of Oslo, and it continued after his 
doctorate degree. The author has not stayed on one site to 
understand the design of maritime technology. Instead, 
multi-sites  [29] were visited both at sea and on land to 
observe and interview the people who will be users of 
remote-control systems. Importantly, seminars, workshops, 
and conferences were included where shipowners and their 
colleagues, such as engineering designers, and policymakers, 
as well as other relevant participants celebrate their technical 
achievements. Although the research project requires a long-
term engagement in the maritime domain, luckily the 
heterogeneous group has not changed much since 2015. A 
group of professionals, such as operators, engineering 
designers, educators, and ship owners are involved in the 
study. The present work is a long-range project to observe 
and interview them in different places both at sea and on 
land in European countries. An online platform was 
established where engineering designers could share 
information via email and videoconferences, chat, and leave 
comments on documents. Those topics that the author does 
not understand in the hope that someone will explain were 
commented and observed. In addition, the author interacts 
with many of engineering designers through individual 
emails and videoconferences to construct an ethnography of 
their experiences in design work. A few new participants 
joined his study, but others have remained since the 
beginning. Thus, informed consent is not required but only 
verbally introduce the research work to newcomers when the 
author works with them. A few of them withdrawal their 
participation due to starting a new career path. However, 
they keep in touch from time to time in case any questions 
need to be followed up.  
A table illustrates the research activities since 2015 (see 
Table I). All interviews, seminar and workshops were noted 
without audio-recordings due to ethical considerations. At 
sea and land-based simulator room the observation was 
recorded by videos. However, the author did not transcribe 
all videos. Instead, only the ones which are relevant to 
engineering design process were transcribed since the 
difference between cooperative work of seafarers at sea and 
on land is vital. 
TABLE I.  
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES SINCE 2015 
Settings 
Methods 
Interviewa 
Observationb 
Year 
At Sea, on board 
72 
1838 
Autumn 2015-
Spring 2016 
Land-based Simulator 
room 
18 
48 
Autumn 2016 
Conferences on sites 
4 
- 
Autumn 2017 – 
Autumn 2019 
Seminar 
8 
- 
Autumn 2016-
Spring 2018 
Workshops 
7 
63 
Autumn 2016-
Autumn 2019 
Emails 
232 
- 
Autumn 2015 – 
Spring 2020 
Videoconferences 
4 
- 
Spring 2018 – 
Autumn 2020 
a. 
Number of interviews 
b. 
Hours of observation 
 
The data analysis has been ongoingly conducted since 
2015. Thematically indexing words was conducted such as 
cooperative 
work, 
design, 
remote-control, 
systems 
collaboration, team’s cooperation, remote-control and so 
forth. Themes were also identified. However, these themes 
are used to describe not only remote-control system design 
but also other work of the project, which is also focused on 
investigation and design in the maritime domain in general. 
The purpose in data analyses are offering an ethnographic 
account of the practice and associations orchestrated by 
crossing multiple sites both offline and online, particularly in 
the case of a remote-control system. Moreover, the aim is 
directing attention to the researcher’s relf-reflectivity [30] to 
bridge the gulf between what Dourish [31] called the 
sociotechnical gap and Ackerman’s definition of “the divide 
between what we know we must support socially and what 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

we can support technically” [32] without any pre-conditions. 
Simply put, this paper addresses the gap between CSCW 
research and CSCW practice in industrial contexts.  
IV. 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF CSCW RESEARCH IN 
DESIGNING REMOTE-CONTROL SYSTEMS 
In the maritime domain, operators are rarely involved in 
the design process. As previously mentioned, operators are 
used as subjects for testing purposes when a product is 
developed. Educators are also rarely involved because they 
teach operators without considering their concerns about 
technology. Moreover, CSCW researchers are rarely 
involved in a maritime design project because their expertise 
is invisible in the engineering field. Furthermore, shipowners 
are rarely consulted in design projects too for various 
reasons. Thus, in this study, a group of stakeholders was 
assembled to balance their interests in design toward a 
sustainable solution for all through a CSCW perspective.  
A. Unheard opinions  
In 2016, challenges were coming up. The operators 
thought the author (a CSCW researcher, and hereafter the 
researcher will be used) was an engineering designer. They 
thought that the researcher was only concerned about 
examining their work. However, that was untrue since a 
CSCW researcher who was also trained as ethnographer. The 
purpose of CSCW researcher to be on board was not to 
evaluate any work but to observe what is going on. The 
CSCW researcher also wanted to interview operators. Based 
on those findings, the CSCW researcher would work with 
engineering designers to design remote-control systems.  
After above explanation, the operators were worried that 
what the researcher observed and heard would be 
documented as ‘evidences’ to change the vessel design to 
automatic shipping. It seems they thought the researcher was 
a spy who studied them and would try to create a technology 
that would replace human operators. Although the purpose of 
being on board was explained and they had given informed 
consent to participate the research study, the author still was 
misunderstood. However, later on they apologised and added 
that they indeed really hope someday their expertise and 
knowledge could be acknowledged rather than overlooked in 
designing remote-control. Since then, the researcher noticed 
that not everyone welcomes remote control.  
On board, one of the operators expressed his worry that 
he does not believe the systems can do what he is good at. 
His experience at sea cannot be simply cloned into a 
machine. He felt anxiety that shipowners just want to save 
costs and do not care operators. The researcher did not know 
how to respond to them at that time. The researcher could not 
promise them that they would be assisted rather than 
replaced by the remote-control system. The researcher also 
was not able to say that their expertise would be 
acknowledged and used in designing maritime technology. 
Because the engineering designers would adopt a concept 
called “human-in-the-loop” anyway, which means that 
machines interact without human assistance. Human 
operators are just a backup if a problem arises.  
This worry was not unique. In 2018, the same worry 
about remote control was expressed by maritime educators. 
These educators expressed their worry at a conference on 
upgrading the skills of maritime operators for digitalisation 
in the future. In a panel discussion, several educators 
questioned remote control operations and worried that no 
one knows how to teach since no one has experiences on 
remote-control. Although educators believe re-training 
themselves are needed, they do not believe simulator-based 
system is the best solution. In addition, although the 
educators said they might be re-trained, systematic training is 
not available. Simply put, remote-control systems have not 
yet been delivered to users. The work is conducted in 
engineering design firms. Only engineering designers run the 
design work. However, engineering designers assume that 
they have the knowledge of remote-control and that it is less 
important to observe current maritime operations or take into 
account the concerns of others. The researcher engaged with 
a design workshop at a company in autumn 2018, asking 
what was the purpose of remote control? One engineering 
designer replied that remote control is aiming at replacing 
human beings on board due to most unsafe operations are 
human errors. Human operators must be relocated on land to 
build up new abilities to control an object that they do not 
touch. Only one concern was given – cybersecurity issue.  
The answer was not convinced the researcher since the 
skills the engineering designer refers to is not clear. The 
researcher asked the engineering designer that what are the 
new skills and how cybersecurity will look like and who will 
able to take responsibility in control vessels. A solid answer 
was not given. Instead, the engineering designer assumes that 
skills are about interaction. Operators need to take 
responsibility to handle any problems and make decisions if 
needed. In order to convince the researcher, the engineering 
designer guided the researcher to a lab, in which a huge 
screen is presented. On the screen much information was 
presented. An engineer sitting front of the screen brought out 
four small screens to simulate a case for the researcher. The 
case was about a vessel being remote controlled but now 
under attack by unknown hackers. The engineer said he 
would lose control of the vessel, and he was now trying to 
solve the problem. The solution was to protect the user 
interfaces through developed software. Using the mouse, the 
engineer opened a software application and ran it to protect 
his user interfaces. The engineer believed that it is a method 
for remote-control and such method no operators have a 
chance to learn it. It is not surprising that engineers expect to 
train everyone to use the new technology. However, it was 
strange for the researcher that operators need to be trained in 
clicking a software application to protect the safety of the 
vessel.  
How about the weather, waves, and swimmers in the 
fjord? If the simulation is not real, why do educators worry 
about training? At least, operators could become familiar 
with the interaction styles in the new technology. However, 
although the educators were eager to welcome remote-
control systems, they mentioned many times that their goal 
was to obtain educational funding, not the outcomes of their 
teaching and the students’ learning. They said nothing about 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

learning how to interact with computers. This was nothing 
new in maritime studies. When discussing this issue with an 
educator at another conference in 2019, the educator replied 
that simulator-based training is computer games. No true 
operations at all. The whole shipping industry misunderstand 
a basic question: What learning outcome and what level we 
expect to achieve in simulator-based training.  
Interestingly, the educator knew it might be questionable 
to accept the engineer’s proposal to conduct training by 
means of simulators. However, the entire maritime domain 
seems to follow the shipowners and engineering designers 
wishes. The educator cannot challenge that value. Although 
the researcher tried to play a mediating role between the 
engineers and operators, there were invisible hands pushing 
engineering work to be conducted as fast as possible.  
B. Assembling participants 
The above scenario indicates that intervening directly in 
the design process was difficult. This situation was not like 
an empirical study that is conducted before the actual design 
process is begun. In the maritime domain, engineering 
designers assume that software and computer systems follow 
mathematical models although this assumption is incorrect 
[33]. In 2019, by chance, the researcher engaged in 
observing the application process regarding innovative 
educational programmes for maritime studies. There was a 
call for applications by nautical science departments at 
universities to use a bottom-up approach to position students 
in the centre in designing new study programmes. The 
objective of the call was to establish an ecosystem to support 
lifelong relationships among technology, 
engineering 
companies, educational institutions, and, most importantly, 
operators. Because the CSCW researcher was engaged with 
the educators and invited engineering designers during the 
application process, the researcher wanted to contribute to 
making the voices of operators heard. However, it did not 
happen because the researcher would like to see how they 
would react to such a call. In CSCW research, balancing 
outsider–insider role and avoid inserting the researcher’s 
biases into the project is vital. Although CSCW insights may 
help design technology, it is unclear that whether those 
insights would pose difficulties for engineering designers, 
challenge their professional expertise, or even interfere with 
their work on the ground. The same applies to working with 
educators. In addition to using CSCW insights to shape 
technology design, the intention is to scrutinise the 
usefulness of such insights outside the CSCW community. 
The power relations between different stakeholders could be 
balanced by their own interests rather than by an external 
force, such as the role of researcher in the present project. 
Thus, instead of interviewing the stakeholders as most 
ethnographers would have done, a few challenging, 
structured questions were asked with aim of fostering a new 
way of thinking about design, which is an approach sought 
by the researcher. 
When participated in a design workshop again in 2019, 
the engineering designers were asked how they understand a 
bottom-up approach in design process. There were no clear 
answers. However, no one doubts that a user in engineering 
designers’ eyes is the person who pay for the project – the 
shipowners. During the dialogue in the workshop, the 
operators were not mentioned even once. The researcher 
reflects that multidisciplinary design is a challenge and 
requires the reconciliation of diverging design perspectives 
[34]. Although in CSCW community, software engineers and 
CSCW researchers in software design projects can share and 
integrate their viewpoints in the design process, such design 
process could still miss important aspects of the design 
problem [35]. If that were the case in the CSCW community, 
it would also apply to the engineering field [36]. Engineering 
designers lack the ability to demonstrate the effects of their 
design concepts because of their insufficient thinking and 
reflection about such effects. In line with these arguments, in 
2019, a question in a panel discussion at an academic 
conference on ship design was posed, addressing the 
overlooked operators in technology design. This time, the 
replies were engineering is about designing functions for the 
needs of products, not people who use it. In most cases, 
training is even important because engineers believe people 
need to be taught in order for properly using a product.  
For the researcher, it is a circular relationship: 
“shipowner–engineering designer–shipowner”. Similar to the 
article, “Located accountabilities in technology production”, 
Suchman reflected on her experience in addressing a similar 
problem as “a central dilemma of CSCW researchers’ 
participation in increasingly complex divisions of labour and 
professional specialisation were the layers of mediation 
between each of us and the consequences of our work” [37]. 
Although it is the responsibility of the researcher to the 
process of technology production, his/her participation, of 
course, broke the relationship into pieces. The question to the 
engineering designer was about investigating whether they 
wanted to take the responsibility to trace the usefulness of 
the production. However, they simply handed off the 
production after delivery, and they might have never 
revisited it until someone requested updates or changes. In 
the present study, one of the engineering designers discussed 
the following with the CSCW researcher privately after the 
conference: The whole industry works in a mechanism like a 
design-test-deliver-maintenance loop. It is about business. 
Our motto is that users know very little about what they do 
and what they want. The researcher cannot agree with this 
statement. Bannon [38] warned that users are as professional 
as anyone else about their workplace and tasks in designing 
computer systems. They have an insiders’ overview of their 
work and the tools (including technology) that assist them.  
The researcher is challenged in thinking about how to 
assemble different insights to propose a balance of design 
and use. According to Suchman, she dwelt uncomfortably in 
the distance between design and use for many years in the 
1980s. The balance between design and use forced her to 
think about her role in technology design projects. She 
concluded that she, as an anthropologist of technology, could 
only translate her practice into design terms. However, 
because of the division of professional labour, the problem 
was caused by neither her ability nor the design team [37].  
After studying the maritime domain for several years, the 
researcher felt differently. As a member of new generation in 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

CSCW research, the origin of the problem is known: the 
mismatch of design problems across multiple disciplines, 
such as design, science, and engineering. The researcher also 
knew where, when, and how to contribute to the project to 
benefit everyone. However, he could not. The reason was not 
the capability but the role of the researcher in the project. 
There was simply no chance to intervene in the design 
process from the very beginning. Because of rapid marketing 
changes in the shipping industry and technological 
development, technology companies would like to respond 
quickly to the expectations of shipowners. Thus, the 
researcher will always intervene late in the project. The 
researcher is expected to focus on how their studies could be 
used in future projects based on the results of investigating 
current technology.  
However, the situation was changed on this occasion. 
Although no one has actually developed remote control, for 
various reasons, the researcher could intervene in an early 
stage to learn how to position themselves in potential 
projects. In this case, the researcher must be sensitive about 
the ongoing discussion in the industry as well as the 
intersection between engineering departments at research 
institutions and project funding organisations.  
Thus, when continually asking if engineering designers 
can predict the future of remote control, none of them could 
reply. Instead, the chief engineering designer said it is sadly 
too few chances for them to learn from the operators. They 
know where to gain knowledge, however, they choose to 
ignore the chance. When continually asking and inviting 
operators to design workshops, however, actually getting 
even one participant is challenge due to various reasons.  
Although the operators did not accept the invitation, they 
seemed happy that their messages were delivered through the 
study. In mail inbox of the researcher, there was an email 
from one of the operators, saying that if the researcher would 
like to ask any questions, please contact the operator in Sep 
2017. The operator would love to share his ideas and 
opinions. In addition, the operator told the researcher that he 
had started a land-based job and had continued his academic 
path, seeking a master’s degree in computer science. He 
wanted to work in an engineering company in the future to 
design systems for vessels. This sounded like an extra bonus. 
At least, the researcher did not expect the research work to 
influence others’ lives. However, to some degree, it seems 
the researcher not only managed to get engineering designers 
to accept that other opinions are also important in technology 
design. The researcher also inspired operators to share their 
experience and expertise with others. The researcher 
unconsciously stepped in the project to play both roles of 
designer (i.e., in guiding engineering designers) and user (i.e., 
in inspiring operators). On several occasions, the researcher 
formatted and reformatted the ideas and opinions of 
operators, educators, engineering designers, and even his 
own reflections into a dialogue between investigation and 
design [28].  
C. Reflexivity as an intervention tools in assembling 
shipowners 
Including only operators, educators, and engineering 
designers in this study was not enough. As previously 
mentioned, design requirements are given by shipowners. 
Without their participation, design work is unrealistic, and 
there would be problems if requirement conflicts arose 
between operators, educators, and shipowners. Indeed, the 
researcher has documented results in various formats. 
However, considering the differences between traditions in 
CSCW research across the Atlantic, it is notable that a few 
previous 
studies 
concentrated 
on 
how 
cooperative 
technologies could be created with a focus on articulation 
work of users [39], as in the European CSCW tradition. 
Some studies focused on how to intervene in the design 
process and how intervention is implemented in design [9]. 
In interviews with Volker Wulf and Myriam, Lewkowicz, 
Richter and Koch [40] observed that the term practice-based 
CSCW was descriptive. Although Lewkowicz argued that 
the importance of CSCW was that it enabled designers and 
social scientists to use same communication channel. The 
CSCW researcher of the present work does not fully agree 
because according to many CSCW studies, at least in 
European CSCW research, the true design process is 
conducted by engineering designers. It is questionable how 
intervention could be implemented realistically without a 
monitor. Moreover, most CSCW research has evaluated the 
outcome of design, and there are few studies on the 
subsequent effects on organizational changes in connection 
with CSCW research.  
Bratteteig and Wagner [41] in the field of participatory 
design asked the following question: What is a result of 
participatory design? They argued, “Ideally, a project 
outcome should be evaluated in a real-use situation when 
users have had a chance to integrate it into whatever they are 
doing and (eventually) develop a new form of practice”. As a 
participant in designing remote control systems, did the 
researcher improves the knowledge of the systems that are 
supposed to be designed? Through his activities to assemble 
participants, did he introduce a better “tool” for all 
stakeholders in the projects, inspiring them to understand 
that all their voices were important, but no one had a priority. 
Like the reply by the chief engineering designer, they 
acknowledged that without information from operators, it 
was impossible to ensure the quality of remote-control 
systems in the future. The educators replied similarly. The 
researcher therefore interviewed three shipowners at their 
offices at different times from August 2019 to February 2020. 
The aim was to enable shipowners to develop a realistic 
expectation of remote control. In doing so, several cases in 
video format based on the fieldwork in 2015 and 2018 both 
at sea and in simulators were showed. The shipowners 
expressed their astonishment after they watched those videos. 
They saw a great difference between realistic operations and 
training using simulators. Although they all invest money on 
training courses for the operators, after the videos they 
expressed their uncertainties when they addressed the 
usefulness of the training programmes. It seems no one was 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

sure that there was a link between training and real work in 
ensuring safer operation. However, everyone wanted to hear 
from the operators, at least the most experienced ones, and 
recognise their voices in decision-making about technology 
design, including decisions about material artefacts on board 
(e.g., dynamic positioning systems).  
In February 2020, when talking with the operators and 
the educator in a seminar at Athens, both were offered a 
chance to participate in the design of remote control. A 
positive answer was given this time: ‘if that could happen, it 
would be great that we were not just treated as tools. We do 
not need to bind ourselves to the terms and conditions 
offered by engineering designers through their productions. 
We will not outsource our decision-making and capabilities 
to someone who has no knowledge of our business. We are 
the core elements of technology.’  
Now operators, educators, and shipowners gather in 
public and in private to discuss their opinions regarding 
design. One example is the joint calls for proposals funded 
by the Education, Audio-Visual and Culture Executive 
Agency (EACEA) of the European Commission, the 
European Shipowner Association and the European 
Transportation Workers’ Foundation. The calls are for a 
bottom-up approach, learner-centred, lifelong action plan 
involving education, research, shipping, and maritime 
technology, which are addressed as vital and mandatory [42] 
[43]. It seems timely for the maritime domain to respond to 
such calls rather than me working to re-assemble them.  
V. 
BEING A REFLEXIVE INSIDER 
The researcher continues to be active in the maritime 
domain. The researcher values making changes according to 
the feedback on what have been seen and where he must 
intervene to improve maritime technology. The intention of 
this value is twofold: 1) deploy useful CSCW research in an 
engineering-oriented field; 2) contributing CSCW research 
with practical feedback from the front line in engineering 
work. If the CSCW work on assembling participation and 
mediating outcomes between social and engineering phrases 
is a practical activity, then the reflection on the role and the 
contribution of the researcher to the CSCW community is the 
highest achievement.  
A. Interest-driven CSCW research in maritime design 
Nygaard and Bergo [44] suggested that designers, 
particularly participatory designers, take sides in considering 
the following: 1) improving the knowledge on which 
systems are built while aiming to build a better “tool” for 
users [45]; 2) enabling people to develop realistic 
expectations and reducing resistance to change [46]; 3) 
increasing workplace democracy by giving the members of 
an organization the right to participate in decisions that are 
likely to affect their work [47]. Differing from their wishes, 
the researcher does not taken side with the operators, 
educators, shipowners, or engineering designers. However, 
the first two suggestions are firmly followed.  
Eyal [48] warned that researchers must consider carefully 
who are experts and lay experts. As an outsider in the 
maritime domain, the judgement of experts is made by the 
researcher 
might 
not 
be 
convincing. 
Although 
all 
stakeholders have an interest in improving maritime 
technology, “better” is understood differently. For example, 
operators and educators believe that their experience and 
expertise are vital in remote control. Engineering designers 
strongly rely on their procedure-based design process. 
Shipowners seek to effectively invest in a project and reap 
the benefits. All these interests involve few or no political 
conflicts. How could the researcher dare to say who is a 
better participant in designing remote control systems? The 
only thing for sure is that the researcher can balance these 
interests and explore a design point that involves all 
stakeholders, such as designing organizational frameworks 
for actions and designing industrial relations context [41]. 
However, differ from participatory designers who discuss 
political and policy contexts in design projects, the 
researcher is particularly interested in collaborating with 
engineering designers to inspire them and the researcher 
himself to bridge the gap between CSCW research and 
CSCW design practice. Some CSCW researchers focus on 
recognising various materials that have different qualities 
depending on how they are used in specific places as 
intervention areas. However, regardless of how the material 
is bounded through time and space in cooperative work 
among stakeholders, it is completely static, irrespective of 
the execution of the coordination it prescribes. CSCW 
researchers have to consider that materials not only stipulate 
articulation work (e.g., a standard operating procedure in a 
social order) as invention [49] but also need to think that 
materials can be inscribed as a result of the delegation of 
social roles to nonhumans [50] as well as humans. In this 
manner, the CSCW researchers can identify different aspects 
of interest in a design project and find the most appropriate 
way to represent it in various formats for different 
stakeholders without changing the meaning. Although the 
formats are different, the core interest of the present project 
is held by the researcher; thus, it is a “win-win” situation 
[51] rather than maximising the complexity of remote 
control systems. Thus, the researcher is a spokesperson who 
addresses interactive relations among operators, artefacts, 
maritime technology, engineering designers, educators, and 
shipowners to improve their cooperation in such actor 
networks. 
Importantly, 
as 
maritime 
technology 
becomes 
increasingly computer supported, the researcher has the 
responsibility to ensure the final design benefits all 
stakeholders. By doing so, CSCW insights into designing 
maritime technology should be best used to change the 
mechanism of design in the maritime domain, including 
information technology [52]. That is, the insights of 
stakeholders 
do 
not 
pertain 
only 
to 
requirement 
specifications that inform design. By representing their 
interests, the researcher should trigger a modus operandi for 
intervening in the project by taking specific actions regarding 
when, where, and what forms in the design process to 
support interactive relationships between actors – in social-
technical associations between humans and nonhumans. 
Such interactions are badly needed in engineering-oriented 
fields. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Insider roles across communities 
Regarding whether CSCW researchers could potentially 
address the sociotechnical gap, the CSCW community is 
divided. Some believe it is possible, but others think that it 
will take a long time to achieve the division of what we knew 
socially and what we can support technically. Although some 
researchers advocate intervention [9] as a solution, their 
peers are uncertain about how to follow the “the guidelines” 
[24] because of the lack of reflexivity in interpretive writing. 
In the present study, the researcher worked in a 
heterogeneous group. The work of CSCW goes beyond 
researcher’s own accounts of epistemological and theoretical 
bases. It is crucial to understand not only the nature of the 
ethnographic encounter and its methodology but also the 
datasets collected in engineering design work. Instead of 
tending to discuss people as the objects of study through so-
called participant observation, the point is that the researcher 
shall take his own embodied experiences in the context of 
personal relationships to gain and exchange knowledge with 
stakeholders. It is not just a matter of methodology, such as 
writing detailed field notes and showing videos about 
practices. It is also a matter of relational epistemology. If a 
CSCW study is inherently experiential, then it loses the voice 
of the author in its writing, which limits our insights into the 
data and our ability to use them in design. The constant 
assessment of the relationship between knowledge and “the 
ways of doing knowledge” must be undertaken. 
Positioning CSCW insights in engineering projects also 
concerns relationships with stakeholders, which are 
reciprocal [53]. In Beaulieu’s [53] definition, the value of 
relationships in different fields in ethnographic studies goes 
beyond the central notion of face-to-face interaction to the 
co-presence with the ethnographer during the research. As 
the present study shows, the relationships among the 
stakeholders and between the stakeholders and the researcher 
had nothing to do with negotiating conflicts of interest. The 
relationship among them was based on self-interest and then 
was extended to integrate their willingness to participate in 
the network of actors. They all want their interests to be 
traceable and consistently represented by someone. The 
researcher of the present study coincidentally crossed various 
sites and moments during the research to formulate 
representations that were useful to all, which was successful. 
Perhaps another researcher could do the same. 
Thus, a few years after completing the research work, the 
researcher does not perceive that he has a value-neutral 
stance in research work in the maritime domain. The 
researcher would argue that CSCW researchers should make 
themselves explicit to stakeholders so that the latter can 
better understand their own interests, which, as well as their 
reasons and motivations, are articulated by the researcher. In 
this manner, the researcher makes explicit his ideological 
assumptions to allow other CSCW peers to see the worlds in 
which the researcher is embedded. Moreover, the CSCW 
peers could build their own interpretations of the case study 
of remote-control technology and the indication to reflect on 
their own assumptions and mindsets. The purpose is mainly 
to triangulate the sources of evidence with other peers 
although they use different contexts. Regardless of whether 
the context is the maritime domain or the healthcare domain, 
they all work with and in a heterogeneous group. How 
should they share their reflexive insiders’ views of 
epistemology and methodology in deploying CSCW insights 
in the design process [26]? It is not a matter that only the 
CSCW researcher must address. It is also a matter of how 
CSCW researchers communicate with others. In the present 
study, the researcher, engineering designers, and shipowners 
did not share the same mindsets in learning from experience. 
Thus, a dialogue between the three forms of knowledge 
helped promote mutual improvement and anchor the 
relevance of the CSCW research in policy making for design 
projects in the maritime domain. The CSCW researcher of 
the present work influences epistemological assumptions and 
the previous experience in the field influences the dialogic 
process. It is likely that the best is to position people in the 
centre in designing the usefulness of technology. Through 
the dialogue between stakeholders with whom the research 
engaged, it was possible for peers to investigate and criticise 
the accounts of interventions, thereby assessing whether the 
interpretations were valid. 
C. Connecting Communities of Practice  
Because of the researcher’s unique background in 
software engineering, CSCW, and sociology, his enrolment 
in a group designing maritime technology was more than 
seeking 
to 
improve 
current 
design 
practices 
in 
multidisciplinary fields. To make sense of the problems the 
researcher faced in the maritime domain by creating 
something new. As a practitioner–researcher in systems 
design, CSCW research is different when it is used in the 
engineering field not only because it was new but also 
because it was a foreign element that was usually rejected by 
a group of professionals. The nature of the work practice of a 
professional community is to transform the status quo by 
new ways of working and interacting rather than 
accommodate a completely new element. CSCW insights are 
examples in the present study.  
Jackson et al. [54] proposed that CSCW has fewer 
concerns about translating its theoretical knowledge into 
forms and instruments that are useable by wider 
communities. The researcher of the present study faces 
similar challenges in working in designing maritime 
technology, in which remote control systems are only one of 
several design projects. The new generation of CSCW 
researchers may be different from first-generation. They 
know about human-centred computing, they know how to do 
fieldwork, and they even know how to translate their 
findings into special formats to communicate with systems 
developers [1]. However, they miss long-term engagement 
and design sensitive analysis in dealing with their reflections 
on how they connect different communities. Most CSCW 
research is iterative enough of its design process and does 
not challenge the lack of voices of confessional reflection 
[30] in their community. When researchers seek intervention 
as a bridge between research and practice, they might fall 
into their existing cognitive knowledge and create their own 
artificial worlds and seek their own language in doing 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

design. They focus on exploring the inner symbolic space of 
a paradigm, and they try to convince others to believe that 
their languages are universal and useful. This might be 
wrong. If they do not accept procedure-oriented engineering 
design, is it correct to assume that CSCW can provide a 
solution? Suchman [55] suggested that we might need to find 
a customised solution rather than a universal solution. The 
challenge of this idea is not only the cognitive aspect of 
engineering design and CSCW research. It requires the 
development of radically new forms of scientific inquiry. 
In this article, the researcher has reported and discussed 
his theoretical struggles in interpretive empirical research to 
fulfil the forms of scientific inquiry in connecting 
communities of practice. In a heterogeneous group, the 
collaboration in designing remote control is not a 
straightforward process. When reading the CSCW literature, 
the researcher always turn on his software engineer mode to 
review praxis [40][77]. It is a challenge. Even though the 
researcher holds two sets of knowledge—CSCW and 
software 
engineering—, 
he 
should 
have 
different 
perspectives on what he has read, and he should consider 
them equal contributions to his knowledge. However, in a 
heterogeneous group, this inner attribute of the researcher 
becomes both he and others. Because the designer of remote 
control systems is not the researcher and most work still 
depends on control engineering principles, inquiry requires 
extensive empirical data and practical concerns as well as a 
theoretical 
framework 
that 
might 
be 
perceived 
as 
disconnected from social construction [56]. Thus, as a 
researcher who was uniquely trained in two fields and is now 
working in the complete unstructured maritime domain 
becomes a challenge. The researcher needs to give his peers 
the tools to criticise his accounts of the work practice in the 
workplace. He also needs to engineering designers the tools 
to investigate the usefulness of the contribution from CSCW 
point of view to them. In the present work, although no one 
forced the researcher to make notes and work-in-progress 
drafts available to all members of the project, he realises that 
opening the datasets helped fulfil hermeneutic cycles and 
multiple interpretations. In interviewing the engineering 
designers, the CSCW perspective of maritime technology led 
to further discussion. Thus, multiple interpretations of the 
benefits and why the project should design alternatives 
became possible. The CSCW approach made it possible for 
the engineering designers to discuss the situation and to 
switch from a cooperative project where everyone had his 
own spot to engage in truly collaborative work. Moreover, 
both the engineering designers and the researcher recognised 
the value of reflectivity even though it might differ among 
them. However, it is important in the discipline of design 
between CSCW and engineering. The engineering designers 
found a way forward to be comfortable with the various 
interests and reflected on them in a dialogue to find a 
solution.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article, a case study of reassembling participation 
to improve the design of remote-control systems with respect 
to all stakeholders is presented. In addition to the 
contribution of practical knowledge to the maritime domain, 
the reflective writing in this article offers a view of how 
CSCW insights and engineering practices were transformed 
during the engagement of the researcher in designing 
maritime technology. In the last seven years, the CSCW 
interpretation of designing maritime technology suffered 
from blind spots. However, following the interpretive 
research and the knowledge and experience gained in CSCW 
research, the reward was not effecting change. Instead, the 
rewards were the better understanding of the challenges and 
opportunities related to bridging the gaps between applying 
CSCW insights and conducting research in CSCW inside 
and outside the CSCW community to make real 
contributions to other fields. As a result, the article suggests 
that the development of CSCW insights in the engineering 
fields should have a strong focus on the participation of 
stakeholders who not only use technology but also those who 
fund and develop technology. Thus, CSCW researchers 
could learn more about self-reflection and self-revelation in 
the contribution to the industry and possibly positively 
influence policymakers to rethink framework development in 
the engineering field. In conducting research in the maritime 
domain, the researcher found that the best way is to reflect 
and reveal one’s own research findings and activities to 
enable combining them in a wider scientific discourse. If 
intervention is an unavoidable condition of CSCW research, 
by 
being 
there, 
the 
researcher 
already 
connected 
communities of practice, thus making a difference by 
affecting the practice he studies. The case in this paper, the 
translation of the research work, the qualitative inquiry the 
paper developed, and the reflective materials the researcher 
wrote are tools that could serve both the community and the 
community from which CSCW insights emerge. The rest is 
up to others who want to confirm their own values to balance 
their position with the CSCW insights in their own work. As 
a result, the gap between research and practice both inside 
and outside CSCW research could be reduced. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Pan, “From field to simulator: visualizing ethnographic 
outcomes to support systems developers,” University of Oslo, 
2018. 
[2] L. Deng, G. Wang, and S. Yu, “Layout Design of Human-
Machine Interaction Interface of Cabin Based on Cognitive 
Ergonomics and GA-ACA,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., pp.1-
12, 2016. 
[3] G. Pahl, W. Beitz, J. Feldhusen, and K.-H. H. Grote, 
Engineering design: A systematic approach, 3rd ed. Springer-
Verlag London, 2007. 
[4] J. A. Hughes, D. Randall, and D. Shapiro, “From 
ethnographic record to system design - Some experiences 
from the field,” Comput. Support. Coop. Work, 1, 3, pp. 123–
141, 1992. 
[5] Y. Pan and S. Finken, “Visualising Actor Network for 
Cooperative Systems in Marine Technology,” in HCC'16, 
2016, pp. 178–190. 
[6] Y. Pan and S. Finken, “From Offshore Operation to Onshore 
Simulator: Using Visualized Ethnographic Outcomes to Work 
with Systems Developers,” Informatics, 5, 1, pp. 1-12, 2018. 
[7] R. Bentley and D. Randall, “Tutorial notes,” in CSCW 2004, 
2004. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[8] K. Schmidt and L. J. Bannon, “Taking CSCW Seriously. 
Supporting Articulation Work,” J. Collab. Comput. Work 
Pract., 1, 1, pp. 7–40, 1992. 
[9] P. Bjørn and N. Boulus-Rødje, “The Multiple Intersecting 
Sites of Design in CSCW Research,” Comput. Support. Coop. 
Work CSCW An Int. J., 24, 4, pp. 319-351, 2015. 
[10] X. Li, Z. Zhang, and A.-K. Saeema, “The sources and 
methods 
of 
engineering 
design 
requirement,” 
Adv. 
Transdiscipl. Eng., 1, pp. 1–10, 2014. 
[11] J. A. Gershenson and L. A. Stauffer, “The creation of a 
taxonomy for manufacturability design requirements,” in 7th 
ASME Design Technical Conferences, 1995, pp. 305–314. 
[12] W. Brace and K. Thramboulidis, “From requirements to 
design specifications - a formal approach,” in International 
Design Conference, 2010, pp. 639–650. 
[13] DNV GL, “Remote-controlled and autonomous ships,” 2018. 
[14] T. Porathe, J. Prison, and Y. Man, “Situation awareness in 
remote control centres for unmanned ships,” in Human factors 
in ship design & operations, 2014. pp. 1-8. 
[15] R. Rylander and Y. Man, “Autonomous safety on vessels,” 
2016. 
[16] M. A. Ramos, I. B. Utne, and A. Mosleh, “On factors 
affecting autonomous ships operators performance in a shore 
control center,” in PSAM 14, 2018, pp. 1–12. 
[17] M. Wahlström, J. Hakulinen, H. Karvonen, and I. Lindborg, 
“Human factors challenges in unmanned ship operations - 
insights from other domains,” in 6th International AHFE 
Conferences, 2015, pp. 1038–1045. 
[18] Unkonwn, “Research on the Impacts of Marine Autonomous 
Surface Ship on the Seafarer’s Career and MET,” 2018. 
[19] Danish Maritime Authority, “Analysis of regulatory barriers 
to the use of autonomous ships,” 2017. 
[20] A. Komianos, “The Autonomous Shipping Era. Operational, 
Regulatory, and Quality Challenges,” TransNav, Int. J. Mar. 
Navig. Saf. Sea Transp., 12, 2, pp. 335-348, 2018. 
[21] T. K. Lee, “Liability of autonomous ship: The Scandinavian 
perspecive: How the liability regimes shall be regulated in the 
Scandinavian region?,” University of Oslo, 2016. 
[22] M. B. Calas and L. Smircich, “Re-writing gender into 
organizational 
theorizing: 
directions 
from 
feminist 
perspectives,” M. R. M. Hughes, Ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 
1992, pp. 227–253. 
[23] M. Burawoy, “The extended case method,” Sociol. Theory, 
16, 1, pp. 4–33, 1998. 
[24] J. Malaurent and D. Avison, “Reflexivity: A third essential 
‘R’ to enhance interpretive field studies,” Inf. Manag., 54, 7, 
pp. 920-933, 2017. 
[25] S. Bødker, “When second wave HCI meets third wave 
challenges,” in NordiCHI 2006, pp. 1-8. 
[26] H. C. Geirbo, “Knowing through relations. On the 
epistemology and methodology of being a relflexive insider,” 
Interacation Des. Archit., 38, 107–123, 2018. 
[27] W. J. Orlikowski and J. J. Baroudi, “Study information 
technology in organizations: research approaches and 
assumptions,” Infor.Syst.Res, 2, 1, pp. 1–28, 1991. 
[28] D. Randall, “Investigation and Design,” in Social Informatics 
- A practice-based perspective on the design and use of IT 
artifacts, V. Wulf, V. Pipek, D. Randall, M. Rohde, K. 
Schmidt, and G. Stevens, Eds. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2018, pp. 221–241. 
[29] G. E. Marcus, Ethnography through thick and thin. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998. 
[30] J. A. Rode, “Reflexivity in digital anthropology,” in SIGCHI 
CHI, 2011, pp.123-132. 
[31] P. Dourish, “Implications for design,” in SIGCHI CHI, 2006, 
pp. 541–550. 
[32] M. S. Ackerman, “Intellectual challenge of CSCW: the gap 
between social requirements and technical feasibility,” 
Human-Computer Interact., 15, 2, pp. 179-203, 2000. 
[33] R. Turner, Computational artifacts: Towards a philosophy of 
computer science. Colchester: Springer Nature, 2018. 
[34] A. Dittmar and P. Forbrig, “Integrating personas and use case 
models,” in INTERACT 2019, 2019, pp. 666–686. 
[35] W. E. Mackay, “Educating multi-disciplinary desi in Tales of 
the Disappearing Computer, 2003. 
[36] Q. Peng and J.-B. Martens, “Design requirements of tools 
supporting reflection on design impact,” in INTERACT 2019, 
2019, pp. 609–622. 
[37] L. Suchman, “Located accountabilities in technology 
production,” Scand. J. Inf. Syst., 14, 2, pp. 1–15, 2002. 
[38] L. J. Bannon, “From human factors to human actors: the role 
of psychology and human-computer interaction studies in 
system design,” in Design at work: cooperative design of 
computer systems, R. M. BAECKER, J. GRUDIN, W. A. S. 
BUXTON, and S. B. T.-R. in H. I. GREENBERG, Eds. 
Morgan Kaufmann, 1992, pp. 25–44. 
[39] P. Bjørn, L. Ciolfi, M. Ackerman, G. Fitzpatrick, and V. 
Wulf, “Practice-based CSCW research: ECSCW bridging 
arocss the Atlantic,” in CSCW ’16, 2016, pp. 210–219. 
[40] A. Richter and M. Koch, “Interviews with Volker Wulf and 
Myriam Lewkowicz on ‘The European Tradition of CSCW,’” 
Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng., 60, 2, pp. 175–179, 2018. 
[41] T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, “What is a participatory design 
result?,” in PDC’16, 2016, pp. 141–150. 
[42] European Commission, “Centres of vocational excellence,” 
European Union Official Website, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://eacea.ec.europa.eu/erasmus-plus/actions/centres-of-
vocational-excellence_en. [Accessed: 03-Feb-2020]. 
[43] E. 
Commission, 
“Improving 
impact 
and 
broadening 
stakholder engagement in support of transport research and 
innovation,” European Union Official Webpage, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://cordis.europa.eu/programme/id/H2020_MG-4-10-
2020. [Accessed: 03-Feb-2020]. 
[44] K. Nygaard and O. T. Bergo, “The trade unions-New users of 
research,” Pers. Rev., 4, 2, pp. 5–10, 1975. 
[45] E. Balka, P. Bjorn, and I. Wagner, “Steps toward a typology 
for health informatics,” in CSCW, 2008, pp. 515-524. 
[46] P. Bachrach and M. S. Baratz, “Power and Its Two Faces 
Revisited: A Reply to Geoffrey Debnam,” Am. Polit. Sci. 
Rev., pp. 1-4, 1975. 
[47] G. Bjerknes and T. Bratteteig, “User participation and 
democracy: A discussion of Scandinavian research on system 
development,” Scand. J. Inf. Syst., 7, 1, pp. 258–266, 1995. 
[48] G. Eyal, The crisis of expertise. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2019. 
[49] K. Schmidt, “Of maps and scripts - the status of formal 
constructs in cooperative work,” in SIGGROUP GROUP, 
1997, pp. 138–147. 
[50] K. Schmidt and I. Wagner, “Ordering systems: coordinative 
practices and artefacts in architectural design and planning,” 
Comput. Coop. Work, 13, 5, pp. 349–408, 2004. 
[51] S. Bødker and P.-O. Zander, “Participation in design between 
public sector and local communities,” in 7th C&T, 2015, pp. 
49–58. 
[52] I. Di Loreto and K. L. H. Ting, “Sense and sensibility: 
Designing a museum exhibition with visually impaired 
people,” Interact. Des. Archit., 38, pp. 155–183, 2018. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[53] A. Beaulieu, “From co-location to co-presence: Shifts in the 
use of ethnography for the study of knowledge,” Soc. Stud. 
Sci., 40, 3, pp. 453-470, 2010. 
[54] S. J. Jackson, S. B. Steinhardt, and A. Buyuktur, “Why 
CSCW needs science policy (and vice versa),” in CSCW’13, 
2013, pp. 1113–1124. 
[55] L. A. Suchman, Human-Machine Reconfiguration. Plans and 
Situated Actions, 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2007. 
[56] L. Mathiassen and A. Sandberg, “How a professionally 
qualified doctoral student bridged the practice-research gap: 
A confessional account of Collaborative Practice Research,” 
Eur. J. Inf. Syst., 34, 3, pp. 695-726, 2013. 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

