Effects of Intervals between Roadside Columns on Speed Perception  
in Human Walking and Running Speed 
Yohsuke Yoshioka  
Division of Architecture and Urban Science,  
Chiba University 
Chiba, Japan 
email: yoshioka.yohsuke@faculty.chiba-u.jp 
Hidetoshi Watanabe  
Department of Architecture and Interior, 
Bunka Gakuen University 
Tokyo, Japan 
email: watanabe@bunka.ac.jp 
Masaki Takahashi 
Department of Architecture and Interior, 
Bunka Gakuen University 
Tokyo, Japan 
email: masa-takahashi@bunka.ac.jp 
 Atsushi Enta  
Department of Conceptual Design,  
Nihon University 
Chiba, Japan 
email: entasan@gmail.com 
Tomonori Sano 
Faculty of Human Sciences,  
Waseda University  
Saitama, Japan 
email: sano-t@waseda.jp 
 
 
Abstract—This study aimed to examine the effects of intervals 
between roadside columns on human speed perception. A 
virtual reality aided experiment was conducted, with 20 college 
students as participants. Each participant was asked to sit in 
front of a screen upon which interactive virtual space was 
projected. Within this space, columns emerged on the right and 
left of the screen at regular intervals. Participants could control 
the speed with which the columns moved on one side of the 
screen, using a mouse to move a virtual slider bar. The 
participants were asked to synchronize the speeds with which 
the controllable and uncontrollable columns moved in each 
experimental trial. The most important results of this study 
were that participants tended to increase the speed with which 
controllable columns moved when the intervals between them 
were longer relative to those between the uncontrollable 
columns. Results indicated that controlling the intervals 
between roadside columns also affected the perception of human 
walking and running speeds. 
Keywords- Speed Perception; Optic Flow; Peripheral Vision; 
Virtual Reality; Driving Simulation 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Human speed perception involves a combination of 
several types of environmental information received via 
sensory organs such as the eyes, ears, and skin. Of this sensory 
information, visual stimuli in the peripheral visual field 
provide the most important clues as to the relative speed with 
which objects surrounding the individual move. Gibson 
described the flow of visual stimuli through the peripheral 
visual field as “optic flow” [1].  
The earliest work examining the effects of peripheral 
visual patterns on human speed perception was conducted by 
Denton [2][3]. The results of this research generally 
demonstrated that human speed perception was differentially 
influenced by the visual patterns that were presented to drivers’ 
eyes.  
Kircher [4] conducted a simulator experiment to 
determine how driving performance was influenced by design 
factors, tunnel wall color, and illumination. The results 
indicated that tunnel design exerted an influence on drivers’ 
behavior, and light-colored tunnel walls were of greater 
importance, relative to that of strong illumination, in keeping 
drivers’ visual attention focused forward. 
Manser [5] also conducted a simulator experiment to 
determine the effect of visual patterns applied to 
transportation tunnel walls on driving performance. Results 
indicated that participants reduced their driving speeds 
gradually when exposed to decreasing visual pattern width 
and increased their driving speeds when exposed to increasing 
visual pattern width. These findings suggest that human speed 
perception was modified by visual patterns expressed on the 
tunnel wall. 
Allpress [6] conducted an open-road investigation to 
evaluate the effects of even and decreasing roadside cone 
spacing at a roadwork site on traffic speed. The results showed 
that although both types of spacing were highly effective at 
reducing driving speed, uneven cone spacing led to a marked 
reduction in the number of speed-related accidents observed. 
Godley [7] conducted an experiment using a driving 
simulator, in which participants drove toward intersections 
with peripheral transverse lines at both reducing and constant 
spacing. The results showed that although both types of 
366
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

peripheral transverse line led to a greater reduction in speed 
relative that of the no-line condition, speed perception was not 
influenced by a decrease in the spacing of the peripheral 
transverse lines. 
Katz [8] conducted a similar experiment to investigate the 
effects of peripheral transverse lines. They found no 
significant difference between various patterns of peripheral 
transverse lines applied to the roadside of a simulated roadway. 
However, the results also indicated that the driving lane 
positions were significantly farther from the centerline in the 
design alternative involving two and four bars per second. 
The objective of the present study was to examine the 
effects of peripheral visual stimuli presented at human 
walking or running speed on human speed perception. Almost 
all studies in this field have involved the control of driving 
speed, as it is one of the most effective methods for reducing 
the incidence of speed-related traffic accidents. This 
knowledge-based 
environmental 
design 
method 
for 
controlling human speed perception is expected to be effective 
in planning and designing an improved pedestrian 
environment, in which people undertake comfortable walking 
or fun running without excessive speeding. 
With respect to the Methods section, in Subsection A, we 
describe the ethical issues considered in conducting the study; 
in Subsection B, we describe the study design; in Subsection 
C, we describe details of the experimental equipment and 
setup; in Subsection D, we describe the features of the 
experimental virtual space; in Subsection E, we describe the 
verification of the column parameters; in Subsection F, we 
describe the experimental conditions. 
With respect to the Results section, in Subsection A, we 
describe the results concerning adjusted C-column speeds 
with a fixed U-column speed of 1.5 m/s; in Subsection B, we 
describe the results concerning adjusted C-column speeds 
with a fixed U-Column speed of 3.0 m/s; in Subsection C, we 
describe the results concerning adjusted C-column speeds 
with a fixed U-Column speed of 6.0 m/s. 
In the Discussion section, we interpret the relevance of the 
findings with respect to those of previous studies and describe 
the limitations of the study. In the Conclusion and Future 
Work section, we summarize the main findings of the study 
and suggest directions for future research. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Ethics 
Written informed consent was obtained from all 
participants prior to the publication of this case report and the 
accompanying images. Participants were permitted to take 
short breaks as required, which increased the total 
experimental period. 
B. Design 
The participants were 20 college students (10 men and 10 
women, mean age: 22.1 years). They were asked to sit on a 
chair in front of a wall-mounted screen, with one hand on a 
computer mouse placed on a desk (Figure 1).  
Several types of interactive virtual movie were projected 
onto the screen. Two rows of columns emerged from the 
center of the screen and flowed to the right and left of the 
screen at regular intervals. Participants were able to control 
the speed with which one of the rows of columns moved, using 
the mouse to move a virtual slider bar. Participants were asked 
to use their own judgment to synchronize the speeds with 
which the controllable and uncontrollable columns moved in 
the experimental trials (Figure 2). 
Participants were expected to be unable to adjust the speed 
with which the controllable columns moved to match that with 
which the uncontrollable columns moved when the intervals 
between the two types of column differed. The effects of 
different intervals between roadside columns on human 
walking speed perception were examined by comparing the 
adjusted speed of controllable-column movement and the 
fixed speed of uncontrollable-column movement. 
Figure 1.  Experimental Setup 
Figure 2.  Projected Virtual Space 
 
367
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Equipment and Setup 
The size of the screen upon which the virtual space movie 
was presented was 2,200 mm wide and 1,760 mm high. 
Participants were asked to find a comfortable point with their 
eyes at a vertical distance of exactly 1,900 mm from the center 
of the screen, to ensure a horizontal angle of 60 degrees for 
the field of view on the screen. 
The movie was projected using a high-contrast projector 
(TAXAN/KG-PH202X, Brightness: 3,500 lm, Contrast: 
1/2,000) connected to a workstation (DELL/Precision 
M3800). The interactive virtual space was described using 
computer graphics software (WorldViz: Vizard5.0). 
D. Virtual Space 
The background to the projected virtual space was entirely 
black, with no earth or sky. The virtual space contained a 
virtual thin black fog, which gradually obscured the virtual 
elements within the space, with the two rows of columns 
hidden entirely at a depth of 100 m from the virtual viewpoint. 
A horizontal angle of 60 degrees was applied to the 
forward field of view in the virtual space, as this corresponded 
to the angle of the participant’s viewpoint in real space, 
considering the screen width and shape. The height of the 
viewpoint in the virtual space was set at 1,500 mm, with the 
vanishing point in the movie set to the vertical centerline of 
the screen. 
E. Columns 
Two rows of virtual columns emerged from the vanishing 
point at the center of the virtual space on the projected screen. 
The two rows of columns were set at a distance of 7,000 mm 
apart, on the right and left of the mid-horizontal ground line, 
toward the vanishing point on the screen (Figure 2).  
The intervals between the columns were set to certain 
values according to experimental condition. However, in all 
experimental conditions, the cross-sectional shape of the 
columns was circular (diameter: 300 mm) and the height of 
the columns was 6,000 mm.  
One of the two columns in each experimental condition 
moved at a continuous fixed speed. In this study, fixed-speed 
columns were known as uncontrollable columns (U columns), 
while columns for which the speed was controlled using the 
virtual slider bar were known as controllable columns (C 
columns).  
F. Experimental Condition 
There were fifty-four experimental conditions designed 
according to the following factors: three U-column speeds, 
three U-column intervals, three C-column intervals, and two 
right–left arrangements (one with the U columns on the right 
and C columns on the left, and one with the opposite right/left 
combination). Each participant completed fifty-four trials 
representing all possible combinations of these factors. 
U-column speed varied according to three levels: 1.5 
meters per second (m/s), 3.0 m/s, and 6.0 m/s. These three 
speeds represented walking, running and riding a bicycle. 
U-column and C-column intervals varied according to 
three levels: 3.1 m, 5.9 m, and 9.7 m. These values were set at 
10% of the prime numbers 31, 59, and 97, to ensure that they 
Figure 3.  
Transition of Mean Adjusted C-Column Speeds with Fixed 
U-Column Speeds of 1.5 m/s (m/s) 
 
Figure 4.  
Transition of Mean Adjusted C-Column Speeds with Fixed 
U-Column Speeds of 3.0 m/s (m/s) 
 
Figure 5.  
Transition of Mean Adjusted C-Column Speeds with Fixed 
U-Column Speeds of 6.0 m/s (m/s) 
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
C-Span 3.1
C-Span 5.9
C-Span 9.7
Base_Line
U-Span 3.1
U-Span 5.9
U-Span 9.7
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
5.00
C-Span 3.1
C-Span 5.9
C-Span 9.7
Base_Line
U-Span 3.1
U-Span 5.9
U-Span 9.7
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
C-Span 3.1
C-Span 5.9
C-Span 9.7
Base_Line
U-Span 3.1
U-Span 5.9
U-Span 9.7
368
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

were similar to the numbers 3, 6, and 9, which were not used, 
because participants would have been able to use lower 
multiples of these numbers to determine common multiples of 
the intervals for the two rows of columns at a glance and adjust 
C-column speed by simply counting the number of columns 
flowing past on each side.  
For example, if there were 3-m intervals between the right-
hand columns and 6-m intervals between the left-hand 
columns, the third right-hand column and second left-hand 
column would be at the same position. Participants could 
adjust C-column speed by simply counting the number of 
columns flowing past on each side of the screen.  
Participants were asked to adjust the C-column speed 
continuously to match the U-column speed, based on their 
own judgment. The virtual slider bar was placed in the lower 
area of the screen for ten seconds in each trial.  
III. 
RESULTS 
Mean C-column speeds, which were adjusted by 
participants in each condition, are shown in Figures 3, 4, and 
5. Each figure shows the aggregated data for the different 
fixed U-column speeds. 
All main and interaction effects were analyzed using a 
multi-way repeated ANOVA, with significant differences in 
the main effects analyzed via Bonferroni post-hoc paired-
comparison tests. Analyses were performed using a 
significance level of p = 0.01; significant results are shown in 
square brackets. 
A. Adjusted C-column Speeds with a Fixed U-column Speed 
of 1.5 m/s 
Figure 3 shows the transition of mean C-column speeds 
adjusted by participants to match the fixed U-column speed of 
1.5 m/s, or walking speed.  
Fixed U-column and adjusted C-column speeds did not 
differ significantly with the regular intervals between the C 
columns (C span) set at 3.1 m.  
However, when the C span was 5.9 m, mean adjusted C-
column and fixed U-column speeds differed significantly with 
the intervals between U columns (U span) set at 3.1 m and 
used as a baseline (p = 0.006). This result suggests that, with 
a C span of 5.9 m, C-column speed was perceived to be slower 
relative to that of U-Columns with a U span of 3.1 m at 
walking speed. 
In addition, when the C span was 9.7 m, adjusted C-
column and fixed U-column speeds differed significantly with 
U spans of 3.1 m and 5.9 m (p < 0.001, p = 0.001, respectively). 
This result suggests that, when the C span was 9.7 m, C-
column speed was perceived to be slower relative to that of U 
columns with U spans of 3.1 m or 5.9 m at walking speed. 
In contrast, in comparisons of pairs of adjusted C-column 
speeds, there were no significant differences observed 
between pairs of C-column speeds with C spans of 3.1 m and 
5.9 m. However, with a C span of 9.7 m, however, with a C 
span of 97 m, in which the intervals between columns were 
larger relative to those with C spans of 3.1 m and 5.7 m, 
adjusted C-column speeds with U spans of 3.1 m and 9.7 m 
differed significantly (p < 0.001). 
As there were no significant differences between pairs of 
adjusted C-column speeds when C spans were 3.1 m or 5.9 m, 
the overall picture of results shown in Figure 3 indicates that 
the speeds of peripheral flowing columns with intervals of 9.7 
m were perceived to be slower relative to those of columns 
with intervals of 3.1 m at walking speed. 
B. Adjusted C-column Speeds with a Fixed U-Column 
Speed of 3.0 m/s 
Figure 4 shows the transition of mean adjusted C-column 
speeds of 3.0 m/s, with fixed U-column speed set at running 
speed, for all participants. In a comparison of fixed U-column 
and adjusted C-column speeds, significant differences 
between speeds were observed with C spans of 3.1 m, 5.7 m, 
and 9.7 m. 
First, when the C span was set at 3.1 m, mean adjusted C-
column and fixed U-column speeds differed significantly 
when U spans of 5.9 m or 9.7 m were used as a baseline (ps < 
0.001). These results suggest that, when the C span was 3.1 m, 
C-column speed was perceived to be faster relative to that of 
U columns with U spans of 5.9 m or 9.7 m at running speed. 
Second, when the C span was 5.9 m, mean adjusted C-
column and fixed U-column speeds differed significantly 
when the U span was 3.1 m (p = 0.005). These results suggest 
that, with a C span of 5.9 m, C-column speed was perceived 
to be slower relative to that of U columns with a U span of 3.1 
m at running speed. In contrast, in a comparison of pairs of 
adjusted C-column speeds, no significant differences were 
observed between pairs with U spans of 5.9 m and 3.1 m or 
5.9 m and 9.7 m; however, pairs with U spans of 3.1 m and 
9.7 m differed significantly.  
Third, when the C-Span was 9.7 m, mean adjusted C-
column and fixed U-column speeds differed significantly 
when U spans were 3.1 m and 5.9 m (p < 0.001 and p = 0.003, 
respectively). These results suggest that, with a C span of 9.7 
m, C-column speed was perceived to be slower relative to that 
of U columns with U spans of 3.1 m or 5.9 m at running speed. 
In a comparison of pairs of adjusted C-column speeds, 
significant differences were observed between pairs with U 
spans of 3.1 m and 5.9 m, 5.9 m and 9.7 m, and 3.1 m and 9.7 
m (p < 0.001, p < 0.007, and p < 0.001, respectively). 
The overall picture of results shown in Figure 4 indicates 
that the speed of peripheral flowing columns with intervals of 
9.7 m was perceived to be slower relative to that of those with 
intervals of 3.1 m or 5.9 m at running speed. 
C. Adjusted C-column Speed with a Fixed U-Column Speed 
of 6.0 m/s 
Figure 5 shows the transition of mean values for adjusted 
C-column speeds of 6.0 m/s, with fixed U-columns set at 
bicycle speed, for all participants. A comparison of fixed U-
column and adjusted C-column speeds revealed significant 
differences between all comparable pairs. 
With a C span of 3.1 m, mean adjusted C-column and fixed 
U-column speeds differed significantly when U spans were 
5.9 m and 9.7 m (ps < 0.001). These results suggest that, when 
the C span was 3.1 m, C-column speed was perceived to be 
faster relative to that of U columns with U spans of 5.9 m or 
9.7 m at bicycle speed. 
369
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

With a C span of 5.9 m, mean adjusted C-column and fixed 
U-column speeds differed significantly when U spans were 
3.1 m and 9.7 m (p < 0.002 and p < 0.006, respectively). These 
results suggest that, when the C span was 5.9 m, C-column 
speed was perceived to be faster relative to that of U columns 
with a U span of 3.1 m and slower relative to that of U columns 
with a U span of 9.7 m at bicycle speed. 
With a C span of 9.7 m, mean adjusted C-column and fixed 
U-column speeds differed significantly when U spans were 
3.1 m and 5.9 m (p < 0.001 and p < 0.007, respectively). These 
results suggest that, when the C span was 9.7 m, C-column 
speed was perceived to be slower relative to that of U columns 
with intervals of 3.1 m or 5.9 m at bicycle speed. 
As pairs of adjusted C-column speeds with C spans of 3.1 
m, 5.9 m, and 9.7 m differed significantly, the overall picture 
of results shown in Figure 5 indicates that the speed of 
peripheral flowing columns with intervals of 9.7 m was 
perceived to be slower relative to that of those with intervals 
of 3.1 m or 5.9 m; in addition, the speed of peripheral flowing 
columns with intervals of 5.9 m was perceived to be slower 
relative to that of those with intervals of 3.1 m at bicycle speed. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
The results reported herein generally indicate that 
participants tended to adjust C-column speed (the speed of 
controllable columns) to be faster, relative to that of U-column 
speed (the speed of the fixed columns), when the C span 
(regular intervals between the controllable columns) was 
wider relative to the U span (regular intervals between the 
fixed columns), in all three U-column speed conditions. This 
finding suggests that C-column speed was perceived to be 
slower, relative to U-column speed, when the C span was 
wider relative to the U span, regardless of U-column speed 
condition. 
In contrast, the results also indicate that the participants 
tended to adjust C-column speed to be slower, relative to U-
column speed, when the C span was narrower relative to the 
U span, in all three U-column speed conditions. This finding 
suggests that C-column speed was perceived to be faster, 
relative to U-column speed, when the C span was narrower 
relative to the U span, regardless of U-column speed condition. 
This tendency can be summarized as follows: the speed of 
columns with wider spans was adjusted to be faster relative to 
that of columns with narrower spans, and the speed of 
columns with narrower spans was adjusted to be slower 
relative to that of columns with wider spans. The results also 
show that this tendency increased when U-column speed was 
faster in the 6.0 m/s, 3.0 m/s, and 1.5 m/s U-column speed 
conditions.  
The tendency observed in the current study was similar to 
that of Manser’s achievements in simulator experiments in 
which vehicle drivers reduced their driving speeds gradually 
when exposed to decreasing visual pattern width and 
increased their driving speeds when exposed to increasing 
visual pattern width expressed on the peripheral walls [5]. The 
findings also complemented Allpress’ observation in an open-
road investigation, in which the uneven spacing arrangement 
of roadside cones at a roadwork site were highly effective at 
controlling driving speeds and led to a reduction in the number 
of speed-related accidents [6]. 
The findings of the current study also suggest that the 
speed modification method based on the nature of human 
speed perception, which involves controlling the design of 
visual stimuli expressed in the peripheral visual field, could be 
applicable at the slower speeds of walking or running. 
However, the findings of the current study are inconsistent 
with Godley’s [7] and Katz’s [8] findings. Both studies 
reported that speed perception was not influenced by 
decreasing spacing of peripheral transverse lines on the 
roadside of a simulated roadway. The difference between the 
results of the current study and those of the earlier studies 
could be due to differences in the sizes of visual stimuli 
presented in the peripheral visual fields. In both earlier studies, 
the visual stimuli effects were verified via transverse bars, 
which were very short white lines at the side of the roadway 
surface. In contrast, the visual stimuli in the current study were 
columns of 6 m in height. Large and three-dimensional 
objective visual stimuli, rather than the surficial visual stimuli 
used in the earlier studies, could have exerted a significant 
effect on human speed perception. 
The first limitation of the current study was that the 
experiment was conducted using a movie projected on a flat 
screen, which entailed a horizontal visual angle limited to 60 
degrees. A different visual angle on the screen or an 
immersive experimental instrument, such as the vehicle 
simulator used in the earlier studies, could have yielded 
different results. The second limitation was that the 
background of the scene, which included earth and sky, was 
removed from the virtual space. Numerous factors could 
affect human speed perception, and different combinations of 
these factors yield different results. Other factors should be 
considered in future studies. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The following results constitute the most important 
findings of the study: 
 
 
At 1.5 m/s, human walking speed, the speed of 
peripheral flowing columns with intervals of 9.7 m 
was perceived to be slower relative to that of those 
with intervals of 3.1 m. 
 
 
At 3.0 m/s, human running speed, the speed of 
peripheral flowing columns with intervals of 9.7 m 
was perceived to be slower relative to that of those 
with intervals of 3.1 m or 5.9 m.  
 
 
At 6.0 m/s, bicycle speed, the speed of peripheral 
flowing columns with intervals of 9.7 m was 
perceived to be slower relative to that of those with 
intervals of 3.1 m or 5.9 m.  
 
 
At 6.0 m/s, bicycle speed, the speed of peripheral 
flowing columns with intervals of 5.9 m was 
perceived to be slower relative to that of those with 
intervals of 3.1 m.  
 
370
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The main finding was that, as peripheral visual stimuli, 
intervals between roadside columns exerted a significant 
influence on human speed perception.  
The most memorable finding was that controlling the 
intervals between roadside columns affected the perception of 
human walking and running speeds, which were slower 
relative to those used in early driving studies in which 
environmental roadside design was effective in controlling 
driving speeds; in other words, the findings of the present 
study indicated that the effects observed for higher speeds in 
driving studies could also be observed with slower speeds.  
Future studies should examine human speed perception by 
varying the height and thickness of roadside columns. If future 
studies also find strong relationships between these 
parameters and human speed perception, the collective 
knowledge provided by their findings and those of the current 
study could be useful in designing an improved pedestrian 
environment to ensure comfortable walking and fun running. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by a JSPS KAKENHI Grant-in-
Aid for Young Scientists (A), No. 22686056, and Grant-in-
Aid for Scientific Research (B), No. 26289210. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. J. Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1986. 
[2] G. G. Denton, “The Influence of Visual Pattern on Perceived 
Speed at Newbridge MB Midlothian,” Transp. Road Res. 
Lab., 1973, no. LR531. 
[3] G. G. Denton, “The influence of visual pattern on perceived 
speed.,” Perception, vol. 9, no. 4, Jan. 1980, pp. 393–402. 
[4] K. Kircher and C. Ahlstrom, “The impact of tunnel design and 
lighting on the performance of attentive and visually 
distracted drivers.,” Accid. Anal. Prev., vol. 47, Jul. 2012, pp. 
153–61. 
[5] M. P. Manser and P. a Hancock, “The influence of perceptual 
speed regulation on speed perception, choice, and control: 
tunnel wall characteristics and influences.,” Accid. Anal. 
Prev., vol. 39, no. 1, Jan. 2007, pp. 69–78. 
[6] J. a Allpress and L. S. Leland, “Reducing traffic speed within 
roadwork sites using obtrusive perceptual countermeasures.,” 
Accid. Anal. Prev., vol. 42, no. 2, Mar. 2010, pp. 377–83. 
[7] S. T. Godley, T. J. Triggs, and B. N. Fildes, “Speed Reduction 
Mechanisms of Transverse Lines,” Transp. Hum. Factors, vol. 
2, no. 4, Dec. 2000, pp. 297–312. 
[8] B. Katz, J. Molino, and H. A. Rakha, “Evaluation of Design 
Alternatives of Peripheral Transverse Bars to Reduce Vehicle 
Speeds and Center Line Encroachment in a Driving 
Simulator,” in Transportation Research Board 87th Annual 
Meeting, 2008 No.08-1251.  
 
371
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

