Adaptivity Considerations for Enhancing User-
Centric Web Experience 
Marios Belk 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Cyprus 
Nicosia, Cyprus 
belk@cs.ucy.ac.cy 
Panagiotis Germanakos 
Institute of Informatics and Telematics (IIT) 
Italian National Research Council (CNR) 
Pisa, Italy 
pgerman@cs.ucy.ac.cy 
 
Panagiotis Zaharias 
Department of Management Science & Technology 
Athens University of Economics and Business 
Athens, Greece 
pz@aueb.gr 
George Samaras 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Cyprus 
Nicosia, Cyprus 
cssamara@cs.ucy.ac.cy
 
Abstract - User Experience (UX) design relates to the creation 
of models that affect user experiences during interaction with a 
system, while the incorporation of cognitive factors in the 
personalization process of Web systems might provide a more 
user-centric approach. This paper explores the influence 
specific cognitive factors may have on UX qualities to be used 
as adaptivity factors for personalizing and improving users’ 
experiences in commercial Web-sites. A user experience 
evaluation was conducted where 96 students navigated in an 
existing commercial Web-site for a problem-based task. A user 
experience measurement was performed so as to assess users’ 
perceptions regarding the pragmatic, hedonic and attraction 
qualities of the environment. It has been observed that specific 
cognitive factors have considerable influence on specific 
qualities of user experience. To this end, such findings are 
encouraging for further investigation of the possible impact of 
cognitive factors in terms of enhancing the personalization 
process of commercial Web-sites so as to achieve better user 
experience. 
Keywords - User-adaptive systems; User Modeling (UM); User 
Experience (UX); Cognitive Factors 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
User-adaptive systems [1] have become progressively 
popular in the last decade due to the exponential increase of 
users and availability of digital information, mainly on the 
World Wide Web (WWW). Since its early days, research on 
User-adaptive systems focused on the weaknesses presented 
in traditional “one-size-fits-all” systems [2] that were unable 
to satisfy the heterogeneous needs and preferences of users. 
By User-adaptive systems we mean all computer-
mediated systems that are able to (semi) automatically adapt 
their structure and presentation by learning from data about 
their users; implicitly (i.e., observing user’s interactions) 
and/or explicitly (i.e., direct input from the user). All User-
adaptive systems, from research-oriented to industrial 
systems, and from educational hypermedia systems to 
commercial Web systems, they all share a common goal, i.e., 
to increase the functionality of the system and improve the 
users’ experiences by making it personalized. 
Research on User-adaptive systems straddles the 
boundaries of User Modeling (UM) [3] and User Experience 
(UX) [4]. UM in User-adaptive systems deals with what 
information is important about the user and how to learn and 
represent this information, while UX studies the feelings and 
thoughts of an individual about a product (e.g., interactive 
system). UX mainly takes the affective consequences on the 
human side as opposed to the computer side. It focuses on 
positive emotional outcomes such as joy, fun and pride and 
deals with hedonic and affective (e.g., surprise, diversion, 
intimacy) aspects of HCI design and evaluation. 
The work presented in this paper lies on previous 
research [5] that has shown that individual traits (i.e., 
specific cognitive factors) may have significant impact in the 
adaptation and personalization process of User-adaptive 
systems. Furthermore, current advances in User Experience 
(UX) reveal that there is still enough space for research by 
combining UM and UX strategies for providing a more user-
centric approach in User-adaptive systems. 
In this respect, this work is an attempt to study a possible 
association between specific cognitive factors of a cognitive-
based user model [5] and UX qualities of a valid UX 
measurement (AttrakDiff) [12]. The main aim is to identify 
possible relationships between these cognitive factors and 
UX qualities that will generate new research possibilities; 
personalizing commercial Web-sites based on cognitive 
factors in order to improve users’ experiences (focused on 
hedonic and affective aspects) during interaction with a 
product. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Sections 2 and 3 briefly discuss the research areas related 
with this work; User Modeling (UM) in User-adaptive 
system and User Experience (UX), respectively. Section 4 
348
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

formulates the basis for the investigation of the relationship 
between cognitive factors and UX qualities. Section 5 
presents the experimental methodology of a study with 96 
participants, followed by a discussion on its results. The 
paper concludes with some future prospects. 
II. 
USER MODELING IN USER-ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 
Adaptation decision in User-adaptive systems is based on 
taking into account any vital information about the user, 
represented in the user model, in order to provide adaptation 
effects (i.e., the same system can look different to users with 
different models). The data kept in the user model can be 
distinguished (according to [6]) to user data, usage data, and 
environment data. User data comprise various characteristics 
about the user, usage data comprise data about user’s 
interactions with the system that are utilized to infer 
knowledge about the user, and environment data comprise all 
aspects of the user’s environment (i.e., context, device’s or 
network’s characteristics). 
The work presented in this paper focuses on modeling 
user data. Among the five most popular user features (i.e., 
user’s knowledge, interests, goals, background, and 
individual traits) of user data applied in User-adaptive 
systems [3], this study focuses on users’ individual traits 
(i.e., cognitive factors) for modeling the user. 
The user’s individual traits are features that define the 
user as an individual. Examples are personality factors, 
cognitive factors and learning styles. Unlike other features, 
that are extracted through interviews or based on user’s 
interactions, individual traits are traditionally extracted using 
psychometric tests. Individual traits are stable user features 
that might change only over a long period of time or might 
not change at all, in contrast with other user features, such as 
user’s goals, knowledge, interests that are rather dynamic 
features and change frequently over time. 
Recently, a considerable amount of research efforts have 
been undertaken focusing on modeling and utilizing 
cognitive factors for personalization in User-adaptive 
systems. Several User-adaptive systems [5][28][29][30] have 
distinguished users based on their cognitive styles and 
learning styles and provided different adaptation effects 
accordingly. In a study, Germanakos et al. [5] have 
distinguished imager and verbal users, and wholist users and 
analyst users based on Riding’s Cognitive Style Analysis 
[16]. Each user was provided with adaptive presentation of 
content and different navigation organization. In a similar 
approach, Triantafillou et al. [28] distinguished field-
dependent and field-independent users based on Witkin et al. 
[18] and provided different navigation organization, amount 
of user control, and navigation support tools for these 
groups. Results in both studies indicate that cognitive styles 
have significant impact in the adaptation and personalization 
process of Web environments by increasing usability and 
user satisfaction during navigation and learning performance. 
Such findings suggest that individual traits are important 
user features to take into account in the personalization 
process of a User-adaptive system. 
III. 
USER EXPERIENCE (UX) 
ISO 9241-210 [7] defines User Experience (UX) as "a 
person's perceptions and responses that result from the use or 
anticipated use of a product, system or service". UX is 
dynamic, because it changes over time as the circumstances 
change [8]. Being a multi-dimensional and complicated area 
a universal definition has not been agreed to date. 
Nevertheless, most of the definitions given to UX [9, 10] 
agree that UX focuses on the hedonic and affective aspects 
of HCI, but it also includes a person’s perceptions of the 
practical aspects such as utility, ease of use and efficiency of 
a system.  
Effective HCI design and evaluation involves two 
important qualities: i) usability (i.e., traditional HCI), and ii) 
hedonic, beauty and affective [10]. Based on Jordan [11], the 
latter complements traditional HCI qualities (i.e., pragmatic) 
by suggesting a fixed hierarchical structure of qualities that 
contribute to positive experience. That is, a product has to 
provide functional and usability qualities before hedonic 
aspects can take effect. In contrast to Jordan, Karapanos et 
al. [8] assume the importance of these different qualities to 
vary with several contextual factors, i.e., individual 
differences, type of product, situation the product is used in, 
and change of experience over time. 
Regarding UX evaluation, one of the most influential 
models is the one proposed by Hassenzahl [12]; according to 
this model each interactive product has a pragmatic (related 
to usability) and hedonic quality that contribute to the UX. 
Based on this model a well-known and widely used 
measurement instrument has been developed, the AttrakDiff 
[12], which has been employed in our empirical study 
(version AttrakDiff2). It is composed of four main constructs 
with seven anchor scales (total 28 items). Within each item a 
word-pair spans a scale between two extremes. The scales 
consist of seven stages (-3,-2,-1,0,1,2,3) between the word-
pairs. The oppositional word-pairs consist of two conflictive 
adjectives like “bad” – “good”, or “technical” – “human”. 
The constructs are [12][13]: Pragmatic Quality (PQ), 
which is related to traditional usability issues (such as, 
effectiveness, efficiency, learnability, etc.); Hedonic Quality 
Stimulation (HQ-S), which is about personal growth of the 
user and the need to improve personal skills and knowledge; 
Hedonic Quality Identification (HQ-I), which focuses on the 
human need to be perceived by others in a particular way; 
and Attraction (ATT), which is about the global appeal of an 
interactive product. 
IV. 
RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS BETWEEN COGNITIVE 
FACTORS AND UX QUALITIES 
This section presents specific cognitive factors that could 
influence UX qualities (based on the AttrakDiff analysis) in 
User-adaptive systems. The goal is to initially investigate 
and formulate a cognitive-based user model for User-
adaptive systems in relation to the UX perspective (Figure 
1).  
349
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. Cognitive Styles 
Cognitive styles represent the particular set of strengths 
and preferences that an individual or group of people have in 
how they take in and process information. By taking into 
account these preferences and defining specific strategies, 
empirical research has shown that cognitive styles correlate 
with performance in a Web-based environment [14][21]. 
Cognitive styles have been defined by Messick as 
“consistent individual differences in preferred ways of 
organizing and processing information and experience, a 
construct that is different than learning style” [15]. 
Regarding the hypermedia information space, amongst 
the numerous proposed theories of individual style, a 
selection of the most appropriate and technologically feasible 
cognitive (and learning) styles (those that can be projected 
on the processes of selection and presentation of Web-
content and the tailoring of navigational tools) has been 
studied, such as Riding’s Cognitive Style Analysis (CSA) 
(Verbal-Imagery, 
and 
Wholistic-Analytic) 
[16], 
Felder/Silverman Index of Learning Styles (ILS) (4 scales: 
Active vs. Reflective, Sensing vs. Intuitive, Visual vs. 
Verbal, and Global vs. Sequential) [17], Witkin’s Field-
Dependent, and Field-Independent [18], and Kolb’s Learning 
Styles 
(Converger, 
Diverger, 
Accommodator, 
and 
Assimilator) [19], in order to identify how users transform 
information into knowledge (constructing new cognitive 
frames). 
TABLE I.  
RIDING COGNITIVE STYLE SCALE 
CSA Scale 
Typology 
Description 
Web Implications 
Imagery- 
Verbal 
Imager 
Represents 
information in 
mental pictures 
Prefers graphic, 
pictorial/visual 
representation 
Imagery- 
Verbal 
Interme
diate 
No specific 
preference 
Combination of 
graphics and text 
Imagery- 
Verbal 
Verbal 
Represents 
information 
verbally 
Prefers material in 
text/auditory form 
Wholistic- 
Analytic 
Wholist 
Organizes 
information as 
whole 
Needs more 
guidance, serial 
navigation approach 
Wholistic- 
Analytic 
Interme
diate 
No specific 
preference 
Combination of 
scattered and serial 
navigation 
Wholistic- 
Analytic 
Analyst 
Organizes 
information in 
parts 
Independent and 
scattered navigation 
 
Riding and Cheema’s CSA [20] has been used as a 
reference theory of cognitive style in previous research [21] 
due to the fact that the two independent scales (Table 1) of 
the 
CSA 
(Imagery-Verbal, 
and 
Wholistic-Analytic) 
correspond at a considerable extend to the structure of 
hypermedia (i.e., Web) environments. A personalized 
environment that is supported by an automated mechanism 
can be altered mainly at the levels of content selection and 
hypermedia structure; the content is essentially either visual 
or verbal (or auditory), while the manipulation of links can 
lead to a more analytic and segmented structure, or to a more 
holistic and cohesive environment. These are actually the 
differences in the preferences of individuals that belong to 
each dimension of the CSA scale [22]. 
This study utilizes Riding’s Cognitive Style Analysis 
(CSA) [16] because its implications can be mapped on the 
information space more precisely, since they consist of 
distinct scales that respond directly to different aspects of the 
Web space. The CSA implications (Table 1) are quite clear 
in terms of hypermedia design (visual/verbal content 
presentation and wholistic/analytic pattern of navigation). 
In this respect, the following research assumptions could 
be formulated: The Imagery-Verbal factor, which mainly 
influences the presentation of content (visual/textual), might 
primarily affect the Attraction (ATT) and Hedonic Quality 
Stimulation (HQ-S) constructs that relate to the overall 
appeal of a Web-site and stimulation and attention through 
inspiring 
and 
supportive 
content 
as 
well 
as 
interaction/presentation 
techniques. 
Furthermore, 
the 
Wholist-Analyst factor might primarily affect Pragmatic 
Quality (PQ) that is related to traditional usability issues (i.e., 
instrumental efficiency and effectiveness) because this factor 
has high impact on the navigation and instrumental 
functionality (e.g., navigation support, supportive tools) of a 
Web-site. 
B. Working Memory Span 
The concept of Working Memory Span (WMS) [23] also 
fits very well into our rationale [21] of personalizing Web 
content on the basis of users’ cognitive abilities and 
preferences. “The term working memory refers to a brain 
system that provides temporary storage and manipulation of 
the information necessary for such complex cognitive tasks 
as language comprehension, learning, and reasoning” [24]; 
Baddeley also refers to individual differences in the WMS 
(digit) of the population, thus providing a very good 
argument for using this concept as a personalization factor. 
We are mainly interested in the notion of the WMS; since 
it can be measured and the implications on information 
processing are rather clear (Table 2). Each WMS instance 
(i.e., low/medium/high), indicating the working memory 
capacity of a person, has implications on the navigation, 
quantity of content and aesthetics of a Web environment. 
Due to the visual form of presentation in the Web, we have 
focused especially on the measurement of visual WMS [25] 
in terms of psychometrics. 
TABLE II.  
WORKING MEMORY SPAN SCALE 
WMS  
Description 
Web Implications 
Low 
Low working 
memory capacity 
Needs more guidance in Web-
sites, navigation support tools, 
less content, emphasize content 
Medium 
Medium working 
memory capacity 
Prefers navigation support tools, 
emphasize content 
High 
High working 
memory capacity 
More complex structure of Web-
sites, more content 
 
The idea of exploring the role of working memory in 
hypermedia environments has indeed generated research. 
DeStefano and LeFevre [26] reviewed 38 studies that 
address mainly the issue of cognitive load in hypertext 
350
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

reading, and working memory is often considered as an 
individual factor of significant importance, even at the level 
of explaining differences in performance. Lee and Tedder 
[27] examine the role of working memory in different 
computer texts, and their results show that low WMS 
learners do not perform equally well in hypertext 
environments. 
The research assumption in this case is that WMS might 
significantly affect Pragmatic Quality (PQ), Hedonic Quality 
Stimulation (HQ-S) and Attraction (ATT), since WMS has 
implications on the navigation, quantity of content and 
aesthetic appeal of a Web-site. 
 
Figure 1.  Relationship Between Cognitive Factors and UX Qualities 
Concluding, Hedonic Quality Identity (HQ-I) might not 
significantly affect any of the cognitive factors in the current 
context since it is essentially intended for evaluation of 
hedonic qualities of products, rather than software (i.e., Web-
based environments). Thus, the HQ-I construct is not 
included in the current analysis. 
V. 
STUDY 
In this section, we describe a preliminary study that aims 
to evaluate the experiences users had in a commercial Web-
site based on their cognitive factors and support the 
aforementioned possible relationship between UX qualities. 
A UX measurement (AttrakDiff2) was performed so as to 
assess their perceptions regarding the pragmatic and hedonic 
qualities of the environment. 
A. Methodology and Sampling 
The study was carried out at the University of Cyprus 
during the whole month of March 2011. Our sample 
included 96 students of the Computer Science department. 
The participation was voluntarily. All participants’ ages 
varied from 18 to 21, with a mean age of 19. All users 
accessed a commercial Web-site using personal computers 
located at the laboratories of the university, divided in groups 
of approximately 20 participants. Each session lasted about 
40 minutes; 20 minutes was required for the user modeling 
process, while the remaining time was devoted to navigate in 
an existing commercial Web-site and evaluate their 
experiences using AttrakDiff2. 
During the user modeling process, students provided 
their demographic characteristics (i.e., name, age, education, 
etc.) and performed a number of interactive tests using 
attention and cognitive processing efficiency grabbing 
psychometric tools [31] in order to quantify their cognitive 
characteristics. 
Furthermore, the students were asked to navigate in a 
replica of the official Web-site of HTC Corp. (www.htc.com, 
derived on March 1, 2011) that was developed for the 
purpose of this experiment. The Web-site’s content was 
about a series of mobile phones; general description, 
technical specifications and additional information were 
available for each model.  
The students were asked to fulfill three tasks; they had to 
find the necessary information to answer three sequential 
multiple choice questions that were given to them while 
navigating and which were referring to a particular type of 
mobile phone. There was certainly only one correct answer 
that was possible to be found relatively easy, in the sense that 
the students were not required to have hardware related 
knowledge or understanding. 
As soon as they completed the three tasks, they were 
presented with an online version of AttrakDiff2 to express 
their opinion regarding the hedonic and pragmatic qualities 
of the environment they just navigated. 
B. Results 
In order to assess the significance and possible impact 
cognitive factors may have on UX qualities, a comparison 
has been performed between the cognitive factor’s instances 
per UX construct.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Mean UX Values per Imagery-Verbal Scale 
Figure 2 illustrates the mean values of the UX 
dimensions per Verbal-Imagery scale. According to the 
results, we observe considerable deviation between the 
instances in Hedonic Quality Stimulation (HQ-S) and 
Attraction (ATT). In HQ-S, mean scores of Imagers were 
0.98, Verbalizers 0.79 and Intermediates 0.48, and in ATT, 
mean scores of Imagers were 1.26, Verbalizers 1.01 and 
Intermediates 1.1, indicating that users based on this 
cognitive factor perceived differently the hedonic quality 
(stimulation) and overall appeal (attraction) of the 
environment. In addition, based on an empirical observation 
of the environment, it can be easily revealed that the 
environment is rich with graphical/visual representations.  
To this end, the Imagery-Verbal factor primarily 
influences the HQ-S and ATT constructs and that Imagers 
351
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

find the environment more stimulating and attractive since 
the environment contains a lot of graphical representations. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Mean UX Values per Wholistic-Analytic Scale 
Figure 3 illustrates the mean values of the UX 
dimensions per Wholistic-Analytic scale. According to the 
results, we observe considerable deviation between the 
instances in Pragmatic Quality (PQ). In PQ, mean scores of 
Wholists were 0.93, Analysts 0.79 and Intermediates 0.36 
indicating that users based on this cognitive factor perceived 
differently the pragmatic quality (i.e., usability) of the 
environment. Regarding the Attraction (ATT), marginal 
deviation has been observed, with Wholists having mean 
scores of 1.08, Analysts 1.05 and Intermediates 1.03, 
indicating that the Wholistic-Analytic factor does not 
significantly influence ATT. This is in accordance with the 
implications the Wholistic-Analytic factor has on the Web 
space; it primarily influences usability of a Web-site (i.e., 
different navigation, support tools for different user models). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Mean UX Values per Working Memory Span 
Figure 4 illustrates the mean values of the UX 
dimensions per Working Memory Span. According to the 
results, we observe considerable deviation between the 
instances in Hedonic Quality Stimulation (HQ-S) and 
Pragmatic Quality (PQ). In HQ-S, users with low working 
memory span (WMS) had mean scores of 1.03, with medium 
WMS 0.72 and with high WMS 0.84, and in PQ, mean 
scores of low WMS users were 0.78, medium WMS users 
0.53 and high WMS users 0.49, indicating that users based 
on these cognitive factors perceived differently the hedonic 
quality (stimulation) and usability of the environment. In 
Attraction (ATT), minor deviation of ratings has been 
observed, indicating that this construct is not primarily 
influenced by this cognitive factor. 
In conclusion, the WMS factor primarily influences the 
HQ-S and PQ constructs and that users with low WMS find 
the environment more stimulating and “usable” since the 
environment contains supportive content and a lot of 
graphical indications. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, this empirical work focused on the 
influence specific cognitive factors may have on UX 
constructs. A UX measurement was performed so as to 
assess users’ perceptions regarding the pragmatic and 
hedonic qualities of a commercial Web-site. 
Initial findings indicate that incorporating specific 
cognitive factors in the personalization process of 
commercial Web-sites may affect users’ experiences. Results 
reveal that the Imagery-Verbal factor primarily affects 
Hedonic Quality Stimulation (HQ-S) and Attraction (ATT), 
the Wholistic-Analytic factor primarily affects Pragmatic 
Quality (PQ), and the WMS factor primarily affects Hedonic 
Quality (HQ-S) and Pragmatic Quality (PQ). In addition, 
results indicate that Hedonic Quality Identity (HQ-I) does 
not primarily affect any of the cognitive factors in the current 
context, which is in accordance with theory [12], since HQ-I 
is essentially intended for evaluation of hedonic qualities of 
products, rather than software (i.e., Web environments). 
The relevant research is in its infancy and further 
empirical studies are needed to investigate UX issues in such 
context. A future research prospect is to employ 
personalization methods [5] in order to assess the impact 
cognitive factors may have in the personalization process of 
commercial Web-sites, in terms of amplifying users’ 
experiences during navigation session. In this respect, an 
experimental study with real users will be conducted in the 
future (similar experimental approach to Germanakos et al. 
[5]), 
where 
specific 
adaptation 
and 
personalization 
techniques will be employed in the same commercial Web-
site used in this study. The main aim is to adapt and 
personalize the original environment based on each 
individual’s cognitive factors in such a way (e.g., remove 
some graphical representations of the Web content for 
Verbal users or enhance navigation support for Wholist 
users) to achieve positive experience. In order to assess the 
approach, users will evaluate the original and personalized 
version of the commercial Web-site utilizing AttrakDiff2. A 
statistical analysis will be performed in order to compare the 
user experience evaluations between the two different 
environments. Based on the influence specific cognitive 
instances may have on UX qualities, we assume that the 
personalized version will lead to better emotional outcomes 
and that the UX qualities will have better ratings than the 
original version. 
Even though the evaluation of this concept in the 
eCommerce domain is encouraging for our work, there is 
352
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

still a lot room of investigation in order to shed light on this 
complex and dynamic research area. Main goal is to initiate 
and drive this research to a concrete cognitive factors’ 
framework that can be used in any hypermedia system 
proposing a new set of design guidelines for the 
enhancement of one-to-one Web services’ delivery. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is co-funded by the EU project CONET 
(INFSO-ICT-224053) and by the project smarTag (within 
the framework of University of Cyprus internal funded 
projects). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Schneider-Hufschmidt, T. Kühme and U. Malinowski, 
Adaptive user interfaces: Principles and practice. Elsevier 
Science Inc., New York, USA, 1993. 
[2] P. Brusilovsky and M.T. Maybury, “From adaptive 
hypermedia to the adaptive web,” Communications of the 
ACM, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 30-33, 2002.  
[3] P. Brusilovsky and E. Millán, “User models for adaptive     
hypermedia and adaptive educational systems,” In The 
Adaptive Web, vol. 4321, P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa and W. 
Nejdl, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 
Berlin, 2007, pp. 3-53. 
[4] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky, “User experience - a 
research agenda,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 
25, no. 2,  pp. 91-97, 2006. 
[5] P. Germanakos, N. Tsianos, Z. Lekkas, C. Mourlas, M. Belk 
and G. Samaras, “Towards an Adaptive and Personalized 
Web Interaction using Human Factors,” In Advances in 
Semantic Media Adaptation and Personalization, vol. 2, M. C. 
Angelides, P. Mylonas and M. Wallace, Eds. Auerbach 
Publications, 2009, pp. 247-281. 
[6] A. Kobsa, J. Koenemann and W. Pohl, “Personalized 
hypermedia presentation techniques for improving online 
customer relationships,” Technical report, no. 66, German 
National Research Center for Information Technology, St. 
Augustin, Germany, 1999. 
[7] ISO FDIS 9241-210:2009, Ergonomics of human system 
interaction - Part 210: Human-centered design for interactive 
systems 
(formerly 
known 
as 
13407). 
International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO), Switzerland, 2009. 
[8] E. Karapanos, M. Hassenzahl and J. Martens, “User 
experience over time,” Extended Abstracts on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI’08), 2008, pp. 3561-3566. 
[9] J. Forlizzi and K. Battarbee, “Understanding experience in 
interactive systems,” Proc. on Designing interactive systems: 
processes, practices, methods, and techniques (DIS'04), ACM, 
2004, pp. 261-268. 
[10] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky, “User experience - a 
research agenda,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 
25, no. 2, 2006, pp. 91-97. 
[11] P.W. 
Jordan, 
Designing 
Pleasurable 
Products: 
An 
Introduction to New Human Factors. Taylor & Francis Group, 
2000. 
[12] M. Hassenzahl, “The interplay of beauty, goodness, and 
usability 
in 
interactive 
products,” 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 19, 2004, pp. 319-349. 
[13] M. Schrepp, T. Held and B. Laugwitz, “The influence of 
hedonic quality on the attractiveness of user interfaces of 
business management software,” Interacting with Computers, 
vol. 18, no. 5, 2006, pp. 1055-1069. 
[14] K. H. Wang, T. H. Wang, W. L. Wang and S. C. Huang, 
“Learning 
styles 
and 
formative 
assessment 
strategy: 
enhancing student achievement in Web-based learning,” 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 22, no. 3, 2006, 
pp. 207-217. 
[15] E. Sadler-Smith, “The relationship between learning style and 
cognitive style,” Personality and Individual Differences, vol. 
30, no. 4, 2001, pp. 609-616. 
[16] R. 
Riding, 
Cognitive 
Style 
Analysis 
- 
Research 
Administration. Learning and Training Technology, 2001. 
[17] R. Felder and L. Silverman, “Learning and Teaching Styles in 
Engineering Education,” Engineering Education, vol. 78, 
1988, pp. 674-681. 
[18] H. A. Witkin, C. A. Moore, D. R. Goodenough and P. W. 
Cox, Field-dependent and field-independent cognitive styles 
and their educational implications,” Review of Educational 
Research, vol. 47, 1977, pp 1-64. 
[19] A. Kolb and D. Kolb, The Kolb Learning Style Inventory-
Version 3.1, Technical Specifications, Experience Based 
Learning Systems, 2005. 
[20] R. Riding and I. Cheema, “Cognitive styles - An overview 
and integration,” Educational Psychology, vol. 11, no. 3-4, 
1991, pp. 193-215. 
[21] N. Tsianos, P. Germanakos, Z. Lekkas and C. Mourlas, “An 
Assessment of Human Factors in Adaptive Hypermedia 
Environments,” In Intelligent User Interfaces: Adaptation and 
Personalization Systems and Technologies, C. Mourlas and P. 
Germanakos, Eds. IGI Global, 2009, pp. 1-34. 
[22] E. Sadler-Smith and R. Riding, “Cognitive style and 
instructional preferences,” Instructional Science, vol. 27, no 5, 
1999, pp. 355-371. 
[23] A. D. Baddeley, “The concept of working memory: A view of 
its current state and probable future development,” Cognition, 
vol. 10, no. 1-3, 1981, pp. 17-23. 
[24] A. D. Baddeley, “Working Memory,” Science, vol. 255, 1992, 
pp. 556-559. 
[25] R. H. Loggie, G. M. Zucco, A. D. Baffeley, “Interference 
with visual short-term memory,” Acta Psychologica,” vol. 75, 
no. 1, 1990, pp. 55-74. 
[26] D. DeStefano and J. Lefevre, “Cognitive load in hypertext 
reading: A review,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 23, 
no. 3, 2007, pp. 1616-1641. 
[27] M. J. Lee and M. C. Tedder, “The effects of three different 
computer texts on readers’ recall: based on working memory 
capacity,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 19, no. 6, 
2003, pp. 767-783. 
[28] E. Triantafillou, A. Pomportsis, S. Demetriadis and E. 
Georgiadou, “The value of adaptivity based on cognitive 
style: an empirical study,” British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 35, 2004, pp. 95-106. 
[29] S. Graf and Kinshuk, “Advanced Adaptivity in Learning 
Management Systems by Considering Learning Styles,” Proc. 
of the International Workshop on Social and Personal 
Computing for Web-Supported Learning Communities 
(SPeL’09), 2009, pp. 235-238. 
[30] K. A. Papanikolaou, M. Grigoriadou, H. Kornilakis and G. D. 
Magoulas, “Personalising the Interaction in a Web-based 
Educational Hypermedia System: the case of INSPIRE,” 
User-Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 13, no. 3, 
2003, pp. 213-267. 
[31] AdaptiveWeb 
System, 
http://adaptiveweb.cs.ucy.ac.cy, 
March, 2011. 
 
353
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

