From Difficult Artifacts to Easy to Use Designs 
Tone Bratteteig 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
P.B. 1080, 0316 Oslo, Norway 
tone@ifi.uio.no 
 
Guri Verne 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
P.B. 1080, 0316 Oslo, Norway 
guribv@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—There are many reasons why artifacts and systems 
become difficult to use. In this paper, we investigate difficulties 
as a basis for design for ease of use. Difficulties may stem from 
the artifact or system itself, or from the artifact or system in 
use in context. Technology introduces new tasks, and both 
learning new tasks and unlearning the old ways pose 
challenges. We propose that users’ habits and previous 
knowledge are used as resources for design, and present a 
conceptual framework for design for coherence and simplicity 
from a user’s perspective.  
Keywords: design; competence; ease-of-use; context. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Usability is often defined as the ease of use and 
learnability of an artifact, sometimes narrowed down to 
specific users in a specified use context having specific 
achievement goals (e.g., ISO 9241). But what does “ease of 
use” mean more precisely? Nielsen [1] lists five aspects of 
usability: learnability, efficiency, memorability, low error 
rate, and satisfaction. Shneiderman and Plaisant [2] present a 
more elaborate list of eight aspects: consistency, universal 
design, feedback, closure of dialogs, reversal of action, 
control, error prevention, and memory load. Except for 
universal design, all the aspects are general and concern the 
design of the artifact seen as a stand-alone context-
independent thing. Our research shows, however, that it is 
difficult to achieve a total independence of contextual design 
elements – it is impossible and even unwanted: “All products 
make some reference to either products extant during 
previous generations or products from different companies or 
product families.” [3: 182]. Such references are important to 
build on when trying to understand how to use the product. 
Even well-designed stand-alone artifacts can be difficult to 
use for users not sharing the contextual competence pre-
supposed in the design. We have seen this in our research, 
where we focus on elderly people and the technological 
support that is supposed to enable them to live independently 
in their homes longer [4]. In this paper we discuss how 
knowing how technology is difficult to use can be a basis for 
designing solutions that are easy to use. 
The paper is structured as follows: In Section II, we give 
a review of literature about problems in using technology. In 
Section III, we present reports from two studies of use of 
technology: the use of public services like tax, and the use of 
common home artifacts like remote controls or mobile 
devices that need charging. Section IV discusses the 
competencies needed for users to use an artifact, as well as 
how such competencies are experienced and embodied. In 
Section V, we discuss how we can go from knowing about 
the difficulties people have in using an artifact to designing 
an artifact that is easy for them to use. Section VI concludes 
the paper.  
II. 
PROBLEMS WHEN USING TECHNOLOGY 
A close study of people using IT artifacts reveals that 
they often find technology difficult to use [5]. A classic 
study is Suchman’s study of use of a Xerox copy machine 
[6][7] demonstrating how operating a copy machine was 
difficult due to the difference between the scripted “plan” in 
the copy machine and the users’ (situated) understanding of 
copying. Another classic is Gasser’s study of how people 
work around computer systems that do not fit the work they 
need to do, show that people carry out their jobs also with 
non-supporting artifacts [8]. Even when an IT system works 
well, it may not work well together with other systems 
[9][5].  
A different set of studies shows that an artifact can be 
used in different ways, e.g., Barley’s classic study [10] of a 
CT scanner: the same technology used differently in two 
radiology departments demonstrates that the same artifact 
can be part of very different socio-technical practices.  
For designers, it is particularly interesting to study the 
non-users of an artifact. They are, however, very difficult to 
get hold of (unless they can be located in a particular place, 
e.g., an organization). Orlikowski [11] and Star and Ruhleder 
[12] describe how people are not using a computer system 
with good reasons, indicating that contextual matters (like 
reward systems) may offer good reasons for not using a 
system – irrespective of the usability aspects of the system 
itself. As a way to get access to non-users of the public 
service web pages of the tax authorities, Verne [13] studied 
people calling the authorities’ call centre. She found that 
even if tax rules are complicated most of the questions 
concern relatively simple tax issues and that the callers’ 
problems are concerned with interpreting and applying the 
rules to their own life. 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A number of studies concerning assistive technology in 
the homes of elderly people have been carried out, see e.g. 
[14]. Noting that much of the technology is not used,  
Greenhalgh et al [15] focus on the subjective opinions and 
experiences from the elderly’s own technology use. They 
call for a different design approach in order to develop 
technology that supports the elderly in achieving what 
matters to them and enhances the quality of their life [15]. 
Many of the current solutions aimed at elderly users are 
imported from other application areas and not designed 
specifically for an elderly user group, e.g., touch screens 
[16].  
We know a great deal about systems and artifacts that are 
not easy to use, but what is less clear is how to get from 
knowing what is difficult to designing a solution that is easy 
to use. In this paper, we have set out to do this: we analyse a 
set of studies of difficult-to-use-technologies in order to 
arrive at design ideas for easy-to-use solutions.  
III. 
DIFFICULT-TO-USE 
Investigating people’s reasons for not using an artifact is 
very instructive for designers: there may be a range of logical 
and sensible reasons for not using an artifact or using it in 
“wrong” ways. In this section, we report from our studies of 
users and non-users of computer technology.  
A. Badly designed Systems and Artifacts 
Some artifacts are difficult to use because of the design. 
Verne’s [17] study of citizens’ calls to the tax information 
call centre showed that many callers had tried to use the 
online tax self-service without succeeding. Listening in to 
474 telephone calls over a period of 22 months gave a basis 
for understanding the callers’ problems. Examples of 
problems ranged from not finding their PIN-code to more 
specific questions like a woman receiving welfare benefits 
and had tax deducted from her pension, but being aware that 
welfare pension was tax free. The call centre advisors often 
walk the callers through the self-service web site, 
commenting that the online services were not user-friendly. 
To callers who do not know which numbers in their tax card 
they need to change, reporting online makes not much 
difference from filling out a paper form. But online tax self-
services may introduce additional complexity for the 
citizens. 
We also include a second set of examples from a study of 
IT technology for independent living in a home for elderly 
people [14], involving sensors, alarms and a tablet connected 
to the Internet. We have studied their use since 2012, 
documenting that several of the technologies do not function 
well in everyday use. The tablet, for example, has a wall-
mounted charger station designed to charge while showing 
the time (Fig. 1 upper). However, the slot for positioning the 
charger in the right position is narrow and difficult to see, 
and many users do not manage to mount it right and do not 
discover this until the battery is empty. Also the very 
common stove alarm is difficult to use for people in wheel 
chairs or people who find it difficult to hold the turn-off-
switch while stretching and bending over the stove to turn 
the alarm off (Fig. 1 lower).  
B. The Artifact in Use  
Some artifacts are difficult to use because of the use 
context and the use situation. Verne’s [17] study of callers 
found that many people call because they need help with 
matching the rules and regulations with events and 
circumstances in their life, not because tax regulations and 
rules are complicated. Her data includes several examples of 
simple tax rules that may represent problems when applied to 
a person’s life situation.  
* When citizens move, they are required to send a 
notification of address to the Population Register. A citizen 
called to ask if he needed to send a notification to the tax 
authorities when he changed his job. (The answer is no.)  
*A newly retired citizen needed guidance on how her 
new status affected her personal economy and on which of 
her different types of incomes are subject to which taxes.   
*A house owner who earned money from renting her 
house asked if renovating costs could be deducted from her 
tax. She rented the apartment to her son, and wondered how 
the rules were applied in this case.  
In all three examples, the life situation or circumstances 
of the citizen triggered the phone call. In the first example, 
the caller’s life situation was irrelevant to the tax regulation 
in question, but in the two others the life situation needed to 
be matched with the rules and regulation by a tax expert.  
Our second set of examples is from everyday 
technologies used by elderly people in their homes. We 
found that these types of difficulties arise when people use 
technologies that they do not have previous experience with. 
One example is an active woman, approximately 85 years 
old, who uses a hearing aid. She is well organised, educated, 
and has had an active work life, and she uses e.g. her TV 
effortlessly. Her occupational therapist has tried to teach her 
how to use an amplifier for her hearing aid:  a wireless 
microphone that amplifies sounds and submits to her hearing 
aid. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Welfare technology: Tablet charging (above), stove alarm 
(below) 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The “accessory pen” is easy to use once fitted to the hearing 
aid: the manufacturer says that it is “zero hassle” because it 
is “completely simple to use, with one-click connection of 
receivers and fully automated settings” [18]. Using the pen 
involves pushing one small button in addition to charging it. 
However, the old woman finds the pen difficult to use. She 
does not remember how to use it from one therapist visit to 
the next. She wants to charge it before she uses it, but 
forgets. The occupational therapist (whose job it is to adapt 
support devices to individual users) has suggested that she 
instead charges it after she has used it, and that she keeps it 
in the charger until the next time she needs it. But in the “old 
days”, keeping devices in the charger can be dangerous, and 
the old woman therefore does not want to do this – even if 
the therapist assures her that with this equipment there is no 
danger. The old woman often finds her hearing aid amplifier 
not charged when she needs it.  
C. Other’s Doings 
Some technology problems are caused by factors outside 
the user’s control, e.g., by actions or errors made by third 
parties. Some callers to the tax information call centre had a 
problem getting too little welfare support because the welfare 
agency “tidied up their systems” and deducted 50 % of the 
benefits because of a missing tax card. The tax authorities 
receive many calls from people who have not received a tax 
card in the mail, but it is often their own doing (or rather: not 
doing). However, in one case the street address had been 
changed by the municipality, without the caller being aware 
that she needed to send a notification of change of address – 
since in this case, she had not moved!  
A more complicated case was a young man who had 
received a bill for penalty tax for underreporting income two 
years ago. His employer had gone bankrupt and his reported 
income was disputed. There was no employer who could 
confirm the callers’ claims, and he had no documentation for 
his version of what had happened. In principle, he needed to 
document the non-event of not underreporting income. The 
advisor helped him by suggesting steps to take to retrieve 
documentation and proceed with his claims.   
The smart home technologies in the apartment building 
for elderly people had electricity saving automation. 
However, the first winter everybody experienced that the 
apartments were very cold, and the elderly people (who 
normally need higher indoor temperatures because they do 
not move much) had to get help from the janitor service to 
correct the temperature. It took a long time to find out that 
some of the basic calculations for the electricity system were 
wrong resulting in faulty temperature regulation in the 
building [19]. We work in a smart building ourselves and 
have experienced similar difficulties when trying to identify 
the reasons for bad temperature regulation mechanisms. 
When using artifacts that are part of a larger complex 
system, the problems a user experiences may result from 
other people’s activities or errors.  
D. What is Difficult?  
Difficulties that stem from the artifact or system itself 
pose different challenges than those stemming from the 
artifact-in-context or in-interaction. We sum up the kinds of 
difficulties in Table 1, and indicate what kinds of challenges 
they pose.  
TABLE I.  
DIFFERENT KINDS OF DIFFICULTIES WITH ARTIFACTS AND 
SYSTEMS, AND THE CHALLENGES THEY POSE 
What is 
difficult? 
Kinds of difficulties  
Artifact  
Context 
Activities by 
others 
Examples: 
Holding the 
turn-off 
switch. 
Positioning of 
the charger. 
Online tax self 
services 
Personal economy 
when retiring. Tax 
deductions for 
renting out a house 
to family. 
Tax card when 
starting a new job  
Bankrupcy by an 
employer. Welfare 
agency “tidies up 
their systems”. 
Errors made by 
subcontractors.  
Challenges:  
Difficult to 
use, afraid to 
make errors 
Matching artifact 
with own life 
situation or 
circumstances 
Disentangling 
interactions and 
complexities 
IV. 
COMPETENCE 
Competence, as the ability to do something successfully 
or efficiently, is important for using technology. The 
examples in Section III show that competence can concern 
the design that makes the operation of the technology 
difficult (III.A) as well as the adaptation of the technology to 
the actual situation (III.B). In both cases, the users have to do 
fitting work [8] in order to use the technology 
A. What we Know 
A usability test of a video conferencing system showed 
that users who did not have the same technological 
experience as the designers: in this case: an iPhone, did not 
understand the interaction mechanisms and hence had 
problems operating the system [20]. Langdon et al [3] 
discuss this problem on a more general level, showing that 
“similarity of prior experience to the usage situation was the 
main determinant of performance, although there was also 
some evidence for a gradual, age-related capability decline.” 
(p. 179). They conclude that in their test of driving a new car 
“there was … some clear evidence that experience may be 
more influential than age” (p. 189). Docampo [21] has 
identified four technology generations: electro-mechanical 
period, remote control era, use of displays, and use of 
layered menus, basically distinguishing between before and 
after 1960. The generations affect learning new technology 
visible in a discontinuity of errors and task timings between 
the generations. 
Previous experience is a salient feature that builds self-
efficacy [22]. According to self-efficacy theory for human 
agency, belief in one’s own competence and mastery is an 
important factor for succeeding. In their study of the effects 
of training programs in computer use for older adults, Wild 
et al. [23] found that after one year of consistent computer 
use the participants reported reduced levels of anxiety and 
increased self-confidence in their abilities using computers. 
Participants with mild cognitive impairments were less likely 
to demonstrate increased efficacy and competence. This is in 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

line with our own empirical findings. We interviewed an 
ergo-therapist, who had the experience that elderly people 
with mild cognitive impairments were able to learn new 
practices, but with much training and follow-up from her.  
Langdon et al [3] suggest that “prior experience with 
similar products and product features is a strong predictor of 
the usability of products over the wider range of capabilities. 
This similarity results from experience with same brand, or 
functionally and perceptually differing products, provided 
that key functional features and visual appearances are 
maintained.” (p. 190). Hurtienne and Langdon [24] suggest a 
continuum of knowledge sources starting with 1) innate 
knowledge like reflexes and 2) sensorimotor experiences like 
speed, gravity (early childhood learning), 3) culture 
(everyday life), and 4) expertise acquired in a profession or 
hobby. Knowledge about tools crosses these “levels” of 
knowledge. They suggest that knowledge residing on the 
sensorimotor level of the continuum is basic to most people 
and is acquired early in life.  
B. How we Know 
Langdon et al found that previous experience provided 
guidance on how to carry out their tests [3: 182], which 
explained why their older test-participants were not able to 
use the technology, rather than they having lower cognitive 
capability as a result of ageing.  
Using technology is also a bodily experience. Höök [25] 
discusses bodily ways of knowing in her study of the 
challenges she experienced when learning the English style 
of horseback riding having experience from riding Icelandic 
style. The horses are trained to react differently to signals 
(from the legs, hands, body posture) from the rider in the 
different riding schools. Competence in and experience from 
horseback riding resides in the body and becomes more or 
less automatic. 
Höök [25] describes how she needed to practice again 
and again with constant feedback from the instructor to be 
able to learn the new movements, positioning and 
interactions. Even though she cognitively knew and 
understood how she was supposed to move and position her 
body, it was difficult to do/perform the new movements at 
the right moments.  
 
C. Learning and Un-learning 
Höök [25] describes vividly how learning new 
movements and ways of communication implied unlearning 
the old ways. Unlearning bodily ways of knowing implies 
consciously and deliberately practicing not doing the usual 
activity and instead practice something new. Having learnt 
how and when to perform a new movement is different from 
practicing the old habits. Unlearning bodily knowledge 
requires conscious cognitive work before it becomes a 
habitual and automated practice.  
A good example is modern hearing aids, where the 
wearer will need to train his or her brain to filter out noise 
from the sound that s/he wants to hear in order to get the 
most out of the hearing aid. The brain needs some years to 
re-adjust, and middle-aged people will benefit from using the 
hearing aids before it is strictly necessary. The brain needs 
time to allow for automation that enables the activity to take 
place outside of the conscious brain activity [26].  
Changes in rules and regulations as well as in the 
technology for doing taxes introduce new tasks for the 
citizens. In 2008 was submitting the tax return form made 
optional in that Norwegian citizens could just accept the 
figures that was already gathered by the tax authorities and 
presented in a pre-completed form. Accepting was done by a 
non-action: by not making changes in the pre-completed 
form. Hence, learning to differentiate and understand when 
to report changes has become a task. Many of the callers 
were not aware that they did not have to send in a paper 
form, and that they could report online [13]. In practice it can 
be difficult to differentiate between learning new tasks and 
unlearning old tasks, but we argue that analytically they 
create different kinds of challenges.   
Wu et al [27] present a participatory design project with 
people with anterograde amnesia, aimed at developing a 
“memory aid” for and with them. They base their design on 
the fact that “amnestics rely heavily on external memory 
aids, such as a calendar or an action item list.” (p. 217) 
providing a “tool [that] will assist amnestics when they feel 
lost or disoriented by providing information as to their 
whereabouts and their intent for being where they are. A 
person having amnesia will typically follow familiar routines 
in their daily life, such as the same route home, because 
deviating from this path will often result in disorientation. 
Our tool enables an amnestic to grow increasingly confident 
and independent in exploring new locations and situations – 
a feat that is very difficult in current practice.” [27:222, 
original emphasis]. 
The tool was based on the fact that amnestics’ procedural 
memory to a large extent remains intact; therefore it was 
possible to train new routines and skills for using the tool. 
“Interestingly, the overall similarity of products that has been 
experienced before does not have to be high to allow 
effective learning” [3: 183].  
Ergo-therapists working with elderly people tell that 
people often install electric water heaters in the homes of 
their old relatives in order to avoid starting a fire when 
forgetting the kettle on the stove. However, if the elderly 
person has a “bad day” and is particularly forgetful, s/he may 
put the water heater on the stove as a bodily habit, and this 
may cause fire. 
D. What is difficult – seen from the user’s perspective 
Looking closer at what is difficult suggests a distinction 
between learning and un-learning tasks. We found that the 
sources for the difficulties were the tasks to learn and the old 
tasks to unlearn: the two different processes are experienced 
in different ways both in cases where the artifact is difficult 
itself and when it is the fitting of the technology to the 
situation that appears as difficult. We came across examples 
of actions and errors made by third parties, such as vendors, 
employers, other public agencies and other technologies. In 
these cases, the situation was experienced as unpredictable 
and confusing and not possible to explain by the user unless 
s/he had a deep knowledge of the complexity of the 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

technology in its social environment. We sum up our 
analysis of what is difficult in Table II, expanding Table I 
with rows from this more detailed analysis of the nature of 
the difficulties. 
V. 
DESIGNING FOR EASE-OF-USE 
The three different kinds of difficulties can be a basis for 
approaching design of easy-to-use technology solutions. In 
this section, we report from some design experiments with 
elderly people [4][14][28][29] as well as our own design 
suggestions based on analysis of identified user problems 
[17].  
Designing from the users’ perspective starts with 
investigating their subjective experiences and competencies. 
Elderly users need much practice and repetition to establish 
new habits and unlearning old habits may be the hardest part. 
Unlearning may require trust to let old habits go to be sure 
that they are not necessary, e.g., for security. As unlearning 
old tasks is a challenge in itself, a design that builds on old, 
habitual tasks will be experienced as less challenging for the 
user. Using everyday technologies like radios, mobile 
phones, water heaters or remote controls is normally easy 
and often   automated and habituated. Many of our memories 
and competencies sit in our bodies as automatic movements 
or perception (e.g., music, smells) and can be carried out 
without conscious deliberation. A design that incorporates 
that the user can rely on his/her old habits can make the 
changing of old practices more likely and the design more 
robust. However, designing for new habits in old age is 
possible, as the example of the memory aid for the amnestic 
people above showed [27].  
 
TABLE II.  
WHAT IS DIFFICULT SEEN FROM THE USER’S PERSPECTIVE 
What is 
difficult 
Kinds of difficulties  
Artifact  
Context 
Activities by 
others 
New tasks 
to learn 
Holding the turn-
off  switch. 
Positioning of the 
charger. 
Online tax 
services. 
Personal economy 
after retiring. Charge 
device after use. 
Check pre-completed 
form 
Check and act if 
something 
unusual 
 
Old 
tasks 
to unlearn 
Handling paper 
forms.  
Putting kettle on 
stove.  
Charge device before 
use.  
Not pushing the 
horse.  
Changed tax rules.  
Need trust to 
stop doing.  
Basic 
knowledge 
for the task 
Understand tax 
and web pages. 
Understand a 
water boiler.  
When does the new 
apply? 
Understanding 
the ecology of 
humans and 
technology 
Challenges:  
Difficult to use, 
afraid to make 
errors 
Matching artifact 
with own life 
situation or 
circumstances. 
Differentiating 
between old and new. 
Disentangling 
interactions and 
complexities. 
 
We will exemplify the first design approach with the 
design of a digital radio that was co-designed with in total 25 
elderly people [29]. Johnsen et al aimed to design interaction 
mechanisms that built on old and familiar bodily skills when 
designing a new way of operating a digital radio [29]. Using 
rotary controls for operating the radio – like in the old days – 
enabled them to make sense of the interface with their body 
even if they intellectually could not understand or remember 
how to turn on the radio. They easily recognized the button 
as a device for rotary movement. Several buttons were 
designed and tested for a good grip for old hands and 
recognizable positioning with different textures and shapes 
[29], see Fig. 2. 
  
 
 
Figure 2.  The prototypes for the knob (above) and the digital radio 
(below). Photo by Johnsen et al [29] 
 
 
Figure 3.  Testing several different induction chargers. Photo: Iversen [28] 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In the second design approach, Iversen and Joshi [28][30] 
built on knowledge about earlier habits, e.g., the fact that in 
the old days telephones had wires and were usually located 
in a specific place, on a particular table by the entrance door. 
Maybe it would be easier to remember to charge the mobile 
phone if it was always put on a particular place like in the 
old days? As a way to provide easy charging of phones, 
Iversen and Joshi [28][30] collected seven different off-the-
shelf induction chargers and had them tested by a group of 
elderly men (see Fig. 3). The trying out of different 
technologies was instructive to the elderly users as well as to 
us as designers.  
Matching the artifact with the personal use situation and 
context represents a challenge [17][31], in particular if the 
artifact is complex (like tax). Showing ways of matching, 
e.g., by using several examples, can help the user in the 
matching 
of 
her/his 
situation 
with 
the 
technology 
requirements: s/he may be lucky and find an example similar 
to her situation. FAQs and help texts can provide such 
examples in the artifact itself, while human helpers like call 
advisors and ergo-therapists will have to assist if the 
matching is too difficult to carry out by the user alone. 
Graphical illustrations and simulations can also help explain 
complex systems like the tax system.  
Fig. 4 illustrates our view of how technology influences 
the tasks done by a human user. Fig. 4a illustrates a loosely 
defined set of tasks for a particular purpose (like doing taxes) 
as seen from the human’s perspective. Fig. 4b illustrates how 
technology takes over some of the tasks: they become 
obsolete. Fig. 4c shows the automated task area as seen from 
the human user’s point of you: s/he encounters some left-
over tasks that are not automated and some new tasks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  a) A set of tasks for a user - not clearly defined. b) Some of 
the tasks are made obsolete because of technology. c) Fragmented tasks 
left for the human user. d) A coherent set of tasks for a user. 
The tasks left for the human interacting with the 
technology appear as fragmented and there may be no or 
little coherence between different subtasks. New tasks can be 
of a very different kind than the original set of tasks. Fig. 4d 
illustrates that in order to make the tasks left for the human 
user coherent and foreseeable, we should design a coherent 
set of tasks left for the user instead of let the technology 
decide what is automated [17][32].  
Managing the boundaries between tasks made redundant 
by technology, tasks left for the user to do and emerging new 
tasks is a challenge in itself. Designing from the user’s 
perspective aims to present the tasks for the human 
interacting with technology as a coherent whole and with 
connected subtasks. This will enable the user to disentangle 
the problems s/he encounters.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Based on examples from our research on design with and 
for elderly people and on citizens doing taxes, we describe 
how artifacts and systems become difficult to use. We have 
reflected on how we can use knowledge about difficulties in 
a constructive way to suggest better designs. In the paper, we 
make an analytical distinction between types of difficulties 
according to where they appear: in the artifact / system itself 
or when used in its use situation / context. Our analysis also 
includes a discussion of the differences between learning 
new tasks and/or competences to benefit from the technology 
and un-learning old habits and practices. In addition, 
difficulties stemming from activities and errors made by 
others may occur, and in order to be able to disentangle the 
problem and sort out what can be done, the user needs to 
understand the larger ecology of the service / system.  
We suggest that habits and bodily knowledge are used as 
resources for design where users benefit from familiarity and 
coherence. Building on and extending old habits instead of 
making them obsolete in a new design can be experienced as 
very simple for the user – independent of any usability 
assessment based on criteria that are external to and 
irrelevant for the particular user in the particular situation. 
Our aim has been to present a conceptual framework for 
design for the user’s subjective perspective.  
Our conclusion is that “easy to use” is difficult to design, 
and that the notion of “ease-of-use” hides the complexity that 
comes when artifacts are used in real life contexts. Both the 
identification of what makes things difficult and what turns 
out to be easy to use challenge a notion of “usability” that 
looks at the artifact as a de-contextualized object. Easy to use 
is a characteristic of the relation between a user, her/his 
activity and the technology that supports that activity. It is 
thus both situational and personal. This makes it even more 
challenging to go from what is difficult to use to designing 
easy to use artifacts.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank the participants in the 
“Autonomy and automation” and “BRIS” projects, both co-
researchers – including Master students – and the elderly 
users. We also want to thank the staff and elderly residents at 
b) 
a) 
c) 
d) 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Kampen Care+ and the advisors and managers at the Tax 
Information Call Centre.  
REFERENCES  
[1] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 1994, ISBN 0-12-518406-9. 
[2] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant, Designing the User 
Interface: 
Strategies 
for 
Effective 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, Addison-Wesley Publ. Co. Reading, MA, 2010. 
[3] P. Langdon, T. Lewis, and J. Clarkson, “The effects of prior 
experience on the use of consumer products”, Univ.Access 
Inf.Soc., vol.  6, 2007, pp. 179-191. 
[4] S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Assembling fragments into 
continuous design: On participatory design with old people”, 
Nordic Contributions in IS Research, 6th Scandinavian 
Conference on Information Systems, SCIS 2015, Oulu, 
Finland, August 9-12, 2015, Proceedings 
[5] S. Bly et al., “Broken expectations in the digital home”, CHI 
2006, Montréal, Quebec, Canada, Apr. 22-27, pp. 568-573 
[6] L. Suchman, Plans and Situated Actions. The Problem of 
human-machine communication. Cambridge University Press, 
1987. 
[7] L. Suchman, Human-Machine Reconfigurations, Cambridge 
University Press, New York, 2007. 
[8] L. Gasser, “The Integration of Computing and Routine 
Work”, ACM Transactions on Office Automation, vol. 4, no. 
3, 1986, pp. 205-225. 
[9] J. Söderström, Jävla skitsystem (in Swedish: Stupid bloody 
system), 
Karneval 
2011, 
ISBN 
9789187207525, 
http://www.slideshare.net/Jonas_inUse/stupid-bloody-system, 
retrieved 03/2016. 
[10] S. R. Barley, “Technology as an occasion for structuring: 
Evidence from observations of CT scanners and the social 
order of radiology departments”, Administrative science 
quarterly,  vol. 31, no. 1, 1986, pp. 78-108. 
[11] W. Orlikowski, “Learning from Notes”, CSCW’92, ACM, 
New York, 1992, pp. 362-369. 
[12] S. L. Star and K. Ruhleder, “Steps Toward an Ecology of 
Infrastructure: Design and access for Large Information 
Spaces”, Information systems research, vol. 7, no. 1, 1996, 
pp. 111-134.   
[13] G. Verne, “Two faces of autonomy. Learning from non-users 
of an e-service”, Systems, Signs and Actions, vol. 8,  no. 1, 
2014, pp. 6–24 
[14] S. G. Joshi, and T. Bratteteig, “Design for Prolonged Mastery. 
On Involving Old People in Participatory Design”, 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, vol. 28, no 1, 
2016 (in press) 
[15] T. Greenhalgh et al., “What is quality in assisted living 
technology? The ARCHIE framework for effective telehealth 
and telecare services”, BMC Med, vol.  13, no. 91, 2015: 13: 
91. 
[16] A. Culén and T. Bratteteig,  “Touch-Screens and Elderly 
users: A Perfect Match?”, In Leslie Miller (ed.), ACHI 
2013, IARIA, 2013, pp. 460-465. 
[17] G. Verne, The winners are those who have used the old paper 
form. On citizens and automated public services, PhD Thesis, 
University of Oslo, 2015, http://urn.nb.no/URN:NBN:no-
50321. 
[18] http://www.phonak.com/com/b2c/en/products/wireless-
accessories/products/roger.html, retrieved 03/2016. 
[19] J.C. Doksrød, Understanding the complexity of error 
detection in smart homes, Masters thesis, Department of 
Informatics, University of Oslo, 2016 
[20] Paulsrud, A discussion of Technological Frames applied at a 
Usability Test, Master thesis, Department of Informatics, 
University of Oslo, 2011. 
[21] R. M. Docampo, Technology Generations handling complex 
User Interfaces, PhD dissertation, TU Eindhoven 2001, ISBN 
90-386-0913-2. 
[22] A. Bandura, “Self-efficacy mechanisms in human agency”, 
American Psychologist vol. 37, no. 2, 1982, pp. 122-147. 
[23] K. V. Wild et al., “Computer related self-efficacy and anxiety 
in older adults with and without mild cognitive impairment”, 
Alzheimer’s & dementia: the journal of the Alzheimer’s 
Association, vol. 8, no.  6, 2012, pp. 544-552. 
[24] J. Hurtienne and P. Langdon, “Prior Knowledge in Inclusive 
Design: The Older, the More Intuitive?”, ACM Conference 
2009. 
[25] K. Höök, “Transferring Qualities from Horseback Riding to 
Design,” NordiCHI, October 16-20 2010, pp. 226–235, ACM, 
ISBN: 978-1-60558-934-3. 
[26] S. Haugland, hearing aid specialist, personal communication 
2015. 
[27] M. Wu, B. Richards, and R Baecker, “Participatory Design 
with individuals who have Amnesia”, The Participatory 
Design Conference ,Toronto 2004, pp. 214–223, ACM, ISBN: 
1-58113-851-2/04/07. 
[28] T. R. Iversen, Exploring tangible interaction: Alternative 
interfaces for assisting elderly users, Master Thesis, 
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, 2015. 
[29] E. Johnsen, M. Ofstad and S. Subaschandran, Care+: Can we 
make the interface of the radio easier for elderly users in the 
digital age?, Student report, Department of Informatics, 
University of Oslo, 2015. 
[30] T.R. Iversen, and S.G. Joshi, Exploring Spatial Interaction in 
Assistive Technology through prototyping, AHFE conference, 
Procedia Manufacturing, Elsevier Publishing Co.  
[31] G. Bowker and S. L. Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification 
and Its Consequences. Massachussets Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachussets, 1999. 
[32] L. Bainbridge, “Ironies of automation”, Automatica vol. 19, 
no. 6, 1983, pp. 775-779. doi:10.1016/0005-1098(83)90046-8. 
 
 
 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

