Heads Up: Using Cognitive Mapping to  
Develop a Baseline Description for Urban Visualization 
 
Ginette Wessel 
University of California 
Berkeley, CA, USA 
gwessel@berkeley.edu 
 
Elizabeth Unruh                    
University of North Carolina 
Charlotte, NC, USA 
eaunruh@gmail.com 
Eric Sauda 
University of North Carolina 
Charlotte, NC, USA 
EricSauda@uncc.edu
 
 
Abstract— Kevin Lynch’s work on urban legibility has taken 
on new importance as the delivery of information about cities 
has shifted largely to mobile computing devices. This study 
extends his work with the aim of quantifying the number and 
type of elements that constitute a competent cognitive map of a 
city. We conducted a user study of 109 student sketch maps of 
Chicago that test the frequency and nature of the elements 
identified by Lynch (path, edge, district, node and landmark), 
their interrelationship and the effect of gender, prior 
experience and scale. We find that (1) participants identify two 
distinct urban scales, one at the neighborhood level and the 
other citywide, (2) competent cognitive maps involve relatively 
small numbers of elements: 15 (+/-7), (3) the selection of 
elements for the sketch map may include any of the elements 
identified by Lynch, but the frequency of landmarks and 
districts is negatively correlated, (4) participants recall 
significantly more districts and nodes at the citywide level, and 
(5) in addition to Lynch’s identification of physical landmarks, 
participants also identify landmarks by function; such 
functional landmarks are more frequent at the neighborhood 
level. 
Keywords-legibility; cognitive mapping; urban visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The image of the city, a phrase coined by Kevin Lynch in 
1960, has been widely used by urban planners and 
geographers as a means of conceptualizing the way users 
perceive and organize spatial information. The five 
categories postulated by Lynch (path, edge, node, district and 
landmark) have been the basis of subsequent research. 
Despite this literature, there are two salient research 
questions that remain unanswered:  
• 
First is the epistemological question: are all the 
items in this set of categories at the same level of 
specificity; are they commensurable? Are there 
significant differences between the kinds of 
information that each category is describing? 
• 
Second is the methodological question: is there a 
way to quantify the sufficiency of the elements and 
to test their relative frequency? In other words, are 
all these elements recognized by users as equally 
valid and are there significant relationships between 
their frequency of use? 
The results of our empirical study will assist in the design 
of urban visualizations at all scales. We do so by uncovering 
those specific elements of the environment that may be 
regarded as most useful and recognizable. Specifically, our 
work is centered upon generating a baseline description of 
the urban environment from humans’ cognitive maps. 
 Literature from urbanism, cognitive science and 
geography 
is 
a 
starting 
point 
for 
understanding 
environmental cognition. The seminal figure is Kevin Lynch 
who examines perceptions of urban environments in order to 
better understand how humans make sense of their 
surroundings. We adopt Lynch’s concept of legibility 
defined as “visibility in a heightened sense, where objects are 
not only able to be seen, but are presented sharply and 
intensely to the senses” [1]. Lynch discovered that the mental 
maps which people use to help them find their way through 
cities are composed of five essential elements: paths, edges, 
districts, nodes and landmarks. Much like Lynch, we assert 
that legibility is crucial to the urban setting and involves 
visual and mental processes. 
The central concept of such work is the idea of a spatial 
mental model [2], referred to by Lynch as mental map [1], or 
more generally understood as a cognitive map which 
proposes that the brain can acquire, code, store, recall and 
decode information about the relative locations and attributes 
of various phenomena in a spatial context. The development 
of a cognitive map often operates using schematization; 
some elements are emphasized and others are deemphasized 
to reduce cognitive workload. Cognitive maps of the 
environment cannot preserve metric information about the 
environment, 
but 
do 
preserve 
topological 
relations 
coherently. For instance, during wayfinding tasks it is 
common that a user’s topological knowledge is more 
pertinent than knowledge of one’s exact distance to an object 
and the precise dimensioning betweens objects. Therefore, 
one is more likely to be concerned with the type of elements 
recognized and remembered rather than the elements precise 
distance from one’s own position in space. For this reason, 
we find hand-drawn sketch maps, a method commonly used 
by Lynch [1] and Appleyard [3,4], most useful as a means to 
capture schematized and topological knowledge about the 
environment. 
In order to generate a baseline description of a cognitive 
map, we conducted a user study of architectural students 
after a field trip to the city of Chicago, distant from their 
home university. We asked each student to draw a sketch 
map of Chicago using an open question protocol. The 
371
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

resulting sketch maps were coded to identify spatial 
characteristics of the city using paths, edges, districts, nodes 
and landmarks. 
Our subsequent analysis was aimed at quantifying spatial 
elements in the sketch maps. How many of Lynch’s elements 
did participants on average feel were necessary to use in 
order to give a clear depiction of the city? Just as important, 
we wanted to determine if the use of one type of element 
substitutes for another. If you identify a lot of landmarks, do 
you in general use fewer paths? Does previous knowledge of 
a city affect your use of elements? Does gender? 
Our objectives in this study are: 
• 
By means of a user study, extract a simple but 
complete set of spatial elements that are essential to 
constructing cognitive maps; 
• 
Establish the base level of each element for a 
competent description of a cognitive map; 
• 
Measure and study the relative interdependence of 
each element in describing an urban environment; 
• 
Discover differences, if any, in the number of 
elements for users based on gender, previous 
experience and map scale. 
The result of this study is an understanding of the 
number, type and interdependence of elements that form a 
cognitively adequate description of an urban setting that can 
serve as a guide in urban visualization design.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Urban Visualization 
In recent years, several innovative mapping applications 
have used cognitive mapping, although without any 
quantitative understanding about the elements that constitute 
such a mental map. 
LineDrive [5] is a navigation interface that incorporates 
principles of map distortion with the rendering of routes, 
adjusting lengths and angles to more closely approximate the 
kind of simplifications that mimic users experience. This 
approach focuses almost entirely on segment elements of 
routes, and demonstrates a subtle and effective adjustment to 
individual users. The shortcoming of this approach is the 
lack of contextual information, leading to problems with 
users becoming confused after a single wrong turn. 
Copernicus [6] attempts to correct flaws within the 
LineDrive system by adding spatial context to the interface. 
Generally, this involves adding paths and neighborhoods 
(cities and towns) to the established routes from LineDrive. 
This represents an advance in terms of legibility, but leaves 
unsolved the issue of how much information to display and 
which types of elements should be used. 
Researchers at Carnegie Mellon on the MOVE [7] 
system have developed mapping software that uses some of 
the principles from LineDrive in a two dimensional 
interactive network that adjusts as the user moves through 
the city. This corrects some of the original problems, but 
does not address directly the issues of cognitive mapping. 
Some interfaces have attempted to incorporate landmarks 
into maps [8], focusing on selection processes for identifying 
landmarks and geo-referencing them on tourist maps. This 
represents an advance in the sort of data related to 
landmarks, but it does not address their relationship to the 
user. 
There has also been some effort related to GPS 
navigation systems in cars, notably at SIGCHI 2008. These 
studies evaluate user behavior while in a car [9], 
performance of a driving simulator to study accuracy rates of 
proposed systems [10], and quick search versus categorical 
semantic search techniques [11]. But again, none of this 
research establishes guidelines for display visualizations. 
Therefore, we identify a need to rely on the research of 
urban planners, cognitive scientists and geographers who 
examine the question of urban legibility. More specifically, 
we are interested in research that identifies a base set of 
spatial elements that are recognizable in any city. While each 
of the following fields of research focus on cognitive maps 
of the city in unique ways, we want to address the most 
relevant work in relation to our focus on element recognition, 
setting aside issues of spatial proximity judgments and 
element recognition sequencing. 
B. Cognitive Science 
To begin our overview of cognitive science related work, 
we should be clear about our use of the terms cognitive map 
and sketch map. By cognitive map, we mean the internal 
mental image that enables people to code, store and decode 
spatial information. By sketch map, we mean an external 
representation of a cognitive map that is solicited by the need 
to communicate in daily life (and by researchers). 
The term cognitive map was first used by psychologist 
Edward Tolman in “Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men” [12]. 
He describes a maze previously mastered by rats that is 
blocked at a critical point and replaced by a series of radially 
arranged alternatives. His finding is that the rats greatly 
preferred the route that demonstrated an understanding of the 
spatial overview of the maze. Partly a reaction against strict 
behaviorism, his work led to the development of cognitive 
psychology. 
A closer examination of cognitive maps later carried out 
by Ronald Briggs explains what factors cause their 
development [13]. He identified three complementary ways 
in which cognitive maps are created about a city: through an 
individual's 
sensory 
modalities, 
from 
symbolic 
representations such as maps, and from ideas about the 
environment that are inferred from experiences in other 
similar spatial locations. Much like Lynch’s notions of 
legibility, Briggs also asserts that an individual’s sensory 
modalities, including visual, auditory, olfactory and 
kinesthetic, play a significant role in cognitive map 
development. We find this insight useful in recognizing that 
cognitive map development is highly complex and involves 
more than just visual qualities. This work also explains the 
subjectivity and variability in such work. 
C. Urban Design and Planning 
As previously mentioned, the work of Lynch is a starting 
point for our study [1]. In addition to his claim that the city’s 
image is represented in memory through five common 
elements, Lynch also develops three principle parts 
372
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

necessary for an environmental image: identity, structure and 
meaning. We recognize or identify objects, we notice a 
recognizable pattern, and we draw emotional value in 
relation to them. These principle components involved in 
constructing an image of a city are fundamental to our work 
and occur at the beginning of cognitive map development. 
As an extension of Lynch’s work on image construction, 
urban designer and environmental behaviorist Amos Rapport 
highlights the importance of meaning in the built 
environment by recognizing three levels of meaning [14]. 
Denotative meaning coincides with object recognition; a 
lower level meaning that manifests in identifying intended 
uses of a setting. A middle-level meaning, also called 
connotative meaning, refers to the emotional values 
associated with the object and is centered upon evaluative 
judgments such as how much you like the appearance of an 
area. Last, abstract meaning refers less to an object than to 
broader values. For instance, when looking at a place 
through “cosmologies, cultural schemata, worldviews, 
philosophical systems and the sacred,” one experiences 
abstract meanings. Rapport’s levels of meaning solidify the 
notion that legibility of the environment can be highly 
complex yet can be clearly organized based on specified 
personal values. Most importantly, people apply different 
types of meaning with different levels of significance to the 
same elements of the environment. 
Donald Appleyard, a collaborator with Lynch, also 
worked in the field of environmental cognition and planning. 
While most of Appleyard’s work focused on a view of the 
city from a navigational standpoint, his work in Ciudad 
Guayana [3] addresses the image of the environment as a 
tool to plan for a better community. He was interested in 
how residents structured their city and asked them to draw 
maps of their local area. Using these maps, he developed a 
categorization of various types of sketch maps (sequential, 
spatial, fragmented, scattered, chain, mosaic, branch and 
loop, and patterned). This method defines how residents 
conceptualize and structurally organize their city and shows 
that a recognizable path system is the main structural 
organizer for residents. Appleyard’s study proves influential 
to our work in stressing methods of abstracting schematized 
information (i.e. topographical elements) from sketch maps. 
D. Geography 
The approach of geographers is not distant from the 
aforementioned 
theorists. 
As 
Peter 
Gould 
explains 
geographers who reach across traditional disciplinary 
boundaries to other social and behavioral sciences, find the 
truly satisfying explanation they seek to come from 
emphasizing the human as much as the geography [15]. For 
the following scholars, cognitive mapping proves a way to 
understand the spatial aspects of human behavior. 
Geographer Reginald Golledge [16] focuses on the 
development of cognitive maps starting with specific 
landmarks to larger general areas. First, a person acquires 
declarative knowledge of discrete places, things and events. 
Next, they develop an understanding of a node and path 
sequencing of the environment. This provides the subject 
with a connective structure of transit paths and concentrated 
locations. Last, a completely integrated spatial representation 
is developed including characteristics of distance, direction, 
orientation, proximity, clustering and hierarchical ordering. 
Similar to Golledge’s work, findings from a study using 
participant sketch maps drawn over a period of ten months 
shows that landmarks and relative locations are among the 
first components that are learned, followed by paths, and 
then building from the framework of paths the initial relative 
locations become more precise [17]. As a three-step process, 
this serves as an incremental approach for which to 
understand the relationships and integration of elements in 
the environment. 
Hintzman and others [18] reconfirm a sequential 
development of a cognitive map based on studies of 
orientation and target domains. They argue that instead of 
recalling the environment as a holistic cognitive map 
participants first recall the origin and target in memory, 
activate the shortest route between them and then span the 
route for a correct response. 
III. 
USER EXPERIMENT 
A. Procedure 
We conducted a user study of 109 architectural students 
after a four-day field trip to the city of Chicago. Within two 
weeks of returning from the trip, participants gathered in a 
study room equipped with a desk, a questionnaire and a 
writing utensil. To start, participants were given a brief 
overview of the study for the first time, but were not told 
about specific elements later used for analysis. Participants 
were then instructed to complete all questions in a thorough 
manner and to take as much time as needed. 
B. Experiment Questionnaire 
The experiment questionnaire primarily consisted of a 
recall exercise that included drawing a sketch map of the 
city. Other questions included background information about 
the participant such as gender, age and familiarity with the 
city. 
The sketch mapping statement was phrased, “Now that 
you have traveled to Chicago, think about the environment 
you experienced. Imagine that you have a friend who has 
never been there before. Draw them a map to help them to 
understand and navigate Chicago.” We intentionally left the 
statement open ended to allow the participant to draw freely 
in order to capture the most influential elements in each 
person’s mental map. 
C. Participants 
 Sixty-one males and 48 females participated in the 
study. Participants’ ages ranged from 19 to 38 years old with 
an average age of 21. Based on questionnaire responses, 26 
of the 109 participants said they had visited Chicago prior to 
the trip. Therefore, to ensure the results of the study were 
consistent, we analyzed the 26 sketch maps by testing for the 
equality of group means (student’s t-tests) and found no 
statistically significant difference in any measure of element 
recognition in comparison to the participants who never 
visited Chicago prior to the study (Table I). 
373
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

D. Data Analysis Procedures 
Upon completion of the user study, we created a set of 
instructions for coding the maps based on Lynch’s five 
elements. The instructions included definitions for each of 
the elements based on Lynch’s description and a comparable 
example in a city other than Chicago. 
In order to validate the clarity of the instructions, ten 
coders (4 professors, 6 students) were given the coding 
instructions and a random sampling of 30 maps. The coders 
performed content analysis by counting the number of each 
kind of element on the maps: paths, edges, districts, nodes, 
landmarks for their physical presence and landmarks based 
on their functional significance. 
Researchers then studied the results of the ten coders and 
analyzed the consistency of coders’ findings.  Discrepancies 
with high significance were identified and consequently, 
researchers modified the coder’s instructions to clarify the 
related areas.  Researchers also determined that 13 of the 30 
maps had a higher occurrence of discrepancies than the other 
12 maps. These 13 maps, along with the revised instructions, 
were returned to the 10 coders for recoding.   
The second round of coding with the revised instructions 
decreased the discrepancies between coder results. Next, two 
members of the research team coded all 109 maps per the 
revised set of instructions. The researchers compiled their 
results and determined a final set of element counts for the 
set of maps. The researchers also recorded the area in square 
miles for each map based on the elements noted as farthest 
from the city center using an online map digitizer tool. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Our analysis showed gender and prior experience 
visiting Chicago did not have a relationship to the total 
number or type of elements drawn on the maps (Table I). 
However, we discovered significant results concerning 
sketch map scale, average number of elements, element 
interdependency and types of landmarks identified. 
TABLE I.  
AVERAGE NUMBER OF ELEMENTS 
 
Gender 
Prior Experience 
(total maps) 
M (61) 
F (48) 
Yes (26) 
None (83) 
All Elements 
15.97 
14.04 
14.27 
15.39 
Paths 
5.38 
4.81 
4.65 
5.28 
Edges 
1.44 
1.29 
1.38 
1.37 
Districts 
1.84 
1.71 
1.65 
1.82 
Nodes 
1.77 
1.58 
1.5 
1.75 
Landmarks 
5.54 
4.65 
5.08 
5.17 
A. Map Scales 
Participants drew their sketch maps at a variety of scales 
ranging from 0.12 to 170 square miles, but the distribution 
was not even. After arranging the sketch maps in ascending 
order based on area, we analyzed the percent change 
between subjects’ maps and noticed over a 100% change in 
area from 8 to 19 square miles, and as a result, we 
developed two catgories of maps: neighborhood level and 
citywide level (Fig. 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Percent change in area from subject to subject using 109 sketch 
maps arranged in ascending order. Given the over 100% percent change 
between subject 70 and 71, we divided the subject’s maps into two groups:  
neighborhood level (70 total) and citywide (39 total). 
A total of 70 neighborhood level sketch maps had an 
arithmetic mean of 2.02 square miles, with a standard 
deviation of 2.02. The 39 total citywide sketch maps had an 
arithmetic mean of 85.4 square miles and a standard 
deviation of 39.6. The standard deviations serve as 
indicators as to how closely the data cling to the sample 
mean. A small standard deviation indicates a set of data 
distributed tightly around the mean, whereas a large 
standard deviation indicates a wider range of areas across 
the sample maps. 
We were surprised by the emergence of two distinct 
scales; nothing in the protocol suggested any bias toward the 
scale of the maps. We believe that this represents an inherent 
inclination on the part of the subject toward viewing the city 
as either a small comprehensible unit or a large extension in 
space. 
B. Average Number of Elements 
One of our central questions was how many elements 
would generally be understood as necessary for a competent 
sketch map of a large urban environment. Our evidence in 
Table II and III points to a relatively limited number of total 
elements: all sketch maps combined revealed an average of 
15.12 (+/- 7.48); neighborhood level maps 14.2 (+/- 7.83); 
and citywide level maps 16.77 (+/- 6.58). We believe that the 
number of total elements is related to two factors: the need to 
provide clear representation and the limits of cognitive 
recall. 
The amount and clarity of spatial information that can be 
presented is probably of particular concern to our subject 
group (design students), but it is likely also an issue to any 
user. We believe that this number of elements can be 
understood as each user’s best guess of what would be 
legible to a third party. 
The limits of cognitive recall also tend to simplify sketch 
maps. Cognitive maps always have less detailed information 
than geospatially constructed representations; they represent 
information that can be quickly recalled. While this limits the 
amount of information, it is good guide to the limits of 
efficient recall. 
374
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE II.  
AVERAGE NUMBER OF ELEMENTS FOR ALL SKETCH MAPS 
 
All Sketch Maps  
(109 maps total) 
All Elements 
15.12 (+/- 7.48) 
Paths 
5.13 (+/- 4.20) 
Edges 
1.38 (+/- 0.65) 
Districts 
1.78 (+/- 1.48) 
Nodes 
1.69 (+/-1.13) 
Landmarks 
5.15 (+/- 3.98) 
TABLE III.  
AVERAGE NUMBER OF ELEMENTS FOR NEIGHBORHOOD 
AND CITYWIDE SKETCH MAPS 
 
Neighborhood Level 
(70 maps total) 
Citywide Level 
(39 maps total) 
All Elements 
14.2 (+/- 7.83) 
16.77 (+/- 6.58) 
Paths 
5.17 (+/- 4.48) 
5.05 (+/- 3.71) 
Edges 
1.3 (+/-0.67) 
1.51 (+/- 0.6) 
Districts 
1.34 (+/- 1.27) 
2.56 (+/- 1.52) 
Nodes 
1.41 (+/- 1.08) 
2.17 (+/- 1.05) 
Landmarks 
4.97 (+/- 4.34) 
5.46 (+/- 3.24) 
C. Element Interrelationship 
We were interested in how the use of the Lynch’s five 
elements would be managed by the subjects. We began the 
study with the hypothesis that some of the elements might be 
less important, or that one element category might 
quantitatively dominate the others. To our surprise, we found 
that all of the five elements were used in the sketch maps 
(although occasionally, a subject omitted an element type), 
and that Lynch’s description seemed to fit the untutored 
sketch maps produced by the participants. 
Second, using all 109 sketch maps, we found a 
significant inverse correlation between landmarks and 
districts. Subjects appeared to describe the city either in 
terms of landmarks or districts, but not generally as both. We 
are aware this finding may only be true for our subject 
population or for the city of Chicago, but it is suggestive that 
either landmarks or districts are sufficient to develop a 
cognitive map and that they both may be referencing similar 
spatial attributes. This would suggest that interface designers 
might use either one element or the other, but not need to 
duplicate them (Fig. 2a and 2b) 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 2.  Two participant sketch maps showing the inverse relationship 
between districts (a) and landmarks (b). 
Third, our qantitative analysis reveals a 91% increase in 
the amount of districts and 53.9% increase in the amount of 
nodes drawn in the citywide level maps when compared to 
the neighborhood level maps (Table IV). Districts are areas 
of a city, from several blocks to a large area, which share 
some kind of identifying characteristic and nodes are spots 
within a city which can be entered and at which different 
activities occur in multiple structures (e.g. parks, squares, 
shopping/entertainment centers, etc.). Based on these 
explanations, our finding suggests both districts and nodes 
serve as instruments for participants to reduce their 
cognitive workload when recalling the complexity of a 
citywide image. 
TABLE IV.  
PERCENT CHANGE IN ELEMENTS 
 
Neighborhood 
Citywide 
% Change 
All Elements 
14.2 
16.77 
18.1% 
Paths 
5.17 
5.05 
2.3% 
Edges 
1.3 
1.51 
16.2% 
Districts 
1.34 
2.56 
91% 
Nodes 
1.41 
2.17 
53.9% 
Landmarks 
4.97 
5.46 
9.9% 
D. Semantic and Physical Landmarks  
We began the study with a hypothesis that the nature of 
landmarks has changed since Lynch’s study. We have 
previously written about the emergence of a dispersed form 
of urbanism that relies less on architectural form and more 
on the flow of people and information [19, 20, 21]. 
Recalling that Lynch’s definition of landmarks is based 
solely on formal attributes (e.g. a tower), we were 
specifically interested to see if subjects would identify 
landmarks based on their form or on their function. Our 
subject group would be if anything prejudiced as architecture 
students towards form; however, we found that overall 22% 
of landmarks are identified functionally (Table V).  
Additionally, 
we 
found 
that 
the 
percentage 
of 
functionally defined landmarks was significantly higher for 
neighborhood level maps (27%) than for citywide (15%) 
(Table VI). We speculate that the finer grain of the 
neighborhood level maps explains the higher use of 
functional landmarks, but even at the citywide level, Lynch’s 
definition of landmarks based on form neglects semantic 
375
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

landmarks which appear with significant frequency. We 
believe the amount of functionally significant landmarks 
identified in the maps confirms our original hypothesis about 
the changing nature of urbanism, even within a more 
traditional city such as Chicago.  
TABLE V.  
RECALL OF PHYSICAL VERSUS FUNCTIONAL LANDMARKS  
 
Physical Presence 
Functional Significance 
Landmarks 
77% 
22% 
Average  
4 (+/- 3.06) 
1.15 (+/- 1.9) 
TABLE VI.  
PHYSICAL VERSUS FUNCTIONAL LANDMARKS 
 
Neighborhood Level 
Citywide Level 
 
Functional 
Physical 
Functional  
Physical   
Landmarks 
27% 
73% 
15% 
85% 
Average  
1.34 
3.63 
0.8 
4.67 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND  DESIGN GUIDELINES  
The use of cognitive maps in urban visualization impacts 
at least two types of interfaces. The most obvious impact is 
on what we might call “heads up” applications. These 
applications are for devices that must convey a maximum 
amount of information as quickly as possible. Mobile 
devices of all types, including but not limited to GPS 
devices, must not distract drivers or users from their 
immediate task. Cognitive maps can provide interface 
designers with a quantitative understanding of the most 
important elements and their relationship, helping to set 
limits on the numbers and type of elements.  
By contrast, urban mapping and visualization may seem 
unlikely candidates because of the immense amount of data 
(layer upon layer of information about roads, buildings, flood 
zones and businesses) and the heterogeneity of the 
information. But here too, cognitive maps provide us with 
insights about the layering of information. Given a complex 
set of data, an interface designer will need to sift through this 
wealth of information to foreground the most important and 
provide a hierarchy of primary, secondary and tertiary 
information within a densely packed interface. Cognitive 
maps, because of the variety of elements, also provide one 
method to combine spatial and semantic information. Thus, 
for complex systems, cognitive maps provide us with 
guidance for “drilling down” into complex information. 
Design guidelines for mapping interfaces: 
• The number of elements used in interactive maps should 
be limited to approximately 15. Top level maps should 
guide user interaction. 
• Landmarks and districts are redundant and a choice 
should be made to use one or the other. 
• Maps are likely to be understood at the citywide level or 
the neighborhood level; good design will incorporate 
both scales into the interface. 
• Designers should consider including both physical and 
functional landmarks in their maps. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Lynch, Image of the City. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1960. 
[2] B. Tversky, “Cognitive maps, cognitive collages, and spatial 
mental models,”  in Spatial information theory: A theoretical 
basis for GIS, A. U. Frank and I. Campari, Eds. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, 1993, pp. 14-24. 
[3] D. Appleyard, Planning a Pluralist City: Conflicting Realities 
in Ciudad Guayana. Cambridge: MIT Press,  1976. 
[4] D. Appleyard, “Styles and methods of structuring a city,” 
Environment and Behavior, vol. 2, no. 1, 1970, pp. 100-117. 
[5] M. Agrawala and C. Stolte, “Rendering effective route maps: 
improving 
usability 
through 
generalization,” 
Proc. 
SIGGRAPH Symp. Computer graphics and interactive 
techniques, 
ACM 
Press, 
2001, 
pp. 
241–249. 
doi:10.1145/383259.383286. 
[6] H. Ziegler and D. Keim. “Copernicus: Context-preserving 
engine for route navigation with interactive user-modifiable 
scaling,” 
Proc. 
Eurographics/ 
IEEE-VGTC 
Symp. 
Visualization, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 27, no. 3. 2008, pp. 
927-934. 
[7] J. Lee, J. Forlizzi, and S. E. Hudson, “Iterative design of 
move: A situationally appropriate vehicle navigation system,” 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 66, 
no. 3, Duluth, MN: Academic, 2008, pp. 198–215, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2007.01.004. 
[8] F. Grabler, M. Agrawala, R. Summer, and M. Pauly, 
“Automatic generation of tourist maps,” Proc. SIGGRAPH 
2008 Transactions on Graphics, ACM Press, vol. 27, no. 3, 
Aug. 2008, Article 100, doi: 10.1145/1360612.1360699. 
[9] G. Leshed, T. Velden, O. Rieger, B. Kot, and P. Sengers, “In-
car gps navigation: engagement with and disengagement from 
the environment,” Proc. 26th annual SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems (CHI ’08), ACM Press, 
April 2008, pp. 1675–1684, doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357316. 
[10] S. Graf, W. Spiessl, A. Schmidt, A. Winter, and G. Rigoll, 
“In-car interaction using search-based user interfaces,” Proc. 
26th annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (CHI ’08), ACM Press, April 2008, pp. 
1685–1688, doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357317. 
[11] I. M. Jonsson, H. Harris, and C. Nass, “How accurate must an 
in-car information system be?: Consequences of accurate and 
inaccurate information in cars,” Proc. 26th annual SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI 
’08), ACM Press, April 2008, pp. 1665-1674, doi: 
10.1145/1357054.1357315. 
[12] E. Tolman, “Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men,” Psychological 
Review, vol. 55, no. 4, 1948 pp. 189–208. 
[13] R. Briggs, “Urban Cognitive Distance,” Image and 
Environment, R. M. Downs and D. Stea, Eds. Chicago: 
Aldine, 1973, pp. 361-388. 
[14] A. Rapport, The Meaning of the Built Environment: A Non-
Verbal Communication Approach, Tucson: University of 
Arizona Press, 1990. 
[15] P. R. Gould, “On Mental Maps,” in Image and Environment, 
R. M. Downs and D. Stea, Eds. Chicago: Aldine, 1973, pp. 
182-220. 
[16] R. G. Golledge, “Learning about Urban Environments,” in 
Timing Space and Spacing Time, T. Carlstein, D. Parkes and 
N. Thrift, Eds. London: Edward Arnold, 1978 pp. 76–98. 
[17] W. G. Evans, D. Marrero, and P. Butler, “Environmental 
learning and cognitive mapping,” in Environment and 
Behavior, vol. 13, no. 1, Jan. 1981, pp. 83–104, 
doi: 10.1177/0013916581131005. 
[18] D. Hintzman, C. O’Dell, and D. Arndt, “Orientation in 
cognitive maps,” Cognitive Psychology, vol. 13, no. 2, April 
1981, pp. 149–206, doi: 10.1016/0010-0285(81)90007-4. 
[19] G. Wessel and E. Sauda, “Urban User Interface,” Proc. ACSA 
Interational Confernce, Barcelona, Spain, June 2012. 
[20] G. Wessel, C. Ziemkiewicz, R. Chang, and E. Sauda, “GPS 
and Road Map Navigation: The Case for a Spatial Framework 
for Semantic Information,” Proc. International Advanced 
Visual Interface Conference, Rome, Italy, 2012, pp. 207-214.
376
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

