Immersion as a Strategy to Facilitate Participatory Design Involving People With 
Intellectual Disabilities and Caretakers as Proxies 
Shaping spaces for participation through contextual insight 
 
Åsmund Dæhlen 
Department of Informatics, Faculty of Mathematics and 
Natural Sciences, University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
email: aasmunkd@ifi.uio.no  
Suhas Govind Joshi 
 Department of Informatics, Faculty of Mathematics and 
Natural Sciences, University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
email: joshi@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract — This paper reports from the early phase of a 
Participatory Design (PD) process where the goal is to design 
technology that involves people with Intellectual Disabilities 
(ID) and their caretakers as participants. The background of 
the study is a long-term collaboration with a local activity 
center for people with ID and 56 participants from this 
empirical context participated in this study. The presented 
methodological approach emphasizes immersion as a means of 
gaining access to and learning about the context to help 
identify crucial considerations for the facilitation of later PD 
activities. The paper presents two analyses of contextual data 
to reflect on how immersion as a strategy provides important 
insight into contextual considerations that can help shape 
future PD activities. Three learning outcomes are presented 
and discussed: involving users with ID and their caretakers as 
proxies, organizing long-term commitment, and lastly building 
on already-established forms of mutual learning.  
 
Keywords — participatory design; Intellectual Disabilities; 
immersion; proxy designer. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The increased attention devoted to the user perspective 
in the assessment of the quality of life has opened up 
possibilities for people with Intellectual Disabilities (ID) to 
involve themselves more in research activities [1]. However, 
including people with communicational issues due to 
cognitive limitations present obstacles for meaningful 
participation in PD. One such example is the often seen 
presence of alternative forms of communication, e.g., as 
mentioned by [2]. The background for our study is a long-
term collaboration with a local activity center where the 
goal is to facilitate a design process where 40 people with 
ID and their caretakers can engage in the co-design of 
technology.  
This paper reports from the initial phase of a 
Participatory Design (PD) process with users and caretakers 
of the activity center aiming at designing technology to 
support the users in their everyday activities. We consider 
PD appropriate as it embeds important underlying values 
that we believe are necessary to tackle the challenges found 
within our empirical context, e.g., power relations, mutual 
learning, and emancipation [3]. Our PD process emphasizes 
immersion as a strategy to gain the necessary contextual 
insight to facilitate future PD activities. We report from our 
initial phase where we have immersed ourselves in the 
context to help identify important considerations. This study 
involves 56 participants, including users with ID, their 
caretakers, and the managerial staff. The data gathered 
through immersion revealed two main topics overarching all 
contextual factors, namely activity and communication. We 
used these two topics to structure our analysis of what type 
of contextual insight we gained through immersion, and 
then later use the findings to reflect on why this knowledge 
is necessary to facilitate a PD process involving both people 
with ID and proxy designers. We end the paper by 
presenting three concrete learning outcomes: (1) the PD 
process should facilitate for the participation of caretakers 
as proxies; (2) the PD process should be organized as a 
long-term commitment; (3) the PD process should be built 
on top of already established forms of mutual learning. We 
discuss the implications of these three learning outcomes by 
summarizing why we advocate immersion as a strategy on 
how to gain the contextual knowledge necessary to facilitate 
a PD process involving people with ID and their caretakers 
as design proxies. 
Throughout this paper, the word user describes someone 
using a facility or service. This notion derives from people 
being users of healthcare systems or services [4]. 
Linguistically, it also represents a neutral word that allows 
the caretakers to talk about people with ID without 
stigmatizing or revealing specific details about the users in 
everyday communication. We attempt to distinguish this 
notion from users in a design process by describing the 
latter as end-users rather than users. 
This paper is structured as follows. We give an 
introduction of related work in Section 2, while Section 3 
outlines our research methodology, empirical context, and 
the specific methods of inquiry. Section 4 presents the 
results from our empirical work. We end the paper in 
Section 5 by introducing three implications of our approach, 
as well as discussing the significance and relevance to 
ongoing discussions concerning design for people with ID.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Previous studies have explored the use of proxies in the 
context of PD involving both adults and children with ID 
(e.g., [2] and [5]). Brereton et al.  [5] present the initial use 
of proxies as an important step towards realizing 
requirements, 
imagining 
possibilities, 
and 
ensuring 
successful inclusion of people with ID into the process of 
design after design. There are other examples of successful 
inclusion of people with ID in specific phases of design, 
e.g., [6]. Putnam & Chong [7] seek to gather information on 
software and technology use for people with autism through 
surveys directed at adult proxies, as well as some adults 
living with autism. Blomberg & Karasti [8] present an 
important perspective on ethnography in PD as a means of 
“channeling access” to the context. Holone & Herstad [9] 
also stress the importance of starting the design in the 
practice of users. 
Redhead and Brereton [10] explain how short-term 
methods as a means to engage in design can be ineffective 
for communities of people. They argue that the researchers’ 
presence and activities are inherently academic, and might 
be too distant from the empirical context to understand and 
support local practice and interaction. Their suggestion on 
how to approach this challenge is by shifting from short-
term to long-term commitment. A similar point is also 
raised by [11]. 
A common denominator in studies about people with 
cognitive impairments is the need for highly contextualized 
understandings of the participants and their challenges and 
capabilities [9][12][13]. As Holone & Herstad suggest, 
working with kids with disabilities requires more time to get 
to a “starting line” where the design process can begin [9]. 
Francis et al. [12] also characterize how challenges caused 
by highly individualized forms of communications amongst 
people with Asperger’s and autism can be tackled with 
correct management of the co-design process. Brosnan et al. 
[14] also reflect upon PD practice, challenges related to 
engaging different stakeholders, and also points to pitfalls 
such as overlooking the value of inclusion. Finally, [13] 
advocates the uniqueness of each co-design study for people 
with cognitive and sensory impairments and the importance 
of understanding the context and people in-depth when 
adjusting the methods applied. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
A. Empirical context 
The empirical context of our study is an activity center 
located in Norway for approximately 40 people with ID. 
Their ages range from 22-70 years with non-significant 
differences in gender distribution. The impairments range 
from mild to profound mental capabilities, but also extend 
to physical challenges as people may have bodily 
configurations that also complicate autonomous functioning. 
To 
support 
each 
person’s 
cognitive 
and 
physical 
capabilities, their everyday activities are individually 
tailored and organized to maximize the sense of autonomy. 
For some people, this requires one-on-one assistance from 
caretakers, while others can work in groups or even without 
any direct assistance. The caretakers’ background ranges 
from non-related or lacking a higher education to domain-
specific competencies such as social workers, social 
educators, teachers, and ergotherapists.  
The everyday dialogue between the people and their 
caretakers is highly contextualized (see, e.g., Figure 1). 
Certain users can only communicate when using a limited 
and tailored vocabulary; however, the caretakers rely on 
many forms of non-verbal communication, most of which 
are directly tied to the context, e.g., objects, places, 
activities, and routines found at the activity center. 
Examples of such non-verbal forms of communication 
include icons, signs, physical gestures, and photographs. 
The activity center offers a wide range of both educational 
and recreational activities for the users such as therapeutic 
activities (e.g., music and light therapy), ludic activities 
(e.g., games and audiobooks), creative activities (e.g., 
painting and sewing), and physical actives (e.g., swimming 
and field trips). 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustrations being used as an alternative form of communication 
B. Methodology 
The 
methodological 
approach 
of 
this 
study 
is 
Participatory Design (PD) – a worldview that emphasizes 
the inclusion of the people who will eventually use the 
technology in the design process as equal co-designers [3]. 
Central principles of PD include mutual learning, co-
construction, and having a say [3], and our approach 
attempts to create a space for engagement supporting these 
principles while simultaneously allowing us to design 
technologies for and with users with ID. One of the central 
challenges in our long-term PD process is to support co-
creation and autonomy without necessarily demanding 
participation from users in all phases and activities.  
Our approach relies on immersion as a strategy to build 
up enough contextual knowledge about the users, their lives 
and everyday activities, to represent their voices in activities 
where they are not interested in, or unable to, participate 
themselves. We see the PD process as a use-oriented design 
cycle that requires familiarity with both the real-life 
problem situation and the practice [3] before moving to 
elicitation of needs and requirement descriptions. As such, 
we use this paper to argue for immersion as a necessary 
component in studies involving proxy designers engaged on 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

behalf of users with an ID, especially when representing the 
users’ voices in the design of technology intended to 
support them with their everyday goals and activities. 
Immersion in our context draws on ethnographic 
traditions and practices. More precisely, we align our view 
on immersion with Crang and Cook’s intersubjective 
perspective [15]: “participant observation should not be to 
separate its ‘subjective and ‘objective components, but to 
talk about it as a means of developing intersubjective 
understandings between the researcher and researched” (p. 
37). We position ourselves as such due to the embedded 
emphasis on mutual learning in PD [16], and our argument 
is that the contextual knowledge gained through immersion 
during the earlier stages of a long-term PD process is vital to 
the facilitation of later design activities. Thus, the results, 
findings, and discussions of this paper revolve around how 
non-users engaged as proxy designers can better connect 
with the everyday world of the users and actively change it 
and create new knowledge through immersive participation. 
The long-term commitment of the study was conducted 
on a weekly basis, where one of the researchers worked on a 
volunteer basis at the activity center. This means working 
closely with the proxies and the users of the activity center, 
engaging in everyday activities, learning about their 
different means of communication and lives in general. The 
nature of the communicational difficulties faced by the users 
means that the proxies were very important in bridging an 
apparent gap of knowledge that was required to have 
meaningful interactions with some of the users.  
On an everyday basis the employees are working 
together in bridging their differences in knowledge and ask 
each other questions about how to perform specific tasks or 
activities. The care-workers are proxies to the users because 
they continuously try to mediate their wants and needs and 
facilitate for a workday which carries meaning in some way. 
 
C. Research methods 
This paper presents the results from the initial phases of 
our long-term PD process and the data involved was 
gathered through six research methods throughout four 
months. Our activities involved 56 participants, including 
users with an ID, their caretakers, managers, and 
researchers. Table 1 presents an overview of the six research 
methods and the participants involved in each activity. 
 
TABLE 1. OVERVIEW OF THE RESEARCH METHODS  
# 
Research method 
Participants 
A 
Participatory inquiry 
30 users and 15 employees 
B 
Contextual observation 
Researcher 
C 
Diary journaling 
Researcher 
D 
Explorative workshop I 
2 researchers and 1 design expert 
E 
Interviews 
Manager 
F 
Explorative workshop II 
6 Employees 
 
1) Participatory inquiry 
One of the researchers in this study immersed himself 
into the context by taking on the role as a volunteer 
caretaker, receiving formal training and introduction similar 
to the training provided to all other caretakers. While the 
researcher still works part-time at the activity center in this 
voluntary role, the data presented in this paper originates 
from the first four months of work, which equals 
approximately 100 working hours. The goal of this 
immersive activity was to gain knowledge through first-
hand experience of the context and the users we are 
designing for and with in our study. The methods of inquiry 
included observations and shadowing of colleagues and 
users during everyday activities, their interaction with 
technology, as well as their means of communication. The 
data produced from this activity consisted of notes, 
photographs, and mind maps. 
 
2) Contextual observation 
The purpose of the observation was to capture important 
contextual concerns in a medium suited for later design 
activities where participants might not possess verbal 
communication skills. As such, the data was documented in 
the form of photographs. 50 suitable photographs that 
described important contextual relationships related to 
everyday activities, interaction between people, and 
technology were selected. Most of these photographs were 
taken after working hours to ensure that the researchers’ 
presence did not disrupt or interfere with the users’ 
activities. Examples of relevant contextual concerns include 
technologies (e.g., audio systems, massage chairs, and light 
projectors), objects used in activities (e.g., instruments, 
games, and drawings), and places of interest (e.g., sensory 
rooms, resting places, and creative spaces). 
 
3) Diary journaling 
After each full day of volunteer work, an entry was 
written in an elicitation diary describing the activities and 
communication challenges encountered. Important events, 
major issues, and concrete examples of situations requiring 
contextual insight constituted the main content of the diary. 
Similar to the contextual observation, most of the diary 
entries were produced after working hours or in the absence 
of users as the goal was to allow everyday activities to 
progress as normal despite being 
the 
subject of 
investigation. Throughout four months, 18 journal entries 
were written down, ranging from a couple of sentences to a 
couple of pages. 
 
4) Explorative workshop I 
To explore design opportunities in the context of 
technology intended to support users with ID in their 
everyday activities, we engaged one researcher and one 
design experts in an explorative workshop. During the 
workshop, we presented data from the previous activities 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

such as photographs, mind maps, and transcribed interviews 
as the basis for a discussion of how we can facilitate future 
design activities in our PD process. Furthermore, both 
researchers conducted an individual objective coding on the 
same data set, which later served as the basis for a reflection 
of the insight gained through immersion and how contextual 
knowledge directly affected our interpretation of the same 
set of data. 
 
5) Interviews 
An important part of the immersive approach was 
facilitating easier access to both contextual and domain 
knowledge which included in-depth details about the 
capabilities of each person who used the activity center. One 
of the main sources of information was ten semi-structured 
interviews with the manager of the activity center revolving 
around practical and organizational issues that were relevant 
to our facilitation of a PD process including both the users 
and their caretakers. These interviews revealed opportunities 
and limitations for participation, e.g., insight into the 
working schedule of the caretakers, as well as suggestions 
on suitable caretakers who could fit the role as proxy 
designers in later stages of our PD process. Each interview 
lasted between 30-60 minutes and was scheduled throughout 
the four months depending on the manager’s availability. 
 
6) Explorative workshop II 
The final activity in our initial phase of the PD process 
was a second explorative workshop conducted with six 
caretakers at the activity center during a morning meeting. 
The goal of this workshop was to compare how the 
caretakers as potential proxy designers understood the 
everyday activities and communication challenges found 
within their own work context with issues we had identified. 
We also used their in-depth knowledge of users and 
everyday activities to facilitate a group discussion on how to 
scaffold the PD process around existing routines and 
preferences to best support our underlying PD principles, 
i.e., mutual learning, co-construction, and having a say. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSES 
The data gathered through the six activities outlined in 
the last subsection consisted of diary entries, transcribed 
interviews, observation notes, discussion summaries, mind 
maps, individual data coding from workshops, and 
photographs. From the data, we identified two recurring 
topics that were common across all the activities and 
mentioned by all participants, both users and non-users, 
namely activity and communication. These two topics also 
embody most of the underlying issues that were discussed 
during the two exploratory workshops. As such, we used 
these two overarching topics to help us structure our 
analysis of whether immersion could contribute to any 
deeper insight to help facilitate the future activities of our 
PD process. 
A. Results 
1) Activity 
The empirical context is an activity center, and as such, 
there was an intrinsic emphasis on activities. Both the 
caretakers employed at the activity center and the users with 
ID who used it shared an activity-centric focus. Already 
during the first participatory inquiry, we registered that the 
caretaker training revolved heavily around daily routines 
and how different users engage in activities. Concerning 
how to engage the caretakers as proxy designers in our PD 
process, the manager who was interviewed explained that 
the availability of these caretakers was highly related to 
their work schedule, which in turn revolved around 
activities. This point was also raised during the first 
exploratory workshop where the participants believed it 
would be easiest for both caretakers and users if the PD 
process were structured around activities. 
From the users’ perspective, we registered through the 
diary entries that most of their autonomy, as well as the 
sense of pride and accomplishment, were related to both the 
activity and the context in which it took place. One of the 
reasons behind selecting activity as a common denominator 
was that users who engaged in activities experienced a 
multitude of personal reactions and rewarding sensations 
based on their particular capabilities and background. We 
also learned during the second exploratory workshop that 
the participation in activities was itself an important catalyst 
for the users’ sense of mastery. In some cases, the act of 
carrying out an activity was of greater importance to the 
user than the purpose or end-goal of the activity. The 
photographs from the contextual observation complemented 
this point by revealing that most of the equipment present at 
the activity center was not intended at problem-solving, but 
rather as means to enable engagement in activities without 
necessarily having a fixed end-goal. Finally, we made 
multiple observations of how successful participation 
depended on the activity’s ability to acknowledge the user’s 
vulnerability, e.g., sudden urges to use bathroom facilities. 
 
2) Communication 
One of the main challenges when working for and with 
people with ID is facilitating communication. Previous 
studies have discussed the need for compensating strategies 
(e.g., [2]). This is especially important to our PD process 
and the emphasis on mutual learning. In our empirical 
context, we found multiple examples of how the activity 
center compensated for the lack of verbal communication 
skills. One such example was the labeling of the shelf 
shown in Figure 1, where photographs rather than text 
communicated different activities. 
Another prominent example was the users’ individual 
daily diaries where the caretakers registered all entries and 
then communicated a summary back to the user. In later 
situations, the diary itself became a means of non-verbal 
between the user and the caretaker. The caretakers who 
participated in the second exploratory workshop also 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

described how being heard and seen was vital to the users’ 
motivation. Most forms of communication were self-
developed and internalized by the different users and the 
contextual activity at hand. As such, one of the contextual 
insights gained through the participatory inquiry and the 
elicitation diary entries was instances of different, but highly 
specific, combinations of gestures and speech employed by 
the users to communicate with their caretakers. To facilitate 
a proper dialogue where the users can communicate choices 
and selections, understanding these varying forms of 
communication is a necessity for all parties. In the most 
extreme cases that we observed, some users rely completely 
on the caretakers’ ability to interpret their language, or lack 
thereof, as well as the caretakers’ ability to reduce the 
dialogue to questions that the user can answer with a simple 
yes or no by using their bodies.  
 
B. Analysis 
We identified two recurring topics in our data, namely 
activity and communication, and we wanted to use these 
two topics to structure our analysis. While the emphasis on 
these two topics emerged from the empirical data itself, they 
align well with the goal of our overarching PD process, i.e., 
designing technology that supports people with ID in their 
everyday activities. The embedded nature of creating spaces 
for co-construction and mutual learning in PD also depend 
on our ability to facilitate communication between 
participants. As such, we used these two topics to structure 
our analysis. Figure 2 illustrates how the analysis included 
multiple people and different types of data. 
 
1) Inter-rater reliability analysis 
In the first analysis, we wanted to analyze to what 
degree our immersion strategy actually provided contextual 
insight. The individual coding of the same data set 
performed by the two researchers in the first exploratory 
workshop yielded a total of 64 overlapping first-order codes 
shared by the two coders. The data included in this analysis 
consisted of photographs, observation notes, elicitation 
diary entries, and documents from the activity center. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Examples of raw data (top row) used in the analysis (bottom row) 
We compared these two sets of individual codes to 
examine how a researcher without contextual knowledge of 
the users and their everyday lives identified opportunities 
and challenges relatively compared to the researcher who 
had gained contextual knowledge through 100 hours of in-
situ volunteer work during the participatory inquiry. More 
precisely, we wanted to use the inter-rater reliability 
between these two coders to examine whether the researcher 
without any contextual knowledge rated each code similar 
to the researcher who had immersed himself into the 
context. To study the consensus, both coders individually 
labeled each of the 64 codes as either activity or 
communication. We then used Cohen's kappa to determine 
the exact level of agreement between the two coders. The 
result of the cross tabulation is outlined in Table 2, where 
Researcher A represents the immersed researcher while 
Researcher B represents the researcher without any 
contextual knowledge. 
 
TABLE 2. ANALYSIS OF INTER-RATER RELIABILITY 
 
Researcher B 
 
Communication 
Activity 
Total 
Researcher 
A 
Communication 
21 
7 
28 
Activity 
12 
24 
36 
Total 
33 
31 
64 
 
From the table, we can see that both researchers divided 
the number of codes between the two topics fairly equally: 
Researcher A labeled 28 codes as communication and 36 
codes as activity, while Researcher B labeled 33 codes as 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

communication and 36 codes as activity. However, there 
were large discrepancies in which codes that were labeled 
under each topic. The coders agreed on 21 of the 64 codes 
(32.8 %) as examples of communication and 24 of the 64 
(37.5 %) as examples of activity. However, the level of 
inter-rater reliability was still only moderate, κ = .409 (95 % 
CI, .189 to .629), p < .001. As such, we see that the two 
researchers had a different understanding of the latent 
meaning behind similarly identified codes in the same data 
set. 
 
2) Thematic analysis 
During the second analysis, we conducted an inductive 
thematic analysis of all the data gathered over four months 
to elicit themes related to our two topics activity and 
communication. The goal was to use the themes to 
summarize and exemplify the type of contextual knowledge 
that was accessible through our emphasis on immersive 
participation. To structure our inductive thematic analysis, 
we followed the procedure presented by Braun & Clarke 
[17], and used the two topics activity and communication as 
the overarching topics to tie together the different emerging 
themes. The preparation consisted of transcribing relevant 
audio recordings from workshops, annotating photographs, 
and a systematic structuring of all elicitation diary entries 
and notes from the participatory inquiry. We categorized the 
data into 40 first-level codes that constituted the lowest level 
of patterned responses and opinions. The codes were 
collated into 15 categories that were organized as four main 
themes. We ended our thematic analysis by mapping out the 
relationships between the different categories and themes, 
and by relating them to our overarching analytic topics 
activity and communication. Figure 3 illustrates the 
categories and themes identified. We omitted the 40 first-
level codes as they were all collated into the 15 categories 
outlined in the figure. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The result of the thematic analysis 
V. 
FINDINGS 
A. Contextual insight gained through immersion 
Table 3 presents a summary of the four themes identified 
in the data during the thematic analysis: meaning, practice, 
choices, and routines. These four themes represent the type 
of contextual insight gained through our immersive PD 
approach; the two former themes relate to activity as an 
overarching 
topic 
while 
the 
two 
latter 
relate 
to 
communication. The table also lists the source methods for 
each of the themes along with key quotes or observations. 
The four identified themes are examples of higher-order 
issues that we have separated to highlight the different types 
of contextual insight gained through immersion, as well as 
to demonstrate the variety of relevant considerations. As 
such, the themes are not four separate and independent 
examples of insight, but rather four overarching themes that 
represent a set of overlapping and intertwined factors.  
Meaning outlines an understanding of the meaning 
bearers for the users. Practice describes the context and the 
various kinds of work and activities carried out at the 
activity center. Choice describes the challenges the users 
and employees face during decision making, as well as how 
they are resolved in situations involving different cognitive 
capabilities. Routine defines how we can understand the role 
and implications of the daily routines within the everyday 
lives of the users. 
  
B. The distribution of difference in understanding 
The four themes and the underlying categories from the 
thematic analysis were also used to assess whether the 
differences in interpretation between researchers with and 
without contextual knowledge pertained to specific themes 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

or created divergence across all themes. The 64 codes used 
to assess the level of agreement between the coders in the 
inter-rater reliability were compared to the 40 first-order 
codes used to structure the thematic analysis, and the 
differences were visualized. Figure 4 combines the four 
themes with the analysis of inter-rater reliability to 
demonstrate how the differences in understanding of 
contextual factors were distributed across all themes and 
underlying categories. The white circles indicate a similar 
understanding for all underlying codes; the striped-colored 
circles indicate disagreements in only some of the 
underlying 
codes; 
and 
the 
grey 
circles 
indicate 
disagreements in all underlying codes, i.e., the whole 
category itself. 
As we can see in Figure 4, the differences between the 
two coders were distributed across all four themes, as well 
as 11 of the 15 underlying categories. For instance, the two 
coders interpreted the whole theme of routine very 
differently, including all underlying categories. In other 
cases, the differences in interpretation of first-order codes 
did not propagate as the clusters of codes were identified 
and collated. One such example would be profession, where 
only one out of several codes was read differently without 
affecting the affiliated theme. As such, the contextual 
knowledge gained through immersion was not limited to 
certain aspects of activity or communication but pertained to 
most categories branching out of the four themes. 
 Stimuli is another example of how contextual 
knowledge created a divergence between the coders. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Distribution of difference in coding between the two researchers 
 
TABLE 3. OVERVIEW OF THE FOUR THEMES AND MAIN FINDINGS 
Theme 
Main findings 
Source 
Key observations and quotes 
Meaning 
(Activity) 
 
Meaning emerges through the context 
in which the activities take place. 
 
The company of the caretaker can 
affect the way in which meaning 
emerges. 
[A], [C],  
[F] 
Users have individually tailored activities and contexts to situate specific 
kinds of meaning 
“Examples of meaning bearer are social relations, safety, predictability, 
well-being, change of environment, learning and acknowledgment.” 
(caretaker, [F]) 
 
Practice 
(Activity) 
 
 
The practice involved in activities 
varies between users. 
 
Activities need to be flexible regarding 
duration. 
[A], [C], 
[E] 
“Some activities require 1-on-1 assistance depending on the individuals 
involved and the context in which it is carried out.” (diary entry, [C]) 
“During the first day, I had to end an activity with a user because I was 
requested to help with something else” (diary entry, [C]) 
Choices 
(Communication) 
 
Presentation of choices must be 
tailored to both the user and the 
context. 
 
Limited language and cognition skills 
inhibit the presentation of choices. 
[A], [B], 
[C] 
“The user was presented with two alternatives, which I later discovered 
was a rather restricted choice considering the user’s capabilities” (field 
note, [A]) 
Representations of choices often require non-verbal forms of 
communication (see Figure 1, [B]) 
Routines 
(Communication) 
 
Structure and daily routines affect the 
users’ ability to participate. 
 
Routines promote autonomy by 
facilitating learning over time. 
[A], [C], 
[F] 
 
“For some users, it is a crisis to have a day off as it breaks routines” 
(caretaker, [F]) 
“One user was frustrated when I communicated that I had to leave early 
because it disturbed some of the users’ routines” (diary entry, [C]) 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
For the researcher with contextual knowledge, this code was 
considered an in-vivo code referring to a specific activity, 
while the researcher without contextual knowledge 
understood it as a matter of communication rather than 
activity. We saw similar differences with physical 
challenges; the researcher with contextual knowledge 
referred to communication challenges with this code as most 
users relied on bodily gestures to communicate, while the 
researcher without contextual knowledge saw this as a 
challenge related to participation opportunities in activities.  
We argue that this distribution of the difference in 
understanding creates highly different outlooks for the 
facilitation of an inclusive and tailored PD process 
involving users with ID and their caretakers as proxy 
designers.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
In the immersive nature of our PD process, taking on the 
role as a volunteer caretaker has us given the possibility to 
create and embed mutual learning in the context on the 
premise of the users and caretakers. We have used the 
contextual knowledge gained to analyze the importance of 
our presence and the type of insight it may provide. We end 
the paper by introducing three concrete learning outcomes 
that we believe can inform the next stages of our own PD 
process. We also use these three learning outcomes to 
structure our discussion and argue what these outcomes 
signalize in a broader context relevant to other PD 
practitioners working with users with ID. 
 
A. The PD process should facilitate for the participation of 
caretakers as proxies 
The use of proxies has been discussed in previous 
studies, e.g., as a way to help researchers learn about the 
goals of the end-users [7]. However, we argue that the 
caretakers specifically constitute appropriate proxies due to 
their ability to break down language barriers (as seen in [2]) 
that may prevent equalized power relations. Throughout the 
immersive process the proxies have been vital in bridging 
communicational gaps and is best exemplified by cases 
where the users have mixed forms of communication, using 
hand signs, body language and words to express themselves 
where either contextual knowledge, like having read the 
users diary(some of the ID keep a diary), or having the care-
workers explicitly tell you what they think the users are 
communicating.  
Balancing the power relations is a common challenge 
found within PD [3][5]. The caretakers’ presence during 
design activities also increases the researchers’ chances to 
successfully facilitate a space for mutual learning by 
supporting 
non-verbal 
and 
contextual 
forms 
of 
communication. 
This 
allows 
the 
users 
to 
express 
themselves, make choices, and be properly understood. 
Being able to speak your native (to the context) language in 
the design process can avoid issues of “model monopoly” 
and expand the universe of discourse [3]. Facilitating an 
arena that allows the users to practice collaborative working 
skills was seen as highly dependent on the presence of the 
caretaker in our study, and other studies are suggesting that 
this factor is often overlooked [14]. We also want to shed 
light on considerations related to the management of the 
design process [12], and advocate the use of caretakers to 
help lower the threshold for participation as they know how 
to initiate design discussions without disrupting ongoing 
everyday activities. One such instance is when the care-
workers has approached the researcher during workhours to 
discuss topics of interest.  
A final related topic not addressed in this paper but 
relevant to the balance of power relation is the inclusion of 
contextual probes [6][18] as another way to circumvent 
users finding themselves in a “passive role” [19] due to 
communication barriers. 
 
B. The PD process should be organized as a long-term 
commitment 
Identifying the appropriate point of departure in a PD 
process demands contextualized knowledge [9]. However, 
we argue that contextual insight over time contributes to 
mutual learning by allowing time and space to identify 
enough examples of the uniqueness of each situation being 
symbiotically shaped by the users, the context, and the 
caretakers’ intimate knowledge of the situations. As such, 
we argue that long-term engagement is a way to converge 
on the uniqueness of each situation [13], as well as a way to 
avoid communities rejecting opportunities for collaboration 
due to short-burst facilitation [10]. Furthermore, we saw 
from our empirical context that committing to long-term 
engagement also contributed to both respect and trust [9], 
and the development of social relationships and skills [7]. 
This gave the activity center more time to familiarize 
themselves with our academic practice, which may be 
unfamiliar to certain communities [10]. 
Finally, we also advocate long-term presence as a means 
to support “channeling” the access to the context and the co-
inhabitants’ needs [8], which we argue is not a static matter, 
but rather something “[…] continually in the making 
through everyday contestations among neighbors, relatives, 
colleagues and the material world they co-inhabit.” [20, p. 
15].  
 
C. The PD process should be built on top of already 
established forms of mutual learning 
One core concept of PD is to enable participants to take 
control over their futures by affecting the technology that 
will help shape it [3]. Technology intended to support 
vulnerable users carries a responsibility of not affecting the 
users’ everyday lives in a negative manner, for instance 
through use or even the inability to use. One such example 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

is stigmatization through technology, which has previously 
been reported within our empirical context. [21] discusses 
the importance of not disrupting the sense of feeling 
“normal” for people with ID through technology that 
separates them from the rest of the world. Similar 
challenges have been reported in other demographics as 
well, e.g., PD involving older adults [22]. 
As such, we argue that immersion offers a chance to 
learn about everyday activities where people with ID and 
their caretakers already have established mutual learning 
through their everyday activities. We argue for building on 
top of established means of communication, which may also 
contribute to the participants accessing a sensation of 
mutual learning quicker [7], as well as taking more 
ownership of the design process and its outcomes [23]. 
Scaffolding the PD process around existing routines and 
habits allows for easier participation for caretakers who find 
themselves in a busy work environment. This may also 
reduce misunderstanding as caretakers more familiar with 
the individual users can assist the researchers in their 
interpretation of non-verbal forms of communication [24]. 
The researchers’ knowledge of the context has allowed us to 
facilitate on top of already established arenas like using the 
“morning meeting” to conduct the Explorative workshop II. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have reported from the early stages of a 
long-term collaboration with an activity center for people 
with ID. The PD process involved both the users and their 
caretakers as proxy designers. We argue for immersion as a 
strategy to gain contextual knowledge. The paper describes 
how underlying values of PD in combination with our 
immersive emphasis helped us identify examples of 
contextual insight that can inform future PD activities. We 
involved a total of 56 participants throughout four months. 
The data was gathered through six research methods, 
including participatory inquires, contextual observation 
documented 
through 
photographs, 
journal 
entries, 
explorative workshops, and interviews. The data was subject 
to two sets of analysis. The first analysis compared the level 
of agreement between one researcher with contextual 
knowledge and one researcher without, and the second 
analysis consisted of an inductive thematic analysis 
structured around two recurring topics (activity and 
communication). We ended the paper by presenting and 
discussing three concrete learning outcomes: (1) the PD 
process should facilitate for the participation of caretakers 
as proxies; (2) the PD process should be organized as a 
long-term commitment; and (3) the PD process should be 
built on top of already established forms of mutual learning.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
J. Perry and D. Felce, “Initial findings on the involvement of 
people with an intellectual disability in interviewing their 
peers about quality of life,” J. Intellect. Dev. Disabil., vol. 
29, no. 2, pp. 164–171, Jun. 2004. 
[2] 
J. L. Boyd-Graber et al., “Participatory design with proxies: 
developing a desktop-PDA system to support people with 
aphasia,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2006, pp. 151–160. 
[3] 
T. Bratteteig, K. Bødker, Y. Dittrich, P. H. Mogensen, and J. 
Simonsen, “Organising principles and general guidelines for 
Participatory Design projects,” Routledge Handb. Particip. 
Des., p. 117, 2012. 
[4] 
M. K. Bahus, “bruker,” Store norske leksikon. [Online]. 
Available from: https://snl.no/bruker 2018.10.19 
[5] 
M. Brereton, L. Sitbon, M. H. L. Abdullah, M. Vanderberg, 
and S. Koplick, “Design after design to bridge between 
people living with cognitive or sensory impairments, their 
friends and proxies,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 4–20, Jan. 
2015. 
[6] 
M. Dawe, “‘Let Me Show You What I Want’: Engaging 
Individuals with Cognitive Disabilities and Their Families in 
Design,” in CHI ’07 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp. 
2177–2182. 
[7] 
C. Putnam and L. Chong, “Software and technologies 
designed for people with autism: what do users want?,” in 
Proceedings of the 10th international ACM SIGACCESS 
conference on Computers and accessibility, 2008, pp. 3–10. 
[8] 
J. Blomberg and H. Karasti, “Positioning ethnography within 
participatory design,” Routledge Int. Handb. Particip. Des., 
pp. 86–116, 2012. 
[9] 
H. Holone and J. Herstad, “Three Tensions in Participatory 
Design for Inclusion,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 2903–2906. 
[10] F. Redhead and M. Brereton, “Growing local participation 
through long term design,” in Proceedings of Participatory 
Innovation Conference 2012, 2012, pp. 1–4. 
[11] N. Moraveji, J. Li, J. Ding, P. O’Kelley, and S. Woolf, 
“Comicboarding: using comics as proxies for participatory 
design with children,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2007, 
pp. 1371–1374. 
[12] P. Francis, S. Balbo, and L. Firth, “Towards co-design with 
users who have autism spectrum disorders,” Univers. Access 
Inf. Soc., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 123–135, Aug. 2009. 
[13] N. Hendriks, L. Huybrechts, A. Wilkinson, and K. Slegers, 
“Challenges in doing participatory design with people with 
dementia,” presented at the Proceedings of the 13th 
Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Industry 
Cases, Workshop Descriptions, Doctoral Consortium papers, 
and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2, 2662196, 2014, pp. 33–
36. 
[14] M. Brosnan, S. Parsons, J. Good, and N. Yuill, “How can 
participatory design inform the design and development of 
innovative technologies for autistic communities?,” J. Assist. 
Technol. Hove, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 115–120, 2016. 
[15] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. Sage, 2007. 
[16] T. Robertson, T. W. Leong, J. Durick, and T. Koreshoff, 
“Mutual learning as a resource for research design,” in 
Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference: 
Short Papers, Industry Cases, Workshop Descriptions, 
Doctoral Consortium papers, and Keynote abstracts-Volume 
2, 2014, pp. 25–28. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[17] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology,” Qual. Res. Psychol., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 
2006. 
[18] H. Hutchinson et al., “Technology probes: inspiring design 
for and with families,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2003, 
pp. 17–24. 
[19] P. Börjesson, W. Barendregt, E. Eriksson, and O. 
Torgersson, 
“Designing 
Technology 
for 
and 
with 
Developmentally Diverse Children: A Systematic Literature 
Review,” in Proceedings of the 14th International 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children, New York, 
NY, USA, 2015, pp. 79–88. 
[20] J. Halse, Ed., Rehearsing the future. Copenhagen: The 
Danish Design School Press, 2010. 
[21] P. K. A. Havgar, “Designing for Intellectual Disability: 
Combining User-Centered Design and Research through 
Design,” Master Thesis Univ. Oslo 2016, 2016. 
[22] S. G. Joshi, “Emerging ethical considerations from the 
perspectives of the elderly,” presented at the CaTaC’14: 
Culture, 
Technology, 
Communication: 
Celebration, 
Transformation, New Directions, Oslo, Norway, 2014, pp. 
186–203. 
[23] C. Bigby, P. Frawley, and P. Ramcharan, “Conceptualizing 
Inclusive Research with People with Intellectual Disability,” 
J. Appl. Res. Intellect. Disabil., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 3–12, Jan. 
2014. 
[24] L. C. L. de Faria Borges, L. V. L. Filgueiras, C. Maciel, and 
V. C. Pereira, “Customizing a Communication Device for a 
Child with Cerebral Palsy Using Participatory Design 
Practices: Contributions Towards the PD4CAT Method,” in 
Proceedings of the 11th Brazilian Symposium on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, Porto Alegre, Brazil, Brazil, 
2012, pp. 57–66. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

