Reduction of Dental Anxiety and Pain in Children
using Robots
Mine Yasemin1, Yelda Kasımo˘glu2, Simin Kocaaydın2, Emine Karslı2, Elif Bahar Tuna ˙Ince2, Gökhan ˙Ince1
1Department of Computer Enginnering, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
2Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
{yaseminm, gokhan.ince}@itu.edu.tr, {kasimogluy, kocaaydins, karslie, ebtuna}@istanbul.edu.tr
Abstract—In this study, we aim to use humanoid robots to
implement a techno-psychological distraction technique for chil-
dren between 4-10 years of age in order to reduce their anxiety
and stress-related pain during their dental treatment. A multi-
modal system supporting audio-based dialogues, videos, gestures
and expressions based on face, head, arm, body movements have
been developed for a robot. We have employed the Wizard-of-
Oz technique, a popular approach in human robot interaction
research. The effectiveness of the system is shown by carrying
out experiments on two groups of children; one group whose
treatment is conducted by the dentist’s own skills alone, the other
whose treatment is conducted by a dentist with the assistance of
the robot. In order to evaluate the robot’s effect on the anxiety
and fear of children during these experiments, procedures with
no anesthesia (not requiring the use of needles) have been carried
out. The system has been evaluated subjectively by applying
a variety of questionnaires to patients, and dentists as well as
objectively by measuring patient’s heart rates.
Keywords—Robotics, dental treatment, WoZ experimentation,
human robot interaction, multi-modal interaction, healthcare
robotics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Dental treatment-related anxiety is a common case in
dentistry, especially affecting children and causing problems
during their dental treatment. It is commmon that some
children having oral/dental pathology do not comply to have
a treatment. Some general methods preferred by healthcare
workers are wearing colored and patterned clothes, and using
clown doctors to encourage children, to distract their mind
and to make medical procedures more fun [1]. Listening to
music or watching cartoons are common procedures to relieve
the pain and anxiety in children [2]. The goal of all these
approach is to reduce unpleasant perceptions, to avoid negative
behaviors and escaping from the treatment. In this way,
completion of treatment without the need of such advanced
medical techniques like sedation and general anesthesia is
targeted. These systems may not always be effective enough to
distract a child’s attention away from pain. According to these
analyses, there is obviously a need of a more comprehensive
system to enable a child to engage more deeply during medical
procedures. Nowadays, combining visual, auditory and tactile
stimuli by making use of multi-sensory strategies is believed to
provide a greater impact on pain than using a single stimulus.
In this study, we aim to direct a child’s attention from a painful
stimulus to a more entertaining and amusing direction during
their dental treatment using a humanoid robot and by making
the therapy session less problematic and more comfortable in
order to provide much cozier treatment environment to the
dentist.
Moreover, instead of the pediatric dentists communicating
with their patients by asking standard questions before treat-
ment, the computer technologies (animation or robot), can take
over these repetitive tasks. As a result, the dentist’s chair time
and energy loss can be minimized. It is targeted to develop
positive behavior and increase treatment success.
For the past several years, robotics has been applied in
the ﬁeld of healthcare in various ways. Social and medical
robots in this domain aim to motivate and encourage humans to
keep up with the medical routine and to provide psychological
therapies. The aim of this study is to provide an entertaining,
and relaxing environment to the children patients with the help
of robots in order to develop positive behaviors in children
resulting to an increase in the success of dental treatment and
to the circumvention of the high cost and risk of complications
such as sedation and general anesthesia. Therefore, to the
knowledge of the authors, our work is the ﬁrst study in our
country and in the world, which investigates the effect of child-
robot interaction in reducing pain and stress during dental
treatment.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Dental fear is an emotional reaction against the frightening
stimulus during dental treatment. Dental anxiety is deﬁned
as unease about the fearful events that occur during dental
treatment and as a feeling of loss of control accordingly. Neg-
ative expectations due to earlier experiences, negative behavior
within the family, a feeling of anxiety about the pain, failed
and painful experiences that occurred in earlier treatments
were reported as the most important factors in feeling fear [3].
Factors associated with dental fear include age, the attitude of
parents towards dental treatment, the bad experiences trans-
mitted by those close to the child, concern about sensation of
pain and past experiences of the child [3], [4], [5]. In various
research works carried out on the human test subjects, the
incidence of dental fear, anxiety and behavior management
problems in children have been reported to range between
20-74% in several countries (74% in Brazil [6], 30.6% in
Singapore [7], 27.02% in Croatia [8], 25.6% in Turkey [9],
23.1% in Sweden [10], 22.2% in Finland [11], 20.6% in
Taiwan [12]).
327
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Management of pain during dental procedures is crucial
to the success of treatment. Prevention of pain is made
possible by a healthy relationship between dentist and patient,
establishing trust, elimination of fear and anxiety, and the
creation of a positive attitude for future visits. However, the
subjective nature of pain perception may alter the patients’
response to treatment and prevent the correct diagnosis and
treatment approaches of physicians by affecting the accurate
assessment scale against painful stimuli [13].
A variety of approaches have been proposed to prevent or
completely eliminate children’s dental fear. The purpose of
directing behaviors of the child during treatment is escaping
from unpleasant and failed experiences and to ensure that the
child accepts the treatment easier. The physician treating the
child should be knowledgeable about the various behavior
management techniques and be able to predict the child’s
response to treatment by properly evaluating the data regarding
child’s developmental level, temperament and attitude during
the operation. In this sense, the behavior of dentists and
accompanying dental staff plays an active role in determining
children’s attitudes to the treatment [14].
Several techniques have been developed to perform dental
care in children with success by applying basic behavioral
methods including tell-show-apply technique, self control,
positive orientation and diverting attention [15]. Especially
recently, unusual stimuli and technological equipments started
to be utilized in the process of attracting attention to another
point. In this case, the attempt is to prevent negative behavior
or escaping from treatment by reducing the unpleasant per-
ception. In this way, it is planned to complete the treatment
without the need for advanced behavioral techniques such as
sedation, general anesthesia.
Although there are studies indicating that listening to music
and watching cartoons reduce pain and anxiety in children
exposed to medical treatment [1], [2], [16], [17], such sys-
tems deprived of interactivity. Stimulating the child as just
listener/viewer is not always sufﬁcient to be effective to divert
the child’s attention away from the pain.
Today, it is believed that combining multisensorial strategies
with visual, auditory, and tactile stimuli (e.g. using robots)
provide a greater impact on pain than the effect of a single
stimulus. Beran et al. have ﬁrst used robots in distraction
during vaccination for a study performed on 57 children
between 4-9 years of age [18]. While nurses were vaccinat-
ing, it was planned that the robot interacted with the child.
Compared with control group, it has been shown that children
with the robots next to them during vaccination smiled more.
After this experience, parents have noticed that their children
remembered the robot more than the needle and they wanted
the robot to be present for the next vaccinations. Robots have
been found quite fun, and helpful for diversion of a child’s
attention and also useful for enabling children to feel less pain
and anxiety during painful medical procedures [19].
In another study, in the bilateral meetings held on 21
children between 7-9 years of age, the mechanisms of commu-
nication with humans and robots were compared [20]. Talking
with children has been performed by an adult in the ﬁrst group
and by a robot in the other group. As a result of analysis of
child behavior during the bilateral talks, it has been observed
that children in robot group have made eye contact more
and talked for longer. Researchers have reported that robot
technology can be utilized in the ﬁeld of social services and
healthcare applications, where robots are superior to people in
contact with children.
There is also a study aimed at increasing children’s health
information using robots, in which children with Type-I dia-
betes between 8 and 12 years of age have been subjected to
quizzes via robots [21]. The study has shown that children
have been motivated, had fun while answering questions and
their level of knowledge about diabetes was increased in this
way.
Wizard-of-Oz (WoZ) is an approach whereby a human
operator, unknown to the participants, operates a robot. This
method, used for full teleoperation or for partial control,
enables simulating and modeling the interaction and allows
the collection of data and experimenting without relying on
speciﬁc system components. In child-robot interaction studies
which use this method, the wizard speaks with the children
through the robot [22].
Based on these ﬁndings, it is observed that there is a need
of more comprehensive and robust system that can make a
child busy during medical procedures. Our goals in this study
are, to divert child’s attention to a more entertaining direction
and to provide more comfortable environment to the dentist
during dental treatment.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Participants
33 children (21 boys, 12 girls) were recruited for this study,
ranging in age from 4 to 10 years old. The tests were run at
a clinic in the Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of
Dentistry in Istanbul University.
The inclusion criteria of the children into the experiment
were the following:
• First time patients to the clinic.
• Lacking of dental treatment experience before.
• Not having pyhsical or mental disabilities.
• Not having long term bleeding or pain in teeth.
• Being given restorative or endodontic treatment plan by
a dentist.
• Being accompanied by at least one parent.
• Not having any genetic syndrome or a serious systemic
disease.
• Agreeing to ﬁll out the questionnaire (both by the children
or parents).
B. Hardware and Software
The robot selected for this study was IRobi, shown in
Figure 1. IRobi has been developed by Yujin Robot company.
It is equipped with a tablet computer, which can play videos
and animations on the front panel. It can move its head, arms,
and wheels, but does not change its position despite of having
328
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

this ability thanks to its wheels. It has 3 DOFs (Degree of
Freedom) on its head and 1 DOF on each arm. The robot
has facial LEDS as a part of its own hardware system and
can display ﬁve types of facial expressions: shy, disappointed,
neutral, happy, and surprised. It can express various emotions
with two LCD eyes and LED dot matrices on its mouth and
cheeks, and react to human touch by ﬁve kinds of sensor.
Fig. 1. IRobiQ
There are many studies that IRobi helps children accelerate
their learning language and speaking education [23], [24]. In
this study, the robot was programmed to motivate the patient
during the treatment and support the interaction with the child
by performing short-time movements such as face, head and
arm gestures or using audio and videos. Irobi asks children
questions, gets responses and allows them to make choices on
LCD screen.
The robot behaviors as well as dentistry animations and
songs have been integrated to the robot by using ROCOS
Studio. We have also prepared multimedia content in Adobe
Flash to strengthen the interaction between the children and
the robot.
C. Measures
Ethical committee approval for this study was taken from
Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University. A set of question-
naires measuring levels of pain and anxiety are applied in
both pre and post session to each participant and their parents
in order to assess the effects of robot assistance and basic
intervention methods. Some questionnaires were administered
to explore the feelings of the child during the interactions,
how they perceived the robot as well as their mood during the
interaction [25].
Before the procedure, it is required to ﬁll the questionnaire
to measure the child’s anxiety levels. Thus, an experimenter
explains the research protocol in detail to the children and
their parents admitted to clinics and ask them to complete
the consent forms. The consent was ﬁlled by the children
and their accompanying parent in the waiting room of the
clinic. After the consent was granted, parents were asked to
primarily answer demographic questions, then the questions
related to their children’s familiarity to robots and computer
technologies.
After the child entered the room, the Facial Image Scale
(FIS) was administered [26]. The FIS is a measure to assess
the state of children’s dental anxiety and comprises a row of
ﬁve faces ranging from very happy to very unhappy as given
in Fig. 2. This scale is scored by giving a value of 1 to the
most positive affect and 5 to the most negative affect face. The
children were asked "How do you feel right now?" and were
guided to show their response by pointing one of the faces.
Approval studies have shown that it is a suitable measure for
assessing the children’s strongest expression of pain and fear
sensation during the dental procedure, i.e. both in the waiting
room and while sitting on the dental chair. Each child gave
his/her own response independently although their parents or
researchers help them in reading the instructions for children
when necessary [18].
Fig. 2. Facial Image Scale (FIS) and the questionnaire used to assess dental
fear and anxiety
Before beginning treatment, the dentist rated the child’s
behaviour on Frankl’s Behaviour Rating Scale (FBRS), which
is one of the more reliable and frequently used behavior rating
systems in both clinical dentistry and research [27]. The FBRS
categorises the child’s behaviour as either one of the following:
deﬁnitely positive (4), positive (3), negative (2) or deﬁnitely
negative (1). This evaluation was also completed by the dentist
at the end of the treatment session. Deﬁnitely negative (1)
represents refusal of treatment, negative (2) means reluctance
to accept treatment, positive (3) shows that the child accepted
the treatment but he/she was cautious and deﬁnitely positive
(4) corresponds to good rapport with dentist, the child was
enjoying the dental procedure.
Anxiety level was also recorded before, during and after
treatment in terms of physiological pulse rate (bpm) by using
a ﬁnger type pulse measuring device (Pulse Oximeter). In the
robot group, apart from measuring the children’s anxiety and
behaviour, we administered the question, “Would you want to
have the robot in your next treatment session?”, to the children.
Responses were given on a 5-point scale from “not at all (1)”
to “very much (5)” [18].
D. Procedure
The children’s treatment plans were determined based on the
ﬁrst inspection carried out by specialist dentists. All children
are exposed to the same dental treatment in the same clinic
environment. While ﬁrst patient group has been treated only by
the dentist (control group, n=17), the second group has been
treated by a robot accompanied by the dentist (robot group,
n=16). Both groups will be subject to previously determined
standard dental treatment. After clinical setting is introduced
in both groups, the treatment phase starts.
Children’s treatment type is divided into subgroups, ac-
cording to predetermined treatment needs: 1) dental treatment
of ﬁrst group will be carried out without local anesthesia
329
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(restorative treatment), 2) dental treatment of second group
will be applied local anesthesia (endodontic treatment). Al-
though the prescribed average duration of treatment is 15
minutes for restorative treatment, endodontic treatment is set to
30 minutes. Treatments are planned to be completed in a single
session. According to routine clinical procedures, parents were
not allowed near children during treatment. In addition, all
sessions will be videotaped with cameras ﬁxed at two different
locations.
Treatment of ﬁrst group also called control group in the
study, was performed in the routine clinical procedure. The
dentist provided information about the clinic setting, equip-
ments and processes. As a result of feedback received from
the child, dentist applied the corresponding therapy using basic
behavior techniques as appropriate. In the second group, or
robot group, the robot was seated on a platform near the dentist
at the child’s eye level as in Fig. 3. The robot chatted with the
child, instructed the child before and during the treatment, dis-
tracted, encouraged her/him, and played animations favoured
by the children.
Fig. 3. IRobi performs some body movements with face expressions during
a child’s dental treatment.
In this context, the robot appeared acting naturally even in
the lack of autonomy. For this purpose, we have used Wizard
of Oz (WoZ) method, widely used in robot assisted studies
to conduct our experiments. WoZ is an approach whereby a
human operator, unknown to the participants, operates a robot.
This method, used for full teleoperation or for partial control,
enables simulating and modeling the interaction and allows
the collection of data and experimenting without relying on
speciﬁc system components [22].
WoZ method allows freedom in interaction and provides
ﬂexibility to make children involved in the interaction. The
WoZ setup of the system is shown in Figure 4. First camera,
placed in front of the child, recorded the face and body expres-
sions and behaviors of the child. Second camera was placed in
a spot with a view of the dentist, robot and child interaction. A
web camera together with a microphone transmitted audio and
video to the “WoZ” room. The WoZ room was away from the
clinic setup. As part of the WoZ setup, an expressive verbal
interaction is thought to be able to easily involve children
in communication. Based on the analysis of captured videos,
the majority of the children started to show more natural and
expressive behavior after the wizard presented some feelings
and emotions in the interaction. Because the wizard’s commu-
nication skills also affect the children’s behavior, we got help
from a child psychiatrist about chatting with children [22].
Fig. 4. WoZ setup of the system.
IRobi was programmed to help the wizard to execute the
commands as distraction strategies (shaking head, swinging
arms, face expressions) during the treatment. Once the WoZ
system was installed, the wizard did not need to make any
adjustment such as re-activate the robot for each phase. Fig. 1
shows some body movements with different face expressions
performed by the robot. This way, the robot played a role as
a member of both the welcoming and the treatment team.
IV. RESULTS
Fig. 5 shows the change of children’s average levels of
heart rate for each group. We have observed that based on
the outcomes of heart rates of the children in control group as
well as the video analyses, these children were more anxious
and stressful during the treatment than before the treatment.
As expected, after the treatment ﬁnished, they became calmer
and their heart rates reached even lower than the pre-treatment
levels. On the other hand, the patients in the robot group had
similar pulse rates before and during the dental procedure,
which indicates that the robots were effective in the reduction
of the patients’ anxiety. Additionally, after the treatment has
been completed, these rates have returned to lower levels
compared to the pre-treatment heart rates.
By investigating the quantitative heart rate changes of indi-
vidual patients, we observed that 70.58% of the participants in
the control group suffered from increased heart rate in the time
interval between pre-treatment and during treatment, deﬁned
as Phase 1, whereas only 23.52% of the patients had decreased
pulse rate. If the change of pulse rate stayed within a limit of
±3% of the original pulse rate during the phase, we deﬁned
this case as No change, and only 5.88% of the patients in the
control group experienced this effect. The transition from the
treatment time to the post-treatment is deﬁned as Phase 2 and
64.70% of the patients were relieved from their dental stress,
while the pulse rate of the 29.41% of the patients did not
330
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Control Group
Robot Group
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Pulse rate
Pre-treatment
During treatment
Post-treatment
Fig. 5. Children’s pulse rates before, during and after dental treatment.
change. However, the results of the robot group indicate an
important trend of reduction in dental anxiety both in Phase
1 and Phase 2. The total percentage of the patients having
either no change or decrease in their pulse rate was 68.75%
compared to 29.40% in the control group. Furthermore, the
relaxation from stress after the treatment continued: a total of
87.00% of the patients had lower or equal pulse rates.
TABLE I
THE CHANGE IN THE CHILDREN’S PULSE RATE.
Increased(%)
Decreased(%)
No change(%)
Control
Phase 1
70.58
23.52
5.88
Group
Phase 2
5.88
64.70
29.41
Robot
Phase 1
31.25
43.75
25.00
Group
Phase 2
12.5
43.75
43.75
According to the Facial Image Scale scores in Fig. 6 from
pre- and post-treatment session, the percentage of children in
control group having a negative or equal affect (indicating
dental fear and anxiety) after the treatment (35.29%) was
drastically higher than the percentage of children feeling the
same way in the robot group (6.25%). %93.75 of the patients
in the robot group have indicated that they felt better after
the procedure. Based on these results, it is apparent that the
level of anxiety of the children increased in control group,
though conversely the children in robot group feel less anxiety
after the procedure. Moreover, there is a remarkable difference
between the levels of both groups.
Fig. 7 shows the change of the children’s behavior towards
dental treatment with respect to Frankl’s Behavior Rating
Scale. Comparing the children’s treatment willingness, which
was evaluated by the dentist, it can be seen that the half of the
control group (50%) showed more positive attitude between
the pre- and post-treatment relatively. However, the children in
the robot group had more positive attitude after the treatment
than they did have before the treatment (93.75%).
Tab. II shows the mean scores given by the dentists to the
patients in both groups. Whereas the decrease in the average
score of the patients in the control group shows a tendency
of non-cooperative behavior, the increase in the willingness
Control Group
Robot Group
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of children (%)
Positive
Negative or equal
Fig. 6. The change of children’s affect in Facial Image Scale.
Control Group
Robot Group
0
20
40
60
80
100
Number of children (%)
Positive or equal
Negative
Fig. 7. The change of willingness of treatment according to Frankl’s Behavior
Rating Scale.
of the patients in the robot group demonstrates the promising
positive effect of the usage of robots in dental treatment.
TABLE II
FRANKL BEHAVIOR RATING SCALE SCORES.
Pre-treatment
Post-treatment
Control Group
2.64
2.21
Robot Group
2.87
3.18
Another assessment made using the answers from the chil-
dren in robot group to the question “Would you want to have
the robot in your next treatment session?” using the same
terminology and notations as in the study of Beran et al. [18],
show that the children liked and enjoyed the presence of the
robot during their dental procedure. The distribution of the
children’s answers is given in Fig. 8: “very much” (%81 n =
13), “a lot” (%13, n = 2), “somewhat” (%6, n = 1).
Thus, all these improvements measured using objective
and subjective evaluation criteria demonstrate the fact that
the robots may have long-term positive effects on children’s
behavior in future treatments.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have described a preliminary study, which
showed that children’s pain and anxiety can be reduced in
331
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

81%
13%
6%
very much
a lot
somewhat
Fig. 8. Children’s responses to have the robot in next treatment as well.
their dental treatment using robots. We believe that a robot
can socially and emotionally aid child patients in their dental
procedures to cope with stress and anxiety better than other
conventional intervention methods. Furthermore, robots have
advantages that they are programmable in content and level
according children’s age, and their usage is simple and eases
the work load of health care workers [19].
In the future, we will continue to recruit more participants
and present much quantitative measures relating to patient
anxiety and pain. In that sense, the most urgent future work
is to analyze the data obtained from all the sessions, i.e.
the answers from all questionnaires, and video recordings.
Furthermore, our next plan is to explore the effects of another
robot Nao [28], developed by Aldebaran Robotics, to see
whether there will be any differences due to the more human-
like appearance and embodiment of this robot.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research reported in this paper was supported by
The Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of Turkey
(TUBITAK) under the grant 214S157. We are thankful to
Behiye Alyanak for her guidance and helpful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] Hoge, MA., Howard, MR., Wallace, DP., Allen, KD. 2012. “Use of
video eyewear to manage distress in children during restorative dental
treatment”, Pediatric Dentistry, 34 (5), 378-382.
[2] Bekhuis, T. 2009. “Music therapy may reduce pain and anxiety in children
undergoing medical and dental procedures”, J Evid Based Dent Prac, 9
(4), 213-214.
[3] Vassend, O. 1993. “Anxiety, pain and discomfort associated with dental
treatment”, Behav Res Ther, 31, 659-666.
[4] Hägglin, C., Berggren, U., Hakeberg, M., Hällstrom, T., Bengtsson, C.
1999. “Variations in dental anxiety among middleaged and elderly women
in Sweden: a longitudinal study between 1968 and 1996”, J Dent Res,
78, 1655-1661.
[5] Locker, D., Liddell, AM. 1991. “Correlates of dental anxiety among older
adults”, J Dent Res, 70,198-203.
[6] Assuncão CM, Losso EM, Andreatini R, de Menezes JV. 2013. “The
relationship between dental anxiety in children, adolescents and their
parents at dental environment”, J Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent, 31 (3),
175-9.
[7] Chellappah, NK., Vignehsa, H., Milgrom, P., Lo, GL. 1990. “Prevalence
of dental anxiety and fear in children in Singapore”, Community Dent
Oral Epidemiol,18, 269-71.
[8] Majstorovic, M., Veerkamp, JS., Skrinjaric, I. 2003. “Reliability and
validity of measures used in assessing dental anxiety in 5- to 15-year-old
Croatian children”, Eur J Paediatr Dent, 4 (4), 197-202.
[9] Bayrak, ¸S., Tunç, E¸S., E˘gilmez, T. 2010. “Ebeveyn dental kaygısı ve
sosyodemograﬁk faktörlerin çocukların dental kaygısı üzerine etkileri”,
Atatürk Üniversitesi Di¸s Hekimli˘gi Fakültesi Dergisi, 20 (3), 181-188.
[10] Klingberg, G., Berggren, U., Norén, JG. 1994. “Dental fear in an
urban Swedish child population: Prevalence and concomitant factors”
Community Dent Health, 11 (4), 208-214.
[11] Alvesalo, I., Murtomaa, H., Milgrom, P., Honkanen, A., Karjalainen, M.,
Tay, KM. 1993. “The Dental Fear Survey Schedule: a study with Finnish
children”, Int J Paediatr Dent, 3 (4), 193-198.
[12] Lee, CY., Chang, YY., Huang ST. 2007. “Prevalence of dental anxiety
among 5- to 8-year-old Taiwanese children”, J Public Health Dent, 67,
36-41.
[13] Köro˘glu, A., Durkan, R. 2010. “Di¸s hekimli˘gi uygulamalarında
kar¸sıla¸sılan dental anksiyete sendromunun etiyolojisinin ve tedavi yön-
temlerinin de˘gerlendirilmesi”, Atatürk Üniversitesi Di¸s Hekimli˘gi Fakül-
tesi Dergisi, 20 (3), 205-212.
[14] Zhou, Y., Cameron, E., Forbes, G., Humphris, G. 2011. “Systematic
review of the effect of dental staff behavior on child dental patient anxiety
and behavior”, Patient Education and Counselling, 85 (1), 4-13.
[15] Armﬁeld, JM., Heaton, LJ. 2013. “Management of fear and anxiety in
the dental clinic: a review”, Australian Dental Journal, 58, 390-407.
[16] Klassen, JA., Liang, Y., Tjosvold, L., Klassen, TP., Hartling, L. 2008.
“Music for pain and anxiety in children undergoing medical procedures:
a systematic review of randomized controlled trials”, Ambulatory Pedi-
atrics, 8, 117-128.
[17] Mungara, J., Injeti, M., Joseph, E., Elangovan, A., Sakthivel, R.,
Selvaraju, G. 2013. “Child’s dental fear: Cause related factors and
the inﬂuence of audiovisual modeling”, Journal of Indian Society of
Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, 31 (4), 215-220.
[18] Beran, TN., Ramirez-Serrano, A., Vanderkooi, OG., Kuhn, S. 2013.
“Reducing children’s pain and distress towards ﬂu vaccinations: A novel
and effective application of humanoid robotics”, Vaccine, 31, 2772-2777.
[19] Beran, TN., Ramirez-Serrano, A., Vanderkooi, OG., Kuhn, S. 2013.
“Humanoid robotics in health care: An exploration of children’s and
parents’ emotional reactions”, Journal of Health Psychology, 0 (0), 1-
6.
[20] Wood, LJ., Dautenhahn, K., Rainer, A., Robins, B., Lehmann, H., Syrdal,
DS. 2013. “Robot-mediated interviews – how effective is a humanoid
robot as a tool for interviewing young children?”, PLoS ONE, 8 (3),
e59448.
[21] Henkemans, OAB., Bierman, BPB, Janssen, J., Neerincx, MAN., Looije,
R., van der Bosch, H., van der Giessen, JAM. 2013. “Using a robot to
personalise health education for children with diabetes type 1: a pilot
study”, Patient Education and Counselling, 92, 174-181.
[22] Yilmazyildiz, S., Athanasopoulos, G., Patsis, G., Wang, W., Oveneke,
M.C., Latacz, L., Verhelst, W., Sahli, H., Henderickx, D., Vanderborght,
B., Soetens, E. and Lefeber, D. 2013. “Voice Modiﬁcation for Wizard-
of-Oz Experiments in Robot-Child Interaction” Workshop on Affective
Social Speech Signals, WASSS.
[23] Hyun, E., Yoon, H., 2009. “Characteristics of Young Children’s Uti-
lization of a Robot during Play Time : A Case Study”, Proceedings
of IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, 675-680.
[24] Hyun, E., Lee, H., Yoon, H. 2012. “Young children’s perception of
IrobiQ, the teacher assistive robot, with reference to speech register”,
Proceedings of International Conference on Computing Technology and
Information Management (ICCM), 366-369.
[25] Nalin, M., Baroni, I., Kruijff-Korbayova, I., Canamero, L., Lewis, M.,
Beck, A., Cuayahuitl, H., Sanna, A. 2012. “Children’s adaptation in multi-
session interaction with a humanoid robot” The 21st IEEE International
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, IEEE RO-
MAN.
[26] Buchanan, H., Niven, N. 2002. “Validation of a Facial Image Scale to
assess child dental anxiety”, Int J Paediatr Dent, 12, 47-52.
[27] Frankl, S.N., Shiere, F.R., and Fogels, H.R. “Should the parent remain
with the child in the dental operatory?” J Dent Child 29:1,50-163, 1962
[28] “Nao
Robot”,
2016,
URL:
https://www.aldebaran.com/en/cool-
robots/nao [accessed: 2016-04-15].
332
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

