Unity-Warmth: Positional and Thermal Sensation Presentation
System Through a Display
Suguru Sato
Faculty of Engineering
University of the Ryukyus
Okinawa, Japan
e185768@ie.u-ryukyu.ac.jp
Kagura Itokazu
Faculty of Engineering
University of the Ryukyus
Okinawa, Japan
e195709@ie.u-ryukyu.ac.jp
Yuhei Akamine
Faculty of Engineering
University of the Ryukyus
Okinawa, Japan
yuhei@ie.u-ryukyu.ac.jp
Yui Kita
H2L, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
yui@h2l.jp
Emi Tamaki
University of the Ryukyus
H2L, Inc.
Japan
hoimei@acm.org
Abstract—In long-distance relationships, partners experience
poor communication between partners because of the lacking
physical existence. Current computer-mediated communication
causes two types of related discomfort: "visual" and "somatosen-
sory". This study aims to emphasize the existence (of a distant
partner) by reducing these discomforts. A hypothesis about
reducing these discomforts by adjusting the "visual size ratio",
"consistency of position sense", and "thermal sense" was made.
In the suggested system, Unity-Warmth, the communication
methods are adjusted to be close to those in real life, in terms of
body size, hand-contact position, and body temperature. Unity-
Warmth consists of a touch panel display that can project half of
someone’s life-size image and a transparent heater that conveys
the body’s warmth. An experiment verified the effectiveness of
Unity-Warmth by comparing the conventional system (Zoom
Meetings) with Unity-Warmth. The results show that Unity-
Warmth emphasizes five out of six types of existence: the sense
that the interlocutor is "being there", the sense of participating
with the interlocutor, the sense of being in the same space as
the interlocutor, the realism of the interlocutor, and consistency
with real-world communication experience. In the future, Unity-
Warmth can be applied to communication between people who
struggle to meet in person and express physical intimacy, such
as "grandparents and grandchildren" and "celebrities and their
fans".
Keywords—HCI; Human Interaction; Human Interface; Telep-
resence.
I. Introduction
The transmission of existence is important in long-distance
relationships. Computer-mediated communication, such as
video calls, is effective in long-distance relationships [1]–[4].
However, video calls cannot transmit much information that
concerns human sensation. Therefore, partners experience poor
communication because of the lacking physical existence.
The human senses are divided into three main categories:
"special", "somatic", and "visceral", as shown in Figure 1.
Special senses include sight, hearing, taste, smell, and equilib-
rium. Somatic senses are roughly divided into cutaneous and
deep sensations (intrinsic sensations). These are divided by the
depth of the receptors that receive information.
Cutaneous sensations are obtained through receptors near
the body’s surface, from the superficial layer to the dermis.
There are three types of cutaneous sensations: "tactile and
pressure", "warmth and cold", and "pain". Tactile and pressure
sensations perceive an object’s surface texture and shape when
touched by a hand. Warmth and cold sensations perceive the
Figure 1. Types of human senses.
warmth and coldness of an object. Pain sensations perceive
pain or strong warmth or coldness only on the surface layer.
Deep sensations (intrinsic sensations) are obtained by recep-
tors intrinsic to joints, muscles, and tendons. There are three
types of deep senses: "positional and motor", "resistance and
weight", and "pain". Positional and motor senses perceive the
position and movement of the joints and body. Resistance and
weight senses perceive the stretch and tension of muscles and
the position and movement of joints and the body. Pain senses
perceive deep pain [5].
Computer-mediated communication is far removed from
real-life communication in terms of "visual" and "somatosen-
sory". The visual size ratio (apparent size) of face-to-face users
through a computer is different from the visual size ratio of
face-to-face users in the real world. This visual difference dis-
comforts users. In addition, communication enabled by touch-
ing a display or device is good given that fingertips perceive
a resistance sensation presentation. However, this generates
somatosensory discomfort because of the lack of "position
sensation" consistency or "thermal sensation" presentation.
This lack of sensations transfer creates poor communication.
This study aims to emphasize the existence (of a distant
partner) by reducing these two discomforts.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes the three existence senses and current state of
computer-based communication with existence. Section III
describes the suggested method for reducing the discomfort of
"visual" and "somatosensory" sensations in computer-mediated
communication. Section IV overviews the experiment and its
methods. Section V describes the results. Section VI considers
the results. Finally, Section VII summarizes the results of this
study and discusses future perspectives.
II. Related Work
When people communicate, they perceive human exis-
tence through three types of existence: "environmental objects
changed by human action", "somatosensory", and "audiovi-
sual". The next section introduces related research divided into
three types of existence.
A. Present Situation of Computer-Mediated Communication
with Existence
1) Environmental Objects Changed by Human Action:
Several studies have published remote communication systems
that provide users with existence of others by remotely manip-
ulating environmental objects [6]–[13].
A study that suggested "SyncDecor", provides a virtual
sense of cohabitation by synchronizing the state of remotely
located household items, such as lamps and trash cans, as
shown in Figure 2 [6]. This system provided a relatively
strong sense of connectedness in which partners’ actions in
their living space impacted each other, as well as shared a
weak sense of connectedness similar to conventional awareness
sharing systems.
Figure 2. SyncDecor, in which environmental objects (everyday items) in
remote locations are changed by human action [6]
.
’Tsunagari’ communication aimed to foster a feeling of con-
nection between people and maintain their social relationships
[7]. A system based on this concept, called the Family Planter
system, was also developed for family use.
"Lover’s Cups" is a drinking-together interface that allows
people to remotely share the drinking time with someone they
care about [8]. Using a wireless connection, an otherwise ordi-
nary pair of cups become a communication device, amplifying
the social aspect of drinking behavior.
A study suggested a new method of communicating "aware-
ness" between people separated by long distances to supple-
ment existing forms of communication, such as telephone and
e-mail [9]. By equipping furniture and appliances such as
doors, sofas, refrigerators and televisions with sensors, a sys-
tem wherein these items are connected to remote equivalents
was developed, and their near-simultaneous use is communi-
cated.
"ComSlipper" is a lightweight yet expressive sensible slipper
that enhances the quality of computer-mediated relationships
[10]. This system empowers wearers to create a sense of
connection with others. Wearers use body gestures and tactile
manipulation to feel and express emotions and availability to
distant loved ones.
"Feellight" enables simple and seamless communication
between distanced individuals [11].
"Connected Candles" creates awareness and connects people
in long-distance relationships [12]. The system consists of a
pair of candle stands, which include two candles each, one
being a real candle and the other electronic. The candle stands
are placed at different locations and are connected through
the Internet such that lighting the real candle illuminates the
electronic candle.
"Peek-A-Drawer" is a new communication device that uses
furniture to support lightweight communication between peo-
ple [13]. It provides virtual shared drawers that connect
distanced family members.
While these systems are adequate for passive communica-
tion, they cannot actively communicate existence. They are
unsuitable for partners to feel each other’s existence through
active communication involving contact.
2) Existence through Somatosensory: Numerous methods
have been investigated to invoke existence by transmitting
somatic sensations such as touch or temperature [14]–[21].
People prefer to use haptic (encompassed by somatosensory)
communication devices, primarily with people close to them.
A study on haptic modality shows that Haptics could be
used for practical purposes and emotional communication, for
example, in mimicking touch between partners [14].
A study that explored the importance of the touch modality
on affect conveyance shows that the story accompanied by
communicative touch resulted in a significant increase in the
sense of connectedness with the storyteller over the speech-
only condition and trended toward greater affective conveyance
[15].
A study on the effectiveness of remote contact in a video
meeting, where a robot hand was used to shake hands remotely,
shows that two-way remote contact, between the user and
device, substituting for the other person’s body, are in contact
at the same time on the other person’s side, creating a high
degree of social telepresence [16]. This study showed that
creating social telepresence and giving the other person a sense
of closeness is possible.
Remote hugs have also been investigated [17]. A study
on the alleviating effect of virtual interpersonal touch on
social judgment shows that a virtual hug reduces the negative
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

inferences in recalling information about a target person [18].
In a study that presented the hugging device with thermal
sensation, a significant difference in social presence between
those that received thermal ’hugs’ and those that did not was
observed [19].
As a device that provides more intimate contact, the inter-
active device provides a physical interface for transmitting a
kiss between two remotely connected people [20], [21].
These devices can invoke existence by eliciting somatosen-
sory sensations through contact. However, input and output
location information is inconsistent with visual feedback owing
to using a device with or without a display.
3) Audiovisual Presence: Capcom Co., Ltd. developed an
adventure game for women called "Prisoner’s Palma" based
on the concept of "experiential love adventure through glass"
[22]. In this game, a smartphone screen is used as the glass
of a visiting room to realize natural physical intimacy through
the display. However, the following disadvantages exist. The
small screen size makes it difficult to perceive a realistic
impression. The touch panel feels cold in contrast to the
character’s reactions, resulting in a sense of discomfort owing
to the lack of "thermal sense". In a scene where the character
and user hold out their hands to each other, the character’s
reaction does not change, whether touching the character’s
hand or other places, making the user feel uncomfortable
because of the absent "positional sense".
A study that designed and evaluated "MyEyes", a First
Person View (FPV) video streaming technology probe made
with cardboard goggles and a smartphone, compared the three
different views with couples to explore the effect on social
presence and body ownership [23]. Distance-separated part-
ners see each other’s view on their screen, where it can overlap
their own view (Overlapped), be placed above it (Horizontal),
or presented in parallel such that each is seen with a different
eye (Split). Couples most preferred the Overlapped View,
as it provided the strongest feeling of co-presence, whereas
a Horizontal View provided the greatest sense of mutual
understanding. These qualitative results showed couples valued
performing synchronized acts together and doing activities "in"
the remote location. However, because it does not involve
physical contact, it causes discomfort in the sense of touch
and resistance.
B. Hypothesis
Table I compares related work for each sense.
TABLE I. COMPARISON WITH RELATED WORK
Visual
Position Sense
Thermal Sense
SyncDecor
Remote Handshaking
✓
✓
Toraware no Palm
✓
Ours
✓
✓
✓
From the present situation of computer-based communica-
tion with existence, discomfort is thought to be caused by
differences in "visual size ratio", "consistency of positional
sensation", and "thermal sensation" compared to the real
world.
Therefore, if these differences and present "audiovisual"
and "existence through somatic sensation" are eliminated, the
system can reduce communication discomfort remotely.
III. Method
Adjust the visual size ratio such that the scale of the
user’s image on display is the actual size to reduce "visual"
discomfort. In addition, by presenting "position sense" and
"thermal sense" on the display contact surface between users,
the discomfort of "position sense" consistency and "thermal
sense" is reduced.
In the suggested system, the communication methods are
adjusted to be close to those in real life, in terms of body
size, hand-contact position, and body temperature. Our system
consists of a touch panel display that can project half of a
person’s life-size image and a transparent heater that conveys
the body’s warmth, as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. "Unity-Warmth" concept image.
The noveloty of our system is to emphasize existence by
presenting the warmth of interlocutor’s body temperature while
maintaining consistency between visual and position sense.
The system is named "Unity-Warmth", meaning "connecting
and uniting the warmth of remote areas".
A. System Structure
Figure 4 shows the system structure of Unity-Warmth.
Unity-Warmth consists of a computer, an Arduino Pro Micro
as a micro-controller, a display(27 inches) that shows the user,
an ultra-wide-angle web camera (ELP USBFHD06H-BL170),
and an IR touch frame to detect hand touch position. The Ar-
duino is connected to a circuit for presenting a warm sensation.
In addition, a webcam (Logitech C270n) is connected for use
as the camera in the general video meeting for comparison
in the experiment. It is also used as a microphone. The two
computers for communication are connected by a network. The
video and audio are transmitted using the web conferencing
application "Zoom Meetings" (Zoom Video Communications,
Inc.) [24].
By adjusting the user’s size ratio using a large display, the
user’s size can be projected as a person’s life-size image. When
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. Unity-Warmth structure diagram.
one user touches the display, the touch location is transmitted
to the other device through the network. A warm sensation is
presented at the corresponding point on the communications
partner’s device to provide a sense of contact from a remote
location.
An IR touch frame for contact detection and a heater
for warmth presentation are attached to an acrylic panel as
the warmth presentation unit. The heater is attached to the
right edge of the screen on one device and to the left edge
of the screen on the other device. Accordingly, the system
can reproduce the warmth of face-to-face and hand-to-hand
contact. The warmth presentation unit was placed at a 250 mm
distance from the display. The black cloth covers the display
and warmth presentation unit to disguise the insertion of light
and display gap.
To capture both the human upper body and the hand touch-
ing the warmth presentation unit using one camera, an ultra-
wide-angle camera is attached to the bottom of the display,
capturing images as if looking up from below. Trapezoidal
correction is performed on the captured images to make it
appear as if they were shot from the front. Therefore, the
system enables the capture of the hand and the user’s upper
body touching the warmth presentation unit in a form close to
the actual size. Figure 5 shows a side-view schematic of the
system.
Figure 6 provides the developed device.
Figure 7 shows the circuit diagram.
When one user contacts the warmth presentation unit, the
transmission program sends the contact state to the partner’s
computer. When the receiving program receives the contact
state, it sends it to the Arduino. When the Arduino receives the
contact state via serial communication, it turns on the LEDs
connected to the GPIO pin to indicate the operation status and
outputs a voltage to the pins connected to the relay module.
The output voltage from the GPIO pin is input to an 8-channel
Figure 5. Side-view system schematic.
Figure 6. Picture of the developed device.
Figure 7. Circuit diagram.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

relay module. A transparent heater (Mirai Tech (now: Heat
Lab. Corporation) high-transparency flexible heater, A4 size)
was connected to the output of the relay module to provide
a warm sensation. An AC 100 V output from a household
outlet is used to operate the transparent heater. Heating was
controlled to activate heating when a hand touched the device
and stopped when the hand is removed. Therefore, the heating
of this system was not controlled by the temperature at this
time.
Figure 8 shows the developed control circuit.
Figure 8. Control circuit.
The relay module is on the left, and the Arduino on the
right. Only 1ch of the relay is used at this time.
IV. Experiment
The effectiveness of Unity-Warmth was verified by compar-
ing a conventional computer-mediated communication method
(web meeting application: Zoom Meetings) with the suggested
method (Unity-Warmth). Specifically, a questionnaire survey
was conducted to determine whether the user’s perception
changes by changing the "visual size ratio of the user pre-
sented" and "presence of a thermal sensation through the
display", and the results were then analysed.
A. Experimental Methods
The analysis was conducted from three viewpoints: "subjec-
tive evaluation", "user’s emotional change", and "existence".
This experiments used a within-subjects design. The question-
naire was administered using the Visual Analog Scale (VAS).
Each questionnaire item was compared by a t-test between the
conventional and suggested method.
Assuming power = 0.80, effect size (delta) = 0.60, and
significance level = 0.05, the optimal number of samples
was n = 23.8. Therefore, 24 samples were collected for this
experiment.
B. Tasks
To conduct a controlled experiment, the degree of atten-
tion directed to the displays and the conversations conducted
through the displays should remain the same. Participants
were asked to perform the following three tasks to satisfy
this condition. The first task is a chat, including greetings
and introductions, to build a relationship with the interlocutor
and check the conversation’s spontaneity. The second task
is to check the color of their partner’s eyes or the state of
their partner’s fingernails to make the participants aware of
their partner by paying attention to their partner’s appearance.
The third task is to compare the hand sizes to confirm the
consistency difference of the "positional sense" and "thermal
sense" between the conventional and suggested methods.
These three tasks help the interlocutors deepen their rela-
tionship with the first and second tasks, and then simulate
skin-to-skin contact through the system to check for changes
in emotion with the third task.
The tasks were the same for both the conventional and
suggested methods, and the only difference is whether the
touching, hand-to-hand action was performed through the
suggested method during the third task.
C. Experiment Environment
A device was placed in two rooms, and participants com-
municate while seated in chairs.
Figure 9 shows participants participating in the experiment.
(a) Room 1
(b) Room 2
Figure 9. Experimental landscapes.
Participants sit at a certain distance such that their entire
face can be seen on the display when communicating with the
conventional method and as close as possible to the warmth
presentation unit when communicating with the suggested
method, because of the camera’s viewing angle .
D. Questionnaire
1) Subjective Evaluation: The questionnaire was designed
to assess discomfort in computer-mediated communication
subjectively. The questions were the five items listed in Table
II.
TABLE II. QUESTIONNAIRE ITEMS RELATED TO SUBJECTIVE EVAL-
UATION
Q1
The person speaking in remote may not be human
(Discomfort regarding human existence)
Q2
The person speaking in remote may not be the person himself
(Discomfort regarding personal existence)
Q3
The person speaking in remote may not be spending the same
amount of time together
(Discomfort regarding real-time progression)
Q4
The person speaking in remote may not be listening to me
(Discomfort regarding attention)
Q5
The person speaking in remote may not be having me favor
(Discomfort regarding favoritism)
This questionnaire aims to investigate the degree of reduc-
tion concerning the discomfort that occurs compared with real-
world communication between the conventional method (web
meeting) and suggested method (Unity-Warmth). Five discom-
forts were targeted: human existence, personal existence, real-
time progression, attention, and favoritism.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

2) Emotional Change: SAM (Self-Assessment Manikin):
SAM was used to evaluate emotions [25]. SAM consists
of emotional valence and arousal levels and can evaluate
pleasant/displeased and excited/relaxed states on 9 levels,
respectively. The participants were instructed to answer the
questionnaire for emotional valence with the center as the
normal state and the questionnaire for arousal level with the
rightmost state as the normal state.
3) Existence: IPQ (Igroup Presence Questionnaire): IPQ
was used to evaluate existence [26]. IPQ consists of four
factors: an overall presence, presence of the virtual space,
awareness of the outside world, and sense of reality. It scores
the presence, immersion, and sense of presence of each
content. This experiment used the six questions listed in Table
III.
TABLE III. QUESTIONNAIRE ITEMS RELATED TO EXISTENCE
Q1
I had a sense that the interlocutor projected on the computer
was "being there".
Q2
I did not feel that I was present beside the interlocutor
Q3
I had a sense of participating with the interlocutor
Q4
I felt present in the same space as the interlocutor
Q5
How real did the interlocutor seem to you?
Q6
How much did your experience of computer-medicated
communication seem consistent with your real-world
communication experiences?
Items that were unsuitable for the experiment or that
were synonymous with other questions when converted into
Japanese were excluded, and only items regarding existence
were selected from these.
E. Participants
Participants were students between the ages of 21 and
23. Each questionnaire answered by the participant in one
experiment was treated as one sample. Different combinations
of participants were treated as separate samples.
V. Results
The results are presented in three viewpoints: "subject
evaluation", "emotional change", and "existence". Assuming
power = 0.80, effect size (delta) = 0.60, and significance level =
0.05, the optimal number of samples was n = 23.8. Therefore,
24 samples were collected for this experiment.
A. Subjective Evaluation
Table IV lists the results of the t-test and average values of
the subjective discomfort evaluation.
TABLE IV. T-TEST RESULTS OF SUBJECTIVE DISCOMFORT EVALU-
ATION
Questions
Result(t-value)
Average Value
Web Meeting
Unity-Warmth
Q1
n.s.
85.21
88.29
Q2
n.s.
83.50
88.13
Q3
n.s.
75.58
82.25
Q4
n.s.
76.04
78.38
Q5
n.s.
31.63
31.04
Significant differences were not observed from this evalua-
tion.
B. Emotional Change
Table V lists the results of the t-test and average values
for the emotional change. Q1 is the result of the emotional
valence, and Q2 of the arousal level.
TABLE V. T-TEST RESULTS OF SUBJECTIVE EMOTIONAL CHANGE
EVALUATION
Questions
Result(t-value)
Average Value
Web Meeting
Unity-Warmth
Q1
n.s.
60.96
64.96
Q2
n.s.
49.96
59.00
Significant differences were not observed from this evalua-
tion.
C. Existence
Table VI lists the results of the t-test and average values for
existence.
TABLE VI. T-TEST RESULTS OF SUBJECTIVE EXISTENCE EVALUA-
TION
Questions
Result(t-value)
Average Value
Web Meeting
Unity-Warmth
Q1
p<.001
30.29
53.83
Q2
n.s
37.83
44.67
Q3
p=.009
53.21
69.25
Q4
p=.009
48.50
64.58
Q5
p=.002
56.25
39.71
Q6
p=.005
51.42
66.88
This evaluation obtained significant differences in five out
of six questions.
Figure 10 shows a radar chart of the average values of the
five items for which a significant difference was obtained.
Figure 10. Radar chart of the significant differences observed from existence
items.
Figure 11 shows the results of the five "existence" questions
in which significant differences were obtained.
This graph is a box plot. The thick line at the center of
the box plot represents the median of the data. The top of the
box represents the third quartile, and the bottom of the box
represents the first quartile. The upper and lower whiskers refer
to the largest and smallest data points, respectively, in the range
between (first quartile - 1.5*(third quartile - first quartile))
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 11. Box plot of the significant differences observed from existence
items.
and (third quartile + 1.5*(third quartile - first quartile)). The
circles represent data points that are larger or smaller than the
whiskers, i.e., outliers.
VI. Discussion
In this section, clarification of the reason why significant
differences were obtained for "existence" but not for "subjec-
tive evaluation" and "emotional change". Each of the questions
about the three viewpoints is discussed.
A. Subjective Evaluation
A paired t-test was performed on the questionnaire results
of Q1 "The person speaking in remote location may not be a
human (discomfort regarding the sense of human presence)".
Significant differences were not observed between the conven-
tional method (web meeting) and suggested method (Unity-
Warmth) on this question. The answers showed that many
samples were obtained without significant differences between
the conventional and the suggested methods. This result may
be because the participants were university students, who
are accustomed to video meeting, and therefore, minimally
discomforted regarding the existence of the interlocutor. This
may also be related to all participants knowing each other,
having met face-to-face just before the experiment.
A paired t-test was performed on the questionnaire results
of Q2 "The person speaking in remote may not be the person
himself (Discomfort regarding personal existence)". Signifi-
cant differences were not observed between the conventional
method (web meeting) and suggested method (Unity-Warmth)
on this question. The answer showed that many samples were
obtained without significant differences between the conven-
tional and suggested methods. This result seems to be caused
by problems of participant combination, as in Q1.
A paired t-test was performed on the questionnaire result
of Q3 "The person speaking in remote may not be spending
the same amount of time together (Discomfort regarding real-
time progression)". Significant differences were not observed
between the conventional method (web meeting) and suggested
method (Unity-Warmth) on this question. This result seems to
be caused by problems of participant combination, as in Q1
and Q2.
A paired t-test was performed on the questionnaire result of
Q4 "The person speaking in remote may not be listening to me
(Discomfort regarding attention)". Significant differences were
not observed between the conventional method (web meeting)
and suggested method (Unity-Warmth) on this question. In
this item, some answers show improvement in the suggested
method (Unity-Warmth) compared to the conventional method
(web meeting). However, some answers show deterioration in
the suggested method compared to the conventional method.
This result may be because of the unnaturalness of the line of
sight and images, as Unity-Warmth uses an ultra-wide-angle
web camera and performs a Trapezoidal correction.
A paired t-test was performed on the questionnaire result
of Q5 "The person speaking in remote may not be having
me favor (Discomfort regarding favoritism)". Significant dif-
ferences were not observed between the conventional method
(web meeting) and suggested method (Unity-Warmth) on this
question. Many of the experiments were conducted with male
participants who were not romantically involved with each
other. This result may be because the participants were less
likely to feel affection for each other, and thus, significant
differences were not obtained.
B. Emotional Change
A paired t-test on the questionnaire results of the emotional
valence (Q1) did not show significant difference between
the conventional and suggested methods. Similarly, the cor-
responding t-test on the questionnaire results of the arousal
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

level (Q2) did not show significant difference between the
conventional and suggested methods.
These results may indicate that the number of experiments
conducted with male participants who were not romantically
involved with each other was too large to obtain significant
differences in emotional change. After the experiment, some
male participants who were romantically attracted to women
said, "I think I would be more excited and happy to use
this system with a woman". This opinion suggests that the
emotional change is more significant when the partipants are
romantic partners.
C. Existence
A paired t-test was performed on Q1 "I had a sense that
the interlocutor projected on the computer was ’being there’".
Significant differences were obtained between the conventional
method (web meeting) and suggested method (Unity-Warmth)
on this question. The average VAS value of the suggested
method (Unity-Warmth) was 53.83 mm, and that of the conven-
tional method (web meeting) was 30.29 mm. In this question,
a VAS value of 0 mm means "not at all", and 100 mm means
"very much". Therefore, the suggested method (Unity-Warmth)
provides "the sense that the interlocutor is ’being there’" more
significantly than the conventional method (web meeting).
A paired t-test was performed on Q2 "I did not feel that I
was present next to the interlocutor". Significant differences
were not obtained between the conventional method (web
meeting) and suggested method (Unity-Warmth) on this ques-
tion.
A paired t-test was performed on Q3 "I had a sense of acting
with the interlocutor". Significant differences were obtained
between the conventional method (web meeting) and suggested
method (Unity-Warmth) on this question. The average VAS
value of the suggested method (Unity-Warmth) was 69.25
mm, and that of the conventional method (web meeting) was
53.21 mm. In this question, a VAS value of 0 mm means
"fully disagree", and 100 mm means "fully agree". Therefore,
the suggested method (Unity-Warmth) provides "the sense of
participating with the interlocutor" more significantly than the
conventional method (web meeting).
A paired t-test was performed on Q4 "I felt present in
the same space with the interlocutor". Significant differences
were obtained between the conventional method (web meeting)
and suggested method (Unity-Warmth) on this question. The
average VAS value of the suggested method (Unity-Warmth)
was 64.58 mm, and that of the conventional method (web
meeting) was 48.50 mm. In this question, a VAS value of 0
mm means "fully disagree", and 100 mm means "fully agree".
Therefore, the suggested method (Unity-Warmth) provides "the
sense of being in the same space as the interlocutor" more
significantly than the conventional method (web meeting).
A paired t-test was performed on Q5 "How real did the in-
terlocutor seem to you?". Significant differences were obtained
between the conventional method (web meeting) and suggested
method (Unity-Warmth) on this question. The average VAS
value of the suggested method (Unity-Warmth) was 39.71 mm,
and that of the conventional method (web meeting) was 56.25
mm. In this question, a VAS value of 0 mm means "not real
at all", and 100 mm means "completely real". Therefore, the
suggested method (Unity-Warmth) provides "the realism of the
interlocutor" more significantly than the conventional method
(web meeting).
A paired t-test was performed on Q6 "How much did
your experience of computer-medicated communication seem
consistent with your real-world communication experience?".
Significant differences were obtained between the conventional
method (web meeting) and suggested method (Unity-Warmth)
on this question. The average VAS value of the suggested
method (Unity-Warmth) was 66.88 mm, and that of the conven-
tional method (web meeting) was 51.42 mm. In this question,
a VAS value of 0 mm means "not consistent", and 100 mm
means "very consistent". Therefore, the suggested method
(Unity-Warmth) gives "consistency with real-world commu-
nication experience" more significantly than the conventional
method (web meeting).
Significant differences were obtained for five of the six
items, indicating an improved existence. That is, this system
can provide communication with an existence significantly
more effective than web meeting.
Another reason for the lack of significant differences in Q2
may have been the difficulty understanding the questionnaire.
For the question "I did not feel that I was present beside the
interlocutor", a VAS value of 0 mm meant "not at all", and 100
mm meant "very much". Therefore, several participants asked,
"Which is ’I felt that I was present next to the interlocutor’?"
about the interpretation of the question. It may have been
necessary to explain the interpretation of the questions and
response scales to all participants in advance.
VII. Conclusion and Future Work
This study shows that Unity-Warmth provide better com-
munication with existence even in remote areas. In the fu-
ture, Unity-Warmth can be applied to communication between
people who struggle to meet in person and express physi-
cal intimacy, such as "grandparents and grandchildren" and
"celebrities and their fans". The following section introduces
the conclusion and future works in detail.
A. Conclusion
This study aims to emphasize the existence (of the distant
partner) by reducing two discomforts "visual" and "somatosen-
sory" of computer-medicated communication.
In the suggested system, Unity-Warmth, the communication
methods are adjusted to be close to those in real life, in terms
of body size, hand-contact position, and body temperature.
Unity-Warmth consists of a touch panel display that can project
half of a person’s life-size image and a transparent heater that
conveys the body’s warmth.
An experiment verified the effectiveness of Unity-Warmth
by comparing the conventional system (Zoom Meetings) with
Unity-Warmth. Consequently, significant differences were not
obtained for "subjective evaluation" and "emotional change".
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

However, the "existence" questionnaire obtained significant
differences in five of the six questions. The suggested method
(Unity-Warmth) was more effective than the conventional
method (web meeting) in terms of the sense that the interlocu-
tor is "being there", sense of participating with the interlocutor,
sense of being in the same space as the interlocutor, realism of
the interlocutor, and consistency with real-world communica-
tion experience. That is the suggested method (Unity-Warmth)
can provide better "communication with existence even in
remote areas", which is the goal of this research, compared
with the conventional method (web meeting).
However, because significant differences were not identified
in the questionnaires of the "subjective evaluation of discom-
fort" and "emotional change", questions remain concerning
the discomfort changes of "visual" and "somatosensory". A
possible reason for the absent significant differences in this
survey can be the combination of participants. In addition,
the suggested method (Unity-Warmth) requires some visual
improvements, such as "video distortion and line of sight
improvement", "internal reflection reduction", and "quality of
transmitted video and audio". Addressing these improvements
is expected to provide existence further.
B. Future Work
The participants in this experiment were only niche students
who knew each other and were not romantically involved
with each other. The results shows that there is no significant
difference was in the subjective evaluation of discomfort.
In the future, we would like to conduct experiments with a
wider range of age groups and participants with romantic or
friendship relationships and compare the results.
Investigating whether the suggested method helps resolve
the sense of discomfort in long-distance communication is
expected.
Conducting the survey again by collecting a sample that
considers whether the respondents are in romantic interest
involved is expected.
Furthermore, Unity-Warmth will be tested with couples
in long-distance relationships, which is the long-term back-
ground of this study to investigate the degree to which
the suggested system enriches long-distance communication.
Moreover, Unity-Warmth can be applied to communication
between people who struggle meeting directly and expressing
physical intimacy, such as "grandparents and grandchildren"
and "celebrities and their fans".
In evaluating communication involving remote contact, the
9-item questionnaire exists to measure the "Social Disfor-
dance" of Mediated Social Touch, with three scales that focus
on Social Discomfort, Communicational Expressiveness, and
Need for Additional Consideration [27]. Conducting more suit-
able questionnaires for evaluating communication involving
remote contact is expected.
The following four points can be identified as areas of
improvement for suggested device. First, the images captured
by the ultra-wide-angle camera are distorted. Second, adjust
the camera position to make the line of sight natural. Third,
the content displayed on display is reflected in the captured
image owing to the internal reflection of the acrylic plate of
the warm sensation unit placed in front of the display. Fourth,
is the quality of the transmitted video and audio. These im-
provements will produce better results. In addition, the heating
of the present device was not controlled by the temperature.
Therefore, verifying the difference in effect depending on the
temperature provided by the device is expected.
References
[1] C. Neustaedter and S. Greenberg, “Intimacy in long-distance relation-
ships over video chat,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 753–762, Association for
Computing Machinery, 2012.
[2] A. P. N. Aguila, “Living long-distance relationships through computer-
mediated communication,” Social Science Diliman, vol. 5, pp. 83–106,
2011.
[3] S. Greenberg and C. Neustaedter, “Shared living, experiences, and
intimacy over video chat in long distance relationships,” Connecting
Families: The Impact of New Communication Technologies on Domestic
Life, pp. 37–53, Springer London, 2013.
[4] L. Kusisto, “The impact of video chatting on idealization and disillusion-
ment for long distance dating couples,” Theses and Dissertations–Family
Sciences, vol. 31, University of Kentucky Libraries, 2015.
[5] E. Tamaki, “[Method of presenting somatosensory stimuli in a VR
environment] VR kankyou ni okeru taiseikannkaku sigeki no teizi
houhou (in japanese),” Journal of the Society of Biomechanisms, vol. 43,
no. 1, pp. 3–9, 2019.
[6] H. Tsujita, K. Tsukada, and I. Siio, “Syncdecor: Communication appli-
ances for couples separated by distance,” 2008 The Second International
Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and
Technologies, pp. 279–286, 2008.
[7] Y. Itoh, A. Miyajima, and T. Watanabe, “’tsunagari’ communication:
fostering a feeling of connection between family members,” CHI ’02
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 810–
811, 2002.
[8] H. Chung, C. J. Lee, and T. Selker, “Lover’s cups: Drinking interfaces as
new communication channels,” CHI ’06 Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’06, pp. 375–380, Association
for Computing Machinery, 2006.
[9] H. Tsujita, K. Tsukada, and I. Siio, “Inphase: Evaluation of a commu-
nication system focused on "happy coincidences" of daily behaviors,”
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, CHI ’10, pp. 2481–2490, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2010.
[10] C. Chen, J. Forlizzi, and P. L. Jennings, “Comslipper: An expressive de-
sign to support awareness and availability,” CHI ’06 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’06, pp. 369–374,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2006.
[11] K. Suzuki and S. Hashimoto, “Feellight: A communication device for
distant nonverbal exchange,” Proceedings of the ACM SIGMM 2004
Workshop on Effective Telepresence - ETP 2004, pp. 40–44, 2004.
[12] J. Häkkilä, H. Li, S. Koskinen, and A. Colley, “Connected candles as
peripheral emotional user interface,” Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, pp. 327–333,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018.
[13] I. Siio, J. H. Rowan, and E. D. Mynatt, “Peek-a-drawer: Communication
by furniture,” CHI ’02 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, pp. 582–583, Association for Computing Machinery,
2002.
[14] K. Suhonen, K. Väänänen, and K. Mäkelä, “User experiences and
expectations of vibrotactile, thermal and squeeze feedback in interper-
sonal communication,” Proceedings of the 26th Annual BCS Interaction
Specialist Group Conference on People and Computers, pp. 205–214,
BCS Learning & Development Ltd., 2012.
[15] R. Wang, F. K. H. Quek, D. G. Tatar, J. K. S. Teh, and A. D. Cheok,
“Keep in touch: Channel, expectation and experience,” Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 139–148, Association for Computing Machinery, 2012.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[16] H. Nakanishi, K. Tanaka, and Y. Wada, “Remote handshaking: Touch en-
hances video-mediated social telepresence,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’14, (New
York, NY, USA), pp. 2143–2152, Association for Computing Machinery,
2014.
[17] F. Mueller, F. Vetere, M. R. Gibbs, J. Kjeldskov, S. Pedell, and
S. Howard, “Hug over a distance,” CHI ’05 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1673–1676, Association for
Computing Machinery, 2005.
[18] J. Nakanishi, H. Sumioka, and H. Ishiguro, “Virtual hug induces
modulated impression on hearsay information,” Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction, pp. 199–204,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018.
[19] D. Gooch and L. A. Watts, “Communicating social presence through
thermal hugs,” Proc. Ubicomp 2010 SISSE Workshop, pp. 11–20, 2010.
[20] H. A. Samani, R. Parsani, L. T. Rodriguez, E. Saadatian, K. H.
Dissanayake, and A. D. Cheok, “Kissenger: Design of a kiss transmission
device,” Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference,
pp. 48–57, Association for Computing Machinery, 2012.
[21] H. A. Samani, J. K. S. Teh, E. Saadatian, and R. Nakatsu, “Xoxo: Haptic
interface for mediated intimacy,” 2013 International Symposium on Next-
Generation Electronics, pp. 256–259, 2013.
[22] “CAPCOM: Toraware no palm official site.” https://www.capcom.co.jp/
palm/. [retrieved: May, 2022].
[23] R. Pan, S. Singhal, B. E. Riecke, E. S. Cramer, and C. Neustaedter,
“"myeyes": The design and evaluation of first person view video stream-
ing for long-distance couples,” Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems, pp. 135–146, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2017.
[24] “Zoom
meetings
|
zoom.”
https://explore.zoom.us/en/products/
meetings/. [retrieved: May, 2022].
[25] M. M. Bradley and P. J. Lang, “Measuring emotion: the self-assessment
manikin and the semantic differential,” Journal of behavior therapy and
experimental psychiatry, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 49–59, 1994.
[26] “igroup presence questionnaire (IPQ) overview | igroup.org – project
consortium.” http://www.igroup.org/pq/ipq/index.php. [retrieved: May,
2022].
[27] K. Mejia and S. Yarosh, “A nine-item questionnaire for measuring the
social disfordance of mediated social touch technologies,” Proc. ACM
Hum.-Comput. Interact., vol. 1, no. CSCW, pp. 1–17, 2017.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

