A Methodology to Establish Usability Heuristics 
 
Cristian Rusu1, Silvana Roncagliolo1, Virginica Rusu2, Cesar Collazos3 
 
1Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Valparaiso, Valparaiso, Chile 
e-mail: cristian.rusu@ucv.cl, silvana@ucv.cl 
 
2Universidad de Playa Ancha, Valparaiso, Chile 
e-mail: virginica.rusu@upla.cl 
 
3 IDIS Research Group, Universidad del Cauca, Popayan, Colombia 
e-mail: ccollazo@unicauca.edu.co 
 
Abstract — Usability evaluation for applications based on 
emerging information technology brings new challenges. Is it 
the classical concept of usability still valid? Which are the 
dimensions of the (new) usability? How can it be measured? 
How should we develop for (better) usability? A methodology 
to develop usability heuristics for emerging applications is 
proposed. The methodology was fully checked in the case of 
Grid Computing applications, and partially applied in the case 
of Interactive Digital Television and Virtual Worlds. 
Keywords - usability; usability evaluations; usability 
heuristics; grid computing; interactive digital television; virtual 
worlds.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Usability evaluation for applications based on emerging 
information technology brings new challenges. Is it the 
classical concept of usability still valid? Which are the 
dimensions of the (new) usability, into the context of new 
interaction paradigms? How can it be measured? How 
should we develop for (better) usability? The traditional 
usability engineering concepts and evaluation methods 
should be re-examined. There is a need for new evaluation 
methods or at least for the use of traditional evaluations in 
novel ways [1]. Frameworks of usability evaluation, 
including appropriate methods or combination of methods 
should be established, in order to get more effective and 
efficient evaluations on new interaction paradigms. 
The paper proposes a methodology to establish new 
usability heuristics. Section 2 highlights the necessity of new 
heuristics for applications based on emerging information 
technology, and describes the proposed methodology. 
Section 3 shows preliminary results of applying the 
methodology: usability heuristics for Grid Computing, 
Interactive Television, and Virtual Worlds. Section 4 
presents preliminary conclusions and future works. 
II. 
DEFINING NEW USABILITY HEURISTICS 
The ISO/IEC 9241 standard defines the usability as the 
extent to which a product can be used by specified users to 
achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and 
satisfaction in a specified context of use [2]. Usability 
evaluation methods are commonly divided into inspection 
and testing methods. Inspection methods find usability 
problems based on the expertise of usability professionals. 
Testing methods find usability problems through the 
observation of the users while they use (and comment on) a 
system interface [3].  
Heuristic evaluation is a widely used inspection method. 
A group of evaluators inspect the interface design based on a 
set of usability heuristics [4] [5]. Heuristic evaluation is easy 
to perform, cheap and able to find many usability problems 
(both major and minor problems). However, it may miss 
domain specific problems. That is why the use of appropriate 
heuristics is highly significant. 
Usability inspections, including heuristic evaluation, are 
well documented and many publications describe the usage 
of the methods. Literature usually focuses on describing the 
advantages and disadvantages of usability evaluation 
methods but not on how to develop new methods and/or 
usability heuristics.  
Over the last couple of years there is an increasing 
interest on usability of applications based on emerging 
information technology [6]. Measuring the usability of such 
applications was a challenging task. Traditional usability 
evaluation methods, especially usability heuristics became 
short.  
A methodology to establish new usability heuristics, for 
specific 
applications, 
was 
gradually 
defined. 
The 
methodology includes 6 stages: 
• 
STEP 
1: 
An 
exploratory 
stage, 
to 
collect 
bibliography related with the main topics of the 
research: specific applications, their characteristics, 
general and/or related (if there are some) usability 
heuristics.  
• 
STEP 2: A descriptive stage, to highlight the most 
important characteristics of the previously collected 
information, in order to formalize the main concepts 
associated with the research. 
• 
STEP 3: A correlational stage, to identify the 
characteristics that the usability heuristics for 
specific applications 
should 
have, based 
on 
traditional heuristics and case studies analysis. 
59
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

• 
STEP 4: An explicative stage, to formally specify the 
set of the proposed heuristics, using a standard 
template.  
• 
STEP 5: A validation (experimental) stage, to check 
new heuristics against traditional heuristics by 
experiments, 
through 
heuristic 
evaluations 
performed on selected case studies, complemented 
by user tests. 
• 
STEP 6: A refinement stage, based on the feedback 
from the validation stage. 
 
STEP 1 explores the specific applications that require 
new usability heuristic.  
STEP 2 re-examines the very meaning of usability and its 
characteristics, in the context of the examined applications.  
If literature provides no specific and/or related usability 
heuristics, Nielsen’s 10 well known and extensively used 
heuristics are used as a basis at STEP 3.  
The standard template used at STEP 4 is the following: 
• 
ID, Name and Definition: Heuristic’s identifier, 
name and definition.   
• 
Explanation: 
Heuristic’s 
detailed 
explanation, 
including references to usability principles, typical 
usability problems, and related usability heuristics 
proposed by other authors. 
• 
Examples: Examples of heuristic’s violation and 
compliance. 
• 
Benefits: Expected usability benefits, when the 
heuristic is accomplished. 
• 
Problems: 
Anticipated 
problems 
of 
heuristic 
misunderstanding, 
when 
performing 
heuristic 
evaluations. 
 
STEP 5 evaluates the set of heuristics defined at STEP 4 
against Nielsen’s heuristics, in specific case studies. The 
application is evaluated by two separate groups of 
evaluators, of similar experience, in equal conditions. One 
group uses only the set of heuristics defined at STEP 4, while 
the second group uses only Nielsen’s heuristics. Usability 
problems founded by the two groups are then compared. 
Three categories of problems are expected: 
• 
(P1) Problems identified by both groups of 
evaluators, 
• 
(P2) Problems identified only by the group that used 
the set of heuristics defined at STEP 4, 
• 
(P3) Problems identified only by the group that used 
Nielsen’s heuristics. 
 
New heuristics works well when (P1) and/or (P2) include 
the highest percentage of problems. Question arises with 
problems (P3). Why these problems are not identified when 
using the new set of heuristics? There are basically two 
possible reasons:  
(1) 
New heuristics are not able to identify these 
problems, either because there are no appropriate 
heuristics, or because the heuristics are not properly 
specified. 
(2) 
Evaluators using new heuristics subjectively ignored 
the problems. 
 
Hypotheses (1) and (2) may be validated or rejected by 
complementary evaluations and/or user tests. 
STEP 6 refines the set of heuristics defined at STEP 4. 
Stages 1 to 6 may be applied iteratively. Specific usability 
checklist may also be developed, detailing usability 
heuristics and helping heuristic evaluations practice. 
III. 
APPLYING THE METHODOLOGY IN PRACTICE  
A. Usability Heuristics for Grid Computing Applications 
Grid computing is a relatively new, distributed 
computing technology, which relies on the coordinated use 
of different types of computing resources of an unspecified 
number of devices, which are not necessarily at the same 
geographical location. The process is transparent for users, 
allowing the use of resources as a single supercomputer.  
Nowadays many Grid Computing based projects offer 
access to their services through Web applications, by Web 
portals. It is expected that in the future the technical 
knowledge of grid users will decrease. That is why usability 
Grid Computing applications’ usability will become a main 
issue. 
The methodology described in the previous section was 
applied in order to establish specific usability heuristics for 
Grid Computing Applications. A set of 12 new heuristics 
was developed, grouped in three categories: (1) Design and 
Aesthetics, (2) Navigation, and (3) Errors and Help. A 
summary of the proposed heuristics is presented below, 
including heuristics’ ID, name and definition. 
 
Design and Aesthetics Heuristics: 
(CGH1) Clarity: A Grid Computing application interface 
should be easy to understand, using clear graphic elements, 
text and language. 
(CGH2) Metaphors: A Grid Computing application 
should use appropriate metaphors, making the possible 
actions easy to understand, through images and familiar 
objects. 
(CGH3) Simplicity: A Grid Computing application 
should provide the necessary information in order to 
complete a task in a concise (yet clear) manner. 
(CGH4) Feedback: A Grid Computing application should 
keep users informed on the jobs’ progress, indicating both 
the global and the detailed state of the system. The 
application should deliver appropriate feedback on users’ 
actions. 
(CGH5) Consistency: A Grid Computing application 
should be consistent in using language and concepts. The 
forms of data entry and visualization of results should be 
consistent. 
 
Navigation Heuristics: 
(CGH6) Shortcuts: A Grid Computing application should 
provide shortcuts, abbreviations, accessibility keys or 
command lines for expert users. 
60
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

(CGH7) Low memory load: A Grid Computing 
application should maintain the main commands always 
available. It should offer easy to find elements, functions and 
options. 
(CGH8) Explorability: A Grid Computing application 
should minimize navigation and should provide easy, clear, 
and natural ways to perform tasks. 
(CGH9) Control over actions: A Grid Computing 
application should offer ways to cancel a running task or 
process. It should allow undo and/or changes of actions. 
 
Errors and Help Heuristics: 
(CGH10) 
Error 
prevention: 
A 
Grid 
Computing 
application should prevent users from performing actions 
that could lead to errors, and should avoid confusions that 
could lead to mistakes.  
(CGH11) Recovering from errors: A Grid Computing 
application should provide clear messages, hopefully 
indicating causes and solutions of errors. 
(CGH12) Help and documentation: A Grid Computing 
application should provide an easy to find, easy to 
understand, and complete online documentation. It should 
provide contextual help and glossary of terms for novice 
users. 
 
Following the proposed methodology, the set of Grid 
Computing usability heuristics was specified, validated and 
refined in a three-cycle iterative process [7] [8]. New 
heuristics proved to work better than Nielsen’s heuristics in 
two case studies. Problems (P1) and (P2) were dominant in 
both cases. Problems (P2) scored 41% in the first case study, 
and 46% in the second one.  
B. Usability Heuristics for Interactive Television 
Interactive Digital Television (iTV) exceeds the analog 
TV in several aspects: capacity, better use of the spectrum, 
greater immunity to noise and interference, better sound and 
picture 
quality, 
potential 
for 
transmission 
of 
data 
simultaneously, saving power transmission. However, the 
main iTV advantage is that the user may interact with the 
application. Interactivity allows the user to be an active part 
of the programming, providing the ability to access or extend 
the information presented, combining multimedia content 
(audio, video, text), to participate in forums and to control 
the sequence of information presented [9]. 
Stages 1 to 4 of the proposed methodology were 
performed for iTV applications [10]. A set of 14 specific 
usability heuristics were developed. Stages 5 and 6 are still 
to be performed. Heuristics were grouped in three categories: 
(1) Design and Aesthetics, (2) Flexibility and Navigation, 
and (3) Errors and Help. A summary of the proposed 
heuristics is presented below, including heuristics’ ID, name 
and definition. 
 
Design and Aesthetics Heuristics: 
(ITVH1) Match between the system and the real world: 
iTV should use words, phrases and concepts familiar to the 
user; the sequence of activities should follow user's mental 
processes; information should be presented in a simple, 
natural and logical order; metaphors should be easy to 
understand; important controls should be represented on 
screen; there should be an intuitive mapping between them 
and the real controls. 
(ITVH2) Aesthetic and minimalist design: iTV should 
have simple, intuitive, easy to learn and pleasing design; the 
system should be free from irrelevant, unnecessary and 
distracting information; icons should be clear and buttons 
should be labeled; the use of graphic controls should be 
intuitive; the need for scroll should be minimized; navigation 
facilities should be present at the bottom of the screen.  
(ITVH3) Consistency and standards: iTV should use 
terminology, controls, graphics and menus consistent 
throughout the system; there should be a consistent look and 
feel for the system interface; iTV should be consistent with 
the related standard TV programs, and colors should be 
consistent between the two systems.  
(ITVH4) Visibility of the system status: Feedback on 
system status should be continuously provided. 
 (ITVH5) Physical constraints: Screen should be visible 
at a range of distances and in various types of lighting; the 
distance between targets (e.g. icons) and the size of targets 
should be appropriate; size should be proportional to 
distance.  
(ITVH6) Extraordinary users:  iTV should use 
appropriately color restricted; it should be suitable for color-
blind users. 
 
Flexibility and Navigation Heuristics: 
(ITVH7) Structure of information: iTV should have a 
hierarchical organization of information, from general to 
specific; related pieces of information should be clustered 
together; the length of text should be appropriate to the 
display size and interaction device; the amount of 
information should be minimized; page titles and headlines 
should be straightforward, short and descriptive; textual 
content should be kept to a maximum of two columns.  
 (ITVH8) Navigation: iTV should provide navigational 
feedback (e.g. showing a user's current and initial states, 
where they have been, and what options they have for where 
to go) and navigational aids (e.g. find facilities).  
(ITVH9) Recognition rather than recall: Help and 
instructions should be visible or easily accessible when 
needed; relationship between controls and their actions 
should be obvious; input formats and units of values should 
be indicated.  
(ITVH10) Flexibility and efficiency of use: iTV should 
allow for a wide range of user expertise; it should also 
appropriately guide novice users. 
(ITVH11) User control and freedom: iTV should provide 
"undo" (or "cancel") and "redo" options; exits should be 
clearly marked (when users find themselves somewhere 
unexpected); facilities to return to the top level should be 
provided, at all stages.  
 
Errors and Help Heuristics: 
(ITVH12) Error prevention: iTV should offer a selection 
method provided (e.g. from a list) as an alternative to the 
direct entry of information; user confirmation should be 
61
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

required before carrying out a potentially “dangerous” action 
(e.g. deleting something). 
(ITVH13) Help users to recover from errors: Error 
messages should adequately describe problems; they should 
assist in diagnosis and suggest ways of recovery in a 
constructive way; error messages should be written in a non-
derisory tone and refrain from attributing blame to the user.  
(ITVH14) Help and documentation: iTV should offer 
clear, direct and simply help, expressed in user’s idiom, free 
from jargon and buzzwords; help should be easy to search, 
understand and apply.  
C. Usability Heuristics for Virtual Worlds 
A virtual world is a computer-based simulated persistent 
spatial 
environment 
that 
supports 
synchronous 
communication among users who are represented by avatars 
[11]. There is interaction between avatars and between avatar 
and environment. Each virtual world has its own rules.  
Stages 1 to 3 of the proposed methodology were applied 
to some Virtual Worlds case studies. Stage 4 is currently 
undergoing. To the date, a set of 16 usability heuristics were 
established. A brief summary, including only heuristics’ ID 
and name, is presented below.  
 
(VWH1) Clarity. 
(VWH2) Simplicity. 
(VWH3) Feedback. 
(VWH4) Consistency. 
(VWH5) Low memory load. 
(VWH6) Flexibility and efficiency of use.  
(VWH7) Orientation and navigation. 
(VWH8) Camera control. 
(VWH9) Visualization. 
(VWH10) Avatar’s customization. 
(VWH11) World interaction. 
(VWH12) Law of physics. 
(VWH13) Communication. 
(VWH14) Error prevention. 
(VWH15) Help users to recover from errors. 
(VWH16) Help and documentation. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Heuristic evaluation is a well known and widely used 
usability inspection method. As it may miss domain specific 
problems, the use of appropriate heuristics is highly 
significant.  
A methodology to establish new usability heuristics is 
proposed. The methodology facilitates the development of 
both usability heuristics and associated usability checklists. 
The methodology was applied and validated for Grid 
Computing applications. It is being currently applied for 
Interactive Digital Television applications and for Virtual 
Worlds. Future works should include more experiments and 
validation. 
 A right balance between specificity and generality 
should be follow. If heuristics are too specific, they will 
probably become hard to understand and hard to apply. 
General heuristics, complemented by specific usability 
checklists, will probably work better, most of the time. 
However, there is a need for new usability heuristics 
especially for applications based on emerging information 
technology brings new challenges.  
As most of the studies recommend, heuristic evaluations 
should always be complemented by other usability 
evaluations, especially usability tests.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work was highly supported by the School of 
Informatics 
Engineering 
of 
the 
Pontifical 
Catholic 
University of Valparaiso – Chile, especially by the members 
of “UseCV” Research Group in Human – Computer 
Interaction, and by the IDIS Research Group of University 
of Cauca - Colombia. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Wiberg, K. Jegers, and H. Desurvire, “How Applicable is 
Your Evaluation Methods – Really?”, Proc. 2nd International 
Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2009), IEEE Press, pp. 324-328, ISBN: 978-1-4244-
3351-3, 2009. 
[2] International Organisation for Standardisation, ISO 9241, 
“Software Ergonomics Requirements for office work with 
visual display terminal (VDT)”, Geneva, 1998. 
[3]  R. Otaiza, C. Rusu, and S. Roncagliolo, “Evaluating the 
Usability of Transactional Web Sites”, Proc. 3rd International 
Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2010), IEEE Press, pp. 32-37, ISBN-13: 978-0-7695-
3957-7, 2010. 
[4] J. Nielsen, “Usability Engineering”, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 1993. 
[5] J. Nielsen, “Ten Usability Heuristics”, Available at 
www.useit.com/papers/heuristic/heuristic_list.html 
(last 
access 12/10/2010). 
[6] C. Rusu, V. Rusu, and S. Roncagliolo, “Usability Practice: 
The Appealing Way to HCI”, Proc. 1st International 
Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI2008), IEEE Press, pp. 265-270, ISBN-10: 0-7695-
3086-9, 2008. 
[7] C. Rusu, S. Roncagliolo, G. Tapia, D. Hayvar, V. Rusu, and 
D. Gorgan, “Evaluating the Usability of Intercultural 
Collaboration Platforms: Grid Computing Applications”, 
Proc. 3rd ACM International Conference on Intercultural 
Collaboration (ICIC 2010), ACM Digital Library, pp. 179-
182, ACM 978-1-4503-0108-4/10/08. 
[8] C. Rusu, S. Roncagliolo, G. Tapia, D. Hayvar, V. Rusu, and 
D. Gorgan, “Usability Heuristics for Grid Computing 
Applications”, 
Proceedings 
of 
The 
4th 
International 
Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2011), Gosier, France, 2011. 
[9] C. Collazos, J. Arciniegas, V. Mondragón, and X. Garcia, 
“Directrices de diseño y evaluación de la televisión interactiva 
desde una perspectiva de usabilidad”, Proc. Interaccion 2008, 
Albacete, Spain, pp. 257-260, 2008. 
[10] C. Collazos, C. Rusu, J. Arciniegas, and S. Roncagliolo, 
“Designing and Evaluating Interactive Television from a 
Usability Perspective”, Proc. 2nd International Conferences on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI 2009), 
IEEE Press, ISBN: 978-1-4244-3351-3, pp. 381-385, 2009. 
[11] J. Yoonhyuk and K. Hyunmee, “User goals in social virtual 
worlds: A means-end chain approach”, Comput. Hum. 
Behav., vol. 26(2), pp. 218–225, 2010. 
62
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

