Unpacking the Contents 
A Conceptual Model for Understanding User Experience in User Psychology 
 
Rebekah Rousi 
Agora Center 
University of Jyväskylä 
rebekah.rousi@jyu.fi 
 
Pertti Saariluoma 
Agora Center  
University of Jyväskylä 
pertti.saariluoma@jyu.fi 
 
 
Jaana Leikas 
VTT Technical Research Centre of 
Finland 
jaana.leikas@vtt.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Paradigm shifts can be noted to have taken 
place in several areas of user-technology research. The 
most obvious have been in terms of including users 
within the design process, either in terms of usability 
studies or user experience design. There have also 
been 
shifts 
towards 
viewing 
human-technology 
interaction as not only an optical experience, but also 
an embodied one. When exploring these factors it is 
easy to prioritize the physical over the psychological. 
User interactions with systems are more easily 
measured in terms of concrete outcomes rather than 
by subjective feelings and perceptions of interaction. 
Through the conference theme: user modeling and 
user focus, this study’s purpose has been to uncover 
mental contents present during the moments of 
human-system interaction. The study has employed a 
range of design stimuli for users to encounter and 
evaluate, giving a holistic idea of the psychological 
components involved in the interactions. The article 
describes a conceptual model which has derived from 
a study of mobile phone icons in the context of their 
graphical user interfaces. This study shows that users 
draw on multiple dimensions of mental information 
contents when experiencing technology, these include: 
cognitive, practical, aesthetic and emotional. Although 
the dimensions somewhat overlap, shifts can be seen 
between the dominance of the dimensions when the 
experience is positive or negative. 
 
Keywords- user experience; mental contents; user 
psychology; conceptual model 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
User interfaces (UIs) are the meeting point between 
technological products and users. Users, or humans, are 
complex organic systems in their own right. They come 
with varied physical, emotional and cognitive needs. 
Numerous factors impact the make-up of these users 
physically and mentally, and in order to get the 
connection between the user and technology ‘just right’, 
designers must consider and address these factors. As UIs 
become more advanced, user-centered matters are grow 
increasingly important. Thus, through ‘user modeling and 
user focus’, we aim to show that it is not just the physical 
and cognitive challenges of UI design that are important, 
but so too is a more encompassing view on psychological 
factors embedded within the user and their perception and 
interaction with the design. 
This paper concentrates on the mental contents of user 
experience (UX). The term ‘mental contents,’ refers to 
information representations, which exist within an 
individual’s mind. These representations, while constantly 
adapting and evolving, shape the way in which people 
experience phenomena [31][32][34][36]. These mental 
contents are shaped by a number of factors, none the least, 
by lived experience. Other factors include: cultural 
(national, gender, sexuality, religious, sub-cultural and 
people with disabilities), social, psychological, linguistic 
and geographical to name a few. The present study 
addresses two of these factors – national cultural and 
linguistic. Empirical material was collected in Australia 
and Finland in 2009 as a part of the Theseus [37] and 
ITEA2 Easy Interactions [38] projects examining the user 
psychology of user-system interactions.  
We have been surprised to discover that astoundingly 
little, if anything, has really been done to understand what 
we consider to be the most important component of UX – 
mental contents. The study of mental contents is an 
important component of user psychology. In the next sub-
section, user psychology and its application in the fields 
of human-technology interaction (HTI) is introduced in 
relation to UX. Section II details the method by 
explaining the picture technique and its rationale and 
detailing components such as the participants, measures 
and procedure. Section III illustrates the results and 
Section IV outlines a conceptual model of experiential 
contents. The paper is concluded in Section V, which 
summarizes and reflects on the findings of this study, 
posing further questions for future investigation. 
 
A. User psychology in the exploration of user 
experience 
In order to understand the mental processes that occur 
when users interact with technology, we must first 
28
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

understand the psychological pre-conditions of this 
interaction. This is what user psychology seeks to explain 
[1][2][3]. Scholars within the discipline of user 
psychology examine and construct psychologically 
justified explanatory models to influence design decisions 
[3]. With progress being made in the fields of UI 
development, it is hardly surprising that the area of UX 
design emerged. Emotional usability pioneer, Don 
Norman [4] articulates that designers and engineers know 
what works and users at least generally can learn how to 
use the products. But what lies at the heart of 
distinguishing two perfectly functioning products from 
one another, still remains somewhat of a mystery. 
UX expands upon traditional usability studies, and is 
quite closely related to the Japanese Kansei engineering 
and North American emotional usability [4][5][6][7][8]. 
By now, the field of UX includes an abundance of 
conceptual models [7][9][10][11][12][13]. Inclusive in the 
models are dimensions such as user HTI perceptions, in 
addition to understandings of cultural and symbolic 
human-to-human 
interaction 
which 
impact 
HTI 
[14][15][16][17][18]. Important in the UX research 
paradigm is the quality improvement of HTI. Norman [4] 
stresses the affective and emotional aspects of interaction. 
Other scholars such as McCarthy and Wright [19] 
emphasize the role of culture as a meaning making tool in 
the process of UX. Battarbee [9] emphasizes the social 
nature of UX by demonstrating that it is not simply 
isolated within one individual, rather it can be and/or is a 
shared 
experience 
between 
multiple 
persons 
and 
communities. The major components of UX articulated by 
Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila 
et 
al. 
[20] 
encompass: 
interactional flow; pleasurable and hedonic aspects of 
product usage; and multisensory interaction.  
The above examples represent studies undertaken in 
disciplines 
of 
cognitive 
science 
and 
task-related 
experimental analysis, phenomenology and qualitative 
analysis. They emphasize the role of feelings and 
emotions, perceptions and behavior in HTI [21]. Another 
key trait of the above mentioned models is that they 
broaden the perspective from human-computer-interaction 
(HCI), 
to 
other 
design 
products 
or 
interactive 
technologies. Thus, they concentrate on incorporating 
users’ lived experience and natural interaction in the 
design process [19][22][23][24].  Despite this, attention is 
still lacking in regards to what we consider the most 
essential property of experience – information contents. 
Apart from phenomenology [25][26][27], and some 
aspects of cognitive models [28][29], information 
contents of mental representations have rarely been 
discussed in relation to UX [30]. Experience is the 
conscious part of human mental representations.  
Previous work by Saariluoma [31][32][33][34][35] 
[36] and Leikas and Saariluoma [24] is continued in this 
study, whereby a content-based approach has been taken 
towards the investigation of life based thought-related 
processes. Content-based thinking enables the formulation 
of new questions. Problems lie within explaining the 
mental contents of users. Contents are in a constant state of 
flux from one phase to the next, leading to a core question 
within our investigation: Given its ever-changing nature, 
how is conscious experience effectively operationalized, in 
order to provide a detailed understanding of UX from a 
psychological perspective? 
In light of a study into user evaluations of mobile 
phone icons, the key aim of this paper is to lay the 
foundations of a conceptual model based on categorical 
dimensions of mental contents. The idea is not to provide a 
finished map of all the dimensions and categories, but to 
illustrate the formational stages of the framework, starting 
from a skeletal version of what has been achieved though 
the examination of user response to graphical user 
interface icons. The further these studies go into other 
design elements, bridging newer UI designs and 
prototypes, the more detailed and thorough the framework 
becomes. 
 
II. 
METHOD 
For this study, the picture sorts technique [46][47][48] 
49] was employed to investigate the ways in which users 
prioritized and constructed explanations of why specific 
designs were preferred over others. In addition to carrying 
on the tradition of investigations which explore user 
emotional responses to designs, the picture sort technique 
focuses on collecting explanatory frameworks provided 
by users. As mentioned above, the challenge for us has 
been to gain an understanding of how participants see and 
mentally construct design products using the information 
content available to them.  
The picture sorts method, developed during the 1950s 
[45], is an empirical technique used to explore Personal 
Construct Theory (PCT). Scholars of PCT advocate that 
people mentally register phenomena through constructs 
that they themselves create by means of mental 
information content. This information content includes 
and is shaped by social, environmental, cultural and 
psychological factors etc. In other words, via interaction 
with design, environments and other people we are 
constantly constructing and reformulating mental images 
of the phenomena we encounter. In fact, our sense of 
reality is based on these constructs. More and more within 
the field of HTI, the significance of methods such as the 
picture sort is being recognized [46][47][48][49][50]. 
 
A. Participants 
In total, 35 subjects participated in this study. Fourteen 
people participated in Australia and 21 participated in 
Finland. Australian participants were aged from 26 to 61: 
2 were 26-29; 3 were 32-35; 3 were 40-44; 4 were 50-54; 
2 were 58-61. The mean age of the participants in 
Australia was 44.2 years old. The gender distribution of 
29
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

the participants in Australia was 8 females and 7 males. 
Ages of the Finnish participants ranged from 21 to 54: 9 
were 21-29; 7 were 30-38; 3 were 43-46; and 2 were 51-
54. The mean age of the Finnish participants was 33.1 
years old. The gender distribution of the Finnish 
participants was 14 females and 7 males.  
 
B. Measures 
Twenty-two screen shots of icon menus were 
presented on a pack of picture cards. The icon menus 
were chosen from competing mobile phone brands, 
models and generations. The idea was to have a sample 
representing the most commonly used brands on the 
Australian and Finnish markets. Once these had been 
selected they were then printed on 200 gsm matt card. A 
USB recording device was used to record the 
experiments.  
The participants were required to sort the cards into 
three piles: least attractive; attractive; most attractive. 
This was not a time based exercise, participants could 
undertake the experiment at their own pace to ensure that 
they carefully looked at the icons. We emphasized that it 
was their personal subjective preferences that we were 
interested in, and that the experiment was not an 
examination. Once the participant had finished sorting the 
cards into piles, they were asked to think of descriptive 
titles (words or phrases) and then reasons for these titles. 
The titles and the reasoning were first written down on an 
open answer questionnaire, and then the participants were 
asked to verbally elicit their responses. This was in case 
they were more likely to favor one of the explanatory 
forms over the other. 
 
C. Procedure 
Before conducting the experiments, a Statement of 
Ethics was applied for and obtained from the University 
of Jyväskylä, Finland, and the Edith Cowan University, 
Western Australia. The experiments were conducted in 
quiet, controlled environments in Finland and Australia. 
Generally, they took place one per time, but on several 
occasions there were two participants at different sides of 
the room. The researcher’s role in the experiments was to 
distribute and explain the experiment components and 
answer questions. In Finland, a native speaking Finnish 
research assistant was used to conduct and explain the 
experiments.  
When entering the experiment setting, participants 
were given an information handout to read about the 
procedure. Participants were asked to sign a ‘Notice of 
Consent’ agreeing to the use of the material obtained 
during the experiments. Participants completed a personal 
details form asking: age, gender, cultural ethnicity, 
highest education level, profession, mobile phone user 
skills (expert; advanced; intermediate; beginner) and 
model of mobile phone. The steps of the experiment were 
explained to the participants. In return for participating in 
the experiments participants were awarded with one free 
movie ticket. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
In an attempt to understand the relationship between 
particular qualities and positive and negative user 
experiences, the titles and explanations given by the 
participants were divided into categories. Through content 
analysis eight categories arose in the Australian data and 
nine from the Finnish data. The categories were: aesthetic 
appeal; clarity; icons, colors and layout; intuitiveness; 
amounts of icons on screen; understandability; labels; 
size; and the category of shapes emerged from the Finnish 
data. The positive and negative descriptions were treated 
separately when counting and grouping adjectives and 
phrases.  
In the positive descriptions, clarity was the most common 
category (31%) used by the Australians. Intuitiveness was 
the next most frequent category (19%). Descriptions 
relating to intuitiveness included “the need to think” and 
“informative”. Later on in the Finnish results this was 
mostly linked to the characteristic of familiarity. 
However, considering this study was supposed to focus on 
aesthetic attraction, it only featured in 18% of the 
Australian explanations. Examples of this can be seen in 
statements such as “good looking”, “aesthetically 
interesting”, “aesthetically appealing”, “funky” etc.  
Comments referring directly to the icons themselves, their 
colors and layout, featured 11% of the time in the 
Australian 
results, 
which 
was 
the 
same 
as 
understandability (e.g., 
easy to understand, 
more 
understandable). On the practical side, even though the 
focus was on the icons, labels were mentioned in 5% of 
the Australians' positive comments. Interestingly, the 
practical 
dimensions 
(labels, 
size 
and 
amount-
arrangement) were mentioned by participants of 50 years 
of age and over. Their descriptions related more to 
usability and physical limitations than to aesthetic appeal. 
In the Finnish participants' positive evaluations, aesthetic 
appeal was mentioned 27% of the time. Clarity was the 
next most frequent category, featuring in 19% of the 
descriptions. The icons, their colors and layout were the 
next most frequently used (18%). Intuitiveness, as well as 
amounts of icons on screen and arrangement were both 
present in 10% of the comments.  
There are some differences between the negative 
descriptions of icons, colors and layout (Australians 4% 
and Finns 18%) and negative descriptions regarding size 
(Australians 12% and Finns 3%). However, one 
substantial finding is connected to the way that practical 
usability (clarity) took preference over aesthetic appeal 
when Australians were positively evaluating icons. In 
order to see these relationships more clearly, figs. 1 and 2 
30
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

below illustrate the comparisons between the distribution 
of adjectives used for positive and negative descriptions, 
in relation to each national group. This is achieved by 
showing the percentage of comments (descriptions) which 
were allocated to each of the adjective categories. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Percentage of adjectives for positive descriptions 
 
Figure 2.  Percentage of adjectives for positive descriptions 
 
The distributions show that content recognized as 
clarity 
was 
present 
particularly 
when 
Australian 
participants positively experienced icon designs. When 
negatively experiencing the icons, content associated with 
aesthetic appeal played an extremely active role amongst 
participants in both national groups. When considering 
the dominance of the dimension in positive descriptions, 
clarity (perceived simplicity and ease-of-use) is a main 
desired quality for positive UX, even more so than an 
abstract more subjective conception of aesthetic appeal. 
This affirms models such as TAM (technology acceptance 
model) [51][52][53] and their advocacy of the importance 
of perceived ease-of-use.  
 
IV. 
CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF EXPERIENTIAL CONTENTS 
A means by which we may express the mental 
contents involved in UX is to examine the categorical 
groups which people generate to justify evaluations. 
Individual remarks differ from one participant to the 
other. However, on a higher categorical level, clear 
dimensions of contents may be extracted from this 
qualitative data. The information content available 
enables insight into the formation and design of UX on 
the basis of it is described by the users themselves.  
 
A. A User Psychology Model of the Categorical 
Dimensions of UX  
In order to make sense of these results, and to create a 
framework 
by 
which 
future 
user 
psychology 
investigations of this nature may be guided, a model of 
categorical dimensions of UX has been plotted. This is 
not a polished product, but the basis upon which a larger 
framework for psychologically understanding UX may be 
developed. 
From the results, slight tendencies may be observed 
within the categories which highlight the elements 
participants focused on during positive or negative 
interaction. In order to approach the results from a deeper 
perspective, the categories were divided into adjective 
dimensions which describe the products’ physical 
attributes, and categories which describe the participants’ 
internal/emotional attributes allocated to the icon designs. 
The division can be seen in the diagram below. 
Fig. 3 below shows the basis of this user psychology 
model of the categorical dimensions of UX. It is a 
simplified mind map of the categories extracted from the 
data, and organized into 4 main dimensions: cognitive, 
emotional, practical, and aesthetic. Furthermore, the 
diagram has been divided vertically into the dimensions 
which can be seen from the point-of-view of the user (top) 
and the point-of-view of the product or design (bottom). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Categorical dimensions of UX 
31
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

The featured categories noted in the results section 
were used as a basis to form themes featured in the 
diagram above. The resulting themes informed our 
understanding of the categorical dimensions. These 
dimensions summarize the users’ explanatory constructs 
in terms of designs’ practical and aesthetic properties, and 
the user’s cognitive and emotional properties. Theme 
allocation within these specific dimensions is not a 
straight forward task. Themes such as motivation and 
format-physicality, may be applied to multiple dimensions 
– 
i.e., 
motivation, 
through 
adjectives 
such 
as 
“invigorating”, “stimulating” and “interesting”, was 
allocated to the emotional dimension, but can be 
attributed the theme of learnability. 
Through analysis of positive, semi-positive and 
negative comments it was observed that positive 
comments mostly concentrated on the technical and 
aesthetic dimensions. Participants focused more on how 
the icon designs worked within themselves, than on how 
they as users were emotionally affected by the designs. 
The positive technical comments focused on formatting – 
such as labels, size, amount of icons. The positive 
aesthetic comments focused on aesthetic values-qualities 
and physicality. Fig. 4 below demonstrates this 
relationship.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Adjective distribution – positive, semi-positive and negative 
The semi-positive comments used to describe the 
attractive pile seem to emphasize the technical, cognitive 
and aesthetic dimensions. Thirty-three different semi-
positive terms were used within the aesthetic dimension, 
in comparison to 30 positive and 35 negative comments. 
The themes emphasized in the semi-positive comments 
included: emotional – attention, motivation, identification 
and comfort; technical – usage and format; cognitive – 
abstraction, 
motivation 
and 
logic; 
aesthetic 
– 
values/quality, time and physicality. Notably, more 
metaphors were used to describe semi-positive traits than 
were used in the cases of positive or negative traits. These 
metaphors included: “basic mass” and “Linux GDM 
window”, describing banality in the icon designs.  
As with the positive comments, the negative 
comments concentrated on the technical dimension. Yet, 
the emotional dimension played a greater role in the 
negative (and semi-positive) comments than in the 
positive comments – i.e., attentional and motivational 
(“dull”, “boring”, “annoying”). Moreover, the negative 
comments emphasized the aesthetic dimension (values 
and physicality themes).  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the results of this experiment some interesting 
observations may be made regarding emotional usability. 
The findings of this experiment show that less emphasis 
was placed on the user’s own emotional responses when 
positively evaluating icon designs. Emotions came to the 
fore when designs were experienced as negative. 
Interpreting design via aesthetic categories was common 
throughout the process of evaluation. However, the 
technical dimension was more important in the positive 
evaluations than the negative evaluations. This may be 
due to the fact that participants found ease in articulating 
technical qualities when explaining why they positively 
experienced certain designs.  
A principal theoretical issue has been opened here. 
This pertains to the way that we can investigate how users 
encode technical devices; and how we may examine this 
encoding process. When allowing participants to generate 
reasoning behind their choices, we are able to glimpse the 
mental contents involved in the way they emotionally 
appraise products. These findings articulate: critical UX 
design characteristics; why they are critical; the 
complexity and multidimensionality of mental contents; 
and possibilities for benefiting from the development of 
design based on our knowledge of mental contents. 
We believe that these empirical findings should be 
considered in terms of content-based psychological 
thinking [31][33][44]. Speech output reflects conscious 
experience, behind which are systems of subconscious 
mental contents. Thus, according to this UX means the 
conscious experience of encoding objects. People are 
guided by their mental representations. If information 
content is understood, then cognitive and emotional 
responses can be used to explain behavior. Thus, we pose 
that knowledge of mental contents will improve the 
analysis of human technology interaction. 
We are no longer primarily interested in computations 
(as seen in Newell and Simon [28] or Fodor [41]). 
Instead, we investigate mental contents in the late 
Wittgenstein [54] sense as systems of languages, 
meanings and thoughts [33][55]. Percepts, concepts, 
beliefs, mental models, schemas and other forms of 
representations such as images or emotions have their 
contents. Therefore, theoretical and explanatory concepts 
are often the contents and not the format in which 
contents have been constructed [55][36]. 
32
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

This was a small-scale study designed to develop 
methods and theoretical frames to measure attractiveness 
in terms of user psychology. However, as a result of this 
small sample, questions have emerged regarding the 
nature of emotional usability in everyday design – should 
more emphasis be placed on inducing positive emotions, 
or on reducing negative ones? We also question the 
relationship between thought and language in such a 
study, as language never precisely produces the sensations 
experienced by the user. The results show the complexity 
of conscious and verbal experience, and moreover, that 
four major categories give a broad idea about how people 
classify icons. The key purpose of the underlying 
conceptual model is to shed light on what people actually 
experience. This form of information allows for mental 
representations and life to be connected [23][24]. UX is 
not an abstract model, but rather, refers to multiple factors 
in the make-up of a person. This means that mental 
content always plays a role. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank the funders of the ITEA2 Easy 
Interactions and Theseus projects, Tekes, for enabling us 
to undertake this research. In regards to experiment 
development and implementation in Australia, we would 
also like to thank our collaborators at: the Edith Cowan 
University; Curtin University of Technology; and 
Adelaide University. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Oulasvirta, and P. Saariluoma. “Long-term working memory 
and interrupting messages in human computer interaction,” 
Behaviour & Information Technology.Taylor and Francis, 2004. 
[2] A. Oulasvirta, and P. Saariluoma.  Surviving task interruptions: 
Investigating the implications of long term working memory 
theory. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2006. 
[3] P. Saariluoma.  Explanatory frameworks for interaction design. 
London: Springer-Verlag, 2004. 
[4] D. Norman.  Emotional design: why we love or hate everyday 
things. New York: Basic Books, 2004. 
[5] M. Hassenzahl, and N. Tractinsky. “User experience – a research 
agenda,” Behaviour and Information Technology, vol. 25 issue 2, 
2006, pp. 91–97. 
[6] ISO DIS 9241-210:2010.  Ergonomics of human system interaction 
– Part 210: Human-centred design for interactive systems. Geneva: 
International Standardization Organization, 2010. 
[7] M. Kuniavsky.  Observing the User Experience. San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufman Publishers, 2003. 
[8] M. Nagamachi.  “Perspectives and new trend of Kansei/Affective 
Engineering,” The TQM Journal, vol. 20 issue 4, 2008, pp. 290-
298. 
[9] K. Battarbee.  Co-experience – understanding user experiences in 
social interaction. Helsinki: University of Art and Design Helsinki, 
2004. 
[10] A. Cooper, R. Reimann, and D. Cronin.  About Face 3. The 
essentials of interaction design. Indianapolis: Wiley, 2007. 
[11] J. Forlizzi, and K. Battarbee.  “Understanding Experience in 
Interactive Systems,” In Proceedings Designing Interactive 
Systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques. 
Cambridge MA: ACM, 2004, pp. 261–268. 
[12] M. Hassenzahl. “The interplay of beauty, goodness and usability in 
interactive products,” Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 19, 2004, 
pp. 319–349. 
[13] D. Russell. “User experience research group: Understanding the 
complete user interaction,” In SIGCHI Bulletin vol. 30 issue 2, 
1998, pp. 90-94. 
[14] L. Arhippainen, and M. Tähti.  “Empirical evaluation of user 
experience in two adaptive mobile application prototypes,” In 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Mobile and 
Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM 2003), Norrköping, Sweden, 2003, 
pp. 27-34. 
[15] M. Buchenau, and J. Fulton-Suri. “Experience Prototyping,” In 
Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive 
systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques. New York 
City: ACM, 2000, pp. 424-433. 
[16] J. Forlizzi, and S. Ford.  “The Building Blocks of Experience: An 
Early Framework for Interaction Designers,” In Proceedings of 
Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and 
techniques. New York: ACM, 2000, pp. 419–423. 
[17] A. Kankainen.  Thinking model and tools for understanding user 
experience related to information appliance product concepts. 
Espoo: Helsinki University of Technology, 2002. 
[18] T. Mattelmäki. Design Probes. Helsinki: University of Art and 
Design in Helsinki, 2006. 
[19] J. McCarthy, and P. Wright.  Technology as Experience. MIT 
Press: Cambridge, 2004. 
[20] K. Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, H. Väätäjä, and T. Vainio. 
“Opportunities and challenges of designing the service user 
experience (SUX) in Web 2.0,” In Saariluoma, P. & Isomäki, H. 
(Eds.), Future interaction design II, London: Springer, 2009, pp. 
117-139. 
[21] D. Swallow, M. Blythe, and P. Wright.  “Grounding experience: 
Relating theory and method to evaluate the user experience of 
smartphones,” In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on European 
Association of Cognitive Ergonomics. New York: ACM Press, 
2006, pp. 91-98. 
[22] Hammel, M.  “The aesthetics of use,” In Bertelsen, O.W., Petersen, 
M.G. & Pold, S. (Eds.), Aesthetic approaches to human-computer 
interaction. Proceedings of the NordiCHI 2004 Workshop, 
Tampere, Finland. Aarhus: Department of Computer Science, 
University of Aarhus, 2004, pp. 17-19. 
[23] J. Leikas.  Life-Based Design - A holistic approach to designing 
human-technology interaction. VTT Publications 726. Helsinki: 
Edita Prima Oy, 2009.  
[24] J. Leikas, and P. Saariluoma.  “'Worth' and mental contents in 
designing for ageing citizens' form of life,” Gerontechnology, vol. 
7, 2008, pp. 305-318. 
[25] P. Dourish. Seeking a Foundation for Context-Aware Computing, 
2001, doi: 10.1207/S15327051HCI16234_07. 
[26] P. Dourish. Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied 
Interaction. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2001. 
[27] J. Rod. “Post Human-Centered Design Approach for Ubiquity,” In 
Proceedings of Digital Art and Culture Conference 2009, 
<http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/7nx6199f> 13.12.2010. 
[28] A. Newell, and H. Simon.  Human problem solving. Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1972. 
[29] S. Payne.  “Mental models in Human Computer Interaction,” In A. 
Sears & J. Jacko (Eds), The human-computer interaction 
33
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

handbook: fundamentals, evolving technologies. New York: 
Taylor and Francis Group LLC, 2008, pp. 63-76. 
[30] A. Markman  Knowledge Representation, 2nd Edition. Mahwah: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2000. 
[31] P. Saariluoma.  “Apperception and restructuring in chess players’ 
problem solving,” In Gilhooly, K., Keane, M., Logie, R., & Erdos, 
G. (Eds.), Lines of thought: reflections on the psychology of 
thinking. London: Wiley, 1990, pp. 41-57. 
[32] P. Saariluoma.  Chess and content oriented psychology of thinking. 
Psihologica, vol. 22, 2001, pp. 143-164. 
[33] P. Saariluoma.  Thinking in work life: from errors to opportunities 
(in Finnish). Porvoo: WSOY, 2003. 
[34] P. Saariluoma, K. Nevala, and M. Karvinen.  Content-based 
analysis of modes in design engineering. Berlin: Springer, 2006.  
[35] P, Saariluoma, and I. Maarttola. Stumbling blocks in novice 
building design, 2003, <https://www.mit.jyu.fi/agora-
center/inbct/InBCT23/Stumbling_blocks.pdf> 13.12.2010 
[36] P. Saariluoma, and K. Nevala.  The focus of content-based 
approach to design engineering a reply to Eder. Pilsen: University 
of Western Bohemia, 2006. 
[37] University of Jyväskylä. Theseus Project. 2008-2010, 
<https://www.jyu.fi/erillis/agoracenter/tutkimus/acprojektit/katsy/e
ngtheseus> 30.12.2010. 
[38] University of Jyväskylä. ITEA 2 Easy Interactions Project. 2007-
2010, 
<https://www.jyu.fi/erillis/agoracenter/en/research/projects/katsy/it
ea2> 30.12.2010. 
[39] A. Collins, and M. Quillian.  “Retrieval Time from Semantic 
Memory,” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, vol. 8, 
1969, pp. 240-247. 
[40] A. Cooper, R. Reimann, and D. Cronin. About Face 3. The 
essentials of interaction design. Indianapolis: Wiley, 2007. 
[41] J. Fodor.  Concepts: A Potboiler. Cognition, vol. 50, 1995, pp. 133-
151.  
[42] J. R. Anderson, M. Matessa, and C. Lebiere.  “ACT-R: A Theory 
of Higher Level Cognition and Its Relation to Visual Attention.” 
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 12, 1997, pp. 439-462. 
[43] S. Card, T. Moran, and A. Newell. The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
1983.  
[44] P. Saariluoma. “Error in chess: Apperception restructuring view,” 
Psychological Research, vol. 54, 1992, pp. 17-26. 
[45] G. A. Kelly.  The psychology of personal constructs. New York: 
W.W. Norton, 1955. 
[46] G. Rugg, and P. McGeorge.  “The sorting techniques: A tutorial 
paper on card sorts, picture sorts and item sorts,” Expert Systems, 
vol. 14, issue 2, 1997, pp. 80-93. 
[47] G. Rugg, and P. McGeorge. “Concept sorting: The sorting 
techniques,” In A. Kent & C. Hall (Eds.) Encyclopedia of Library 
and Information Science. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1999, pp. 43-
70. 
[48] M-D. Shieh, W. Yan, and C-H. Chen.  “Soliciting customer 
requirements for product redesign based on picture sorts and ART2 
neural network,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 34, 2008, 
pp. 194-204. 
[49] G. Rugg, and P. McGeorge, P.  “Concept sorting: The sorting 
techniques,” In A. Kent & C. Hall (Eds.) Encyclopedia of Library 
and Information Science. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1999, pp. 43-
70. 
[50] W. Yan, C-H. Chen, and L.P. Khoo. “Artificial Intelligence for 
Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing. An integrated 
approach to the elicitation of customer requirements for 
engineering design using picture sorts and fuzzy evaluation,” 
Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and 
Manufacturing, vol. 16 2, 2002 April, pp. 59-71. 
[51] F.D. Davis. “Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and 
User Acceptance of Information Technology,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 
13, 1989, pp. 319-340. 
[52] F.D. Davis, R. Bagozzi, and P. Warshaw.  “User Acceptance of 
Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical 
Models,” Management Science, vol. 35, 1989, pp. 982-1003. 
[53] P. Dourish. Seeking a Foundation for Context-Aware Computing, 
2001, <http://www.dourish.com/embodied/essay.pdf> 13.12.2010  
[54] L. Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishers Ltd, 1958. 
[55] P. Saariluoma.  Foundational Analysis. London: Routledge, 1997. 
 
 
 
 
34
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

