A Cross Domain Lyrics Recommendation from
Tourist Spots Reviews with Distributed Representation of Words
Yihong Han∗, Ryosuke Yamanishi†, Yoko Nishihara† and Kenta Oku‡
∗Graduate School of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Shiga 525-8577, Japan
†College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Shiga 525-8577, Japan
Email: {is0387ps@ed, ryama@media, nisihara@fc}.ritsumei.ac.jp
‡ Department of Media Informatics, Ryukoku University, Shiga 520-2194 Japan
Email: okukenta@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a system for recommending
lyrics similar to the context of the reviews of a tourist spot. The
system is based on the technique of distributed representation
of words. Instead of the metadata, such as genres and artists,
the proposed approach takes the listening environment into
consideration. By using the listening environment, it is possible
to recommend music lyrics that ﬁt the atmosphere of a tourist
spot when the user enjoys the sightseeing. In this paper, the
proposed system recommends the music that ﬁts the atmosphere
of a tourist spot by sharing the distributed representation beyond
the domains of lyrics and reviews. The system uses a lyrics corpus
to build the distributed representation model, and the reviews’
vectors are calculated with the model. As a result, the tourist spot
reviews are assumed to be types of lyrics. Based on the lyric-like
vector representation of reviews, the similarity between reviews
and lyrics can be calculated.
Keywords–Music Information Retrieval; Lyrics; Context Aware
Music Recommendation; Cross Domain Search.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The user-system interaction for listening to music has
dramatically changed with the use of web services. Subscrip-
tion services for music enable us to bring almost an inﬁnite
amount of music everywhere. Users do not need to select
the music before going out. We previously enjoyed music
in places designed especially for music, such as live houses
and concert halls. However, nowadays, we can listen to music
in many places, such as when driving, being on a ﬂight, or
trekking. That is to say, music has now become more of a
co-entertainment while doing some other activities though it
was previously the main entertainment for places designed
especially for music.
Based on this background, context-aware music retrieval
can be a new style to enjoy music: listening to music while
interacting with the environment surrounding the user. In this
paper, we take music in tourism in consideration as a listening
context for the music. Perhaps, some of us might experience
listening to music which includes the name of a tourist spot
in the lyrics. The experience of visiting a tourist spot is more
impressive while listening to music related to it, e.g., “San
Francisco” by Glantis in San Francisco, USA and “Lovers
in Japan” by Coldplay in Osaka, Japan. It is expected that
even listening to the music without the name of a spot in
the lyrics also enhances the impressions toward the trip if
the sentiment for the music corresponds to the atmosphere of
the spot: for example, listening to “Perfect” by Ed Sheeran
which is a relaxed love song in the airy and relaxed park
in Vancouver “Stanley Park” and listening to “Toxicity” by
System of a Down in an exciting city like Kabuki-Cho, Japan.
It is reasonable to say that such experiences are similar to
listening to the background music for each scene in movies.
This paper can be positioned in the location-aware music
recommendation ﬁeld [1] [2].
In this paper, the goal is to enrich the tourism experiences
with listening to music for the tourist spot. We propose a
method to recommend music that has lyrics suitable for the
tourist spot. In the proposed method, the reviews for the
tourist spots are assumed as the general evaluation or the
collective intelligence of experience toward the tourist spot.
By using the reviews of the tourist sport as the query, the
proposed method retrieves the lyrics for the spot: that is,
cross-domain retrieval between tourist spots and music. The
distributed representations of words are modeled using a lyrics
corpus. As the reviews of tourist spots are vectorized with
the distributed representation model, the reviews of tourist
spots should be assumed as the lyrics. The lyrics that have
higher vector similarity with the reviews of the tourist spots are
retrieved: the lyrics retrieval with tourist spots should become
enable.
Section II will introduce the related work. The description
of the proposed method will be in Section III. Section IV will
show the experiment results and the evaluation of the proposed
method. Finally, Section V will summarize this paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
Music Information Retrieval (MIR) has been widely re-
searched. Music retrieval with humming [3] and music genre
classiﬁcation [4] [5] are typical research topics in the MIR
ﬁeld.
Music with singing can be considered as multimedia art
and consists of acoustics and linguistics. That is, the affection
towards music can be caused by the combination of “listening
to acoustics” and “understanding lyrics.” Let us focus on the
related work for lyrics, which is the target of this paper.
Tsukuda et al. [6] developed Lyrics Jumper that recommends
artists whose lyrics have similar topics. Cai et al. [7] have pro-
posed MusicSense that recommends the music while reading a
document on the Web. In the work by Cai et al., the affective
words extracted from both lyrics and documents on the Web
are used to relate the two types of domains with each other.
Our proposed system does not focus on some speciﬁc words,
but the overall similarity between lyrics and reviews by using
the word distributed representation model.
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Flowchart of proposed method.
The music and location have been related to each other in
several existing research works. Kaminskas et al. have pro-
posed a location-aware music recommendation system while
using a tag-based approach [8] and a knowledge-based ap-
proach [9]. In their tag-based approach [8], music and Point
Of Interest (POI) are related to each other based on the tag
given to those. Their knowledge-based approach [9] constructs
the graph that semantically relates music with POI based
on the knowledge with DBPedia and ranks the songs for
a given POI. Moreover, a hybrid approach of a tag-based
and knowledge-based approach has been proposed [10]. Our
proposed method is considered as the lyrics-based approach in
the above research context.
III.
PROPOSED METHOD
In this paper, we propose a lyrics recommendation method
based on the vector similarity between lyrics and reviews of
tourist spots. The proposed method uses distributed represen-
tations of words [11] to quantify lyrics and reviews of tourist
spots. We use an English lyrics corpus to build distributed
representations as a model. The model is used for calculating
the distributed representations vectors of lyrics and reviews of
tourist spots. The mean vectors of a single tourist spot are
calculated from all of the vectors concerning the reviews for
the tourist spot. The method calculates the vector similarities
between lyrics and tourist spot reviews. The lyric with the
highest similarity to the given tourist spot is output as the
recommendation result for the tourist spot. The concept of our
method is, the texts of reviews for tourist spots are assumed
as “pseudo lyrics.” So, the lyrics and reviews can be uniﬁed
into the same dimension and become comparable. Figure 1
shows an outline of the proposed method. Each process of the
proposed method will be detailed in the next two sections.
A. Words Distributed Representations Model
We model a distributed representations with the lyric data
fetched from a lyrics site “azlyrics” [12]. This paper focuses
on English content, so we just choose English lyrics as the text
corpus. All lyrics written in non-English language are omitted
from the lyrics dataset. After the cleansing, there are 94,451
English lyrics remaining in the dataset. We use Word2Vec
(Skip-Gram) [13] [14] framework to model word distributed
representations as the primal study, though there are so many
types of frameworks. We use this lyrics corpus on Word2Vec
framework as the training data and get a distributed represen-
tation model that represents every word in the corpus as a
300 dimmensions vector. During the training, the parameter
setup of Skip-Gram is as follows: size = 300, window = 10,
min count = 2, workers = 8, iter = 10.
B. Quantifying Lyrics and Tourist Spot Reviews to Vectors
This section describes the general concept for the dis-
tributed representation for both lyrics and tourist spot re-
views. Based on the distributed representation model described
in Section III-A, the distributed representations vectors of
lyrics and reviews for tourist spots can be obtained. In detail,
for every word in lyrics and reviews, we fetch the word vector
from the distributed representations model. Then, the mean
vector of lyrics or reviews V is calculated by summing all
word vectors for each dimension and dividing the sum by the
number of words in the lyrics or reviews (1) as follows:
V = ⃗v1 + · · · + ⃗vi
N − γ
,
(1)
where, ⃗vi, N, and γ denote the vector of ith word, the number
of words in a lyric or review text, and the number of words that
only exist in review texts, respectively. Note, as the distributed
representations model is trained from lyrics corpus, the words
that only exist in review texts but do not appear in lyrics texts,
will not get their vectors from the model. In the calculation of
average vectors, we counted the number of these “not available
words” and subtracted the number γ from the word number in
the whole text. As a result, the number of “available words”
is the divisor in the equation.
C. Merging Vectors of Reviews for Tourist Spot to Spot Vectors
In Section III-B, we obtain both vectors of lyrics and tourist
spot reviews (hereafter, review vectors). Here, another process
for the tourist spot reviews is detailed in this section. Tourist
spot reviews are written by a human so they may include
emotional expressions and subjective estimations. By merging
reviews of the same tourist spot, the individuality and general
properties of the tourist spot can be represented. Based on this
consideration, we calculated the weighted arithmetic mean of
each tourist spot. The mean vector of tourist spot s: Xs is
calculated using the following equation:
Xs = ωs,1 ⃗
xs,1 + · · · + ωs,j ⃗
xs,j
ωs,1 + · · · + ωs,j
,
(2)
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I. EXAMPLES OF TOURIST SPOTS AND THE
CORRESPONDING RECOMMENDED LYRICS. THE CONTENTS OF
LYRICS WILL BE DETAILED IN TABLE II.
Tourist spots
Recommended lyrics ID
The Montcalm at the Brewery London City
84127
The Beekman A Thompson Hotel
84057
Conservatory Garden
55628
Riverside Park
74814
Hudson River Park
74814
Roosevelt Island
39663
Fort Troon Park
74814
New York Harbor
56837
Franklin D Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park
53520
Long Beach
54217
where, ⃗xs,j and ωs,j denote the vector of jth review and the
number of words in jth review for tourist spot s, respectively.
A given tourist spot may have two types of reviews: short
simple or long detailed reviews. By weighting the vectors of
words using the number of words in the review, the contri-
butions to the tourist spot expression should be differently
evaluated depending on the length of the description. We
suppose that the longer the review text is, the more information
this review brings to the tourist spot expression. Hereafter, the
mean vector of each tourist spot is named as “location vector.”
D. Lyrics Recommendation Based on Similarity Between
Lyrics and Spots
For a tourist spot s, we calculate the cosine similarity be-
tween its location vector and every lyrics vector. The lyric with
the highest similarity for the tourist spot s is recommended as
the lyrics toward the tourist spot s. The cosine similarity is
calculated using the following equation:
cos( ⃗
Xs, ⃗Lk) =
⃗
Xs · ⃗Lk
| ⃗
Xs| × | ⃗Lk|
,
(3)
where, ⃗Lk shows the vector of kth lyrics in the lyrics dataset.
The proposed method recommends arg maxk cos( ⃗
Xs, ⃗Vk) as
the recommendation result for the tourist spot s.
IV.
EXPERIMENT
The effectiveness of the proposed method is subjectively
discussed through the lyrics recommendation experiments.
In the experiment, we evaluate some tourist spots randomly
selected from “TripAdvisor [15]”. We take some of the recom-
mendation results as examples to be discussed in detail. Also,
we discuss the overall tendency of the recommendations.
This paper is a working in progress, so the objective
evaluation for the recommendation will be our future work.
The discussion may lead to the direction for the idea of our
future objective experiments.
A. Results
TABLE I shows the recommendation results of each tourist
spot in lyrics ID. TABLE II shows the list of lyric URLs for
each lyrics ID on lyrics site “azlyrics.”
Figure 2 shows the number of tourist spots corresponding
to each of the lyrics, where the horizontal axis is the lyrics
TABLE II. EXAMPLES OF RECOMMENDED LYRIC ID AND ITS
URLS. THE URL WAS RETRIEVED ON MARCH 16, 2020.
Lyric No.
Lyric URLs
59978
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/mcﬂy/
mcﬂythemusical.html
84127
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/sunkilmoon/
strangerthanparadise.html
92790
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/whitestripes/
littlecreamsoda.html
84057
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/sunkilmoon/
beautifulyou.html
80687
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/slimdusty/
themanfromthenevernever.html
55628
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/lobo/whyisitme.html
35313
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/gregoryalanisakov/
ﬁreescape.html
74814
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/rodstewart/manhattan.
html
56035
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/lorettalynn/
imshootinfortomorrow.html
39663
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/idinamenzel/
oneshortday.html
20655
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/cowboyjunkies/
arlington.html
56837
https://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/luckyboysconfusion/
likeratsfromasinkingship.html
Figure 2. Number of locations corresponded to same lyric.
ID and the vertical axis is the number of tourist spots. In the
ﬁgure, from left to right, the lyrics are sorted in the descending
order.
B. Discussions
From the experiment results, the tendency of the recom-
mendations was found. Several tourist spots corresponded to
the same lyrics. In TABLE I, the same lyrics “74814” was
recommended to “Riverside Park,” “Hudson River Park” and
“Fort Troon Park.” As these three locations are all parks, we
supposed that the reason for this tendency was caused by the
speciﬁc common features in the several tourist spots. To verify
the assumption, we focused on the lyrics “39663” and “59978,”
which were recommended for the most spots. The tourist spots
corresponding to the lyrics were studied in detail to ﬁnd if
there had been some similarity among them. The tourist spots
recommended to lyrics “39663” and “59978” are each shown
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE III. TOURIST SPOTS CORRESPONDING TO LYRIC “39663”
Tourist spots
Locations
Roosevelt Island
State of New York, America
Bowling Green
Commonwealth of Kentucky, America
Governors Island National Monument
State of New York, America
SoHo
State of New York, America
West Village
State of New York, America
Meatpacking District
State of New York, America
Twin Peaks
State of California, America
Lincoln Park Conservatory
State of Illinois, America
Greenwich
London, England
Greenwich Park
London, England
TABLE IV. TOURIST SPOTS CORRESPONDING TO LYRIC “59978.”
Tourist spots
Genre of location
Neue Galerie
Museum
Solomon R Guggenheim Museum
Museum
New York Historical Society Museum Library
Museum
Museum of Arts and Design
Museum
United Nations Headquarters
Organization
Broadway
Street
Radio City Music Hall
Theater
Le Puy du Fou
Theme Park
Westminster
Street
in TABLE III and TABLE IV, respectively.
As a result, it was suggested that the tourist spots corre-
sponding to the same lyrics had speciﬁc common features.
In TABLE III, there were a lot of spots located in the
U.S.A., especially in the State of New York: for “Greenwich”
and “Greenwich Park,” the latter is inside of the former so
substantially they should be almost the same spot. Generally,
the tourist spots that corresponded to lyric “39663” were
similar to each other in their location.
In TABLE IV, lyric “59978” was recommended to many
museums and other historical places, such as “Radio City
Music Hall” and “Westminster.” Kaminskas mentioned that the
recommendation result of music could be diversiﬁed with the
matching of music and location information in his paper [16]:
this is a common issue in this ﬁeld. We will improve the
method to recommend more diverse lyrics depending on the
characteristics of tourist spots by using more speciﬁc features
for each spot.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a cross-domain lyrics recom-
mendation system based on the distributed representation of
words. The vectors of tourist spot reviews were generated by
using the distributed representation model with lyrics corpus.
Then, the tourist spot reviews were assumed as a type of
lyrics in the proposed system. The system merged the vectors
of tourist spot reviews to location vectors and calculated the
similarity between location vectors and lyric vectors. The
system ﬁnally selected the lyrics with the highest similarity to
the arbitrary tourist spot as the recommendation result. During
the experiment, we found a tendency that several locations
corresponded to the same lyric in the recommendation results.
We conﬁrmed some commonalities among those locations
corresponding to the same lyric through the survey. This
discussion will help the future work of this research to achieve
better recommendations.
This paper is still a work in progress, so the objective
evaluation of the recommendation result will be one of the
tasks in the future. Also, we should carry out subjective
evaluation experiments to verify usability in real use cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is in part supported by KAKENHI #16K21482,
#15K12151, and #19K12567. The data of lyrics is collected by
Assist. Prof. M. Yoshida at Toyohashi Institute of Technology,
Japan. We show our best appreciation.
REFERENCES
[1]
Z.
Cheng
and
J.
Shen,
“On
effective
location-aware
music
recommendation,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 34, no. 2, April
2016. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2846092
[2]
M. Pichl, E. Zangerle, and G. Specht, “Improving context-aware
music recommender systems: Beyond the pre-ﬁltering approach,”
in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on International Conference on
Multimedia Retrieval, ser. ICMR ’17.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2017, p. 201 ‒
208. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3078971.3078980
[3]
S. Pauws, “Cubyhum: A fully operational query by humming system,”
in Proceedings of ISMIR 2002, 2002, pp. 187–196.
[4]
D. Wang, T. Li, and M. Ogihara, “Are tags better than audio features?
the effect of joint use of tags and audio content features for artistic
style clustering,” pp. 57–62, 2010.
[5]
E. Pampalk, A. Flexer, and G. Widmer, “Improvements of audio-based
music similarity and genre classiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, 01 2005, pp.
628–633.
[6]
K. Tsukuda, K. Ishida, and M. Goto, “A lyrics-based music exploratory
web service by modeling lyrics generative process,” in Proceedings of
the 18th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, 2017,
pp. 544–551.
[7]
R. Cai, C. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Zhang, and W.-Y. Ma, “Musicsense: con-
textual music recommendation using emotional allocation modeling,” in
Proceedings of the 15th ACM international conference on Multimedia,
2007, p. 553 ‒
556.
[8]
M. B. abd Marius Kaminskas and F. Ricci, “Location-aware music
recommendation,” International Journal of Multimedia Information Re-
trieval, vol. 2, no. 1, 2013, pp. 31–44.
[9]
I. Fern´andez-Tobias, I. Cantador, M. Kaminskas, and F. Ricci, “Cross-
domain recommender systems: A survey of the state of the art,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd Spanish Conference on Information Retrieval,
2012, p. 187 ‒
198.
[10]
M. Kaminskas, F. Ricci, and M. Schedl, “Locationaware music recom-
mendation using auto-tagging and hybrid matching,” in Proceedings of
the 7th ACM conference on Recommender systems, 2013, p. 17 ‒
24.
[11]
T. Mikolov, W.-t. Yih, and G. Zweig, “Linguistic regularities in con-
tinuous space word representations,” in Proceedings of HLT-NAACL,
2013, pp. 746–751.
[12]
“AZLyrics - Song Lyrics from A to Z,” https://www.azlyrics.com/, last
accessed on 01/28/20.
[13]
T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient estimation
of word representations in vector space,” CoRR, vol. abs/1301.3781,
2013.
[14]
T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compo-
sitionality,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
[15]
“Tripadvisor: Read Reviews, Compare Prices & Book,” https://www.
tripadvisor.com/, last accessed on 01/28/20.
[16]
M. Kaminskas and F. Ricci, “Emotion-based matching of music to
places,” in Emotions and Personality in Personalized Services, J. Fager-
berg, D. C. Mowery, and R. R. Nelson, Eds.
Springer, 2016, pp.
287–310.
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

