Closing the Loopholes:
Categorizing Clients to Fit the Bureaucratic Welfare System
Johanne Svanes Oskarsen
Department of Informatics
Gaustadalléen 23B, 0373 Oslo
University of Oslo
Email: johansos@ifi.uio.no
Abstract—Categorizing clients is an essential part of the work
in public services traditionally done by street-level bureaucrats.
However, in the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration,
this work has been distributed between supervisors, the front-line
workers interacting with clients, and central unit caseworkers,
who make decisions regarding ﬁnancial welfare beneﬁts on
behalf of the bureaucracy. In cases regarding disability beneﬁts,
supervisors do the work of closing loopholes in clients’ cases to
improve the client’s chances for being granted beneﬁts, before a
caseworker further processes the case. Both knowledge about the
bureaucratic system with its laws and rules and knowledge about
the client’s situation is vital to do this work well. Digitalization
or automation of case management processes and the increased
use of self-service solutions may make this work more difﬁcult.
Thus, it may hinder the individual assessment that clients have
a right to. This paper contributes to a growing interest in public
services in Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) by
giving a detailed account of the work that street-level bureaucrats
do to represent citizens’ cases digitally.
Keywords–Categorization; Representations; Street-level Bureau-
cracy; Work; Digitalization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In public welfare organizations, a central part of the work
is to categorize citizens so that they can receive the further
treatment and ﬁnancial beneﬁts they are entitled to. This work
is done by street-level bureaucrats — the employees who,
through encounters with citizens, "render services, provide
support, or make judgments about how citizens ﬁt the laws
and practices" of the organization they represent [1] (p. 237). A
key characteristic of street-level bureaucrats is the opportunity
to use discretion in their work, as they are unable to work
"according to the highest standards of decision making" [1]
due to lack of time, information or other resources. Their
work is complicated by nature and can rarely be reduced
to "programmable formats"— as they meet with and make
decisions for real people with individual issues and concerns.
In CSCW and related ﬁelds, the use of digital systems
in public service organizations has gained increased attention,
both when it comes to the street-level bureaucrats’ work [2]
and with the notion of participatory citizenship and coop-
eration between employees and clients [3]–[6]. A common
anticipation when introducing digital case management sys-
tems or automating work is that professionals will spend less
time on routine tasks and thus have more time to do work
that the systems can not do, typically referred to as more
meaningful. However, this is not necessarily the case, as digital
or automated systems may leave residual tasks, or introduce
new tasks that add on the employees’ or users’ workload [7]–
[9]. For street-level bureaucrats, the expected outcome may
be that they can spend their time and resources on complex
cases that require human intervention or work that is more
social. Still, research shows that not only may digital systems
add new tasks — street-level bureaucrats may end up doing a
very different job. Classiﬁcation systems meant to systematize
front-line workers in employment services have been shown
to lead to their work becoming more administrative than
social, and the use of classiﬁcation systems may "beneﬁt the
system rather than the client" [10] (p. 400). The work of
front-line professionals may also change as a consequence
of introducing new digital self-service solutions for citizens
because administrative tasks are moved from the bureaucracy
to the citizens themselves, and thus the bureaucrat’s role is no
longer tied to specialized ﬁelds of knowledge, but rather to a
support role for the citizen to become digital [11].
In this paper, we examine a particular part of the work
that the supervisors in the agency do: the work of closing
loopholes in preparatory casework to make sure the client will
ﬁt into the category that the front-line worker consider is the
correct one when the case is processed further. Though the
metaphor is not precisely used as it is in the ordinary language,
it represents an association with suspicion and deception that
the supervisors ascribe the bureaucratic system. The paper is
structured as follows. Section 2 presents the background for the
study, both the research project and the scientiﬁc background.
Section 3 describes the theoretical grounding in street-level
bureacuracy and categorization, while Section 4 describes the
methods used. Section 5 presents the ﬁndings, before they are
discussed in Section 6.
II.
BACKGROUND
The study is part of an ongoing research project on how
citizens’ cases are represented and processed in the bureau-
cratic system, both by people in the local ofﬁce, people in
central units, and computer systems. The aim of the project
is to explore how clients of welfare services is and can be
represented digitally to ensure that they receive the good they
are entitled to. In the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Admin-
istration (NAV), citizens must belong to a category to get the
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

treatment they need. These categories include "unemployed"
to get help seeking jobs, "sick" to get sickness beneﬁts, or as
in the cases described later, "permanently disabled" to receive
permanent disability beneﬁts. The categorization of people in
public organizations is not a new phenomenon [1][12][13], but
the modern-day public organizations have developed, both in
terms of internal organization, increased managerial control,
and with the use of Information and Communication Technolo-
gies (ICTs). Where street-level bureaucrats traditionally could
make many decisions concerning their clients using discretion,
their work has been distributed between several employees in
NAV.
In questions regarding ﬁnancial welfare beneﬁts, the work
of categorization is distributed between the client’s supervisor
and a central unit caseworker. The supervisor is an employee
working in a local agency ofﬁce who interacts with the client
and does the preparatory categorization work, while the central
unit caseworker processes the case and make the decision on
whether the client ﬁts with the supervisor’s selected category
and is thus entitled to welfare beneﬁts. They can only assess
the case with the documentation available in computer systems,
and the local supervisor’s written assessment of the client’s
case. As the supervisors know the clients after having been
involved in their case over time, they work to make sure
the clients’ cases meet the bureaucratic system in the best
way possible. Therefore, they do work to present the case to
an unknown person representing the bureaucratic system —
the caseworker — in a way that they ﬁnd beneﬁcial to the
client. For the processing of cases, then, digital information
from various actors such as doctors, course organizers and
specialists surrounding the clients is becoming increasingly
important in the further processing of the cases, along with
the supervisor’s knowledge of the bureaucratic system.
Within CSCW, categorization and representation of people
has not been explored much. However, both social workers’
work practice and the notion of participatory citizenship has
been described, as well as employee’s “intermediary” role
in public encounters between citizen and state [2]–[5][14].
Through an ethnographic study, Bolous-Rødje investigated the
work practice of welfare workers in municipal jobcentres in
Denmark, with an emphasis on how they use computational
artefacts to assess citizens and identify perfect pathways. She
describes a work environment very similar to that of NAV,
where work is "carried out in a highly politically driven orga-
nization, with constantly changing institutional demands" [2]
(p. 843). Ehrlich and Cash [14] discussed how technological
developments would decrease the need for people acting as in-
termediaries between users and companies, as the information
that people need will be available through the Internet. Their
point is, however, that people who have an intermediary role,
such as tech support or librarians, have a different expertise
and competence with customization, formulation and source
validation that regular people do not have. They are trained to
uncover the user’s “real” problems, ﬁnd relevant information
and customize that information to the user’s problem [14].
Borchorst et al. [4] transfer the concept of intermediaries
into public service provision, and describes how front-line
professionals serve as intermediaries between citizens and
the services they encounter face-to-face when they need to
“construct identities” in order to ﬁt within the bureaucratic
system to get the service they need. Thus, when introducing
digital self-service, the role that intermediaries have in today’s
public encounters will change. The authors state that ﬁnding
ways of designing interfaces that conform better with the
citizens’ situations is a major design challenge, but that human
contact should not be replaced. Instead, they argue that ﬁnding
ways to re-conﬁgure processes and thus empowering citizens
is key [4].
III.
METHODS
This case study deals with the phenomenon of representa-
tions of people in computer systems, where NAV is used as an
instrumental case to illustrate this [15]. An important aspect is
how the representations can enable automated case processing
in the future, as well as what cannot be automated. The ﬁve
participants in the study are all front-line employees at a local
NAV ofﬁce, who interacts with citizens and thus represents
the bureaucracy at the street level. We have interviewed all
participants, and each interview was recorded and transcribed.
Furthermore, we have used ethnographic methods for data
collection through a combination of observation and inter-
views. The observation has been participatory as we have asked
questions and discussed work and cases with the participants
along the way. During the ﬁeldwork, we have also spoken
to other employees and attended internal meetings where they
discussed client’s cases and their work. All the people involved
have been aware that we are researchers, and consent has
been given orally in these cases. Observations have not been
recorded, and the data from the observations are based on
ﬁeld notes. The reason for this is that the participants work
in open ofﬁces where other than the participants are also
located. All participants who have been recorded have signed
a consent form, but not the clients mentioned. Therefore, it is
important to emphasize that none of the cases mentioned here
are precisely described as they are in reality, but they are based
on real cases. Elements such as age, occupation, and diagnoses
have been blurred or changed, and all the names mentioned are
pseudonyms. The data in the study was collected from August
2019 to January 2020. The project is reported to the Norwegian
Center for Research Data and follows its requirements for safe
storage.
IV.
THEORETICAL GROUNDING
Citizens come to street-level bureaucracies as unique indi-
viduals with different personalities, experiences, and circum-
stances [1]. For them to receive treatment or help from the
bureaucracy, the complex citizen must transform into a client,
which is more manageable for the bureaucratic system. People
are therefore placed in one of a small number of categories
deﬁned by the bureaucracy itself as if all people somehow ﬁt
a standardized deﬁnition with a set of characteristics and an
associated slot in the system. These client characteristics often
do not exist outside the process that gives rise to them; the
social process it is to make a human being into a client [1].
Prottas [12] (p. 289) views clients as both consumers of the
bureaucracy’s output or services and as the raw material that
the bureaucracy processes. In typical public service bureaucra-
cies, it is not the goods that are distributed between clients,
but clients that are distributed between the goods, and therefore
the work of categorizing and processing people is very central.
Becoming a client belonging to a category with an associated
process is thus a prerequisite for being able to receive the
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

goods you are entitled to. Clients are therefore viewed as
the organization’s raw material: as something that must be
transformed or processed in order to become consumers of
the goods [12]. In some cases, categorization of people is
a simple routine task and is done without particular human
involvement on the part of the bureaucracy. Other times, it
is complex, requiring someone to receive, evaluate, interpret,
and act upon information from and about citizens [12]. In
this process, highlighting or ignoring speciﬁc attributes of
the citizen to determine which category they belong to is
central. It is not all attributes that are important in all further
processes. For example, NAV distinguishes between medical
factors and social factors that may prevent a citizen from
working. Social factors include challenges related to things
such as not speaking the language, unhappiness at work, and
sickness in the family. In cases of citizens receiving sickness
beneﬁts, for example, only the medical factors should be taken
into account when processing the case.
The work of the street-level bureaucrats thus lies in trans-
forming the human being into a client with certain character-
istics or attributes that are crucial to the further process. The
work and decisions of the street-level bureaucracy are naturally
bound to and directed by the client’s "real" characteristics and
the bureaucracy’s own rules, but "a considerable margin of
discretion remains," according to Prottas [12] (p. 291). Cate-
gorization in institutions and bureaucracies differs from other
categorization because one wants both to reduce complexity by
categorizing and then use the category to determine possible
actions and further processes [10]. Categorizing involves both
a label and a process: The client’s label deﬁnes what treatment
it can get, and this label simultaneously binds the bureaucracy
itself to a process of tasks, and therefore categorization has not
only implications for the client itself but also the bureaucracy
[12]. According to Lipsky [1], it is not certain that the citizens
themselves agree with the categorization done by the street-
level bureaucrat since their perception of reality is often
different. The citizen sees himself as a human being with
individual needs, challenges, and expectations of treatment that
ﬁt their understanding of their unique situation, as they are
encouraged by society. The street-level bureaucrats who decide
on the categorization, on the other hand, want to reduce human
complexity to determine which categories of action suits their
problems [1]. Categorizing is, therefore, a powerful tool that
can be of great importance to the citizens of the welfare state;
it is not only retrospective but also prospective.
V.
FINDINGS
In this section, we present the ﬁndings by using illustrative
examples from the data. We describe here the work of closing
loopholes by supervisors in the local NAV ofﬁce, and how this
work is done as an attempt to make sure the outcome in the
case will be what the supervisors believe is correct.
A. Closing loopholes around unclear diagnoses
A supervisor in the sickness beneﬁts department, Jon,
has taken on the task of writing a work-ability assessment
document for one of his colleagues who works in the work
assessment allowance department. Jon’s colleague ﬁnds this
assessment particularly difﬁcult to write as it is not a straight-
forward case easily categorized in the slot they are aiming
for. Though the client is currently receiving work assessment
allowance (a different ﬁnancial welfare beneﬁt) and thus is not
Jon’s client or in his department, he can still write the assess-
ment. His colleague has asked him this favor as she believes he
does a good job formulating the document in a way that favors
the client. Jon is an experienced employee, having worked in
the agency for nearly 20 years in various departments with
different positions. The case at hand belongs to a middle-aged
woman working in a job that is quite physically demanding,
but that she likes and masters. Both her physical and mental
health, however, are poor. She has a long history of thorough
medical examinations, but except for a mental diagnosis, it
is not clear what is the reason for her physical challenges.
She has been on sick leave for years, though working part-
time for a while. Thus, she has ﬁrst been a client receiving
sickness beneﬁts, then work assessment allowance, and now
hopefully moving on to receive disability beneﬁts, as she is
considered to have a permanent impaired ability to work by her
supervisor and doctor. They believe she can work part-time 40
percent, which means she can be considered to be 60 percent
disabled. The client’s supervisor is clear about this: though she
ﬁnds the case difﬁcult, it is still apparent to her that the client
should be granted a disability beneﬁt. She has known the client
for years, following her journey through sickness, employment
measures, and disagreements with her employer. However, as
the work-ability assessment can only be based on the available
documentation, the state ofﬁce may disagree. To be granted a
disability beneﬁt, everything must have been tried and tested
out to examine any options for full-time working.
Jon explains that writing a good assessment document takes
time, and he often starts by writing a draft containing the
most important information, before going back several times
to tweak formulations and change the wording. His task in this
case, according to himself, is to write pro disability beneﬁts
by "closing the loopholes" that may cause the state caseworker
to refuse the client’s application for disability beneﬁts. Jon’s
loyalty thus lies with the client and his colleague. He trusts
that his colleague has assessed this case the right way. To
write the assessment document, Jon starts by ﬁnding the
relevant documentation in the client’s case. In the archiving
system, he ﬁnds the doctor’s assessment and the ﬁnal report
from the employment measure organizer. In the system that
facilitates dialogue between the client and her supervisor, he
ﬁnds a summary of the latest meeting between the client and
supervisor. He uses this documentation as a basis for what he
intends to write in the assessment document but emphasizes
what the client’s supervisor tells him about the case as well.
She has been in and out of his ofﬁce during the time he has
been working on the case, discussing the case and answering
any of Jon’s questions.
B. Closing loopholes by adding or reformulating information
In a different department, Mia, a supervisor working with
young adults receiving work assessment allowance, tells a story
about another disability beneﬁts case. One of her clients is
a young woman who has had cancer. She has been through
treatment and is considered to be recovered from cancer, but
she is suffering from fatigue and is struggling to get back to
work because of this. The client has been in an employment
measure after recovering but had to quit due to exhaustion.
Mia ﬁnds it evident that this client has the right to be granted a
disability beneﬁt so that she can focus on getting well without
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

worrying about her ﬁnances. She says the client will most
likely be able to work in the future, but that, as of this moment,
she is unable due to medical reasons. As all other ﬁnancial
beneﬁts are temporary, Mia argues that disability beneﬁts will
enable the client to focus on getting well instead of worrying
about her ﬁnances. The client applied for disability beneﬁts
months back after Mia had written a work-ability assessment
she believed to be bulletproof. Both Mia and the client’s doctor
agreed that she was so ill that she was currently unable to work.
The state caseworkers, however, disagreed. They justiﬁed the
rejection by arguing that the client had not tried out everything,
and their advisory consultant doctor did not consider the client
to be so sick that she could not do anything work-related.
Mia found this assessment weak, and thus began her quest
to convince the state caseworkers she was right. As the work-
ability assessment can only be a little less than 5000 characters,
she forwarded additional documentation that she did not have
room for in the original document, like the epicrisis from
the hospital where the client was receiving treatment. The
processing time in the disability beneﬁts cases is normally
about ﬁve months, but Mia spent another three to four months
to argue in her client’s favor. In the end, the state caseworkers
granted the client disability beneﬁts.
Another supervisor describes a similar case. The supervi-
sor, Anne, wants to discuss one of her client’s further possi-
bilities with the others in her team so that she can ensure that
the client gets the best possible further case progress. Anne’s
client has been documented by doctors to be very ill, but the
central unit caseworkers rejected his application for disability
beneﬁts. Anne believes the caseworkers have misjudged the
case, as they justiﬁed the refusal by explaining that the client
had to see if the treatment he received could work positively
and possibly lead to him being healthy enough to work in the
future. After the rejection, Anne spoke with the client’s doctor,
who stated that the treatment the client was receiving was only
a way to keep the disease at bay and relieve the client’s pain,
and as such, the doctor said that nothing would change for the
client’s health in the future. The colleagues agree with Anne’s
assessment and believe that if the caseworkers are informed
of the correct description of the treatment the user receives,
they will grant him disability beneﬁts. Anne and her colleagues
want to make the further case process as quick as possible for
the client. Therefore, they agree that Anne should ask the client
not to use his right of appeal to complain about the previous
rejection, as it will stop the temporary ﬁnancial beneﬁt the
client is receiving today. Instead, the client should submit a
new disability beneﬁts application after Anne’s colleague has
written a new work ability assessment. This way, the client
can retain the temporary beneﬁt he receives today until he is
granted the disability beneﬁt. In other words, the supervisors
have come up with a plan for how they will close the loopholes
in the case by specifying that the treatment the client receives
will not change anything regarding his illness. Also, they have
put together a strategy for how the holes in the previous work
ability assessment should not affect the client’s ﬁnances until
they have set the record straight.
VI.
DISCUSSION
The clients in the agency are categorized into the bureau-
cratic system by a set of characteristics. In the case of disability
beneﬁts, the client must be between 18 and 67 years of age,
they must have been a member of the National Insure scheme
for three years prior to their sickness, the sickness or disability
must be the main reason their earning capacity is reduced,
appropriate treatment or employment measures must have
been tried, and their earning capacity must be permanently
reduced by at least 50 percent due to sickness or disability.
The two former requirements can quite easily be ticked off
in a scheme. The last three requirements, however, demands
an assessment by someone. To be granted disability beneﬁts
today is described to be very difﬁcult by the supervisors in the
NAV ofﬁce. From a political point of view, the line of work
is strong, and all Norwegian citizens should work as much
as they can. For citizens who are sick or disabled to such
an extent that they cannot work full time, their work ability
must be clariﬁed to examine how much they are capable of
working. Disability beneﬁts are intended to replace the income
of people who have a permanent disability due to illness or
injury. Since disability beneﬁts cost society a great deal, it is
important for the agency that the work ability of clients who
may be entitled to disability beneﬁts is thoroughly assessed
and that all possibilities for working are explored. This means
that the clients must have been through various employment
measures, which can be e.g., education or courses, and that
they have tried the treatment their doctor recommends based on
the illness or injury they are living with. If everything has been
tried and the work ability is still considered to be permanently
reduced, the client can be considered to be entitled to disability
beneﬁts. The number of measures or treatments a client must
take is individual and is often evaluated by NAV based on med-
ical certiﬁcates and documentation from medical treatment.
The medical certiﬁcates or documentation typically include a
diagnosis — which is a code that consists of one letter and two
numbers. Some diagnoses are classiﬁed as a sickness diagnosis
(a clear diagnosis where the doctor has identiﬁed disease or
injury). In contrast, others are so-called symptom diagnoses
— unclear diagnoses explaining the patient’s symptoms rather
than the sickness itself. Clients who have a chronic illness
that is known to prevent them from having a permanent job,
e.g., dementia, may not need to go through many measures
to be considered for disability beneﬁts. Others, who may have
unclear diagnoses, often need to go through more. It is these
measures and treatments that help close loopholes in a case
initially.
The work of assembling the key information needed in a
work ability assessment starts long before the actual document
is opened. First of all, the client, supervisor, and doctor need
to have a common understanding of the client’s case: they
have to agree that what is best for the client is to apply for
a disability beneﬁt. Thus, the client must already have tried
any and all other options for work there is, and treatment
for whatever disease or disability they suffer from. Further,
the client must partake in a clariﬁcation measure to get an
outsider’s perspective on the work ability. When all the actors
involved agree that a disability beneﬁt is the best solution
for the client, the client and supervisor must have a meeting
discussing the matter together. This meeting is the client’s
opportunity to inﬂuence the outcome by explaining how the
disease or disability affects his or her life, emphasizing why he
or she cannot work the usual 100 percent. Next, to ensure that
the advisors in the ofﬁce assess cases somewhat in a similar
matter, the case might be brought up for discussion in a joint
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

meeting with other advisors and managers. These meetings
typically occur every week and is a chance for the advisors to
get others’ views on the case and to ensure that similar cases
are handled in a somewhat similar manner.
After there is a consensus between the involved actors
that the work ability is assessed as permanently reduced, the
supervisor must write a work ability assessment before the
client can send in the digital application for disability beneﬁts.
In the work ability assessment, the supervisor must present the
case in such a way that the caseworker understands that ev-
erything the local agency ofﬁce considers appropriate has been
tried, even though the client may not have tried all possible
measures. The supervisor’s job here is to speak the client’s
case, and close any loophole that may cause the caseworker
to reject the client’s application. The loophole issue seems
to stem from a basic belief in the bureaucratic system and
society in general that some people do not want to work, and
thus, it is important to screen out those who would try to trick
the system. From the supervisors’ point of view, caseworkers
look for potential loopholes in the work ability assessments
that may cause them to reject the client’s application. All the
caseworkers who write work ability assessments regularly have
a similar approach to writing them, as they follow the same
recipe. They have a template document on their computer that
they use as a basis, and ﬁll in the information they consider
relevant from other electronic documents. This is typically
medical certiﬁcates, summaries from conversations between
the supervisor and the client, and reports from labor marked
initiatives in which the client has partaken. To do this job,
they ﬁnd the user’s case ﬁles in the archiving system and
the case management system that facilitates dialogue between
supervisor and client by using the client’s social security in the
search ﬁeld. The information in the systems is usually sorted
by date so that the most recent information is immediately
visible. However, to ﬁnd the relevant documentation, they often
need to browse through several documents. Every loophole
must be closed, or else speciﬁcally mentioned why it has not
been tried. The documentation that makes up the basis for the
supervisor’s assessment of the case is made mainly by doctors
or other medical personnel, as well as people working in the
private companies that organize employment and clariﬁcation
measures that the client has partaken in.
The supervisors describe the work of closing loopholes
both as overseeing that the client has been through any
necessary measures for exploring options for working and as
the work of assembling and presenting the key information in
the case in a 5000-character document: the work ability as-
sessment. In this document, the facts in the case are presented
with the supervisor’s subsequent assessment of the clients
opportunities for a working life or lack thereof. When the case
is sent for processing in the central unit, the caseworker uses
this document as a basis for his or her assessment of the case,
together with the user’s digital application and other available
documentation that the work ability assessment is based on.
A loophole in the work ability assessment is described as, for
instance, missing information about the illness, labour market
measures, or a lacking assessment that may cause the central
unit caseworker to reject the application for disability beneﬁts.
Thus, the supervisors do some parts of their work to ensure
that their clients’ cases are assessed in what they consider is
the right way further in the bureaucratic system. This is done
to make up for the fact that other caseworkers and computer
systems do not know the client as they do, and do not have
the same knowledge about the client. They speak their clients’
case when it meets the bureaucratic system.
In Jon‘s case, two aspects of the case may be considered as
loopholes: the fact that the client does not have a clear sickness
diagnosis, and the fact that he ﬁnds the clariﬁcation measure
report a bit lacking. Thus, his job of closing loopholes concerns
writing about these aspects in such a way that the central
unit caseworker may not see them as loopholes. Therefore,
he puts a strong emphasis on all the examinations that the
client has partaken in with the aim of getting a ﬁnal diagnosis
and ﬁguring out what treatment may be ﬁtting. Also, he avoids
mentioning what he ﬁnds lacking in the clariﬁcation measure
report but puts emphasis on the organizer’s assessment. The
two latter cases illustrate the importance of solid supervisor
work. Both of the client’s applications were rejected by the
central unit caseworkers because they believed some aspects
in the cases were not appropriately explored, and that the
client’s health might change in the near future. However,
the supervisors were sure that additional existing information
would change the outcome. In the former case, the supervisor
was right. As the whole team agreed on the latter case, the
client’s application will likely be approved after the supervisor
reformulates the wording about the medical treatment. Thus,
more information and a richer description of the clients‘ cases
were needed to close loopholes.
The supervisors in the local agency ofﬁces work with peo-
ple and their cases, whereas the caseworkers in the central unit
only ever work with the cases that belong to the people. When
a case is sent for further processing, important aspects about
the clients disappear, as only the information that is crucial to
the outcome in the case is sent. The supervisors can, in face-
to-face encounters with the clients, see things such as how they
function in social settings and whether their disease is hurting.
Such things can only be described to the caseworkers, but
they cannot see it for themselves. Therefore, the supervisors
do their best to make sure the caseworker assesses the case
in what they consider to be the right way. If they believe a
client is entitled to disability beneﬁts, they work to close any
potential loophole. We see this as an attempt to ensure that the
individual client is represented as just that: a unique individual,
not like a person who automatically ﬁts into a standardized
category [1]. However, the digital systems in use today do
not support this work: the information in the clients’ cases
is distributed between three systems; the archiving system, the
case management system, and the system that facilitates dialog
between client and the agency. To make case processing more
efﬁcient, only the most relevant information in the case should
be included in the work ability assessment. As some clients
may have had a case in the NAV system for many years,
the supervisors emphasize how difﬁcult it is to decide what
information is crucial.
The work of closing loopholes has arisen as a result of
redistributing the work of the traditional street-level bureau-
crat among several different people. As the decision-making
authority concerning ﬁnancial welfare beneﬁts has been moved
out of the local ofﬁce, front-line employees cannot make these
decisions for their clients any longer. The supervisor who
meets the client does the work of closing loopholes to represent
the client as best as possible when facing the bureaucratic
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

system. The caseworker in the central unit represents the
bureaucratic system with its laws and rules. They act to
a greater extent based on pressure from management, and
political and socio-economic goals, to reduce the number of
citizens receiving disability beneﬁts. By granting disability
beneﬁts, they also bind the bureaucracy to a further, expensive
process [10][12]. From a political point of view, therefore, as
few as possible should be placed in the "disabled" category.
The supervisors, who know the clients, have a vast knowledge
of the bureaucratic system; they also often know which aspects
of a case should be highlighted in further processing. Thus,
they speak the client’s case by closing loopholes. The work of
assembling the key information and closing loopholes can be
quite a time-consuming activity for the supervisors. They may
not know what information might make a difference when the
case is further processed, and because the supervisor needs to
search for the information in three different case management
systems. Wording and formulations may also be of importance,
as was illustrated in Anne’s case.
Furthermore, since public welfare services are working on
getting as many users as possible into using self-services,
the client does some parts of the bureaucracy’s prior work
himself [8]. Will the clients eventually have to do the work
of closing loopholes? As most citizens may not have a deep
understanding of the bureaucratic system, they will have chal-
lenges with representing their case, free of loopholes, to the
caseworkers who are making the decision. The categorization
work described in this paper is complex and difﬁcult, even for
experienced supervisors. As the caseworkers always look for
potential loopholes, the client should have an understanding of
what these might be if he or she is to assemble the case.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Lipsky, Street-Level Bureaucracy, 30th Anniversary Edition: Dilem-
mas of the Individual in Public Services, 2010.
[2]
N. Boulus-Rødje, “In Search for the Perfect Pathway: Supporting
Knowledge
Work
of
Welfare
Workers,”
Computer
Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 27, no. 3, Dec. 2018, pp. 841–874.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-018-9318-0
[3]
N. G. Borchorst and S. Bødker, ““You probably shouldn’t give them too
much information” – Supporting Citizen-Government Collaboration,”
in ECSCW 2011: Proceedings of the 12th European Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 24-28 September 2011, Aarhus
Denmark, S. Bødker, N. O. Bouvin, V. Wulf, L. Ciolﬁ, and W. Lutters,
Eds.
Springer London, 2011, pp. 173–192.
[4]
N. G. Borchorst, B. McPhail, K. L. Smith, J. Ferenbok, and A. Clement,
“Bridging Identity Gaps—Supporting Identity Performance in Citizen
Service Encounters,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW),
vol.
21,
no.
6,
Dec.
2012,
pp.
555–590.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-012-9163-5
[5]
N. G. Borchorst, S. Bødker, and P.-O. Zander, “The boundaries of
participatory citizenship,” in ECSCW 2009, I. Wagner, H. Tellio˘glu,
E. Balka, C. Simone, and L. Ciolﬁ, Eds.
Springer London, 2009, pp.
1–20.
[6]
N.
L.
Holten
Møller,
G.
Fitzpatrick,
and
C.
A.
Le
Dantec,
“Assembling the Case: Citizens’ Strategies for Exercising Authority
and Personal Autonomy in Social Welfare,” Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 3, no. GROUP, Dec. 2019, pp.
244:1–244:21. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3361125
[7]
L. Bainbridge, “Ironies of Automation,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes,
vol.
15,
no.
6,
Sep.
1982,
pp.
129–135.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474667017628970
[8]
G. Verne and T. Bratteteig, “Do-it-yourself Services and Work-like
Chores: On Civic Duties and Digital Public Services,” Personal
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, Aug. 2016, pp. 517–532. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-016-0936-6
[9]
L. Gasser, “The Integration of Computing and Routine Work,” ACM
Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 4, no. 3, Jul. 1986, pp. 205–225. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/214427.214429
[10]
D. Caswell, G. Marston, and J. E. Larsen, “Unemployed citizen
or
‘at
risk’
client?
Classiﬁcation
systems
and
employment
services
in
Denmark
and
Australia,”
Critical
Social
Policy,
vol.
30,
no.
3,
Aug.
2010,
pp.
384–404.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0261018310367674
[11]
A. S. Pors, “Becoming digital – passages to service in the digitized
bureaucracy,” Journal of Organizational Ethnography, vol. 4, no. 2, Jan.
2015, pp. 177–192. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1108/JOE-
08-2014-0031
[12]
J.
M.
Prottas,
“The
Power
of
the
Street-Level
Bureaucrat
in
Public
Service
Bureaucracies,”
Urban
Affairs
Quarterly,
vol.
13,
no.
3,
Mar.
1978,
pp.
285–312.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1177/107808747801300302
[13]
G. C. Bowker and S. L. Star, Sorting Things Out: Classiﬁcation
and Its Consequences.
MIT Press, Aug. 2000, google-Books-ID:
xHlP8WqzizYC.
[14]
K. Ehrlich and D. Cash, “The Invisible World of Intermediaries: A
Cautionary Tale,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW),
vol.
8,
no.
1,
Mar.
1999,
pp.
147–167.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008696415354
[15]
R. E. Stake, “Qualitative Case Studies,” in The Sage handbook of
qualitative research, 3rd ed.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications
Ltd, 2005, pp. 443–466.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

