Smartphone Devices in Smart Environments: Ambient Assisted Living Approach
for Elderly People
Roua Jabla
University of Sousse, ISITCom
4011 Hammam Sousse, Tunisia
e-mail: jabla.roua@gmail.com
Félix Buendίa 
Universitat Politècnica de Valencia
46022 Valencia, Spain
e-mail: fbuendia@disca.upv.es
Maha Khemaja
University of Sousse
4000 Sousse, Tunisia
e-mail: khemajamaha@gmail.com
Sami Faiz
University of Tunis El Manar
5020 El Manar, Tunisia
e-mail: sami.faiz@isamm.uma.tn
Abstract—One of the motivations for smart environment and
Ambient
Assisted
Living
(AAL)
research
works
is
the
significant increase in the elderly population. In that sense, it is
important to address the problems associated with aging and
to provide solutions to support the elderly in their daily life.
This paper aims to present an AAL approach able to identify
ongoing elderly activities and their context through embedded
smartphone sensors in a mobile smart environment. Based on
the learned context of elderly people, the proposed approach
addresses the elderly’s needs and triggers the most appropriate
service based on ontological reasoning so that it could interact
with the elderly and, more importantly, seamlessly ensure their
assistance.
Finally,
we
validate
the
proposal
through
a
questionnaire
exploring
elderly’s
views
about
service
satisfaction. We found that our proposed approach has the
potential to assist the elderly in their daily life, with the
majority of elderly people being mostly satisfied with the
provided services.
Keywords-context-awareness; smart environment for elders;
AAL; activity recongnition; ontology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The number of elderly people keeps on growing in
today’s
societies.
According
to
the
World
Health
Organization (WHO), the elderly population will quickly
increase in the upcoming years [1] and may reach about 2
billion in 2050 [2]. Since age-related declines and chronic
diseases can severely impair elderly’s ability to remember
and adequately perform everyday activities, the fulfillment of
their needs with relevant assistance with daily activities and
with continuous caregiving is essential to promote healthy
aging. Therefore, the rapid population aging, the importance
of independent living and the fulfillment of elderly’s needs,
together motivate the development of smart environments for
elders, which open up novel opportunities for enhancing
their independence and their quality of life. The concept of
smart environments that interact with the elderly has
emerged to provide them support and assistance with their
needs, preferences and surrounding context, in addition to
helping elderly who are experiencing a disability or a decline
in their health and their ability to remember and undertake
activities of daily living. Assisting elderly’s needs and
reducing caregiver’s burden without compromising safety
and the sense of self-control could, therefore, be regarded as
one of the main purposes of smart environments for elders.
In this regard, such environment shall detect emergency
situations or deviations in the elderly’s routine, which can
indicate a decline in their abilities. To cope with this, AAL
has emerged to represent a promising approach where the
aging issues are further addressed [3]. Owing to the fact that
AAL systems represent support for aging in place and offer
great potential to carry out tailored services to suit elderly’s
needs, they are able to guarantee the monitoring of the daily
living activities performed by the elderly through data
captured from heterogeneous sensors and context.
Moreover, context-awareness and recent advancements
in mobile and wearable sensors help the vision of AAL to
become reality. With AAL, context-awareness highlights a
crucial feature that facilitates the decision-making in real-
time according to elderly’s circumstances and gain in
accuracy. In order to support context-awareness and justify
its effectiveness, another key feature in AAL is human
activity recognition to detect the elderly-relevant activities.
Activity recognition plays an important role in bridging the
gap between sensor data and interpretation of necessary
services that the elderly need.
Within this context, we propose, in this paper, an AAL
approach that meets the requirement related to continuously
monitoring, motivating and assisting elderly in different
daily life situations and locations. The presented AAL
approach acts as a mobile smart environment for elders to
help them to be more integrated within their societies while
being monitored and assisted indoors and outdoors. This
mobile smart environment is illustrated with merging sensor
data provided by different sensors embedded in smartphone
devices to dynamically find out what services should be
promoting for helping the elderly to continue to live an
independent life.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
provides some background knowledge. In Section III, we
review some related works that deal with support for the
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

elderly in smart environments. Section IV presents an
overview of the proposed AAL approach. We describe the
implementation details and the potential scenarios and then,
we present the main evaluation findings in Section V.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II.
BACKGROUND
Aging is associated with progressive problems and needs
in different domains, such as psychology, physiology and
societal environment. Preparing for a further aging society, it
is essential to deeply explore these heterogeneous elderly’s
needs and problems. In this regard, we put forward Maslow’s
hierarchy of needs [4] to provide more effective solutions for
the elderly. Tamang et al. [5] argue that Maslow’s hierarchy
provides a solid footing to understand the needs faced by
elderly people seeing that each Maslow’s level of need has
relevance
for
elderly
assistive
technologies
[6].
The
hierarchy of needs proposed by Maslow categorizes human
needs into 5 distinct levels, namely, physiological needs,
safety needs, love and belonging needs, esteem needs and
self-actualization needs.
III.
RELATED WORK
Many non-trivial issues should be addressed when
monitoring elderly activities and providing assistive services.
Within that context, recognizing daily activities, deploying
sensors and providing tailored support services for the
elderly in smart environments are well-researched problems.
With this purpose, numerous solutions have been proposed
in
the
literature
for
supporting
the
elderly
in
smart
environments. For instance, Fahim et al. [7] proposed a daily
life activity tracking solution for an aging society. The
system monitors elderly activities through different kinds of
sensors, such as Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) Tags
and cameras that are located in their homes. Then, it can
generate reminders for scheduled tasks and for overlooked
medicines. Alternatively, Mainetti et al. [8] described an
AAL system to assist the elderly by tracking them during
indoor and outdoor activities. In particular, the proposed
system focuses on capturing elderly data for recognizing
their behavioral changes, both in their home and city
environment. When abnormal behavioral changes occur, the
system triggers health care notifications. More recently,
Huang et al. [9] explored context awareness, an ontology-
based
and
a
rule-based
reasoning
approach
for
risk
recognition and assistance. They proposed a framework for
smart home management based on numerous sensors located
in the home, such as device, contact, position and camera
sensors. The proposed framework offers safety assistance
services according to the current user activity inferred
through the reasoning process based on the Semantic Web
Rule Language (SWRL) rules. Moreover, Jung et al. [10]
presented a hybrid-aware model for elderly wellness service
in a smart home. This model detects elderly health risk based
on monitoring their activities and locations in the smart
home. Elderly activity is monitored using biosensors in each
location. After detecting elderly health status, appropriate
treatment
(e.g.,
music
therapy,
exercise
and
hospital
checkup)
is
recommended
for
the
elderly
using
an
Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm. Lately, Patel et
al. [11] introduced a hybrid framework for human behavior
modeling in AAL. The proposal employs machine learning
and deep learning approaches to discover the user’s activity
in a smart home. For that, the authors employed different
types
of
sensors,
i.e.,
body,
object,
camera
and
environmental sensors. This proposed solution recognized
user’s actions to offer essential services like medical
assistance or emergency response.
Following the aforementioned works, we observe that
most of them have not taken into consideration the mobility
of the elderly. For that reason, a common problem associated
with these works discussed so far [7][9][10][11] is that they
detect daily activities performed by the elderly in a single
smart environment that is usually a smart home. They target
a single smart environment since sensors, which are
integrated with everyday objects and connected through
networks, are exploited in elderly’s smart home. In addition,
they apply an activity recognition approach based on dense
object sensors that are attached to such indoor objects. So,
elderly activities are inferred by monitoring elderly-object
interactions. On the other hand, the work of Mainetti et al.
[8] supported elderly people in their indoor and outdoor
activities by gathering ambient parameters through sensors
included in wearable devices. Moreover, all these works are
based on healthcare and medical services. They do not take
into account more interesting services that fulfill current
elderly needs to allow them to live safely and independently
in their environments. Furthermore, none of the mentioned
solutions really uncover the different needs of the elderly.
There is a lack of research works that propose elderly need-
related services within smart environment based on a good
reference for elderly needs interpretation and services
development.
In the context of an aging society, we present an AAL
system to enhance and provide support for daily life of the
elderly by sensing the surrounding environment and the
elderly activity, and interpret these data to identify their
situations and to infer services accordingly. Unlike the main
solutions investigated in the literature, the gap of elderly
mobility has been addressed by conducting a mobile smart
environment in our work. As a consequence, our proposed
solution encompasses heterogeneous smart environments
through which an elderly can move, by using a mobile
device and by applying sensor-based activity recognition. In
other words, the exploitation of sensors embedded in mobile
devices with the abandonment of object-attached sensors
provides a mobile smart environment where the elderly
mobility
is
supported.
In
this
regard,
our
solution
transparently collects and processes information about the
elderly and the environment around them from the multitude
of sensors built in their smartphones. In this way, the adopted
sensor-based
activity
recognition
does
not
require
environment object sensors and ensures elderly mobility.
And then, our solution identifies needed service with respect
to the current elderly’s situation that falls under a specific
category of needs. These elderly’s needs are put forward
based on Maslow’s hierarchy of needs already presented in
the background section. Although services offered for the
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

elderly in main AAL works cover only the healthcare and
medical areas, our solution can improve the elderly relief and
promotes more elderly-friendly care services by figuring out
different needs addressed in the two lowest levels of
Maslow’s hierarchy. Apart from the need for health care that
is fulfilled as a safety need, we focus on physiological needs,
such as food, sleep, housing, transportation, etc.
IV.
PROPOSED APPROACH
A.
Architecture Overview
The main focus behind our proposed approach aims to
assist the elderly users in a mobile smart environment and
provide them with an appropriate service at the right time
considering
their
preferences,
current
activity
and
surrounding environment. In that sense, this approach should
allow a continuous monitoring of all incoming sensor data
and an immediate prediction to detect a certain elderly’s
emergency or anomalous situation over a short period of
time. Further, it necessitates to perceive any significant
changes in elderly’s context and manage the current elderly’s
needs to meet their context changes.
As a solution to this, we present a layered architecture
overview as depicted in Figure 1 that summarizes the above
discussed facts.
1)
Context
manager
layer:
Is
responsible
for
continuously managing both static and dynamic elderly’s
context
information.
This
lowest
layer
includes
the
following components:
a) Context collector: Refers to the process of gathering
the sensed data in real-time to deal with the dynamic aspects
involving contextual elements, such as elderly’s activity,
location and time.
b) Context pre-processor: Is in charge of analyzing the
incoming sensor data. For both location and time sensor
data, a high-level information is produced from a set of low-
level
information.
And
with
respect
to
built-in
accelerometer sensor data, the analysis process is to choose
the better window size.
c) Constraint analyser: Interprets the elderly’s profile
that reveals their different preferences, requirements and
health status.
Figure 1. Architecture Overview.
2)
Context
reasoner
layer:
Supports
reasoning
mechanisms for activity recognition and then for situation
identification regarding elderly’s current context. This layer
comprises two components as follows:
a) Activity reasoner: Is responsible for identifying the
current activity of elderly using ontology reasoning and
machine learning.
b) Situation reasoner: Is based on inference engine and
uses rules on the available context information of an elderly
to infer their current situation.
3)
Service controller layer: Sustains the provision of
personalized and adapted services to go with different
elderly’s needs and requirements. This layer includes the
following components:
a) Service reasoner: Is responsible for determining
which appropriate service should be executed through
ontological inferences that are based on the current situation
and elderly’s profile.
b) Service
executor:
Is
responsible
for
executing
services that are earlier selected by “Service Reasoner” on
the elderly’s mobile device.
B.
Elderly service identification
To support the proposed architecture, we focus on elderly
service identification. To this end, we address the underlying
needs of the elderly people based on Maslow’s hierarchy
previously discussed to offer certain assistive services for
elders. Considering the most fundamental Maslow’s levels in
the view of prior study results [5], these services are fully
provided to fulfill both Maslow’s need levels that concern
elderly physiological and safety needs. Thus, we can arrange
our assistive services into two main categories to reach
optimal elderly’s satisfaction. The first category is elderly’s
physiological needs-related services and the second is
elderly’s
safety
needs-related
services.
In
fact,
both
categories are often easily conflated, we investigate each of
them in turn, as follows:
1)
Elderly’s physiological needs-related services: In
addition to the basic human physiological needs, such as
food, sleep, housing, transportation, etc., the eldely’s
physiological needs target also the daily care due to age-
related problems. To moderate the side effect of unfulffiled
physiological needs, a variety of elderly’s physiological
need-related services are developed to get over their
physiological barriers.
a) Food recommendation service: Many elderly people
cannot eat and drink unaided and need a special assistance.
In this regard, we offer service that reminds elderly about
eating at the right time. This service creates numerous
reminders as notifications based on sensing and analyzing
the current situation of elderly.
b) Exercise recommendation service: Elderly can carry
out some physical activities that require moderate efforts,
such as walking, biking, aerobics, etc. to maintain and
improve their physical well-being. Hence, the increase of
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the efectiveness of well-being and falls-prevention needs
further interventions for elderly into the behavioral patterns.
To
tackle
that
concern,
we
propose
an
exercise
recommendation
service
that
provides
a
reminder
notification
to
encourage
elderly to
perform selected
physical activity or exercise suggested by their doctors.
c) Entertainment recommendation service: While few
studies, such as [12] along these lines have revealed that the
entertainment needs of the
elderly people is equally
important for their well-being and joyful living, we provide
entertainment recommendation service that selects the
relevant entertainment media and delivers notification with
the proposed media content, such as music, movie and so
forth.
2)
Elderly’s
safety
needs-related
services:
Once
physiological requirements are met, the safety needs, such
as healthcare, emergency prevention, etc., arise. Elderly’s
safety needs-related services look forward to cover the
demand of elderly people for life safety that refers to halth,
emrgency and medical services.
a) Health
recommendation
service:
Ensuring
safe
circumstances and protections for elderly, we aim to move
when there are some anomalous events occurred as elderly’s
fall or inactivity and assure rapid and efficient help. To
accomplish this aim, a health recommendation service raises
alerts to an emergency contact, such as doctor, caregiver or
family member when elderly is falling to the ground or has
not arisen from bed for a long period in order to repond to
an emergency event in a fast way.
b) Medication recommendation service: With age-
related decline of memory and cognitive functionalities
[13], elderly may forget to take the relevant medications at
the
appropriate
times.
For
this
attend,
a
medication
recommendation service is offered to provide basic medical
attention for people in old age. It yields an alert to remind
them about their medicines at a pre-scheduled time to
experience a healthy aging.
C.
Elderly activity recognition
Tracking ongoing elderly’s activity is regarded as a basis
context information to better recognize their current situation
in real-time and then providing the most relevant service
from the aforementioned elderly’s services. In this respect,
we present a sensor-based activity recognition method based
on mobile device using tri-axial accelerometer. We perform
an online activity recognition on different activities, such as
sitting, standing, walking, running, walking up/downstairs
and
falling,
from
the
Heterogeneity
Human
Activity
Recognition (HHAR) dataset [14]. The published HHAR
dataset was employed as input to train a model. For inferring
accurately, the actual elderly’s activity, we enclose a
knowledge-driven reasoning with a data-driven technique.
Machine Learning (ML) algorithm as Random Forest is used
to predict the initial activity label, where the accuracy of
several ML algorithms (e.g., Random Forest Naïve Bayes,
K-Nearest Neighbor) is well explored in previous work [15].
Then, a modular ontology, which represents the user’s
context, is applied for the purpose of enhancing and refining
the predicted activity label derived from ML reasoning. This
ontology was merged by means of activity recognition rules
that are based on users’ history as well as their current
contexts.
D.
Ontology and rules-based model
In order to process dynamic context, we provide a
modular
ontology
for
a
semantic
description
of
heterogeneous elderly’s profiles with elderly’s situation
management and efficient service provisioning. Thus, we
developed a modular ontology that offers a better selection
of relevant service among a large number of services. The
selection process of services is moving along a set of
inference rules that are based on the current elderly’s
context, their needs and their inferred situations. This
ontology consists of a set of interrelated ontologies, known
as elderly, activity, sensor, device, process, situation, service,
time and location. The general relationships among these
different ontologies are depicted in Figure 2.
1) Elderly ontology: Is subclass of the context that
represents and
captures the elderly context
within
a
changing environment. Figure 3 describes information about
the elderly, which can alter the inferred service. An elderly
has an elderly profile and an elderly constraint. Elderly
profile is limited to some personal information, such as
name, age, telephone, address and health status, as the
elderly can be healthy or unhealthy (suffers from disease or
disability). Also, it contains a medical profile that refers to
the medical history of elderly including type of diseases,
treatments and risk factors. As for the elderly constraint, it
consists of two main branches: elderly preferences, which
cover preferred entertainment content, preferred exercises
(yoga, walking, biking, etc.) and preferred emergency
contacts, and elderly requirements that deal with the elderly
needs, such as what suggested exercises that elderly must
perform.
2) Activity ontology: Describes the several physical
activities that can be performed by an end user.
3) Sensor ontology: Manages perceived raw sensory
data to monitor elderly’s activities. It is built on top of SSN
ontology [16] to represent mobile built-in sensors and their
operations.
4) Device ontology: Defines knowledge about devices
that are used to record raw sensory data.
5)
Process ontology: Descibes different techniques that
are used to interpret perceived raw sensory data and their
relationships that make up activity recognition process.
Figure 2. The core structure of our ontology and their relationships.
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

6)
Situation
ontology:
Contributes
to
identify
the
possible
situations
depending
on
elderly
contextual
information to provide relevant service selection in order to
meet their needs as closely as possible. As illustrated in
Figure 4, situation consists of pertinent conditions that can
be composed of the currently available context information
to throughly understand elderly and improve their situation
identification.
A situation has different proprieties to
characterize it, such as name, time, location and others. An
elderly situation, which is sub concept of situation, can be
either a daily situation binding a normal situation or a
irregular situation related to urgent situation, such as,
elderly’s health issues.
Figure 3. Excerpt of Elderly ontology.
Figure 4. Excerpt of Situation ontology.
7)
Service ontology: Provides a way for describing
context-triggered services through the context and situation
aware-based
reasoning
results.
This
sub-ontology
for
semantic service description adopts basic concepts and
relations from a service ontology called OWL-S [17] since it
is tailored to services in general along with the Web services
and the semantic Web. It expands the OWL-S ontology to
include additional features, such as elderly service, elderly
service profile and elderly service model that extend,
respectively, the OWL-S elements: service, service profile
and service model. These elements are the core concepts of
our service ontology as illustrated in Figure 5. An elderly
service is triggered by an inferred situation. Each elderly
service presents a profile to describe its characteristics by
defining its name, input, output, precondition and intended
purpose. Additionally, an elderly service profile can have a
category. This elderly service category is divided into two
basic categories: physological elderly services and safety
elderly services. Moreover, elderly service is described by a
model that deals with its internal structure. This elderly
service model executes its own method, which defines the
operational description related to the elderly service profile,
to carry out the corresponding service.
Figure 5. An excerpt of Service ontology.
8) Time ontology: Represents the time notion in the
context, which can be used to indicate the time of performed
activity.
9) Location ontology: Decribes the location of occurred
activity.
V.
IMPLEMENTATION AND POTENTIALS SCENARIOS
This section describes some implementation details of
our approach, potential usage scenario and experimentation
results.
A.
Prototype implementation
First, we have implemented our modular ontology model
based on OWL-DL using the Protégé tool. Second, Jena rule
language as a syntax is used to express rules and to increase
the expressivity of the ontology. The Jena inference rules are
introduced to infer new knowledge that are related to the
user’s context, such as user activity, location and so on, the
user’s situations and user’s needed services to adapt the
interaction with the elderly and assist them. For instance, the
Music service is an Entertainment situation that has Music as
a media preference (see Figure 6). Then, we have developed
a mobile application as a proof of concept. This application
is basically implemented in Android environment and
written in Java. For the purpose of activity recognition, we
considered a hybrid activity recognition method, which
combines data-driven on inertial sensor data from mobile
devices
and
knowledge-driven.
So,
the
implemented
application
is
leveraging
the
smartphone’s
sensing
capabilities as GPS and accelerometer for the localization
and the detection of human activity, respectively. And
finally, to validate the selection of appropriate needed
service, our application integrated the modular ontology and
a raft of inference rules discussed above.
B.
Potential scenario
To demonstrate that our proposed prototype has the
potential to infer current situations and determine relevant
services for the elderly based on their profile information,
their current physical activities, their current locations and
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

time, we consider the following scenario depicting a typical
real-life situation.
Figure 6. An example of inference rule.
There are two elderly, named David and Sarah which are
sitting in their living rooms during the morning after they
had breakfast. But, they each have pretty different context
profiles. First, David prefers cycling as physical exercise. He
has a healthy status and has not any disease, risk factor and
exercise requirement. Second, Sarah prefers walking as
physical exercise. She has an unhealthy health status and
suffers from diabetes disease. She adheres to Yoga as a
regular physical exercise routine prescribed by her doctor
and has not any risk factors. This situation provides an
exercise need and the application triggers a notification
service to convince David to get out and enjoy some cycling
and to remind Sarah that she must make some Yoga as
suggested by her doctor, as exhibited in Figures 7 and 8.
Figure 7. Interfaces for elderly assistance: Notification for Cycling service.
Figure 8. Interfaces for elderly assistance: Notification for Yoga service.
C.
Evaluation and discussion
User
satisfaction
is
commonly
applied
evaluation
criterion for services in general. In our case, this criterion
assesses the degree of elderly satisfaction with the provided
services.
Nevertheless,
the
evaluation
of
the
elderly
satisfaction from their perspectives is a critical step, which
can be done with questionnaires. We decided to choose the
Client Satisfaction Questionnaire-8 (CSQ-8) [18] as a
reference to assess elderly satisfaction to evaluate and refine
afterward our provided services for the elderly as optimally
as possible. We chose CSQ since it offers a quick assessment
of the client satisfaction of the services received. On this
basis, our questionnaire that is conducted based on CSQ-8,
consists of 8 questions ranging from Q1 to Q8. Each
question should be answered using a response scale from 1
to 4, total score goes from 8 (great dissatisfaction) to 32
(great satisfaction). For the purpose of this evaluation, the
questionnaire was completed by 10 elderly living alone who
will use the application as an aid in their daily life and have
heterogeneous context profiles. After receiving feedback
from the elderly, we analyzed the collected responses
outlined in Table I.
TABLE I.
SCORES ON ELDERLY SATISFACTION QUESTIONNAIRE
Questionnaire
Scale Score
1
2
3
4
Q1. How would you rate the effeciency of services
you have received?
0
4
4
2
Q2. Did you get the kind of service you expected?
1
4
3
2
Q3. To what extent has our application met your
needs and intends?
1
5
2
2
Q4. Would you recommend our application a friend?
0
6
3
1
Q5. How satified are you with the amount of help
and assitance you received through offered services?
1
3
3
3
Q6. Have the services you received help you to deal
more effectively with your daily situations?
0
3
5
2
Q7. In an overall, general sense, how satisfied are
you with the service you have received?
0
6
3
1
Q8. Would you reuse our application?
2
4
3
1
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Based on the analysis results, the mean overall score for
the questionnaire was 25.8. We concluded that the majority
of elderly was mostly satisfied with the proposed application.
The elderly were more satisfied with the provided services
and less inclined to recommend the application to a friend or
family member.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
The concept of smart environment for elders is still
evolving, which may lack the mobility for elderly to
simultaneously move around and maintain their daily
assistance. Smartphone is a convenient device to provide
mobility for assisting elderly. In this paper, we have
presented an AAL system that monitors elderly in their
mobile smart environments using smartphone devices in
order to relieve burden of stress among elderly. The
proposed system promotes services based on elderly’s
situations. These situations may vary based on the current
elderly’s needs, which are highly context dependent, and
their profiles, such as their preferences, requirements, health
status and so on. Moreover, we have introduced the
experimental
results
of
elderly
test
that
show
the
effectiveness of our proposed system where a great number
of
elderly
are
satisfied.
Despite
that,
we
deemed
indispensable to develop further new intelligent services for
the elderly with a consideration of the rest of Maslow’s
hierarchy levels to undertake more robust evaluation results.
Hence, we intend to shift our focus to the love and belonging
level of Maslow’s needs that could be met by socializing
with others. We also plan to include other kind of
smartphone sensors to keep a good control of the elderly’s
environment and to allow a faster response to the elderly’s
needs and
situations at hand. Through this proposed
approach, we aim to take on the history information of
elderly to improve the evaluation results. Additionally, our
future work includes evaluating our approach on more
adequate population.
REFERENCES
[1]
Eurostat, “Population projections 2008-2060: from 2015,”
deaths projected to outnumber births in the EU27, 2008.
[2]
World Health Organization. WHO, “10 facts on ageing and
the life course,” 2008.
[3]
H. Biermann, J. Offermann-van Heek, S. Himmel, and M.
Ziefle, “Ambient assisted living as support for aging in place:
quantitative users’ acceptance study on ultrasonic whistles,”
JMIR Aging, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. e11825, 2018.
[4]
A.
H.
Maslow,
“A
theory
of
Human
Motivation,”
Psyhological Review, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 370,1943.
[5]
T. M. Tamang, “User-centered design of an interactive social
service concept for elderly people,” 2015.
[6]
S. Thielke et al.,“Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs and the
adoption
of
health-related
technologies
for
older
adults,” Ageing international, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 470-488,
2012.
[7]
M. Fahim, I. Fatima, S. Lee, and Y. K. Lee, “Daily life
activity tracking application for smart homes using android
smartphone,”
In 2012
14th
International
Conference
on
Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), IEEE, pp.
241-245, 2012.
[8]
L. Mainetti, L. Patrono, A. Secco, and I. Sergi, “An IoT-
aware AAL system for elderly people,” In 2016 International
Multidisciplinary
Conference
on
Computer
and
Energy
Science (SpliTech), IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2016.
[9]
X. YI. J. Huang, X. Zhu, and S. Chen, "A semantic approach
with decision support for safety service in smart home
management," Sensors, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1224, 2016.
[10] Y. Jung, “Hybrid-aware model for senior wellness service in
smart home,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1182, 2017.
[11] A.
Patel,
and
J.
Shah,
"Real-time
human
behaviour
monitoring using hybrid ambient assisted living framework,"
Journal of Reliable Intelligent Environments, pp. 1-12, 2020.
[12] N. Alm et al., “Engaging multimedia leisure for people with
dementia,” Gerontechnology, 2009.
[13] S. A. Small, Y. Stern, M. Tang, and R. Mayeux, "Selective
decline
in
memory
function
among
healthy
elderly,"
Neurology, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1392-1392, 1999.
[14] A. Stisen et al., “Smart devices are different: Assessing and
mitigatingmobile
sensing
heterogeneities
for
activity
recognition,” In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on
Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, pp. 127-140, 2015.
[15] R. Jabla, F. Buendía, M. Khemaja, and S. Faiz, “Balancing
Timing and Accuracy Requirements in Human Activity
Recognition
Mobile
Applications,”
In Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute Proceedings, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 15,
2019.
[16] M. Compton et al., “The SSN ontology of the W3C semantic
sensor network incubator group,” Web semantics: science,
services and agents on the World Wide Web, vol. 17, pp. 25-
32, 2012.
[17] D. Martin et al., “OWL-S: Semantic markup for web
services,” W3C Member Submission. World Wide Web
Consortium, 2004.
[18] T.
D.
Nguyen,
C.
C.
Attkisson,
and
B.
L.
Stegner,
“Assessment
of
patient
satisfaction:
development
and
refinement of a service evaluation questionnaire,” Evaluation
and program planning, vol. 6, no. 3-4, pp. 299-313, 1983.
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

