Is Aging the New Disease?
Anita Woll
Department of Informatics
University of Oslo
Oslo, Norway
email: anitwo@ifi.uio.no
Abstract—In this paper, we discuss the phenomenon of aging in
relation to Hofmann’s three perspectives on disease including
disease, illness and sickness role. We further discuss how the
introduction of technology supported elderly care changes our
perspectives on aging into becoming more disease focused.
Especially, in user situations where technology supported care
is introduced in order to prevent and reduce individual risks of
prospective elders at risk of becoming wanderers, or who need
support in order to avoid- or reduce outcomes of falls. Thus,
even if early introduction of technology supported care is
recommended in order to realize assistive technology to its
potential benefits, we raise critical concerns in how this also
can change our view of aging from being a natural process of
life into a disease focused phenomenon.
Keywords-aging; disease perspective; assistive technology;
social implications of technology use.
I.
INTRODUCTION
What classifies a condition to be defined as a disease?
Moreover, is aging a disease? Depending on whom we are
addressing these questions to, we can expect different
answers
according
to
Hofmann
[1].
There
are
well
established international classification systems such as the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) that define and
classify diseases on the basis on a minimum set of criteria
[2]. However, even the ICD system changes over time as
new diseases constantly are introduced, and some diseases
are reclassified as rather being natural phenomenon as new
knowledge is gained.
Hofmann [1] debates that the
classification systems and the criteria that define diseases are
fluctuating over culture – historical time, and that these
changes are based on our worldview, or gained knowledge
and science. For example, homosexuality was formerly
classified as a disease in Norway until the year of 1977 [1].
Homosexuality was viewed as a deviation from normality,
and one of the primary reasons for classifying homosexuality
as a disease was to avoid the homosexuals in feeling
stigmatized [1]. Moreover, those who were gay were not able
to
sexual
reproduce
humankind.
However,
as
new
technology,
knowledge
and
science
were
developed,
homosexuality was over time viewed as a normal sexual
orientation, and human reproduction is achievable as new
technology can treat many of those who are infertile.
The classification of a condition can be made from
different perspectives on disease by the characteristics to
whom that are represented: the medical health professionals
(disease), the person who is being ill (illness) and the society
(sickness role) [1], see table 1 below. The different terms
presented in table 1 can have different departures of how we
view the phenomenon of aging, and these perspectives are
important to understand initially in order to discuss if we
could classify aging as a disease or rather as a natural
process of life. The term illness is associated with the person
who is experiencing the negative subjective illness [1]. This
negative experience of being ill can be present by the
subjective experience of pain and suffering, or symptoms or
a collection of symptoms (syndrome) [1]. The term disease
is reserved to the medical professionals who based on
objective signs and markers are able to classify a condition
according
to
the
established
classification
systems
of
diseases and related health problems (e.g., ICD [2]) [1]. For
example, a person can experience to be ill, without necessary
the health professionals approval of the illness as being a
disease. Moreover, the term sickness role is associated with a
certain social behavior that is colored by phenomena such as
social status and privileges. Thus, the sickness role is defined
by norms and values based on inter-subjective relationships
within the society [1].
TABLE I. THE THREE CENTRAL PERSPECTIVES ON DISEASE
ACCORDING TO HOFMANN [1]. COPYRIGHT: HOFMANN [1, P.134]
Term
Meaning
Characteristics
Illness,
To be ill
(Negative)
subjective experience
of the person who is
being ill.
Pain/Suffering,
Symptoms,
Syndromes
(collection of
symptoms).
Disease,
To have a disease
Signs and
classifications
observed and
identified by health
personnel.
Signs,
Marker.
Sickness, Sickness
role.
To be perceived as
having a sickness role
in a society.
Social behavior.
However, why all this eager to define a specific condition as
a disease? The main reason is that a disease diagnosis gives
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

an ill person welfare benefits including the rights for cure (if
existing) or treatment (to regain health, reduce pain, reduce
risks, prolong life/ life-sustaining treatments etc.), as well as
a pause from duties and financial benefits, such as paid sick
leave
[1].
Moreover,
the
society
represented
by
the
government influences the redistribution of tax money
including making socioeconomics decisions. For example,
the government decides which diagnoses are the most
valuable to treat according to the Diagnosis-Related Group
(DRG) system [5] or which diagnosis that qualifies for
retirement.
The government also decides indirectly which
diseases should gain more research finances in order to
obtain new knowledge for improved treatment.
The health care system can also have an interest in
treating those who are most valuable treating according to
performance-based financing of health care services as
defined by the DRG system. Furthermore, the health care
system is influenced professionally by the pressure from the
society and is forced to keep focus on diseases that are
valued as important research areas / grant areas. These few
examples illustrate the complexity of defining a specific
condition as a disease or not, and show that there are several
stakeholders involved, and that defining a condition as a new
disease has, among others, individual-, socio-economical and
medical consequences. Thus, the relationship between the
different perspectives on disease, illness and sickness is
highly intertwined as they all influence and rely on each
other.
A growing elderly population demands us to design new
ways of delivering health care in order to develop a
sustainable elderly care systems based on cost – efficient use
of scarce health care resources and shortage of health care
professionals. Several initiatives have been explored in order
to provide care services to more care takers by less use of
resources [3]. Thus, the introduction of assistive technology
is valued as an essential instrument in future elderly care; but
then we have to succeed in incorporate ICT – supported
elderly care in the overall elderly care trajectory – and not
just in specific acute phases, e.g., as a follow-up intervention
after hospital admission [4].
There are a number of ethical
dilemmas by the introduction of technology supported
elderly care. Prior studies that have touched on these
dilemmas are concerned about concepts such as intrusion of
the privacy, stigma of assistive technology use, or (false)
trust in the safety of technology use.
In many studies, the conclusion is that the ethical
implications need to be balanced with the personal gain of
assistive technology use, e.g., the mastery of living as an
independent individual. This paper adds to the existing HCI
literature by expanding the knowledge on how technology
use within elderly care can have personal, medical and social
impacts on our view of aging. Thus, this paper aims to make
a contribution by widening the debate on ethical aspects
concerning assistive technology use among elders. We are
doing so by discussing aging in the light of the following
research questions (RQ):
RQ1: Is aging a disease according to Hofmann’s three
perspectives on disease?
RQ2: Are the three perspectives on disease and aging
changed when assistive technology is introduced to support
the aging population?
The paper is organized as follows: Section 1 introduces
the research objective of this paper. Section 2 presents the
background. Section 3 summarizes the related work. Section
4 discusses how the different perspectives on disease and
aging are changed when technology is introduced into the
caring for elders. Section 5 presents summary of this paper.
II.
BACKGROUND
In
this
section,
we
present
and
discuss
the
three
perspectives on disease in relation to the phenomenon of
aging.
A.
The disease perspective
Medical
professions
define
diseases
after
well-
established international medical classification systems such
as
ICD
(specialist
health
care),
the
International
Classification of Primary Care (ICPC) (primary care) and
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) (psychiatry) [1]. These classification systems hold a
number of criteria that could coincide with the subjective
experience
of
aging
including
physical
dysfunction,
progressive impairment, various treatment and preventive
efforts, changes in social structure and deviations in social
behavior [1]. Therefore, several of these classification
criteria could diagnose age-related symptoms and signs of
aging into various diseases. However, a sum or combinations
of various criteria gathered from the classification system are
not sufficient or necessary in order to define something as a
disease. Nevertheless, aging is defined as decline in organs
and functions; as a result of normal arts and age-related
biological processes, thus these processes cannot be said to
be disease related nor a deviation from normality in the aging
population [1]. It is also important to note that most elderly
persons actually live a more or less active life. Statistics
Norway [6] reports that as many as 74 % of the elderly
Norwegian population (above 67 years of age) are non-users
of municipal health care services. Therefore, aging is not a
disease viewed as an isolated phenomenon. However, the
reminding 26 % of elderly persons that are health care
receivers have additional diseases [7]. These numbers
display that it is important to separate aging and diseases /
age-related diseases.
In the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 (GBD 2013)
[8], there is no death cause referred to as old age. However,
old age could be indirectly the cause of death, but the death
cause is always disease specific. The eight most frequent
death causes in Norway 2013 are listed below, in addition to
the number of deaths in parentheses [9]:
1.
Myocardial infarction and other ischemic heart
disease (7290)
2.
Alzheimer's disease (4126)
3.
Stroke (4020)
4.
Lung cancer (2283)
5.
COPD
(2176)
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

6.
Pneumonia (2083)
7.
Colon cancer (1999)
8.
Fall (incl. hip fractures and other injuries) (1193)
Alzheimer's diseases are the second most frequent cause of
death in Norway in 2013. Alzheimer’s diseases are according
to the Alzheimer’s organization “not a normal part of
aging”[10], however the most dominant risk factor for
Alzheimer’s
is aging, as the majority of persons who are
suffering from these diseases are from 65 years of age [10].
However, there are exceptions as early onset of these
diseases can appear in younger years and the Alzheimer’s
Association [10] says that almost 5 % of these incidents are
present already from the age of 40 – 50 years.
Aging increases the risk of diseases and death [11], thus
for some health professionals, e.g., the geneticists, increased
risk for diseases and death are enough to define the cause as
a disease. Hence, preventive efforts are made in order to
avoid development of diseases, e.g. surgical treatment can be
done in order to reverse or reduce the risks for hereditary
breast-ovarian cancer syndrome by undergoing mastectomies
and/or remove the ovaries in cases where the geneticists have
identified abnormal BRCA1 gene [12].
However, as
discussed above; aging and diseases are not objectively
concurrent. Aging is rather a natural biological process, and
currently there is no cure that can stop the process of aging,
even if some treatments give promises of slowing down the
process of aging [13] [14]. Thus, in order to stop aging you
have to die young, which is not normality in the western
world where the life expectancy is set to be approx. 82 year
as average for both genders [15].
Nevertheless, the outcome of relatively harmless diseases
such as the seasonal flu have much worse prognosis for
elderly people above 65 years of age as their human immune
defenses weaken with aging [16]. Similar can other minor
diseases cause major health consequences for elderly people,
e.g., urinary tract infection and constipation can lead to acute
delirium [17]. Other examples are; the mortality caused by
hip fracture for elderly Norwegian is as high as 25 % of 10
000 registered incidents per year. The mortality percentage is
not directly linked to the fracture itself, but the strains of the
fracture are worsening their general health and sickness [18].
Hence, the elderly people’s vulnerability and mortality after
falls including hip fractures is present as the eight most
frequent death cause in Norway in 2013 [9].
No general practitioner (GP) or specialist health care
doctor would give a sick leave to a working person of 60
years solely based on observed signs and markers of aging.
There has to be an additional disease present. Thus, based on
the disease perspective; aging is not a disease.
B.
The illness perspective
Albert, Munson and Resnik [19] state that a “…disease is
best understood as a departure from normal functioning”
[19, p. 160]. What is the characteristic of normal functioning
for aging people are probably a subjective perspective, as
well
as
depending
on
the
context
and
individual’s
experiences of what is normal functioning. An active
younger person that exercises three times a week is more
likely to keep on exercising at older age, but at reduced and
adjusted pace. However, even if the normal functioning is
subjective experienced as being abnormal compare to
younger years of life, the abnormality is still a normal
process within the aging population. The onset of the
biological aging starts already at 20 years of age, where
aging is characterized by a gradual reduction of the body’s
organs and functions, which is said to be 50 % reduced at 70
years of age [7]. However, this reduction of organs and
functions is not classified as a disease from the disease
perspective of medical professionals, however persons of old
age have increased vulnerability for diseases, mortality and
stress [7]. Additionally there is also present a mental and
social aging process that onset later in life. Mental aging
refers to reduced memory capacity, and the subjective
experience of everything going slower than it did before.
Social aging is associated with a decrease in social contact.
The reduction in social life is especially present after
retirement. The energy level of elderly persons decreases,
and even if wanting to participate in social activity, elderly
persons are often cutting down on social networking, which
can make them vulnerably for loneliness and isolation [7].
The senior report of Oslo municipality [20] has brought
attention to active aging. In doing so, the health government
in Oslo has emphasized that each elderly person has a
responsibility for self- caring to the extent it is possible, and
that families should increase their involvement in the caring
for their elderly relatives. This is comparable to the global
health movement of developing strategies for successful
aging, whereas the concept embraces aging as something
positive, and refers to physical, mental and social well-being
in older age [21][22]. However, prior studies have displayed
findings that the elderly people’s subjective experiences of
quality of life are weighted higher than the absence of
diseases [21] [23].
The notion of successful aging aims to develop strategies
to increased adaption of aging well. These strategies vary
over time as new knowledge is gathered. However, lifestyles
strategies such as diets, physical exercising, non - substance
use, social activities, prevention or treatment of depression,
in addition to positive attitude and reduction of stress are
some examples [22], [24], [25]. The notion of successful or
active aging can also have an opposite effect for those
elderly people who are not mastery aging well. Especially,
can this be the case for those elderly persons who have
additional diseases. Pushed to the extreme; the society can
blame those elderly who have not lived their life according to
the successful aging strategies. We know that factors such as
socio – economics can have impacts of life expectancy [26]
and for some elderly people the society’s expectations of
active aging and increased self – care activities cannot be
fulfilled. Subjective life quality for some elderly persons can
also be that aging is experienced as illness as decline in
general health, limited capabilities and/or functional abilities
make them struggle with daily life activities, and we know
that the transition from work life to pension life can be
experienced as brutal for some [25] [27]. The experiences
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

from someone’s younger life are also likely to affect the
subjective experience of older age.
The poet and philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–
1882) is famously quoted for “All diseases run into one, old
age” that has origin from the Emerson’s essay Circle (1841).
Emerson’s somehow extreme description of old age can be
interpreted as old age leads to the only “disease” that none
human are able to escape, as death is the only fixed and
known outcome of life. Other translations could be that the
author argues for the fact that it is the sum of diseases or
lived life that is the most essential factor of our final
experience of old age.
The illness perspective is a subjective perspective, thus
people of old age may define aging as an illness if they
experiencing aging as painful and negative. However, most
elderly people (74 %) do not have a need for public health
care services according to Statistics Norway [6], so the
majority of elderly Norwegians are likely to think of aging as
a natural process of life.
C.
The sickness perspective
One understanding of the perspective of sickness is that it
is a social constructed phenomenon as the notion of age has
different meanings and values within cultures and nations
[27]. Thus, there is a belief that Eastern and Asian culture
value and honor the wisdom of their elderly people to a
greater extent than the industrialized Western countries –
however
there
are
scarce
literatures
supporting
this
hypothesis according to Löckenhoff and co - authors [27].
Moreover, the western world has been criticized for their
youth focused societies, where cultural traditions have
outdated elderly persons as they retire from work life [27].
The
aging
population
has
in
past
decades
been
stigmatized by the view of elderly people being a burden for
the society, especially has this been the case in several
Western countries [27]. This negative value of the aging
population can also be reinforced by the mass media’s
focuses and stressing about how to cope with the growing
proportion of elderly people in the society in conjunction
with scarce health care resources and shortage of health care
professionals. Moreover, there have been tendencies that
research studies have focused on the negative aspects of
aging where elderly people have been viewed as more care
needy in opposite to resourceful human beings. Several
contributors have in resent time claimed that aging is in fact
a disease, and should therefore be treated [28] [29].
Consequently, Caplan [28] requires the society to put in
extensive resources to do research on how to cure aging so
we can live longer under the assumption that the cure of
aging also includes maintenance of the younger people’s
health and quality of life. However, this standpoint brings up
ethically
dilemmas
that
conflicts
with
the
earth’s
sustainability, and is sensitive as many people on the earth
struggles to survive their 60 years. One of the Caplan’s
argument for curing aging is that premature born babies get
treatment, which Caplan argues are conflicting with the
evolution theory and survival of the fittest – thus he
questions why not elderly people should be saved from dying
[28]. However, there is a different between premature babies
that have a potential for life and human reproduction versus
elderly persons who have lived a life and are done with
reproduction. It is also a question of prioritization of scarce
health care resources, and curing aging should not be on the
top list of health care issues that need to be resolved.
The sickness perspective is based on norms from the
inter-subjective relationships within the society. The society
may define aging as a sickness when they still are young, or
are experiencing signs of aging – or making effort in slowing
down the aging processes with various measures.
However,
the society’s sickness perspective of aging is rather linked to
additional diseases such as Alzheimer’s diseases and other
age-related diseases, so per definition aging as an isolated
phenomenon is not classified as a sickness itself. Thus, aging
is not sickness from the sickness role perspective.
In the previous sections, we have discussed how aging
can be classified according to the various perspectives on
disease, illness or sickness role. We argue that none of the
three perspectives is defining aging as a disease. However,
we understand that from a subjective experience; elderly
persons can have own experience of aging as being an
illness. Further in this paper, we want to discuss if the
introduction of assistive technology influence our discussion
of aging being a natural process of life.
III.
RELATED WORK
There are no other HCI studies that have explored upon
the different perspectives of diseases in regard to the
phenomenon of aging and technology use. However, several
studies from interdisciplinary research communities have
examined various ethical aspects of assistive technology use,
often in the context of people with dementia and Alzheimer’s
diseases. These research contributions are focused on
concepts and issues in regard to the following:
autonomy
[30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37], privacy issues [38]
[39] [40], stigma of assistive technology use [41] [42] [43],
affordance [44] [45] and safety [46] [47] [48].
However, Greenhalgh and co-authors [30] discuss illness
and frailty in the living body by use of phenomenology.
They are doing so in order to develop a phenomenologically
and socio-materially informed theoretical model of assistive
technology adoption and use by older people. However, they
do not discuss aging in the light of the different perspectives
on diseases, but rather how the experienced body influences
the technology use and appropriation. The authors [30] argue
that providers of assistive living technologies are not
supporting the users in coping with their illness in everyday
life
activities.
Moreover,
the
authors
[30]
state
that
introduction
of
technologies
in
order
to
support
for
independent living require for solutions that support the users
in “think with things” [p. 86] to increase usability and user
experiences.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV.
APPLYING THE DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES ON DISEASE
ON TECHNOLOGY – SUPPORTED ELDERLY CARE
The classification of a disease often comes along with the
fact that “something can be done” [1, p. 24]. Hofmann [1]
refers
to
infertility
and
the
innovation
of
assisted
reproduction as one of the driven forces of redefining
infertility as being a disease. This, according to Hofmann [1],
indicates that in situations where something can be done in
order to “control or intervene” [p. 24] we are willing to
include these into our disease perspective [1].
Technical solutions that aim to support elderly persons
with Alzheimer’s diseases or technology to prevent falls for
those having fall tendency are important interventions in
order to reduce the risk of mortality. Hence, these types of
technologies could fit into the prescription of having the
function to control or intervene in order to reduce the risk for
accidents with severe outcome. Especially considering that
Alzheimer’s diseases are the second most frequent cause of
death among elderly people, and falls are reported as the
eight frequent cause of death. But then again, Alzheimer’s
diseases are not a natural part of aging. However, in order to
succeed in incorporating assistive technology into the overall
ICT- supported elderly care system it is considered beneficial
to introduce technology at early onset of old age, e.g. before
the elderly person is diagnosed with Alzheimer’s diseases.
However, the person has to be at risk for Alzheimer’s
diseases if defending a formal consent of installing door
controller or other technical solutions such as Global
Positioning System (GPS) to either use technology for
diagnostic purposes, or to control and prevent accidents if the
person has a social behavior that make the family concerned.
A.
From the disease perspective: Introduction of assistive
technology to support the aging population
Delegation of health care services to technology in the
caring for elderly persons brings up a number of ethical
dilemmas, especially in relation to protecting the elderly
people’s right to privacy. It is also important to emphasize
that use of assistive technology is not merely affecting the
elderly persons, but also bring the elderly peoples’ families
and public health care staff within its scope. For example,
technologies that alert in a pre-defined situation require an
infrastructure where “someone” responds to the alert or acts
when the collected information requires some action. That
“someone” could be health care staff and/or family, which
means that they also need to familiarize themselves with the
introduced technology.
And the housing – oriented care
system has a motivation for including the family to a greater
extent in the care network – as past institutionalization of
care services has resulted in the family being less involved in
practical matter or in the caring for their relatives [49]. The
phenomenon
of
aging
has
advanced
into
becoming
increasingly disease focused from the perspective of disease
in user cases where the GP and municipal health care service
make a formal decision of introducing assistive technology
for the purpose of reducing the risks of potential accidents
and/or diseases.
B.
From the illness perspective: Introduction of assistive
technology to support the aging population
A home is perceived as a private sphere and should be
protected against the health authorities intruding with
mandatory sensors for monitoring purposes. Thus, it is a
danger that introduction of assistive technology within the
home will do something about the elderly residents’
perceptions of the home.
The purpose and gain of the elderly person using
assistive technology should be weighed against the intrusion
of the elderly person’s private sphere. In a Norwegian
Official Report [3], it is argued that use of technology within
welfare services can give the elderly possibilities to extend
their time living as self-reliant in their private homes. Thus,
technology that controls or intervenes in order to prevent
diseases and mortality can slow down age related diseases
and prevent risks for accidents. However, elderly persons
may also experience the introduction of assistive technology
as an intrusion to the home, as well as they may fear that
technology is replacing social contact. This is especially true
in user cases where technology is introduced in a top-down
approach from the public health care system.
Moreover, the elderly persons could have increased
negative subjective experience of being ill, or get the
impression of being vulnerable for diseases and accidents as
all these interventions must have a purpose. Thus, from the
illness perspective of aging, aging has an increased illness-
focus by the preventive efforts being made in the homes of
elderly persons in order to reduce the risks for additional
diseases and/or accidents.
C.
From the sickness perspective: Introduction of assistive
technology to support the aging population
In this scenario, it is essential to address the question:
assistive technology for whom? As in the long run who are
the benefiters of the increased ICT supported elderly care. Is
it the community, health care system, patient / user or their
families? It could also appear that there might be potential
conflicts of interest between these stakeholders. The society
will benefit from a more efficient use of scarce health
resources, and use of technology in the elderly care will
generate a need for additional manpower, which again will
reduce the work load on health care staff.
The Health
governance is forced to develop a more cost efficient elderly
care system as increased safety efforts in the home can
reduce repeated hospital admissions and decrease the need
for long term stay in nursing homes.
The future plan of having a health watch call center for
more efficient treatment and safety system will require
access to shared patient health record systems within all
levels of the health care services. Thus, all these preventive
efforts are turning elderly persons who may not have any
health care needs into potential users or patients of a health
watch call center.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The families of elderly persons can use public technology
for remote visits and then feel less guilty of not going on a
home visits to their loved ones.
Thus, from the sickness -
role perspective of aging, aging has got an increased
sickness-focus by the preventive efforts being made in the
homes of elderly persons in order to reduce the risks for
additional diseases – and the society’s need of prolonging the
time elderly persons can live in their ordinary homes.
It is also a dilemma to use the society’s scarce health
resources on elderly persons who are considered as non-
users of health care services for preventive purposes.
The resources used on preventive measures can pay off in
the long run if the elderly persons have reduced need for
complex health care services in the future. However, there is
a lack of research that explores upon the health economics
gains of implementing assistive technology into the overall
elderly care.
The perspectives on disease and the relationship between
disease, illness and sickness role are changed when assistive
technology is introduced as an incorporated part of the ICT-
supported elderly care for preventive efforts when no other
diseases are identified, see figure 1 (as Appendix). The
reason is because assistive technology is also introduced into
the homes of elderly person who have no health care needs –
but who are at risk of diseases or accidents that can have
fatal outcome. Thus, preventive measures made to control or
intervene in the private homes of elderly persons give an
increase disease focus on aging.
However, this has to be separated from user cases where
assistive technology is introduced in order to support elderly
person with additional diseases such as known Alzheimer’s
diseases – the technology is then a treatment measures in
order to support additional disease and not aging. Thus, it is
important to recognize that it is a difference between aging
and assistive technology usage for preventive measures
supporting “healthy” elderly persons, and aging and assistive
technology usage in user situation where the elderly person
has additional diseases that need to be controlled or intervene
for safety reasons or treatment purposes.
V.
SUMMARY
In this paper, we have discussed aging in relation to the
three perspectives on disease including disease, illness and
sickness role by addressing two research questions:
RQ1: Is aging a disease according to Hofmann’s three
perspectives on disease?
RQ2: Are the three perspectives on disease and aging
changed when assistive technology is introduced to support
the aging population?
Thus, we argue that the phenomenon of aging is not a
disease according to Hofmann’s three perspectives of disease
when looking at aging as an isolated phenomenon. Thus,
aging is acknowledged as a natural process of life in regard
to RQ1. It is also emphasized that aging and ordinary
diseases / age–related diseases need to be separated as the
majority of elderly persons in Norway (74%) are non-users
of public health care services. Moreover, we recognize that
even if aging increases the risks for diseases and death;
diseases like Alzheimer’s diseases are still not a normal part
of aging.
We have also discussed further how the introduction of
assistive technology affects our perspectives on aging as
being a natural process of life in order to address RQ2.
Especially, in user situations where the technology is
introduced to prevent and reduce individual risks, such as
technical efforts made to support potential wanderers, or
persons with fall tendencies. We argue that the phenomenon
of aging gets an increased disease focus when applying all
the different perspectives of disease.
Especially, in cases
where assistive technology is introduced to “healthy” elderly
persons who have no ordinary diseases or age – related
diseases, but who are at risk of getting diseases.
Prior research studies have brought attention to other
aspects of assistive technology use, such as privacy, stigma
and
safety.
We recognize use of Hofmann’s
disease
perspectives as highly informative in order to bring the
ethical debate further and by this highlight other aspects of
assistive technology use within the elderly care.
Future research needs to be aware of how the move of
assistive technology into the homes of elderly people can
challenge our perspectives of aging as being a disease. Thus,
if assistive technology for preventive purposes is scaled to a
larger proportion of elderly persons, we need to re-debate if
turning aging into a disease is actually beneficial for us as a
society.
“Since life itself is a universally fatal sexually transmitted
disease, living it to the full demands a balance between
reasonable and unreasonable risk” [50, p. 44].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The
author
wants
to
acknowledge
the
Norwegian
Research Council for the grant 222011 titled “Developing
new Smart house Technology to support and assist elderly in
private and public spaces at Care + housing.”
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Hofmann, What is diease? 2nd ed., Oslo: Gyldendal Akademisk,
2014.
[2]
International
Classification
of
Diseases
(ICD),
World
Health
Organization, version 2016, retrieved October 2015. Access from:
http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2016/en
[3]
Ministry of Education and Research, NOU 2011:11 – Innovation in
care, Ministry of Health and Care Services, Oslo, 2011.
[4]
A.Woll and T. E. Bratteteig, Design of an elderly care trajectory for
increased accessibility and user support of housing oriented care
services. Unpublished.
[5]
The
Directorate
of
Health,
Retrived:
November
2015
https://helsedirektoratet.no/finansieringsordninger/innsatsstyrt-
finansiering-isf-og-drg-systemet/drg-systemet
[6]
Statistic Norway, Elders use of health care services. Retrived:
November 2015, Oslo: Statisics Norway.
[7]
The Norwegian Medical Association (NMA), “Knowledge about
elders and their dieases”, retrieved:
October 2015 Access from:
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

http://legeforeningen.no/Emner/Andre-
emner/Publikasjoner/Statusrapporter/statusrapport-om-situasjonen-i-
helsetjenesten-nar-du-blir-gammel-og-ingen-vil-ha-deg/kapittel-2-
kunnskap-om-eldre-og-eldres-sykdommer/
[8]
GBD 2013, Global, regional, and national age–sex specific all-cause
and cause-specific mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990–2013: a
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease. Study 2013,
retrieved: October 2015. Access from:
http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-
6736(14)61682-2.pdf
[9]
The Norwegain Institute of Public Health, These are the death cause
in Norway and the rest of the world - Findings from the international
burden of disease project, retrieved: October 2015,
Access from:
http://www.fhi.no/eway/default.aspx?pid=239&trg=Area_7064&Mai
n_6157=6261:0:25,9086&MainContent_6261=7064:0:25,9086&Area
_7064=6178:113361::0:7065:1:::0:0
[10] Alzheimer's Association, “What Is Alzheimer's?” Retrived: October
2015. Access from:
http://www.alz.org/alzheimers_disease_what_is_alzheimers.asp
[11] D. Harman, “The Aging Process: Major Risk Factor for Disease and
Death” Proc. of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, vol. 88, No. 12 (Jun. 15, 1991), 1991, pp. 5360-
5363
[12] T. B. Bevers et al, “Breast Cancer Risk Reduction”, version 2.2015
clinical practice guidelines in oncology clinical practice guidelines in
oncology. Journal of National Comprehensive Cancer Network, 13,
2015, pp.880-915
[13] D. Gems, “What is anti-aging treatment”, Experimental Gerontology,
vol. 58, 2014, pp.14–18.
[14] National Institute on Aging, “Can We Prevent Aging?”, U.S.
department of health and human services, 2012.
[15] UN data, Life expectancy Norway 2015, retrieved: October 2015.
Access from
http://www.globalis.no/Statistikk/Levealder
[16] Center for diseases control and prevention (CDC), retrived: October
2015. Access from: http://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/disease/65over.htm
[17] Oslo University Hospital
(OUS), Method book for specialists in
internal medicine: Delirium, acute confusional, retrived: October
2015,
Access
from
http://www.helsebiblioteket.no/retningslinjer/metodebok/geriatri/delir
ium-akutt-forvirring
[18] NRK, Thousands elders die after a hip fracture.
Retrieved 18.
October 2015. Access from:
http://www.nrk.no/livsstil/tusenvis-dor-etter-hoftebrudd-1.12176988
[19] D. A. Albert, R. Munson, M. D. Resnik, Reasoning in medicine.
Baltimore, 1988, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
[20] Senior report, Oslo Municipality, retrived: october 2014,
Access
from:http://www.sak.oslo.kommune.no/dok/Vedlegg%5C2014_05%5
C1049733_1_1.PDF
[21] J. W. Rowe and R. L. Kahn (1997), “Successful aging”, The
Gerontologist, vol. 37 (4), 1997, pp 433-440.
[22] S. Katz, (2013) “Active and Successful Aging. Lifestyle as a
Gerontological Idea.” Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques
vol. 44(1), 2013, pp.33-49.
[23] J. F. Fries, “Reducing Disability in Older Age.” JAMA, vol. 288 (24):
2002, pp. 3164–6. doi:10.1001/jama.288.24.3164. PMID 12495399
[24] D. V. Jeste, M. Ardelt, D. Blazer, H. C. Kraemer, G. Vaillant, T. W.
Meeks, (2010). Expert Consensus on Characteristics of Wisdom: A
Delphi Method Study. The Gerontologist, Vol. 50(5) 2010, pp. 668–
80. doi:10.1093/geront/gnq022. PMC 2937249. PMID 20233730.
[25] K.A. Hamblin,
“Changes to Policies for Work and Retirement in
EU15 Nations (1995- 2005): An Exploration of Policy Packages for
the 50-plus Cohort”, International Journal of Ageing and Later Life,
vol. 5(1): 2010, pp. 13-43.
[26] S. S. Bassuk, L. F. Berkman, B. C. Amick (2002) “Socioeconomic
status and mortality among the elderly: findings from four US
communities”, Am J Epidemiology, vol. 155(6), 2002, pp. 520-33.
[27] C. Lökenhoff, D. S. Lee, K. M. L. Buckener, R. O. Moreira, S. J.
Martinez, M. Q. Sun , “Cross-Cultural Differences in Attitudes about
aging: Moving beyond the East – West dichotomy.” S.T. Cheng et al
(eds.) Successful aging, 2015, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-9331-5_19.
[28] A.L. Caplan (2005). “Death as an unnatural process”, Science and
Society, Vol. 6(1), 2005, pp. 72–75. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400435
PMCID: PMC1369280
[29] T. Greenhalgh, J. Wherton, P. Sugarhood, S. Hinder, R. N. Procter,
R. Stones. “What matters to older people with assisted living needs?
A phenomenological analysis of the use and non-use of telehealth and
telecare”. Social Science & Medicine, vol. 93, 2013, pp. 86–94.
[30] M. Tosato,V. Zamboni, A. Ferrini, M. Cesaru, “The aging process
and
potential interventions to
extend
life expectancy”.Clinical
interventions in aging, vol. 2(3) 2007, pp. 401 – 412.
[31] C. Satchell and P. Dourish,”Beyond the user: use and non-use in
HCI.”, Proc. Annual Conference of the Australian Computer–Human
Interaction Special Interest Group: Design: Open, vol. 411, 2009, pp.
9 – 16 ACM, Melbourne,
[32] K.
Shankar,
“Pervasive
computing
and
an
aging
populace:
methodological challenges for understanding privacy implications”
Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society, vol. 8
(3), 2010, pp.236 - 248.
[33] M. Skubic, G. Alexander, M.
Popescu, M. Rantz, J. A. Keller,”A
smart home application to eldercare: current status and lessons
learned”. Technology and Health Care, vol. 17(3), 2009, 183-201.
doi: 10.3233/THC-2009-0551.
[34] S. Bjorneby et al. (2004). “Ethical considerations in the ENABLE
project”. Dementia, vol. 3(3), 2004, pp. 297-312.
[35] R. Landau, S. Werner, G. K Auslander, N. Shoval, J. Heinik, 2010;
“What do cognitively intact older people think about the use of
electronic tracking devices for people with dementia? A preliminary
analysis.” International Psychogeriatrics vol. 22 (8), December 2010,
pp 1301-1309
[36] A. Sharkey and N. Sharkey, “Granny and the robots: ethical issues in
robot care for the elderly”, Ethics Inf Technol, vol. 14, 2012, pp. 27–
40.
[37] Sparrow R, Sparrow L (2006) In the hands of machines? The future
of aged care. Minds Mach 16:141–161
[38] H. Remmers, “Environments for ageing, assistive technology and
self-determination: ethical perspectives.” Informatics for Health and
Social Care, vol. 35(4), 2010, pp. 200-210
[39] A. J. Bharucha,V. Anand, J. Forlizzi, M. A Dew,C. F. Reynolds, S.
Stevens, H. Wactlar, “Intelligent assistive technology applications to
dementia care: current capabilities, limitations, and future challenges”
The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry: Official Journal of the
American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 17, 2009, pp. 88–
104.
[40] G. Demiris, M. Rantz, M. Aud, K. Marek, H. Tyrer, M. Skubic, A.
Hassam, (2004). «Older adults’ attitudes towards and perceptions of
‘‘smart home’’ technologies: A pilot study.” Medical Informatics and
the Internet in Medicine, vol. 29, 2004, pp. 87–94.
[41] B. K. Hensel, G.Demiris, K.L. Courtney, “Defining obtrusiveness in
home telehealth technologies: A conceptual framework.” Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 13, 2006, pp.
428–431.
[42] V. Faucounau, Y. H. Wu, M. Boulay, M. Maestrutti, A. S. Rigaud,
“Caregivers’ requirements for in-home robotic agent for supporting
community-living
elderly
subjects
with
cognitive
impairment”
Technology and Health Care: Official Journal of the European
Society for Engineering and Medicine, vol. 17, 2009, pp. 33–40.
[43] L. Magnusson, E.J. Hanson, M. Nolan, “The impact of information
and communication technology on family carers of older people and
professionals in
Sweden.” Ageing and
Society, vol. 25
(05)
September 2005, pp 693-713.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[44] J. Coughlin, L.A. D’Ambrosio, B. Reimer, M. R. Pratt, “Older adult
perceptions of smart home technologies: implications for research,
policy and market innovations in healthcare”. Proc. IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society, 2007, pp. 1810–1815.
[45] B. Penhale and J. Manthorpe, “Using electronic aids to assist people
with dementia”,. Nursing and Residential Care, vol. 3, 2001, pp. 586–
589.
[46] C.M.P.M. Hertogh (2004). “Between autonomy and security: Ethical
questions in the care of elderly persons with dementia in nursing
homes” In G.M.M. Jones & B.M.L. Miesen (Eds.), Care-giving in
Dementia, 2004, pp. 375–390, East Sussex: Brunner-Routledge.
[47] A. Melander-Wikman, Y. Faltholm, G. Gard,
“Safety vs. privacy:
Elderly persons’ experiences of a mobile safety alarm” Health and
Social Care in the Community, vol. 16, 2008, pp. 337–346.
[48] R. Landau, G. K. Auslander, S. Werner, N. Shoval, J. Heinik,
“Families’ and professional caregivers’ views of using advanced
technology to track people with dementia.” Qualitative Health
Research, 20, 2010, pp. 409–419.
[49] S. O. Daatland and B. Otnes, Housing oriented elderly care:
Development trends, Report, vol. 16, 2014, Oslo: NOVA
[50] P. Skrabanek and J. McCormick, Follies and fallacies in medicine.
1990, Glasgow: Tarragon Press.
Figure 1.
A simple model illustrating how the phenomenon of aging gets increased disease focus when technology is introduced as part of preventive
efforts to prospective elders at risks, as well as later introduction of technology is viewed as efforts that are done in order to support aging as a natural
process of life.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

