Touch-Screens and Elderly users: A Perfect Match? 
 
Alma Leora Culén 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
P.B. 1080, 0316 Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no  
 
Tone Bratteteig 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
P.B. 1080, 0316 Oslo, Norway 
tone@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—This paper discusses some challenges in use of 
touch–based screens by elderly adults. We are focusing 
primarily on touch-based interactions with personal artifacts 
such as smart phones and tablets or touch-screens embedded 
in the home environment. We have conducted several small 
studies as a prequel to a larger study of “smart home” package 
designed and employed in “care residences” for elderly. We 
report here on findings from these studies and extend them 
into more general discussion on the use of touch interfaces by 
elderly. We discuss challenges related to diversity of elderly as 
a user group, progressive changes due to aging and their 
effects on the use of touch-screens. How to use technology to 
support mastering of daily life tasks and at the same time easy 
to use, touch-based solutions that support mastery (usually 
requiring some level of skills)? How to select other modes of 
interaction when the touch is not enough? Elderly people 
constitute a challenging and vulnerable user group that we 
want to strengthen and empower in the spirit of participatory 
design.  
Keywords—Touch Interfaces; Design Method; Elderly 
Users; Multimodal Interactions. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
We are experiencing dramatic trends in the diffusion of 
information and communication technology (ICT). A 
persistent increase in the ageing population is seen as both a 
challenge and an opportunity for ICT. Elderly adults are a 
diverse group, diversity further augmented by the nature of 
ageing. Gradual decline in visual and auditory perceptions, 
motor skills and cognitive abilities make elderly into a highly 
non-homogeneous user group in terms of physical and 
cognitive abilities. This has implications for interface design 
[7, 15].  
Changes associated with ageing make elderly adults, as 
an ICT user group, more challenging and vulnerable than 
younger adults. The term ‘vulnerable’ indicates that they 
may experience difficulties in raising their voice or getting 
their voice heard. The term ‘challenging’ refers to the 
difficulties for designers to empathize with their experience 
of the world [11] given their gradual decline in physical 
ability.  
A. Coming of Age 
An important aspect of ageing is the process of losing 
physical and cognitive abilities over time. The process starts 
early (in the 20ies), but it is not until too much of the ability 
is lost that we see it as a problem. Progressive changes, in 
many cases, lead to increased need for care and loss of 
independence in later years. Most elderly prefer to live 
independently in their own homes as long as possible and 
postpone moving to senior communities or care centers [10]. 
The main indicators for having to move to a care unit are 
fall accidents, cognitive decline and loneliness [12]. 
Maintaining everyday physical and cognitive activities are 
crucial for not losing them and for counteracting these three 
problem areas. Technologies can replace or enhance lost 
abilities e.g. by smart home technologies (safety alarms, fall 
sensors, stove alarms) and by easy-to-use communication 
devices (video calls (skype or similar), easy-to-use phones 
such as the one shown in Fig. 1).  
European Union has a large research initiative on 
Ambient Assisted Living [1]. Many national research-
funding agencies all over the world invest into similar 
projects concerned with various aspects of designing 
technological solutions for and with elderly that are 
intended to provide assistance in their daily lives, increase 
the quality of life and prolong their stay at home (see [2, 3, 
5, 8, 10, 13, 20]). 
 
                   
 
Figure 1.  The phone designed for elderly, DoroS1, popular with elderly. 
B. Touch Interfaces 
There is a common perception that touch interfaces are 
intuitive, natural and easy to use, even for elderly [23, 28]. 
Smart phones, tablets and large multitouch surfaces are now 
commonplace and affordable. Thus, they are often the 
interface of choice for assisted living research and design. 
460
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

However, there is very little systematic research 
undertaken on if and how these interfaces may enable and 
help elderly in interacting with their technology rich home 
environments [2]. On the other hand, there is an increasing 
amount of literature on principles and frameworks for touch 
interaction in general. Hornecker and Buur [14] present a 
framework emphasizing the interweaving of the material/ 
physical and the social, contributing to understanding social 
user experiences of tangible interaction. Similarly, Challis 
[4] discusses tactile interaction and its general principles. 
Wang and Quek discuss [28] how touch screens enable 
(intimate) contact and communication, and encourage 
exploration. 
C. Do Touch Screens Fit Elderly Users? 
In a newly started project: ‘technology@home’, we aim 
at studying and designing for elderly people living in their 
own apartments in a “care residence” (offering some services 
like a 24/7 reception desk, a restaurant, a gym to the 
inhabitants). The care residence offers a basic ‘smart home’ 
package to its inhabitants and we will study how the 
technology solutions are used and how they can be improved 
or enhanced through participatory design (PD). One of the 
apartments is reserved as a ‘living lab’ where inhabitants, 
relatives, carers and health care workers can get information, 
try out and learn about available technologies. In addition, 
the ‘living lab’ is an arena for PD experiments for new 
technical solutions.  
We have used touch interfaces in earlier research with 
“challenging” users [6]. The ‘smart home’ package we will 
work with includes a touch screen that can be hung on the 
wall or be taken down and used as a tablet pc. Since there 
already are a number of apps for health care on tablets, we 
see a potential in evaluating relevant apps as a part of the 
process of designing new apps.  
We are committed to work, starting in January 2013, on 
development of novel interfaces and services utilizing touch 
screens and tangibles, with users’ mastery as a key design 
principle [3]. Elderly users (and their relatives and carers) 
will be recruited for collaboration and engagement in the 
(PD) design activities and evaluation sessions aimed at novel 
products and services (see [16, 19, 20]).  
In this paper, we report from a set of small studies 
concerning the use of touch interfaces by elderly. These 
studies were carried out in preparation for the larger study 
described above, technology@home. The studies aimed to 
identify challenges and opportunities of touch technology for 
elderly people, as a basis for designing usable systems for 
and with this vulnerable user group. 
II. 
OUR STUDIES WITH ELDERLY AND TOUCH-SCREENS  
This section presents our short studies of use and design 
on touch –based platforms with and for elderly people. The 
first example is a small study testing touch screen-based 
phones on a small set of elderly users. The three remaining 
examples are all semester long student projects [18, 25, 30], 
illustrating important challenges: how to balance simplicity 
and mastery, and how to make a good choice of interface 
when touch alone is not enough and multimodal interfaces 
may be called for. 
A. Smart Phone Experience 
For this experimental study we contacted a small sample 
of elderly with the aim to discuss and, if possible, observe 
their use of touch interfaces.  Surprisingly, none of our 
participants have used touch interfaces, not even on a smart 
phone. Most of the elderly were using phones like the one 
shown in Fig. 1, designed with large buttons and 
straightforward 
functions. 
Friends 
and 
family 
often 
recommend the phone to them. It is sold in specialized stores 
targeting people with special needs.  
None of the elderly we talked with liked this phone. The 
phone is bulky and heavy. Elderly, just like youngsters, like 
certain kinds of technology. Their tastes may be more along 
side of practical, but they do retain the sense of what is cool 
as a piece of technology and what is certainly not. However, 
they were familiar with them and liked the simplicity of use. 
In order for them to become familiar with the new 
technology, they received touch-based phones and got some 
instructions for using them (see Fig. 2).  
 
          
 
Figure 2.  An elderly learning how to use a smart phone. 
At the follow up meeting, the SIM card from one of the 
smart phones was back in the old phone. The elderly woman 
was very proud that she has managed to take it out of the 
new phone and place back into the old one. The explanation 
was that she does not need all the fancy stuff, she only uses 
the call functionality, does not feel like having Internet 
access, or any other features. When asked if the interface was 
too complicated on the new phone, the answer was that it 
was not difficult, it was easy and intuitive, but at the same 
time the smart phone was not needed. She was used to her 
old phone and attached to it emotionally, but had rational 
reasons for continued use.  She argued that her old phone 
was smaller and lighter then the smart phone she got to try 
(android based one). The two functions that she uses, call 
and receive call, were very simple to use. She does not use 
461
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the SMS feature. At first it was because there were three 
letters per small button, thus hard. She now does not wish to 
learn how to do it on the touch phone. If she did, SMS could 
become a new communication channel for her friends and 
family and she did not want to engage in that.  
This example illustrates how important it is to listen to 
the users’ reasons for using the technology or not (see also 
[17, 21, 23]). The use practices and habits are very important 
to consider when designing with elderly, and may be hard to 
break even when new solutions are easy, fun and intuitive. 
The design challenge is to provide space for users to keep the 
technology they use and like, but offering at the same time 
the possibility to master new devices and encourage an 
organic change of the established habits enabling them to 
master tasks and do things in easier ways.  
Similar to the attachment to the old phone, many elderly 
still enjoy walking to the bank to pay their bills. Learning 
how to do it online may become a necessity at some point, as 
many banks already have only net-based solutions. 
B. TV control on the iPad 
Our next example is a student project [18] that studied 
how elderly people use their regular TV remote control, and 
aimed to design a touch-based solution based on knowledge 
about use practices. Four elderly people were involved in the 
project, but interesting challenges were encountered even 
within such a small sample. 
The design team quickly found out that the remote 
control was used to a minimal extent. The elderly people had 
a choice of 21 basic channels that they could watch; 
however, all four of them were regularly watching 4 
channels or less. Apart from that, only the ‘on button’ was 
regularly used. The volume button was used occasionally. 
The first design suggestion for this user group was to make a 
very simple interface, with just a few (four) choices for 
channels, an ‘on/off button’ and a ‘volume button.’ Here, the 
affordances would be very clear, but so would the 
limitations. The question that presented a challenge was how 
to take the step from the ease of use towards actual mastery 
of an interface that could open for more possibilities if 
needed. The suggested design is shown on Fig. 3, where the 
possibility to choose more channels (the ‘Flere kanaler 
button’ on the bottom right) or to perform some basic system 
functions (the ‘Innstillinger button’, bottom left). A display 
of the time was also added.  
Testing this new prototype brought another challenge: 
one of the participants had hand tremors and it was difficult 
for the participant to touch only the desired area since the 
buttons were too small. Adding some physics, so that more 
pressure needed to be applied by this participant than by 
other users on their interfaces was a way to resolve this 
challenge for the purposes of the project.  
This is, however, not an easy task [13, 26, 28, 29]. A 
light, accidental touch should not activate a wrong channel. 
There are many ways to solve this problem, e.g., combining 
the touch with tangibles and/or sound. 
Since the variation in the elderly population is so vast, a 
possible approach to a more general design solution could be 
through multimodality, configurability and personalization. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The second prototype implemented on an iPad [18]. 
C. Video conferencing on the iPad. 
Our last two examples are student projects [30, 25] both 
focusing on the feeling of being alone, which is so common 
among elderly [12]. Both projects were concerned with 
providing easy access to video conferencing, in order to 
enable easy access to friends, family of caretakers. The 
solutions were developed on the iPad, using open source 
software whenever possible. The focus was on the closer 
understanding of touch functionality for elderly. Therefore, 
in case of the project [30], Fig. 4, a heat map was developed 
to show how wide is the range of places where elderly apply 
touch, while trying to press the green phone icon. This is 
contrasted to the heat map showing a group of students who 
had the same task. It is easy to see that, while the students 
are always on the target icon, the elderly touch everywhere, 
including empty spaces. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  A heat map showing where elderly touch the screen  when 
trying to reach the call button (left) vs. students (right) [31]. 
In [25], the students have focused on providing a large 
area where the touch may be applied; combining this with 
large icons similar to those of phone in Fig. 1; see Fig. 5. 
 
462
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 5.  Simple interface for calls [25]. 
III. 
CHALLENGES IN DESIGN FOR AND WITH ELDERLY 
We face three major kinds of design challenges in the 
‘technology@home’ project. The first is concerned with our 
choice of PD as design approach, the second stems from the 
loss of abilities that elderly people experience as they grow 
older, and the third is our focus on touch interaction. 
A. Participatory Design Challenges  
A challenge specific for PD with vulnerable users is how 
well they can represent themselves and have a say in the 
design process. Vulnerable users’ interests (e.g., children, 
disabled or elderly people) are often represented by those 
whose task is to work with and for them (case handlers, 
nurses, teachers, etc.) potentially leading to conflict where 
the two have differing interests.  It is therefore of interest 
also in design of touch interfaces to explore ways in which 
less articulate groups of users can be given a stronger 
position as a PD participant. Thus, the first design challenge 
is concerned with arranging the participatory design process 
in ways that accounts for potential vulnerabilities and 
challenges that participants are meeting and at the same time 
enable active and creative engagement in the design process 
[3,16, 19, 20]. 
B. Challenges from Loss of Abilities  
An important set of challenges in design for and with 
elderly people stems from their loss of physical and 
cognitive abilities. Such impairments often do not originate 
from one source only. In design, it is important to see how 
the elderly people themselves perceive their impairments and 
how these affect their everyday life [5]. For example, 
reduced vision and dementia are both frequent among those 
over 70 years. Clearly, both may affect a significant 
percentage of elderly population. But each elderly individual 
see him/herself differently and the way these two 
impairments play out in a person’s life would most likely 
differ from one person to another. It is understandable that 
because of the complexity of issues, designers often choose 
participants with only one impairment, such as dementia 
[20]. In-depth studies of the more complex composition of 
health issues normally present for elderly people suggests 
that technical solutions must be seen as parts of a system – 
an evolving system – and fit together. A basic infrastructure 
(like the ‘smart home’ package) can be a first step in the 
design of a set of technology tools that can be combined as 
needs change and appear. 
C.  Touch Interface Challenges  
The third challenge concerns touch interaction and how 
this kind of interaction addresses bodily changes stemming 
from old age. Hornecker and Buur [14] introduce a 
conceptual framework for characterizing tangible interaction 
with four themes: 1) tangible manipulation, 2) spatial 
interaction, 3) embodied facilitation, and 4) expressive 
representation (Fig. 6). All four themes introduce limitations 
and possibilities based on the challenges posed by elderly 
users. For themes 1 and 2 the loss of abilities will directly 
limit the technical solutions, while new technologies offer 
new possibilities for themes 3 and 4.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Tangible interaction framework [14, p. 440]. 
The tangible interaction theme introduces challenges 
concerned with haptic direct manipulation, where age-related 
changes constitute challenges of touch and grip. We need to 
explore whether the interpretation of lightweight interaction 
and isomorph effects is consistent for different age groups. 
Isomorph effects may turn out to be very important for 
people with cognitive impairment. The second theme, spatial 
interaction, seems particularly relevant for the home 
environment where the technical things should be integrated 
and fit in. Many elderly people arrange their home space in 
order to help them remember things (letters by the door, bills 
on the fridge, etc. [22]). The three remaining elements of this 
theme (non-fragmented visibility, full-body interaction and 
performative action) seem to not be particular for elderly 
users. The theme embodied facilitation concern how we 
move in space. Here, we focus on how the physical 
arrangement ease or delimit activities – and where the 
particular needs of elderly people are important to address. 
We are concerned with tailoring the representations to this 
particular user group and to offer multiple access points. The 
fourth theme concerns expressive representations: how the 
digital functions and data are represented physically. Here, 
463
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

we focus on the representational significance [24] conveying 
the state of the system to the user, the externalization as well 
as the perceived coupling between the physical object and 
the digital representation it embodies.  
The ‘technology@home’ will explore these themes from 
the perspective of the elderly user.  Possibilities for tailoring 
the technology to the needs of each individual seems to be 
necessary for supporting elderly in their (technology-filled) 
homes. However, this is not possible to do neither 
practically nor economically. We will explore ways of 
customizing or individualizing a general solution as a easy-
to-do part of the solution itself. 
D. Implications for Design  
Design grounded in the characteristics of elderly users 
may have to reconsider some design issues. One important 
issue is ethics. Ethical considerations concern the PD process 
and how the research and development is carried out [16] as 
well as the technical solutions resulting from the process [9]. 
Connected to the question about ethics is the announced aim 
to “improve quality of life” through technology – an aim that 
makes sense if we see technology as a support for and 
replacement of lost abilities. Mastery and autonomy of their 
own life is a basic element of social and emotional well-
being. Home automation should be designed as something 
complementary to human care, not as a replacement. 
Interestingly, there are many initiatives to solve social 
problems and fear of loneliness with another series of 
technological solution falling under the category empathic 
design [2, 25, 31]. 
The major implication for design is that current touch 
screen designs rest on some assumptions that are often not 
present for elderly users: they are sometimes not able to see 
what to do on a small screen, nor are they able to push a 
small area in a way which is not too hard or soft, or too long 
or short. The elderly users’ abilities are different from person 
to person and they change over time. It therefore seems 
necessary 
to 
include 
in 
the 
design 
an 
automatic 
customization procedure where the system gets to know the 
particular user and her/his particular way of touching the 
screen.  
IV. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Designing with and for elderly carries a complex set of 
issues 
ranging 
from 
ethical 
considerations 
and 
methodological challenges to the choice of interaction styles 
and modalities. Many challenges are related to their 
vulnerability, decline in physical and cognitive abilities and 
diversity in manifestation of this decline among elderly. A 
smart home can be viewed as ecology of devices, potentially 
interacting with each other and/or with the outside world. If 
the elderly are to be supported by these devices, they need to 
be willing to, and know how to use them for their own well-
being. Everything they use needs to be customizable for 
them, as well as adaptable to their changing abilities. 
Mastery and autonomy are among basic ingredients needed 
for the feeling of well-being. If the technology can help 
elderly to accomplish greater degree of independence 
through mastery and autonomy, its promise and opportunity 
is fulfilled. To approach that goal, we believe PD is a good 
methodological approach for evaluation of use of existing 
solutions and designing new solutions for elderly. When it 
comes to the naturalness and ease of touch-screens for 
elderly, we cannot conclude that they are an optimal choice. 
However, with customization and adaptation strategies, they 
may become a better match. This is also a direction for our 
future research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful to Oslo municipality, elderly 
who participated in the study and students participating in 
projects involving elderly users. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ambient Assisted Living joint programe http://www.aal-
europe.eu/ [retreived: January, 2013]. 
[2] M. Asboe, J. Fernandes, and E. Grönvall, “C-HUB: a 
communication 
and 
network 
platform 
targeting 
the 
Generation Plus and their social and care networks,” 
DHRS2010, pp. 7, 2010. 
[3] T. Bratteteig, and I. Wagner, Beyond the smart home. 
Designing multimodal environments to support mastery 
design, 4S conference, Denmark, September 2012.  
[4] B. Challis, Tactile Interaction. In Soegaard, et al. eds. 
Encyclopedia 
of 
Human-Computer Interaction (2012). 
Available 
online 
at 
http://www.interactiondesign.org/ 
encyclopedia/tactile_interaction.html 
[retreived: 
January, 
2013]. 
[5] K. Cheverst, K. Clarke, G. Dewsbury, T. Hemmings, S. 
Kember, T. Rodden, and M. Rouncefield, “Designing 
assistive technologies for medication regimes in care 
settings,” Universal Access in the Information Society, vol. 2, 
no. 3, pp. 235–242, 2003.  
[6] A. Gasparini, A. Culén, Tablet PCs – An Assistive 
Technology for Students with Reading Difficulties? ACHI 
2012, Fifth International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interactions (2012), pp. 28–34. 
[7] A. Dickinson, J. Arnott, and S. Prior, “Methods for HCI 
research with older people”. Behavior & Information 
Technology, 26, 4, 2007, pp. 343-352. 
[8] W. K. Edwards and R. E. Grinter, “At Home with Ubiquitous 
Computing: Seven Challenges,” in Proceedings of the 3rd 
international conference on Ubiquitous Computing, London, 
UK, UK, 2001, pp. 256–272.  
[9] A. Essén, The two facets of electronic care surveillance: an 
exploration of the views of older people who live with 
monitoring devices”. Social Science & medicine, 2008, 67 
(1), pp. 128-136. 
[10] S. M. Golant and J. Hyde, Eds., The Assisted Living 
Residence: A Vision for the Future, 1st ed. The Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2008.  
[11] J. Grudin, “Groupware and social dynamics: eight challenges 
for developers,” Commun. ACM, vol. 37, no. 1, 1994, pp. 92–
105.  
[12] Helsedirektoratet. 
Welfare 
technology. 
Report 
on 
implementation of welfare technologies in the municipal 
helath and care services 2013-2030, 2012. 
[13] T. Hirsch, J. Forlizzi, E. Hyder, J. Goetz, C. Kurtz, and J. 
Stroback, “The ELDer project: social, emotional, and 
environmental 
factors 
in 
the 
design 
of 
eldercare 
464
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

technologies,” in Proceedings on the 2000 conference on 
Universal Usability, New York, NY, USA, 2000, pp. 72–79. 
[14] E. Hornecker and J. Buur, “Getting a grip on tangible 
interaction: a framework on physical space and social 
interaction,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human Factors in computing systems, 2006, pp. 437–446.  
[15] D. Howthorn, “Possible implications of aging for interface 
designers.”  Interacting with Computers. 12, 2000, pp. 507 – 
528.  
[16] S. Jesper, and T. Robertson. Routledge Handbook of 
Participatory Design. Routledge International, 2012. 
[17] M. Kobayashi, A. Hiyama, T. Miura, C. Asakawa, M. Hirose, 
and T. Ifukube, “Elderly User Evaluation of Mobile 
Touchscreen Interactions,” in Human-Computer Interaction – 
INTERACT 2011, vol. 6946, P. Campos, N. Graham, J. Jorge, 
N. Nunes, P. Palanque, and M. Winckler, Eds. Springer Berlin 
/ Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 83–99.  
[18] K. Larsen, G. Gahnstrøm, K. Matyja and J. P. Nilssen. 
Student 
project 
“Team 
Old 
School”: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h11/pros 
jekter/inf2260-team-old-school-rapport-v2.pdf 
[retreived: 
January, 2013]. 
[19] S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, G. Schofield, and P. Olivier, 
“Engaging older people using participatory design,” in 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2012, 
pp. 1199–1208. 
[20] S. Lindsay, K. Brittain, D. Jackson, C. Ladha, K. Ladha, and 
P. Olivier, “Empathy, participatory design and people with 
dementia,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual 
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 521–530. 
[21] D. López and M. Domènech, “Embodying autonomy in a 
Home Telecare Service,” The Sociological Review, vol. 56, 
2008, pp. 181–195.  
[22] L. Palen & S.Aaløkke Ballegaard. Of pill boxes and piano 
benches: "home-made" methods for managing medication. 
CSCW, 2006, pp. 79-88. 
[23] M. Rauhala and P. Topo, “Independent living, technology and 
ethics,” Technology and Disability, vol. 15, no. 3, 2003, pp. 
205–214. 
[24] B. Ullmer and H. Ishii. Emerging frameworks for tangible 
user interfaces. IBM Systems Journal 39 (3-4), 2000, pp. 915-
931.  
[25] A. Voje, H. Eggen, T. Gabrielsen, T. Vitikka and L. Bech 
Student project “Kamfer”: http://www.uio.no/studier/emner 
/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h12/projects/elderly/Kamfer/ [retreived: 
January, 2013]. 
[26] C. Wacharamanotham, J. Hurtmanns, A. Mertens, M. 
Kronenbuerger, C. Schlick, and J. Borchers, “Evaluating 
swabbing: a touchscreen input method for elderly users with 
tremor,” in Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on 
Human factors in computing systems, 2011, pp. 623–626.  
[27] R. Wang and F. Quek, “Touch & talk: contextualizing remote 
touch for affective interaction,” in Proceedings of the fourth 
international conference on Tangible, embedded, and 
embodied interaction, 2010, pp. 13–20. 
[28] F. Werner, K. Werner, and J. Oberzaucher, “Tablets for 
Seniors – An Evaluation of a Current Model (iPad),” in 
Ambient Assisted Living, R. Wichert and B. Eberhardt, Eds. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 177–184.  
[29] X.J. Zhao, T. Plocher, and L. Kiff, “Touch screen user 
interfaces for older adults: button size and spacing”. In: HCI 
International 2007, Beijing, China, July 22–27, 2007. 
[30] V. S. Åmdal, K. Klette, H, L. Simonsen and S. Ahmedov 
“Selskap”: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF 
2260/h12/projects/elderly/Elderly-aid-app/ 
[retreived: 
January, 2013]. 
 
 
 
 
465
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

