Creating a Social Serious Game 
An interdisciplinary experience among computer scientists and artists from UNLP Faculties 
Javier F. Díaz, Laura A. Fava, Luciano J. 
Nomdedeu 
Research Laboratory on New Information Technology -
LINTI- 
Informatics Faculty, La Plata National University, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina 
jdiaz@unlp.edu.ar, lfava@info.unlp.edu.ar, 
luciano.nomdedeu@gmail.com 
 
Carlos Pinto, Yanina Hualde, Leo Bolzicco, 
Vicente  Bastos Mendes Da Silva 
Multimedia Department 
Fine Arts Faculty, La Plata National University  
La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina  
cpintius@hotmail.com, yaninahualde@gmail.com, 
leobolzicco@gmail.com, vicentebms@gmail.com
Abstract—This article describes the interdisciplinary work 
carried out by teachers and students of the Faculties of Fine Arts 
and Informatics in La Plata city, to develop a serious game for 
social networks related with Argentine native peoples. The game 
presented is a serious video game, innovative for social sciences, 
which promotes more effective learning processes than 
traditional methods, adding to social networks the ability to 
transmit knowledge, besides favoring socialization, cooperation 
and 
entertainment. 
The 
artists, 
computer 
scientists, 
anthropologists and primary school teachers who are part of the 
team believe that this game help understand and become aware 
of the historical and current issues of native peoples, seeking to 
strengthen the concept of Argentina as a multiethnic and 
multicultural country. The most important aspect of this serious 
game, called Raices, is to provide an innovative interactive 
interface to encourage the interests of school children in learning 
cultural history of Argentinean aboriginal communities. Also, the 
paper would be a guidance for other teams who would like to do 
similar work. 
Keywords-Serious Game; Social Game; Heritage Culture; 
Games for kids; Games with kids. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The use of multiple electronic media is an integral part of 
the lives of many children today. The TV, dominant media 
from the '90s to the present, is having significant competitors 
[1][2][3]. A child today can watch a TV program on his 
computer, use his cell phone to browse the Internet or connect 
to social networks from his Tablet. While this is not the reality 
for all children, a large percentage has access to one or another 
media and therefore spends many hours using them and 
playing through them. Our work with heterogeneous children 
communities reveals that children between 9 and 12 play an 
average of more than 3 hours a day. Also, the number of users 
who join social networks like Facebook and Twitter is 
growing daily [4][5]. Technological convergence, a hallmark 
of the use of the media today, allows children and adolescents 
in a greater extent to access the same places through different 
media, often to social networks. In this context, we intended to 
develop a game that benefits from social networks, creating a 
serious game where kids have fun, share experiences with the 
game, compete for scores in a collaborative and collaterally, 
learn without trying, without seeking it. Social networks have 
the potential to make this happen. They help promoting a pro-
social behavior, increased social skills, and provide an 
attractive place to play, a significant space to transmit and 
acquire knowledge.  
In Argentina, there are nearly one thousand communities 
established in different parts of the country with a self-
recognized native population which is 2.38% of the total 
national population, representing a total of 955,032 people, 
according to the official report of the 2010 census INDEC [6]. 
It is also important 
to stress, extending 
ourselves 
geographically, that even though in Latin America there are 
nearly thirty million natives, a high percentage of children are 
unaware of their existence or have a distorted understanding 
about them. It is the aim of this game to introduce the culture 
of these people, help so that they are perceived as people who 
exist today and not something of the past, helping to make 
their values remain, knowing that their identity is constructed 
and reconstructed in the context of their relationships and 
situations, both within the community and outside of it. 
It is important to highlight that there are other games related to 
aboriginal communities as Papakwaqa [7] and Expedition 
Conquistador [8]; however, Raices focuses on a social 
approach, language, technical aspects, and is also oriented -
though not exclusively- to Argentinean children and 
adolescents. The former is an educational game whose aim is 
to teach about the history and culture of Atayal tribe from 
Taiwan. This is an interesting game but it only relates to one 
community of that country and is only available in Chinese. 
The latter is a strategy non-educational Spanish game for 
children and adolescents which recreates the genocide 
perpetrated by conquerors in America during the conquest. 
Raices deals with local issues connected to the primary school 
curricula which is interesting for teachers since it could be 
used by students inside or outside the classroom as educational 
material favoring a learning process through the same 
multimedia they are used to. 
This paper is organized as follows: after proposing a 
definition for serious games and discussing the current 
characteristics of social networks, the motivations for the 
development of social play are described. Then, the subgenres 
that make up the game and the artistic aspects are described, 
both visual and sound aspects. The article ends with a 
description of a prototype testing and conclusions. 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. SERIOUS GAMES DEFINITION 
It is interesting to recover beginning the definition given 
by Salen and Zimmerman [9], who argue that: “A game is a 
system in which players engage in an artiﬁcial conﬂict, 
deﬁned by rules, that results in a quantiﬁable outcome”. This 
definition has important features, such as the virtual conflict, 
the rules that must be met to solve the conflict and it also 
states that the game should have a measurable outcome, that 
is, that an appraisal of the possible outcomes can be done. It is 
also interesting to work with Juul's [10] definition based on 
these aspects, but which discusses in more detail the 
relationship between the player and the game, the game 
outputs are classified as positive or negative, states that an 
effort is done by the player to achieve something and believes 
that a player will have different moods depending on whether 
he achieves a positive or negative result. Thus, the definition 
given by Juul is: “A game is a rule-based formal system with a 
variable and quantifiable outcome, where different outcomes 
are assigned different values, the player exerts effort in order 
to influence the outcome, the player feels attached to the 
outcome, and the consequences of the activity are optional 
and negotiable”.  
Based on this latter definition, we propose incorporating 
the following premise for the game to be serious: the game 
should allow the acquisition of benefits in the real world. The 
benefits will depend on the goal of the game, for example, 
educational 
games 
should enable the 
acquisition of 
knowledge, health games should promote physical and / or 
mental improvement of a patient, business games may favor 
the incorporation of labor skills for employees, etc. In 
particular, the game we are presenting, will try to benefit non-
aboriginal children and adolescents with the acquisition of 
knowledge through social networks. It will also seek to raise 
awareness on the values of native cultures and the rights of 
these peoples. On the other hand, it is expected for children of 
native communities to be satisfied with the game and can self-
recognize as such, without fear of discrimination. 
III. REASONS FOR CREATING A SERIOUS SOCIAL GAME 
There are many motivations for undertaking the design and 
implementation of a new serious video game for Facebook. 
On one hand the high number of hours that children and 
teenagers spend online, sharing information with friends and 
playing video games is well known. This statement is based on 
a recent survey conducted for the National Ministry of 
Education which revealed that 70% of Argentine children are 
part of a social network and use the Internet to communicate 
with friends, have fun and spend time [11]. Also, to discover 
the habits, customs and preferences of Argentine school 
children between 9 and 12 years old regarding games, a 
quantitative methodology was applied using a survey in public 
and private urban educational institutions of our country. An 
illustrated questionnaire with 12 age-appropriate questions for 
scholars was designed and was provided to about 300 children 
in different schools by the teachers of each course. Below, the 
most significant data that influenced the decision to make a 
serious social game are shown in a graphic.  
 
 
Fig. 1. 
Favourite activities 
 
The graph in Fig. 1 shows the favorite activities of children 
outside school hours, where we can see a strong tendency to 
play video games, play with friends and use the internet. 
On the other hand, from a more theoretical framework, it is 
interesting to recover Lazzaro's analysis [12] regarding the 
ability of games to generate emotions and how they make 
game an entertaining didactic instrument. She has categorized 
emotions into four groups, Hard Fun emotions provoked with 
the intention of overcoming obstacles and progressing, Easy 
Fun emotions evoked by visual and sound features, Serious 
Fun emotions that arise when playing ins intended to have a 
meaning, to be useful for something, and finally People Fun 
which is the emotion that arises from the interaction with other 
players, cooperation and competition between them. 
In short, the expansion of information and communication 
technology (ICT), the everyday use of social networks in all 
areas and the number of daily hours children spend playing 
must be used / exploited for other purposes and not just for 
fun. The data obtained from surveys and the undoubted 
emotions that social games provoke, led to the design of a 
serious social game that aims besides being fun, to help raise 
awareness among children about the problems of native 
peoples. The viral expansion provided by social networks will 
promote knowledge and values that are to be transmitted to 
spread more easily and reach the largest population/amount of 
people as possible. 
IV. FEATURES OF SOCIAL GAMES 
Social networks can stimulate collaborative learning 
because they facilitate the formation of effective and affective 
groups, enable communication within groups and help to 
strengthen individual and collective identities. 
Most games embedded in social networks obey an 
asynchronous communication. This is due to the fleeting 
nature of how people use the social network: multiple daily 
and short sessions. For this reason, games have had to adapt to 
the player´s routines and not vice versa. Asynchronous game 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

has been successful in social networks as stated by Järvinen 
[6], who identifies five features causing playfulness in 
facebook: 
physicality, 
spontaneity, 
inherent 
sociability, 
narrativity and asynchronicity. But now, synchronicity is also 
an interesting feature that could provide benefits in the 
interaction of players with the social game. For example, the 
fact that the game motivates real-time interaction reinforces 
the sense of "social presence" of children. Players choose 
social games to become more social. The immediate physical 
sense of the presence of other players, although in the form of 
avatars, is one of the factors favoring the creation of a strong 
sense of social immediacy. This accompanied by the 
immediate reciprocity that is achieved with this type of 
interaction, favor retention of the player in the game. 
Data collected on game modalities shows a strong 
preference to share a common space simultaneously playing 
with other people (mostly friends). Moreover, it is observed 
that many children also like to play alone. Fig. 2 illustrates the 
data collected. 
 
 
Fig. 2. 
Preferences regarding game modalities 
 
Attending to the data on the polls, the game we are 
presenting, called Raíces, will contemplate different game 
modalities: playing alone, with friends and with strangers. To 
spread the word on the game, several of the functionalities 
provided by Facebook will be used, such as publishing the 
player's progress on their wall, showing the friends that are 
using the game and the level they are on, ranking the players, 
enabling gift sending and invitations, among others [14]. These 
are asynchronous functionalities. However, the game will also 
exploit some synchronic characteristics such as inviting players 
to the game to solve levels collaboratively, and communicating 
through virtual chats. 
V. GAME GENRE 
After analyzing the game genres most chosen by children 
at the time of having fun and considering that the video game 
would be embedded in the social network Facebook, we 
decided to make a platform game. In such games, the 
character handled by the player must move carefully from left 
to right jumping on airborne platforms, and overcome various 
obstacles. This genre, unlike adventure or role games, can 
easily be structured in short levels and does not require a 
continuous game, which makes it ideal for use on social 
networks, where access may have a fleeting nature. 
In platform games, there are different aspects that may be 
more or less interesting for the players. In [15], three 
preference patterns or subgenres are identified: combat, flow 
and puzzle. Based on this classification and in order to make a 
game that appeals to any child, it can be played in three 
different ways (three paths). Each of these ways will have 
specific mechanical elements for these subgenres. 
There will also be levels which combine elements of 
various subgenres and require the presence of other players 
synchronously, these players (friends or unknown) come from 
a different path than ours. Real-time cooperation to achieve 
goals, encourages the participation of players because each 
participant feels he is necessary to achieve a goal. Fig. 3 
shows the map of the game's levels and subgenres provided. 
    
 
Fig. 3. 
Game level map 
 
All roads have one thing in common: to complete each 
level certain items must be collected (level pieces) and the 
player must get to a door (end of level). 
Below, the basic characteristics of each subgenre are 
described: 
 
Combat: based on struggles against various enemies to get 
to the next level. These enemies are creatures that hinder the 
progress of the player and should be eliminated until the end 
of the level. The enemies in this game are characters 
representing people who have been hostile to the story along 
with the native peoples. At different levels, appear different 
characters in the story line, such as Spanish settlers, 
landowners, soldiers, harvester machinery, etc. 
 
Flow: the player must move skillfully, jump obstacles, etc. 
In this subgenre the rhythmic patterns of the jumps and 
movements are central. Levels have more cliffs, faster 
movements, elements that follow the character or fall from the 
sky, time constraints, etc. The objective of running in the 
game is getting to retain aspects of native culture before a 
certain time, arriving before their languages are lost, arriving 
before their ceremonies, music, etc. are extinguished. 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Puzzle: the player must carefully observe the level 
identifying which objects and paths exist, and based on this, 
reason as to combine together all the pieces of the level. The 
objective of this subgenre is favoring the incorporation of 
elements of different cultures by children. We will make a 
particular emphasis on the communion of these peoples with 
nature. The player must interact with various elements looking 
for the right strategy to solve each level. 
Next, we describe the game art, visual and sound aspects 
that have led each subgenre to have its own aesthetics, colors 
and iconic characters, native music and much more, for each 
native people selected for this game. 
VI. GAME ART 
Video games are a complex interplay of narrative, images 
and music which, from a digital platform, brings a unique 
experience to users. The plot provides the context in which 
actions take place in an environment that offers the player 
stimuli from an artistic discourse where different disciplines 
meet: music, sound, animation, painting and drawing. Below 
we describe sound and visual art composition of the 
videogame Raíces. 
A. The sound as a narrative 
According to the theorist Henri Pousseur [16], sounds must 
be considered as acoustic messages. They obey their own 
sound language syntax applied to different artistic media such 
as music, movies, video games, dance, etc. Henri Pousseur 
classifies sound messages into two types: unintentional: those 
that are evocative of the source producing the sound, like rain, 
a car passing, the wind; and intentional: those which are 
organized with the intention of communicating something. 
The latter classification can be divided into two sub types: 
verbal and nonverbal. Speech is part of acoustic verbal 
messages. Sound montage, background sound and music are 
considered nonverbal. Note that the background sound is the 
sound mimesis expected to be heard in a given area to be 
represented. 
The sound montage is the composition of sounds that may 
or may not be evocative. One of the features of sound montage 
is the sound organization guided by the links between sounds 
and images. A rhythm that goes in sync with the actions of the 
accompanying image can be generated by sounds that evoke 
the represented space. The music alone, when executed by a 
machine or played by a musician or band, has no evocative 
properties, does not tell a story, just answers to the musical 
language and communicates through its own statement. But 
when being part of a sound montage it acquires contextual 
characteristics evoked in relation to the accompanying image: 
contextualizing an epoch, a feeling or a character for example. 
The sound montage applied to video games serves to 
facilitate the player´s comprehension, accompanying his 
actions, capturing his attention, providing an appropriate 
setting to achieve the immersion of the player in a virtual 
world, thus reinforcing emotions. To create the sound montage 
of Raíces we opted to use sounds which evoked space and 
actions of the character as well as sound effects that 
semantically reinforce other actions without pretending to 
represent mimetically what is seen on the game screen. 
The music of the first prototype has been made in relation 
to the region and culture of the native people involved in the 
story, with the presence of typical instruments of each region 
mixed with electronic effects generated by Musical Instrument 
Digital Interface (MIDI). The soundscape obtained is a hybrid 
made of two realities involved, the digital universe together 
with the native aspects of the country. The instruments used at 
this stage for the sound of the Collas uses local instruments 
such as huayno, charango, the caja, quena,  sikus, erkenko and 
anata. Also we are beginning to produce the sounds for the 
Guarani people using the sounds of the mimby, mbaraká, ravê, 
anguapú and takuapú and for the Mapuche people we are 
using the trutruca, the cultrún the huada and the kunkulkahue. 
B. The visual identity of each ethnic group 
The concept art is the visual universe and product design 
such as a film, a comic book, a video game, etc., which 
involves the study, development and aesthetic coherence of 
the characters, fonts, sets, animations, environment and other 
elements. It is essential to communicate to users or viewers the 
genre and style, time and place, as well as the atmospheres 
that make the different moments of a story, the characteristics 
and personality of the actors or characters. 
For the visual art of this videogame regarding the clothes, 
ethnic features, landscapes and other elements of daily life in 
each community, was defined a style with geometric accents. 
We chose an aesthetic of valued lines, outlined in black for 
character design, with color lines in the background and 
elements: clouds, mountains, trees, rocks, etc. After 
performing several samples and sketches, we defined 
geometric lines as an articulating visual motif: synthesis of 
strokes and shapes, typical of textile art and aboriginal pottery, 
which was applied to all the art elements in the game. 
Once we determined the prevalent morphology and visual 
style in the game, a production scheme was carried out with 
the first sketches, where the following items were ordered 
according to the native group: distinctive landscape depending 
on the geographic location of the people, characters of both 
sexes, wise community elder or shaman, typical animal and 
finally, in a story line, the people's enemies were plotted. Fig. 
4 shows this production scheme of the game. 
 
 
Fig. 4. 
Production scheme of the game 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

From this system, was determined that the backgrounds of 
each village would have a chromatic identity through color 
palettes featuring the natural landscape in which each culture 
settled in Argentina. They also took into account typical colors 
of clothes, ornaments or utensils, and a wide color symbolism 
in the worldview of each culture. 
For the Colla people, we selected a palette of reds and 
oranges. This culture settled in northwest of Argentina, where 
hot climate prevails, so this warm range was chosen. In 
addition, this combination takes as reference the colors the 
popular area of the Quebrada de Humahuaca and the Cerro de 
los Siete Colores, an icon of the region, where there are 
predominantly reds, earth colors, yellows and oranges. 
As for the Guarani people, a palette of green and yellow 
was selected. The chromatic combination draws on dominant 
colors in the jungle landscape according to the habitat of these 
aboriginal communities. Also these colors are present in corn, 
which beyond its importance as food has a strong symbolic 
presence. The green color was typical of the necklaces worn 
by women, as well as the color they chose for their headband 
feathers and body decorations. Wicker was an important 
element for building crafts and everyday objects, in yellows or 
golds, led us to choose these colors for the palette that 
identifies the natives of this region that inhabited northeastern 
Argentina. 
Finally, for the Mapuche, a palette of blues and violets was 
selected. This combination adopted to identify this native 
people of Patagonia, was chosen taking as reference the blue 
seas and lakes that fully visually identify the landscape of 
southern Argentina and Chile where these communities lived 
and live. The monumental mountains and vast spaces between 
them generate an atmospheric perspective that makes blue 
colors predominate. The continental ice and snow also bring 
colors in these ranges. Blue is not just a visual reference, but 
also spiritual, blue color is associated with energy and great 
forces that occur in the location of the Wenu Mapu (above 
land). 
In addition, for the design of the characters, features were 
synthesized considering physical characteristics and taking 
into account the costumes of the native peoples, giving the 
user the possibility to choose from a repertoire of traditional 
clothing of each region to customize clothing and accessories 
of his avatar. Fig. 5 shows the characters of the Colla people 
in the video game. The color palette for clothing was defined 
taking opposite colors from the chromatic circle to the 
predominant palette in the landscape to achieve color contrast 
and visibility. 
 
Fig. 5. 
Characters and clothing of the Colla people 
So, landscapes and elements of the different levels of 
Raíces refer to aboriginal weaving and textile forms that allow 
linking to modular geometric aesthetic and which refer to 
pixel art, as seen in the elderly, in Fig. 6. 
  
 
Fig. 6. 
Pixelated image of elderly Colla (Shamán) 
This choice is based on the translation of data on daily life 
according to the dialogue between the cultural layer and 
informatics 
layer. 
Formal 
synthesis 
operations, 
geometrization, 
chromatic 
organization 
and 
texturized 
surfaces in the design of characters, objects and interactive 
backgrounds was defined in relation to the processes of 
aesthetic research and technical resolution in accordance with 
the codes of the gaming device . 
VII. TRANSMISISION OF KNOWLEDGE THROUGH PLAY 
It is intended that as they progress in the game, children 
can recognize and incorporate aspects of the culture of these 
native peoples such as language, dress, music, customs, etc. 
The avatar customization contributes in this direction by 
including traditional clothing and accessories specific to each 
culture, allowing children to play with different combinations 
and, almost without seeking it, through to descriptions, 
discover why and on what occasions it was used. Also each 
character will transit through their own geographical areas, 
enabling the transmission of information about the places of 
origin of these people. 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Cultural aspects such as musical instruments, traditional 
medicine, artistic events (pottery, silverware, etc.) and 
religious symbols are represented in the game. The pieces to 
obtain at each level will correspond to these elements, 
allowing the player to discover through the levels the various 
elements that are part of each culture. For instance, when the 
player gets a piece representing a musical instrument, the real 
sound of the instrument will be reproduced, thus letting the 
children recognize their sonority.  
Also important is the existence of cross-cutting themes that 
address common to all subjects. Respect for nature and the 
wisdom of the elderly are some of them. To reflect the first 
issue, respect for animals and plants will be stressed. If during 
the course of the game, a player causes unnecessary damage to 
nature, they will be warned and punished accordingly. With 
regard to the wisdom of the elderly Shamans, at each level 
there will be a character (elder) who gives advice to the player 
on how to move on, provides information on the meaning of 
the different elements and at certain levels narrates little 
stories. 
As for language, an approach to the various sounds will be 
sought. Many of the items that appear will have their names in 
the original language as well as some words from the story of 
the elderly. The virtual chat necessary to communicate with 
other players include prefixed messages with bilingual text for 
children to recognize basic words. 
During loading levels, time will be used to include 
information as a trivia offering the possibility to add additional 
points. 
Finally, and to complete the educational aspect of the 
game, as the different pieces or objects are obtained, or certain 
stories told by the elderly are "heard", certain items will be 
unlocked in a kind of game album. This section can be 
accessed at any time to view all items achieved and the 
information about. 
VIII. TECHNICAL DETAILS 
The selection of technologies for the implementation of the 
videogame Raíces (which, as anticipated, was thought for 
Facebook) was based on two requirements: the game should 
work in most web browsers and the web technologies used 
should be open. For these reasons, we chose to develop the 
game in javascript and HTML5. Flash technology, widely 
used for this kind of development, was discarded. 
After analyzing the features provided by several existing 
game engines, small prototypes were implemented, initially 
with Construct2 [18], then with Impact [19], and finally, with 
Turbulenz [20]. This latest open-source 2D/3D engine 
provides a set of functions for handling graphics, sound, user 
input and resources, and has a complete and efficient 2D 
physics engine, which encouraged its selection for the 
implementation of Raíces. 
WebGL [21] is an immediate mode 3D rendering API 
designed as a rendering context for the HTML Canvas 
element. The HTML Canvas provides a destination for 
programmatic rendering in web pages, and allows a better  
performance for that rendering using different rendering APIs.  
Although the use of WebGL enables superior performance, 
not all browsers support this technology and Turblenz graphic 
renderer works exclusively on WebGL. To solve this problem 
and in order to look for greater compatibility, the graphics 
engine management was replaced by the Pixi.js [22] library, a 
2D canvas with WebGL renderer fallback. Thus, Pixi.js 
automatically identifies the best option: the rendering is done 
through WebGL when this technology is available and 
through the Canvas object for the case of non WebGL 
browsers. 
Turbulenz engine also provides facilities to manage 
leaderboards, badges, networking and multiplayer. Although 
these features are heavily tied to Turbulenz game platform, 
they will not be used. Instead, the server-side part of the game 
will be supported through NodeJS, Javascript-based platform 
for data-intensive applications Real-time [23]. 
The integration of Raíces with Facebook will be done 
through the Javascript Software Development Kit (SDK) 
provided by the platform [24]. This SDK, among other things, 
allows Facebook Login and manage calls to the Graph API 
interface from which the application can read and write data 
and interact with the different components of the social 
network. 
IX.  TESTING OF A FIRST PROTOTYPE 
To get a first impression of the impact caused by the basic 
game mechanics, the dynamics generated from them and the 
emotional responses of children when they interact with the 
game, children between 9 and 13 years were convened at the 
Faculty of Informatics for testing a first prototype 
implemented with the three genres. 
Fig. 7 shows video scenes filmed during the game testing 
session, where it is possible to observe that the game provokes 
emotions and a high concentration. 
 
  
 
Fig. 7. 
Prototype testing 
 
There was enthusiasm in passing to the next level and 
reaching the end of the game. Some faces of frustration were 
noted in gender thinking and less excitement in the run. This 
will be taken into account as feedback on the new stages of 
development. During the testing they were given a short 
survey to determine the feelings caused by the different 
genres. Fig. 8 shows some results. Also as part of the survey, 
33% responded that the puzzle was the subgenre they liked 
most, 45% chose combat and 18% chose the subgenre run. 
While there are differences between them, each subgenre has 
its adherents. 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Fig. 8. 
Emotions caused by the subgenre 
After the testing, the children asked to continue playing 
and were interested in the new levels and stories. Following 
this, a group on Facebook was created that informs about new 
versions of the game and the kids comment and suggest new 
features. This is a way to incorporate them into the game 
design. In this line of work where a game for children and 
with children is designed we are also working with a plastic 
workshop of our city [25], where teenagers have drawn scenes 
from legends of native peoples with the topics covered in the 
video game, which then will be collated in legend and may be 
accessed on demand from the context of the game. 
So far, two evaluations of prototypes have been carried out 
where the game mechanics and the emotions generated by the 
game were analyzed. In later versions of the game, we will 
also evaluate if the knowledge the game is trying to convey is 
acquired by the students, that is, if learning is favored by 
playing with Raíces. For this reason, we are working very 
closely with teachers from different schools participating in 
the project, so that we can compare if the learning process in 
students playing with Raíces, is different from that of students 
who are not.   
X. CONCLUSIONS 
After long struggles and silences, the aborigines of 
Argentina are starting to recover their place and rights as 
native peoples. However, many problems persist and the 
contribution of education to a final recognition of their rights 
and full integration is essential. This paper has presented the 
design of a serious game for Facebook that provides an 
attractive space to promote socialization, cooperation and 
entertainment for children, while collaborating with the 
acquisition of knowledge. It is also expected to help raise 
awareness of the historical and current problems of native 
peoples. 
Regarding the design of the game, we have described the 
theoretical frameworks taken into account to manage to make 
it fun and encourage children to play with it, we have also 
described the game art, both visual and sound aspects. 
Finally, it should be pointed out that the data collected 
from surveys of our own and others confirm that children and 
young people today are very crossed by audiovisual culture 
and consumption associated with new technologies making it 
positive to leverage these characteristics / traits / peculiarities 
when generating new educational proposals. 
It is expected that this videogame, mark of the time, will 
be conducive to more effective learning processes than 
traditional teaching methods, and that along with teachers 
from educational institutions we may demonstrate the 
effectiveness of this innovative approach. 
XI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are grateful to the educational institutions and teachers that 
made it possible to conduct the surveys. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Castells, "The Culture of Real Virtuality: The Integration of 
Electronic Communication, the End of the Mass Audience, and the Rise 
of Interactive Networks", in The Rise of the Network Society: With a 
New Preface, Volume I, Second edition With a new preface, Wiley-
Blackwell, 2010, Oxford, UK. doi: 10.1002/9781444319514.ch5 
[2] 
"Digital-Set-Surpass-TV-Time-Spent-with-US-Media",  available at: 
http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Digital-Set-Surpass-TV-Time-Spent-
with-US-Media/1010096, [Last accessed: February 20th, 2014]  
[3] 
E. 
Respighi, 
"Baja 
el 
rating, 
sube 
la 
web", 
available 
at: 
http://www.pagina12.com.ar/diario/suplementos/espectaculos/8-31237-
2014-02-04.html. [Last accessed: February 20th, 2014]  
[4] 
J. Constine, "Facebook’s Q2: Monthly Users Up 21% YOY To 1.15B, 
Dailies Up 27% To 699M, Mobile Monthlies Up 51% To 819M", 
TechCrunch, available at: http://techcrunch.com/2013/07/24/facebook-
growth-2/. [Last accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[5] 
M. Watanabe and T. Zuzumura, "How social network is evolving?: a 
preliminary study on billion-scale twitter network", International World 
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee Republic and Canton of 
Geneva, Switzerland. table of contents ISBN: 978-1-4503-2038-2, pages 
531-534. 
[6] 
Official 2010 Census Report of the National Institute of Statistics and 
Census of Argentina (Spanish: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y 
Censos, 
INDEC), 
updated 
on 
2012. 
Available 
at:      
http://www.censo2010.indec.gov.ar/cuadrosDefinitivos/analisis_cuarta_
publicacion.pdf. [Last accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[7] 
H. Chih-Hong and H. Yi-Ting, "An Annales School-Based Serious 
Game Creation Framework for Taiwanese Indigenous Cultural 
Heritage", Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH) - 
Special issue on serious games for cultural heritage JOCCH. Volume 6 
Issue 2, May 2013, Article No. 9.  
[8] 
Expeditions/Conquistador, 
available 
at:   
http://conquistadorthegame.com/. [Last accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[9] 
K. Salen, and E. Zimmerman, "Rules of Play: Game Design 
Fundamentals". 2004, The MIT Press. ISBN=13-978-0-262-24045-1.   
[10] J. Juul: "The Game, the Player, the World: Looking for a Heart of 
Gameness". 
Level 
Up: 
Digital 
Games 
Research 
Conference 
Proceedings, edited by Marinka Copier and Joost Raessens, 30-45. 
Utrecht: Utrecht University, 2003. 
[11] M. Carbajal. "The generation of the multiple connections", available at: 
http://www.pagina12.com.ar/diario/elpais/1-199322-2012-07-23.html. 
[Last accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[12] N. Lazzaro, "Why we Play Games: Four Keys to More Emotion in 
Player Experiences", proceedings of GDC 2005.  
[13] A. Järvinen, "Game design for social networks: interaction design for 
playful dispositions". Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH 
Symposium on Video Games, New Orleans, Louisiana., 2009. 
[14] X. Wei, J. Yang, L. A. Adamic "Diffusion dynamics of games on online 
social networks", WOSN'10 Proceedings of the 3rd conference on 
Online social networks, 2010. 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[15] N. Nygren, J. Denzinger, B. Stephenson, J. Aycock, "User-preference-
based automated level generation for platform games". 2011 IEEE 
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG).  
[16] H. Pousseur, "Semantic music and society", Alianza Editorial, Madrid, 
1984. 
[17] M. Carabajal, "La generación de las conexiones múltiples" available at: 
http://www.pagina12.com.ar/diario/elpais/1-199322-2012-07-23.html. 
[Last accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[18] Construct2 Game Engine: https://www.scirra.com/construct2. [Last 
accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[19] Impact Game Engine: http://impactjs.com/. [Last accessed: February 
20th, 2014] 
[20] Turbulenz Game Engine: http://biz.turbulenz.com/developers. [Last 
accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[21] WebGL, WebGL Working Group: http://www.khronos.org/webgl/. [Last 
accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[22] Pixi.js Renderering Engine, available at: http://www.pixijs.com/. [Last 
accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
[23] Node.js, available at: http://nodejs.org/. [Last accessed: February 20th, 
2014] 
[24] Facebook 
SDK 
for 
JavaScript, 
available 
at: 
https://developers.facebook.com/docs/javascript. 
[Last 
accessed: 
February 20th, 2014] 
[25] Art 
Workshop 
"The 
cow 
with 
many 
colors", 
http://lavacademuchoscolores.blogspot.com, https://es-es.facebook.com/ 
LaVacaDeMuchosColores. [Last accessed: February 20th, 2014] 
 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

