You Do Not Miss Advice from Mentor during Presentation: Recognizing Vibrating 
Rhythms 
 
Ali Mehmood Khan 
Universität Bremen, TZi 
Bremen, Germany 
akhan@tzi.de 
Michael Lawo 
Universität Bremen, TZi 
Bremen, Germany 
mlawo@tzi.de
 
 
Abstract— The haptic technology takes into consideration the 
human sense of touch and gives a new dimension to the way 
people communicate. In this work, we examined how a mentor 
could advise speakers to control their voice pitch and volume 
like speak slowly, speak fast, speak loudly and speak softly 
using haptic feedback during their speech. We made four 
vibrating rhythms and conducted a user study on different 
people in order to know whether they can feel the difference 
among four vibrating patterns or not. We used mobile's phone 
vibrating motor, for this purpose, which was meant to give a 
haptic feedback to participants. Our results show that 
participants were able to judge the vibrating rhythms with 
high accuracy. 
Keywords- Actuator, Wearable computing, Haptic feedback. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Giving a speech or presentation to the audience is not 
easy, especially if you do not have lot of experience. People 
sometimes lose control of their voice and pitch; they speak 
fast, loudly, slowly and softly. The issue is that they do not 
realize it while giving a speech. It is not possible for a 
mentor/friend to interrupt the speaker during a presentation 
and advise him to control voice and pitch. Therefore, we 
need a system that gives the mentor the possibility to 
seamlessly advise the speaker during his speech. 
We want to figure out how to convey advise to a speaker 
since he is giving a speech to the audience and it is not a 
good idea to interrupt him in front of all or show some body 
gestures which would be seen by others as well. However, 
rehearsals always help to make a better presentation but they 
do not solve this problem. Bottom line is that we need a 
system which can help a speaker during his speech so that he 
can control his voice and pitch. 
Studies conducted before revealed that by using haptic 
vibration patterns (the so called tactons) is an an approach 
which can be used for communication [11]. It is not 
necessary to limit ourselves to understanding and perceiving 
single vibration patterns from or devices when there is a big 
possibility of understanding much more complex messages. 
Tactons are defined as structured tactile messages. For a 
wide range of distinction between them, several encoding 
dimensions have been studied. The research made in this 
area revealed that with the right combination and number of 
patterns, the recognition rates are not that different [11].  
The way in which the information is encoded and how 
we distinguish the meaning of the message can prove 
challenging sometimes especially when we have large 
number of possible tactoons [12]. The limitations are given 
by the incapacity of distinguishing between the patterns, if 
they are not clear. As for parameters, it is common to use 
frequency, amplitude, roughness and rhythm.  
Another important aspect is the spatial localization of the 
vibrating device. The human skin does not have the same 
sensibility on its entire surface to perceive information. This 
is due to the innervations density that varies across the 
average area of two square meters of skin. In order to avoid 
confusion of some parameters, it is necessary to consider  
that the skin is not able to distinguish between frequency and 
intensity [6]. Also, studies have shown that several areas of 
the body are more perceptive than others. In order to get a 
good perception of the pattern, the source of the vibration 
has to be situated close to the elbow or the spine [13]. For 
less sensitive parts of the body, not much research has been 
conducted. 
In order to successfully transmit information using 
vibration patterns, all these aspects are needed to be taken 
into consideration. In this research, we want to: 
• 
Achieve a good overall recognition rate (more than 
80% of correct patterns recognition). 
• 
Have user acceptance of the device and the idea 
behind. 
• 
Figure 
out 
parameters 
that 
affect 
general 
recognition rate score 
• 
Discover if the neck area can be an alternative for 
the spatial localization. 
We decided on the following points regarding the 
number of patterns and the spatial localization. We designed 
four patterns using different lengths and time pauses between 
the vibrations (i.e., rhythm for the messages including more 
than one vibration). A rhythm was realized with this 
combination. Four messages meaning speak louder, speak 
quieter, speak slower, speak faster were encoded using this 
way. In case of an extended vocabulary, it is recommended 
to add at least one more variable parameter (intensity for 
instance). In one of the studies [7], the results showed that a 
combination of rhythm and intensity offers a higher 
recognition rate than using rhythm and roughness. 
 As for the location, the side part of the neck was used, 
since there are no studies that reveal if the neck is perceptive 
or not. A reduced number of patterns were designed (based 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

on rhythm). The main goal behind the study is to see how 
perceptive this area is, how the users accept the device and if 
people are able to act according to the information received, 
when engaged in a speaking activity. 
We developed a system, using a connected actuator to 
mobile phone via Bluetooth/Wi-Fi, which was controlled by 
a mentor for advising speakers if they wanted to change their 
voice and pitch (as shown in Figure 1). 
In the next section, the related work will be discussed. 
Hypothesis and research question will be discussed in 
Section III. Experimental methodology will be discussed in 
Section IV. Results and analysis will be discussed in Section 
V. Participants’ feedback will be discussed in Section VI, 
and conclusion and future work will be presented in the last 
section. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
 Integrating vibrating sensors with mobile phones are not 
a new research field. A lot of research has been done in this 
area [1]-[5]. Similarly, researchers have already designed 
different vibrating patterns in order to give a haptic feedback 
and it was proven that people can distinguish different 
vibrating patterns [5]-[9]. 
Research conducted by Feige [8], where participants 
were asked to keep mobile phones in their pockets, 
shows results far from being satisfactory to make it possible 
for users to distinguish different vibration patterns. That is 
why a prototype in a form of wristband with embedded 
vibromotor was built and used. Five patterns with different 
rhythms were designed during an iterative process, which 
included pre-tests on each iteration until patterns showed to 
be discernible. Fourteen persons aged 19 to 46 (avg: 26.2, sd: 
8.4) participated in the experiment and were randomly 
assigned to either the experimental or the control group 
which were of equal size. The difference between groups 
was in the environment where they received tactile patterns: 
control group - in a neutral room environment, experimental 
- in a mobile street environment where they had to walk 
according to route randomly selected for each participant. 
The results show that the environment does not makes any 
difference in the overall recognition score (about 93% (sd: 
11.5) in the control group and even 94% (sd: 16.2) in the 
experimental group). 
 Another research conducted by Lorna M. Brown and T. 
Kaaresoja was devoted to investigate if a regular mobile 
phone can be used as the source for vibrations to represent 
tactile patterns [7]. Nine patterns with different roughness 
(from smooth to rough and very rough) and intensity (low-, 
mid- and high-level, controlled by vibromotor frequency) 
were used in experiment [9]. An important fact that needs to 
be mentioned is that the amplitude-modulated waveforms 
(used to create rough nesses) could not be reproduced on the 
phone motor. An approximation of roughness was created by 
using different speeds of on-off pulses. As for positioning, 
participants were holding a phone in non-dominant hand. 
 “A series of experiments was conducted to evaluate the 
effectiveness with which a tactile display mounted on either 
the forearm or the back can be used to communicate simple 
instructions and commands”[6]. The results revealed that the 
back is more perceptive (up to 98% correct pattern 
recognitions, lowest - 75%), while for the forearm, the 
correct pattern recognition rate was only between 30% and 
96% depending on specific patterns. When participants were 
engaged in different activities, like physical or cognitive 
tasks, the results of accuracy of identification were up to 
92% (for back). The amount of patterns used during these 
experiments varied from 7 to 8 and some of the patterns were 
adjusted during procedures. The big difference with many 
other haptic experiments and with one we have conducted is 
in the type of vibrotactile devices and patterns used. Here, 
mounted tactile displays constructed from several (9 for 
forearm and 16 for back) vibro motors were used, so tactile 
patterns were encoded not with a roughness or intensity, but 
with a sequence of active motors. This combination made it 
possible to give sophisticated navigation commands with 
application to military forces and with a minimum amount of 
tactile patterns training required. Even though the solution 
can be considered highly scalable and effective, it is also a 
sophisticated and expensive one. 
 
Figure 1: Actuator is connected to mobile phone via Bluetooth/Wi-Fi 
 
In our research, we want to develop a system where a 
mentor should be able to send advice to speakers that they 
need to control their voice and pitch. Speakers will be 
wearing an actuator which would be connected to a mentor’s 
mobile phone via Bluetooth or Wi-Fi as shown in Figure 1. 
III. 
HYPOTHESIS AND RESEARCH QUESTION 
The vibrating rhythm generated by an actuator, worn by a 
speaker, controlled by a mentor which is connected to the 
mentor's mobile device via Bluetooh/Wi-Fi advises the 
speaker to change his voice and pitch during a speech. 
We want to prove that it is possible to determine the 
user's wish regarding receiving the incoming mobile calls by 
using some contextual information like surrounding 
temperature, noise and light intensity, user location like 
“indoors” or “outdoors”, user's physical position like 
“sitting”, “horizontal” and “vertical”  and location of the 
mobile device like “pocket”, “bag”, “table” and “hand”.  
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
This section describes the approach we have adopted; it 
introduces the experimental set-ups, including the software 
system for testing and the gathered data in detail. 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A mobile phone Huawei U8800 Pro running Android 
v.2.3.5 operating system was used as the source for 
vibrations. The device was attached to the participant’s neck 
using an elastic band as shown in Figure 2. For data 
transmission, a Bluetooth Logical link control and adaptation 
protocol (L2CAP) was used. 
 
 
Figure 2: Phone is attached to participant’s neck with elastic band. 
 
In order to solve our research question, we implemented 
an application for the mobile phone which generates four 
types of vibrating rhythms as shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3: Different vibrating rhythms 
 
We recruited 10 participants (7 males, 3 females), age 
ranged from 21 to 32 (mean: 25.2, SD: 4.11) and ranged in 
BM (body mass index) [10] was from 19.0 to 30.4 (mean: 
22.99, SD: 3.38) because we also wanted to know whether 
corpulent people can feel vibrating rhythms or not. 
Firstly, the purpose of the experiment was explained to 
participants and each participant was familiarized with the 
vibration patterns by holding the mobile device in his hand. 
After this short introduction, each participant had an 
unlimited amount of time to explore the four vibrating 
patterns in order to learn them. During training session, the 
device was attached to one side of the neck using the elastic 
band. The software user interface allowed them to select the 
desired pattern that was transmitted to the device as many 
times as he or she needed to feel it. 
Later, the participants had to go through with the testing 
session in order to know whether they are familiar enough 
with the vibrating patterns. A pre-experiment was done and 
participants were asked to determine patterns that were sent 
in a random order (the default is 20 times and it can be 
configured). The developed software has a testing mode 
which shows the percentage of correct answers after 
completion of this part. Each participant was required to 
achieve a minimum of 75%; otherwise, he had to go through 
all processes again in order to get better trained.  
Finally, participants were asked to speak about any topic 
for few minutes (around 7 minutes). During the speech, each 
participant received a total of 12 vibrating patterns (each 
vibrating pattern repeated 3 times). There was an interval of 
at least 30 seconds between two instructions. Participants 
were observed throughout the experiment by an observer. 
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
While conducting the experiments, we were expecting 
two major drawbacks, which can be categorized into the 
following groups: 
A. Confusion 
When the participant recognizes the pattern, but feels 
unsure or unpleasant with a vibration and this affects his or 
her speech accordingly. 
B. Interruption 
When the participant’s speech was interrupted for a while 
and then they continued. 
These two are the most common reactions on vibrations 
and they can occur with correct pattern recognition (i.e., 
following the given hint), ignoring of the pattern (pattern 
could have been recognized but ignored or have not been 
recognized and ignored) or when pattern is recognized 
incorrectly (i.e., participant interpreted it as another pattern). 
We obtained data from 10 participants (as shown in 
Table 1). Each participant received 12 patterns, bringing the 
overall total to 120 patterns; out of these, 107 patterns were 
interpreted correctly, i.e., 89.17% correct interpretations, 
taking a fact into account that 20% had two trainings, 10% 
had four trainings and rest 70% had three trainings before 
experiment. 
Overall, most of the participants were able to act 
accordingly to a received pattern without showing any of the 
mentioned emotions and reactions. So, the speech was 
neither interrupted, nor was there any confusion or repeated 
speech in 80 correct interpretations, that is 74.766% of all 
107 correct pattern recognitions or 66.667% of all 120 
patterns being totally sent during experiment. The statistics 
for problems with the speech is the following: 14 speech 
interruptions, 11 confusions and 2 repeated speeches, all 
among 107 correct pattern interpretations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  
OVERALL RECOGNITION FOR ALL PATTERNS 
 
Loud 
Soft 
Slow 
Fast 
Total 
% 
% 
% 
% 
Avg(%) 
Correct 
interpretation/ 
% of correct 
interpretation 
28/30 
23/30 
27/30 
29/30 
107/120 
93.33 
76.67 
90 
96.67 
89.17 
Incorrect 
interpretation/ 
% of incorrect 
interpretation 
0/30 
4/30 
1/30 
0/30 
5/120 
0 
13.33 
3.33 
0 
4.17 
Ignored, 
no 
interpretation/ 
% of ignored 
interpretation 
2/30 
3/30 
2/30 
1/30 
8/120 
6.67 
10 
6.67 
3.33 
6.66 
 
Our results show that vibrating patterns were recognized 
with an accuracy of 89.17%. “Fast” pattern was recognized 
with an accuracy of 96.67% whereas “Soft” pattern was 
recognized with an accuracy of 76.67%. There were only 5 
patterns out of 120 which were interpreted incorrectly, 
whereas 8 patterns out of 120 were ignored by participants, 
which means that participants were not able to feel anything. 
. 
VI. 
PARTICIPANTS’ FEEDBACK 
We could infer that the neck can be a good place for 
usage of vibrotactile device. However, we must pay a lot of 
attention to the social acceptance, as well as user acceptance 
and usability issues, because if the device and system are 
helpful but rejected by public it will not have any success. 
This is a very important aspect in wearable computing 
domain. This is why after each experiment we asked 
participants for their opinions and feedback and here is a 
summary of what we were able to find out: 
• 
Sometimes the speech was interrupted because 
of vibration. Since the difference between the 
patterns was often associated with the number 
of vibrations, it can be possible that the 
participants waited until the device stopped 
vibrating and counted the vibrations. 
• 
Since mobile phone was a source of vibrations 
and its vibromotor made noise, one participant 
stated that he associated the vibrated noise with 
the patterns instead of vibrated rhythm (haptic 
feedback). 
• 
The device was considered too big for the neck 
area and it created a discomfort for the 
participants (in order to have user acceptance, 
the device needs to be smaller and lighter). 
• 
Several participants mentioned that there is a 
chance that others could notice that you are 
receiving some information or hints in some 
way. Also, 30% of participants stated that they 
can probably show better results after additional 
training. Finally, only one (10%) participant 
stated that placing a vibrating device on the 
neck is suitable for him and does not make a big 
disturbance. While most of the participants 
wanted to take the device off as soon as possible 
because it felt very unpleasant and disturbing, 
one of the participant totally not accepted the 
device and stated that he “felt like a dog” 
because of the elastic band and big vibrating 
device located on the neck. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper explains how to give instructions to speakers 
during their speeches, this paper describes the importance of 
the problem, discusses the methodology, results and analysis.  
Currently, we are using mobile phone's vibrating motor 
instead of using any separate actuator (vibrating motor). 
Mobile phone’s vibrating motor. We generated four different 
vibrating rhythms by using mobile phone's vibrating motor; 
those rhythms were differentiated by participants with high 
accuracy. Results have shown that one actuator can be 
enough for solving this problem. This prototype is a proof of 
concept and our results show that one actuator can solve this 
problem by using the haptic feedback. Results also show that 
people can use this system independent of gender, BMI 
(body mass index) and age group. 
We also got a good feedback from our participants for 
this proposed system because they think that this system 
would be helpful to those people who want to give a good 
presentation. Later, we will embed an actuator either in a 
necklace or in a tie in order to give a haptic feedback to 
speakers.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was funded by USEFIL (www.usefil.eu) 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. M. Khan, An empirical study on mobile phone usage. 
BCS-HCI 2011, Newcastle, UK . Proceedings, pp. 120-125 
[2] D. Siewiorek, et al, A context-aware mobile phone. In 
Seventh IEEE Interna-tional Symposium on Wearable 
Computers, 2003. Proceedings, pp. 248-249 
[3] A. Schmidt, et al., Advanced interaction in context. In 
Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing: First International 
Symposium, Huc'99, Karlsruhe, Germany, September 27-29, 
1999, Pro-ceedings, pp. 89-101. Springer. 
[4] R. Ballagas, F. Memon, R. Reiners, and J. Borchers. 2006,  
iStuff Mobile: prototyping in-teractions for mobile phones in 
interactive spaces. In Proc. PERMID, Workshop on Perva-
sive Mobile Interaction Devices at PERVASIVE. 
[5] A. M. Khan 2012, “You don't miss a phone call: Recognizing 
vibrating rhythms”, HCI 2012; Baltimore, USA. DOI: 
10.2316/P.2012.772-034 
[6] L.A. Jones, J. Kunkel, and E. Piateski, "Vibrotactile Pattern 
Recognition on the Arm and Back," Perception, vol. 38, pp. 
52-68, 2009.  
[7] L. M. Brown, T. Kaaresoja, “Feel who is talking: using 
Tactons for Mobile Phone Alerts.”, CHI '06. Proceedings, pp. 
604-609 
[8] S. Feige, “Can you feel it? Using Vibration Rhythms to 
Communicate 
Information 
in 
Mobile 
Con-texts.”, 
INTERACT’09. Proceedings, pp. 120-125 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[9] L. M. Brown, S. A. Brewster and H.C. Purchase, “A First 
Investigation 
into 
the 
Effectiveness 
of 
Tactons”,  
in Proc. World Haptics 2005, IEEE Press (2005),  pp. 167-
176. 
[10] Body Mass Index - http://www.nhlbisupport.com/bmi/ (15th 
December, 2014). 
[11] Brewster, S.A. and Brown, L.M. Tactons: Structured Tactile 
Messages 
for 
Non-Visual 
Information 
Display. 
In 
Proceedings of Australasian User Interface Conference 2004 
(Dunedin, New Zealand), Austalian Computer Society, pp15-
23. 
[12] D. Ternes and K. E.  MacLean, “Designing Large Sets of 
Haptic Icons with Rhythm”, University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Y8. 
[13] R. W. Cholewiak,  A. A. Collins, "Vibrotactile localization on 
the arm: Effects of place, space and age", Perception and 
Psychophysics 65, 7 (2003), 1058-1077. 
 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

