Designing Mobile Apps for Visually Impaired and Blind Users 
Using touch screen based mobile devices: iPhone/iPad 
 
Javier Sánchez Sierra 
Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics 
Stanford University 
Palo Alto, CA, USA 
e-mail: jsanchez@ccrma.stanford.edu 
Joaquín Selva Roca de Togores 
Raylight Soluciones Tecnológicas 
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: ica@icaudit.org
 
 
Abstract—Although 
mobile 
devices 
include 
accessibility 
features available for visually impaired users, the user 
interface of the majority of the mobile apps is designed for 
sighted people. It is clear that “Design for Usability” differs 
depending if the final user is a sighted user or a visually 
impaired user. This paper introduces the concept of “Low 
Vision Mobile App Portal”, which provides a way to access 
mobile apps specifically designed for visually impaired users. 
Some design aspects will be described. Preliminary results 
show some of the low vision controls specifically design for 
visually impaired users. 
Keywords - design; mobile App; visually impaired; blind; 
usability; low vision mobile portal; accesibility; iOS ; iPhone 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This research work deals about design, mobile App 
design centered on low vision users. The concept of 
Universal Design has been widely used in several fields, 
such as architecture or product design. This term was coined 
by the Architect Ronald L. Mace [1], and refers to the idea of 
designing products to be aesthetic and usable by everyone, 
regardless of their age, ability or status in life. 
The most common adjectives used when referring to 
universal design are: simple, intuitive, equitable, flexibility, 
perceptible or tolerance for error. The term Universal Design 
is closely related to other terms such us accessibility or 
usability [2]. 
With the appearance of the new technologies, the term 
accessibility is extended to computer accessibility. The 
majority of the operative systems include new and 
innovative solutions for people with disabilities. See Fig.1. 
Due the growth of Internet, there is a specific section 
inside computer accessibility dealing with web accessibility.  
Some authors [3-7] have written about this topic, 
describing assistive technologies for web browsing: speech 
recognition, screen magnification or screen reader software.  
In 1999, the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) 
published the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines WCAG, 
to improve the accessibility of the web for people with 
disabilities. 
Since the appearance of mobile devices, human computer 
interaction has changed significantly, appearing new 
techniques for usability evaluation [8-9]. The usability tests 
evaluate the user interface and navigation issues in different 
environments. 
A radical changed has occurred since the development of 
touch screen based mobile devices, such as the iPhone, iPad 
or Android devices. In less that a couple of years, gesture 
based interaction has become a standard on the majority of 
mobile devices. 
It is an emerging area of research since touch displays are 
more and more present in our everyday life [10-11]. Touch 
screens provide a great flexibility and a direct access to 
controls and information, but on the other hand, the physical 
feedback is lost, making them less accessible to visually 
impaired and blind users. The goal of our research work is to 
facilitate low vision users the interaction with devices that 
use this kind of displays. 
So, this paper deals about design. Design of touch based 
mobile apps usable by visually impaired people. Despite the 
great 
effort 
of 
hardware 
manufacturers 
to 
include 
accessibility features in their touch based mobile devices, 
they are not good enough to obtain a good visually impaired 
user experience. Since most of the existing apps are designed 
for sighted users, the accessibility features are not always 
adequate to obtain a reliable result. 
Section II of this paper describes the importance of 
designing specific mobile apps for low vision users. Design 
for Usability is an essential requirement to achieve a good 
feedback from visual impaired users when using the apps. 
In section III, the Low Vision Mobile App Portal is 
introduced. Thanks to this portal, visually impaired people 
will have the possibility of accessing an extensive collection 
of apps specifically designed for visually impaired users. 
Later on, section IV describes some of the mobile apps 
that will be available in the Low Vision Mobile App Portal. 
Traditional apps such as telephone, calendar or contacts need 
to be reinvented. On the other hand, specific apps for blind 
users, such as text magnifiers or GPS, need to be effectively 
designed.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 1.  Accesibility options: (a) Windows 7 (b) Mac OSX 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The paper finishes with some conclusions, which show 
the benefits of using Design for Usability when designing 
apps for blind and visually impaired users. 
II. 
DESIGN FOR USABILITY FOR BLIND AND VISUALLY 
IMPAIRED USERS 
Following are described some basic concepts needed in 
order to design specific mobile apps for visually impaired 
users. iOS devices (iPhone and iPad) are used to illustrate 
these ideas. 
A. User Experience / Usability 
One of the best ways to evaluate the effectiveness of a 
product design is to obtain a good user experience [12-13]. 
User Experience is about how a person feels about using 
a product, system or service. User experience highlights the 
experiential, affective, meaningful and valuable aspects of 
human-computer interaction [14]. As its name indicates, user 
experience focused on the user. 
As example of user experience in touch screen based 
devices, iPhone and iPad have an specific Human Interface 
Guidelines [15], which describes the guidelines and 
principles that help developers to design a superlative user 
interface and a user experience for the iOS app. These 
guidelines are oriented to design apps for sighted users. 
Usability describes the quality of user experience.  
B. Accesibility in mobile Apps 
Accessibility is a general term used to describe the 
degree to which a product, device, service, or environment is 
available to as many people as possible [16].  
As example, iPhone and iPad include a set of features 
specifically designed to provide accessibility to users with 
special needs. Some of these features are: VoiceOver, Voice 
Control, White on Black, Zoom, Speak auto-text, tactile 
buttons, giant fonts, hands-free speakerphone, audible, 
visible and vibrating alerts or assignable ringtones. 
In order to create accessible apps, Apple Accessibility 
Programming Guide [17] helps iOS developers make their 
applications accessible to low vision users, using the Voice 
over feature. 
Once user experience, usability and accessibility have 
been defined, we can concentrate on mobile Apps design. 
The vast majority of the 425.000 iOS apps available at the 
App Store have been designed for sighted users. The user 
interface and the usability tests of these apps have been 
designed focusing on sighted users. If the designer decides to 
make the app accessible for low vision or blind users, he can 
add an extra layer with useful labels and hints that will be 
used by VoiceOver feature. 
Figure 2a shows this design situation. A mobile app 
designed for sighted users with an extra layer including 
accessibility features. Although blind users could use this 
mobile app, the user interface has not been conceived for 
blind users. In this case, design for usability applies only for 
sighted users and blind user experience is not assured at all.  
Figure 2b shows a different design scenario. In this case, 
the mobile app has been designed centered on low vision 
people. Design for usability applies directly to visually 
impaired and blind users. It affects to design aspects of the 
user interface, such us the size of the controls, position, 
shape, image contrast, brightness, etc. Voice over 
accessibility features are not just an extra layer, they are 
directly connected to the main user controls. 
If we want to design apps for visually impaired people, 
we should go to the scenario shown in Figure 2b, instead of 
adding accessibility features to apps that are not initially 
conceived for visually impaired users. 
According to this premise, specific apps are needed for 
visually impaired users in order to obtain the best user 
experience. Even for those general apps, such us calendar, 
contacts or phone, a specific design app will increase 
dramatically the usability and user experience for visually 
impaired users. 
A) APP DESIGNED FOR SIGHTED USERS 
SIGHTED USERS 
BLIND USERS 
DESIGN FOR USABILITY / USER EXPERIENCE 
ACCESIBILITY 
B) APP DESIGNED FOR BLIND USERS 
SIGHTED USERS 
BLIND USERS 
DESIGN FOR USABILITY / USER EXPERIENCE 
ACCESIBILITY 
Figure 2. Mobile Apps designed for (a) sighted user (b) blind users. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

It is also clear the advantage of using this low vision 
focused design in the development of specific apps, such us 
magnifiers, screen readers, GPS locators, etc. 
An analogy that would help to understand this design 
singularity occurs between the iPhone and the iPad devices. 
If you have to design the same app for both devices, the user 
interface can be dramatically different. There are even 
specific iOS controls that are available only for iPad. If the 
size of the device could influence so much the final 
appearance of user interface, you can imagine how different 
would be the App user interface whether the final user is 
sighted or blind. 
 
 
Figure 3. Non Usable Accesibility design. 
In other words, the scenario given on Figure 2b would be 
defined as Usable Accessibility Design. Design for usability 
is focused on low vision users and it is using the available 
accessibility features. 
Another useful analogy to understand our approach is 
shown in Figure 3. It shows a ramp that is used to cross some 
steps. The initial design of the steps was not conceived for 
disable people, but the ramp is an alternative that would 
work. The slope is quite pronounced and the disabled users 
would require the assistance of other people to cross the 
steps. The best alternative would have been the design of an 
alternative accessible route with a lower slope. 
If we translate this to the design of mobile apps for 
visually impaired users, the figure of the ramp would be 
equivalent to the Voice Over feature included on the iPhone 
and iPad devices. This feature acts like an extra layer added 
to the mobile app, which was originally designed for sighted 
users. Voice Over is a great tool that facilitates low vision 
users the interaction with apps designed for sighted users, but 
a design centered on visually impaired users would be a 
much better solution.  
III. 
LOW VISION MOBILE APP PORTAL  
The main goal of our project is to create a collection of 
mobile Apps for visually impaired users. In order to facilitate 
the access to these apps, our approach consists on the 
creation of a low vision mobile portal. The appearance of the 
portal is a simple App that connects the low vision user with 
the most common apps, such as phone, contacts, messages, 
notes, etc. 
The user can customize the portal, adding or removing 
apps directly from the Apple Store. Other features such as 
icons size, colors, screen contrast or voice speed would also 
be easily customized by the low vision user. 
In order to associate an App to the low vision portal, it 
should comply with a minimum set of specifications. The 
main requirement is that the App should be specifically 
designed for low vision users. An App designed for sighted 
users should be redesigned to meet this requirement and 
include it in the low vision portal. 
Nowadays, there are thousands of apps available on the 
Apple Store. Although the Apps are divided in different 
categories, it is not easy for a low vision user to explore all 
the apps and find an adequate one. The main idea of this 
portal is to identify those apps and to facilitate low vision 
user to locate and use them.  
 
Figure 4. Low Vision Mobile App Portal. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

.Making mobile apps oriented to blind and visually 
impaired people is not a novel idea. There are already some 
mobile apps on the market that include a collection of basic 
Apps such us phone, contacts, etc. The main difference 
between these mobile apps and our proposed Low Vision 
Mobile App Portal is that our portal includes own apps and 
third party apps. Thanks to this portal, low vision users can 
access easily to a wide variety of Apps specified design for 
them. On the other side, developers can use this portal to 
promote their apps between the blind and visually impaired 
community.  
Figure 4 shows an example of the Low Vision Mobile 
App Portal. It would be defined as a mobile desktop with 
icons to access apps specifically designed for low vision 
users. Some of the apps shown in the Figure 4 are Phone, 
Contacts, SMS, Alarm, Calendar, Battery, Email, Magnifier 
and GPS Location between others. There is also a setting 
option to adjust some other features: screen contrast, 
background, icons size, user interactions, text to speech 
parameters, etc. 
IV. 
MOBILE APPS FOR VISUALLY IMPAIRED USERS 
In order to ensure a good user experience, it will be 
important that all the apps use the same kind of controls to 
interact with the low vision user. The way the user navigates 
through views within the app should be similar across 
different apps. 
To make this possible, the first step is to identify those 
controls used by sighted users that would be also valid for 
low vision users. A button type control seems to be valid for 
both blind and sighted users. But other controls such as 
toolbars, segmented controls, tables or data pickets would 
need to be adapted in order to meet the low vision user 
requirements. At this stage, new controls for visually 
impaired users could be also created.  
Once we have defined those controls, the next step is to 
create usability tests for those controls. The tests are used to 
study how the low vision user interacts with a specific 
control. On the usability test we can also measure the ability 
of the users navigating across different views, identifying the 
controls and interacting with them. 
The definition and the test of these controls will give the 
low visual users the needed user experience that will help 
them to identify view components and to navigate easily 
across any app of the portal. Voice Over or any other TTS 
(text to speech) library would are used as complement to the 
usable accessibility design.  
Once we have all the needed ingredients to build a solid 
low vision user app, the final step is to start with the design 
of the portal apps. Following are some of the mobile apps 
that will be included in the basic low vision mobile portal. 
The majority of these apps are traditional apps that have been 
redesigned to meet the needs of visually impaired and blind 
users. 
• 
Phone: This App will facilitate the user making 
phone calls. Figure 5 shows a snapshot of the App. 
Simple design with buttons and high contrast. As the 
user moves around the screen touching numbers, the 
text to speech feature reads those numbers. 
• 
Contacts: This App will allow the user to navigate 
through his contact list. Voice over combined with 
special gestures will make it easier to locate a 
specific contact in the list. 
• 
SMS: By means of this app, the user will send SMS 
messages to his contacts in a very simple way.  
• 
Alarm: Date, Time and alarms can be set using this 
App.  
• 
Calendar: The low vision user will use a special 
context, which will help him adding and editing 
notes to the calendar. 
• 
Battery: Text to speech is used to notify the user 
about the battery level.  
• 
Email: Special email client designed for low vision 
users. 
• 
Magnifier: The iPhone camera works as a magnifier, 
facilitating the low vision users the reading of books, 
newspaper, etc. Special image filters are used to 
create a high contrast inverting the image to obtain a 
dark background. 
• 
GPS Location: This simple App will inform the user 
about his location: street number, city. 
 
Figure 5. Phone App for low vision users 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
Social network clients: A collection of apps will be 
developed to allow visually impaired and blind users 
the connection with social networks, such as twitter 
or facebook. 
In order to help developers to add their own apps to the 
mobile portal, a specified API will be designed. This API 
will include the low vision mobile app portal features, which 
will facilitate developers the design of Apps for low vision 
users. Design for usability is an essential premise in order to 
achieve the best user experience. 
V. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
The first stage of the project consisted on the design and 
development of a low vision library for iOS devices (iPhone 
& iPad). This library includes several controls specifically 
designed for low vision and visually impaired users. Two are 
described: 
• 
Low Vision Wheel Control: This control was 
conceived to allow low vision users to navigate 
through a collection of data. An example would be 
the navigation through the telephone contact list. 
iPhone and iPad devices offer accessibility options 
to interact with tables, but they require users to use 
many gestures to get to the desired location. If the 
users are manipulating a long list it is really 
annoying to move up and down the list. Our 
alternative uses a wheel control. The metaphor 
behind this control is the same that using the wheel 
button of a traditional mouse. When the user touches 
the control on the screen, a speech message tells him 
that it is a wheel control that is connected to a given 
list. Then, the user touches the screen with a second 
finger and starts moving it vertically up and down. 
As the user moves through the list, the system starts 
speaking the list content. The sensibility of the wheel 
can be changed. The control is smart enough to 
detect slow and fast movements of the second finger, 
which are related to slow or fast movements through 
the list. This control can be defined vertically or 
horizontally. 
• 
Low Vision Segmented Control: This control was 
conceived to facilitate low vision users the 
interaction with a segmented control. This kind of 
control is used when the user has to select an option 
from a small list of options. A good example of 
segmented control would be a list of colors where 
the user has to choose one color from a list of four 
colors. The iPhone offers a native “segmented 
control” that includes accessibility options, but low 
vision users find it difficult to interact with it. We 
have designed an alternative that uses a single button 
to choose a value from a small list. When the user 
touches the button, a speech message tells him that 
he has found a segmented control, with a specific 
value (ex: color “red” selected). To select other 
values from the list, the user just need to tap with a 
second finger on the screen until the desired value 
appears. 
Other low vision controls have been designed and tested 
by a group of low vision users, that have been involved in 
the design of these controls. 
An iOS Low Vision control library will be available to 
allow developers to use these controls in their apps. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper deals about mobile apps design, focusing on 
design for usability centered on visually impaired and blind 
people. 
The majority of the existing mobile Apps have been 
initially designed for sighted people. Some of them have 
been adapted, including accessibility features that allow low 
vision people to use them. In terms of design, accessibility 
features are added as a new layer to the apps, acting as a 
patch that is placed over the initial design layer. iPhone and 
iPad devices use Voice Over feature  to facilitate the 
accessibility. 
Although Voice Over is a power tool to make the apps 
accessible, it is not enough. Our way of thinking is that the 
best way to ensure that the app will be usable by low vision 
users is to design the App specifically for them, instead of 
designing the app for sighted people and adding extra 
accessibility features. In order to achieve this goal, special 
controls (buttons, sliders, tables…) have been redesigned to 
comply with low vision users needs. 
According to this, our research work has lead us to the 
creation of a collection of Apps, following a common 
redesign centered on visually impaired and blind users. We 
have also created a low vision mobile portal that includes 
these apps, facilitating the visually impaired and blind users 
the access to a wide collection of Apps specifically designed 
for them. 
The portal is open to any developer willing to design an 
App for low visual users. An API including special low 
vision controls will be available to facilitate the design of the 
App in order to achieve the best user experience. 
An iOs Low Vision Library is been developed to allow 
other users to include these controls in their apps and offer 
them in the low vision portal. 
Future work will consist on the use of technology and 
mobile devices in order to create new products to assist 
visually impaired and blind users, making their life more 
accessible. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research work is supported by IMPIVA (Instituto de 
Pequeña y Mediana Industria de la Generalitat Valenciana, 
Spain) [18] as a project in Technology Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship. The work has been supervised by Raylight 
Soluciones Tecnológicas [19], a Spanish company that offers 
products for low vision users.  
We want to thank Rosario Vidal from Jaime I University 
[20] and AIDO (Instituto Tecnológico de Óptica)[21] for 
their previous research work on this project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R.L. Mace. “Universal Design”, http://design.ncsu.edu/ 
alumni-friends/alumni-profiles/ronald-mace 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[2] M.F.Story, “Maximizing Usability: The Principles of 
Universal Design”, Assistive Technology 10:1, 1998, pp. 4-12 
[3] H.Takagi, C. Asakawa, K. Fukuda, J.Maeda “Accesibility 
Designer: Visualizing accesibility for the blind”, ASSETS’04, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Oct 18-20, 2004 
[4] J. Mankoff, H. Fait, T. Tran, “Is Your Web Page Accessible? 
A Comparison Study of Methods for Assessing Web Page 
Accessibility for the Blind”, CHI 2005, Portland, Oregon, 
USA, April 2-7, 2005. 
[5] S. Leuthold, J.A.Bargas-Avila, K. Opwis, “Beyond web 
content accessibility guidelines: Desing of enhanced text user 
interfaces for blind internet users”, Int. J. Human-Computer 
Studies vol. 66, 2008, pp.257-270.  
[6] K.Fukuda, S. Saito, H. Takagi, C. Asakawa, “Proposing New 
Metrics to Wvaluate Web Usability for the Blind”, CHI 2005, 
Portland, Oregon, USA, April 2-7, 2005. 
[7] J.P. Bigham, A.C. Cavender, J.T. Brudvik, J.O. Wobbrock, 
R.E. Ladner, “WebinSitu: A Comparative Analysis of Blind 
and Sighted Browsing Behavior”, ASSETS’07, Tempe, 
Arizona, USA, Ocy 15-17, 2007 
[8] J. Kjeldskov, J. Stage, “New Techniques for usability 
evaluation of mible systems” on Int. J.Human-Computer 
Studies, vol 60, 2004, pp.599-620 
[9] A. Kaikkonen, T.Kallio, “Usability Testing of Mobile 
Applications: A Comparison between Laboratory and Field 
Testing”, Journal of Usability Studies, Issue 1, vol 1, Nov 
2005, pp 4-16. 
[10] S. Vidal, G. Lefebvre, “Gesture Based Interaction for 
Visually-Impaired People”, proceedings NordiCHI 2010, Oct 
16-20. 
[11] S.K.Kane,  J.P. Bigham, J.O.Wobbrock, “Fully Accessible 
Touch Screens for the Blind and Visually Impaired”, 
University of Washington. 
[12] M. Hassenzahl, N.Tractinsky, “User experience – a research 
agenda”, Behavior & Information Technology, Vol. 25, No.2, 
March-April 2006, pp 91-97 
[13] B.Buxton, “Sketching user Expeciences: getting the design 
right and the right design”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
Elsevier, 1997 
[14] “User Experience definition” on wikipedia      ,  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_experience 
[15] “iOS Human Interface Guidelines. User Experience”, Apple 
Inc. 2011 
[16]  “Accesibility 
definition” 
on 
wikipedia 
 
 
 
 
 
, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accessibility 
[17] “Accessibility Programing Guide for iOS. User Experience”, 
Apple Inc. 2011 
[18] http://www.impiva.es 
[19] http://www.raylight.es 
[20] http://www.uji.es 
[21] http://www.aido.es 
 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

