Exploring Temporal Ego Networks Using Small Multiples and Tree-ring Layouts
Michael Farrugia∗, Neil Hurley†, Aaron Quigley‡
∗School of Computer Science & Informatics
University College Dublin
Email: mike.farrugia@gmail.com
†School of Computer Science & Informatics
University College Dublin
Email: neil.hurley@ucd.ie
‡Chair of Human Computer Interaction
School Of Computer Science
The University of St. Andrews
Email: aquigley@cs.st-andrews.ac.uk
Abstract—Many of the current dynamic network visuali-
sations methods or techniques rely on node-link force-based
models that were originally developed for visualising static net-
work snapshots. In this study, we diverge from this traditional
layout approach and develop a layout for ego networks that
places the time dimension in the foreground, by turning time
into an element of shape. In addition to this we develop an
interactive system that enables the visualisation of multiple
networks simultaneously by employing small multiples. Using
the proposed layout and analytical system as a grounding visual
structure, we visually characterise dynamic network events in 3
different networks; the evolution of the biotechnology ﬁeld, a
phone call data set and a network of passenger connections
of an airline. From this analysis we propose a range of
ego network visual motifs that can be used as templates to
identify and characterise events that are occurring in a dynamic
network.
Keywords-Dynamic networks, Ego networks, Small Multi-
ples, Graph Drawing
Social networks are dynamic systems in a state of constant
change. People are born, form friendships, ﬁnd partners,
lose friends and die. Companies are created, merge, spilt
and close. Traditionally, mainly because of the difﬁculties in
collecting data, networks were studied by analysing a single
snapshot of the network taken at a particular time. Today,
dynamic network data is becoming increasingly available
from sources such as social networking sites, telecommuni-
cation networks and customer transaction databases. Leading
researchers in the ﬁeld of network science have identiﬁed
the study of dynamic networks as one of the next primary
challenges in network theory [4].
From the very early days of social network analysis,
visualisation has been a key element to the development
of the ﬁeld [21]. With access to dynamic network data,
researchers in information visualisation are working to en-
hance the social scientist toolbox by developing tools and
visualisation techniques that facilitate the study, understand-
ing and exploration of network dynamics and the processes
they represent.
Where dynamic social network visualisation has been
studied the focus has been predominantly on new nodes
entering the network, large scale networks, and the use of
animation techniques to convey the dynamics within the
network [5], [8], [15], [26]. Recent studies [19] comparing
static and animated dynamic network tasks, have shown
that contrary to common expectation, static displays are
generally more effective in terms of both time and accuracy,
when performing analytic tasks.
By contrast, instead of visualising dynamic networks
using animation techniques we develop a system based on a
small multiples visual interface. The principle behind small
multiples design is to place several small visualisations near
each other to facilitate comparison and pattern identiﬁcation
while maximising the ink to information ratio [35]. By
displaying multiple networks simultaneously on the same
page, we seek to overcome the weaknesses of animation
while preserving the ability to understand the temporal
nature of the network dynamics.
The motivation and tasks for this study originated from
studying interactions between biotechnology companies,
over a span of 10 years. The initial visualisation approach re-
lied on using multiple node-link diagrams each representing
a single year displayed on the same page as small multiples.
This visualisation approach soon became impractical due
to the large size of the data and scale free nature of
connections. The resulting diagrams were complex, difﬁcult
to understand and poor according to most graph drawing
aesthetic measures [13]. Additionally, the visualisation was
cluttered because it was conﬁned to the small space dictated
by the small multiples design. Our next attempt refocussed
on the analyst’s tasks and asked the question, “how can the
patterns of connections and events be mapped into simple
visual images that can be generalised as visual motifs for
dynamic network data”.
We ground our study of dynamic social network visuali-
sation in the tasks and problems faced by social scientists.
79
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

This grounding has allowed us to focus on the concept of an
ego network. An ego network is a sub-network that focuses
on an individual actor who is the subject of the network. The
focal point of the network is called the “ego”, whereas the
other actors he interacts with are called “alters”. In an ego
network, only actors that are directly connected to the ego
form part of the network. We describe an event as a change
in the graph structure that occurs at a particular point in
time.
A network motif acts as a visual ﬁngerprint of a connec-
tion pattern. While motifs for static networks are commonly
employed, especially in biology, the equivalent for dynamic
networks do not exist. In [36], Welser et al address ego
motifs to characterise roles in social groups. In order to
visualise the temporal element of activity, they use a separate
visualisation called an authorline, to supplement ego motif
networks with temporal data. Here, we address the need to
create a simple intuitive layout that can be used to describe
temporal information in ego network motifs, a visualisation
that is able to tell a story in time with a single diagram.
Our method to achieve this is through a tree-ring layout
algorithm which converts several temporal aspects of data
into visual shape elements. This form of visualisation pro-
vides a network analyst both a visual language for describing
network motifs and the ability to focus on important changes
in the links between actors in the network. New nodes and
hence new edges are an important facet of dynamic network
structure but so too are the nature, rhythm and pattern of
interactions these new entities bring. Figure 1 shows the
design of our small multiples system that combines a number
of different network diagrams including traditional node link
diagrams, matrix views and tree-ring ego networks, in one
interface.
In this paper, we make two main contributions. The ﬁrst
contribution is the development of a new visualisation based
upon a tree-ring metaphor that ﬁts well within a small
multiple design and is more structured and intuitive than
traditional force based node link diagrams for displaying
dynamic networks. The second contribution is the design
of a small multiples based network exploration system that
displays multiple network visualisations at the same time.
Traditionally small multiple visualisations focus on dis-
playing attribute based visualisations such as scatter plots
or bar charts. Here the small multiples system is used in
favour of animation to visualise dynamic networks. The
small multiples are intended to assist with the exploration
of different relationships between actors in a network and
help identify different roles and types of actors based on
their individual connection patterns. With the help of this
visualisation technique and interactive system we study 3
different data sets and provide analytical insights into the
networks and the data within the networks. We also show
examples of how the ego network motifs can be used to
identify divergent or atypical patterns in the data.
I. DYNAMIC NETWORK TASKS
Prior to proposing any new visualisation design for dy-
namic networks, one has to clearly understand the questions
and tasks that the visualisations are intended to assist with.
Past research in information visualisation has grouped user
tasks into taxonomies according to the type of data in
question. Robert Amar et al [2] and Plaisant et al [25] have
extended the general study by Shneiderman [31] to attribute
data and graphs respectively. As yet, there is no published
taxonomy tailored towards dynamic network tasks, so in this
section we attempt to describe the most common dynamic
network concepts and tasks drawn from previous studies of
such data.
Network structures can change in a variety of ways. How-
ever, the dynamic processes behind network evolution can
be categorised in three overarching categories; formation,
rewiring and dissolution [30]. These three general principles
apply to both the atomic elements of the network (actors,
links) and compound structures within the network, such as
groups or communities [29].
If we consider the whole network structure, the formation
of the network describes how the network was formed
to exhibit the structure that it currently holds. If a time
component is added to any structural feature in a static
network, the temporal formation of that feature can be
explored. This is the most basic means of enhancing a
network with temporal information.
A more signiﬁcant aspect of change occurs when there
is rewiring within a structure manifested as a change in the
links between actors. The term rewiring groups all changes
that alter the connections within the current structure, possi-
bly changing the type of the structure. For example, rewiring
can include a split or a merge between members of a
community. Rewiring is signiﬁcant in the context of network
evolution because these rewiring changes can raise important
questions and lead to insights into the processes that are
underlying the change.
Dissolution describes the process of any structural com-
ponent or network member disappearing from the network
structure. An example of dissolution is a scenario in which
an actor in the network does not continue to from a part of
the network after a certain time period. The propagation of
a dissolution effect on the network is sometimes referred to
as churn [12].
While the above types of change relate to changes in
network structure, the properties of the members or actors
of the network can also change. This type of change is
important especially if it occurs as a result of the connections
in the network. Christakis and Fowler investigate this type
of change in their studies on obesity [10] and smoking
habits [11]. In the biotechnology ﬁeld evolution study by
Powell et al [30], the authors use the term multivocal to
describe the behaviour of actors that perform different roles
80
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Figure 1.
Small Multiples Network Exploration System
throughout the data collection period.
In dynamic social network visualisation, many of the
current techniques focus on showing the formation of the
structure over time [23]. In this study we ﬁll in a gap for the
task of analysing actor rewiring. Our visualisation addresses
the question, “how can we visually describe the choice and
change of partner preference over time”. Along with this we
also try to facilitate the understanding of how nodes change
their properties or exhibit multivocal behaviour over time.
II. TREE RING LAYOUT
The proposed node layout algorithm for dynamic ego
network motif exploration was inspired by tree rings. Den-
drologists study tree rings to determine the age of a tree
and the amount of new growth of a tree in a year. In the
tree ring layout, the ego node is ﬁrst placed in the centre
of the drawing (black node in Figure 2). From the central
ego node a number of concentric circles, akin to tree rings,
are drawn. Each concentric circle represents a time period
in the network data (t1 to t4 in Figure 2). The alters are
then placed on the concentric circles according to the time
when the interaction between the alter and the ego takes
place. The earlier the interaction, the closer to the centre the
alter is placed. All alters are placed equidistantly from each
other based on the total number of nodes in the ego network
through the networks’ timespan. In Figure 2 the ﬁrst group
of nodes that interact with the ego are the red node and two
green nodes on ring 1. On ring 2, only green nodes interact
with the ego, while on rings 3 and 4, a mixture of green and
blue nodes interact with the ego.
The alter nodes start being positioned from the angular
Figure 2.
Tree ring ego network layout principle
position zero with respect to the ego. In Figure 2 this position
is occupied by the red node on time ring 1. The desirable
visual characteristic here is to position the majority of alters
that interact with the ego at one time point, close together in
a logical ordering. The ordering of the alters within the same
time period can be changed using the layout parameters (see
Section II-B).
Each alter has a unique angular position with respect
to the ego position in the centre. The uniqueness of this
constraint avoids overlapping of the same nodes across
different time periods. Assigning a unique angular position
to each node also enables nodes to be replicated at each
time point, when there is an interaction with the ego. For
example, if a node interacts with the ego at time t1 and time
t4 then the node can be shown both on the ring representing
time t1 and the one showing time t4. The node is shown at
the same angular position thus aligning it in a straight line
with the ﬁrst time the node was displayed. An example of
this can be seen in Figure 3 label 2, where the orange node
is replicated across 4 time periods.
81
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Figure 3.
Example of the ego network of a biotech company
Rings do not necessarily have to represent a year in
time or a uniform time pattern. A single ring can contain
an aggregate number of time periods in it. If each ring is
representing a time aggregate, then any node placed on the
ring means it interacted with the ego during that time period.
For instance, if the data set contains a range of a 100 years
each time ring can be used to aggregate a uniform number
of years, in this case 10 rings each representing 10 years.
Alternatively, a period of years can be compressed on one
ring and the others expanded in the rest of the rings. In this
example, the ﬁrst 90 years can be represented in the inner
ring while the last 10 years can be displayed in their own
individual rings.
A. Motivational Example
Figure 3 is an example of an ego network from the
data analysed in the biotechnology case study (discussed
in detail in Section IV-A). The explicit edges from the ego
to the alters are omitted to evidence the node positioning of
the layout and the meaning behind the ordering. The ﬁrst
interaction of the ego, a dedicated biotechnology company
represented by a blue node, is with a diversiﬁed company,
represented by an orange node (label 1). Notice how this
node has the smallest angular position with respect to the
ego. In the second year there is no more interaction with
this company, but the ego interacts with a new diversiﬁed
company (label 2). This relationship continues for the next
four years. In year four, the ego interacts with another
diversiﬁed company (label 3), for a duration of 3 years.
Within this time period the relationship with diversiﬁed com-
pany 2 terminates. In the fourth year the ego also interacts
with another diversiﬁed company (label 4), however the
relationship has a two year gap which could have possibly
been ﬁlled by the other diversiﬁed companies labelled 5, 6
and 7. In the ﬁfth year when company number 2 is dropped
three diversiﬁed companies 5, 6, 7 are introduced.
B. Layout Parameters and Interaction
The general layout description speciﬁes that all the nodes
that interact with the ego during a time period should be
displayed on the same tree ring, however it does not impose
an ordering of nodes on the same ring. The order of the
nodes could follow a temporal structure. If each time ring
represents a time aggregate, for instance a year, the nodes
can be ordered by the day when they ﬁrst interact with the
ego. Alternatively, nodes can be ordered using an attribute of
the data set, such as, the type of the node. This has the effect
of visually clustering together nodes of the same visual or
logical characteristic.
Nodes can also be ordered based on graph drawing
aesthetic criteria, particularly edge crossings between the
alters. Since each node in the tree ring layout occupies its
own layer, a layer crossing minimising algorithm similar to
Sugiyama’s approach [33] or Brandes et al [7], can be used
to reduce edge crossings. Alternate intra layer node layout
techniques may also be adopted.
A number of parameters can be used to control the visual
encodings of the elements in the visualisation. Explicit edges
such as those connecting the ego to all the alters can be
displayed or hidden (this is the case in most of the ﬁgures
in the paper). Alter nodes and edges can be set to persist
through the time period from the ﬁrst time they interact with
the ego. When persistence is enabled the elements in the
network aggregate over time to produce a composite view of
the network. The edges between alters can also be turned on
or off or altered in intensity based on either edge importance
or time properties.
In tree rings, the size of each ring is proportional to the
growth of the tree during the year. This concept can also
be visually applied to the layout by mapping the size of
each concentric circle to the activity in the time period. This
can be used to allow for the nodes to be spread out further
in time. Intermediate time rings can also be introduced in
between other time periods to improve the readability of
dense time periods.
Interactive techniques can also be used to overcome issues
with the selection and aggregation of time periods displayed
in the ego network. If there are more time periods than
the layout can support in a small multiple view, a brushing
interactive motion on an ego network can let the analyst
scroll thorough time periods to display activity in other time
steps. A movement from the ego out towards the periphery
would scroll forward in time, while a movement from the
periphery towards the centre could scroll back in time. The
time periods that are out of range can be aggregated on the
ﬁrst or last ring if required. Once this motion is complete
for the reference network it can be easily applied to all the
other small multiples.
III. SMALL MULTIPLES INTERACTIVE SYSTEM
A generic small multiples framework was developed to
allow different types of visual representations in each in-
dividual small multiple. We extend this paradigm that is
traditionally used to visualise attribute based data [20], to
82
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

visualise network data. Figure 1 shows an example of a
display where the majority of the diagrams are tree ring
diagrams and the last 3 diagrams on the bottom right show
traditional node link and matrix visualisations respectively.
When designing the small multiples based system we
follow the design mantra of Shneiderman et al [31] of
overview ﬁrst, ﬁlter and details on demand as a guiding
framework for interaction and exploration. In the overview
stage the small multiples can be reduced in size to maximise
the number of data elements that can be displayed and
provide an overview of the data. In this stage different
aggregations and abstractions of the network can also be
used to visualise the overall structure of the network and
its components. From these visualisations the analyst can
interact with the system to select individual visualisations
or ﬁlter the data by the properties of the network in order
to focus on the elements of interest. To get more detail
on individual elements within the visualisation, individual
elements in the visualisation can be selected to obtain further
information.
Each small multiple image consists of a visual represen-
tation in a small window and all images are displayed in a
grid similar to a photo album. The number and size of the
images can be controlled by the user at run time to balance
between the amount of information displayed and the detail
in each image. The image sizes range from 150x150 pixels
up to 300x300. When displaying the ego networks at their
smallest size one can get an overview of a 400 node network
in 10 frames. All the images in a small multiples display are
traditionally of the same size and this system follows this
design pattern.
The ego networks can be sorted by different criteria such
as; the node degree at a time period, node attributes, activity
within the time period and the relative age of the ego. When
paging through the list of multiples, the user can select a
number of small multiples by selecting a checkbox near each
image. Upon conﬁrming the selection the display can be
reconﬁgured to display the selected ego networks next to
each other on the same page. This interactive features shows
how ﬁltering can be used from the small multiples display
to enable the comparison and study of interesting networks.
If more details are required for an individual image, the
analyst can select the image and display that image at full
size instead of showing that image in a small multiple view.
Apart from interacting with the visualisation as a whole,
one can also interact directly with the node link visuali-
sations. If a node is double clicked and that node exists
in other ego networks on the same page, then the node
is highlighted in all the other small multiples. To evidence
this highlighting, all the the other node types can be faded
and shown in the same colour. If the node is right clicked,
the small multiples on the page change to show all the ego
networks of which the clicked node is a member. A group
of nodes can also be selected to change the small multiples
Figure 4.
Homophily and multi-connectivity ego motifs
displayed to the ego networks of the selected nodes. It is
also possible to interact with the individual node elements
to view information tooltips and/or node labels, depending
on the available data.
IV. CASE STUDIES
In this section we analyse three different data sets to
characterise the types of ego networks that are present in
each data set and study the capabilities of using a tree-ring
ego layout to develop ego network motifs. The three case
studies are from thee diverse ﬁelds, the ﬁrst one is from
social science, the second one is a scenario based synthetic
data set created for the VAST 2008 competition and the third
data set is a commercial data set of airline passengers.
A. Biotechnology company data case study
In the ﬁrst case study we use data from previous work in
the social sciences, that studies the dynamics of “logics of
attachment” in the evolution of the biotechnology ﬁeld [30].
This data set contains examples of the analytical task that
our visualisation sets out to assist with, i.e. changing patterns
of connection.
The data used for this case study was compiled by
Powell et al primarily from BioScan, an independent in-
dustry directory. Six types of companies are represented:
dedicated biotechnology companies (2736), academic in-
stitutions (279), public research ﬁrms (177), government
institutes (201), diversiﬁed companies (778) which include
large pharmaceutical corporations and diversiﬁed health cor-
porations, ﬁnancial institutions and other types of companies
(523). A connection between any two organisations exists
whenever there is a news report that mentions a collabora-
tive tie, alliance, contractual agreement or an exchange of
resources between two or more organisations. The sample
data selected covers a period of from 1988 to 1998 and the
data is aggregated on a yearly basis.
The authors of the paper report that the biotechnology
industry is characterised by many short term connections
between companies. Once the connection is formed and the
goal for which the connection was sought is achieved, then
the two companies do not remain in contact with each other.
For this reason, in this particular analysis the links between
alters are only shown if they happen during the same time
period.
83
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Figure 5.
Different company evolution patterns
1) Network motifs and patterns: Powell et al discuss
four types of partner attachment principles, Accumulative
advantage, Homophily, Follow the herd and Multiconnec-
tivity. We focus on three of these principles and explore
other types of events that can be easily visualised with the
tree ring visualisation. In the case study examples, each
type of company is represented with a different colour and
the explicit links between the ego and the alters are not
displayed.
The principle of homophily [27] states that actors have
a higher probability of making connections with actors that
are similar to them. This sort of behaviour can be explained
with the common saying “Birds of a feather ﬂock together”.
On the contrary, multiconnectivity explains the behaviour
when actors connect with different types of partners, thus di-
versifying their connections. Accordingly, organisations that
exhibit homophily are more likely to connect to companies
of the same type, therefore of the same colour. Conversely,
multiconnectivity can be identiﬁed when companies connect
to a variety of different companies, thus connecting to nodes
of different colour.
Figure 4a shows an ego motif of a biotech company
(blue node) exhibiting homophilious behaviour by primarily
interacting with other biotech companies. Figure 4b shows
an example of a biotech ﬁrm that starts out exhibiting
homophilious relationships, but expands to interact with
different types of companies in the later years. This pattern is
a common pattern in the data set as the importance to forge
connections with different types of companies increases with
time. Ties with different types of companies are important
for survival in such a competitive market, since different
ties give access to different resources in the network. In
Figure 4c the ego has a connection with different types of
nodes, showing a good example of multiconnectivity.
The pattern of accumulative advantage [3] shows how
actors with a high number of connections have a higher
likelihood of getting new connections. This property is a
feature of the entire network that is difﬁcult to visualise
when considering individual ego networks, as these do not
generally provide a complete network perspective. Using
the developed small multiple system, we can visualise the
change in degree between the most connected nodes and
the rest of the nodes. When ordering the ego networks by
degree, a clear difference emerges from the ﬁrst few nodes
with a high degree of interconnections and the rest of the
ego networks.
In an aggressive domain such as the biotechnology in-
dustry, companies tend to forge alliances, merge with other
companies, or acquire new companies to gain access to
technology and resources. Ego evolution visualisations can
be useful to identify these behavioural patterns by following
the temporal outline of the visualisation. Figure 5 shows four
examples of company evolution. In Figure 5a the company
has a concentrated amount of activity in the early years but
this activity ceases soon after. This is visually indicated
by the concentration of nodes placed on the ﬁrst three
inner circles. This pattern is indicative of a company being
bought out and replaced by another company, or a company
failing and ceasing to exist. In Figure 5b the company has a
consistent level of activity throughout all the years, visually
indicated by a general spread of nodes on all the circles. In
Figure 5c the company is a late comer, as there is no activity
at all in the ﬁrst 6 years and all the activity is concentrated
in the last 4 years. This is of particular interest because
of the high level of activity without prior build up. This
pattern might be indicative of an old company opening under
a new name, which will explain the signiﬁcant number of
connections in the last few years with no activity in the
early years. A similar pattern of connection can be seen in
Figure 5d, however here there is some activity in the early
years, which quickly increases in later years. This pattern
could be indicative of an acquisition or a merger with a
bigger company that already has many connections.
The properties of actors in a network can change if data
is collected over a long period of time. This change can
be important both in terms of the new type of interaction
and also to understand if the change occurred as an effect of
network connections. In this case study, companies can fulﬁll
different operations and take a different role that changes
their type of operation, thus changing their colour. Figure 6
shows some examples of nodes that exhibit this behaviour.
These nodes can be easily identiﬁed because each node is
replicated on the same radius with the outermost circle. As
the nodes on the radius are aligned in a straight line it is
easy to identify the change in node colour of the same node.
84
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Figure 6.
Actors changing type over time
B. VAST 2008 Phone Call Network
In the second case study we use the VAST 2008 phone call
data set [24] that consists of a set of phone records between
families in control of a controversial religious organisation.
Each record has the time of the call, duration and the location
of the cell tower from where the call was made. The data
spanned a 10 day period and contained 400 unique cell
phones.
The main analytical task in the VAST mini challenge was
to characterise the change in the network occurring in the
10 day period of data collection. In this case study we use
the tree-ring visualisation within the small multiples system,
to categorise and characterise the different types of network
actors based on their interaction patterns and their possible
change in behaviour over the 10 day period. After having
identiﬁed the important actors in the data set using ego
network visualisation, different visual and analytical tools
can be used to investigate how the interactions between these
prominent nodes evolves through time [17].
Figure 1 (on page 2) shows examples of some of the
most prominent actors in the VAST data set. The ﬁrst set
of nodes (1, 2, 3, 5) are the nodes that have the highest
number of connections, however we observe that in the outer
circles that represent the later time periods, the number of
connections is close to zero. If we study the nodes under the
ﬁrst set (360, 397, 306, 309) we notice that these exhibit a
similar but inverse behaviour to the ﬁrst set of nodes. They
are very active nodes but are only active in the last 3 days
of the time period.
A very common ego network motif is the one exempliﬁed
by nodes 210, 211 and 212 where the ego regularly interacts
with the same 2 or 3 alters throughout the whole 10 day
period, with little or no interaction between the alters at
the same time period. This is typical of scale free networks
and is indicative of the same accumulative advantage pattern
seen in the biotech network where only few nodes have
a large number of connections and most have few con-
nections. Other network ego motifs that are common are
those exempliﬁed by nodes 90, 92, 120, 158 where the ego
interacts with a number of nodes in a regular pattern with
gaps between some time periods.
Nodes 199, 200 and 300 are examples of atypical ego
motifs because of the high number of interactions between
alters when compared to the number of alter interactions
in the other ego networks that was very limited. In the
scenario description node 200 is described as an important
node. From the visualisation we notice that node 300 has
a similar ego network motif to node 200 which prompts us
to ﬂag is as suspicious. The geography and call duration
can be encoded by colour and node size respectively. Using
this representation, actors that are changing their geographic
location will exhibit the same multivocal patterns as seen in
Figure 6.
C. Airline Passenger Network
In the third case study we visualise a sample of an inferred
network of airline passengers [16], [18]. The network is
automatically inferred from the bookings records of around
430 unique passengers spanning over a period of travel
of 10 weeks. The passengers are uniquely identiﬁed using
an entity resolution pre-process as a unique identiﬁer was
not available for all passengers. A relation between two
passengers exists if they are booked together on the same
booking.
Unlike the VAST and the Biotech network data sets the
airline customer data set contains many cliques between
passengers travelling together. Each time three or more
passengers are booked on the same booking a link is created
between all the passengers in the booking, thus creating a
clique connection pattern.
Figure 7 shows ﬁve representative patterns from the airline
passengers data set. The ﬁrst network illustrates the case
where the ego travels with two parties of 4 and 5 passengers
each, towards the end of the 10 week time period and
a separate trip with another passenger. The second ego
network is typical for most egos in that they travel once
in the sampled time period but with a number of people in
the same booking.
The third network illustrates an interesting pattern of
a passenger travelling with the same group of people on
subsequent weeks. This can be seen with the overlapping
triangles shown in the top left corner. The same passenger
travels with other groups of people during the other weeks.
The fourth pattern is interesting because it goes against
our intuition and is quite uncharacteristic (there were only
two egos with this pattern). In fact this shows the pattern of
an actor who has a lot of trips with many separate people,
few of which are linked. Upon further analysis of these
actors we realised that this was in fact an anomaly which was
showing an instance of actor misidentiﬁcation in the entity
resolution stage. Here more than 4 different passengers were
considered to be the same person therefore the individual
trips of those four people resulted in multiple sparse links
in this ego network motif.
The last pattern shows an actor travelling with two groups
of people in different time periods where one of the members
in the group overlaps. This almost results in a diamond
85
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Figure 7.
Airline passengers ego network nodes
shaped pattern with the extension of one of the nodes
reaching out in a different time slice.
V. RELATED WORK
The layout approach proposed in this paper is a type
of radial visualisation that uses a circular pattern to posi-
tion network nodes. The widespread adoption, variety and
applicability of radial visualisations was the subject of a
recent survey paper by Draper et al [14]. In this work, the
authors categorise different radial layouts based on their
visual properties. Our visualisation contains elements of
three of these patterns – the star pattern, the tree pattern
and, to an extent, the concentric circle pattern. The deﬁning
characteristic of the star pattern is the centre of the diagram
from which edges originate. In our ego diagrams, the ego
is placed in the centre and edges originate from the ego to
connect the ego to all the alters. While all leaf nodes are
connected to the central node with a straight line, which
is a characteristic of star patterns, the inner nodes can
be connected between themselves too which is a pattern
exhibited in the tree pattern. Thirdly, concentric circles are
a critical positioning element in the visualisations where
time representation becomes a key issue. The novelty of our
approach lies in the combination of a star based layout with
an underlying concentric circle ﬁeld that is used to encode
a positional dimension for time.
Circular layouts were amongst the ﬁrst types of layouts
used by social scientists to draw the ﬁrst social network
visualisations [21]. Perhaps the most famous example is
Northway’s target sociogram [28] that uses a series of
concentric circles to represent actor centrality and guide the
placement of nodes by placing the most structurally central
nodes in the innermost circle. Brandes et al [6], in their work
on visualising policy networks, use Northway’s original
target sociogram principles and elaborate on a method to
improve aesthetics when automatically drawing such dia-
grams. An approach that uses the tree ring metaphor to
draw nodes is presented in [34]. In this layout, a hierarchical
tree structure is placed along concentric circles representing
different time periods.
There is further novelty in our approach of displaying
the circularly laid-out ego networks as small multiples,
allowing in a single visualisation, the different temporal
patterns of different ego networks to be compared. Thus,
the ‘when’ question, which by deﬁnition is central to any
dynamic analysis is emphasised in each small multiple and
differences in temporal patterns are easily discernible by
scanning across the multiples. Our work also complements
the ideas presented in [32] where the authors use node
attributes, including temporal attributes, to guide the node
placement.
The idea of using small multiples to visualise networks
was explored by Chi and Card in their work on visual
spreadsheets [9] where they apply the spreadsheet metaphor
for visualisation. In this paper, the authors visualise complete
dense scale free networks of the internet over a sequence
of steps. The problem with this approach is that large scale
free networks tend to be difﬁcult to visualise using node link
diagrams with the effect of reducing the readability of the
networks. Adamic et al [1], use small multiples to visualise
ego networks to explain the types of egos that are present in
online Q&A forums. In a recent study [22], the authors use
small multiples to visualise network properties such as edge
count, density and degree, to facilitate network exploration,
but they do not attempt to visualise relationships between
nodes in their small multiple displays.
VI. DISCUSSION
The embedding of the temporal dimension in a single
network image enables us to use a small multiple design to
display different egos simultaneously, showing how different
types of egos evolve. The small multiples design allows the
analyst to explore and identify patterns and differences in the
data, however not all types of visualisation are appropriate
for small multiples.
Traditional node link layouts have two disadvantages in
this regard. Firstly, as traditional layouts only represent
a single snap-shot in time, multiple images are required
to explore the network over time. As each network is
only showing one time period, the number of images is a
multiple of the number of time periods. Identifying change
in multiple images requires a mental comparison between
multiple images which increases the cognitive load on the
analyst. Secondly, certain patterns of connection can create
diagrams that are too complex with many overlapping nodes
and edge crossings that make the diagram unreadable.
86
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

The limitation of space when visualising data in small
multiples automatically limits the number of data elements
that can be visualised. Better strategies do exist to maximise
the amount of information displayed, for instance matrix
representations, but the strong metaphor that the tree ring
provides makes this layout very intuitive to understand and
use. This is particularly beneﬁcial when introducing a new
visualisation to users who are not information visualisation
specialists but rather specialists in their own ﬁelds who need
tools to help them analyse their data.
Furthermore, the ‘lost’ space that is intrinsic in a circular
shape when bin packing serves as a natural delimiter be-
tween different small multiple images. A square or rectangu-
lar shape that might enable denser packing might still require
the same amount of space in between different images, to
make it possible to discern between different images. It is
also still not clear how small dense matrices that encode
time on one of the axis can be useful to convey the path
connection information between the alters. We intend to
follow up with user studies on these aspects to compare
the different visualisations.
In the three case studies used we make use of two real and
one synthetic data set that was modelled on real networks to
serve as a realistic scenario for a conference competition. In
the three examples, the number of network nodes increases
over time in line with what is usually observed in dynamic
networks. One natural aspect of concentric ring layouts is
that the inner circles are smaller than the outer circles. This
visual characteristic ﬁts well with the pattern of network
evolution since the increase in the number of nodes over
time is in line with the increased amount of space on the
outer circles of the visualisation.
When visualising individual ego networks, the network is
being decomposed into its constituent parts. This particular
network perspective is tailored towards understanding the in-
dividual actors in a network rather than the network structure
as a whole. Tasks suited to this technique include identifying
change in connection patterns, visual characterisation of
network actors based on common patterns of interaction over
time, and identifying actors that diverge from those network
patterns, the outliers. The majority of actors in a large scale
network might not be those that an analyst might want to
focus on, based on the typical connection properties of most
large scale networks. The ﬁltering and ordering interactions
built in the interactive small multiples system can help the
analyst focus on the more interesting actors.
The applicability of the tree ring layout can be extended
and applied beyond a small multiple system. For instance,
the visualisation can be used to provide details on demand
when combined with a traditional node link layout. In this
case, the tree-ring layout can be used to display an overlaid
expanded image of a node’s ego network when the node is
selected. A sort of “ego lens” feature.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we describe an intuitive approach to vi-
sualise dynamic ego networks using time to guide the
positioning of nodes. We take advantage of the compact
nature of the generated diagrams to create a system based on
small multiples that allows the analyst to explore the network
through ego networks. In the 3 diverse case studies, we
show how different types of networks can lead to different
motifs, we found some similarities and generalities between
motifs and also discovered some unexpected patterns that
can highlight suspicious activity or issues with data quality.
Based on these positive results we plan to further our
studies of this visualisation within a small multiples design.
We plan to conduct user studies to study the efﬁciency of
this technique and are also working to provide a similar
tool to social scientists to assess the applicability of this
technique for other networks in their studies. As part of the
user study we would like to study how this visualisation
compares to traditional representations along with the effect
of unwinding the circle and representing the data in a linear
fashion. This should help us get a better understanding of
the intuitive positive characteristics of the circular structure
of the diagram.
While there are clear beneﬁts to this type of visualisation
we are aware that it is not a silver bullet for any dynamic
network visualisation problem. The social scientist analysing
dynamic networks should be armed with a toolbox of
techniques that can be applied according to the problem
being investigated and the need to solve it. The advantage
that this layout technique is that it is a simple design
and easy to understand based on a universally recognised
metaphor which makes it a good candidate to integrate into
any existing social science toolkits.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Adamic, J. Zhang, E. Bakshy, and M. Ackerman. Knowl-
edge sharing and yahoo answers: everyone knows something.
In Proceeding of the 17th international conference on World
Wide Web, pages 665–674. ACM New York, NY, USA, 2008.
[2] R. Amar, J. Eagan, and J. Stasko. Low-Level Components of
Analytic Activity in Information Visualization. Proceedings
of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages
111–117, 2005.
[3] A. Barab´asi and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in random
networks. Science, 286(5439):509, 1999.
[4] R. J. Barbara, M. Z. Laura, and E. Marshall. Connections
- Introduction to Complex Systems and Networks Special
Issue. Science, 325(5939):405–, 2009.
[5] S. Bender-deMoll and D. McFarland. The art and science of
dynamic network visualization. Journal of Social Structure,
7(2), 2006.
87
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

[6] U. Brandes, P. Kenis, and D. Wagner.
Communicating
centrality in policy network drawings. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, pages 241–253, 2003.
[7] U. Brandes, J. Raab, and D. Wagner. Exploratory network
visualization: Simultaneous display of actor status and con-
nections. Journal of Social Structure, 2001.
[8] J. Branke.
Dynamic Graph Drawing.
Lecture Notes In
Computer Science, 2025:228–246, 2001.
[9] E. Chi and S. Card. Sensemaking of evolving web sites using
visualization spreadsheets. In Proc. InfoVis 1999, pages 18–
25, 1999.
[10] N. Christakis and J. Fowler.
The spread of obesity in a
large social network over 32 years. New England Journal
of Medicine, 357(4):370, 2007.
[11] N. Christakis and J. Fowler.
The collective dynamics of
smoking in a large social network.
New England Journal
of Medicine, 358(21):2249, 2008.
[12] K. Dasgupta, R. Singh, B. Viswanathan, D. Chakraborty,
S. Mukherjea, A. A. Nanavati, and A. Joshi. Social ties and
their relevance to churn in mobile telecom networks. In EDBT
’08: Proceedings of the 11th international conference on
Extending database technology, pages 668–677, New York,
NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[13] G. Di Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I. Tollis. Graph
Drawing; Algorithms for the Visualization of Graphs. Prentice
Hall, 1999.
[14] G. Draper, Y. Livnat, and R. Riesenfeld. A survey of radial
methods for information visualization. IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics, 15(5):759, 2009.
[15] C. Erten, P. Harding, S. Kobourov, K. Wampler, and G. Yee.
GraphAEL: Graph animations with evolving layouts. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 98–110, 2003.
[16] M. Farrugia and A. Quigley.
Enhancing airline customer
relationship management data by inferring ties between pas-
sengers. In Proceedings of the international conference on
Social Computing, 2009.
[17] M. Farrugia and A. Quigley. TGD: visual data exploration of
temporal graph data. In Proceedings of SPIE, volume 7243,
page 724309, 2009.
[18] M. Farrugia and A. Quigley. Actor identiﬁcation in implicit
relational data sources. In I.-H. Ting, H.-J. Wu, and T.-H.
Ho, editors, Mining and Analyzing Social Networks, volume
288 of Studies in Computational Intelligence, pages 67–89.
Springer Berlin, 2010.
[19] M. Farrugia and A. Quigley. A comparative study of ani-
mation versus static display methods for visualising dynamic
social networks. Information Visualization, In print.
[20] S. Few. Information dashboard design: the effective visual
communication of data. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2006.
[21] L. C. Freeman. Visualizing social networks. Journal of Social
Structure, 1(1), Feb. 2000.
[22] M. Freire, C. Plaisant, B. Shneiderman, and J. Golbeck.
Manynets: an interface for multiple network analysis and vi-
sualization. In CHI ’10: Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages
213–222, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[23] Y. Frishman and A. Tal. Online dynamic graph drawing. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, pages
727–740, 2008.
[24] G. Grinstein, C. Plaisant, S. Laskowski, T. O’Connell,
J. Scholtz, and M. Whiting. Vast 2008 challenge: Introducing
mini-challenges.
Visual Analytics Science and Technology,
2008. VAST ’08. IEEE Symposium on, pages 195–196, Oct.
2008.
[25] B. Lee, C. Plaisant, C. S. Parr, J.-D. Fekete, and N. Henry.
Task taxonomy for graph visualization.
In BELIV ’06:
Proceedings of the 2006 AVI workshop on BEyond time and
errors, pages 1–5, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.
[26] L. Leydesdorff, T. Schank, A. Scharnhorst, and W. De Nooy.
Animating the development of Social Networks over time
using a dynamic extension of multidimensional scaling. El
Profesional de Informacion, 2008.
[27] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. Cook.
Birds of a
feather: Homophily in social networks.
Annual review of
sociology, 27(1):415–444, 2001.
[28] M. Northway. A method for depicting social relationships
obtained by sociometric testing. Sociometry, 3(2):144–150,
1940.
[29] G. Palla, A. Barab´asi, and T. Vicsek. Quantifying social group
evolution. Nature, 446(7136):664, 2007.
[30] W. Powell, D. White, K. Koput, and J. Owen-Smith. Network
Dynamics and Field Evolution: The Growth of Interorganiza-
tional Collaboration in the Life Sciences 1. American Journal
of Sociology, 110(4):1132–1205, 2005.
[31] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: a task by data type tax-
onomy for information visualizations. In Visual Languages,
1996. Proceedings., IEEE Symposium on, pages 336–343,
1996.
[32] B. Shneiderman and A. Aris.
Network visualization by
semantic substrates. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 12(5):733–740, 2006.
[33] K. Sugiyama, S. Tagawa, and M. Toda. Methods for visual
understanding of hierarchical system structures.
Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, 11(2):109–125,
1981.
[34] R. Theron.
Hierarchical-temporal data visualization using
a tree-ring metaphor.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
4073:70, 2006.
[35] E. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[36] H. Welser, E. Gleave, D. Fisher, and M. Smith. Visualizing
the signatures of social roles in online discussion groups. The
Journal of Social Structure, 8(2):20036–1903, 2007.
88
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

