The User-Focused Storybuilding Framework for Competence Developing Games 
A Design-Framework considering the basics of an educational game’s story 
Johannes A. König, Veronika Völker, Martin R. Wolf 
Lab for IT Organization and Management 
Aachen University of Applied Sciences 
Aachen, Germany 
email: koenig@fh-aachen.de, veronika.voelker@alumni.fh-aachen.de, m.wolf@fh-aachen.de 
  
Abstract—During 
the 
development 
of 
a 
Competence 
Developing Game’s (CDG) story it is indispensable to 
understand the target audience. Thereby, CDGs stories 
represent more than just the plot. The Story is about the 
Setting, the Characters and the Plot. As a toolkit to support the 
development of such a story, this paper introduces the User-
Focused Storybuilding (short UFoS) Framework for CDGs. 
The Framework and its utilization will be explained, followed 
by a description of its development and derivation, including 
an empirical study. In addition, to simplify the Framework use 
regarding the CDG’s target audience, a new concept of Nine 
Psychographic Player Types will be explained. This concept of 
Player Types provides an approach to handle the differences in 
between players during the UFoS Framework use. Thereby, 
this article presents a unique approach to the development of 
target group-differentiated CDGs stories. 
Keywords-CDG; Competence Developing Game; Serious 
Game; 
Video 
Game; 
Story; 
Narrative; 
Player 
Types; 
Player-Types; User-Focused Storybuilding Framework; UFoS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, games have become more and more important 
for serious education in private or business situations. 
Entertaining gaming situations are inherently motivating and, 
as such, could be utilized to deliver a specific message to 
their audience in an entertaining way [1]. For this purpose, 
not only business simulations (often board game based) are 
in use, also video game based solutions (e.g., serious games) 
are common. Every game with a serious intention, regardless 
if it is a video game or a board game, can be described as a 
Competence Developing Game (CDG). In detail, a CDG is 
characterized by the endeavor to teach its players a 
competence and utilize the motivational and entertaining 
nature of games to do so [2].  
Zyda [3] refers to “Bing Gordon, chief creative officer of 
video and computer games developer Electronic Arts […] 
[who] defines video games as ‘story, art, and software’” [3]. 
The first aspect ‘story’ distinguishes between a board game 
or a business simulation compared to a video game based 
CDG. Here, a video game tells a complex continuous and 
sometimes changing story presented by technology. 
Meanwhile, a board game or a business simulation presents 
an often minimalistic story using printed game material or a 
facilitator. Nevertheless, Ritterfeld explains that the quality 
of a game with a serious intention has to be similar to an 
entertainment game to be successful [4]. The other two 
aspects ‘art’ and ‘software’ are comparable in their roots. 
Art, for instance, includes the visuals of a game. Software 
may pertain to executable files, but for board games it can be 
understood as resource to create the cards, board, etc. Art 
and software need to be implemented by a development 
team. To do so, the team needs tools. In the case of video 
games, the team uses programming languages to produce a 
new piece of executable software. Board game developers 
use physical materials to create a touchable and playable 
game. Consequently, only the game’s story differentiates 
deeply between analog and digital games. By that, story is 
one of three main game components and the only component 
that differs greatly between the game types under the CDG 
umbrella term. Because of that, an explicit CDG story 
Framework is useful. There are different approaches for 
story development (see e.g.: [8][14][16][18]), but there is no 
approach that was developed specifically for CDG story 
design so far. 
Story, in fact, is one of the key components of video 
games [3]. It creates background information and context for 
many of the actions taken within a game. It can also serve as 
a motivator and a means of maintaining interest in the game 
and understanding of the sequence of events occurring 
within it. Therefore, story should be crafted to compliment 
the rest of the game. Also, in CDGs, it supports and 
underlines the serious intention and connects with the 
audience. To support a CDG’s developer to design a story in 
a standardized way, this paper presents the User-Focused 
Storybuilding (short UFoS) Framework for CDGs.  
The Framework thus supports the development of the 
game story on paper. By that, the UFoS Framework has to be 
applied before using game engines like Unity [23], Unreal 
[24] or their board game equivalents. The result of this 
application can even support to decide whether a video game 
based CDG, a board game based CDG or a mix up will be 
the best choice.  
The structure of this paper will be as follows: In Section 
II of this paper, the Framework itself with all its components 
will be explained, elaborating its content and visual 
representation. Section III will provide an overview and 
explanation of the Nine Psychographic Player Types, placing 
a focus on the psychographical attributes of a Player. Section 
IV explains how to apply the Framework as a development 
tool for the basic elements of a story. In Section V, the 
derivation of the Framework will be discussed, examining 
how its components were chosen and designed and why 
those particular components belong to the Framework. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Section VI seeks to explain the origin of the Player Types, 
including the taxonomies used to craft the different 
categories and the process of developing them. Section VII 
concludes the paper by examining the need for further 
research and the possibilities and advantages of the UFoS 
Framework. 
II. 
THE UFOS FRAMEWORK 
The UFoS Framework serves as a guideline to create the 
basics of a CDG’s story that can motivate players. It entails 
six components (Serious Content, Plot, Characters, Setting, 
Presentation, and Player), which are examined individually 
in the process of story creation. Therefore, these six 
components cover all aspects of a video game-based CDG’s 
story. In the following paragraphs the components are briefly 
described (for the Framework derivation see Section V).  
The first story component is the ‘Serious Content’, 
based on the word 'Serious' in the 'Serious Game’ term. This 
aspect deals with the intention behind the game. It is usually 
one of the first elements to be described in the process of 
developing a CDG [5]. The Serious Content describes the 
real life problem that the game is attempting to solve. The 
competence the game is aiming to teach is derived from this. 
The Serious Content is the game’s purpose and its primary 
focus and, as such, other components of a CDG have the 
objective of underlining it. The next story component is the 
‘Player’. This component covers the audience of the game. 
It is different from the other components, as it is the only 
element that the designer cannot create but merely describe. 
The Players exist independently from the game, whereas 
every other element does not. The Player is defined by two 
different parts: ‘Demographics’ and ‘Psychographics’. 
Demographics describe external attributes, such as age and 
gender [6].  Psychographics describe inner attributes, such as 
preferences or life styles [6]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The UFoS – Framework for CDGs 
Both parts need to be considered when describing the 
Player as both influence how a game story is designed. 
Additionally, understanding and describing the Player will 
enable the developer to craft a powerful gaming experience 
for their specific target audience. The whole story of a digital 
CDG serves as a bridge between the components ‘Serious 
Content’ and ‘Player’.  
The three components in between are the Plot, the 
Characters and the Setting. These components are the heart 
of every digital CDG’s story. The amount of influence they 
have on the whole story varies depending on the nature of 
the components ‘Player’ and ‘Serious Content’, as will be 
discussed later (see Section IV).  
The ‘Plot’ describes the sequence of events happening in 
the game. It starts with the beginning of the game and ends 
with its conclusion. As seen in [7] and [8], the Plot has an 
overall ‘Structure’, as well as three parts: The ‘Beginning’, 
the ‘Middle’ and the ‘End’ [7][8].  
The ‘Characters’ are the entities living within the game. 
These are separated into the ‘Player Character’ (PC), an 
entity controlled by the player to navigate through the game; 
and the ‘Non-Player Characters’ (NPCs), entities controlled 
by an Artificial Intelligence [7][9] 
The ‘Setting’ describes the ‘Time & Space’ of the game. 
This can be very realistic or very unrealistic and entail other 
elements, such as the laws it follows [10]. Time and Space 
are only the frame conditions of the Setting. Everything else, 
like its laws or specific areas, are its ‘Content’, which is 
influenced and defined by those two initial parameters [6]. 
As already mentioned, the level of influence of the three 
components depends on the Serious Content and the Player 
and is individually crafted for each game. This is the case 
because detailing all elements in the same amount could 
potentially overwhelm players, especially those who are not 
willing to invest time and energy into a game story [7]. 
Therefore, the developer needs to select a focus, which is in 
line with the determined intention of the game (Serious 
Content) and, if possible, caters to its target audience 
(Player). So, the level of detail required for each component 
varies from CDG to CDG. Therefore, components of a lower 
priority should also be considered later during a game story 
development process. 
The final component of a story is its ‘Presentation’, also 
called ‘Discourse’. A story’s presentation refers to the 
question of how something is shown within the game [11]. It 
describes the way how the five previously established 
components are explained and presented to the Player. The 
literature describes different possibilities to present a CDG to 
its players. The decision of the right style of presentation for 
a specific CDG, again, depends on the intention of the game, 
as well as the preferences of the target audience.  
Presentation is divided into the areas ‘Plot’ and ‘Choice’. 
Video games provide the player varying amounts of choices; 
some of them influence the events and some of them do not 
[6]. Choices can be presented in different ways, ranging from 
on-screen options to subtle decisions. Different degrees of 
subtlety can cause different effects, as more obvious choices 
can be utilized to demonstrate cause and effect and less 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

visible ones can be exhibit how easy it is to make wrong 
decisions or miss certain things in some scenarios. 
However, keeping the serious mission of every CDG in 
mind, the different options the player can take have to be 
considered carefully, because the decision made by a player 
in the game’s world may support building competences the 
player is able to use in the real world. By that, ‘Choices’ 
support achieving the serious mission of a CDG in a very 
direct manner. Additionally, there a several ways to present 
the Plot.  
 A common way of a plot’s presentation is ‘Narration’. It 
is about telling a story via text and speech [12]. Another plot 
presentation opportunity is ‘Dialogue’ [13], a method of 
conveying information via the interactions between two or 
more characters in the game, shown with either text, sound 
or both. An overarching category of presentation deals with 
visual storytelling. This term describes methods in which, 
rather than explaining story with words, the audience 
witnesses the events directly by observing the characters, or 
is provided with images or other visual cues that deliver 
context and clue them into the happenings of the story [14]. 
For this kind of visual storytelling there two more 
possibilities: 
‘Cut-Scenes’ 
(not 
interactive 
sequence, 
breaking up the gameplay) [15] and ‘Environmental 
Storytelling’. The latter describes a technique which uses 
certain environmental features to tell a story. For instance, 
puddles in the street as a signal for rain having fallen [16]. 
The last plot presentation method is called ‘Collection’. 
Collection takes place when the pick up or the interaction 
with a game object triggers a narrative sequence [17], and 
several of these interactions and triggers exist, or are 
required to understand the narrative.  
The six components are arranged in a circle as their order 
depends on the CDG’s purpose and players and therefore, 
from a generic view, there is no hierarchy between them. 
However, the components of the Setting, the Characters, the 
Plot and the Presentation separate the Serious Content on the 
outside from the Player on the inside. This is because the 
Serious Content serves as a frame for the other components, 
not only determining several of their attributes, but also 
providing possibilities and limitations to them. The Player, 
on the inside of the Framework, is the target of the Serious 
Content, so the components should be designed to allow the 
Serious Content on the outside to have the optimal way to 
the Player, on the inside. Figure 1 shows the visual 
representation of the Framework. The derivation of the 
Framework will be explained in Section V. 
III. 
THE NINE PSYCHOGRAPHIC PLAYER TYPES 
As will be shown in Section IV, there are phases and 
steps, which support the use of the six Framework 
components. The Player and their preferences have to be 
considered. This means that a developer has to make choices 
that match the likes and dislikes of different Psychographic 
Player Types.  
The Nine Psychographic Player Types are a method of 
grouping Players of a game by psychographic attributes (for 
their derivation, see Section VI). They were jointly 
developed with the Framework and are essential for the 
application of the Framework as shown in Section IV. The 
Player Types are: 
1. The Narrator. This category defines people with a 
strong interest in observing dramatic sequences of 
events. They take pleasure in strong narratives and 
well-written plotlines. 
2. The Challenger. Challengers primarily play video 
games for their problem-solving qualities. They 
enjoy difficulty and examining a problem or puzzle 
from multiple angles before solving it. 
3. The Socialite. Socialites enjoy the social aspects of 
games, such as playing with friends or interacting 
with realistic Non-Player Characters.  
4. The Explorer. This group represents people who 
enjoy discovering things. They thrive on a sense of 
wonder and act in pursuit of it, exploring and 
uncovering. This exploration is not limited to areas 
but extends to the discovery of new methods or 
abilities. 
5. The Expressionist. These players play for the 
chance to express themselves within the game. They 
wish to have control over what happens and 
generally influence the game.  
6. The Dreamer. The Dreamer plays to escape 
everyday life temporarily. They wish to fully 
immerse themselves in the game world and become 
part of it for a while, taking in the various sensations 
offered by it. 
7. The Daredevil. These players, like Challengers, 
enjoy difficult games. However, their motivation to 
play them is not the careful consideration of 
problems, but instead the thrill and suspense 
provided by certain obstacles. They also enjoy 
Horror games as these are suspenseful and thrilling 
by nature. 
8. The Winner. This category describes players who 
deem winning to be one of their primary goals or 
their only goal. They also enjoy difficulty in games, 
as it makes the experience of winning more 
rewarding. There is less merit in winning something 
easy than winning something difficult. 
9. The Collector. Collectors like collecting and 
completing. This does not only refer to quests or 
objects in games, but also describes the act of 
finding or doing everything a game has to offer. 
Of course, no person can be described as only one Player 
Type. Humans’ desires and their psychology are far too 
complex to be labeled accurately with nine terms. Instead of 
assigning one description to each person, this approach 
attempts to describe possible motivations while considering 
that each player falls into different categories to different 
degrees [6]. For instance, one person may enjoy a strong 
narrative (Narrator), while also playing the game to escape 
everyday life (Dreamer) and following the drive to collect 
everything in the game (Collector). But they despise puzzles 
(Challenger) and thrills (Daredevil). Each player has an 
individual profile of Player Types, with some of them being 
stronger motivators and influencers of behavior than others. 
A group of people can be defined by their common 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

predominant Player Types. One person can fall into many 
categories this way, each of them defined by one of the 
Player Types that influences them the most. This approach at 
classifying them acknowledges the multitude of possible 
motivators and influencers, while also maintaining the ease 
of identifying people with labels. 
It is important to understand which Player Types are 
predominant in the audience. Due to their different motives, 
natures and drives, people categorized as different Player 
Types have different priorities and preferences regarding 
several elements of a game’s design; this includes the story 
[6], as will be discussed later.  
IV. 
HOW TO USE THE FRAMEWORK 
A. General description 
In Section III all components of a game story and their 
positions within the UFoS Framework were explained. In 
addition, the Nine Psychographic Player Types were 
introduced, which simplify the Framework application. Now, 
it is important to understand how the UFoS Framework 
could be used during the story design of a CDG.  
There are different phases in the process of the story 
development. They all correspond with one or more of the 
components described in the previous Section. Each phase 
contains several steps to be followed to create the basis of a 
CDG story. 
The first phase exists to establish the Serious Content 
which, as previously mentioned, must be determined first to 
design every other element to underline and support it.  
The second phase deals with determining the Player, the 
audience of the game. It requires a definition of their 
demographic traits, as well as their psychographic profile, 
which can include up to nine different psychographic player 
types (see Section III). This phase has to take place after the 
definition of the Serious Content, because the teaching goal 
implies a specific target audience. Sometimes, when a CDG 
is developed, several of the traits of the Players are already 
pre-determined (e.g., if the intention is to play the game with 
employees of a company, they have to be at least 18 years 
old). It has to, however, occur before developing several of 
the other components, as the definition of the Player will 
influence design choices that affect them.  
The third phase is used to determine the priorities of the 
Setting, the Plot and the Characters. As previously 
mentioned, a developer should prioritize one of the three 
components over the other two, to focus on that one in more 
detail. So, the developer should establish a priority list, 
which includes the components Setting, Plot and Characters. 
This third phase requires the developer to not only prioritize 
one component, but to furthermore determine which of the 
other two is the second and which is the least important, 
creating a hierarchy. This list is utilized to make design 
choices and determine the level of detail each component 
gains in the design process. Since the priorities determine 
some of the design choices of the other aspects, phase three 
needs to occur at this time. However, since setting the 
priorities largely depends on the Serious Content and the 
preferences of the Player, it cannot take place sooner. 
The fourth phase is the largest one. It is about designing 
the now prioritized components Setting, Plot and Characters. 
This phase is repeated multiple times. Due to the varying 
order of the elements, some of the steps may require 
information from steps or elements that have not yet been 
developed. In such instances, the developer will have to 
make a note and move on with the following steps and return 
to the missing or incomplete ones during the next iteration, 
to complete them with the information gained and developed 
within their successor steps. As mentioned, not only their 
order is determined by the assessment of the priorities, but 
their level of detail, as well. That does not necessarily mean 
that the development team cannot give each element a lot of 
details. It merely indicates how much detail should be 
actively presented to the Player in the game and how much 
detail should be relevant and a part of the overall product 
(this relationship is explained in the second Section of this 
Section with an example). 
The fifth and final phase deals with presentation. Once 
all other elements have been determined, the developer has 
enough knowledge to understand in what capacity which 
things have to be presented to the Player throughout the 
CDG interface. 
Table I shows that each of these phases contains steps 
describing the precise actions the developer must take. These 
steps include a brief descriptive title.  
Furthermore, there are three pieces of information that 
are not included in Table I because of spatial limitations: 
Required internal information, Required external information 
and the Instruction. The first two columns describe which 
information is needed to perform the instructions. This 
additional content can be found in [22]. 
It should be noted, that the information provided in this 
paper is not adequate to use the story Framework. If the 
Framework is to be used, it is absolutely necessary to 
download the pdf file from [22] and follow its instructions 
step by step. 
As can be seen in the linked pdf document, the actions 
that have to be taken in each step depend on the 
Psychographic Player Type the game wants to serve. 
Therefore, during the use of the Framework (carry out the 
Framework step by step) it will be necessary to understand 
the preferences of the CDG’s players. This knowledge is 
required for many steps and displayed in the Framework in 
the ‘required internal information’ area. To provide a handle 
for the different player characteristics, Nine Psychographic 
Player Types where defined through conceptual and 
empirical research (see Sections III or V). These Player 
Types refer not only to digital CDGs, but also to 
entertainment video games. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  
THE PHASES AND STEPS OF THE UFOS FRAMEWORK 
Phases 
UFoS Steps for CDGs 
Phase 1: 
Defining the 
Serious 
Content 
Serious Content – Step 1: Determine the intention 
Serious Content – Step 2: Define the Serious Content 
Phase 2: 
Defining the 
Player 
Player – Step 1: Demographic Factors 
Player – Step 2: Define the Psychographic Player Type 
Phase 3: 
Determining 
Priorities 
Priorities – Step 1: Set the Priorities 
Phase 4: 
Performing 
Setting, 
Characters 
and Plot 
Setting – Step 1: Requirements 
Setting – Step 2: Realism 
Setting – Step 3: Accessibility 
Setting – Step 4: Debriefing 
Setting – Step 5: Simplicity 
Setting – Step 6: Size 
Setting – Step 7: Laws 
Setting – Step 8: Player Influence 
Characters – Step 1: Existence of NPCs 
Characters – Step 2: Character Focus 
Characters – Step 3: NPC roles 
Characters – Step 4: NPC character Profiles 
Characters – Step 5: NPC backstory 
Characters – Step 6: NPC memories 
Characters – Step 7: NPC affective State and Actions 
Characters – Step 8: NPC relationships 
Characters – Step 9: PC observer  
Characters – Step 10: PC grade of Personality 
Characters – Step 11: PC customization 
Characters – Step 12: PC motivations 
Characters – Step 13: PC player Character Personality 
Characters – Step 14: Relationships 
Plot – Step 1: Linearity 
Plot – Step 2: Outline 
Plot – Step 3: Time Constraints 
Plot – Step 4: Serious and Non-Serious Content 
Plot – Step 5: Exposition 
Plot – Step 6: Tutorial 
Plot – Step 7: Hook 
Plot – Step 8: Obstacles 
Plot – Step 9: Plot Points 
Plot – Step 10: Choice 
Plot – Step 11: Impact of Choice 
Plot – Step 12: Illusion of Freedom 
Plot – Step 13: Climax 
Plot – Step 14: Resolution and endings 
Phase 5: 
Defining 
Presentation 
Presentation – Step 1: Plot 
Presentation – Step 2: Choice 
 
B. Exemplary use 
To illustrate this process, one can examine a fictional 
example. This will create a better understanding of the 
Framework use and underline the connections between 
different parts of the process. The preferences of the Player 
Types that will be mentioned here are shown in the UFoS 
Framework document [22]. 
The fictional example in this case is a CDG that seeks to 
teach the employees of various companies IT-Security. The 
game writer, tasked with developing the story, utilizes UFoS.  
In Phase 1, they must describe the Serious Content. The 
description of the project already does this loosely. The 
Serious Content is IT-Security. However, the game writer 
needs to define what parts of IT-security the game will entail 
and which it will exclude. They examine some standards and 
risks described by the ISO/IEC 27001 and formulate 
scenarios that will be depicted by the game. Then they 
continue with Phase 2. 
Phase 2 requires them to define the Player. The Serious 
Content determines some of the demographic traits. Since its 
IT-Security in companies, the Players have a broad age range 
from 18 to around 65, are of all genders, and can be at 
various stages of life. To establish the Player Types within 
the audience, the game writer conducts a survey questioning 
the employees of multiple companies. The results e.g., show 
that the primary Player Types in the target audience are 
Narrators, Explorers, Dreamers and Winners.  
In Phase 3 the game writer has to establish the priorities 
between the three large components Setting, Characters and 
Plot. They decide that the most important component to 
depict IT-Security is Plot, as this entails showing behavior 
and consequences. In IT-Security this means showing what 
type of behavior can lead to security breaches. The 
preferences of the Narrators, Explorers, Dreamers and 
Winners underline this decision. The game writer is unsure 
which to set as second most important component. The 
Setting can provide themes of environmental security 
whereas Characters allow dealing with social engineering. 
Because Explorers prefer Characters over Setting and the 
other Player Types are indifferent, the writer selects 
Characters. 
Phase 4 deals with the three large components. First, the 
game writer writes the Plot, as this is the component they 
prioritized. They write a basic outline for the Plot in which a 
group of people has to master IT-Security to overcome some 
large obstacle. They realize that they need to establish the 
Setting to get into more detail. They match the Plot to the 
time constraints, decide on a pattern to include Serious 
Content and write everything, keeping IT-Security and the 
preferences of the Player Types in mind. Next is the design 
of the Characters. The game writer decides to include NPCs, 
as Characters is of the second highest priority and IT-
Security can benefit from it. Additionally, all of the found 
Player Types enjoy them. For social engineering, a part of 
IT-Security, the game writer places the focus on the NPCs. 
They then write characters that match the requirements 
posed by the Serious Content, the Player Types, and the Plot. 
The Plot, for example, demands that certain people exist to 
carry out certain actions, which are roles that the game writer 
has to consider. 
Once the Characters are developed, the game writer deals 
with the Setting. They decide to set the story in a spaceship 
in the future as this is a topic all people of the target audience 
understand. Also, it can portray all needed elements of IT-
Security (e.g., technology, etc.). After the Setting is 
developed, they go back and fill in more details in the Plot, 
such as describing which NPC is used in which situation and 
what elements of the Setting are employed in which way. 
Once all Steps are finished, Phase 4 is concluded. 
In Phase 5 the game writer decides to present the Plot via 
Cut-Scenes and Dialogue, as these methods cater to all 
Player Types in the audience.  
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The game writer documents all their decisions in one 
comprehensive document, creating the basic story of their 
CDG. 
V. 
DERIVATION OF THE FRAMEWORK 
The Framework is based on the previously explained 
components of story. These were derived by examining a list 
of elements of story and modifying it to be simpler and to 
meet the requirements of an interactive medium. The initial 
list of elements consisted of 11 elements found and arranged 
by Miller, director of the World Storytelling Institute [18]: 
1. “Characters (decisions and follow-through) 
2. Place 
3. Time (continues, or jumps, flashbacks?) 
4. Storyline (also known as, plot). 
5. Sensory Elements: Smells, Flavours, Colours, 
Textures, etc. 
6. Objects. Such as: Clothing. A costume. A piece of 
fabric. 
7. Characters’ physical gestures, and attitudes. 
8. Emotions in the story (for the characters, the teller, 
and the listeners). 
9. Narrator’s Point of View. (Who is telling the story? 
[…]) 
10. Narrator’s Tone of Voice, Attitude, Style (casual, 
formal, other?). 
11. Theme (Meaning, moral, message, idea).” [18] 
This list was selected as a starting point, as Miller is a 
very credible source. Additionally, his list entails several 
steps that were only partially covered in other lists and 
sources. This list is altered in the following paragraphs, as it 
only matches stories in general not stories in CDGs, 
specifically. 
Several of these elements can be combined into one, 
more broadly defined element. The first element, Characters 
and the seventh element Character’s physical gestures, and 
attitudes, can be merged into one bigger element of 
Characters with all their traits and behavior. The elements 
place and time can be combined in one element Setting. This 
also seems to be important, since the state of a place can only 
be described under the consideration of time.  
Miller understands the Storyline as a sequence of events, 
that occur within the story [18]. To reduce misunderstanding 
between storyline and story, the term Plot will be used 
instead.  
Sensory Elements are stimuli which affect the audience 
[18]. But usually, the development of these kind of elements 
is task of other departments than the story department [7]. 
For that reason, they do not occur in the actual story 
developing process, so that they are omitted for simplifying 
reasons. 
Objects are things that appear in the Plot or the story 
[18]. They do not add enough to the whole story construct to 
process them separately.  
The following two elements: Narrator’s Point of View 
and Narrator’s Tone of Voice et al. will also be summarized 
under the element Characters. This is because a distinction 
between two types of Characters can be made: The PC, an 
entity controlled by the Player, and the NPCs, characters 
who are controlled by Artificial Intelligence. The elements 
pertaining to the Narrator are included in the definition of the 
PC, as their perspective determines the audience’s point of 
view, and their comments, attitude etc. (see [9]) reflect a 
narrator’s tone of voice. 
The eleventh and final element is Theme. Theme is 
described as a combination of the preceding ten, it is the 
driving force behind the game [18]. In a CDG this driving 
force has to be the Serious Content of the game and as that it 
will be maintained.  
 By shortening the list in that way, it will be easier for the 
developer to work with and understand the elements. The 
resulting list looks as follows: 
1. Characters 
a. 
Non-Player Characters 
b. Player Characters 
2. The Setting 
3. The Plot 
4. Serious Content 
As shown, these elements cover a whole CDG story. By 
that, they shape the base of the UFoS Framework as shown 
in the Sections II and III and represent four of the six 
Framework components. Beyond these elements, the center 
of the UFoS Framework consists additionally of the 
components Player and Presentation. The following Section 
explains the derivation of this both components.  
Miller wrote about Story and Storytelling in general. In 
addition to his definition, some elements that are not part of 
traditional storytelling must be considered when dealing with 
CDGs or video games in general. While each story requires a 
form of presentation, games are one of the only mediums 
with as many different possibilities of presenting story as 
they have. 
One of the missing components is the Presentation of a 
digital game story. There are several ways to do so, the 
possibilities are hardly limited. This fact is e.g., shown in the 
‘Preverbal phenomenon’. This phenomenon is based on the 
consideration that a narrative can be understood without the 
use of language [11]. By that, every element inside a CDG 
can contribute to the whole game story construct, but it does 
not necessarily have to. Of course, it is not possible to cover 
a huge amount of story presentation methods, but to assist a 
story developer at work the UFoS Frameworks deals with 
five common plot presentation methods: Narration [12], 
Dialogue [13], Cut-Scenes [14], Environmental Storytelling 
[15] and Collection [16], which were already explained in 
Section II. 
Another aspect of a game story presentation is that game 
stories are not static. In interactive media, as opposed to 
books or movies, the audience has the possibility to influence 
the course of events happening in the game.  
To provide interactive content to the player, games offer 
‘Choices’ e.g., in form of several textual options on screen or 
by putting the player in an open world, allowing them to do 
whatever they want [6]. Of course, this kind of freedom has 
to be considered during the story development. A game 
designer has to be sure that the story is presented in the right 
sequence and that every path of the game leads to a 
consistent story. In a dynamic game environment these 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

conditions result in very high requirements on the story 
presentation. Choices have to be considered during the whole 
game development to perform well during the story 
presentation. For the above reasons, as part of Presentation, 
Choices have been included in the Framework, to ensure the 
timely integration into the story development process. 
The other missing component is the Player. While every 
medium has an audience, interactive media needs to consider 
it more strongly as the player has to play to drive the story 
forward and has to be invested in the gameplay. Because the 
story aspects of gameplay are presented through the Setting, 
the Characters and the Plot, the Player should be considered 
while developing these components. Therefore, these three 
elements are the most vital as they make up the true content 
of the story. The Player, represented by the Psychographic 
Player Types, was integrated into the Framework, too. The 
derivation of the types is explained in the next Section.  
1. Serious Content 
2. The Player 
3. The Setting 
4. Characters 
a. 
Non-Player Characters 
b. Player Characters 
5. The Plot 
a. 
Choices 
6. Presentation 
VI. 
DERIVATION OF THE PSYCHOGRAPHIC PLAYER TYPES  
In this Section, it will be explained how the different 
Psychographic Player Types were created and what 
taxonomies were examined in order to do so. Understanding 
what the Player Types are and how their traits were defined 
aids in understanding Players and their desires as such, since 
the derivation provides insights into several attempts at 
categorizing and defining human desires and preferences. 
Considering the expertise and observations of different 
people provides a more objectively true and thorough insight 
into the minds of the audience. 
The Player Types were derived from preexisting 
taxonomies and attempts to group the motivations and 
desires relating to games. The selected taxonomies are some 
of the few grouping players by psychographic attributes and 
all examine this theme from slightly different angles (Types, 
Pleasures, Motives), without repeating their point of view. 21 
categories with their origins in three different taxonomies 
were examined. Their traits and attributes were analyzed to 
determine similarities and differences. They were then 
grouped by those traits to create new, sometimes more 
broadly defined, Player Types. The comparison of the 
different categories and resulting Psychographic Player 
Types can be seen in Table II. 
Here, the different taxonomies are depicted in columns. 
Each cell contains one or more of their categories. The rows 
show which categories share similarities and were therefore 
combined, with the resulting Player Type of each 
comparison being presented in the right-most column. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
PLAYER TYPES DERIVATION 
 
While sometimes different categories from different 
taxonomies were combined to create a Player Type, 
occasionally some categories of one taxonomy were fused 
into one Player Type with a broader definition.  
The only category that is absent is the “Luck Motive” of 
the “Aesthetic Motives of Play” [19]. This is because, on one 
hand, that motive is describes as a desire for fairness and 
equal opportunities, which every person has to a degree. On 
the other hand, Players of a CDG should not rely on luck to 
achieve victory, as this does not underline the learning and 
improvement of a skill or competence. 
From these Player Types, as well as the Framework 
components, a need for empirical research arises to ensure 
that these conceptually derived elements indeed exist as 
assumed through the literature examination. However, 
because the player preferences are crucial during the use of 
the UFoS Framework (represented through Player Types), a 
study has been designed to link Player Types to Player 
preferences. 
This study was created in form of an online survey. First, 
the participants were asked to select up to two motivations 
factors to play video games from a list of nine motivations, 
corresponding to the Nine Psychographic Player Types. This 
information was utilized to group the participants into the 
Player Types. They were then asked several questions related 
to each Framework component, asking for preferences, likes 
and dislikes regarding video game stories. 
Overall, the study includes 37 questions. The first 8 
questions refer to demographic characteristics, like age and 
gender, but also to general video game subjects as the main 
reasons to play (Player Type) or whether the participant has 
ever played to learn. The following 5 questions relate to the 
Setting, followed by 9 questions about Characters, 8 about 
the Plot, 4 about Choices plus 2 about Presentation. Finally, 
there was one question referring to the desired balance 
between Characters, Plot and Setting.   
118 people participated in the survey. Among them, all 
the Player Types were represented as seen in Figure 2. Each 
subject was assigned to up to two Player Types. 
Bartle’s 
Taxonomy 
of Player 
Types 
[20] 
LeBlanc’s 
Taxonomy of 
Game 
Pleasures 
[21] 
The 
Aesthetic 
Motives of 
Play 
[19] 
The 
Psychographic 
Player Types 
(result) 
 
Narrative 
Narrative 
The Narrator 
Achiever, 
Killer 
Challenge 
Problem-
Solving 
The Challenger 
Socializer 
Fellowship 
Social 
The Socialite 
Explorer 
Discovery 
Curiosity 
The Explorer 
 
Expression 
Agency 
The 
Expressionist 
 
Submission, 
Fantasy, 
Sensation 
 
The Dreamer 
 
 
Thrill-Seeking, 
Horror 
The Daredevil 
Achiever 
 
Victory 
The Winner 
Achiever, 
Explorer 
 
Acquisition 
The Collector 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

To validate the preferences and differences in preferences 
between each Player Type, the data records were grouped by 
Player Types. These grouped records were used to analyze 
for each question whether the average-answer of a certain 
Player Type is ‘within the average’ of all answers, ‘above the 
average’, ‘below the average’, ‘strongly above the average’ 
or ‘strongly below the average’ of all answers. By that, it 
was possible to determine whether the Player Types deviate 
greatly from another or whether they are very similar.  
The analysis of the congruence in answers between 
Player Types determines that the highest congruence in 
answers in between two different Player Types is at 53.73%. 
The Player Types in question are the Narrator and the 
Dreamers. This means that for 53.73% of all answers, these 
two Player Types answered very similarly. In other words, if 
a game developer creates a game story to cater to Narrators, 
he would also be catering to Dreamers about 53.73% of the 
time. This means that about half of the time the Dreamers 
would not be as satisfied with the design choices as they 
could be. This, in return, means that no two Player Types are 
similar enough to combine them into one. It can be 
interpreted as a confirmation that considering several types is 
meaningful. 
To ensure that the differences in the Player Types are 
statistically significant, the answers to every item grouped by 
the Player Types were replaced by numbers from 1 (strongly 
below the average) to 5 (strongly above the average). This 
creates a scale from 1 to 5 for every answer, representing 
how much each Player Type agrees with the average answer. 
An ANOVA calculated with these data shows with α = .05 a 
p-value < .0002 with 𝐹(8;252) = 3.963 and a critical F-Value 
= 1.975. By that the H0 hypotheses “there are no differences 
in between the Player Types” with a level of significance of 
α = .05 is to be rejected. Table III shows in how many cases 
the questions between two Player Types are “very similar” 
and, by that, in reverse the differences between the Player 
Types.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Player Type distribution 
 
 
TABLE III.  
NUMBER OF ‘VERY SIMILAR’ ANSWERS IN BETWEEN 
PLAYER TYPES 
Values >40% are bold printed 
 
Therefore, many of the steps shown in Table I contain a 
note explaining what to do when dealing with which Player 
Type, allowing for the designer to optimize the story for the 
Player Types they uncovered in their audience. These notes 
are accessible as ‘instructions’ in [22]. These instructions are 
developed from the literature and only integrated into the 
Framework, if they were validated by the study. Therefore, 
the integrated concept between the UFoS Framework and the 
Psychographic Player Types provides a designer with the 
possibility to develop an audience optimized and entertaining 
CDG-Story. The entire concept has to be carried out 
iteratively. This ensures that the player preferences 
characterized by the Player Types are incorporated into all 
areas of the story and are noticed in all story developing 
phases. In this way (as shown in Section IV) the components 
Characters, Setting and Plot are influencing each other 
depending on the targeted Player Type. 
However, a detailed review of the 37 questions, grouped 
according to the Player Types, in this paper is not 
meaningful in terms of the scope of this publication. It is 
planned to publish a detailed review in another publication 
with a different focus.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
A Framework that has the power to create an entire 
motivating CDG’s story is explained in this paper. The 
Framework supports CDG story designers to ask themselves 
the necessary questions in the right moment and to take 
solidly based decisions in the right order. During that 
process, game story designers are encouraged to define their 
target audience. Therefore, due to the use of the UFoS 
Framework, it can be ensured that a story was created in 
which everything is included, and the right priorities were 
set. By that, the possibility to use CDGs for research topics is 
enhanced because the influence of the CDG’s story on the 
research will be decreased. 
The paper illustrated the Framework dependencies by 
utilizing a fictional example, establishing that it’s possible to 
use the Framework in the field and underlining the 
connections in between the components. In addition to 
providing a simple use of the 
Framework, Nine 
Psychographic Player Types were described. Furthermore, it 
was explained how to use the Framework and where to get 
additional information and detailed procedures to do so. 
 
Na 
Ch 
So 
E 
Ex 
Dr 
Da 
Wi 
Co 
Na 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ch 
43% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So 
31% 
40% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 
53% 
40% 
35% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ex 
43% 
44% 
40% 
43% 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr 
54% 
50% 
43% 
52% 
45% 
 
 
 
 
Da 
37% 
30% 
25% 
32% 
37% 
29% 
 
 
 
Wi 
40% 
44% 
34% 
43% 
38% 
45% 
28% 
 
 
Co 
28% 
26% 
28% 
32% 
32% 
32% 
29% 
33% 
 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Subsequently, the derivation of the UFoS Framework and 
the Nine Psychographic Player Types was described. For that 
reason, an empirical study was presented that validates the 
existence 
of 
the 
Player 
Types 
and 
the 
different 
characteristics. A story designer has to integrate these 
characteristics, depending on the Player Types and the 
current Framework phase or step.     
However, it is required to further test and specify the 
Player Types and the UFoS Framework.  
Currently, it is only statistically significantly proven that 
there are at least the nine identified Player Types; it could be 
possible that there are more yet unknown. Because the 
current nine Types were discovered during a literature 
analysis, an explorative empirical study will be useful to 
identify more types, if there are any. In addition, possible 
connections between the Player Types and demographic 
traits should be sought to more easily group a potential 
audience into the Player Types. Yet, the only method is close 
observation of the audience and asking them to evaluate their 
own motivations to play as has been done in the survey.  
Although the Framework was carefully derived from the 
literature, it is only proven by concept, excluded from the 
step-instructions. Therefore, the next step will be a use of the 
Framework during a CDG development process to prove the 
concept as whole in a real development situation.  
Furthermore, the UFoS Framework has been developed 
to get used by game story designers. So far it is not possible 
for laymen to develop a CDG story with the Framework. 
Enabling this could be the focus of future developments. It 
would require a deep understanding of every detail and 
aspect of a CDG story, but it would allow many scientists to 
perform CDG-based experiments even in small or low 
budget research groups. 
In summary, the User-Focused Storybuilding Framework 
for Competence Developing Games provides a powerful tool 
to develop CDG stories.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Michael and S. Chen, “Serious Games That Educate, Train, 
and Inform,” Thomson Course Technology PTR, 2006. 
[2] J. A. König and M. R. Wolf, “A New Definition of 
Competence Developing Games,” ACHI 2016, pp. 95-97, 
2016. 
[3] M. Zyda, “From visual simulation to virtual reality to games,” 
IEEE Computer Society (Computer), Volume:38, Issue: 9, 
2005, P. 25-32. 
[4] U. Ritterfeld, Serious Games: Only Quality is Fun (Original 
foreign title: Serious Games: Nur Qualität macht Spaß), 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.checkpoint-
elearning.de/article/5425.html [retrieved: January, 2018] 
[5] J. A. König and M. R. Wolf, “The Pyramid Assessment 
Framework for ‘Competence Developing Games’,” HCI 
International, pp. 232-237, 2016. 
[6] J. Schell, “The Art of Game Design: a Book of Lenses,” 
Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann, 2008.  
[7] S. Rogers, “Level up the Guide to great Video Game Design,” 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[8] S. Field, “Screenplay: The Foundations of Screenwriting,” 
Delta, Revised ed., 2005. 
[9] A. M. Freed, Alexander Free. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.alexanderfreed.com/2014/01/13/craft-sessions-
character-viewpoint-and-audience-sympathy/ 
[retrieved: 
January, 2018] 
[10] Anon, 
Dictionary, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.dictionary.com/browse/setting [retrieved: January, 
2018] 
[11] R. Nakatsu, M. Rauterberg, and P. Ciancarini, “Handbook of 
digital Games and Entertainment Technologies,” Signapore: 
SpringerReference, 2017. 
[12] P. Hühn and R. Sommer, The living handbook of narratology. 
[Online]. 
http://www.lhn.uni-hamburg.de/article/narration-
poetry-and-drama/ [retrieved: January, 2018] 
[13] S. King, “On Writing,” Charles Scriber’s Sons, 2000. 
[14] T. C. Caputo, “Visual Storytelling: The Art and Technique,” 
Watson-Guptill Publications, 2003. 
[15] M. Aaron, “Design, User Experience, and Usability. User 
Experience Design for diverse Interaction Platforms and 
Environments,” Springer, 2014. 
[16] A. Pitzer, Harvey Smith on environmental Storytelling and 
embedding 
Narrative. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://niemanstoryboard.org/stories/harvey-smith-
onenvironmental-storytelling-and-embedding-narrative/ 
[retrieved: January, 2018] 
[17] J. 
Wöbbeking, 
4Players. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.4players.de/4players.php/dispbericht/Allgemein/T
est/30907/816 87/0/Gone_Home.html [retrieved: January, 
2018] 
[18] E. Miller, Theories of Story and Storytelling. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.storytellingandvideoconferencing.com/ [retrieved: 
January, 2018] 
[19] K. Karpouzis and G. N. Yannakakis, “Emotion in Games,” 
Switzerland: Springer, 2016. 
[20] R. 
A. 
Bartle, 
MUD. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm#1 [retrieved: January, 2018] 
[21] R. Hunicke, M. LeBlanc, and R. Zubeck, “MDA: A Formal 
Approach to Game Design and Game Research,” Workshop on 
Challenges in Game AI, AAAI, 2004, pp.1-4 doi: 
http://dx.doi.ord/10.1.1.79.4561. 
[22] Lab for IT-Organization and Management, “Gamified Hacking 
Offence Simulation-based Training”, [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.itom.fh-aachen.de/pdf/UFoS-Framework.pdf 
Last access: 12.03.2018, 2018. 
[23] Unity Technologies, “Unity”, [Online]. Available from: 
https://unity3d.com/ Last access: 12.03.2018, 2018. 
[24] Epic 
Games, 
Inc. 
“Make  
Something 
Unreal”, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/what-is-unreal-engine-4 
Last access: 12.03.2018, 2018. 
 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

