“Was it easy”? “Yes”. “Will you use it”? “No”.  
Elderly Trying Out a Kinect Interface 
 
Guri Verne 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Norway 
e-mail: guribv@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes a qualitative study that seeks to 
give a rich description of the experiences and viewpoints of 
elderly about their use of digital technologies in general and 
videoconferencing in particular. Interviews and workshops 
were methods for data collection. The workshops included a 
discussion group session in addition to a session of trying out 
gesturing as a response to a videoconference call. A prototype 
of a gestures-based interface for interacting with a 
videoconference system intended for use in their homes was 
tried out. The participants had clear views of technologies they 
used and liked, and they wanted to maintain physical fitness as 
long as possible. Although they found the gestures easy to 
perform, they did not want to use this technology in their 
homes. This apparent self-contradictory response is discussed. 
Keywords-elderly; videoconference; gestures; Kinect; design. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Welfare technology for the elderly is intended to improve 
their health and quality of life while preserving their 
autonomy and well-being. The aim is for public health 
services to be able to take care of an increasing population of 
elderly. As more people live longer and need care from 
public services, the elderly that are accepted into care homes 
are less able to take care of themselves than previously. 
Elderly who cannot take completely care of themselves live 
longer in their own homes supported by public care services 
and welfare technology is expected to play a role in this 
support.   
The term “welfare technology” denotes a rather wide 
class of technologies. There are several approaches to the 
development of welfare technology. Some focus on assisted 
living and remote surveillance [1][2][3], others focus on 
exercising 
[4][5][6], 
while 
others 
again 
focus 
on 
communication and socializing [7][8][9]. 
Social connections are considered important for a healthy 
life in old age. Loneliness is found to correlate with 
functional decline and even death [10]. Videoconference 
technology is one means of supporting connections with and 
between elderly in their homes. This paper reports from a 
project where videoconference technology is developed to 
support communication between elderly in their homes, 
municipal care personnel, and with friends and family. The 
elderly do not need to use a PC as the TV set that is already 
present and familiar to the elderly will be used for the 
videoconference. To enable also elderly who do not use a PC 
to use the videoconferencing technology, an interface based 
on gestures instead of a mouse or a remote controller will be 
tried out. The ambition is to base the gestures on previous 
habits and bodily knowledge which are experienced as easy 
for the elderly users [11]. A Kinect camera was used to 
capture and interpret the gestures.  The gestures that are 
chosen build on naturally occurring gestures for greeting 
someone or answering the phone and will be presented 
below.  
This paper presents the experiences from two workshops 
with elderly participants. The workshops served a dual 
purpose of eliciting the elderly participants’ experiences with 
digital technologies and trying out gesturing as an interface 
to a videoconference prototype. The workshops were part of 
a user-centered development process and were aimed at 
giving input to the design process.   
This study is a qualitative case study as the elderly 
participants’ own views are the focus of the study [12]. A 
result of the study is that many elderly use more digital 
technology than they say they do. Even though the elderly 
participants found the gestures easy to perform, they did not 
want to use gestures-based videoconferencing in their 
homes.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next 
Section, 
related 
works 
about 
welfare 
technology, 
videoconferencing and gestures-based communication are 
presented. The method is described in Section III, while 
Sections IV-V presents findings from the study. In Section 
VI, the results are discussed, while Section VII concludes the 
paper.  
II. 
ELDERLY AND THEIR USE OF TECHNOLOGIES 
Early work on elderly and technology showed that 
practical experience from using computers earlier in life 
reinforced their positive attitudes  towards computer use as 
they grew older [13]. The emotional dimension of staying 
engaged with life and society, and adapt to changes in 
technology is important with elderly users of ICT. They are 
concerned that they can continue living autonomously and 
continue activities that they value [14][15]. If the technology 
fits with their lives and values, elderly people can learn new 
technological skills and use them for their own purposes. In 
addition to practical purposes, using any device is coupled 
with affective and emotional experiences, for example 
expectations, satisfaction, values, joy, or frustration. Also, 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the age group between 71-92 years can be active producers 
of online content and interact with strangers sharing the same 
interest [14]. 
However, technology often becomes too difficult to use 
in practice [9][16]. Assistive technologies installed into the 
homes do often not meet the elderly person’s needs. Some 
devices become abandoned and some deliberately disabled 
[1]. 
 
A. Videoconferencing 
An experiment with using videoconferencing with 
elderly functioned well in semi-controlled environments in a 
lab [17]. When the videoconferencing equipment was moved 
into the homes of the elderly and put into use there, it did not 
function so well [9]. Various difficulties arose. Elderly who 
managed to use the remote controller and the TV set and 
respond to videoconference calls in the controlled test, did 
not respond with the same high level of fidelity when they 
were in their own homes where contextual and contingent 
events got their attention and priority. Also, light conditions 
in the homes turned out to be different and less favourable 
for the video camera than in the lab, and this caused the view 
to be of less quality for the nurse in the other end. In one 
case, a woman was in her bed and did not answer the call 
within time.  
The different responses between lab conditions and the 
home will be of importance if this technology is considered 
for use in a real life work setting. The nurse may need to 
contact the person in a traditional way, for example visit the 
home in question or telephone the elderly, if there is no 
response. The no-response could indicate that a serious 
situation has occurred, and the nurse will need to find out. 
The video call will in this situation mainly provide her with 
extra work as she will have to resort to the traditional means 
for contacting the elderly person at home if the call is not 
answered.  
 
B. Experiences with  Kinect camera 
The Kinect camera is developed as a motion-sensing 
input device for gaming computers. The camera comes with 
software specifically tailored to recognize certain gestures 
and movements, and is used in a variety of contexts and 
applications. The Kinect with its software can interpret 
specific gestures, making completely hands-free control of 
electronic devices possible.  It uses an infrared projector and 
camera and a special microchip to track the movement of 
objects and individuals in three dimensions. There are 
expectations that gesture interaction will be experienced as 
natural and easy as it builds on bodily communication and 
movements [18][19]. However, gestures-based interaction 
needs to be learned for sufficient precision [20].  A mutual 
adaption takes place: users have to adapt to the technology 
by learning to move in particular ways, and the algorithms 
adapt to the users’ movements [21]. 
To be read by the camera so that the user’s “skeleton” 
can be detected and movements identified with sufficient 
precision, the Kinect requires exaggerated gestures. 
Controlling oneself to perform the exaggerated movements 
may be difficult. To be able to move in a way that is 
recognized by the algorithms, the user benefitted from being 
able to “technomorphise”; that is, adapt to how the user 
believes that the machine will interpret his or her movements  
[19]. Although the gestures need to be learned, hands free 
control open for a larger space for possible human computer 
interactions.  
The Kinect is used in many applications related to elderly 
and health care, in particular to encourage older adults to 
exercise [4][22][6]. A literature review from 2014 of Kinect 
applications in elderly care classify its use into fall detection, 
fall risk reduction, evaluation of Kinect’s spatial accuracy, 
rehabilitation methods and exercise games [23]. The 
camera’s accuracy is discussed by [22] who finds that the 
camera lacks precision in some situations, for example when 
a user is in wheelchairs, or when body parts are occluded. 
There is a perceptual asymmetry between the Kinect user 
and the computer, in terms of the resources available for both 
parties to interpret the interaction. The user perceives the 
whole space where the Kinect is situated, while the computer 
only “senses” the users’ movements through a motion 
recognition camera. Only gestures that function as input is 
“seen” and identified by the algorithms [24]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY AND METHOD 
This study is a qualitative interpretive case study 
[25][26][27]. In two workshops, 22 elderly participants 
discussed their experiences with and views on digital 
technology. They were also invited to try gesturing to the 
Kinect camera in a simulated response to an incoming 
videoconference 
call. 
Interpretive 
research 
aims 
to 
understand what gives meaning for other people and takes as 
the starting point that our knowledge about other people’s 
thoughts and experiences comes from social interactions. 
The methods for data gathering were interviews and 
participant observation in the two workshops. 
Interviews: As a preparation for the workshops, two 
women in their seventies were interviewed about their 
experiences and use of digital technologies. The in-depth 
interviews lasted about one hour and a half, and took place in 
their homes in the fall of 2015. The women were recruited 
through a women’s NGO for health and society. The 
interviews were recorded and transcribed. Topics from the 
analysis of the interviews were used in the guidelines for the 
discussion groups in the workshops. The two interviewees 
did not participate in the workshops.  
The workshops consisted of a discussion group session 
where each participant was invited to try out the selected 
gestures to a Kinect camera. The workshops took place in the 
spring of 2016. They served a double purpose: discussing the 
participants’ experiences with and thoughts of using digital 
technologies in their homes as well as trying out the 
prototype for gesture interaction with an incoming video 
conference call. The project wanted to test whether the 
selected gestures were easy to perform.  
In the discussion group, the participants were engaged in 
talking about their views of using videoconferencing from 
the living room TV set in their homes. The videoconference 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

prototype functioned in the discussion group as  a “thing to 
think with” [28] in the way that it triggered the participants 
to express concrete viewpoints on videoconferencing 
technology. The author and other members of the project 
acted as facilitators in the discussion group, and two project 
members run the gesturing test. The author had planned and 
arranged the workshop, and took notes during the discussion. 
The participants did not want the discussion recorded. 
The gesturing test was set up as a wizard-of-oz test 
simulating an incoming videoconference call. The sound of a 
telephone ringing could be heard, and the TV screen showed 
a large icon of a green vibrating telephone receiver. When 
the participant performed the selected gesture, the ringing 
stopped and a simulated videoconference session was set up. 
The participant was after some time encouraged to perform 
the same gesture to close the call.  
The TV screen connected with the PC and Kinect camera 
was located in the same room at some distance from the 
discussion group. After trying the gestures in front of the 
Kinect camera, the participants were asked a few questions 
about which gestures they preferred. The Kinect session was 
video recorded and transcribed. The notes were transcribed 
afterwards. After both workshops, the facilitators discussed 
their notes. The analysis consisted of looking for recurrent 
issues in the transcription of the interviews, the notes from 
the discussion groups and the video recordings. 
The first workshop took place in a municipality in the 
south east of the country, called South Mun in this paper. 
The six participants were recruited from a women’s NGO for 
health and society in South Mun. They were all active in 
their community and of good health. They did not receive 
any municipal care services in their homes. We did not ask 
for their exact age; however, they volunteered information 
about being in their seventies.  
The second workshop took place in a day care centre for 
elderly located in the north of Norway, here called North 
Mun. The sixteen participants lived in their own homes and 
received varying degrees of municipal care services. They 
were recruited through the day care centre. This group was 
on the average older than the first group, many were in their 
eighties and the oldest was 95 years old. All participants had 
some physical or cognitive issues. Some was very 
cognitively alert but had some physical challenges, while 
others suffered from some degree of dementia. This day our 
workshop was scheduled by the personnel as the 
(entertainment) event for the day.  
All six participants in the first workshop tried the 
gestures, while nine out of sixteen in the second. The 
personnel at the care centre took an active role in facilitating 
the second workshop and encouraging the participants to try 
the gesturing. Since they knew their clients, they could talk 
in a loud voice to someone with reduced hearing or comment 
on their knowledge of the participants’ life situation or 
technology experience, or in other ways act as interpreters 
between their clients and us, the outside guests.  
IV. 
TRYING OUT GESTURES  
The Kinect was programmed to recognize three specific 
arm movements for accepting an incoming videoconference 
call: a) hand waving like you say “hello”, b) grabbing with 
the arm like picking up the telephone receiver, and c) merely 
moving the arm to an upwards and sideways position at 
one’s right side. In the women’s group at South Mun, all six 
participants tried the gestures, and nine out of fifteen 
participants in North Mun volunteered to try out the 
movements to be recognized by the Kinect.  
 
 
        
 
 
 
Figure 1. The three gestures for answering a call:  
a) hand up, b) grab “the receiver”, c) waving hello.   
 
All participants that tried out the gestures for interacting 
with the prototype received oral instruction before and 
during the test. The participants in North Mun needed more 
follow up instructions. In some cases, there were some 
technical problems, for example the Kinect camera did not 
recognize the body or hand of the participant in front and the 
participant had to wait a little while the test leader tinkered 
with the technology. When the Kinect did not recognize the 
test user’s “skeleton” or she did not immediately succeed, 
she became insecure as to how the gesture should be 
performed. The test leader provided instructions and guided 
the movements in detail if necessary for the user to succeed. 
With detailed guidance, most participants succeeded in 
performing all three gestures with adequate response from 
the Kinect. In some occasions, they had to try more than 
once before the Kinect recognised the gesture. One woman 
did very well with the arm gestures, and it turned out that she 
had played Kinect games with her grandchild. 
The participants preferred different gestures. In South 
Mun, they were asked to rank their preferences, and four out 
of six preferred the hand up gesture, see Figure 1 a). None 
preferred the “grab the receiver” gesture (Figure 1 b), while 
two preferred the hand waving (Figure 1 c). Table I shows 
their preferences in detail. P1-P6 represents the preferences 
of each participant, where Roman numeral i is considered the 
easiest gesture. Hand up was considered the easiest overall 
and received the lowest overall score.  
 
TABLE I. PRIORITIES OF PARTICIPANTS TRYING THE GESTURES 
 
P1 
P2 
P3 
P4 
P5 
P6 
Score 
Hand up 
ii 
i 
ii 
i 
i 
i 
8 
Grab 
iii 
ii 
iii 
ii 
ii 
ii 
14 
Wave 
i 
iii 
i 
iii 
iii 
iii 
14 
 
The Kinect recognition algorithm was only programmed 
for right-handed movements, and left handed gestures were 
not recognized. Of the nine elderly at the day care centre that 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

tested the gestures, two preferred to use the left hand. One of 
them had a painful right handed shoulder, and he needed to 
be reminded of using his right hand several times during the 
test. He seemed to have some pain or discomfort from using 
the right hand.  
One man reacted to the hand up gesture. He said that it 
resembled a “Heil Hitler” movement of the arm. The 
movement is not similar but the man obviously associated 
this gesture with the nazi greeting. He made this comment 
several times when he responded with the hand up gesture 
during the test.  
The workshop at the day care centre was scheduled as the 
main program for the day we visited there. Participants that 
had finished their gestures testing, hang around the TV set 
and watched the others perform. As the day progressed, more 
of the participants gathered around in the TV set, and created 
an atmosphere with funny comments, laughter and 
sometimes bantering to the one trying out the gestures.  
In some occasions, the user performed the movement 
successfully; however, a slight delay between the ringing 
sound and the gesture that can be seen on the videotape 
indicate that the participant does not move the arm as a 
response to the ringing sound, but according to the 
instructions by the test leader.  
In both workshops, the participants observed the test 
leader tinkering with the technology. They observed him 
while setting up the PC, TV and Kinect before the test 
session. In some occasions, some tests could not be 
performed because the camera did not pick up their skeleton 
even after several attempts.  
Most participants stated that that the gestures were easy. 
They 
preferred 
different 
movements, 
seemingly 
independently of the ease with which they succeeded in 
answering the simulated incoming conference call.  To the 
question about what she found easiest, one woman 
responded “I think it is simple as it is, that we answer the 
phone the usual way”.  
V. 
EXPERIENCES AND VIEWPOINTS 
One of the elderly women who was interviewed as a 
preparation for the workshops, accepted the interview 
request with the comment that she was “not so experienced 
with technology”. However, during the interview, she 
described a lot of digital technologies that she used. She said 
that she used her tablet a lot, and talked about using e-mail, 
Facebook, online banking, and reporting the reading of the 
electricity meter online. She started using Facebook when 
her childhood friends who lived on another part of the 
country asked her to join so that they could keep in touch. 
She did not use Skype because she did not like the interface, 
but she used Facetime with her granddaughter who lived in 
another part of the country. 
She had downloaded and installed an app for buying 
public transport tickets and found it very practical while 
moving about. She preferred one app for cloud storage of her 
family pictures instead of another, and explained that she 
preferred the one with less clicks to show the pictures. She 
upgrades the operating system and the apps herself, and 
when in doubt about what to do, she asked her children or 
grandchildren. She demonstrated that she was very familiar 
with the TV set and the remote controller, and she switched 
between sources to let me hear online radio stations through 
the TV set. However, she didn’t like if her grandchildren 
rearranged the cable connections between the devices during 
a visit without putting it back together before they left. She 
felt unsure about how to put it back together.  
All the women who participated in the discussion group 
in South Mun were retired and in their seventies. Some 
volunteered information about their earlier professional life: 
two had worked as a school teacher, one as a kindergarten 
teacher, and one had worked in a bank. They describe days 
with lots of activities. During the summer season, they often 
go to their summer houses or are active in other ways so they 
are not available for meetings between May and August. 
They stay in touch or take care of their grandchildren. They 
are active with organizational work in their NGO, where 
documents and minutes from meetings are emailed as pdf-
files to the mostly retired female members. Most of them are 
physically active, although to different degrees. Except for 
the participant working in the bank, they had little or no 
practical experience from using computers in their previous 
working life.  
As 
with the interviewee mentioned above, the 
participants use more technology than they explicitly say 
when first asked. They all use ICT in some ways, although it 
does not look like ICT to them. Most of them had smart 
phones. One described herself as “not clever” with 
technology. She “has cut out the PC”, and uses her iPad and 
the iPhone. She uses online banking apps on both these 
devices, depending on whether she is at home or in the cabin, 
and reads online newspapers. She has used Facetime on her 
iPhone for contact with her grandchildren, but she did not 
use it so often. She finds that it does not give her so much 
even though she can see snippets of her grandchildren at the 
summer house or on fishing trips. On later consideration, she 
remembers a recent occasion where her son had lost his 
phone at a shopping mall, but could borrow an iPad and get 
in touch with her through facetime to her iPad when she did 
not answer her own telephone. On this occasion, she found 
Facetime very useful.  
After returning to the discussion group after trying out 
gesturing, the participants gave some immediate feedback 
from their experience with the videoconference and the 
Kinect 
camera. 
Many 
express 
concerns 
that 
videoconferencing will come instead of and not in addition 
to the care personnel’s physical contact with their clients. 
However, one woman commented that she could have 
benefitted from videoconferencing to stay in touch when she 
a few years ago broke one arm and leg at the same time and 
had to stay indoors for three months while recovering.  
One expresses doubt as to how simple the technology 
will be in practical use. She compared it with the 
introduction of online banking, where many problems 
occurred and nobody was there to help. One woman had 
experience from playing gestures-based computer games 
(from a different technology) with her grandchildren, and she 
was slightly familiar with gesturing commands.  
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

One woman responded to whether she will use the 
videoconference technology with the Kinect that she would 
not have used it. She “would go and pick up the phone. I 
need to move about, and not rot while sitting”. Another said 
that this technology “is for those who are well versed and 
would like to keep in touch”. One added that her late mother 
who suffered from dementia could not have used it, as “one 
will need a good head” to use it. Another said it was suitable 
for those who have “a good head and a lousy body”, 
indicating that the interaction requires some understanding of 
the technology and that it is most useful for those who 
cannot move about easily. This they all agreed to.  
Activities that are learned at an earlier stage in life can be 
kept up into old age and also into some degree of dementia 
[16]. On this basis, the participants were asked whether they 
would consider taking videoconferencing into use before 
they strictly needed it, so that its use could become an 
established habit before they get too old to learn. They all 
responded “no”. Many of the participants who said that they 
would not want this technology at home, suggested that 
others might find it useful, for example if you are young and 
computer savvy but bedridden for some reason.  
The participants at the day care centre in North Mun 
were in average older and less healthy and active. Some was 
cognitively challenged with various degrees of dementia, 
while others were cognitively clear but had various physical 
health issues that required care. They all received a minimum 
of municipal services, at a minimum they were accepted into 
regular meetings at this centre based on their application. 
The centre had a waiting list and accepts clients based on 
their needs. Some received care services in their homes as 
well.  
Some of the participants there had previous experience 
from using computers in their working life, although they did 
not use digital technologies now. One woman said that she 
had had a mobile phone but that she did not use it anymore. 
She used a land line telephone at home. One woman had 
talked with her son in the US via Skype when visiting her 
daughter.  Her daughter had set up the call.  
After he had tried the gesturing, one man found the 
videoconferencing could be useful in his life situation. He 
asked if he could be called from a country abroad, because 
he has a grandchild there. Another man though it could be 
good for his son, who was “very intelligent” but bedridden.   
In North Mun the winter weather can be quite cold and 
windy with lots of snow. When asked if they would consider 
videoconferencing as a means to keep in touch during 
periods with challenging weather in the winter months, one 
said with pride “We are northerners! We are used to ice and 
snow! As long as I can move about, I would prefer going 
down to [the café at the shopping centre] and meet the others 
there.”  
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The dual objective of the workshops functioned well to 
stimulate the participants to tell us about their experiences 
with using digital technologies and their viewpoints on 
gesturing for videoconferencing which they tried out. The 
workshops were neither intended as a user study aimed at 
providing quantitative data about e.g. the time to respond to 
an incoming call nor a usability test where the user is asked 
to do several tasks with the equipment to be tested [29]. The 
prototype was too unfinished to appear as a product to be 
tested in a controlled environment.  
This paper seeks to give a rich description of the elderly 
participants’ experiences and viewpoints. However, as this 
study did not try out videoconferencing via other kinds of 
interfaces, we cannot differentiate between their viewpoints 
about this prototype for a gesturing interface and 
videoconferencing with more traditional interfaces.  
The title of this paper is a quote from several brief 
interviews done immediately after the participants had tried 
the gesturing. Even though they found the gestures easy to 
perform with success, they did not want to use such 
technology at home. In addition to the TV screen, which is 
familiar to them and in regular use, the technology includes 
one unpopular device, the PC, and one mostly unfamiliar 
device, the Kinect camera. This result is in line with several 
studies about use of technology in the home.  
As technology makes some old tasks obsolete, new tasks 
emerge – and the new tasks belong to a different domain 
than the old, familiar task. New tasks may increase the level 
of complexity around the user [30]. Setting up and 
maintaining home networks is a challenge for families [31]. 
The participants in both workshops could observe that the 
technology to be tried out needed some tinkering to function 
properly – if at all. They can anticipate problems with actual 
installation and maintenance of the Kinect camera and the 
accompanying PC in their homes, where many already have 
some unused technology [32][33][1].  
Technology that is entered into the homes of people 
without their interest in that particular technology will often 
stay unused. Nansen et al. found that even though the older 
participants in their study both mastered the Kinect and 
found it fun to do, they preferred their usual activities to the 
Kinect: an old woman would rather watch tennis on TV, and 
her husband would rather stay outdoors working with the 
plants in his garden in daytime and doing his jigsaw puzzles 
when inside. There was no room for new activities with the 
Kinect in their habitual daily life [21].  
Elderly people in the study of Culén did not consider 
technology to be a solution to their needs for social contact  
[8]. Loe argues that old women use or reject old and new 
technologies in their daily life according to how nicely it fits 
into their lives; whether the technology functions for 
continuity and control in their lives or the opposite [15]. 
Their considerations go “beyond usability” [14]:  Without a 
personal objective for taking some technology into use, the 
experience will not necessarily be meaningful or useful. 
Elderly’s understandings of usefulness “point to the 
relevance of perceptions and feelings of safety and self-
efficacy” [14]. ICT introduced for personal growth is 
perceived differently than ICT for compensating for reduced 
capabilities. Loss of independence is feared by the elderly 
[14]. This finding is in line with the views of the participants 
who said they would prefer to maintain physical fitness by 
walking to the café or moving about to pick up the phone. 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The Kinect experience when gaming is about having fun. 
The exaggerated movements that is required for the Kinect 
camera to recognise the gestures are easily laughed about, 
and laughing together is what makes it fun [19]. We saw that 
the participants in North Mun were laughing and bantering 
when they watched some of the others. Gestures, such as 
turning lights on or off in a smart house with exaggerated 
movements are not fun, and Harper and Mentis argue that the 
Kinect is not fit for controlling the lights or doors in for 
example a smart house (ibid.). A question is whether 
gesturing to a Kinect camera that will need to be always on 
will be a good way to interact with a videoconferencing 
service for elderly people who want to stay healthy. In line 
with [15], perhaps this technology will fit better into the lives 
of technology interested people with health issues that 
immobilises them and confine them to the home. The Kinect 
is a more familiar technology with younger people.  
Design that builds on elderly’s habits and competences 
will be in a better position to fit smoothly into their lives. 
Habits enable elderly people to continue life as they cherish 
it. Their habits will be a resource for continuing life as they 
know it into their really old days.  Habits can be a resource 
for design [16]. To get in touch with elderly people’s habits 
and activities, participatory design will be well suited with its 
focus on user participation and situated practices [34].  Early 
engagement of elderly participants in the design process 
helped to support their engagement in the design process 
[35]. Voicing their values is an important prerequisite for 
elderly people’s participation in design [36]. The elderly 
participants’ response after trying the gesturing created a 
challenge for the design team, who decided that the next 
design step would be to try out various button-based 
interfaces to the videoconferencing. Further research will 
show how the future elderly users will respond to such an 
interface.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The elderly women in their seventies used more digital 
technologies than they explicitly state at first. They use 
smartphones and tablets, but avoid using a PC. They have 
some experience with Facetime, which they prefer over 
Skype. They do have some experience with Skype, which 
they mostly use when it is administered by children or 
grandchildren to keep in touch with family members.    
All participants in the two groups expressed concern that 
they would prefer to meet people physically. They want to 
maintain physical fitness by moving about as long as 
possible, for example by walking to the café for meeting 
friends or moving outdoors even in wintery weather. Some 
found that if they were physically restrained from moving 
about, videoconferencing with a Kinect interface could be 
useful.  
Most participants succeeded in performing the gestures, 
although with guidance to fine tune their movements. Even 
though they said the gestures were easy to perform in front 
of the Kinect and the TV screen, almost all the participants 
said that they are not interested in taking videoconference 
technology with Kinect interface in use in their homes. They 
found the gestures easy to do, but did not want the 
equipment at home. They considered the gestures for video-
conferencing with Kinect as requiring “intelligence” or “a 
good head”. 
The elderly workshop participants’ responses show that 
they take more than usability into account when they 
consider technology for use in their homes. The results of 
this study indicate that they consider their own competence 
to use and maintain the technology as well as how the 
technology will fit into their lives and support activities they 
cherish – to support their need for well-being and autonomy 
as they continuously adapt to growing older.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A big thank you goes to the participants of the interviews 
and workshops who willingly gave us their time and 
attention! I will also thank the colleagues in the BRIS project 
for developing the technology that were used in the 
workshops. The project is funded by the Regional Research 
Funds in Norway. 
  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Greenhalgh et al., "What matters to older people with assisted living 
needs? A phenomenological analysis of the use and non-use of telehealth 
and telecare," Soc Sci Med, vol. 93, pp. 86-94, Sep 2013. 
[2] R. Procter et al., "The Day-to-Day Co-Production of Ageing in Place," 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 23, pp. 245-267, 
2014/06/01 2014. 
[3] A. Danielsen, H. Olofsen, and B. A. Bremdal, "Increasing fall risk 
awareness using wearables: A fall risk awareness protocol," Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, vol. 63, pp. 184-194, 10// 2016. 
[4] S. Ganesan and L. Anthony, "Using the kinect to encourage older adults 
to exercise: a prototype," presented at the CHI '12 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Austin, Texas, USA, 2012. 
[5] A. Nawaz et al., "An Exergame Concept for Improving Balance in 
Elderly People," in ICTs for Improving Patients Rehabilitation Research 
Techniques: Second International Workshop, REHAB 2014, Oldenburg, 
Germany, May 20-23, 2014, Revised Selected Papers, H. M. Fardoun, V. 
M. R. Penichet, and D. M. Alghazzawi, Eds., ed Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 55-67. 
[6] F. Ofli et al., "Design and Evaluation of an Interactive Exercise 
Coaching System for Older Adults: Lessons Learned," IEEE J Biomed 
Health Inform, vol. 20, pp. 201-12, Jan 2016. 
[7] L. Savolainen, E. Hanson, L. Magnusson, and T. Gustavsson, "An 
Internet-based videoconferencing system for supporting frail elderly people 
and their carers," Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 14, pp. 79-82, 
2008. 
[8] A. L. Culén, "Later Life: Living Alone, Social Connectedness and 
ICT," in Digital Human Modeling. Applications in Health, Safety, 
Ergonomics and Risk Management: Ergonomics and Health, 6th 
International Conference, DHM 2015, Los Angeles, 2015, Springer 
International Publishing, pp. 401-412. 
[9] S. G. Joshi and A. Woll, "A Collaborative Change Experiment: Post-
experiment Evaluation of Home Telecare for Elderly Home Dwellers," 
Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp. 82-89, 2015/01/01 2015. 
[10] C. M. Perissinotto, I. S. Cenzer, and K. E. Covinsky, "Loneliness in 
Older Persons: A predictor of functional decline and death," Archives of 
internal medicine, vol. 172, pp. 1078-1083, 2012. 
[11] T. Bratteteig and G. Verne, "Old Habits as a Resource for Design: On 
Learning and Un-learning Bodily Knowledge," International Journal On 
Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, 2016. 
[12] M. D. Myers. (Living version). Qualitative Research in Information 
Systems. Available: http://www.qual.auckland.ac.nz/ 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[13] A. White and J. Weatherall, "A Grounded Theory Analysis Of Older 
Adults And Information Technology," Educational Gerontology, vol. 26, 
pp. 371-386, 2000/06/01 2000. 
[14] E. Hernández-Encuentra, M. Pousada, and B. Gómez-Zúñiga, "ICT 
and Older People: Beyond Usability," Educational Gerontology, vol. 35, 
pp. 226-245, 2009/02/04 2009. 
[15] M. Loe, "Doing it my way: old women, technology and wellbeing," 
Sociol Health Illn, vol. 32, pp. 319-34, Feb 1 2010. 
[16] T. Bratteteig and G. Verne, "From Difficult Artifacts to Easy to Use 
Designs," presented at the Ninth International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI), Venice, Italy,, 2016. 
[17] S. G. Joshi and A. Woll, "A Collaborative Change Experiment: 
Diagnostic Evaluation of Telecare for Elderly Home Dwellers," in Digital 
Human Modeling. Applications in Health, Safety, Ergonomics and Risk 
Management: Ergonomics and Health: 6th International Conference, 
DHM 2015, Held as Part of HCI International 2015, Los Angeles, 2015, 
Springer International Publishing, pp. 423-434. 
[18] J. R. Parker, "Buttons, Simplicity, and Natural Interfaces," Loading... 
vol. 2, 2008. 
[19] R. Harper and H. Mentis, "The mocking gaze: the social organization 
of kinect use," in Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work, San Antonio, Texas, USA, 2013, ACM, pp. 
167-180. 
[20] D. A. Norman, "Natural user interfaces are not natural," interactions, 
vol. 17, pp. 6-10, 2010. 
[21] B. Nansen et al., "Reciprocal Habituation: A Study of Older People 
and the Kinect," ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., vol. 21, pp. 1-20, 
2014. 
[22] S. Obdrzalek et al., "Accuracy and robustness of Kinect pose 
estimation in the context of coaching of elderly population," in Engineering 
in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2012 Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE, 2012, pp. 1188-1193. 
[23] D. Webster and O. Celik, "Systematic review of Kinect applications in 
elderly care and stroke rehabilitation," Journal of NeuroEngineering and 
Rehabilitation, vol. 11, p. 108, 2014. 
[24] L. Loke, A. T. Larssen, T. Robertson, and J. Edwards, "Understanding 
movement for interaction design: frameworks and approaches," Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 11, pp. 691-701, 2007. 
[25] H. K. Klein and M. D. Myers, "A set of principles for conducting and 
evaluating interpretive field studies in information systems," MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 23, pp. 67-93, 1999. 
[26] R. E. Stake, "Qualitative Case Studies," in The Sage Handbook of 
Qualitative Research. vol. 17, N. L. Denzin, Y., Ed., ed: Sage Publications, 
2005, pp. s. 443-466. 
[27] G. Walsham, "Doing interpretive research," European Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 15, pp. 320–330, 2006. 
[28] E. Brandt, "How Tangible Mock-Ups Support Design Collaboration," 
Knowledge, Technology & Policy, vol. 20, pp. 179-192, 2007. 
[29] S. MacKenzie, "User studies and usability evaluations: from research 
to products," in 41st Graphics Interface Conference, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada, 2015, Canadian Information Processing Society, pp. 1-8. 
[30] G. Verne and T. Bratteteig, "Do-it-yourself services and work-like 
chores: on civic duties and digital public services," Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 20, pp. 517-532, 2016. 
[31] R. Grinter, W. K. Edwards, M. W. Newman, and N. Ducheneaut, "The 
Work to Make a Home Network Work," in ECSCW 2005: Proceedings of 
the Ninth European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work, Paris, France, 2005, Springer. 
[32] J. Halloran, E. Hornecker, M. Stringer, E. Harris, and G. Fitzpatrick, 
"The value of values: Resourcing co-design of ubiquitous computing," 
CoDesign, vol. 5, pp. 245-273, 2009/12/01 2009. 
[33] E. Christiansen and P. K. Andersen, "Digital Living at Home - User 
Voices about Home Automation and a Home-Keeping Design Discourse," 
presented at the Nordic Contributions in IS Research, 2013. 
[34] J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, Eds., Routledge International 
Handbook of Participatory Design (Routledge International Handbooks. 
Routledge, 2012. 
[35] S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, G. Schofield, and P. Olivier, "Engaging older 
people using participatory design," in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Austin, Texas, USA, 
2012, ACM, pp. 1199-1208. 
[36] T. W. Leong and T. Robertson, "Voicing values: laying foundations 
for ageing people to participate in design," in Proceedings from the 14th 
Participatory Design Conference:, Aarhus, Denmark, 2016, ACM, pp. 31-
40. 
 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

