BEACON: A CSCW Tool for Enhancing Co-Located
Meetings Through Temporal and Activity Awareness
Ole-Edvard Ørebæk, David Aarlien, Fahad Faisal Said, Karoline Andreassen, Klaudia Carcani
Østfold University College, Halden, Norway
Emails: {oleedvao, davidaa, fahads, karolan, klaudia.carcani}@hiof.no
Abstract—This paper explores how enhancement of temporal
awareness and activity awareness affects co-located meetings’
effectiveness and efﬁciency. Our focus is meetings happening as
part of a project where cooperation is essential for its fulﬁllment.
As a case study, we investigated group work in university projects.
In a preliminary study, we found that individuals deviate from
topics due to the lack of structure, which results in time wasted
on irrelevant discussions. Agendas are essential in order to
conduct a productive meeting. In order to investigate this issue, a
prototype, “BEACON”, was developed with two components. The
ﬁrst component is a desktop dashboard revolving around creating
and managing meeting agendas, as well as having an integrated
co-writing noting tool that contributes to temporal awareness. The
second component is a status-based artifact that uses color and
sound as notiﬁcations of deﬁned time limits for different activities
in the meeting agenda and contributes to activity awareness.
An evaluation with a group of 6 persons was conducted. The
ﬁndings showed that enhancing temporal and activity awareness
through displayed shared notes and a clearly presented agenda
during the meeting contributed to generate more ideas and keep
the discussions focused. Participants expressed that the artifact’s
colors dictated the pace of the meeting positively, inﬂuencing
them to optimize the available time and reach conclusions. Thus,
we conclude that the enhancement of temporal and activity
awareness in a workspace-like meeting setting can increase
meeting effectiveness and be an incentive of better cooperation
within a project.
Keywords–awareness meetings; CSCW; temporal awareness;
activity awareness; design study.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Organizations nowadays work quite often with project
groups, where a set of people come together from different
departments to achieve a speciﬁc goal. Examples could be
the launch of a new product, producing a common report,
writing a common document, etc. In these cases, people need
to cooperate in order to achieve the ﬁnal goal. An important
part of this cooperation are group meetings. These are used
as touchpoints where important things are discussed, and
decisions that will push the project forward are made. Meetings
are an integral part of the everyday working life of employees
who attend approximately 3.2 meetings per week. However,
the quality of these meetings is evaluated as poor in 41.9% of
the cases [1].
People feel that meetings are not as productive as they
would like [2]. They lose track of the context of the topics
discussed, resulting in poor decision making [3]. Furthermore,
it appeared that agendas have an essential role in structuring
group meetings [4]-[7]. Thus, new ways to enhance meeting
efﬁciency and effectiveness are needed as a way of contributing
to the cooperation.
Context-Based Workplace awareness [8] was deﬁned as
establishing an awareness of the workplace and the activities
occurring within it, regardless of distance in space and time.
This type of awareness has been studied in situations where
people are distributed and ways to remain aware of others’
activities in the workplace are needed. In this paper, we
explore context-based workplace awareness, speciﬁcally, its
subtypes of temporal awareness and activity awareness in the
context of meetings and study how meeting efﬁciency and
effectiveness can be inﬂuenced by the enhancement of these
types of awareness.
Through an interaction design process, we developed a
prototype that we call BEACON. It consists of a desktop dash-
board that supports creating and managing meeting agendas,
as well as having an integrated co-writing noting tool that
contributes to temporal awareness. The second component is a
status-based artifact that uses color and sound as notiﬁcations
of deﬁned time limits for different activities in the meeting
agenda.
BEACON was further used to investigate how technology
that enhances context-based temporal and activity awareness
can affect meeting effectiveness and efﬁciency?
In Section 2 of this article, we present the conceptual
grounding for our work. In Section 3, we present a short
description of the design process of the prototype and its eval-
uation. In Section 4, we present the ﬁndings of the evaluation.
In Section 5, we discuss our ﬁndings in relation to temporal
and activity awareness. Finally, in Section 6, we conclude the
study and outline possible directions for future work.
II.
CONCEPTUAL GROUNDING
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), as de-
ﬁned by [9], is ”the ﬁeld which aims to understand the nature
and characteristics of cooperative work with the objective of
designing adequate computer-based technologies”. This type of
technology has previously been referred to as groupware [10],
where the focus was on the group of people working together.
However, Schmidt and Bannon [9] argue that the focus should
not be only on groups but on cooperative ensembles which
can be people or organizations that come together to work on
a common goal. These are usually dissolved after the goal has
been achieved. Project work ﬁts this description of cooperative
work.
Moreover, Schmidt and Bannon argue that cooperative
work requires ensembles to be distributed in time and space.
This is the case with project work where members work on
their own. However, their common encounters in meetings are
relevant, which is why we in this paper study meetings as a
cooperative work activity in need of technological support.
A. Meeting Effectiveness and Efﬁciency
We live in a world where it is common that workers
in service-oriented organizations spend a considerable part
of their time in meetings. However, meetings are not as
productive as participants would like, and participants often
engage in discussions that deviate from the meeting focus.
Garcia et al. [4] imply that despite the importance of meetings,
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

participants often feel that time is wasted because meeting
goals could not be reached (low effectiveness), or because
the meeting lasted signiﬁcantly longer than planned (low
efﬁciency). Symptoms of a bad meeting are stated as low group
participation, bad decision-making processes, free riders and
lack of group attention.
A study by Nixon and Littlepage [11] examined the rela-
tionship between certain group meeting procedures and their
correlation with the studied subjects’ perceived effectiveness
of the meetings. The meeting effectiveness was measured by
goal attainment and decision satisfaction. The results suggested
that among other things; open communication, focus on tasks,
exploration of options, analysis of decision consequences,
temporal integrity, and agenda integrity might be important
effectiveness-related processes. More detailed aspects con-
tained in these processes include (in no particular order);
that all members participate in the meeting, that options are
discussed before ﬁnal decisions are made, as well as the conse-
quences of these options, that the agendas are followed during
the meeting and that the goals are clear and well deﬁned, being
focused and committed to the meeting in terms of time and
effort, being prepared for the meeting and having access to
the relevant meeting information like, e.g., the agenda, that
the meetings are more satisfying than frustrating, that notes
are taken of the decisions made during the meeting, and that
the meeting start and end on time.
In a study by Davison [2], a method for measuring meeting
success was proposed. The factors of this method were quite
similar to the procedures explored in Nixon and Littlepage’s
[11] study, with emphasis on, e.g., communication, discussion-
quality and how result-oriented and time-efﬁcient the meeting
was. Thus, looking for how many of these meeting procedures
are present in group meetings might also give an indication of
how effective and/or efﬁcient they are.
B. Context-Based Workplace Awareness
A largely discussed concept in CSCW is the concept
of awareness [10][12]-[14]. Awareness within CSCW was
initially discussed by Heath and Luff in their seminal paper,
”Collaboration and control: Crisis management and multi-
media technology in London Underground” [15]. A relevant
deﬁnition of awareness comes from Dourish and Bellotti [16].
They described it as ”an understanding of the activities of
others, which provides a context for your own activity”, and
outlined the importance of awareness information in coordi-
nating group activities. This deﬁnition of awareness has in the
CSCW community been referred to as “social awareness”.
Bardram and Hansen [8] discussed in their work another
type of awareness which they called context-based workplace
awareness. They deﬁned context-based workplace awareness
as establishing an awareness of the workplace and the activities
occurring within it, regardless of distance in space and time.
Thus, focusing not only on what others in your immediate
surroundings are doing but also having an awareness of the
activities that happen in a speciﬁc workplace by focusing on
the spatial, temporal and activity-related dimensions.
The part “context-based” of the term was used by Bardram
and Hansen [8] to deﬁne that the awareness they are discussing
is often based on context. Their deﬁnition of context was
derived from Dey at al. [17] who deﬁned it as “information
that characterizes a situation related to the interaction between
users, applications, and the surrounding environment”. Dey
et al. [17] also outlined in their paper several categories of
context. Of these, status (also referred to as activity) is the
most relevant to our study. Status encompasses characteristics
of the relevant entity of focus that can be sensed. The entity
can here refer to anything from an individual or group of
people, to software components or applications. In a separate
study, Borges et al. [18] proposed a conceptual framework for
analyzing the context in the form of presented information
in groupware applications. Of the outlined information types
that encompass the context were scheduled tasks, deﬁned as
identifying tasks through representing their characteristics, and
completed tasks, deﬁned as providing an understanding of
previously completed tasks and their contexts.
Bardram and Hansen [8] argued that context-based work-
place awareness is central when attempting to establish co-
ordination in workplaces. Based on the works of Nixon and
Littlepage [11] and Davison [2], it is quite apparent that many
of the outlined factors that indicate meeting effectiveness and
efﬁciency are related to coordinating the meeting participants
around different aspects of the meeting. Thus, coordination
is an important factor when discussing meeting effectiveness
and efﬁciency. In this study, we explore how enhancing cer-
tain aspects of context-based workplace awareness might be
relevant when attempting to improve meetings’ effectiveness
and efﬁciency.
As methods of how context can be utilized in applications,
Dey et al. [17] proposed the concept of context-aware functions
in the form of three categories. The ﬁrst category, presenting
information and services, contains two functions, the ﬁrst is
displaying context information to the user and the second is
proposing a set of relevant actions to the user based on the
current context. The second category, automatically executing
a service, is described as applications that will perform certain
commands or reconﬁguring the system for the users triggered
by context changes in the system. The third and last category,
attaching context for later retrieval, is deﬁned as applications
that tags relevant context information data, in which the users
can later retrieve. These three proposed functions are thus
useful when designing a technological solution that aims to
enhance context-based workplace awareness.
While the aim of the study was to look into how meeting
effectiveness and efﬁciency was inﬂuenced when enhancing
workplace awareness, we should as well state that as meetings
happen in co-located places (different from the study setting
Bardram and Hansen [8]), the inﬂuence of context-based
workplace awareness has not been studied before in a meeting
“context”. Thus, this paper also contributes as an example
of discussing context-based workplace awareness in settings
where participants are indeed seated together, but cooperation
can still be enhanced through context-based elements.
Bardram and Hansen [8] described several types of aware-
ness as part of context-based workplace awareness. Of these,
we thoroughly present temporal awareness and activity aware-
ness below, as well as their relation to the contexts of status,
scheduled tasks, and completed tasks.
C. Temporal Awareness
Temporal awareness is deﬁned as an awareness of the
progress of activities over time in terms of past, present, and
future and outlines the importance of schedules for coordina-
tion, as well as being aware of events in the past, which often
can be important when making decisions in the present or
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

planning the future [8]. This is very relevant to group meetings
as they often have a limited timeframe. Planning and managing
the tasks/activities according to the available time is, therefore,
important in order to avoid problems, such as those highlighted
by Garcia et al. [4] and achieve the meeting’s objective(s).
As stated above, our context is a “meeting” where people
come together to discuss issues that relate to a cooperative
project. In order to increase the temporal awareness in meet-
ings, we investigate the concept of agendas. According to the
Cambridge dictionary [19], an agenda is described as ”a list
of matters to be discussed at a meeting”. In other words; An
agenda can implicitly be used as a method of describing the
activities and establishing the structure of a meeting. Multiple
studies have concluded that the use of agendas is essential for
improving the effectiveness and efﬁciency of group meetings
[4][5][7][20]. Furthermore, a study [21] in the area of Group
Support Systems (GSS) discussed that meeting structure has
a positive inﬂuence on information sharing between group
members in decision-making situations, and highlighted how
group members need cues and indicators, e.g., boldfaced text
to be able to share initially unshared information. Using the
context of scheduled and completed tasks, presenting such
agendas by describing upcoming and completed activities
during the meeting can be used as a method for increasing
temporal awareness.
Yamane [22] conducted a study in the context of his
lectures where students were given ”course preparation assign-
ments” aiming to prepare them prior to the lectures in order
to establish thoughts and opinions on the course matter. This
was an attempt to increase the effectiveness of the discussion
in the lecture, which was documented to be very successful.
Thus, presenting meeting information in a way that allows
group members to prepare thoughts and opinions about the
discussion topics before the meeting, might be a good method
of promoting discussions.
D. Activity Awareness
Activity awareness is deﬁned as an awareness of speciﬁc
activities and their surrounding context, irrespective of who
is performing them [8]. As group meetings naturally contain
several different activities, e.g., in the form of tasks, this type
of awareness becomes quite relevant. In our study, to simplify
the types of activities in a group meeting, we group them to
three levels of abstraction; high, medium, and low. We deﬁne
high-level as the activity of conducting the meeting as a whole,
medium as activities related to the meeting’s overarching goal
(e.g., topic discussions), and low-level as any activity contained
within a medium-level activity, such as communication and
discussion within a speciﬁc topic.
In a study by Haller et al. [23], a digitally enhanced meeting
room was developed to promote group creativity by combining
digital and paper media through pen-based interfaces. The
results indicated that having digital tools simulating pen and
paper helped improve group collaboration. Integrating a note
system where group members can make notes and share with
the rest of the group, might, therefore, have a positive effect on
how the members collaborate as well as increase the awareness
of low-level activities.
In a study by Janicik and Bartel [24], it was discussed how
temporal planning affects coordination and task performance
in groups and found that temporal planning had a positive rela-
tionship with task performance. In another study [25], different
design strategies for supporting collaborative activities were
proposed. Among these, deadlines were suggested as a method
of enhancing activity awareness and prompting coordination by
presenting progress, speciﬁcally as a status reminder. Another
study [26] that revolved around patterns in group interaction
when regarding time limits and task types on the quality and
quantity of the group performance, suggested that sessions
with short time limits generate ideas at a higher rate despite
a reduction on the quality of such content produced. Based
on these studies, having a method of planning the meeting’s
activities in terms of time and presenting the time limits as
a status reminder during the meeting might make a positive
impact on the meeting’s effectiveness.
III.
METHODS
As mentioned in the introduction, we chose student projects
as a case study. The study was conducted in a university
college in Norway.
We took a design process approach for our research [27]
and went through the four phases of Informing, Visioning,
Prototyping, and Evaluating. Initially, we conducted research
for design to design the prototype and then we conducted
research through design by using the prototype to answer
our research question. In the ﬁrst part, we collected data that
showed the need for a digital tool that could support meeting
efﬁciency. We then designed and developed a prototype based
on these needs and conducted a thorough investigation into
relevant literature as a means for answering the research
question through an evaluation. Hence, we shortly present our
design journey and explain in detail the evaluation process and
its respective ﬁndings.
A. Informing and Visioning
In order to understand the students’ needs in a meeting
situation, an observation of a group meeting was conducted
early on. Additionally, the informing-phase included individual
interviews with two students and one expert. Collected data
were analyzed with a qualitative interpretive approach [5] from
a CSCW perspective, where we tried to identify the groups’
needs in relation to the cooperation among participants and the
overall meeting efﬁciency.
Findings showed that there was a lack of a consistent ﬂow
in the activities discussed despite having a good leader that
stimulated the discussion. Decisions were made by just a few
of the participants without being documented. However, when
they utilized a collaborative writing platform on the common
display (google docs), the participants seemed to be more
active in discussing and expressing ideas based on what the
activity required. The fact that the group’s discussions were
lacking in structure seemed to reduce the quality of the meet-
ing, but the use of a common medium for information sharing
and collective decision-making notes seemed to improve it.
The ﬁndings presented above were, through an initial
literature investigation, associated with “awareness” as a major
concept in CSCW. Further investigation in the CSCW literature
regarding awareness brought us in the context-based workplace
awareness and the respective sub-types such as temporal and
activity awareness as closely related to the needs for increasing
meeting efﬁciency that was our initial aim. Thus, our aim
became designing a digital solution that supports context-
based workplace awareness and investigates how that would
inﬂuence meeting effectiveness and efﬁciency.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Based on our ﬁndings in the informing phase both from the
empirical data and the look at the literature, we took the role
of designers and had a brainstorming session, and a design
workshop [27] where various design concepts for possible
prototypes were discussed. Through different sketches and use
of different materials, we explored how the solution would look
and what kind of features would promote temporal and activity
awareness. Based on the ﬁnal sketches we built a prototype that
we named “BEACON”. The name was inspired by the concept
of a beacon, a light set up in a high or prominent position as
a warning, signal, or celebration [28].
B. Prototype
The prototype Beacon consists of two components, a
desktop Dashboard and an Artifact. Figure 1 illustrates the
prototype in a meeting setting.
Figure 1. Stylised illustration of how the prototype is intended to be used.
1) Desktop Dashboard: This component utilizes the ﬁrst
context-aware function, presenting information and services,
as described by Day et al. [17]. It presents to users medium-
level meeting activities in the form of an agenda, as well as
their descriptions and time durations. It also utilizes the third
context-aware function, attaching context information for later
retrieval, through an interactive co-writing noting tool for each
activity that allows the participants to later retrieve previously
recorded low-level activities. Adobe XD was used to create
the dashboard with four base pages:
•
Home screen: Shows recent projects, current group
members, and meetings that have been conducted.
Users can create a new meeting agenda from here.
•
Agenda creation: Includes a form section for the
creation of agendas, such as agenda title, description,
date, as well as the agenda’s activities that each has a
title, description, and priority (1 - 5). The higher the
priority, the more time will be allocated to the activity.
•
In-session screen: Shows which activity is active, in
addition to the noting functionality. This is shown in
Figure 2.
•
Meeting review screen: Gives the users the ability
to review the activities they have discussed in a
structured manner, with the option to edit the notes
of each one.
2) Status-based Artifact: This component is a 3D printed
artifact (shown in Figure 3) designed to present the status
of deﬁned time limits of high- and medium-level activities
in the meeting. The artifact has a built-in speaker and two
Figure 2. Screenshot of the desktop dashboard in the ”in-session” phase.
light sources that each can display different colors. The top
light source represents the time left of meetings’ high-level
activities (the meeting as a whole), and the bottom light
source represents the time left of medium-level activities (e.g.,
topic discussions). The speaker is used to audibly notify the
participants when different time limits have been reached.
Figure 3 illustrates the artifact component of the prototype.
The deﬁned colors of the light sources indicate the following:
•
Green: More than half of the activity’s allocated time
remains.
•
Yellow: Half of the activity’s allocated time remains.
•
Red: Only about 10% of the activity’s allocated time
remains.
•
Blue: The activity’s allocated time has been used
up and any further time spent on this activity is
considered overtime. The speaker sounds a notiﬁcation
when this phase is reached.
The choice of colors is inspired by a study on the relation-
ship between color and emotion [29]. The transition between
colors occurs instantly. When high and medium-level activities
are concluded the relevant light source resets to green. This is
especially relevant for medium-level activities.
Figure 3. The artifact component of the prototype.
The second context-aware function, automatically execut-
ing a service [17], is the core concept of this component.
The component will dynamically change its colors based on
context changes, such as the time duration of the activity. These
changes are both triggered by time events and user input. E.g.,
the allocated time of remaining medium-level activities can
increase if the current activity is concluded before the time
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

is up, or the allocated times can be reduced if and the more
the current activity is spent in overtime. These increases of
reductions in allocated times are calculated based on deﬁned
activity priorities and the remaining time of the high-level
activity.
C. Evaluation
We will refer to this subsection as “Evaluation” to adhere to
the interaction design process phases. However, the evaluation
in this paper relates to the testing of our prototype, collecting
data about the testing and further analyzing it. The evaluation
phase helped us explore the research question raised in this
paper.
Due to limitations in time and resources, we conducted the
evaluation with a small group of people as a pilot study. The
evaluation was conducted in the form of a usability test in a
controlled setting involving users [27]. We investigated how
users utilize, interact with, and feel about the prototype, and
how the presence of the prototype impacted the efﬁciency and
effectiveness of the meeting.
We observed a group of 6 students having a meeting in a
university group room. The observation was followed with a
structured interview in which each participant in the meeting
was asked about his/her experience of using the tool in the
meeting.
The process of the evaluation started with the researches
explaining how the evaluation would be completed, with an
explanation on how the artifact and desktop dashboard oper-
ates. They were informed that the researchers would manually
control the artifact’s colors and sound notiﬁcations (Wizard
of Oz approach [27]) based on their time used during the
meeting and that they should try to pay attention to these
types of changes. Since Adobe XD could not support writing
directly in text boxes in the prototype tab, we utilized a google
docs document mimicking the desktop dashboard. They were
however told to use the desktop dashboard when they needed to
read the activity titles and descriptions, and when concluding
medium-level activities.
Task enactment: The subjects were beforehand given four
activities in the form of discussion topics, with additional in-
structions for how to interact with the prototype. As described
in Subsection C, the desktop dashboard can be used to assign
priorities to the activities, which the group leader was told to
do before the meeting.
Observing users’ reaction: During the task enactment, all
four of the researchers took notes on how the users reacted to
certain predicted scenarios and other unexpected reactions to
the prototype.
User satisfaction structured interview: An interview includ-
ing nine structured questions were created for understanding
how the participants felt about using the prototype and how
they perceived the prototype to inﬂuence meeting efﬁciency
and effectiveness through enhancing context-based workplace
awareness. Questions related to the prototype were therefore
mostly stated as ”How did you feel...”. Questions related to
awareness was more investigative without using CSCW termi-
nology as that would most likely just confuse the interviewees.
The whole observation was video recorded to prevent
data loss. The interviews were audio-recorded and further
transcribed. Figure 4 shows the evaluation setup with the
prototype in a group room.
Figure 4. Evaluation observation in process.
The data collected was then analyzed with a qualitative
interpretative approach [30] in two phases. Initially, all the
researchers looked at the video-recording and the notes taken
during the observation. The aim was to reﬂect on meeting
efﬁciency by interpreting participants’ behavior in relation to
the features of the prototype. The ﬁrst round of interpretations
was then reﬁned with the data from the interview transcript.
That helped us in reﬁning the initial interpretations, ﬁnding
contradiction among what was said, and what was observed
and further explore behaviors with uncertain interpretations.
The results of this ﬁrst analysis are presented in Section 4.
The second phase was a qualitative interpretative analysis
of our ﬁndings from the perspective of context-based work-
place awareness and its subtypes, such as temporal awareness
and activity awareness and their inﬂuence in the meeting
efﬁciency and/or effectiveness. The data from the interview
was in this phase primarily used for interpretation and sense-
making. Iterative rounds of discussions with all researchers
concluded in what is presented in Section 5.
IV.
FINDINGS
Our selected group of participants found the prototype
interesting and were generally excited about the opportunity
to test it. Participants agreed that knowledge of the content of
the discussions presented in a structured manner prior to the
meeting helped to form ideas and express opinions with ease.
The participants also agreed that the colors of the artifact had
an impact on how the discussion dynamic played out.
One thing to note is that the participants never naturally
used up the allocated time suggested from the dashboard. As
a result, the artifact’s function for indicating overtime (blue
light) was not activated due to the early conclusions of the
activities. To test the function for overtime, an additional topic
(“bonus activity”) was added, with a stricter time constraint
than what the participants thought to be necessary.
The ﬁndings are separated into two sections, the artifact
and the dashboard, where we elaborate on the speciﬁc results
of the evaluation.
A. Dashboard
1) Agenda: As mentioned at the start of this section,
knowing the activities beforehand and having the activities
and their descriptions structurally listed was agreed by all
participants as being helpful with forming ideas, which made
it easier to state their individual opinions. It was also expressed
by participants 1, 2, 3, and 6 that knowing the activity sequence
within the meeting had a similar effect of helping them prepare
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

their opinions. It was observed that the participants would
often reread the activities’ titles and descriptions. Participants
1 and 5 said that the option to reread the activity’s titles and
descriptions was helpful in reminding them of what the initial
discussion was about. They also said that this additionally
helped them to keep their thoughts and opinions relevant to
the topic.
2) Noting: The participants frequently used the noting
function of the prototype during the activities for multiple
purposes. Generally, they used it to record each participant’s
take on the topic. It was also observed that the fourth activity
was controversial for all participants as the atmosphere seemed
to become more tense and focused as they had strong and
partially biased opinions on the topic. To overcome this the
group used the recorded data in the noting tool to systemati-
cally exclude the less agreed upon opinions, until a consensus
by majority vote was reached. At the end of each activity,
the group would analyze what was written in the notes and
continued to the next activity when all members agreed to do
so.
3) Meeting review: As described in the Prototype-section,
the desktop dashboard also provided a meeting review of
the completed activities at the end of the meeting. It was
observed that the group used this feature brieﬂy to review
the contents and conclusions of the meeting’s activities, as
well as conﬁrming that nothing was missing and that the
conclusions should remain. One of the participants suggested
after the evaluation that “It could be helpful to have some sort
of agree/disagree button to click on each activity to make the
process faster”.
B. Artifact
1) Colors of the Artifact: Participants 1, 3, and 5 expressed
the colors made a positive impact on controlling the pace
and engagement of the discussion. Participant 4 said it made
them more aware of the time left. It was also mentioned by
participants 1 and 5 that the time-pressure made them feel that
things moved faster, and a conclusion had to be met regardless
of incidental disagreement between participants. These views
coincided with what was observed by the researchers, who
noted that the members actively responded to the color changes
even in the middle of discussions. For instance, when the color
of the activity status was green; the discussion was perceived to
be relaxed and open. When the participants noticed the color of
the activity status had changed to yellow; they became more
focused on moving towards a conclusion without becoming
stressed. The color change to red was perceived to make the
participants stressed to reach a conclusion.
However, it was expressed by almost all of the participants
that the color red was thought to be indicating the end of
an activity, even though they were explained beforehand that
red is meant to represent a low amount of time before a
recommended activity change. Another observation was that
the participants only seemed to express notice of the color
change after about 1-2 minutes after it had changed. In the
“bonus activity” it was observed that the participants became
aware of the activity running on overtime when the color
changed to blue and asked the researchers if they had to stop
working on the activity. The researchers told the participants
to continue their discussion if they wished to do so, which
they chose to do for a few minutes.
2) Sound Notiﬁcations: As mentioned in Section 3.B, the
artifact had the function of playing soundbites as an indication
of, e.g., activity change. Activity change was only reached
in the ”bonus activity” and it was observed that the sound
notiﬁcation was not immediately noticed by the participants.
The sound was also not signiﬁcantly mentioned by any of
the participants in the interview answers. The melody that
was played after the participants agreed that the meeting was
over, was observed to make them uplifted as they laughed and
smiled in reaction. The group also mentioned in the interview
that a helpful implementation could be a short ping when
the color of the activity status would change to keep the
awareness present. One participant mentioned the possibility
of integrating a voice that informs users how much time is left.
The use of vibrations was also suggested by another participant
in a casual discussion after the meeting.
V.
DISCUSSION
A. Temporal Awareness
As mentioned in Section 4, the participants stated that
knowing the activities and their sequence before and during
the meeting, helped them prepare by generating thoughts/ideas,
which made it easier to express them in the discussions.
In other words; The temporal awareness of knowing about
activities in the future was helpful for preparing in advance,
and that in the moment of the activities these past preparations
made it easier to contribute. This appeared to make the
discussions more effective and/or efﬁcient by reducing the time
spent in generating these thoughts/ideas during the activities.
This seems to coincide with what Yamane [22] suggested in
his study. Being prepared before meetings in terms of role
and information was also listed by Nixon and Littlepage [11]
as a procedure that might be related to meeting effectiveness
and efﬁciency. Backing up this argument; The evaluated group
meeting, in regard to this, certainly seemed more efﬁcient
than the group observed in the informing phase, where several
minutes were used just acquiring knowledge about the task at
hand.
An interesting and unexpected observation made by the
researchers was one of the ways the participants used the
prototype’s noting tool. In the fourth activity, the discussions
between the participants were quite heated and there was
a signiﬁcant amount of disagreement and differing opinions
on the discussed topic. To solve this the group, without any
guidance from the researchers, wrote down each participant’s
opinion. This could potentially have given the rest of the group
members a cue [21] to discuss why some of the opinions were
more “valid” than others in regard to the discussed topic. One
could argue that providing these cues “forced” the members to
defend their argument by presenting initially unshared infor-
mation about their opinion, which could have resulted in other
members adjusting their opinion/stance and therefore, led to
a more thorough exploration of options. The participants then
proceeded to systematically narrow down the opinions until
a conclusion was made by the majority vote. This is a small
example of temporal awareness as the recorded opinions can
be considered records of past low-level activities used to solve
the task in the present. Somewhat similarly, the meeting review
feature was also used brieﬂy by the participants as a method
of control checking if what was previously concluded was still
agreed upon. This is another example of how the notes can
contribute to temporal awareness by allowing the participants
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

to view what had previously been discussed. Coincidentally,
exploring different options properly before a ﬁnal decision is
made is outlined by Nixon and Littlepage [11] as something
that might indicate meeting effectiveness and efﬁciency.
We argue that removing the common noting tool would
reduce the quality of the discussions as the participants would
have fewer means of properly exploring options. It could,
however, be argued that the group leader was the primary
reason for the noting tools good use, meaning that the noting
tool’s efﬁciency might be depended on how well the users can
apply it. Regardless, it seemed that when the noting tool was
put to good use, it enhanced the awareness of the low-level
activities in the discussion. This could conﬁrm our assumptions
made in the conceptual grounding on the basis of Haller et al.
[23], that group collaboration could be enhanced by integrating
a noting system where participants can share their thoughts
with the rest of the group.
B. Activity Awareness
During the meeting, the information about the high- and
medium-level activities presented through the agenda appeared
to help the participants to stay on track in the discussions.
Speciﬁcally, the opportunity to reread the title and descriptions
of activities appeared to be useful, as participants 1 and 5
expressed that this helped them remember what the initial
activity was about. This could be an indication of something
that improved the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the meeting,
as Garcia et al. [5] speciﬁed that lack of group focus is a sign of
a bad meeting, and Nixon and Littlepage [11] mentioned how
participants being focused and committed to the meeting might
be a factor indicating meeting effectiveness and efﬁciency.
In the interview, several of the participants expressed that
the colors of the artifact made them more aware of the status
of the meeting in terms of activity time limits and encouraged
them to come to a conclusion before the time was up. This
aligns with the researchers’ observations that the participants
seemed aware of the status of medium- and high-level activities
even when predominantly working on low-level activities.
Raising activity awareness through presenting the status of
activity time limits using colors seemed to be effective as
the participant 1 explicitly mentioned that the pace of the
meeting was controlled positively by this feature. This was
also implicitly mentioned by participants 3 and 5. It was also
observed that the participants would not recognize the status
change before 1-2 minutes had passed, which likely changed
the current pace as soon as it was identiﬁed. It could, therefore,
be argued that the state of the color changed too quickly, and a
gradual change over time could facilitate the pace even more.
In terms of the sound notiﬁcations of recommended topic
changes, this was never naturally observed during the meeting,
as the participants concluded the topics before this notiﬁcation
could initiate. The only time this was observed was during the
“bonus topic”, where the participants at ﬁrst did not notice the
notiﬁcation until the sound was replayed by the researchers
with higher volume. This gives the indication that such a
notiﬁcation sound should be clear and easily identiﬁable, in
which the sound used during the evaluation apparently was
not. However, the fact that the topics were always concluded
before the recommended time was up, and thus the meeting
was also ended with time to spare, could be an indication that
the meeting was efﬁcient. This coincides with both Nixon and
Littlepage [11], as well as Davison [2], who both outlined the
potential importance of temporal integrity. The time allocated
to each topic was also indirectly deﬁned by the participants
themselves through giving each topic a priority, as described
in Section 3.C. This aligns with the study by Janicik and
Bartel [24], who proposed that there is a correlation between
speciﬁc time duration and task performance. As also described
in Section 5, Kelly and McGrath [26] suggested that having
short time limits results in a faster pace but might lead to
lower result quality. As mentioned earlier in this section, the
participants perceived the awareness of activity status to result
in a higher pace, which coincided with what the researchers
observed. The quality of conclusions/results, however, were
not signiﬁcantly investigated.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our ﬁndings, based on the observation and interviews
compared to the conceptual grounding, indicate a positive
effect on decision making in group meetings when temporal
and activity awareness are enhanced. Speciﬁcally, The partic-
ipants came prepared for the meeting, and it seemed that the
foreknowledge of activities was beneﬁcial for the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of the discussions. A central focus for increasing
the awareness of the meeting structure was the agenda, and
especially the topic titles and descriptions, which were reread
several times by the participants during the discussions. They
expressed that this helped them keep the discussions relevant
to the ongoing topics, which in turn might have made the
discussion more effective and/or efﬁcient. The most impactful
observation for the awareness of discussion was the use of
the noting tool. The tool was often used as a common area
to record thoughts and seemed to be useful and effective in
that the participants could keep track of the explored and,
therefore, unexplored options/information until a conclusion
was reached. In addition, the status-based artifact seemed to
be dictating the pace of the meeting. For instance, the activity
status colors of yellow and red were perceived to motivate the
group to move towards a conclusion at a quicker rate compared
to green, which seemed to have a more relaxed atmosphere.
Hence, our ﬁndings show promising results on how the
prototype can aid group meetings in terms of effectiveness
and/or efﬁciency through enhancing temporal and activity
awareness in the meeting. The responses from the participants
were generally quite positive.
While the ﬁndings of the study seem promising, the
prototype was only tested in one meeting. In order to gain
more insight into its true effects on group meeting efﬁciency
and effectiveness, the prototype would have to be tested in
several meetings of different settings, as well as with different
participants. It would be especially relevant to investigate
the prototype in the setting of an organizational meeting,
as this would provide more insight into how generalizable
the prototype is in more and less professional settings. The
effectiveness and efﬁciency would also have to be measured
with a more reliable method, and the ﬁndings of meeting
participants using the prototype would have to be compared
with the ﬁndings of participants not using it in order to see
if there is a signiﬁcant difference. The prototype should also
be further developed, so all of its features are fully functional
and not controlled through a ”Wizard of Oz”-approach. This
should make for a more natural experience, and thus produce
more accurate results.
Beyond this, we also collected more data during the evalua-
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

tion regarding insight into possible improvements to the design
of the prototype. One such improvement could be looking into
design alternatives for the artifact, as it was observed that it was
not naturally visible at the center of the table due to being low
in height. This is suboptimal as it can prevent the participants
from receiving the presented context information, and thus not
generating awareness. We also believe that gradually changing
the colors of the artifact is another possible improvement for
enhancing awareness, as this would give a more accurate feel
of the status of activities, as opposed to instant color change.
Lastly, adding more functionalities to the noting tool could be
beneﬁcial.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Kauffeld and N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, “Meetings Matter Effects
of Team Meetings on Team and Organizational Success,” Small Group
Research, vol. 43, Apr. 2012, pp. 130–158.
[2]
R. Davison, “An instrument for measuring meeting success,” Informa-
tion & management, vol. 32, no. 4, 1997, pp. 163–176.
[3]
L. K. Michaelsen, L. D. Fink, and A. Knight, “Designing effective group
activities: Lessons for classroom teaching and faculty development,” To
improve the academy, vol. 16, no. 1, 1997, pp. 373–397.
[4]
A. C. B. Garcia, J. Kunz, and M. Fischer, “Meeting details: Methods
to instrument meetings and use agenda voting to make them more
effective,” in meeting of the Center for Integrated Facility Engineering,
Stanford (no. TR147), 2003.
[5]
A. C. Bicharra Garcia, J. Kunz, and M. Fischer, “Cutting to the
chase: improving meeting effectiveness by focusing on the agenda,”
in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported
cooperative work, 2004, pp. 346–349.
[6]
H. Bang, S. Fuglesang, M. Ovesen, and D. Eilertsen, “Effectiveness
in top management group meetings: The role of goal clarity, focused
communication, and learning behavior,” Scandinavian journal of psy-
chology, vol. 51, Jun. 2010, pp. 253–61.
[7]
R. J. Garmston, “Results-oriented agendas transform meetings into
valuable collaborative events,” The Learning Professional, vol. 28, no. 2,
2007, p. 55.
[8]
J. E. Bardram and T. R. Hansen, “Context-based workplace awareness,”
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 19, no. 2, 2010,
pp. 105–138.
[9]
K. Schmidt and L. Bannon, “Taking cscw seriously,” Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 1, no. 1-2, 1992, pp. 7–40.
[10]
T. Gross, “Supporting effortless coordination: 25 years of awareness
research,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 22,
no. 4-6, 2013, pp. 425–474.
[11]
C. T. Nixon and G. E. Littlepage, “Impact of meeting procedures on
meeting effectiveness,” Journal of Business and Psychology, vol. 6,
no. 3, 1992, pp. 361–369.
[12]
C. Heath, M. S. Svensson, J. Hindmarsh, P. Luff, and D. Vom Lehn,
“Conﬁguring awareness,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW), vol. 11, no. 3-4, 2002, pp. 317–347.
[13]
C. Heath and P. Luff, “Documents and professional practice: “bad”
organisational reasons for “good” clinical records,” in Proceedings of
the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work,
1996, pp. 354–363.
[14]
P. Luff, C. Heath, and D. Greatbatch, “Tasks-in-interaction: paper and
screen based documentation in collaborative activity,” in Proceedings of
the 1992 ACM conference on Computer-supported cooperative work,
1992, pp. 163–170.
[15]
C. Heath and P. Luff, “Collaboration and controlcrisis management
and multimedia technology in london underground line control rooms,”
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 1, no. 1-2, 1992,
pp. 69–94.
[16]
P. Dourish and V. Bellotti, “Awareness and coordination in shared
workspaces,” in Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on
Computer-supported cooperative work, 1992, pp. 107–114.
[17]
A. K. Dey, G. D. Abowd, and D. Salber, “A conceptual framework
and a toolkit for supporting the rapid prototyping of context-aware
applications,” Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 16, no. 2-4, 2001, pp.
97–166.
[18]
M. Borges, P. Brezillon, J. Pino, and J.-C. Pomerol, “Bringing context
to cscw,” in 8th International Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work in Design, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2004, pp. 161–166.
[19]
“AGENDA | meaning in the cambridge english dictionary.” [Online].
Available:
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/agenda
[retrieved: Feb., 2020].
[20]
H. Bang, S. L. Fuglesang, M. R. Ovesen, and D. E. Eilertsen, “Effec-
tiveness in top management group meetings: The role of goal clarity,
focused communication, and learning behavior,” Scandinavian Journal
of Psychology, vol. 51, no. 3, 2010, pp. 253–261.
[21]
B. E. Mennecke, “Using group support systems to discover hidden
proﬁles: An examination of the inﬂuence of group size and meeting
structures on information sharing and decision quality,” International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 47, no. 3, 1997, pp. 387–
405.
[22]
D. Yamane, “Course preparation assignments: A strategy for creating
discussion-based courses,” Teaching Sociology, vol. 34, no. 3, 2006, pp.
236–248.
[23]
M. Haller et al., “The nice discussion room: Integrating paper and digital
media to support co-located group meetings,” in Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2010,
pp. 609–618.
[24]
G. A. Janicik and C. A. Bartel, “Talking about time: Effects of
temporal planning and time awareness norms on group coordination
and performance.” Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice,
vol. 7, no. 2, 2003, p. 122.
[25]
J. M. Carroll, D. C. Neale, P. L. Isenhour, M. B. Rosson, and D. S.
McCrickard, “Notiﬁcation and awareness: synchronizing task-oriented
collaborative activity,” International Journal of Human-Computer Stud-
ies, vol. 58, no. 5, 2003, pp. 605–632.
[26]
J. R. Kelly and J. E. McGrath, “Effects of time limits and task types
on task performance and interaction of four-person groups.” Journal of
personality and social psychology, vol. 49, no. 2, 1985, p. 395.
[27]
P. Rogers, H. Sharp, and J. Preece, Interaction Design, beyond hu-
man–computer interaction, fourth edition ed. West Sussex, PO19 8SQ,
United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2015.
[28]
“Beacon | Deﬁnition of Beacon by Lexico.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.lexico.com/en/deﬁnition/beacon [retrieved: Feb., 2020].
[29]
K. NAz and H. Epps, “Relationship between color and emotion: A study
of college students,” College Student J, vol. 38, no. 3, 2004, p. 396.
[30]
H. K. Klein and M. D. Myers, “A set of principles for conducting
and evaluating interpretive ﬁeld studies in information systems,” MIS
quarterly, 1999, pp. 67–93.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

