Down the Rabbit Hole: 
Five Hedonic and Pragmatic Facets of Audience Engagement in Playable Stories 
Daniel Echeverri  
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Kowloon, Hong Kong 
email: 17901330r@connect.polyu.hk 
Huaxin Wei 
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Kowloon, Hong Kong 
email: huaxin.wei@polyu.edu.hk
 
Abstract— This paper presents an exploratory study that relates 
hedonic and pragmatic aspects of audience engagement to 
playable stories on different interactive media. Eighteen 
participants discussed their individual experiences with three 
different interactive adaptations of Lewis Carrol’s Alice in 
Wonderland. The paper illustrates the initial findings of how 
fun, attraction, excitement, satisfaction, and frustration, as facets 
of audience engagement, are shaped by different attributes that 
are related to the affordances of each medium.  
Keywords-Playable Stories; Interactive Narrative; User 
Engagement; Hedonic Experience; Play 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This work in progress aims to explore the 
attributes that shape audiences’ experience with 
playable stories, by mapping out the relations 
between engagement dimensions with attributes of 
the narrative media. This study is driven by a larger 
research that seeks to identify possible methods of 
interaction that can be applied to a model intended 
for playable interactive narratives. In it, the 
participants played with one of three interactive 
adaptations of Alice in Wonderland. Each 
represented a different mode of interaction: 
hypertext, touch-based and naturally tangible. This 
paper intends to present a structure that explores the 
relationship between different facets of audience 
engagement and medium-specific attributes of 
interactive narratives. Most of the published work 
in regards to engagement in interactive narratives, 
especially games and video games, has been 
grounded in quantitative methods (see [13] for 
details). Nonetheless, Ijsselsteijn et al. [7] argue 
that gaming experiences are so experientially rich 
that 
by 
just 
measuring 
engagement 
and 
involvement, other dimensions such as fun are left 
out of the traditional metrics. Additionally, Boyle et 
al. [2] note that in most studies of this type, the 
attention is placed on usability factors instead of the 
enjoyment of the game itself. Using an alternative 
and complementary approach that relies on semi-
structured interviews, this paper intends to present 
instead an account of a study grounded on 
emotional and subjective aspects of a playable 
narrative experience. This paper is organized in the 
following way:  Section 2 will introduce briefly the 
key concepts and related works relevant to the study 
as well as its procedures. Section 3 will present the 
findings, illustrating some attributes explored in the 
paper with statements from some of the 
participants. Finally, Section 4 will discuss the 
conclusions and future work of the study.  
II. 
RELATED WORKS AND BACKGROUND  
A. Concepts and Literatre 
Playable Stories, a primordial component of this 
study, is defined by Ryan [19] as the narratives in 
which the audience observes the evolution of the 
story world, focusing on aesthetic pleasure, and free 
play. User engagement, on the other hand, can be 
characterized by the depth of someone’s investment 
when interacting with a system and the context of 
the experience [11][15]. For example, Chapman [3] 
talks about engagement as something that draws, 
attracts and holds a person's attention, while Laurel 
[8] mentions playfulness, and sensory integration. 
Other concepts involved are flow, where there is 
intrinsic motivation, sustained focus, and loss of 
awareness, as well as play, as something that 
encourages learning, creativity, an urge to satisfy 
needs and a sense of competition or collaboration 
[4][17].  
One of the most cited studies of user engagement 
is the User Engagement Scale (UES) originally 
developed by O’Brien and Toms and further 
revised by O’Brien et al. [11][12]. Among many 
adopters of UES, Wiebe et al.’s [22] adapted the 
Scale specifically for engagement in video game-
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

based environments, which is highly relevant to this 
work. In their framework, which incorporates 
O’Brien & Toms’s and Hassenzahl et al.’s theories, 
user engagement dimensions are classified into two 
categories: hedonic and pragmatic [6]. Hedonic 
aspects include pleasure, aesthetics and novelty, 
whereas pragmatic aspects include usability and 
whether the user would want to use it again. For 
games, it is commonly believed that user 
engagement is mainly driven by hedonic rather than 
pragmatic qualities [22]. These aspects were further 
developed into a four-factor model of User 
Engagement that considered [11]:  
• Aesthetic 
Appeal: 
related 
to 
the 
perceived 
attractiveness and 
visual 
appeal of the medium. 
• Focused Attention: describes the feeling 
of absorbed in the interaction and losing 
track of time during the experience.  
• Perceived Usability: the affect, either 
positive or negative, experienced because 
of the interaction and the degree of 
control and effort. 
• Reward: associated also to Satisfaction 
[22], it describes the success of the 
interaction, the curiosity, and interest in 
the medium while having fun with it. 
B. Study Procedure 
Our first study covered eighteen individual 
sessions with the same number of participants from 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, including 
eleven Ph.D. students, four undergraduates, and 
three academic staff. Only one was a native English 
speaker, while the rest were non-native speakers 
from Europe, South East Asia and Mainland China. 
Ten were women; eight were men, all between 20 
to 35 years old. The participants were based on a 
convenience sample recruited through a mass email 
as well as posters placed across different other 
departments on campus. Before each session, the 
participants were asked to complete the Common 
European Framework (CEFR) Can-Do self-
assessment grid. This self-assessing tool allows the 
participants to categorize themselves as language 
speakers in three groups A (basic), B (independent), 
C (proficient) and 2 levels respectively. Each level 
describes the learner abilities in terms of reading, 
listening, speaking and writing the language [21]. 
One participant categorized himself as a beginner, 
eight as independent and nine as proficient English 
speakers. The purpose of this initial assessment was 
to single out problems caused by language abilities 
during the experiment.  
At the beginning of the session, participants were 
asked to pick from a closed bag a piece of paper that 
contained the name of the adaptation they were 
going to interact and play. The chosen adaptations 
were Matthias Conrady’s hypertext version Allice 
Falling, Emmanuel Paletz's The Alice App designed 
for touch-based tablet devices and Robert Sabuda’s 
movable book Alice's Adventures in Wonderland 
(Figure 1). All participants read and interacted 
specifically with Down the Rabbit Hole, the first 
chapter of the Alice in Wonderland story, which 
appeared across all adaptations. Although the 
textual details of this chapter differ and might 
marginally 
influence the results, the three 
adaptations cover the same plot and characters with 
little to no changes in the narrative itself.  Once 
finished, the participants completed a slightly varied 
version of the aforementioned UES questionnaire. 
Our survey contained 29 of the of the original 30 
questions outlined by O’Brien et al. [12]. The 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Media used in the study. Left: Matthias Conrady’s Alice Falling. Center: Emmanuel Paletz's The Alice App Right: Robert Sabuda’s Alice's 
Adventures in Wonderland. 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

discarded question –PU8 in the UES– addressed a 
matter associated to productivity and not applicable 
to interacting with a playable narrative. The session 
concluded with a semi-structured interview partly 
inspired by Fullerton’s suggested list of general 
postgame questions for playtesters that focus on the 
experiential aspects of the game [5]. Other questions 
invited participants to elaborate on the reward and 
aesthetic appeal attributes from the UES, to ensure 
the interview to cover a wide range of emotions and 
experiences. All the sessions were video and audio 
recorded for a total of 12 hours worth of material. 
The duration of each session was, on average, 40 
minutes; out of those, 5 minutes were dedicated to 
the Can-Do statements, 12 minutes for the 
participants to read and interact with the story, 5 
minutes to complete the UES and 13 minutes for the 
semi-structured interviews. 
Each session was later transcribed and grouped 
based initially on the medium the participants 
interacted 
with. 
Following 
Smith’s 
Shared 
Experiences [20], each collection of interviews was 
analyzed and coded, later grouped into themes and 
then connected as clusters. The analysis of the 
information gathered was done through an inductive 
approach. Considering that our primary interest was 
to look at emotional and affective responses of the 
participants, the primary themes identified were 
mainly drawn from the key moments when 
participants 
were 
discussing 
their 
affective 
experiences: 
• Fun: pleasure without purpose. Framed in 
two 
types: 
solipsistic 
where 
every 
individual gets to define their version of 
fun, and consensual, where fun involves 
physical pleasure, abandonment, and 
debauchery [10].  
• Attraction: object-based emotions or 
(appealing-ness) It concerns the person’s 
attitudes 
and 
relative 
to 
their 
predispositions to like or dislike certain 
aspects [14]. 
• Excitement: a positive emotional state that 
consists of high levels of pleasure and 
arousal [18]. 
• Satisfaction: framed as the pleasure or 
contentment one feels when s/he performs 
a required or desired action and 
experiences the result [9].  
• Frustration: is a phenomenon that 
happens from the struggle to fulfill a will or 
particular goal [1]. 
The first four aspects are classified as hedonic 
experiences while frustration as a pragmatic one. 
Although frustration can be classified also as a 
hedonic experience, the Perceived Usability 
attribute of the UES focuses specifically in 
frustration and other cognitive aspects of the 
experience [12] [22]. Considering these themes, the 
statements of each medium (hypertext, touch-base, 
and tangible) were grouped based on the attributes 
above. Only then, they were coded initially and 
organized. Some of the statements were placed 
across several attributes as they described different 
phenomena. There were statements that were split 
into separate entries due to their length and their 
theme, as sometimes the participants expressed 
multiple ideas in a single sentence.   
III. FINDINGS 
This section focuses on the qualitative findings 
from the exploratory analysis of the interview 
results, which concern the emotions and experiences 
perceived and discussed by the participants. Based 
on the language and comprehension criteria 
established for this study, the contributions from 
seventeen out of the eighteen participants were 
considered suitable. The excluded participant 
scored himself as A1 in his language proficiency 
assessment and his overall narrative comprehension 
was substantially lower compared to the other 
participants. The remaining participants presented 
an acceptable level of language proficiency –equal 
or above B1 in the self-assessment, and an adequate 
comprehension of the narrative –being able to recall 
key events in the story. Gender or age of the 
participants were not an excluding parameter of this 
study. 
The interview findings aim to establish a 
relationship 
and 
a 
hierarchy 
between 
the 
experiences observed and the medium’s affordances 
that induced them. These affordances are mostly 
experiential and their supporting attributes or 
features are of hedonic nature (Figure 2). This can 
be explained by Pucillo and Cascini’s [16] 
characterization for experiential affordances, which 
are enabled by a product’s hedonic features to 
contribute to users’ basic psychological needs.  
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The UES results, on the other hand, showed a 
comparative tendency among the three media on 
the four dimensions of engagement. For example, 
participants report higher scores in Focused 
Attention and Reward for the naturally tangible 
story (i.e., the movable book). Nevertheless, as the 
sample size was small, the current study findings 
weigh more on the interview than the UES 
questionnaire results.  
A. Fun 
The participants who played with the hypertext 
adaptation stated that the narrative ambiguity 
originated their sense of fun. This was most likely 
instigated by the plot, usually dependent on the 
adapting author, the navigational position of the 
hypertext, 
and 
certain 
interactive 
elements 
available to the audience. The feeling of uncertainty 
stimulated their imagination, with the support of 
such visual stimuli as animation or changes in text 
color and shape. Regarding this, Participant 5A 
stated: “I deliberately... when was like: Do cats eat 
bats? It didn't stop looping […] I kept trying not to 
press anything and [to] see what happens.”  
In the touch-based tablet adaptation, fun was 
derived from the sense of feeling curious and 
anticipation about what happens in the narrative, 
with the support of dynamic elements that generate 
sound or motion. Because of the medium’s 
perceptible nature, manipulation is also essential to 
foster fun; sometimes it can be exploratory, while 
in other cases it can have a diegetic effect. 
Participant 6B mentioned “I was quite curious, like 
when I saw... when it started there was the key 
basically.... and it fell down when I tested... so it 
made me expect in every page some kind of 
animation, so I was just checking if there was 
anything.”  
In the naturally tangible narrative instead, the 
dynamics of motion and manipulation of three-
dimensional objects contributed to the sense of 
ludic play, which was reported to have nurtured 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Attributes and modes between the experiences observed and the medium’s affordances that induced them. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

their imagination. This was also grounded in the 
different visual (images) and cognitive (text) 
stimulus of the experience. The latter especially, 
not only in the narrative itself but also for example, 
on the labels placed in the mechanisms that entice 
to act upon them. Participant 2C stated, “It’s kind 
of like... you can have the playable thing to match 
what is happening in the story” Only the 
participants that interacted with this medium 
mentioned being able to “play” with the story, 
while those that experienced the hypertext and 
touch-based narratives described the experience as 
being just fun but never mentioned the idea of ludic 
play. Although all narrative media offered a way of 
playing with the story, it seems that the sense of 
play develops better and is more rewarding in 
media 
that 
allow 
direct, 
three-dimensional 
manipulation.  
B. Attraction 
The second hedonic facet is the sense of 
attraction that entices audiences to interact with the 
narrative. In hypertext narratives for example, 
feeling involved with the dynamic elements seemed 
to be the most attractive affordance. This is 
particularly true with animated typeface that 
entailed the reader acting on it before moving 
forward in the story, for example Participant 1A 
expressed: “I need[ed] to chase the words... like the 
"Cats eat bats” […] when the first sentence is 
popping out, I need to chase it... yeah, chasing 
something.”  
Due to its manipulable nature, the different 
dynamics embedded in the touch-based narrative 
were the most attractive affordances, especially 
when several elements stimulated the participant’s 
curiosity, which sets up their anticipation. About 
this, Participant 2B said, “I was just turning a page, 
and I noticed that when I was trying to turn the 
page, there were some movements, so that made me 
curious that, while in the previous pages I did not 
do that... so that made me curious that there might 
be a purpose.” This also led to interplay between 
the reader and the plot. In some cases, it had a 
purpose like seeing how the character grew, while 
in other cases it turned into exploratory free play 
with the interactive elements.  
In the naturally tangible narrative, the images 
and the text in the book were cognitive and visual 
stimuli to support play and manipulation that has a 
diegetic effect in the story. The participants 
expressed that the ingenuity of the medium –as 
having functional paper mechanisms– raised their 
curiosity with the experience. For example, 
Participant 4C noted that “… once you started 
seeing all these different elements and characters, 
the story starts taking shape and it all happens in 
your mind as you read.”   
C. Excitement 
Feeling excited changes the way an audience 
engages with a narrative. The participants 
expressed that in the hypertext narrative, it was the 
curiosity and the anticipation or surprise of an 
outcome coming from an uncertain part in the plot 
that generated excitement in them. Another 
essential affordance of excitement in this medium 
is the ability to focus on the story; probably due to 
the lack of external distractions such as images and 
a single storytelling mode.  
In contrast, excitement was the least discussed in 
touch-based narratives, perhaps because the 
participants were already familiar with this mode of 
interaction and did not feel novel or foreign. There 
were cases in which the participants highlighted 
excitement from the dynamic elements of the 
narrative such as the moving images and other 
details of the story. Participant 3B mentioned about 
this: “…see there is a picture of a British king 
there... little details like that... I’m not sure 
everyone would pick that...but I appreciated that.”  
In the naturally tangible narrative, the images of 
the movable book along with the texts of the story, 
acted as visual and cognitive stimulus, to fuel the 
sense of curiosity and anticipate the next. Playing 
and manipulating the paper mechanisms intensify 
the sense of immersion. Participant 4C concluded, 
“You don't know what the next page will give you, 
so there is a sense of... unexpected... something 
unexpected, […] like, something folded shows up... 
you flip it, and you discover more detail[s]”.  
D. Satisfaction 
The process of engagement is not exclusively 
linear, but a series of looping moments. Satisfaction 
seems to be mostly derived from that looping 
experience. In the case of the hypertext narrative, 
the sense of contentment was constructed by the 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

plot progression based on specific actions on a 
branching point in the narrative or acting through 
one of the interactive elements. In both cases, this 
was motivated by anticipating the outcomes. This 
cause-effect factor also nurtured imagination, as the 
participants had to create mental images of what 
was happening in the story. For example, according 
to participant 5A “When there is some underlying 
hidden text... for example what she thinks, it’s not 
bulky at the very start, but when you read it you 
want to know what she thinks, that’s why you click 
on it. And then it says what she is thinking.”  
The visual features of the touch-based narrative 
allowed the participants to feel that the medium 
augmented the narrative and their imagination 
through different dynamic elements on the screen. 
These 
elements 
also 
eased 
the 
readers 
understanding of the text and what they thought the 
writer intended to tell. This was especially 
important to the participants with lesser second-
language skills.  
In the naturally tangible narrative, evidently, the 
sense of satisfaction comes from the cognitive 
stimuli of manipulating the paper mechanisms that 
produced movement and inspired their imagination 
and curiosity. Contrasting the other media, 
satisfaction was usually discussed from a more 
expressive standpoint as the participants felt happy 
and involved with the story and the characters. This 
also developed a sense of immersion as the plot 
progressed. 
For 
example, 
Participant 
5C 
highlighted “…and when we see some pop-up 
images like [the] big forest... although we are not 
in the forest, it made me feel like we are there... it’s 
so huge it made me feel like I’m part of it... I’m part 
of Alice's story.” 
E. Frustration 
This experience is directly connected to the 
pragmatic qualities of user engagement. It is worth 
discussing as interesting statements were collected 
regarding frustration. It appears that the non-linear 
nature of the hypertext narrative is one of the main 
sources of frustration, especially when feeling 
uncertain about the plot position and the 
expectations on functional factors as well as the plot 
itself. Seemingly, the frustrations in hypertext 
narratives came from a series of chained factors that 
unfolded into a single struggle. In the other media 
however, they were isolated moments.  
The most prominent concern on what makes the 
experience of the touch-based narrative frustrating 
was to tell those purposeful and functional 
interactive elements apart from those that appear to 
be decorative. Compared to the other media, 
ironically, what was frustrating to the participants 
on the naturally tangible narrative were the same 
distinctive features that generated fun and 
excitement: 
the 
paper 
mechanisms. 
These 
frustrations were visual—overwhelming images 
and colors, cognitive—text that was hard to engage 
with or understand because of the mechanisms, and 
dynamic—urge to play with the mechanisms 
overcoming the need to read.  
F. Child’s (and adult’s) Play 
One interesting observation, although not 
directly related to the experiences discussed, was a 
general consensus on the generational view of the 
story; namely, a certain sense of bending the 
generational appropriateness of the story was 
continually mentioned across the all media. For 
example, one participant mentioned that compared 
to a regular book, the movable one was too delicate 
for children, although for her being an adult felt it 
was ok to manipulate. Other participant stated that 
the story was told mostly to children, but that the 
medium made it more relatable to adults. One final 
participant argued that as an adult she does not get 
to engage with this type of narratives regularly and 
that although it was for children, its child-like 
aspects made her feel good. 
IV. CONCLUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work-in-progress paper presented the initial 
findings from an exploratory study that identified 
five hedonic and pragmatic facets of user 
engagement in the context of playable stories. The 
preliminary findings provided a comparative 
account of how people engage with different but 
related narrative media and how this engagement 
relays their emotions into their own subjective 
experiences.  
The initial findings also provided a promising 
structure to associate the affordances and their 
supporting medium-specific attributes to varied 
facets of audience engagement. Such affordances as 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ludic 
play, 
immersion, 
imagination, 
or 
manipulation lead to free play and pleasure as 
experienced in the unfolding of the narrative and in 
some cases, physically unleashing the storytelling 
spectacles. These findings, after validation, will 
help researchers and designers better harness the 
power of different interactive media to craft 
playable stories with more intended hedonic 
experiential effects.  
As mentioned earlier, the scale of the current 
study-in-progress is not large enough to provide 
clear quantitative tendencies or a fully reliable 
interpretation during the exploratory data analysis. 
The next round of the audience study will increase 
the sample size and refine the procedure in order to 
reach more reliable findings. For example, 
considering the generational bias towards Alice in 
Wonderland as shown among our participants, we 
may, if possible, employ a second story example 
that is more adult-oriented to complement findings 
through Alice. Collecting data from more media can 
also help reveal new affordances or attributes. With 
more valid quantitative results complemented with 
interview results, we will potentially be able to 
interpret better the patterns emerged from them, as 
well as provide insights into the subtle differences 
between the engagement of users of a system, 
game, or software and audiences of a playable 
story, as well as the cause behind these differences. 
This presents an interesting opportunity to 
contribute further to the limited amount of theory 
available on playable stories. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank all the participants who were involved 
in our study. We also thank Dr. Jeffrey C. F. Ho for 
his valuable insights and suggestions along the 
research process. Finally, we thank the reviewers 
for their valuable input in the refinement of this 
paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Amsel and J. Roussel, “Motivational properties of frustration: I. 
Effect on a running response of the addition of frustration to the 
motivational complex.,” Journal of experimental Psychology, vol. 43, 
no. 5, p. 363, 1952. 
[2] 
E. A. Boyle, T. M. Connolly, T. Hainey, and J. M. Boyle, “Engagement 
in digital entertainment games: A systematic review,” Computers in 
Human Behavior, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 771–780, May 2012. 
[3] 
P. Chapman, “Models of Engagement: Intrinsically Motivated 
Interaction with Multimedia Learning Software.,” M.A. Sc Thesis, 
University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 1997. 
[4] 
M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: the psychology of optimal experience, 1st 
ed.. New York: Harper Perennial, 1991. 
[5] 
T. Fullerton, “Chapter 9: Playtesting,” in Game design workshop: a 
playcentric approach to creating innovative games, Third Edition., 
Boca Raton, FL, US: A K Peters/CRC Press, 2008, pp. 294–295. 
[6] 
M. Hassenzahl, S. Diefenbach, and A. Göritz, “Needs, affect, and 
interactive products – Facets of user experience,” Interacting with 
Computers, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 353–362, Sep. 2010. 
[7] 
W. IJsselsteijn, Y. De Kort, K. Poels, A. Jurgelionis, and F. Bellotti, 
“Characterising and measuring user experiences in digital games,” in 
International conference on advances in computer entertainment 
technology, Salzburg, Austria, 2007, vol. 2, p. 27. 
[8] 
B. Laurel, “Dramatic Interactors: Collaboration, Contrainsts and 
Engagement,” in Computers as theatre, Second Edition., Addison-
Wesley, 2013, pp. 139–145. 
[9] 
M. A. Mahmood, J. M. Burn, L. A. Gemoets, and C. Jacquez, 
“Variables affecting information technology end-user satisfaction: a 
meta-analysis of the empirical literature,” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 751–771, 2000. 
[10] A. McKee, “What is Fun?,” in FUN!: What Entertainment Tells Us 
About Living a Good Life, Springer, 2016, pp. 29–40. 
[11] H. L. O’Brien and E. G. Toms, “The development and evaluation of a 
survey to measure user engagement,” Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 50–69, Jan. 
2010. 
[12] H. L. O’Brien, P. Cairns, and M. Hall, “A practical approach to 
measuring user engagement with the refined user engagement scale 
(UES) and new UES short form,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 112, pp. 28–39, Apr. 2018. 
[13] R. P. de Oliveira, D. P. de Oliveira, and T. F. Tavares, “Measurement 
Methods for Phenomena Associated with Immersion, Engagement, 
Flow, and Presence in Digital Games,” Proceedings of SBGames, pp. 
127–135, Sep. 2016. 
[14] A. Ortony, G. L. Clore, and A. Collins, “Factors Affecting the Intensity 
of Emotions,” in The cognitive structure of emotions, Cambridge 
university press, 1990, pp. 59–83. 
[15] C. Peters, G. Castellano, and S. de Freitas, “An exploration of user 
engagement in HCI,” in Proceedings of the International Workshop on 
Affective-Aware Virtual Agents and Social Robots, 2009, p. 9. 
[16] F. Pucillo and G. Cascini, “A framework for user experience, needs 
and affordances,” Design Studies, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 160–179, Mar. 
2014. 
[17] L. P. Rieber, “Seriously considering play: Designing interactive 
learning environments based on the blending of microworlds, 
simulations, and games,” ETR&D, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 43–58, Jun. 1996. 
[18] J. A. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect.,” Journal of personality 
and social psychology, vol. 39, no. 6, p. 1161, 1980. 
[19] M.-L. Ryan, “From Narrative Games to Playable Stories: Toward a 
Poetics of Interactive Narrative,” Storyworlds: A Journal of Narrative 
Studies, vol. 1, pp. 43–59, 2009. 
[20] J. Smith, M. Jarman, and M. Osborn, “Doing Interpretative 
phenomenological analysis,” Qualitative Health Psychology, pp. 218–
240, 1999. 
[21] N. Verhelst, P. Van Avermaet, S. Takala, N. Figueras, and B. North, 
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: learning, 
teaching, assessment. Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
[22] E. N. Wiebe, A. Lamb, M. Hardy, and D. Sharek, “Measuring 
engagement in video game-based environments: Investigation of the 
User Engagement Scale,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 32, pp. 
123–132, Mar. 2014. 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

