Keyword Extraction for Local Foods from Restaurant Menus of Roadside Stations
Yoko Nishihara
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
email: nisihara@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Hirofumi Noguchi
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
Ryosuke Yamanishi
Faculty of Informatics
Kansai University
Osaka, Japan
Abstract—Some foods are only consumed and available in some
regions; these foods are called local foods. For example, B.C. roll
is one of the local foods in Canada. The local foods are a form
of tourism and are expected to attract more tourists. People in
the region are so accustomed to the local foods that they may
have difﬁculty in identifying their values, which means they are
unsure whether a particular food is local or not. If they success
to choose appropriate local foods, they may get more tourists.
Therefore, they should know which food should be sold as a
local food. Previous studies have proposed statistical methods
for extracting keywords for local foods from restaurant menus
on the Internet. However, the restaurant menus often exclude
local foods. This study applies the previous statistical method
to restaurant menus of roadside stations and extracts keywords
for their local foods. These roadside stations are government-
designated rest areas located along Japanese roads. They sell
local foods for promotion, while the restaurants provide menus
of the local foods. Thus, if we apply the statistical method to
the restaurant menus of roadside stations, we may obtain menus
of the local foods. First, we developed a dataset of restaurant
menus of roadside stations. Then, we apply the previous method
to the dataset to extract keywords for the local foods. We invited
participants to our experiment and they evaluated whether the
extracted keywords were related to the local foods. The average
rate of keywords for the local foods was 21.1%. Furthermore, we
discovered that the extracted keywords were not only for foods
but also place names, dish names, and their combinations.
Keywords-local food; roadside station; restaurant menu; food
tourism; TF-IDF
I. INTRODUCTION
People enjoy not only sightseeing on their vacation but also
food tourism[1][2]. Some foods are only eaten and available
in speciﬁc regions. These are called local foods. B. C. roll (a
kind of sushi containing barbecued salmon and cucumber),
Nanaimo bar (butter tarts), and Rocky road (chocolate ice
cream with almond and marshmallow) are examples of food
only eaten in Canada. Lanzhou Ramen (a kind of Chinese
noodle), Tianjin Xiao Long Bao (a type of soup dumpling),
and Peking duck (roast duck), which are local Chinese foods,
can be found in foreign countries. However, if people want
to experience their authentic taste, they would have to get
the dishes from their original region. Local foods have been
receiving a lot of attention in recent years: the example is the
Slow Food movement in Italy [3]. The Slow Food Association
in Italy published guidebooks titled “Osterie D’Italia,” which
list restaurants offering local foods. Tourists expect to enjoy
the local food on their vacations. The tourism industry must
advertise local foods that can be eaten in their region and
consider how to make them appealing to tourists [4].
Although local foods are only eaten and available in speciﬁc
regions, people may be confused about which foods are local.
This is because people in these regions are accustomed to these
foods that they are unaware of their origin. If they success to
choose appropriate local foods, they may get more tourists.
Therefore, they should know which food should be sold as
a local food. Several studies have been conducted to survey
the local foods in restaurant menus[5][6]. Further studies
have been conducted to discover local foods automatically
by applying statistical methods to restaurant menus [7]. The
previous methods achieved the automatic evaluation of the
locality of food.
The previous study [7] applied their method to restaurant
menus on the websites of restaurants, such as Yelp. However,
the restaurant menus on the website do not necessarily include
local foods. We discover more local foods if the previous
method is applied to restaurant menus that include more
local foods. Thus, this study applies the previous method
to restaurant menus in Japanese roadside stations to extract
keywords for the local foods. As the roadside stations provide
foods produced in those regions, the restaurants may offer
menus that include the local foods. We explain how to extract
keywords for the local foods and show the experimental results
in the next sections.
The contributions of this study are as follows:
1) We developed a dataset of restaurant menus in Japanese
roadside stations. The dataset has 8,707 menus from
1,109 roadside stations in 47 prefectures (regions)
(Please contact the 1st author if the database is needed.)
2) We discovered that the keywords for the local foods were
not only foods but also place names, dish names, and
their combinations.
In Section 2, we propose a keyword extraction method. In
Section 3, we explain experiments and experimental results.
In Section 4, we discuss the experimental results. In Section
5, we conclude the paper.
II. KEYWORD EXTRACTION METHOD
Figure 1 illustrates the outline of the keyword extraction
method. The method is based on restaurant menus of roadside
stations. Furthermore, the texts of restaurant menus are parsed
into words. The words are evaluated based on their locality
and assigned evaluation values. The method extracts keywords
with a high locality for the local foods. The following sections
will introduce how to develop a dataset and extract keywords.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I: DATASET EXAMPLE OF RESTAURANT MENUS IN ROADSIDE STATIONS. THE AUTHORS TRANSLATED JAPANESE MENUS INTO
ENGLISH.
Menu
Roadside station
Prefecture
Chinese noodle with horse meat
Shichinohe
Aomori
Chinese noodle with boiled strawberry
Hashikami
Aomori
Curry with Murakami (place name) beef
Asahi
Nigata
Rice with tea poured and a sea bream in Kashiwazaki (place name)
Nigata furusato mura
Nigata
Meal of fried pork with Japanese miso
Fuji
Shizuoka
Japanese mustard ﬂavored ice cream
Amagi goe
Shizuoka
Meal of fried pork of Fujisakura (place name)
Mitomi
Yamanashi
Row salmon of Shinshu (place name)
Kotani
Yamanashi
Meal of fried chicken of Choshu (place name) with vinegar and tartar sauce
Abucho
Yamaguchi
Meal of rice bowl with fried shrimp of Hagi (place name) and Japanese noodle
Hagi jyukan
Yamaguchi
Cold Japanese soba of Reiwa (era name of Japan’s ofﬁcial calendar)
Adachi
Fukushima
Meal of Aizu (place name) DE Jyaran
Kita no sato
Fukushima
Rice bowl of fried gamecock with vinegar and tartar sauce
Nangoku furari
Kochi
Rice bowl of shiitake mushroom
Birafu
Kochi
Ice cream with ﬁg ﬂavored
Buzen okoshikake
Fukuoka
Ice cream with salt and Yame (place name) tea ﬂavored
Tachibana
Fukuoka
Curry with Japanese pepper
Shimizu
Wakayama
Fried chicken
San Pin Nakatsu
Wakayama
Curry with loquat
Tomiura
Chiba
Meal of preserved ﬁsh
Kamogawa ocean park
Chiba
Figure 1. Outline of the proposed method.
A. Dataset of restaurant menus in roadside stations
We focus on the restaurant menus at roadside stations that
may provide menus of local foods. These roadside stations are
government-designated rest areas located along Japanese roads
[8]. There are shops, rest areas, and restaurants that people
can use 24 hours a day. Drivers use the facilities since these
stations are along roads. However, these stations are used to
promote and make local areas active. They provide services
using the local culture, famous places, and specialties; the
local food is a specialty. Although ingredients for the local
foods can be bought at the market, these items must be cooked
before they can be eaten. For example, B. C. roll is indigenous
to Canada. Salmon, cucumber, rice, and some sauce can be
bought at markets but must be cooked before being eaten as
B. C. roll. Since the roadside stations provide the ingredients
for the local foods and have restaurants, their restaurants may
offer menus that include these ingredients for the local foods.
Thus, we use restaurant menus at roadside stations to extract
keywords for the local foods.
TABLE II:
STATISTICAL DATA OF DATASET.
Item
Value
Number of prefectures
47
Number of roadside stations
1,109
Number of menus
8,707
Average of menus per a prefecture
184.8
Minimum of menus among prefectures
0
Maximum of menus among prefectures
561
Average of menus per a roadside station
24.9
Minimum of menus among roadside stations
0
Maximum of menus among roadside stations
102
These roadside stations have Web pages that provide infor-
mation about their services. We develop a dataset of restaurant
menus in roadside stations using the following attributes:
1) Restaurant menu.
2) Roadside station of the restaurant offering the menu.
3) Prefecture, where the roadside station is located.
We choose prefectures in Japan as the regions. The dataset
has the three attributes in one line that are separated by
commas. TABLE I shows a part of the dataset.
TABLE II shows the statistical information of the dataset.
The dataset has 8,707 menus from 1,109 roadside stations
in 47 prefectures. The average of menus per prefecture and
roadside station is 184.8 and 24.9, respectively.
B. Keyword extraction for a local food
Restaurant menus in the dataset are parsed into words. The
words are evaluated in their locality and extracted as keywords
for the local foods. Keyword extraction is performed by the
previous method [7] using a statistical index called Term
Frequency and Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF). TF-
IDF is an index for word importance in a document [9]; it is a
product of two indices: TF (term frequency) and IDF (inverse
document frequency).
Although a document contains numerous words, word distri-
butions are not uniform. Some words appear frequently while
others do not. Since a document consists of messages by the
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

author, words of high frequency must be more signiﬁcant for a
document. Thus, the word frequency is used to evaluate word
importance in a document; this is called a TF value. However,
when looking at a set of documents, some words appear in
most of the documents while others do not. Therefore, words
that appear in particular documents must be more important
for the documents. Thus, the inverse document frequency is
used to evaluate the word importance for a document; this is
called an IDF value. The two values are multiplied to obtain
a TF-IDF value using (1).
TF − IDF(w, d) = tf(w, d) × log
N + 1
df(w, D) + 1,
(1)
where w is a word, d is a document that includes word w,
N denotes the number of documents, and D is a set of N
documents.
The previous study [7] applied TF-IDF to extract keywords
for the local foods. It is assumed that the keywords for the
local foods frequently appear in the menus of the area. In
contrast, the keywords for the local foods do not frequently
appear in those from other areas. Based on this assumption,
Restaurant Frequency (RF) and Inverse Local Frequency (ILF)
were adopted instead of TF and IDF. The product of the two
values becomes RF-ILF, which is given by (2).
RF − ILF(w, a) = rf(w, a) × log
M + 1
lf(w, A) + 1,
(2)
where a is a menu that includes the word w, M denotes the
number of prefectures, and A is a set of M prefectures.
In this study, we employ words that are nouns, verbs,
adjectives, and adverbs. For parsing, we used MeCab and the
NeologD as a dictionary. Words with a high locality for each
prefecture are extracted as keywords for the local foods.
III. EXPERIMENT
We conducted experiments with participants.
A. Experimental settings
Experimental procedures were as follows:
1) An experimenter extracts keywords using the method
introduced in Section II.
2) The experimenter asks participants to evaluate whether
or not the extracted keywords are for the local foods.
3) The experimenter evaluates the rate of keywords for the
local foods.
The experimenter is the second author of this study. We
chose prefectures as the regions. In procedure 1), the experi-
menter extracted 20 keywords for each of the 47 prefectures
in Japan, totaling 940 keywords.
In procedure 2), 92 Japanese participated in the experiment.
Their ages ranged from 10 to 80, which includes 45 men and
47 women. The experimenter asked the participants to choose
prefectures from which they were born and resided for a long
time. Then, the participants evaluated the keywords of the
chosen prefectures based on their locality. We obtained 100
TABLE III: EXPERIMENTAL RESULT: RATES OF KEYWORDS FOR
LOCAL FOODS. THE TOP AND BOTTOM FIVE PREFECTURES ARE
DEPICTED.
Prefecture
Rate
Hokkaido
68%
Nagasaki
64%
Okinawa
39%
Gifu
30%
Aomori
28%
Hiroshima
4%
Ibaragi
5%
Miyazaki
6%
Kanagawa
8%
Yamaguchi
10%
Average
21.1%
TABLE
IV:
EXAMPLES
OF
EXTRACTED
KEYWORD
FOR
HOKKAIDO PREFECTURE AND THEIR APPROVAL RATES. PLACE
NAME MEANS A KEYWORD TYPE.
Keyword
Rate
Type
Siretoko
100%
Place name
Rausu
66%
Place name
Chinese noodle
100%
Dish name
Ice cream
33%
Dish name
Curry
0%
Dish name
Oyster
100%
Food name
Scallop
66%
Food name
Fried noodles with starchy sauce
33%
Dish name
Hanamaka
100%
Place name
Kelp
100%
Food name
Crab
66%
Food name
Traditional Fried Chicken
100%
Dish name
Dosan
100%
Place name
Lunch
33%
Others (meal style)
Salmon roe
100%
Food name
Mongolian mutton barbecue
100%
Dish name
Sun ﬂower
33%
Others (plant name)
Atsukeshi
0%
Place name
Uryu
66%
Place name
Vegetable
66%
Food name
answers for 29 prefectures because some participants chose
a few prefectures. The average answer was 1.08 for each
participant. The experimenter evaluated the rate of keywords
for the local foods for each prefecture in Japan (in procedure
3)). The experiments were conducted on December, 2021.
B. Experimental results
TABLE III shows experimental results, which illustrates
the top and bottom ﬁve prefectures of the approval rate of
keywords for the local food. We obtained answers from 29 of
the 47 prefectures. The highest, lowest, and average approval
rates were 68%, 4%, and 21.1%, respectively. The approval
rate was the rate of approval numbers versus answer numbers.
IV. DISCUSSION
We discuss a prefecture with the highest rate of keywords
for the local foods. TABLE IV shows the extracted keywords
and approval rates by the participants. We obtained answers
from three participants. More than half of the participants
approved 14 of the 20 keywords. We extracted the top 20
keywords with a high locality. However, some keywords were
judged as not the local foods (for example, curry and ice
cream).
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE V: TYPES OF KEYWORDS WITH THE HIGHEST LOCALITY
FOR 47 PREFECTURES.
Type
Rate (total 47 prefectures)
Place name
40%
Dish name
26%
Food name
17%
Combination of place and food names
11%
Person name
4%
Adjective
2%
The extracted keywords are for food and non-food items.
We analyzed different types of keywords. The third column of
TABLE IV shows the types of keywords. We observed that the
keywords were not only for foods but also for place names,
dish names, meal styles, and plant names. Furthermore, we
assumed that other prefectures had similar trends in keyword
types. The same analysis of keywords with the highest lo-
cality in each prefecture was conducted. TABLE V shows
the analysis result. We observed that the different types of
keywords were place names (40%), dish names (26%), food
names (17%), combinations of place and food names (11%),
and others (person names and adjectives were 4% and 2%,
respectively). The results indicated that the keywords for the
local foods were not necessarily foods. People can feel the
locality from keywords for place and dish names.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This study applied a basic statistical method for extracting
keywords for local foods from restaurant menus of roadside
stations. First, we developed a dataset of restaurant menus
of roadside stations. The dataset included 8,707 menus from
1,109 roadside stations in 47 Japanese prefectures. Then, we
applied the previous method to the dataset to extract keywords
for the local foods. We asked participants to evaluate whether
or not the extracted keywords were for the local foods. The
average of keywords for the local foods was 21.1%. We found
that the results might be signiﬁcant because keywords for
local foods could be extracted but the extraction rates were
not high. We would like to improve the proposed method
to obtain keywords for local foods with a higher accuracy.
Furthermore, we observed that the extracted keywords were
not only for foods but also place names, dish names, and their
combinations. We haven’t compare the results with those of
previous study [7] because the evaluation method was not the
same. We will evaluate the consistency of the proposed method
by comparing the results of [7].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This paper was partly supported by Ritsumeikan Global
Innovation Research Organization. We show our great appre-
ciation.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Sengel, A. Karagoz, G. Cetin, F. I. Dincer, S. M. Ertugral, and
M. Balik, “Tourists ’Approach to Local Food,” Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 195, pp. 429-437, 2015.
[2] F. J. Jimenez Beltran, F. Santa-Cruz, and T. Lopez-Guzman, “Gastron-
omy as a Factor of Tourism Development: Case Study of the City of
Cordoba in Spain, ” Journal of Gastronomy and Tourism, vol.2. pp.1-14,
2016
[3] J. Chrzan, “Slow food: What, why, and to where?” Food, Culture &
Society, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117-132, 2004.
[4] E. Latham, “Food tourism in oceania: Telling the stories,” Tourism
Culture & Communication, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 221-234, 2021.
[5] H. R. Yurtseven and O.Kaya, “Local food in local menus: The case
of gokceada,” Tourismos: An International Multidisciplinary Journal of
Tourism, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 263-275, 2011.
[6] M. Nummedal and C. M. Hall, “Local food in tourism: An investigation
of the new zealand south island ’s bed and breakfast sector ’s use and
perception of local food,” Tourism Review International, vol. 9, no. 4,
pp. 365-378, 2006.
[7] Y. Tanaka, R. Yamanishi, and Y. Nishihara, “A study on regional
characteristics of food by statistical analysis of menus on restaurant
search websites (in japanese),” In ARG the 13th Web Intelligenceand
Interaction Domestic Conference, no. 13, pp. 61-64, 2018.
[8] Roadside station, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roadside station.
[9] G. Salton and M. J. McGill, “Introduction to modern information
retrieval,” McGrow-Hill Book Company, 1983.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

