Line Drawing Perceptual Characteristics for the Number of Strokes  
Using an Active-Wheel Mouse 
Yoshihiko Nomura, Yoshiaki Kashino, Koki Katsuta, 
Graduate School of Engineering 
Mie University 
Tsu, Japan 
e-mails: {nomura, y-kashino, katsuta-k}@int.mach.mie-
u.ac.jp  
 
 Tokuhiro Sugiura 
Center for Information Technologies and Networks 
Mie University 
Tsu, Japan 
e-mail: sugiura @ cc.mie-u.ac.jp 
Abstract—This paper reports perceptual characteristics for 
multiple line-drawings using an “active-wheel mouse” and 
employing an “After-Recognition Go” presentation strategy. The 
active-wheel mouse is a mouse interface to which a finger-tactile 
interface is attached. The finger-tactile interface embodies an 
active wheel being rotatable in any directions, with any speeds 
and with any time durations, and the rotation provides slippages 
to users on their fingertip skin.  Users are instructed to accept the 
slippage stimuli as straight-line stroke motions with specific 
directions, velocities and lengths. A perceptual experiment was 
conducted: up to seven, straight-line strokes were presented to 
subjects, i.e., participants by the active-wheel mouse, and the 
strokes were drawings reproduced by the subjects. Next, the 
reproduced strokes were evaluated from the viewpoints of 
lengths, directions, velocities, and time durations. As a result, it 
made clear that the active-wheel mouse worked well for line 
drawing presentation. 
Keywords— Fingerpad; tactile; interface; stroke; perception 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Visually impaired persons utilize sensations other than the 
vision such as skin and proprioceptive sensations. For example, 
some handy-and-portable devices were proposed. For 
instructing arm motions, Tsuda et al. [1] and Causo et al. [2] 
proposed vibrotactile device. Norman et al. [3] proposed skin-
stretch device. Gwilliam et al. [4] proposed a skin stretch-
based tactile display in conjunction of a joystick-based force 
feedback, and Koslover et al. [5] combined a skin stretch-
based tactile display with vibrotactile and voice guidance. Ion 
et al. [6] proposed a tactile display to drag a physical tactor 
across the skin for instructing geometrical shapes. Tsagarakis 
et al. [7] proposed a slippage display to rotate two cones for 
instructing 2D directions. Moscatelli et al. [8] proposed other 
slippage display to rotate a ball for instructing 2D slippages.  
They provided motion information with tactors. However, 
they could not solve following problems: ① the number of 
physical properties to be presented was restricted in such the 
way that motion direction can be presented alone, ② the 
operating range was restricted in several millimeters. As a 
solution for the problems, the authors have presented an 
“Active-Wheel 
Mouse 
(AWM) 
[9]” 
and 
an 
“After-
Recognition Go (ARG)” presentation strategy [11].  
Towards a practical application of the AWM, we should 
know better the line-drawing perceptual characteristics. The 
perceptual characteristics can be evaluated by the outcome, that 
is, the reproduced strokes resulted from a series of processes 
from the stimulus perception, stroke recognition, and memory-
retention. In this study, the perceptual characteristics were 
examined for multiple-stroke line-drawings up to seven strokes 
through a psychophysical experiment. The remainder of the 
paper is structured as follows. The hardware and software of 
the system employed in this work are explained in Sections II, 
i.e., the authors’ developed AWM, a line-drawing-stroke 
presenting strategy. Next, a stroke perception experiment 
follows the system descriptions. Practically, in Section III, 
perceptual characteristics of simple patterns of 1-, 3-, 5-, and 7-
strokes are presented. The paper closes with a conclusion and 
remarks for further developments. 
II. METHOD  
This section describes a hardware and software, i.e., a 
mouse interface and a line-drawing stroke presenting strategy. 
A. Active-Wheel Mouse 
An “Active-Wheel Mouse (AWM) is a renovated mouse 
interface: at the front of a mouse interface, a Finger-Tactile 
Interface (FTI) is attached as shown in Figure 1. In the FTI, a 
wheel is swiveled and rotated by two stepping motors 
(M15SP-2N and M25SP-6NK by Mitsumi Electric Co., LTD., 
Tokyo, Japan) as shown in Figure 2. The rotation and swivel 
provide a slippage on the user’s fingerpad with a velocity and 
time-duration: the velocity together with the time duration 
results in a slippage length. The wheel has a diameter of 20 
mm and a thickness of 6 mm (see Figure 3). On the wheel 
peripheral surface, raised dots are formed to enable slippage 
perception [9]-[11]: as for the raised dots, the height is 0.5 mm, 
and the diameter of the bottom circle is 1.7 mm. The dot 
interval was about 10.5 mm so that dots appear one by one on 
the fingerpad, which makes the slippage perceived [12][13].  
 
Figure 1. Active wheel mouse (AWM): the finger-tactile interface (FTI) is 
attached at the front 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 (a) Rotation mechanism   (b) Finger-tactile interface in total 
Figure 2. Finger-tactile interface: reduction gear ratio for rotation: 6.5, that 
for swivel: 3.5 
 
 
 
(a) Wheel   
 
 
(b) Raised dot:  
Figure 3. Wheel configuration: raised dots were designed, based on the 
Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS) for tactile graphics 
B. After-Recognition Go Stroke-Presenting Strategy 
Multiple strokes were learned through two recognition 
stages as shown in Figure 4: (1) the first stage is for whole line 
segment patterns (i.e., motion loci), and (2) the second stage is 
for velocity variations (i.e., motion trajectories), in particular, 
the velocities were changed stepwise. In either case of the first 
or second recognition stage, the “After-Recognition Go stroke-
presenting Strategy (ARG-S)” [14] was employed in presenting 
each of the strokes as in the following. 
 
Figure 4. Two recognition stages for learning multiple-stroke loci and 
velocities. 
[Step 1] Subjects hold the mouse in their right hand. Then, 
they touch the wheel upper peripheral surface from 
above with their index-fingerpad. 
[Step 2] Finger-tactile interface swivels the rotating unit to a 
given direction and rotates the wheel with a given 
velocity and time duration: the velocity and the time 
duration determine a rotation angle. (See Figure 5 ①) 
[Step 3] While accepting the slippage stimulus, the subjects 
recognize the stimulus as a line segment in the 1st stage 
and as a constant velocity movement in the 2nd stage. 
(See Figure 5 ②) 
[Step 4]  The subjects drag the AWM so as to reproduce 
subjects’ recognized motion. (See Figure 5 ③) 
[Step 5] The subjects memorize the drag motion as a stroke. 
(See Figure 5 ④) 
[Step 6] Just after memorizing stroke, the subjects send a 
signal by pressing a button by their left finger. 
[Step 7] Return to [Step 2] till all the strokes are presented 
and memorized. 
 
Figure 5. After-Recognition Go stroke-presenting Strategy (ARG-S). 
III. STROKE PERCEPTION EXPERIMENT 
This section describes a stroke perception experiment and 
presents line-drawing perceptual characteristics in relation to 
the number of strokes. 
A. Experimental Conditions 
Ten healthy right-handed males in their 20s (22~24; 
mean=22.6; SD=0.9) participated. The line drawings presented 
were from single to seven straight-line strokes (See Figure 6.). 
All the strokes were made by constant-velocity straight-line 
motion. The factors, i.e., the length, speed, direction and 
stroke-number and the factor-levels are shown in TABLE I.  
For each of the runs, the factor levels were randomly chosen, 
provided that corner angles are more than 30 deg. 
TABLE I.  
FACTORS AND FACTOR LEVELS USED FOR EXPERIMENT 
Factor 
Factor level 
Subject 
10 males 
Presentation strategy 
After-recognition go 
Presented stroke drawing 
8 drawings in total: 2 patterns for each of 1-, 
3-, 5-, and 7-stroke drawings 
Length 
50, 66, 83, 100 mm 
Speed 
12, 25, 37, 50 mm/s 
Direction 
0, 22.5, 45, ・・・, 337.5 deg 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 6. Presented drawings: each stroke  is presented as an uniform motion. 
B. Evaluation Values 
By connecting the start and end point, a secant was 
obtained for each of the actually reproduced strokes. Then, the 
length- and angle-differences between the secants and the 
desired strokes were used as evaluation values (see Figure 7):  
    Δl = lsecant – ldesired 
    Δ𝜃= 𝜃secant –𝜃desired 
In addition to these, the velocity difference of the mean 
velocity from the desired one is also employed as the third 
evaluation value: 
Δv= vmean –vdesired 
 
Figure 7. Evaluation values: the differences of lengths and angles between 
the secants of actual trajectory and the desired trajectory 
C. Experimental Result 
Some reproduced line-drawings for the  drawing No. 7-1 
are shown in Figure 8. Even though much improvement is 
expected, they show a potential for rough sketches. For each 
of the 1, 3, 5, and 7 stroke drawings and for each of the 10 
subjects, the Mean Absolute Errors (MAEs) per stroke for the 
lengths, angles, and velocities of the reproduced strokes are  
shown in  Figure 9.  As the number of strokes increases, the 
elapsed times and their variances seem to increase. On the 
other hand, the errors of the length, angle, and velocity per 
stroke seem to be no difference in this experiment. That is, for 
the length MAEs (Figure 9 (a)), the angle MAEs (Figure 9 (b)), 
and the velocity MAEs (Figure 9 (c)), the sample means were 
calculated for the 1, 3, 5, and 7 stroke drawings, and they are 
shown by ▭, 
△, □, and 〇, respectively. Then, we applied a 
statistcal test, ANOVA, to all the residuals (the differences of 
the perceived values from the actual value). It was confirmed 
that there were no significant differences between the 
population means of the 1, 3, 5, and 7 stroke drawings: lengths, 
F(3, 309) = 0.73, p = 0.54; angles, F(3, 309) = 0.47, p = 0.70 ; 
mean-velocities, F(3, 309) = 1.01, p = 0.54 . 
On the other hand, the sample means of the elapsed times 
and the number of iterations were plotted by ● and ■, 
respectively in Figure 10. It is interesting to note that there are 
linear characteristics of the elapsed time per iteration and the 
number of iterations. It means that the elapsed times per stroke 
would not increase as the number of stroke increases (see 〇 
in Figure 10). Even so, it is also noted that, since there must be 
some limits for human beings on the amount of information 
that can be memorized at a time, the elapsed time per stroke 
may increase in the much more strokes.  
 
 
Figure 8. Examples of the reproduced line-drawings: drawing No. 7-1. 
 
 
(a) Lengths 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
(b) Angles 
 
(c)  Velocities 
Figure 9. Mean absolute errors with respect to the reproduced lengths, angles, 
and velocities  for multi-stroke drawings 
 
Figure 10. Elapsed times in relationship to the number of strokes 
IV. CONCLUSION 
This 
paper 
presented 
multiple-stroke 
recognition 
characteristics using a tactile interface, i.e., an active-wheel 
mouse, and with an after-recognition go strategy. As a result 
of multiple-stroke recognition experiments using 1- to 7-stroke 
drawings with less than 100 mm of strokes, the followings 
were confirmed.  
(1)  The residuals (the differences of the perceived values 
from the actual value) of lengths, angles, velocities 
and elapsed times per stroke did not show significant 
difference between the 1- to 7-stroke drawings. The 
means of them were about 20 mm, 10 deg, and 10 
mm/s, and 6 sec, respectively. 
(2)  Elapsed times were proportional to the number of 
strokes of the presented drawings. It means per-stroke 
elapsed-times were almost remained unchanged even 
though the number of stokes increased.  
 
In the future, accuracy and efficiency are to be furthermore 
improved. Further extension of applicable scope is expected 
for curved strokes and accelerated strokes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by KAKENHI (Grant-in-Aid for 
Challenging Exploratory Research 15H02929 from Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Tsuda, N. Kato, and Y. Nomura, “Instruction of arm motion for 
calligraphy using vibrotactile stimulations,” In Advanced Intelligent 
Mechatronics (AIM), 2011 IEEE/ASME International Conference, pp. 
677-682, 2011. 
[2] A. Causo, S. H. Yeo, and I. M. Chen, “Vibrotactile motors on stationary 
arm as directional feedback to correct arm posture.” In Advanced 
Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM), 2012 IEEE/ASME International 
Conference, pp. 202-207, 2012 
[3] S. L. Norman, A. J. Doxon, B. T. Gleeson, and W. R. Provancher, 
“Planar hand motion guidance using fingertip skin-stretch feedback.”, 
2014 IEEE transactions on haptics, vol.7, no.2, pp.121-130, 2014 
[4] L. T. Gwilliam, A. J. Doxon, and W. R. Provancher, “Haptic matching 
of directional force and skin stretch feedback cues,” 2013 IEEE World 
Haptics Conference, pp. 19-14, 2013. 
[5] R. L. Koslover, B. T. Gleeson, J. T. De Bever, and W. R. Provancher, 
“Mobile navigation using haptic, audio, and visual direction cues with a 
handheld test platform,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 
33-38, 2012. 
[6] A. Ion, E. J. Wang, and P. Baudisch, “Skin drag displays: Dragging a 
physical tactor across the user's skin produces a stronger tactile stimulus 
than vibrotactile,” In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2501-2504, 2015. 
[7] N. G. Tsagarakis, T. Horne, and D. G. Caldwell, “Slip aestheasis: A 
portable 2d slip/skin stretch display for the fingertip,” Eurohaptics 
Conference, 2005 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual 
Environment and Teleoperator Systems, pp. 214-219, 2005. 
[8] Moscatelli, A., Naceri, A. and Ernst, M., “Navigation in the fingertip,” 
IEEE World Haptics Conference, pp. 519-523, 2013. 
[9] Y. Nomura, and S. Oike, “Active-Wheel Mouse for Human-Computer 
Interface: Slippage-Perception Characteristics on Fingerpad,” Proc. of 
10th International Conference, UAHCI 2016,Part II Part of HCI 
International 2016, Part II, pp. 54-61, 2016. 
[10]  Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and S. Oike, “Proposal of active-wheel-based 
finger-tactile 
interface 
and 
its 
slippage-presenting 
functions,” 
Transactions of the JSME, vol.83, no.852, pp.1-17, 2017 (in Japanese) 
[11] Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and T. Sugiura, “Line-drawing presentation 
strategies with an active-wheel mouse,” Proc. ACHI 2018 : The 
Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, pp.199-203, 2018. 
[12] Y. Nomura, and K. Iwabu, “Length perceptual characteristics on raised-
dot slippages,” Human-Computer Interfaces and Interactivity: Emergent 
Research and Applications, IGI Global, pp. 286-308, 2014. 
[13] Y. Nomura, and H. Kato, “Raised-dot slippage perception on fingerpad 
using active wheel device,” Recent Advances on Using Virtual Reality 
Technologies for Rehabilitation, Nova Science Publishers, Inc. New 
York, pp. 165-172, 2015. 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

