Suppression of Information Diffusion in Social Network
Using Centrality based on Dynamic Process
Eiichi Takazawa and Norihiko Shinomiya
Graduate School of Engineering
Soka University
1-236 Tangi, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan
Email: shinomi@soka.ac.jp
Abstract—Individual activities propagate on social networks and
had a large impact on our society. For example, incitement
acts such as hoaxes, widely propagated through social media,
gave unnecessary confusion and uneasiness to many people. The
purpose of this study is to propose an edge centrality index
in a network considering the propagation of activities through
analysis. Our previous studies have proposed an evaluation
method that quantiﬁes the edge importance based on an activity
propagation model. The model represents the propagation by an
equalization process of the variable amount given to each vertex.
This paper experimentally shows that the information diffusion
can be suppressed by using the edge importance measure.
The experiment veriﬁes that the range of information diffusion
becomes smaller than that before deleting some edges from the
network based on the importance measure.
Keywords–Centrality; Graph Theory; Information Diffusion.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The development and dissemination of information net-
work technologies have accelerated online communications
among individuals and dispatch of information at the individual
level. In particular, individual activities also have propagated
throughout the world due to the advancement in social media.
As a result, the impact of individual activities on society has
been increasing. For instance, in the so-called Arab Spring,
democratization movement spread through social media. That
led to huge demonstration activities that occurred in many
countries [1]. In the future, it is expected that technological
innovation such as blockchain further facilitates interaction
among individuals, complicates mutual inﬂuence, and makes
the scale spread out. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze not
only a network itself but also the behaviors of the people
connecting to the network.
On the other hand, a variety of centralities have been
theoretically and experimentally studied in the ﬁeld of network
analysis and graph theory [2]. Each centrality quantiﬁes how
important a vertex or an edge is in a graph that abstracts the
corresponding network. There are different measures of cen-
trality depending on how to deﬁne the criteria on importance.
For example, degree centrality [2] is based on the number
of edges connected to vertices. As the signiﬁcance index
of centrality, it is assumed that vertices with higher degree
strongly contribute to spreading information. Betweenness
centrality [3] is deﬁned as a ratio of an edge existing on the
shortest path between arbitrary two vertices. It is assumed
that information tends to be transmitted along the shortest
path. These conventional centralities have been applied in a
wide range of ﬁelds such as human relationship analysis and
information communication network design. However, these
measures are deﬁned only based on the static structure of
the network such as the degree and the shortest path, thereby
not suitable for analyzing a dynamic process such as activity
propagation.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to propose a new
edge centrality index in a network considering the propagation
of activities through analysis. The proposed centrality is ex-
pected to be used as a clue of prevention on the diffusion
of computer viruses, false propaganda, and online ﬂaming,
since it can measure the edge importance in propagation. Our
study previously has proposed a novel centrality and analyzed
its characteristics by comparing it with other centralities [4].
Our centrality index of an edge is deﬁned by the inﬂuence on
propagation when a link corresponding to the edge is removed.
The activity propagation is modeled by an equalization process
of exchanging variable amount among vertices.
This paper investigates how the information diffusion can
be suppressed by using the proposed centrality. Speciﬁcally,
the range of information diffusion on a network is compared
with that on the transformed network where some edges with
higher centrality are deleted. Then, we analyze how much the
range of information diffusion becomes smaller after the edges
are removed. The results of the numerical experiments on
the proposed centrality and betweenness centrality demonstrate
that it is possible to reduce the range of information spreading
by deleting edges based on the proposed centrality. This fact
implies that this centrality is useful as an index to prevent the
information diffusion.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows, Section II
deﬁnes the model that represents how people interact with each
other through a network, Section III proposes the new edge
centrality based on the propagation model, and Section IV
investigates how the information diffusion can be suppressed
by using the proposed centrality.
II.
DYNAMICS OF PROPAGATION
A. Modeling
This section deﬁnes the model that represents how people
interact with each other through a network. A given graph G =
(V, E) is an undirected and connected graph with vertex set V
and edge set E, suppose that each vertex vi ∈ V has a variable
Wi(t) ∈ R+ at a time t ∈ N, Wi(t) is referred as weight. At
each time t, vertices transfer some of their weights to adjacent
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Dynamics of propagation.
vertices, in order to reduce the difference in weights among
vertices. The weights are not lost or externally added while
transferred, and the total weights of the graph as a whole are
conserved (Figure 1). Hence, the sum and ensemble average of
all weights is constant and independent of time, and the weight
of each vertex approaches the average value over time. If the
difference between the ensemble average and each weight of
all vertices is less than a threshold ε, this condition says that
”the weights have converged”. Let the ensemble average of
weights be ⟨W⟩, the condition of weights convergence can be
written by the following equation.
|⟨W⟩ − Wi(t)| ≤ ε
∀vi ∈ V.
(1)
In this model, the force trying to synchronize the states
at connected vertices works. When there is no state difference
between vertices, they are stable and do not mutually inﬂuence
each other. The force trying to synchronize state with others
is seen in various ﬁelds such as restoring force in physics,
peer pressure in psychology, imitation in sociology. Thus, it
is assumed that our model is a universal model describing
characteristics commonly included in many models.
B. Propagation Rules
This section shows the rules of weight transfer. If the
weight of a vertex is regarded as loads (works), the syn-
chronization process of our model can be thought of as a
process of solving the load balancing problem. We deﬁne the
propagation rules using the simple load balancing algorithm:
diffusion algorithm and local equalization algorithm.
1) Diffusion Algorithm: This algorithm determines the rule
of weight transfer based on the physical diffusion process such
as chemical substances [5]. Speciﬁcally, when the vertex vi
transfers some weight to adjacent vertices vj, the amount of
transferred weight can be calculated by the difference between
Wi(t) and Wj(t) multiplied by a nonnegative constant Aij.
Aij is called the diffusion coefﬁcient and can be interpreted
as a parameter representing the ease of transferring weights.
When the weight of each vertex at a time t is Wi(t), the weight
Wi(t + 1) at the next time can be written as follows.
Wi(t + 1) = Wi(t) +
∑
vj: neighbor of vi
Aij(Wj(t) − Wi(t)).
(2)
Boillat proposed (3) as a method of choosing Aij. deg(vi)
expresses the degree of vi. In the experiment, we assumed the
homogeneity of the link for simplicity and set any element of
Aij to the inverse of one plus the maximum degree of vertices.
Aij =
1
1 + max{deg(vi), deg(vj)}
vi, vj ∈ V.
(3)
The propagation process based on this rule represents that
each node is gradually affected by the surroundings and the
inﬂuence spreads.
Figure 2. Extracting sub-star graphs.
2) Local Equalization Algorithm: This algorithm repeats
the operation of converging the weights locally for each
subgraph [4]. First, a sub-star graph Si centered on each
vertex vi is extracted from the graph G. The sub-star graph
Si is a subgraph induced by one vertex vi and its adjacent
vertices (Figure 2). Since sub-star graphs are extracted for each
vertex, the number of elements of the set of sub-star graphs
S extracted from the graph G is equal to |V |. Next, select the
sub-star graph Si in random order from the sub-star graph set
S, and locally converge the weights of the vertices included
in Si. When the local convergence of all sub-star graphs in S
is completed, the time t goes to the next. The weight of the
vertex vk included in Si changes as follows, when converging
locally on the sub-star graph Si.
Wj(t + 1) =
1
|Si|
∑
vk∈Si
Wk(t)
vj ∈ Si.
(4)
Unlike the diffusion algorithm, this rule represents the prop-
agation that is very susceptible to mutual inﬂuence, because
the states are instantaneously synchronized at the surroundings
around a node.
III.
EDGE CENTRALITY PROPOSAL
Using the model of Section II-A, we deﬁne the centrality
of edge. Here, the time until the convergence of the weights
is used as an index of the centrality. In order to deﬁne the
importance of the edge e, converge the weights of the graph
G′ obtained by removing an edge e from the graph G. At
that time, the weights transmitted along the edge e has to be
propagated bypassing e, thus the weights would be difﬁcult
to converge. Therefore, the importance of an edge is deﬁned
by the difﬁculty of weights convergence when the edge was
removed. Speciﬁcally, the importance of the edge e is deﬁned
by the ratio of the time to the convergence of the original graph
G and the graph G′ removed e. The time until convergence
depends on the weights W0 = {W1(0), . . . , Wn(0)} at the
initial (t = 0). Hence, the importance is calculated with the
initial weights of several patterns, and the average is used as
the centrality value. Let W0 be a pattern set of the initial
weights and T(G, W0) be the time until convergence, the
importance D(e) can be written as follows.
D(e) =
1
|W0|
∑
W0∈W0
T(G′, W0)
T(G, W0) .
(5)
From this deﬁnition of importance, if the graph is not
connected when an edge is removed, there is a possibility
that the weight cannot converge in the propagation model.
Therefore, the importance D(e) cannot be deﬁned unless a
graph is at least two connected.
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a) IC model.
(b) LT model.
Figure 3. The value of ∆k for each k, graph models, and information diffusion models.
IV.
EXPERIMENTS
The proposed centrality deﬁnes the edge importance by
measuring how much the propagation becomes more difﬁcult
when an edge is removed. Therefore, it is assumed that the
propagation on the network can be suppressed by deleting the
edges with high importance in this centrality. In addition, the
propagation process expressed by the diffusion algorithm (in
Section II-B1) can be used for analysis of the information
diffusion [6]. This experiment analyzes how much the range
of information diffusion becomes smaller after the edges are
removed. These removed edges are chosen in descending
order of the importance in our centrality using the diffusion
algorithm as the propagation rule.
A. Simulation Setting
1) Information Diffusion Model and Parameter Setting: In
order to simulate the diffusion process of information, this
experiment uses two popular information diffusion models:
Independent Cascade (IC) model [7] and Linear Threshold
(LT) model [8]. In these models, each vertex has either active
or inactive state, and active represents a state receiving the
information and inactive represents a state which has not yet
been received the information respectively. Also, the informa-
tion diffusion on the network is expressed as the increase of
active vertices. In the IC model, the set of active vertices at the
beginning and diffusion probability pu,v for each edge (u, v)
are given, and active vertex u conveys the information with
probability pu,v to its adjacent vertex v. On the other hand,
the LT model sets the set of active vertices at the beginning,
the weight ωu,v for each edge (u, v), and the threshold θv
of each vertex v as initial parameters. The inactive vertex v
is affected by all adjacent active vertices u according to ωu,v,
and v becomes active when the following equation is satisﬁed.
∑
(u, v) ∈ E s.t. u is active
ωu,v ≥ θv
(6)
Assuming the homogeneity of nodes and links, this exper-
iment set the diffusion probability pu,v = 0.2 in the IC
model, the weight of edge ωu,v equals the reciprocal of
max {deg(u), deg(v)} and the threshold θv = 0.25 in the LT
model [9]. In addition, the number of active vertices at the
beginning is set to 0.25|V | for both models.
2) Deﬁnition of Indicators for the Information Diffusion
Suppression: We simulate the information diffusion by the IC
or LT model on a graph G = (V, E), and deﬁne A(G) by the
expected number of active vertices at the end of that diffusion
process. The removed edges are decided as the following. First,
we rearrange the element of E by the descending order of the
centrality value, that is, the importance of ei is larger than that
of ej if i is smaller than j. Ek is deﬁned as E divided into
|E|/l sets, as in the following equation.
Ek = {ekl, ekl+1, . . . , ekl+l−1},
k ∈ {0, . . . , |E|/l − 1}
(7)
According to this equation, E0 is composed of the edges with
the highest centrality value. Let Gk be the graph obtained by
removing edges included in Ek from G, run the information
diffusion model on each Gk to calculate A(Gk). Then, we
deﬁne ∆k = A(G) − A(Gk) as an indicator to how much the
information diffusion can be suppressed. This experiment uses
the average value obtained by running the diffusion simulation
for 1000 times as A(·), and set l = 0.1|E| to investigate the
effect of removing the 10 percent edges from the whole.
3) Graph Topology: Graphs generated based on Erd˝os-
R´enyi (ER) model [10] and Barab´asi-Albert (BA) model [11]
were used for experiments. The ER model is the simplest
random graph. This model generates edges with probability p
between arbitrary two vertices. This experiment determines the
number of vertices is 180 and the edge generation probability
p = 0.1. Also, we add some edges randomly to the graph
generated by the ER model in order to satisfy the two connec-
tivity, because the proposed centrality can not be deﬁned on
the two connected graphs. The BA model generates a graph
with scale-free. Many networks in the real world have been
reported to be scale-free, for example, social networks and
the world wide web. The BA model evolves a graph to add
vertices and edges randomly by repetition. In the experiment,
the number of vertices of the initial graph is 10, and every time
a new vertex is added to the existing graph, 10 new edges are
added to that. We add a new vertex until the number of vertices
equals 180.
4) Parameter for the Proposed Centrality: Since the value
of the proposed centrality varies depending on the initial
weight of vertices, we use the average value calculated by 100
samples of the initial weights as the centrality value (that is
|W0| = 100). In addition, as described above, the propagation
rule is according with the diffusion algorithm, and the diffusion
coefﬁcient Aij of an edge is set by (3).
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. Example of a graph that can not efﬁciently suppress information
diffusion with the proposed centrality
B. Results and Discussion
Figure 3 is a bar chart of the value of ∆k for each k, graph
model, and information diffusion model. For example, the left
of Figure 3a represents the simulation result on information
diffusion using IC model on a graph generated by the BA
model. The smaller the value of k is getting, the more edges
with higher centrality values are removed. The experiment uses
the proposed centrality using the algorithm in Section II-B1 as
a propagation rule and the betweenness centrality [3] for the
comparison.
All the charts clearly show that ∆0 of the proposed
centrality is largest in all combinations of information diffusion
models and graph models. The number of active vertices after
the information diffusion simulation is reduced by elimination
of an edge with the higher value in the proposed centrality. This
fact suggests that the proposed method is useful to suppress
information diffusion as an indicator in comparison with the
betweenness centrality.
On the other hand, this result shows that ∆1 also takes
a large value. This fact suggests that there is a possibility
that the value of ∆0 still can be increased by changing the
edges in Ek. According to (5), the proposed centrality is
deﬁned based on the inﬂuence when a single edge is removed,
and measures the function of a single edge. Therefore, it
is considered difﬁcult to evaluate the inﬂuence of removing
multiple edges simultaneously like the experiment. Take the
case that we remove two edges from the graph in Figure 4
(that is l = 2). Let the four edges drawn with bold be the
edges with the highest centrality value. In this case, we can
divide it into the unconnected graph by removing e0 and e2, so
it is assumed that the information diffusion can be effectively
suppressed. When the two removed edges are chosen based
on the centrality value to suppress the information diffusion,
since the centrality values of the four bold edges are the same,
not {e0, e2} but {e0, e1} might be chosen, it is not optimal.
We try to extend the deﬁnition of edge importance to
consider multiple edges. In fact, it is unlikely that the situation
of removing only one edge (corresponding to the link of such
as human relations) occurs. Therefore, it is important to con-
sider the inﬂuence of removing multiple edges, when applying
this method to information diffusion and other propagation
phenomena in the real world. In Section III, G′ is deﬁned
by G without an edge e, and the importance of an edge e is
calculated depending on the propagation process on G′. We
change the G′ in (5) like the following equation in order to
calculate the inﬂuence of removing multiple edges in a subset
E′ of E.
D(e) =
1
|W0|
∑
W0∈W0
T(G \ E′, W0)
T(G, W0)
.
(8)
This equation measures the inﬂuence that the edges in E′ are
removed from a graph G, so it can evaluate the importance
of the multiple edges. However, the number of combinations
to select a subset of edges is enormous, and it is necessary to
devise an efﬁcient method for calculating them.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This paper investigates how the information diffusion can
be suppressed by using the proposed centrality. The results
of the numerical experiments on the proposed centrality and
betweenness centrality demonstrate that it is possible to reduce
the range of information spreading by deleting edges based on
the proposed centrality. We also extend the deﬁnition of edge
importance to consider the inﬂuence for the propagation of
multiple edges.
There are future tasks. First, we use only the two type
of the ER model and BA model for the experiment, so it
is necessary to simulate the real social network topology
in the future. In addition, we will analyze the effect when
changing parameters for such as graph models, information
diffusion models, and the ratio of removing edges, and also add
other centralities for comparison. Then, this paper investigated
whether the proposed method can be applied to only the
information diffusion. However, it is assumed that the proposed
centrality can be widely used for analysis of not only for the
information diffusion but also the dynamic propagation pro-
cesses. Therefore, for example, we will investigate whether this
method can be applied to such as efﬁcient control of power-
ﬂow network for smart grid and design of the communication
protocol on mobile ad hoc network.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Guille, H. Hacid, C. Favre, and D. A. Zighed, “Information diffusion
in online social networks: A survey,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 42, no. 2, Jul.
2013, pp. 17–28.
[2]
T. E. Ulrik Brandes, Network Analysis: Methodological Foundations.
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.
[3]
L. C. Freeman, “A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness,”
Sociometry, vol. 40, no. 1, 1977, pp. 35–41.
[4]
K. Hamda, G. Ishigaki, Y. Sakai, and N. Shinomiya, “Signiﬁcance
analysis for edges in a graph by means of leveling variables on nodes,”
in Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Computing
Communication and Networking Technologies, ser. ICCCNT ’16. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 27:1–27:5.
[5]
J. E. Boillat, “Load balancing and poisson equation in a graph,”
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, vol. 2, no. 4,
1990, pp. 289–313.
[6]
E. Takazawa, K. Hamada, and N. Shinomiya, “Characteristic analysis
of the edge centrality based on activity propagation in information
networks,” in Proceedings of 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 2018, pp. 1578–1582.
[7]
J. Goldenberg, B. Libai, and E. Muller, “Talk of the network: A complex
systems look at the underlying process of word-of-mouth,” Marketing
letters, vol. 12, no. 3, 2001, pp. 211–223.
[8]
M. Granovetter, “Threshold models of collective behavior,” American
Journal of Sociology, vol. 83, no. 6, 1978, pp. 1420–1443. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1086/226707
[9]
D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos, “Maximizing the spread of
inﬂuence through a social network,” in Proceedings of the Ninth ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, ser. KDD ’03.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2003, pp. 137–
146. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/956750.956769
[10]
P. Erdos and A. R´enyi, “On the evolution of random graphs,” Pub-
lications of the Mathematical Institute of the Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, vol. 5, no. 1, 1960, pp. 17–60.
[11]
A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, “Emergence of scaling in random
networks,” Science, vol. 286, no. 5439, 1999, pp. 509–512.
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

