Basic Study of an Evaluation that Uses the Center of Gravity of a Facial Thermal 
Image for the Estimation of Autonomic Nervous Activity 
Shogo Matsuno, Shunsuke Kosuge, Shunsuke 
Kawazura, Naoaki Itakura, and Tota Mizuno 
Dept. of Informatics, Graduate School of Informatics and 
Engineering 
The University of Electro-Communications 
 Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: {m1440004, k1210058, k1430023, ita, 
mizuno}@edu.cc.uec.ac.jp 
Hirotoshi Asano 
Dept. of Electronics and Information Engineering  
Faculty of Engineering 
Kagawa University 
Kagawa, Japan 
e-mail: asano@eng.kagawa-u.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose using the temperature-
centroid of a facial thermal image as a new index to evaluate the 
Mental Work Load (MWL). The existing evaluation methods 
using thermal images are non-contact mental-stress–evaluation 
methods that measure a change in the temperature of the 
regions around the nose, which is caused by MWL. However, 
automatic evaluation of mental load is difficult because 
identifying a part of the nose automatically from the 
thermograph is difficult. In this paper, we have focused on 
developing a solution to this problem that combines 
temperature with the coordinates of the thermal image. 
Keywords-facial thermal image; nasal skin temperature; 
mental work load. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Mental load or mental burden associated with work is 
called mental work load (MWL) [1]. Moderate mental load 
results in a positive effect on the workers; however, excessive 
mental load can cause negative effects such as fatigue, 
decreased attention span, and monotony [2][3]. Thus, if 
possible, MWL that leads to human errors and reduction in 
work efficiency should be evaluated. 
In previous studies, a variety of indicators were used for 
the evaluation of MWL [4]-[7]; for example, behavioral 
assessments that use work performance, psychology 
evaluations 
using 
questionnaires, 
and 
physiological 
evaluations using electrical physiological signal indicators. In 
particular, the evaluation using a physiological index is an 
attractive option in quantitative real-time applications. The 
physiological indicators that are generally used are the 
heartbeat, respiration rate, blood pressure, electromyography 
(EMG), and electroencephalography (EEG). However, to 
measure these metrics electrically, the concerned electrodes 
must be attached to the skin; this calls for the development of 
a measurement environment such as a laboratory, for the 
physiological measurement of MWL. To solve this problem, 
we developed a technique for assessing the mental state of 
humans using facial thermal images. These images are 
obtained using non-contact infrared thermography [8]-[10]. 
Facial thermal images can be used to study human 
physiological psychology, because they vary depending on 
the changes in the blood-flow rate associated with human 
autonomic nervous activity. In addition, changes in skin 
temperature due to MWL are significantly different at 
different regions of the face. For example, the concentration 
of the arteriovenous anastomoses (AVA) vessels that adjust 
the blood flow in capillaries is higher in the periphery of the 
nose compared to the other sites. Furthermore, the blood-flow 
changes due to autonomic nervous activity and inhibition are 
directly reflected as skin-temperature changes because the 
blood vessels run through low-fat regions between the skin 
and the nasal bone. Thus, it is possible to quantitatively 
evaluate the MWL using sympathetic-activity MWL (mental 
arithmetic tasks) by measuring a temperature drop in the nose 
region for a short period. Physiological psychology 
assessments using facial thermal images do not use physical 
restraints, and hence, they are non-contact compared to 
assessments using other bioelectric-signal indexes. Thus, this 
assessment is believed to be suitable for the physiological 
evaluation of MWL in real work situations.  
We focused on the evaluation of MWL using facial 
thermal images. Furthermore, we aimed for a more 
established, robust, and stronger measurement and evaluation 
system that is capable of withstanding disturbances such as 
changes in the subject’s position, changes caused by wind, and 
so on. So far, we have evaluated MWL using the temperature 
difference between the skin at the forehead and at the nose 
[11]-[13]. The MWL evaluation method using thermal images 
has a measurement accuracy and reliability that is of the same 
order as those of the evaluation methods using other 
physiological indicators or questionnaires. However, the 
results of the temperature comparison between the forehead 
and nose regions may become less accurate because it does 
not use information on the position or area of the thermal 
images. Therefore, we consider the use of the temperature–
center-of-gravity as a parameter by adding temperature 
information as a depth to the coordinate information. If it is 
possible to divide the facial thermal image into a number of 
regions, and evaluate the change in temperature distribution in 
each region, the realization of a strong physiological 
psychology state-estimation, in spite of disturbances such as 
effects of movement or shooting angle of face, can be made 
possible. 
The method proposed in this paper was verified through 
experiments to determine how the temperature–center-of-
gravity was affected by the number of area divisions at the 
time of capturing the facial thermal image. In Section II, we 
explain the relationship between the characteristics of the 
facial thermal image and MWL. This enables us to measure 
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the change in MWL using the temperature-center-of-gravity 
as a first step. In Section III, we report and discuss the results 
of an estimation experiment. In addition, we verify the amount 
of change in the temperature displacement of the center-of-
gravity by dividing the facial thermal image into a number of 
regions and examining its effectiveness. 
 
II. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FACIAL THERMAL IMAGE 
Nasal skin temperature (NST), which refers to the 
difference between the forehead temperature and the nasal 
temperature, has been used for evaluating the MWL from the 
thermal image of the face. The temperature image obtained 
using infrared thermography captures the face; however, it is 
necessary to extract the forehead and nose regions from this 
image because the NST is the difference between the 
temperatures at these two locations on the face. The automatic 
extraction of the nose portion was previously performed using 
image processing [9], utilizing the local binary pattern (LBP) 
feature values and AdaBoost. However, to use a machine-
learning algorithm such as AdaBoost, it is necessary to 
prepare in advance a large amount of training data to improve 
the identification accuracy. In addition, the efficiency of the 
general image-processing techniques with different detection 
rates tends to decrease with changes in the thermal images 
caused by factors such as changes in temperature, skin-
temperature changes due to wind, and changes in the image 
caused by tilting the head. To solve these problems, we 
focused on the temperature differences between several 
regions of the image. We tried to identify areas of significant 
temperature changes by dividing the thermal image into 
multiple regions. Figure 1 shows an example of a thermal 
image. The temperature–center-of-gravity (G), which is 
considered as an evaluation index for the new MWL, is 
defined by the average of the coordinates obtained from the x 
and y-axes and the temperature of the thermograph obtained 
by adding high or low temperatures to the position 
information of the thermal image. This is because when the 
number of pixels in the image region is n, G is expressed as 

𝐺 = 
1
𝑛 ∑
𝑥⃗𝑖𝑦⃗𝑖𝑇𝑖⃗⃗⃗
𝑛
𝑖=1


where, x is the horizontal axis of the image, y is the vertical 
axis, and T denotes the temperature. Figure 2 shows an 
example for calculating the temperature-centroid of a 
complete thermal image. We hope to evaluate the effect of 
MWL by evaluating the temperature-centroid changes in each 
image region after division. Furthermore, the thermal image 
of the face of a person is at a higher temperature than the 
thermal images of the other parts of the body. Therefore, it 
may be possible to extract the face region easily using a 
temperature-centroid of the entire thermal image. This is one 
of the future challenges. If qualitative MWL evaluation using 
thermal images can be realized, it can become one of the 
indexes for evaluating usability in the field of human-
computer interaction (HCI) such as in input user interfaces. 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a thermal image. 
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
 
We conducted an experiment to study the changes in the 
temperature–center-of-gravity of the facial thermal image 
during MWL work, using four subjects. We considered 10 
divisions of 102 pixels each in the thermal image, for acquiring 
the characteristic amount of the temperature-centroid (G) by 
evaluating the scalar values of the center-of-gravity changes 
in this experiment. 
A. Experimental Procedure 
Figure 3 shows the outline of the experiment environment. 
In the experiment, an infrared thermographic camera (View 
Ohre IMAGING XA0350) was installed at a horizontal 
distance of 1 m from the nose of the subject. Specifications of 
the photographic image obtained from the apparatus are as 
follows: 320-pixel horizontal and 240-pixel vertical. The 
sampling frequency was 1 Hz. Figure 4 shows the 
measurement process. The subjects repeatedly performed 
simple mental arithmetic tasks with a rest time of 3 min after 
every 10 min. In addition, the evaluation was performed 
continuously, allowing the participants the resting time of 3 
min even after the completion of the task. The mental 
arithmetic tasks involved addition of two integers between 10 
and 99. The subjects were asked to enter the answers of 
problems displayed on the computer, using a numeric keypad. 
The problem was presented for 3 s. Regardless of the 
correctness of the input, when the problem presentation time 
was over, the next question was presented. Here, the 
importance is on the input; the correctness of the answer or 
feedback does not matter.  
B. Experimental Result 
Table 1 shows the changes in the temperature-center-of-
gravity resulting from the longitudinal MWL challenges. Here, 
the average of the splits within the region of changes in the 
temperature–center-of-gravity summarizes the respective 
differences. Again, it shows a typical example of the change 
in the characteristic amount of the sum due to the region 
division number (scalar value) as shown in Figure 5. 
 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2.   (a) Thermal images before and after mental arithmetic tasks. 
(b) Divided regions and each temperature-centroid (e.g., 3 × 3) 
 
Figure 3.   Experiment environment. 
 
 
Figure 4.   Experiment protocol. 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
SUM OF CHANGES IN THE TEMPERATURE-CENTROID FOR 
EACH NUMBER OF DIVISION [*102 PIXEL] 
Division 
numbers 
Subject A 
Subject B 
Subject C 
Subject D 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0.549 
0.233 
0.347 
1.689 
3 
0.586 
0.240 
0.327 
1.637 
4 
0.564 
0.236 
0.341 
1.583 
5 
0.557 
0.228 
0.316 
1.532 
6 
0.538 
0.214 
0.307 
1.485 
7 
0.510 
0210 
0.295 
1.437 
8 
0.507 
0.205 
0.288 
1.381 
9 
0.483 
0.201 
0.283 
1.327 
10 
0.458 
0.207 
0.270 
1.269 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  The sum of change in the temperature-centroid value for each 
division number (logarithmic graph). 
 
C. Discussion 
Figure 5 indicates that the feature amount increases 
monotonously, in this experiment, as the number of divided 
regions increases to a certain value. However, a tendency of 
one side of the divided area to become unstable was observed 
for a sum of feature values from a periphery of 1/10 or less 
divisions of the total number of image pixels. This is because 
of the availability of less amount of temperature information 
from the divided areas because of the influence of increased 
relative noise. Furthermore, the feature quantity of the sum is 
found to be insufficient for capturing the changes in 
temperature to be used for the evaluation of less mental 
activity in the case of reducing the number of divisions, in 
reverse. Therefore, it is considered that a splitting ratio of 
about 30%, which approaches the maximum value before the 
unstable evaluation sum of feature values to do the mental 
activity based on the temperature-centroid is suitable. In the 
current experiment, the most residual, even if you increase the 
number of divisions when using the maximum value when 
0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
1%
10%
100%
Change of gravity
Division ratio
Change of gravity(Average)
[     pixel]
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

considering a change in temperature-centroid, was small. 
Therefore, it is considered stable when compared to the other 
two feature evaluations. In the future, we plan to estimate the 
autonomic nervous activity by evaluating the vector value of 
the temperature change using the split system that was verified 
in this paper. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We studied analysis methods to take advantage of the 
temperature–center-of-gravity of the thermal image, using 
thermography as a non-contact and robust autonomic nervous-
activity measuring method. Autonomic evaluation of the 
temperature changes in the facial area caused by nervous 
activity during MWL was carried out. We believe that it might 
be possible to quantitatively assess the distribution of 
temperature caused by the autonomic nervous activity, using 
the temperature-centroid (including coordinate information of 
the temperature change in the face area) as an index. In the 
first stage of the experiment in this study, the number of 
divisions that can be best measured was confirmed based on 
the changes in the temperature–center-of-gravity before and 
after the MWL challenges. 
In future, we want to develop a more accurate verification 
technique by increasing the amount of data collected from the 
subjects. In addition, we want to establish an evaluation 
system for autonomic nervous activity by evaluating the 
change in temperature as a center-of-gravity vector. By 
performing these tasks, we are planning to apply and establish 
a usability evaluation method for user interfaces. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Nachreiner, “International standard on mental work-load – The ISO 
10075 series”, Industrial Health, vol. 37, no.1, 1999, pp. 125–133. 
[2] H. Selye, “The Stress of Life”, McGraw-Hill, 1976, p. 1956. 
[3] N. Moray, “Mental Workload since 1979”, International Reviews of 
Ergonomics, vol. 2, 1988, pp. 123–150. 
[4] K. Hioki, A. Nozawa, T. Mizuno, and H. Ide, “Physiological evaluation 
of mental workload in time pressure”, The transactions of the Institute 
of Electrical Engineers of Japan. C, A publication of Electronics, 
Information and System Society, vol. 127, no. 7, 2007, pp. 1000–1006. 
[5] G. Mulder, “ Mental effort and mental workload”, Proc. The First 
International Symposium of Human Engineering for Quality of Life, 
1992, pp.25–32. 
[6] G. Mulder and L. J. M. Mulder, “Information processing and 
cardiovascular control”, Psychophysiology, vol. 18, no. 4, 1981, pp. 
392–402. 
[7] K. J. Vincente, D. C. Thornton, and N. Moray, “Spectral analysis of 
sinus arrhythmia : a measure of mental effort”, Human Factors, vol. 29, 
no. 2, 1987, pp. 171–182. 
[8] T. Mizuno, S. Nomura, A. Nozawa, H. Asano, and H. Ide, “Evaluation 
of the effect of intermittent mental work-load by nasal skin temperture”, 
IEICE, vol. J93-D, no. 4, 2010, pp. 535–543. 
[9] S. Kawazura et al., “Estimation of the autonomic nerve activity with 
facial 
thermogram”, 
11th 
International 
Conf. 
Electrical 
Engineering/electronics, 
Computer, 
Telecommunications, 
and 
Information Techology, Advanced Techniques in Applications, DSP 
and Hardware Design, no. 1320, 2014, pp.1-6. 
[10] T. Mizuno et al., “Facial Skin Temperture Fluctuation by Mental 
Work-Load with Thermography”, Proc. the International Conf. 
Electronics and Software Science, 2015, pp. 212–215. 
[11] H. Zenju, A. Nozawa, H. Tanaka, and H. Ide, “Estimation of unpleasant 
and pleasant states by nasal thermogram”, IEEJ Trans. EIS, vol. 124, 
no. 1, 2004, pp.213–214. 
[12] B. A. Rajoub and R. Zwiggelaar, “Thermal facial analysis for 
deception detection”, IEEE Trans. Information Forensics and Security, 
vol. 9, no. 6, 2014, pp.1015–1023. 
[13] D. Shastri, M. Papadakis, P. Tsiamyrtzis, B. Bass, and I. Pavlidis, 
“ Perinasal imaging of physiological stress and its Affective potential”, 
IEEE Trans. Affective Computing, vol. 3, no. 3, 2012, pp. 336–378. 
 
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

