Approaches to a Practical Implementation of Industry 4.0 
 
Ahmed Elkaseer 
Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 
Faculty of Engineering, Port Said University, Egypt 
e-mail: ahmed.elkaseer@kit.edu 
 
Mahmoud Salama 
Department of Computer and Systems Engineering, 
Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt 
e-mail: g16091591@eng.asu.edu.eg 
 
Hazem Ali 
Intel Germany GmbH 
Nürnberg, Germany 
e-mail: Hazemx.ali@intel.com 
 
 
Steffen Scholz 
Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail: steffen.scholz@kit.edu 
 
Abstract—The arrival of Industry 4.0 has popularised the 
concept of smart interactions between humans and the physical 
world that could realise the synergistic integration of intelligent 
manufacturing assets. However, a systematic and cogent 
approach to the practical and profitable application of Industry 
4.0 is still missing. This paper presents practical approaches to 
the application of Industry 4.0 to manufacture with the aim of 
strengthening its competitiveness and meeting the growing 
serious challenges that threaten its profitability and survival. 
Precision Additive Metal Manufacturing is utilised in this study 
for demonstration purposes. A conceptual framework combined 
with two practical modules available in the market, a “native-
design” and “Plug and Play”, is proposed. These approaches 
offer flexible prototypes with sequential procedures that 
ultimately would allow for easy employment of Industry 4.0, and 
will help remove technical barriers to the development of 
manufacturing industry in the domain of Industry 4.0.  
Keywords-Industry 4.0; IoT; Cloud-based big data analytics; 
CPS; precision additive metal manufacturing  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Although European industrial sectors continue to receive 
significant investment, unfortunately, the generated profit 
does not follow the same positive trend, which negatively 
influences their growth. Figure 1 illustrates the relative 
proportions of world global manufacturing outputs for gross 
domestic products (GDP) between 2003 and 2011 [1]. It is 
clearly seen that while the share of global manufacturing 
output for USA and European manufacturing communities 
have lessened consistently, the Chinese share has had a strong 
upward trend.  
 
 
 
Figure 1:  Shares of global manufacturing output until 2011 [1] 
This observation certainly reflects the fierce competition 
between the well-established manufacturing communities in 
USA and Europe, and the new superpower player, China, who 
can offer highly competitive industrial products of good 
quality at low cost, due to lower expenses (both labour and 
operating costs) [2]. This has driven some European 
manufacturers to invest outside Europe in other growing 
economies. This objectively works against the advancement 
of European industry and poses serious threats to European 
economies. In view of this situation, the transition to the fourth 
industrial generation “Industry 4.0” has become indispensable 
as a robust solution for the survival of European industry [3]. 
In particular, the existing capabilities of conventional 
manufacturing technologies are no longer adequate to face the 
current 
industrial 
challenges. 
This 
has 
motivated 
manufacturers 
and 
researchers 
to 
develop 
different 
approaches to implement Industry 4.0 for a range of industrial 
applications, which would ultimately strengthen the 
competitiveness of the European economy [4].  
Literally, the term “Industry 4.0” stands for smart 
manufacturing, involving Data Acquisition, Cyber-Physical 
Systems (CPSs), Internet of Things (IoT), Cloud/Edge 
Computing, Big Data Analytics (BDA), and Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP) [3]-[5].  
Since information is the key factor in implementing 
Industry 4.0, data acquisition techniques play an important 
role in any proposed approach [5]. Different convenient 
algorithms have been utilised for sensing, acquiring, and 
processing of signals. However, CPSs are central in Industry 
4.0, to monitor and control physical processes. The industry 
basically builds a seamless link between the mechanical and 
digital systems combined with a data exchange system onto 
the CPS [6]. The digital system can be designed based on 
convenient hybrid approaches using hardware components 
such as embedded systems and computers with integrated 
software solutions.  
In Industry 4.0, communication technology is empowered 
by the IoT, which enables system components, processed 
products and people to concurrently exchange information 
[7][8]. This technology allows for acquiring massive data, 
where its analysis can be performed via cloud computing and 
BDA. 
This 
facilitates 
modelling, 
simulation, 
and 
virtualisation of the manufacturing process [7]. However, 
cloud computing and BDA are also used to feed the 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES), in order to monitor 
the work in progress and enables the simultaneous connection 
of partners, suppliers, customers and other stakeholders 
[9][10]. 
Some of these components have already been utilised on 
an industrial scale. However, the synergistic integration of the 
aforementioned fragments is the most challenging issue that 
still needs addressing, and could eventually offer a smart 
solution to manufacturing problems [10]. A capable and 
insightful approach on how to apply Industry 4.0, practically 
and profitably, is still not available. The aim of this paper is to 
provide a generic practical model on how to implement 
Industry 4.0. Therefore, metal additive manufacturing, as a 
good example of the digital manufacturing method, is utilised 
in this study to improve obtainable precision and accuracy of 
the manufacturing processes. This research was inspired by 
project Precision Additive Metal Manufacturing (PAM2). 
The following sections of this paper are organised as 
follows. First, some of the expected benefits and challenges 
that are associated with the implementation of Industry 4.0 are 
discussed. After that, a theoretical Industry 4.0 model 
followed by two practical approaches are detailed. Finally, 
conclusions are drawn and future perspectives presented. 
II. 
INDUSTRY 4.0: BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES  
The 4th industrial revolution, currently in-progress, has 
been promoted by the advent of recent advanced information- 
and communication-driven technologies, aiming at realising 
the potential of cross-linking intelligent manufacturing 
operations with automated near real time data acquisition and 
simulation technologies, see Figure 2. This offers the 
possibility of instantaneous identification of physical 
problems with the almost concurrent production of necessary 
corrective actions which are expected to optimise the 
performance of the entire manufacturing system [11][12]. 
The expected outcomes of the implementation of Industry 4.0 
in manufacturing processes and the challenges associated 
with this implementation are presented in the following sub-
sections. 
 
 
Figure 2: Industry 4.0 Framework 
A. Benefits  
The added value to the manufacturing processes can be 
seen in the following four phases.  
1. Virtual design and pre-manufacturing validation  
For additive manufacturing technology, Industry 4.0 offers 
an upgraded version of the design tool, which especially 
integrates virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) into 
the design environment. In particular, computer-aided design 
(CAD) will be able to interface with VR and AR to present in 
virtual form the physical product, and thus enable assessment 
of the design prior to actual manufacturing [13]. 
2. Corrective actions of manufacturing process  
Any fabrication process depends on a controller to secure 
a stable response under different process conditions. Industry 
4.0 presents smart pilot actions based on the CPS and cloud 
computing. In particular, CPS works to transfer physical 
parameters (thermal, power, and geometry) to the cloud to be 
processed, where optimal control decisions will be sent back 
to the physical system. If the information indicates an issue 
such as too high power consumption, then the system has to 
take an appropriate action. 
3. Self-decision and big data analytics 
Smart decision making is an advantage of Industry 4.0. 
The ultimate goal of deploying widespread sensors is to 
achieve smart decision making through comprehensive data 
collection. The realisation of smart decision making requires 
real time information sharing and collaboration. Big data and 
its analytics play an important role in smart decision making 
tasks, 
including 
data-driven 
modelling, 
data-enabled 
predictive maintenance, ERP and marketing.  
B. Challenges  
Although applying Industry 4.0 will generate new 
opportunities and provide enormous benefits, it will not be a 
bed of roses. There are some challenges that need addressing 
prior to swinging into action.   
Industrial challenges generally can be understood to act as 
a barrier to the advancement of manufacturing technology and 
the challenges generally increase in complexity over time. On 
the other hand, to move forward, industrial capability has to 
grow beyond existing levels, and this is what Industry 4.0 is 
intended to help accomplish.  
The following areas are examples of potential challenges 
to realising Industry 4.0: 
1. Ensure integrity 
Integration compatibility is one of the main issues to be 
considered when applying Industry 4.0. As previously stated, 
Industry 4.0 has different elements, which need to be suitably 
integrated to attain the best possible performance of the 
developed system. In particular, it is a communication 
challenge to tune the sub-systems’ components (nodes) to 
work in synchronised time domains based on the desired 
priorities.  
2. Ensure security 
Since massive data sets with important and confidential 
information will be exchanged, strenuous effort must be taken 
to ensure secure data processing among and between Industry 
4.0 systems; Data Acquisition, CPSs systems, IoT, Cloud 
computing, BDA, and ERP. The encryption used must resist 
cipher analysis (attack), which poses formidable challenges 
on the level of security and data protection.  
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

3. Power consumption 
Reducing power consumption is of significant importance 
to stakeholders, and is considered one of the major priority 
parameters in a good design. Generating an optimal design to 
reduce power consumption without affecting the work 
performance is still a major design issue. 
C. Industry 4.0: Human-Machinery Interaction   
The industry 4.0 will introduce entirely different ways of 
smart interaction between human and the physical world. 
Especially, Industry 4.0 provides a user-friendly interface for 
humans to remotely interact with machines. Advancement of 
Industry 4.0 allows users to have remote interaction with 
manufacturing processes, and to enhance the manufacturing 
parameters using this interface. HMI will be developed for 
mobile, web, and other techniques [6]. Based on the 
developed techniques on HMI, the HMI will dramatically 
change the way people work together and also the interaction 
among industrial partners. Thus, attention should be paid to 
the working environment to persuade people to accept the new 
procedures and changes. The results of using HMI is playing 
an important role in using the productivity and manufacturing 
process optimisation such as enhancing of monitoring, 
reporting, quality control, and other manufacturing process.  
Human machine interaction in industry can also take place 
on-site. On site interface/control can be implemented via local 
area network (LAN). Both aforementioned interactions, 
remote and on site interfaces, could be realised via contact and 
non-contact methods. Examples of Contact HMI are 
Graphical User Interface (GUI), Menu Driven Interface, 
Command Line Interface (CLI) and Touch Sensitive 
Interface. However, Hand Gesture Recognition and Voice 
Driven Interface (Voice recognition) are methods of non-
contact HMI, as shown in Fig. 3. To utilise one or more of the 
formerly mentioned techniques, an algorithm has to be 
designed that consideres constraints related to machine, 
operation, work-piece and safety environment. 
 
 
Figure 3: Proposed Human-Machinery Interaction 
III. 
THEORETICAL APPROACH  
German chancellor Angela Merkel in a visit to the Siemens 
“smart” factory in February 2015, defined Industry 4.0 as 
“the fusion of the online world and the world of industrial 
production” [12]. Technically, Industry 4.0 can be simply 
defined as the digitising of the manufacturing processes 
combined with real time data acquisition to server computing, 
cloud and/or edge, where the acquired data is processed and 
analysed to simulate the real world [5][6].  
One of the main objectives of developing manufacturing 
solutions based on Industry 4.0 concepts is to monitor 
industrial processes in order to optimise them.  
Virtual simulation can be conducted based on real time 
data acquisition to enable monitoring of the real state of the 
manufacturing process. This real time monitoring helps to 
reduce the time taken for maintenance, with the added 
possibility of almost instantaneously taking necessary 
corrective measures, by either human to machine, or learned 
algorithms to the machine, as shown in Figure 4. 
Figure 4 illustrates proposed approaches to implementing 
Industry 4.0 in additive manufacturing processes. The 
approach starts with the Data Acquisition module, where an 
invasive or non-invasive sensor takes a measure of the 
relevant industrial parameter to be then digitised. Data 
Acquisition is the process of sensing, sampling, acquiring and 
measuring an electrical or other physical signal representing 
the real world and converting it into numeric values so that it 
can be analysed using statistical techniques. 
 
 
Figure 4: Industry 4.0: theoretical approach 
The data acquisition is considered as the input of the CPS 
which processes information received and analyses it to 
perform the digitalised manufacturing process as a real-time 
simulation. This simulation is the core of the monitoring 
process using the CPS approach. 
IoT plays an important role on the approach, as shown in 
Figure 4. The IoT technology helps the nodes (products, 
machines parts, controllers, users, and manufacture districts) 
to exchange the information in a way that increases the 
efficiency of the manufacturing process. The collected 
information helps human/machine learning algorithms to 
solve serious decision/estimation problems. The proposed 
study interlinks with the IoT based on a cipher algorithm 
sufficiently robust to protect against security threats. Also, the 
proposed IoT platform and software algorithms are designed 
for low power consumption.  
Industry 
4.0
Data 
Acquisition 
Techniques 
Cyber-
physical 
systems
IoT
Cloud 
Computing  
Big Data 
analytic
s
ERP, MES 
and PLM
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Edge computing “refers to the enabling technologies 
allowing computational processing to be performed at the 
edge of the network, on downstream data on behalf of cloud 
services and upstream data on behalf of IoT services” [15]. 
Based on the above definition, edge computing can be 
described as a computing technique for processing acquired 
data from machines (IoT devices) and generating a pre-
analysis/ simulation at the edge of the network (on site) before 
sending it to the cloud computing to avoid latency problems, 
while cloud computing consumes time but gives stable and 
independent analysis and simulations. In the proposed Cyber-
Physical world, edge/cloud computing will play a significant 
role in managing the IoT data received for processing and to 
feed the simulation process.  
Machine Learning is a computational algorithm based on 
statistics and mathematical optimisation that allows for 
prediction, classification, recognition or decision-making [16]. 
Decision making using clustering of data is important in 
modern industrial applications. Besides, pattern recognition 
for validation and verification of the processing conditions 
(raw materials, product status during the industrial process) 
has received great attention by manufacturers. However, so-
called deep learning such as Convolution Neural Networks 
(CNN) has been implemented recently in order to recognise 
images/frames during the industrial process [17]. Herein, 
machine/deep learning will be utilised to analyse the collected 
data and identify the proper actions to be taken for the ERP 
based on the predicted and estimated needs of the 
manufacturing scenario. The simulation process will be used 
to optimise the manufacturing processes by getting fully 
remote monitoring/interfacing of, e.g., laser direct metal 
deposition (LMD) or other additive processes by detecting 
possible defects and enhancing product quality.   
IV. 
PRACTICAL APPROACH  
A. Native design approach   
The proposed design of the Industry 4.0 has been 
developed based on the theoretical criteria presented in the 
previous section. In this approach, humans can interact with 
multiple nodes (data acquisition, industry 4 sub-systems, 
products, and raw materials). These nodes can exchange data 
between themselves through a communication physical layer 
based on LoRa technology [18]. Also, each node can send or 
receive the data to/from a LoRa gateway wirelessly and the 
data can be stored on the cloud for analysis. There will be 
communication between user and cloud data via a Long-
Term Evolution (LTE) gateway. Also, there can be 
communication between a human and the LTE gateway 
through, for example, a mobile phone. The proposed overall 
processes are as a shown in Figure 5. 
In this design, the proposed data acquisition technique and 
CPS are used for extracting relevant features of the product 
during its fabrication by additive manufacturing. The process 
will be simulated based on the output of the data acquisition 
which, here, is a non-invasive data acquisition technique. The 
algorithms are based on computer vision, where the camera 
works to capture frames of the results of the additive 
manufacturing during production, and processes them into 
information form. This information will, for example, contain 
the physical geometrical shape, temperatures and colours 
during the process [6]. 
 
 
Figure 5: Proposed native design of Industry 4.0 application 
The proposed sensing elements for the above approach are 
2D/3D cameras, and a thermal camera. The data acquisition 
algorithms will work on embedded applications in visual 
computing. A Jetson TX1 Developer Kit enables embedded 
vision systems based on a GPU NVidia core structure, as 
shown in Figure 6. The benefits of the proposed design based 
on the Jetson TX1 are the low power consumption based on 
the Linux low power management solution of a NVidia GPU 
[19]. Also, it’s supported to interact with the camera module 
interface, as shown in Figure 6. The processing speed of the 
GPU NVidia is significantly higher than other models, which 
is crucial for investigating the process properly [20]. The 
device comes with a large assortment of porting interfaces, to 
interact with other peripherals, as shown in Figure 6. The 
proposed design of the CPS/inspection will be interfacing 
between 2D/3D cameras and thermal camera with the Jetson 
for extracting the relevant feature within the production 
process. LoRa is the proposed hardware for the 
communication physical layer for IoT nodes. The wireless 
sensor network (WSN) structure is illustrated in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 6: Block diagram of Jetson TX1 with its interfaces [13] 
The proposed software will extract features of the 
image/frame (of the additive manufacturing product) based 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

on a convenient image processing algorithm. Furthermore, 
the feature will be compared with the feature as stored in the 
CAD file and an inspection result generated for quality 
control. The software will be supported with a wide range of 
libraries such as Computer vision, Deep learning and Linux 
platforms, based on the Jetson SDK [20].  
Thus, the manufacturing process and products’ 
states information will be extracted using computer vision 
system then it will be presented in form of Virtual Reality 
(simulation) approach. All these developments will be 
performed based on the Jetson kit.  
The working scenario will be as follows: 
1. CAD file received (Client Request). 
2. Software sends the CAD file to a machine.  
3. Product is being built by AM based on CPS and 
Inspection system; 
3.1 Captures frames for the process and acquires the 
manufacturing data such as (temperature, physical 
and so on). 
3.2 Compares the processing part with the design.  
3.3 Simulates the process based on acquired data.  
3.4 Interacts with LoRa gateway to upload simulation 
to the cloud and feedback will be sent to the 
manufacturing system.  
4. Data will be analysed on the Cloud then sent as 
reports to quality control inspection. 
5. Cloud can query any data from the nodes such as 
(conditions of the machine, maintenance issue, etc.) 
6. Deep learning works to estimate the maintenance 
issues and the capacity of production at certain time 
and quality inspection for raw martials and product.  
B. Plug and Play approach 
This model is built according to the Reference 
Architectural Model of Industry 4.0 (RAMI 4.0), see Figure 
7. RAMI 4.0 describes the hierarchical levels of a 
manufacturing system networked via the Internet, the 
lifecycle of systems and products, and the IT structure of the 
Industry 4.0 components. The hierarchical levels are almost 
the same as the layers of the pyramid of automation.  
 
 
Figure 7: Industry 4.0 productive process pyramid 
There is a wide range of commercial brands available in 
the industrial market that can be utilised to implement an 
Industry 4.0 approach; these include Siemens, Allen Bradley, 
Mitsubishi, Omron, Schneider, GE Fanuc, Beckhoff, Moeller, 
Hitachi, ABB, Phoenix, and Bosch- Rexroth. However, it 
would be very difficult to construct a generic model for each 
brand. In this implementation, specific brands are proposed 
because of their compatibility, availability and market share. 
In particular, Siemens and Beckhoff, as the big brand names, 
have been chosen in building our approach to Industry 4.0.   
1- The proposed model starts by linking the physical world 
with the virtual world, the so-called CPS, to monitor the 
manufacturing processes, and the collected information will 
be processed using big data analytics. To achieve this step, 
two hardware solutions are proposed: 
A. Siemens SIMATIC IOT2000 which can facilitate data 
processing/exchange between the manufacturing system and 
cloud-based data.  
B. Beckhoff EK9160 IoT Bus Coupler offers a plug and 
play module that can simply transmit all control data to all 
common cloud systems, in a timely and cost effective manner. 
This allows I/O data to be parameterised via an easy-to-
configure website on the device, for sending to a cloud server. 
2- For Additive manufacturing, it is recommended to add 
motion and axis control option for the 3D printer. To achieve 
this step, two hardware solutions are proposed: 
A. Siemens SIMOTION, which provides high-end motion 
control system, features optimal performance for all machine 
concepts as well as maximum modularity. 
B. Beckhoff CX2040 motion control system will 
give high-performance and can be used for interpolating 3-D 
path movements. 
3- To perform an integration between the manufacturing 
data of the physical systems and ERP;  
A. The MindSphere Siemens Cloud is a cloud-based IoT 
operating system that will connect products, machines and 
systems to interface with the ERP system and will perform 
any required exchange of data between automated 
components. The system uses the SAP S/4HANA open cloud 
platform enabling users to operate, extend and develop the 
applications in the cloud.  
B. The Beckhoff EK9160 coupler will support most of the 
main cloud systems; Amazon Web Services (AWS), 
Microsoft Azure and SAP HANA. It will also support the 
private cloud systems included in many company networks.  
4- To enable Physical systems to interact with the real 
world, particularly to allow for real time simulation and 
visualisation of the manufacturing process: 
A. Siemens provides software, entitled; “SEMATIC inside 
TIA portal” supports real time visualisation and simulation for 
manufacturing processes. In addition, NX software offers real 
time visualisation and sophisticated depiction which is a 
valuable asset for the product development process.  
B. Beckhoff TwinCAT3 supports real time visualisations 
of the manufacturing process for HMI and Web processing. It 
allows for analysis, visualisation, diagnosis and recording of 
variables both external and internal. 
5- Finally, CPSs need to increase their experience of 
utilising machine learning and data mining algorithms. 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. MindSphere Siemens Cloud offers its MindConnect 
Library on edge devices; providing secure advanced analytics 
in close proximity to the equipment. MindConnect is suitable 
for use with descriptive, prescriptive, diagnostic and 
predictive analytics. Cloud connectivity can be enhanced by 
combining MindConnect with edge applications in integrated 
software/hardware environments. 
B. Beckhoff TwinCAT Analytics, is able to store process 
data for each cycle synchronously, this can be invaluable for 
easy and informative analyses of the processes involved. The 
software can be expanded with C/C++ and MATLAB for 
enhancing the analytics application via Mathworks toolboxes 
for machine learning and optimisation. 
 
Figure 8 summarises the proposed approaches to the 
practical implementation of Industry 4.0. 
 
 
Figure 8: Native approach vs. Plug and Play approach  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has presented practical approaches to implant 
Industry 4.0 in the additive manufacturing process to increase 
the flexibility, competitiveness and profitability of the 
manufacturing systems. However, it is also proposing new 
ways of human machinery interaction. Next step comprises an 
implementation of M2M communication for Additive 
manufacturing. Moreover, RFID will be utilised to manage an 
interaction between machine and product/raw material.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the European Commission 
for funding the PAM2 project under H2020-MSCA-ITN-2016 
Program, Grant Agreement No 721383. 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission, Competitiveness report 2013: no 
growth 
and 
jobs 
without 
industry, 
MEMO/13/815. 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-13-815_en.htm 
[2] G. Erber, “German-Chinese Economic Relation: Opportunities 
and Risks,” DIW Economic Bulletin, 2012 2(3), pp. 27-31 
[3]  A. Dujin, C. Geissler, D. Horstkotter, “Industry 4.0: the new 
industrial revolution, How Europe will succeed”, Roland 
Berger Startegy Consultants, 2014 
[4] A. Gilchrist, “Industry 4.0: The Industrial Internet of Things”, 
Apress, 2016, ISBN 9781484220474. 
[5] R. Zhong, X. Xu, E. Klotz, et al “Intelligent Manufacturing in 
the Context of Industry 4.0: A Review” , Engineering, 2017, ,3, 
pp. 616-630 
[6] P Zheng, H. Wang, Z. Sang, et al, “Smart manufacturing 
systems for Industry 4.0: Conceptual framework, scenarios, 
and future perspectives”, Front. Mech. Eng., 2018, pp. 1–14 
[7] P. Verma, R. Verma, A. Prakash, et al., “Machine-to-Machine 
(M2M) Communications:A Survey”,  Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications, 2016, 55, pp. 83–105 
[8] J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, et al, “A Survey on Internet of Things: 
Architecture, Enabling Technologies, Security and Privacy, 
and Applications”, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2017, 4(5), 
pp. 1125-1142  
[9] J. Lee and H. Kao, “Service innovation and smart analytics for 
Industry 
4.0 
and 
big 
data 
environment”, Procedia CIRP, 2014, 16, pp. 3-8  
[10] B. Denkena and T. Morke, “Cyber-Physical and Gentelligent 
Systems in Manufacturing and Life Cycle: Genetics and 
Intelligence – Keys to Industry 4.0.”, 2017, ISBN 
9780128126004. 
[11] J. Hull, "The Second Industrial Revolution: The History of a 
Concept", Storia Della Storiografia, 1999, 36, pp. 81–90 
[12] D. Klitou,  J. Conrads, M. Rasmussen et al “Digital 
Transformation Monitor Germany: Industrie 4.0” European 
Commission, European Union,  January 2017 
[13] D. Imkamp, J. Berthold, M. Heizmann, et al., “Challenges and 
trends in manufacturing measurement technology – the 
“Industrie 4.0” concept”, Journal of Sensors and Sensor 
Syatems, 2016, 5, pp. 325–335 
[14] R. Babiceanu and R. Seker “Big Data and virtualization for 
manufacturing cyber-physical systems: A survey of the current 
status and future outlook”, Computer in industry, 2016, 81, pp. 
128-137 
[15] W. Shi, J. Cao, Q. Zhang, et al., “Edge Computing: Vision and 
Challenges” , IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2016, 3(5), pp. 
637-646 
[16] S. Arthur, “Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game 
of Checkers”, IBM Journal of Research and Development, 
1959, 3, pp. 211-229 
[17] A. Karpathy, G. Toderici, S. Shetty, et al., “Large-scale Video 
Classification with Convolutional Neural Networks”, CVPR, 
2014, pp. 1725-1732 
[18] M. Rizzi, P. Ferrari, E. Sisinni, et al , “Using LoRa for 
industrial wireless networks”, IEEE (WFCS), 2017, pp. 1-4  
[19] A. Das, M. Walker, A. Hansson et al, “Hardware Software 
Interaction for Run-time Power Optimization: A Case Study of 
Embedded Linux on Multicore Smartphones” IEEE, ACM 
(ISLPED), 2015, pp. 165-170 
[20] NVIDIA® Jetson™ TX1 Supercomputer-on-Module Drives 
Next 
Wave 
of 
Autonomous 
Machines 
“https://devblogs.nvidia.com/nvidia-jetson-tx1-
supercomputer-on-module-drives-next-wave-of-autonomous-
machine
 
Connect with
Get access to
Add
Select
Select
Implementation 
of Industry 4.0
Practical 
approach
Plug & Play 
Solution
Siemens
IoT2000  for 
networking of 
production
MindSphere 
Siemens based 
SAP HANA
MindConnect 
Library on edge
Beckhoff
EK9160 for 
networking of 
production
Microsoft Azure 
Amazon AWS
SAP HANA
TwinCAT 
Analytics
native design 
Solution
CPS based Desgin 
on Embedded 
Vision
LoRa 
Communication 
Desgin  based on 
Embedded System
Web Application 
based on Cloud 
Desgin Data 
Analysis based on 
Deeplearning 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

