User Interface Development of a COPD Remote Monitoring Application 
A User-centred Design Process 
 
Berglind Smaradottir, Martin Gerdes and Rune Fensli 
Department of Information and Communication Technology 
University of Agder 
N-4604 Kristiansand, Norway 
{berglind.smaradottir, martin.gerdes, rune.fensli}@uia.no 
Santiago Martinez 
Department of Psychosocial Health 
University of Agder 
N-4604 Kristiansand, Norway 
santiago.martinez@uia.no
 
 
Abstract—The Norwegian Health sector is undergoing changes 
at all levels due to recent health reforms. Services traditionally 
offered by specialized health care are being transferred to 
primary health care managed by municipalities. In this 
context, telemedicine technology is introduced to facilitate new 
services that support communication across local borders, 
optimizing resources and increasing cost effectiveness. This 
study focuses on the user-centred design, iterative development 
and evaluation of the user interface of a mobile application to 
be used in a new telemedicine service for remote monitoring of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease symptoms. The 
research is a result of the cooperation between a municipality 
and a hospital as part of the European Commission project 
United4Health. Through a user-centred design approach, the 
tablet device application was developed based on information 
gathered in a workshop and group interviews where the end-
users, patients and health professionals, described their 
preferred way of interacting with the telemedicine technology. 
User evaluations reported positive results on the ease of use 
and user satisfaction with the interaction with the application. 
Iterative application’s user interface refinements were made 
through several end-users’ evaluations, resulting in a fully 
developed system suitable for remote monitoring. 
Keywords-remote 
monitoring; 
patient 
empowerment; 
usability evaluation; telemedicine; user-centred design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Norwegian Coordination Reform [1] urged health 
organisations to implement structural changes as the ultimate 
citizens’ health care providers. Services traditionally offered 
by specialized health care national and regional institutions 
(e.g., follow up of chronic diseases managed by hospitals) 
were transferred to primary health care managed by 
municipalities. This new situation brought to light the need 
for an effective coordination and improved communication 
across borders of health care services. 
Services associated with the new patient pathways 
required from municipalities an effective and efficient use of 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs). In 
this context, the European Commission funded research 
project United4Health [2] is developing technology for 
remote monitoring of chronic diseases and communication 
across the different levels of health care services. The 
Norwegian contribution to the United4Health project focuses 
on technologies that support remote monitoring of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients after 
hospital discharge. The aim of the project is to evaluate the 
benefits of using technology for monitoring COPD patients 
that traditionally did not have the possibility of reporting 
their symptoms and health status after hospitalisation. 
Potential benefits would include reduction of hospital 
readmission rates with their correspondent diminution in 
cost, and benefits of quality of life improvements (already 
being investigated in other ongoing research from the same 
project). Research evidence shows that COPD patients are at 
an increased risk of readmission to hospital within 12 months 
[3][4] after hospital discharge. 
In this study, a mobile telemedicine application was 
developed in a tablet device for remote monitoring of blood 
oxygen saturation (SpO2) and pulse measurements. In 
addition, the application contained a questionnaire for daily 
report of COPD symptoms. Patients took measurements at 
home that were wirelessly transmitted to a newly established 
telemedicine centre assigned by a municipality partner where 
health professionals would remotely attend the patient. 
A user-centred design (UCD) process was employed for 
the development and evaluation of the mobile telemedicine 
application. The application was designed with the active 
involvement of end-users from patient’s union of cardiac and 
pulmonary 
patients, 
health 
professionals 
from 
the 
municipality and partner hospital. The study was led by a 
research group with ICT and health background. The 
application was validated from an operational and qualitative 
usability aspect. The research questions (RQs) of this study 
were:  
RQ1: “How can a telemedicine application be developed 
for remote home monitoring purpose, including COPD 
patients and disease-related health professionals?”  
RQ2: “What lessons from this study are transferable and 
applicable for the development of technology useful for other 
clinical pathways?“ 
Following this introduction, Section II gives an overview 
of research background about UCD and Section III outlines 
the research methodology employed. Section IV describes 
the results of the mobile application development. In Section 
V, the results are discussed and in Section VI the conclusion 
and future work are presented. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
UCD involves end-users in all the stages of a system’s 
development [5][6][7]. It helps to understand users’ needs 
and the context of use, which are key elements for the 
construction of a system framed within a clinical workflow 
[8]. In addition, the usability evaluation is necessary to 
analyse user’s interaction and user satisfaction with the 
system [9][10][11]. Telemedicine systems often involve the 
interaction between multiple user groups through a system, 
e.g., a patient at home communicates using a device with 
nurse in telemedicine or health centre, or with general 
practitioner (GP) at his office. Communication in these 
scenarios of use is usually multimodal, that is, synchronous 
(e.g., videoconference) and asynchronous (e.g., data 
transmission and dispatch), what makes it crucial to know 
between whom, how and when the information transmission 
and personal contacts occur. Thus, an effective telemedicine 
application requires a detailed analysis of end-users’ needs to 
inform system designers. In addition, the usability of such 
application is crucial for the continuous, efficient and 
satisfactory use of an application [7]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The design of the telemedicine tablet application was 
performed as a part of the research project United4Health 
[2]. Qualitative methods were used for data collection and 
analysis. The UCD process was divided into two phases, as 
illustrated in Figure 1: (A) workshop with representative 
end-users, such as patients and health professionals; (B) 
iterative design of the tablet application for COPD remote 
monitoring. The latter was formed by a set of four sub-
phases: design and implementation, functional test, user 
evaluation, and field trial. Each sub-phase’s output informed 
the input of the next. The iterative system development 
included a sequence of concatenated stages where user 
requirements informed the design, implementation and 
functional test of the application.  
Running commentary gathered in the two phases of the 
UCD process resulted in 18 hours of audio-visually recorded 
data, verbatim transcribed by the researchers. Transcripts 
were coded into categories and a qualitative content analysis 
[11] was made with the software QSR NVIVO v10.  
A. Workshop with End-users 
A one-day workshop with end-user representatives (i.e., 
health professionals and patients) was set up in October 2013 
hosted by the University of Agder, Norway. The aim was to 
understand the context of use and to gather user requirements 
for the design of the tablet application for remote monitoring. 
In addition, the workshop was a source of information and 
familiarisation for end-users with the research team and 
health personnel working in the project. The participants 
were two members of the union of cardiac and pulmonary 
patients, mean age of 69 years; two nurses from the 
municipality and hospital, mean clinical experience of 6 
years with COPD patients; and two technicians from hospital 
responsible for correct functioning and maintenance of the 
tablet devices, with a mean of 6 years of experience working  
 
Figure 1.  The User-Centred Design Process. 
with medical technical equipment. 
The workshop lasted 5 hours and was divided into two 
parts. In the first part of the workshop, participants were 
given an introduction to the research project United4Health. 
In order to understand the context of use of the system, a 
prototype 
demonstration 
of 
wirelessly 
transmitted 
measurements of SpO2 and pulse was shown to end-users on 
a tablet. Additionally, a video-conference (software Cisco 
Jabber Video for Telepresence, v4.2) between a patient and a 
health care professional was tested. COPD patient 
representatives described their preferred way of interacting 
with the application at home and suggested ideas for the user 
interface’s (UI) layout. Participants used colourful post-it 
notes and handmade sketches to describe application’s 
functionalities and design. 
In the second part of the workshop, participants described 
the workflow of remote monitoring of a COPD patient, such 
as 
taking 
measurements 
at 
home, 
transmitting 
measurements’ values through the system to the telemedicine 
centre and illustrating the feedback given from telemedicine 
centre to COPD patient at home. 
B. Iterative Design 
The design of the application was carried out through the 
iterative execution of the following stages: design and 
implementation, functional test, user evaluation and field 
trial. A development team supervised by one of the 
researchers developed the system. An interaction designer 
hired by the team was in charge of the initial graphical user 
interface and interaction design. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
1) Design and Implementation: The results from the 
workshop led the initial design and implementation of a Java 
native application. Java includes libraries for several low-
level Application Program Interfaces (APIs), in particular for 
the Bluetooth connectivity and communication with sensor 
devices. In addition, using Java allowed the application to be 
used across different tablet devices. The outcome of the latter 
sub-phases informed additional user requirements included 
in the implementation of the User Interface Design (UID) 
and system’s functionality. 
2) Functional Test: The facilities of the Centre for 
eHealth and Healthcare Technology of the University of 
Agder, Norway, were used as a test bed for a functional test 
of the implemented application. It allowed to verify whether 
the system matched the requested functionality determined 
by users in the workshop and in user evaluations from other 
iterations. 
3) User 
Evaluation: 
Two 
evaluations 
of 
the 
application’s prototype were carried out with end users in the 
Usability Laboratory at the Centre for eHealth and 
Healthcare Technology, in January and February 2014. The 
facilities had two separate test rooms (referred to as “test 
room 1” and “test room 2”) and one observation room. The 
infrastructure is further described in [12]. The user 
evaluations had the aim to provide end-user’s feedback to the 
development team about system’s errors and potential 
refinements. They consisted of a series of tasks using a think 
aloud protocol [9][10]. Group interviews were made at the 
end of the evaluations to complete the feedback. 
a) Evaluation 1: 15 health care professionals from the 
municipality and hospital partner constructed a role-play 
scenario. In test room 1, which represented patient’s home, 
health care professionals simulated the patient’s use of tablet 
application and, at the same time, the interaction with the 
health care professionals placed in test room 2, which 
represented the telemedicine centre. The functionalities 
tested at a patient’s home consisted of taking and sending 
patient’s measurements (i.e., SpO2 and pulse) and filling and 
sending a questionnaire to the telemedicine centre. In 
addition, a videoconference session between the patient and 
the telemedicine centre was performed and evaluated. There 
were three repetitions of the scenario with different users and 
the overall duration of the evaluation was 6 hours. 
b) Evaluation 2: The evaluation was performed as a 
role-play with a simulation of the proposed use scenario of 
the new telemedicine application. It was carried out two 
weeks after evaluation 1 and included 9 end-users: 2 
members of the patient’s union (played the patient’s role), 3 
nurses from municipality (played telemedicine centre health 
professional’s role), 2 nurses from hospital and 2 technicians 
from hospital. The test simulated the following interactions 
with the application: 1) user training of COPD patient in 
hospital with instructions from a hospital nurse; 2) COPD 
patient at home taking measurements, filling in questionnaire 
and sending it to the telemedicine centre; 3) videoconference 
between COPD patient at home and a health professional at 
the telemedicine centre. There were two iterations of the user 
evaluation, with a total duration of 5 hours. 
4) Field Trial: A field trial was carried out with 6 
diagnosed COPD patients (mean age 72.6 years). They tested 
the continuous functioning and interaction with the 
technology at home during a period of 7 days. The trial 
lasted 5 weeks. Each user made daily measurements, filled in 
a questionnaire and sent them to the telemedicine centre. In 
addition, videoconference between a user and a health 
professional at the telemedicine centre was tested. All these 
tasks were performed using a tablet device. 
After each week of testing, user suggestions were 
incorporated in the improvement of the system. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results were obtained from transcripts of the audio-
visually recorded data and annotations and observations 
during the UCD process. To ease the reading, the results of 
each phase are separately presented. 
A. Workshop with End-users 
The contributions from end-users in the workshop are 
grouped in 3 different categories: context of use, UID and 
patient workflow. 
1) Context of Use: Patient representatives explained that 
individual’s level of physical energy is regularly low and 
even simple actions, such as using a tablet device, may seem 
unachievable. This issue underlined the importance of 
designing an easy-to-use application that did not require 
much effort to be successfully used. Therefore, it was 
suggested that user interaction with the system must be 
minimal, with only the few necessary actions. One of them 
stated: “Usability is extremely important for the interaction 
with this application since COPD patients have little energy 
left on bad days”. 
2) User Interface Design: Patients agreed with the 
authentication method through a Personal Identification 
Number (PIN) mechanism, although they expressed having 
difficulties remembering numbers and they preferred to be 
able to choose their own PIN instead of using a pre-defined 
one. In addition, they requested to have the user’s name at 
the top of the home screen after successful login. 
Patients required seeing the results of their own 
measurements on the device’s screen before sending them to 
the telemedicine centre. In addition, they asked for receiving 
immediate feedback when measurements were successfully 
delivered.  
A 
time-span 
visualization 
of 
several 
days 
of 
measurement results was also suggested where patients could 
see measurements from previous days.  
 
Figure 2.  User’s UI suggestions (left) and questionnaire’s sketch (right). 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Another request was the possibility of simultaneously 
seeing videoconference professional was required to guide 
the patient through any of the tasks. 
For the interface’s layout, patients chose not to have 
nested menus (e.g., one patient representative said: “you 
cannot ask elderly people to remember what is inside each 
menu”) and instead, one touch area per action. Suggestions 
included 6 squared big-size touch areas, with readable and 
appropriate function’s names. The 3 most important 
functions were placed at the top: “new measurements”, 
“daily questionnaire” and “videoconference”. The other 3 
touch areas with less frequently used functions were placed 
at the bottom: “historical data”, “information about COPD”, 
and “user instructions”, see Figure 2, left. 
Further, it was concluded that the system was not to be 
used for emergency situations, so a written text saying “Call 
113 for emergency” was required to be shown in the 
system’s interface. 
The answer to the daily questionnaire was suggested to 
be of multiple touchable selections (see Figure 2, right), and 
to have six questions visible on the screen at the same time 
because patients were afraid they would get tired of reading 
the questions one by one. 
3) Patient Workflow: One of the most important findings 
of the workshop was the setup of the COPD patient’s 
workflow for the use of the telemedicine application for 
remote monitoring, see Figure 3. In addition, instructions 
were required to be concise, to be on paper and digitally 
available in the system. 
It is a common practice in the telemedicine centre to 
differentiate patient status by an easy-to-interpret colour 
scheme, called triage. Triage colour was represented in this 
case by a green colour for measurement values within the 
pre-defined cut-off values; and yellow and red ones for 
attention and alert respectively, activated when measurement 
values are outside the cut-off values. Patient representatives 
initially suggested that patients at home should be able to see 
the triage colour related to their own measurements in order 
to have a feeling of control of their own health. However, a 
“false” red measurement (e.g., cold finger can alter 
measurement readings) could potentially increase patient’s 
anxiety. At the end, patient representatives agreed with the 
option that only health care professionals could see the 
triage’s colour. 
B. Iterative Design 
1) Design and Implementation: In the sub-phase Design 
and Implementation, workshop’s results were transformed 
into the initial Graphical User Interface (GUI) outline, see 
Figure 4, and user requirements of the application. Outcomes 
from further iterations’ sub-phases contributed to refine the 
user 
requirements 
and 
improve 
the 
application 
implementation. 
2) Functional Test: In each of the iterations, the 
application had to go through functionality test run by the 
development team. The identification of errors at this stage  
 
Figure 3.  COPD patient workflow in remote monitoring. 
proved to be relatively cost-effective to fix in terms of time 
and effort compared with further sub-phases. 
3) User Evaluation: User evaluations in laboratory 
settings concerned the display of the questionnaire with the 
adequate number of questions per screen, from 6 to finally 1 
to ease individual reading. A questionnaire’s answers review 
was included to allow patient to double check before 
sending. Initially, a progress bar notified data transmission 
but it was insufficient for distinguishing between successful 
and unsuccessful data delivery. Therefore, a feedback 
notification pop-up window was included with text, a round 
face and a status colour code (green smiley face for 
successful delivery and red sad face for unsuccessful one).  
In addition, user manual needed to be incorporated in the 
system, with intuitive images to guide on how to handle the 
measurement devices step-by-step. In this line, the GUI 
corresponding to the new measurement was improved by 
removing the unnecessary information load to perform the 
task. For instance, while measurement reader device showed 
correct measured values, wrong ones were displayed in the 
tablet screen and sent to the telemedicine centre. User 
evaluation helped to identify this issue.  
In the group interviews, user comments about the tablet 
use were overall positive: “I think this will help us if we get 
worse; the tablet was easy to use with 5 or 6 functions and 
few things that should be touched to do measurements”.  
Some comments referred to the need of user training: 
“With some user training I think most people could use this, 
it was not complicated. If you forget how to do it, you can 
contact telemedicine centre”. Patients also positively 
commented about the videoconference: “It was a good 
feeling to have videoconference with telemedicine centre. I 
think for users at home, it is good to see and hear the nurse”. 
 
Figure 4.  GUI of tablet application and the questionnaire.  
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

4) Field Trial: Field trial results included automatic start 
of the application due to problems with touch initiation of the 
program icon (equivalent to mouse double-click). It was 
found that, ideally, the tablet application should report the 
battery level of the measurement device to the telemedicine 
centre and user. The videoconference image and sound 
quality was improved through software configuration 
changes. Furthermore, the sound quality was improved by 
the selection of optimal headphones and microphone setup 
for the users. All participants gave positive feedback about 
the printed user manual. In particular, they stated that the text 
was easy to understand and the pictures accurately illustrated 
what to do for each task.  
Users’ overall rating of the application was satisfactory 
concerning all interactions with tablet (equipment setup, 
device connection, measurements, questionnaire filling, data 
transmission, and videoconference): “I think the application 
is very well designed so you do not misunderstand anything. 
I consider this system user-friendly”; “This application was 
easy to use, because even an old person like me without 
computer experience could use it”. 
C. Final Version 
The UCD process resulted in a tablet application that was 
evaluated as “satisfactory” in all sub-phases. A number of 
exemplary screen shots of the application are shown in 
Figure 5. The UI screenshot on top shows the main screen of 
the application, from where the user can initiate the main 
functions, such as “new measurements” and “questionnaire”. 
The blue screen on the bottom left shows the start screen for 
carrying out new SpO2 measurement, while the orange 
screen on the bottom right shows parts of the UI for the daily 
questionnaire. This application is being deployed on the trial 
devices of the Norwegian part of the United4Health project, 
and will support the new remote monitoring services 
provided by the municipalities involved. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Screenshots of the system’s final implementation. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
In this paper, the UCD process for the development of a 
tablet device application for remote monitoring of patients in 
home 
environment 
has 
been 
presented. 
A 
typical 
telemedicine application involves multiple users in number 
and type, such as patients, health professionals and 
administrative officers. This is why the involvement of those 
groups of end-users in the design of a new technical 
application is crucial to understand the clinical workflow 
where the solution will be deployed, its context of use and 
the interactions involved. The two research questions (RQs) 
formulated at the beginning of this paper are answered below 
based on the results from the study. 
About the RQ1, which asked about the development of a 
telemedicine application for remote monitoring, it has been 
demonstrated that a UCD approach successfully included the 
user (i.e., COPD patients and health professionals) needs in 
the development of the application. For it, a workshop 
efficiently outlined user needs, context of use, and helped 
user groups to familiarise themselves with each other and the 
research team. In addition, the workshop established a useful 
starting point for the system’s application development 
taking on board different kinds of user requirements, as 
aspects of GUI, interaction and functionalities. 
The user evaluation was carried out both in a laboratory 
environment and at users’ homes. The early evaluations in 
laboratory environment simulated a realistic user scenario in 
a controlled test environment, and enabled users to give 
feedback about GUI design and the interactions following 
the remote monitoring process. The field trial allowed 
studying the long-term and real-time usage of the technology 
by users at their home. 
Several lessons were learned during the study that can be 
transferable for technology development for other clinical 
pathways (RQ2) involving chronic conditions included in the 
projections of global mortality for 2030, such as ischaemic 
heart disease and diabetes [13]. In particular, solutions to be 
installed in medical environments necessarily need to firstly 
involve all the user groups in the creation of the solution, and 
secondly, analyse how this solution can best fit in an existing 
clinical workflow or, if non-existent, build up such workflow 
in collaboration with the end-users. It is known that 
interoperability issues are one of the main problems 
nowadays in the deployment and use of technology in 
medical environments. In this way, the inclusion of a field 
trial provided useful information about the interactions 
between humans and technology, but also between the 
different technologies involved.  
The research study of the UCD process had also some 
limitations such as a reduced number of end-users and user-
scenarios were tested in a simulated environment. However, 
the simulated test environment allowed to create highly 
realistic scenarios under controlled conditions, and the field 
trial gave the opportunity to test the system in real-world 
settings.  
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study has been developed including end-users’ (i.e., 
COPD patients and health professionals) needs, suggestions 
and preferences, in the design and evaluation of a COPD 
remote monitoring application. Positive results were reported 
after evaluation in laboratory settings, regarding ease of use 
of the telemedicine solution and user satisfaction. The 
continuous refinement of the application was the key to fully 
develop the system suitable for remote monitoring of COPD 
patients.  
The benefits of giving the opportunity to COPD patients 
to report symptoms and health status after hospitalisation, 
together with actively including them in building the 
solution, are in line with the European Union (EU) Health 
Strategy, “putting patients at the heart of the system and 
encouraging them to be involved in managing their own 
healthcare needs” [14].  
These facts, together with the simulation in high fidelity 
laboratory settings, and the field trial are significant 
contributing factors to the ecological validity of the research 
here presented. In a world where human-computer 
interactions 
progressively 
increase 
in 
number 
and 
complexity, real-time evaluations in real-world settings 
become crucial to understand not only the successful 
deployment, but the efficient and continuous use of 
technological solutions. 
The proposed UCD process has been validated by the 
development 
of 
a 
telemedicine 
tablet 
application, 
successfully adopted by the 7th Framework Programme for 
Research and Technological Development (FP7) EU project 
United4Health, which focused on technologies that support 
remote monitoring of COPD patients after hospital 
discharge. As a result, over 200 patients in various 
municipalities in Norway will use the application. 
In terms of future work, it is proposed to address research 
on appropriate identification and authentication methods for 
patients, more autonomous reasoning and decision support in 
the application, and integration of further devices to support 
other patient groups and clinical pathways associated with 
chronic diseases, such as hypertension and diabetes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank all participants and project partners for 
their contributions in the UCD process. We thank Joris-Jan 
van den Boom for contribution in graphic and interaction 
design and Baddam Sriramreddy, Mahdi Mahdavi Amjad, 
Navid Mokhtari, Saeed Zanderahimi, Volodymyr Shulgin 
and Yannick Schillinger in the development team.  
This work was supported by UNIversal solutions in 
Telemedicine Deployment for European HEALTH care, 
2013-2015 ICT PSP call identifier: CIP-ICT PSP-2012-3 and 
Point-of-Care Services Agder, sub-project financed by the 
Research Council of Norway, 2013-15, ref 227131/O70. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, “The 
Coordination Reform, Proper treatment – at the right place 
and right time,” Report No. 47 (2008-2009) to the Storting. 
[retrieved: 
January, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.regjeringen.no/upload/HOD/Dokumenter%20INF
O/Samhandling%20engelsk_PDFS.pdf. 
[2] United4Health 2015, European Commission Competitiveness 
Innovation Programme, ICT Programme to Support Policy. 
[retrieved: 
January, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.united4health.eu/ (the umbrella project) and 
http://www.united4health.no/ 
(the 
Norwegian 
project 
contribution). 
[3] G. Gudmundsson et al., ”Risk factors for rehospitalisation in 
COPD: role of health status, anxiety and depression,” Eur 
Respir 
J, 
vol. 
26, 
2005, 
pp. 
414-419, 
doi:10.1183/09031936.05.00078504. 
[4] I. M. Osman, D. J. Godden, J. A. Friend, J. S. Legge and J. G. 
Douglas, ”Quality of life and hospital re-admission in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,” Thorax, vol. 52, 
Jan 1997, pp. 67-71, doi:10.1136/thx.52.1.67. 
[5] Y. Rogers, H. Sharp and J. Preece, Interaction Design- 
Beyond Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & Sons; 
2011. 
[6] J. Lazar, Web Usability- a user-centered design approach. 
Pearson Education, 2006. 
[7] J. Nielsen, Usability engineering. Elsevier, 1994. 
[8] A. De Vito Dabbs et al., “User-centered design and interactive 
health technologies for patients,” Comput Inform Nurs, vol. 
27(3), 
May-June 
2009, 
pp. 
175–183, 
doi: 
10.1097/NCN.0b013e31819f7c7c. 
[9] A. W. Kushniruk and W. L. Patel, “Cognitive and usability 
engineering methods for the evaluation of clinical information 
systems,” J Biomed Inform, vol. 37, Feb 2004, pp. 56-76. 
[10] M. W Jaspers, “A comparison of usability methods for testing 
interactive health technologies: methodological aspects and 
empirical evidence,” Int J Med Inform, vol. 78(5), 2009, pp. 
340-353. 
[11] J. Lazar, J. H. Feng and H. Hochheiser. Research methods in 
human-computer interaction. John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[12] M. Gerdes, B. Smaradottir and R. Fensli, “End-to-end 
infrastructure for usability evaluation of eHealth applications 
and 
services,” 
Scandinavian 
Conference 
on 
Health 
Informatics (SHI 2014) Aug 2014; pp. 53-59, ISSN(print): 
1650-3686, ISSN(online): 1650-3740 
[13] C. D Mathers and D. Loncar, “Projections of global mortality 
and burden of disease from 2002 to 2030,” PLoS Med, vol. 
3(11), 
Nov 
2006, 
pp. 
2011-2030, 
doi: 
10.1371/journal.pmed.0030442. 
[14] European Union. Official Journal of the European Union, vol. 
C 146, 22 June 2006, ISSN 1725-2423. [retrieved: January, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=OJ:C:2006:146:TOC.  
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

