 
Tablet Game Design and Evaluation: A Practice-based Experimentation Approach
Uttam Kokil  
College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Marietta, GA 30060, USA 
E-Mail: ukokil@kennesaw.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this project is to first design, develop and 
evaluate an iOS adventure game for tablet devices using 
Practice-based 
Experimentation 
(PBE) 
approach. 
The 
objective of creating a digital game is to explore how usability 
and visual aesthetic attributes of the interfaces affect users’ 
perception of usability and engagement. The new PBE 
methodology is adopted, involving two phases. First, during the 
practice phase, the games are designed from a user-centric 
approach iteratively, and modified into two visual aesthetic 
conditions, which serve as stimuli, to measure perception of 
usability and in the future to evaluate user engagement. In the 
second phase, the game interfaces are empirically evaluated 
using quantitative methods to measure users’ perceptions of 
usability on the visual quality of the interfaces. As per extant 
literature, the concepts of perception of usability and visual 
aesthetics have been a controversial topic. Existing research on 
user experience have not fully explored perceived usability and 
visual aesthetics, in the domain of tablet gaming. This research 
is in its preliminary stage as data have only been collected to 
examine the first research question concerning users’ 
perception of usability towards the variation of visual aesthetic 
quality of a tablet game user interface. The preliminary results 
indicate that there is no significant difference in perception of 
usability between the two modified visual interfaces. 
 
Keywords-Tablet gaming; user experience; user interface; 
Practice-based Experimentation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
While the concepts of instrumental qualities (usability, 
functionality) 
and 
non-instrumental 
qualities 
(visual 
aesthetics, hedonics, acoustics) have been widely discussed 
in the field of Human Computer Interaction (HCI), they have 
not been applied in a coherent manner to the HCI sub-
category of gaming, which is distinct from other HCI areas 
in that its primary aim is to entertain the user, rather than to 
enhance productivity or task performance. The skyrocketing 
use of tablets has brought the gaming experience to a new 
level with a new medium of interaction, the touch screen, in 
a mobile context. This shift in medium and context of use 
has only highlighted the lack of critical research on User 
eXperience (UX) as it relates to instrumental and non-
instrumental attributes of system properties in tablets in 
general, and tablet-based in particular. Koutsabasis and 
Istikopoulou [1] explain that the methods and knowledge 
from a user centered design standpoint are scarce in the 
domain of aesthetics. In addition, UX, a relatively new field, 
is associated with instrumental and non-instrumental 
qualities [2], which still has deficiencies in terms of scope, 
and experiential constructs to assess the experience [3]. 
O’Brien & Toms [4] explain that user engagement forms part 
of a positive UX. The researchers further define User 
Engagement Scale as a multi-faceted instrument that 
measures experience in terms of its “appeal, novelty, focused 
attention, felt involvement, usability and durability.” 
Engagement is a phenomenon determined by users’ 
perceptions of usability and aesthetics toward product use, as 
well as the extent of their activities [5]. Carr [6] stipulates 
that the visceral property of game visual elements influences 
players to make choices and quick decisions during 
gameplay. The next section describes the design process of a 
new tablet game It becomes imperative to understand users’ 
perceptions and behavior when they interact with tablet 
games. This will provide a deeper insight of the elements 
that attract and engage users to play games [7]. The study 
takes recourse of a novel methodology called PBE, a variant 
of PBR, which includes both practice and professional 
research. Section II provides an overview of the literature 
review. Section III discusses a practitioner’s approach of 
game ideation and narrative. Section IV describes the game 
design process. Section V justifies the methods, including 
data collection procedure that is carried out using scientific 
inquiry. Section VI showcases the analysis portion and 
Section VII concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Practice-based Research (PBR) methodology concerns 
the 
generation 
of 
new 
knowledge 
contributing 
to 
understanding of the role of the artifact in that experience 
[8]. The role of the artifact is crucial in the generation of 
new knowledge but not necessarily the primary outcome. 
PBR begins with practice. The artifact is created first and 
then research questions are devised to evaluate the practical 
work. The artifact is modified into two conditions – a low 
and high visual quality prototype, for empirical evaluation 
by participants. PBE approach can be described as a variant 
of PBR, comprising of a combination of practitioner 
research and professional research (scientific inquiry). In 
this case, PBE begins with aims and pre-defined objectives, 
which include the creation of an artifact through a series of 
formal evaluations, referred to as practice. The depiction of 
the games (artifacts) is informed by theories. Experimental 
work is carried out on the artifact to create the desired 
conditions prior to empirical evaluation, using quantitative 
methods. The latter refers to scientific inquiry. PBE follows 
the logical sequence of theory informing practice, and the 
experimental evaluation process of the research questions 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
leads to the emergence of new knowledge or theory. 
Arlander [9] states "sometimes artists come closer to 
scientists 
than 
historians 
since 
they 
engage 
in 
experimentation" (p 319). This implies that practitioners are 
already engaged in experimentation to create artifacts during 
their practice. The word “experimentation” in Practice-
based Experimentation plays a key role in the sense that 
practice has always been associated with experimentation, 
and experimentation forms the basis of professional 
research. In this study, the process of PBE follows the 
sequence: Game Theory à Games characteristics à 
(Practice) Create Artifacts à Evaluate Artifacts (Empirical 
Evidence)à Inform Theory. Each type of game conforms to 
specific requirements. For example, both Hard Fun Key and 
Easy Fun Key games portray distinctive characteristics to 
meet users’ needs. Each game is devised based on Lazarro’s 
Four Fun Keys theory [10]. In a Hard Fun Key (Action 
game), the user’s goal is to beat his opponent, or to win 
against the computer. Easy Fun Key has a different goal, as 
the game is played for the sake of discovery, not necessarily 
to win. The Four Fun Keys game theory describes four 
different types of fun in a game: Hard Fun, Easy Fun, 
People Factor, and Serious Fun. For the scope of this 
research, an Easy Fun (adventure game) was devised. Easy 
Fun Key game is geared towards eliciting an appreciation 
for curiosity and surprise. One does not play to win but to 
discover or explore, as the focus is on the game activities. 
The game is used as a stimulus and empirically evaluated by 
participants to respond to the research questions, from 
which new knowledge or theory emerges. 
 
Crawford [11] explains that if players find a game 
enjoyable, with that immersive experience, it is more 
probable that they will engage and deeply interact with the 
game. Fun is a kind of user experience triggered by various 
tangible (i.e., physical) and intangible qualities of products 
evoking certain relevant emotions in users, such as joy or 
amusement [12]. Admittedly, fun is related to a “sense of 
timelessness, similar to flow experiences [13].” Hassenzhal 
[14] explain that both fun and pleasure are a form of 
enjoyment, but there is a distinction between the two. Fun is 
about “distraction,” implying that a user is distracted from 
concerns, motivations and the inner-self. Pleasure has to do 
with “absorption,” such as being immersed in an activity, 
and one can still relate to one’s concerns, motivations and 
goals. Fun is clearly an experience, not an emotion. Even 
though one fails 80% of the time while playing a game, the 
activity is still perceived to be fun [10]. 
III. 
 PRACTITIONER’S APPROACH  
Seven participants, two game developers, two designers, 
and three game player experts from a Midwest university 
volunteered to meet on two different occasions, for a three 
hours work session for a focus group discussion, and to 
shape the initial ideas for a casual tablet game that can be 
targeted towards a broader audience. A brainstorming 
technique, known as mind-mapping, was employed in the 
generation of initial ideas for the game design. Mind-
mapping is a useful brainstorming tool that organically 
generates associations that the researcher may not otherwise 
have considered [15]. It relies on words and begins with a 
central concept or node as a focal point. Other nodes are 
added spontaneously to the mind map as the process unfolds. 
Once a mind map is completed, one needs to identify internal 
connections and useful adjectives and keywords that have 
appeared. The theme generated during the first focus group 
session culminated into a combination of an action and an 
adventure game. A game genre classifies entertainment 
games into action, adventure games, puzzle games, role 
playing games, strategy games, sports games, simulations 
[16]. An action and adventure game genre were created for 
the tablet platform. For the scope of this paper, only the 
adventure game was used to collect data at the time of 
writing. The tablet game is comprised of two phases - the 
narrative of first phase is an action-based game (Hard-Fun 
Key) referred to as a Space Shooter game and the second 
phase of the tablet game encompasses an adventure game 
(Easy-Fun Key), referred to as Mars Exploration. Phase I of 
the game narrative revolves around a spaceship starting its 
journey from Earth to planet Mars. On its way, it has to 
surmount multiple obstacles (storms, asteroids, aliens) to 
land on Mars. In Phase II, the character explores the 
landscape of planet Mars, grows green leaves to sustain  
survival, and copes with enemies (aliens), as well as sand 
storms on the planet. The player opens treasure chests 
randomly containing aliens (loses points) or gold coins 
(bonus points), or must avoid any abrupt sandstorms in order 
to earn enough points or life to sustain the green leaves. For 
the purpose of this study, the Easy Fun Key game was the 
only one used for data collection due to the shorter duration 
required for a participant to complete a game session. 
IV. 
 GAME DESIGN 
Technology has evolved rapidly but game design has been 
a slow process. The goal of a game is to entertain and 
provide enjoyment to the user [17]. Game usability is more 
accentuated towards player satisfaction and learnability, 
whereas effectiveness and efficiency are considered 
secondary factors. The game design and development were 
devised iteratively, with the application of a user centered 
design approach. The structure of a digital game is composed 
of the following components: game play, game interface, 
game mechanics, and game narrative [18]. Game play is the 
process of encountering multiple obstacles before a player 
can win. Gameplay is the process during which the user 
overcomes a series of challenges in a simulated environment 
[19]. Crawford describes challenges as a mental activity 
aiming to develop one's skill [20]. Game interface is the 
mechanism through which the user interacts with the game; 
it includes the physical game controls as well as the game 
environment, assets and characters. It provides a visual 
representation of the game. Game mechanics form part of the 
physics of the game based on the programming and 
animation. Game mechanics are rules constructs intended to 
produce gameplay. It is these rules and rewards that make 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
the activity challenging, satisfying and compelling [21]. 
Game narrative is the story or the plot that unfolds over time 
as the game is played. 
The iOS game was developed using Xcode and Swift. 
Xcode allows the developer to build the interactive user 
interface elements while Swift-programming language 
responds to user events and gestures in order to express the 
game logic. Three participants tested the game prototype by 
responding to a usability survey devised by Federoff [18]. 
The game was refined, and underwent another round of 
usability testing by four other participants who played the  
game multiple times, under the observation of the researcher.  
 
 
 
Figure 1 Rapid Iterative Testing and Evaluation 
(Medlock et al., 2005) 
 
The first objective was to evaluate whether a variation of 
visual aesthetic quality while keeping game usability 
constant affects the perception of usability of players. To 
respond to this research question, the game interface was 
devised into two different levels of visual aesthetic qualities 
for experimentation purposes. An iterative prototyping cycle 
(Figure 1) session was held to showcase which visual 
elements could be modified while maintaining the same level 
of consistency, such as game play, and game mechanics 
between the two versions for each game category. The Easy 
Fun Key game was modified into a low and high visual 
aesthetic value. Elements and Design Principles, such as 
symmetry, grid system, eye flow, contrast, bitmap images 
quality were adopted in rendering the two versions. The low 
visual aesthetic quality version was designed in such a way 
to violate the Principles and Elements of Design [22]. For 
instance, to create the low visual aesthetic quality version 
(Figure 2b), low color contrast, low-resolution bitmaps and a 
monochromatic color scheme were adopted in achieving the 
same. This modification objectively changed the look and 
feel of the game user interface. To create a high visual 
aesthetic version (Figure 2a), the design elements were 
accentuated with high quality graphics rendering, high color 
contrast and a vivid color scheme, and low bit graphics. 
Seven participants rated a series of 3 different layouts, with 
different color schemes, graphics bits, contrast and 
combinations on a 27-inch iMac. After each prototype was 
depicted, it was evaluated using the Visual Analog Scales 
containing two dimensions: Classical and Expressive 
aesthetics [23]. The Classical aesthetic dimension is guided 
by three items: clean, pleasant, aesthetic; the Expressive 
aesthetic dimension has three items: sophisticated, creative, 
and fascinating. Each prototype was evaluated on a scale 
from strongly disagree to strongly agree, which was 
converted to a 1-7 range for analysis purposes.  
 
 
 
Figure 2a Easy Fun Key (Adventure) - High Visual Aesthetics 
 
 
 
Figure 2b Easy Fun Key (Adventure) - Low Visual Aesthetics 
 
Referring to Lim, Lee and Kim [24] concepts of user 
interactivity, the interaction styles most relevant to the games 
interaction in this study were movement speed, movement 
range, and response speed. The player interacts with the user 
interface with a navigation tool. The game begins as the 
character first explores. The player’s goal is to successfully 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
grow a plant on planet Mars.  Every time 100 points are 
scored, a leaf is grown; conversely, the plant will shed a leaf 
every time 100 points are lost. There is no level in this 
game. The character explores the Red Planet, encountering 
aliens, falling objects and dust storms. The player must 
ensure that that the oxygen level is sufficient enough to 
carry out the mission. Destroying aliens earns points, which 
helps grow a leaf to sustain oxygen levels. Opening treasure 
chests, either accumulates bonus points or loses points, as 
the player randomly encounters aliens in the treasure chests. 
 
V. 
METHODS 
The objectives of this study were: (i) to examine if a 
variation of visual aesthetic level influences perceived game 
usability. (ii) to measure the level of game engagement of 
the two different game versions. In order to evaluate 
perceived game usability, the constructs related to pragmatic 
quality (PQ) of the AttrakDiff instrument were utilized to 
gather data. Similarly, the constructs related to visual 
aesthetics quality (VA) of the AttrakDiff instrument were 
used to gather perception of visual aesthetics data [25]. PQ 
is comprised of seven bi-polar items, and is related to the 
perceived usability assessing ease of use and whether users 
are attaining their goals by playing the games. Similarly, 
VA consists of 7 bi-polar items, aimed to measure the 
perceived attractiveness of the user interface.  The game 
scores for all the participants were recorded. The procedure 
involved a within-subjects test whereby the same participant 
played both game versions. A convenience sample frame of 
27 participants was chosen for this study as students 18-35 
years old were recruited on a university campus. This age 
group represents approximately 30% of the population who 
plays game on their mobiles [26]. Each participant was 
assigned randomly to either the low or high visual aesthetic 
game version in order to ensure high internal validity. This 
also ascertains that two equivalent groups are created, as per 
the law of probability [27]. At the end of each 10-minute 
game session, participants were requested to complete the 7-
items of the PQ and the 7-items of the VA section of the 
AttrakDiff instrument. In the future, user engagement will 
be measured using the User Engagement Scale (UES), a 
self-report instrument using a 31-item questionnaire to 
capture the six domains of experience [28]. The investigator 
plans to collect data using the UES tool afterwards at a later 
date 
VI. 
ANALYSIS 
Two results are reported from the AttrakDiff instrument 
using a one-way ANOVA within-subjects test. The SPSS 
result for the VA dependent variable shows F(1,26)=4.056, 
p=0.054. The mean value of the high visual aesthetic value 
interface was reported to be 22.26 whereas the mean value 
of the low aesthetic quality was 18.63; this implies that 
participants perceived a difference in terms of visual look 
and feel of the game versions, but given that p>0.05, the 
difference was not statistically significant. From the mean 
values reported, participants recognized and showed 
preference to the high visual aesthetic version. 
The PQ dependent variable reveals Greenhouse-Geisser 
F-statistic as F(1, 26) = 0.09, p-value=0.925, and since 
p>0.05, this implies that the two game versions were not 
significantly different from each other; we fail to reject the 
null hypothesis. In other words, game usability of both 
game versions, low and high visual aesthetic qualities, was 
not perceived to be statistically different. Participants found 
both game versions to be practically usable. Therefore, a 
variation in visual aesthetic quality did not influence 
perceived usability in the Easy Fun Key game category. 
Furthermore, observed power was low at 0.051, which could 
imply the study lacked sufficient power to detect any 
effects. Thus, increasing the sample size of this study will 
certainly boost power statistics, thereby providing a robust 
result. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The preliminary results in this study reveal that when the 
tablet (adventure) game interface was manipulated into low 
and high visual quality, game usability was not affected. 
One shortcoming of this study is the small sample size. 
Moreover, the participants’ affinity to visual aesthetics in 
products is a confounding variable. The next stage is to 
screen participants using the (Centrality of Visual Products 
Aesthetics) CVPA instrument to understand to which degree 
they are sensitive to visual aesthetics in products [29]. The 
higher the CVPA score of the participants, the greater the 
level of accuracy in judging visual aesthetic quality. In 
future work, the level of user engagement in each game 
condition will be investigated to examine if the level of 
visual aesthetic qualities affect game engagement. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P. Koutsabasis and T. Istikopoulou, "Perceived Website 
Aesthetics by Users and Designers", International Journal of 
Technology and Human Interaction, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 39-52, 
2013.M. Wysocki, Ctrl-Alt-Play Essays on Control in Video 
Gaming. Jefferson, NC: McFarland Publisher, 2013. 
[2] S. Mahlke, "User Experience of Interaction with Technical 
Systems", Doctoral dissertation. The Technische Universität, 
Berlin, Germany, 2008. 
[3] E. Law, P. van Schaik, and V. Roto, "Attitudes towards user 
experience (UX) measurement", International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 526-541, 2014. 
[4] H. O’Brien and E. Toms, "Examining the generalizability of 
the User Engagement Scale (UES) in exploratory search", 
Information Processing & Management, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 
1092-1107, 2012. 
[5] D. Norman and S. Draper, User centered system design. 
Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1986. 
[6] B. Carr, “Applying cultural and critical theory to video game 
aesthetics,” Southern Mass Communication Journal, vol. 27, 
no. 3, pp. 1–25, 2012.  
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
[7] A. Sutcliffe et al., "User engagement by user-centred design 
in e-Health", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 
368, no. 1926, pp. 4209-4224, 2010. 
[8] L. Candy and E. Edmonds, "The role of the artifact and 
frameworks for practise-based research", in Routledge 
Companion to Art-based Research, 1st ed., M. Biggs and H. 
Karlsson, Eds. London: Routledge, 2011, pp. 120-138. 
[9] A. Arlander, "Characteristics of Visual and performing arts", 
in The Routledge Companion to Research in the Arts, 1st ed., 
M. Biggs and H. Karlsson, Ed. NY: Routledge, 2011, pp. 
315–332. 
[10] N. Lazarro, "The 4 Fun Keys",Xeodesign.com, 2004. 
[Online].Available:http://www.xeodesign.com/whyweplayga
mes.html. [Accessed: 22- Jan- 2016] 
[11] G. Crawford, Video gamers. London: Routledge, 2012.  
[12] N. Cila, "The dimensions of users' fun experiences with 
consumer products", MSc Thesis, Middle East Technical 
University, 2008. 
[13] B.R.Dubbels, "Distinguishing Games, Work, Fun, Flow and 
Play: 
A 
Framework 
for 
Design, 
Development, 
& 
Gamification." INTENSIONS ISSUE 7: Fun and Games – 
Playing to the Limit. York University Press, Toronto, ON: 
CANADA, 2014. 
[14] M. Hassenzahl, "The Thing and I: Understanding the 
Relationship Between User and Product", in Funology: From 
Usability to Enjoyment, 1st ed., M. Blythe, K. Overbeeke, A. 
Monk and P. Wright, Ed. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 2003, pp. 31-42.  
[15] D. Beardslee, "Mind Mapping", Rochester Institute of 
Technology, NY, 2003.  
[16] J. C. Herz. “Joystick nation,” Little, Brown and Company. 
1997. 
[17] J. Lee and C.-Y. Im, “A Study on User Centered Game 
Evaluation Guideline Based on the MIPA Framework,” 
Human Centered Design Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
pp. 84–93, 2009. 
[18] M. Federoff, "Heuristics and usability guidelines for the 
creation and evaluation of fun in video games", MA Thesis, 
Indiana University, 2002. 
[19] A. Rollings and E. Adams, Andrew Rollings and Ernest 
Adams on game design. Indianapolis, IN: New Riders, 2003. 
[20] C. Crawford, Chris Crawford on game design. Indianapolis, IN: New 
Riders, 2003. 
[21] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, Rules of play. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2003. 
[22] A. Tuch, J. Bargas-Avila, and K. Opwis, "Symmetry and 
aesthetics in website design: It’s a man’s business", 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 1831-1837, 
2010. 
[23] N. Tractinsky, "Aesthetics in Information Technology: 
Motivation and Future Research Directions", in Human–
Computer Interaction and Management Information Systems: 
Foundations . Advances in Management Information Systems, 
1st ed., P. Zhang and D. Galletta, Ed. Armonk, NY: M.E. 
Sharpe, 2006, Vol 5, pp. 330–347. 
[24] Y. Lim, S. Lee, and D. Kim, "Interactivity Attributes for 
Expression-oriented Interaction Design", International Journal 
of Design, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 113–128, 2011. 
[25] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky, "User experience - a 
research agenda", Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 
25, no. 2, pp. 91-97, 2006. 
[26] "Entertainment Software Association: Game Player Data", 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.theesa.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/ESA-Essential-Facts-2015.pdf. 
[Accessed: 
22- 
Jan 
2016] 
"Entertainment 
Software 
Association: Game Player Data", 2015. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ESA-
Essential-Facts-2015.pdf. [Accessed: 22 Jan 2016] 
[27] B. Johnson and L. Christensen, Educational Research: 
Quantitative, Qualitative,and Mixed Approaches, 5th ed. 
London: Sage Publications, 2013. 
[28] H. O'Brien and E. Toms, "The development and evaluation of 
a survey to measure user engagement", J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci., 
vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 50-69, 2010. [28] 
[29] P. H. Bloch, F. F. Brunel, and T. J. Arnold, “Individual 
Differences in the Centrality of Visual Product Aesthetics: 
Concept and Measurement,” J Consum Res Journal of 
Consumer Research, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 551–565, 2003. 
 
 
 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

