Webpage Accessibility and Usability for Autistic Users:
a Case Study on a Tourism Website
Antonina Dattolo
SASWEB Lab,
Dept. of Mathematics, Computer Science,
and Physics, Universit`a di Udine, Gorizia, Italy
email: antonina.dattolo@uniud.it
Flaminia L. Luccio
DAIS
Universit`a Ca’ Foscari Venezia,
Venezia, Italy
email: luccio@unive.it
Elisa Pirone
Universit`a Ca’ Foscari Venezia,
Venezia, Italy
email: elisapirone06@gmail.com
Abstract—Web accessibility and usability represent an open
challenge for the current research on the Web; in particular,
for speciﬁc disabilities such as the Autism Spectrum Disorders
(ASD), to the best of our knowledge, no experimental case study
on an autistic-friendly Website on tourism is available.
However, people with ASD are usually solitary and visual thinkers
and they could take advantage by the use of the Web. This paper
identiﬁes the set of basic and general guidelines provided by
the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) to make a Website
accessible and usable to this speciﬁc set of users, and extends it,
integrating new speciﬁc features.
Following these new guidelines, the paper proposes a case study
dedicated to a tourist, autistic-friendly, Website developed in the
area of Rieti, central Italy; it has been validated through expert
reviews, and several trials with users of a specialised centre for
neurological and physical disabilities.
Keywords–Autistic-friendly
Website;
Accessibility;
Usability;
Tourism; Autism Spectrum Disorders.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Web accessibility and usability represent an open challenge
for the current research on the Web: they aim to make Web
content more accessible and usable to a wider range of people
with disabilities, including blindness and low vision, deafness
and hearing loss, learning disabilities, cognitive limitations,
limited movement, speech disabilities, photo sensitivity and
combinations of these [1]. Usually, Web developers apply
general standards, following the guidelines provided but the
W3C [2], without considering the importance of a universal
Web access. However, every country supports the application
of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0
[1], although adopts a different Web accessibility legislation:
WCAG 2.0 are recommended, but become mandatory only
in speciﬁc cases, such as, for example, in Italy, for the Web
sites of public Institutions (see the so-called “Legge Stanca”,
literally Stanca Act [3]).
A. Autism Spectrum Disorders
In this paper, we are interested in the development of
websites for people with the disabilities denominated Autism
Spectrum Disorders (ASD). The American Psychiatric Associ-
ation deﬁnes the ASD as neuro-developmental disorders with
persistent impairments in social communication and social
interaction, and restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviour,
interests, or activities [4]. This general deﬁnition puts together
people with a wide and different set of features and behaviours;
so, it is difﬁcult create multi-purpose environments, but some
general guidelines may be followed. We have focused our
attention on ASD user proﬁles with the following features.
Typically, the impairments in social communication are
related to language delays, however, people with ASD often
present good visual abilities. Thus, modern speech therapies
are usually combined with Augmentative and Alternative
Communication (AAC) techniques, i.e., powerful methods that
combine different visual components in order to create syntac-
tically and semantically correct sentences [5] [6]. Among these
AAC techniques a standard approach is to use the Picture Ex-
change Communication System (PECS) which promotes inter-
actions among users with the exchanging of images [7]. People
with ASD are usually visual thinkers, i.e., think in pictures and
express their concepts by visualising sequences of pictures of
the same object [8]. They have often limited attention, i.e.,
limited time in which they might be able to concentrate on
a particular task, thus deﬁning limited, self-contained tasks is
very important. They might also suffer of Sensory Processing
Disorders (SPD), and may thus feel distressed and confused
in particular situations. SPD are neurological disorders that
cause difﬁculties with processing information from the ﬁve
senses (vision, auditory, touch, olfaction, and taste), as well
as from the sense of movement (vestibular system), and/or the
positional sense (proprioception) [9].
B. Website usability and accessibility
Access to information and communication technologies
is a basic human right as recognised in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)
[10].
Disabilities might be either physical (visual, auditory, etc.),
or cognitive and neurological, might be temporary or bound-
less.
The W3C [1] [2] has proposed different guidelines to pro-
duce accessible websites, however speciﬁc features have to be
considered while dealing with people with speciﬁc disabilities
such as ASD. As we have previously mentioned, typical prob-
lems that people with ASD face are limited attention, sensory
hypersensitiveness, different way of learning and reacting to
things, problems related to limited text comprehension (e.g.,
not understanding ﬁgurative language, etc.). For such a reason
standard usable and accessible websites might not be suitable
for such users.
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Web usability and accessibility are closely related: their
goals, approaches, and guidelines overlap signiﬁcantly [11].
Usability is all about designing an easy to use website that
appeals to as many people as possible. Websites should be
intuitively usable. Usability is a quality attribute that assesses
how easy user interfaces are to use; it is is deﬁned in [12] by
ﬁve quality components:
•
Learnability: How easy is it for users to accomplish
basic tasks the ﬁrst time they encounter the design?
•
Efﬁciency: Once users have learned the design, how
quickly can they perform tasks?
•
Memorability: When users return to the design after a
period of not using it, how easily can they reestablish
proﬁciency?
•
Errors: How many errors do users make, how severe
are these errors, and how easily can they recover from
the errors?
•
Satisfaction: How pleasant is it to use the design?
For Web developers, a key aspect of usability is following
a user-centred design (UCD) process to create positive and
emotional user experiences [13].
Accessibility is about ensuring an equivalent user experi-
ence for people with disabilities. For the Web, accessibility
means that people with disabilities can perceive, understand,
navigate, and interact with websites and tools, and that they
can contribute equally without barriers.
Usable accessibility combines usability and accessibility to
develop positive user experiences for people with disabilities.
User-centred design processes include both techniques for
including users throughout design and evaluation, and using
guidelines for design and evaluation. UCD helps making
informed decisions about accessible design. Thus UCD is
necessary to improve accessibility in websites and Web tools.
The goal of Web accessibility is to make the Web work
well for people, speciﬁcally people with disabilities. While
technical standards are an essential tool for meeting that goal,
marking off a checklist is not the end goal. People with
disabilities effectively interacting with and contributing to the
Web is the end goal [11].
We note that accessibility ̸= usability: a website can com-
ply with standards; pass all the automated accessibility checks,
appear to be accessible. However, an accessible website is not
necessarily usable; Web pages can be veriﬁed accessible by fo-
cus groups, and still be inaccessible to a third party. Individual
users may have cognitive, technical, or other barriers.
In this paper, we are interested in websites which are ac-
cessible and usable by people with ASD. We thus ﬁrst present
the state of art of existing guidelines for the development of
websites for people with ASD, and extend them with new
features. We then consider the relation between autism and
tourism, and show the existing solutions for proposing tours
for these speciﬁc users. To the best of our knowledge, there are
no existing websites that are usable and accessible for people
with ASD, and let them freely navigate inside them and take
independent decisions (as, e.g., the choice of a tour). We thus
propose an interesting case study of a touristic website for
autistic users and we show some experimental results on a set
of 9 users.
The paper is organised as follows: Section II is dedicated
to the state of art in autism and tourism; Section II-B presents
general guidelines for accessibility and usability, specialised
for users with ASD, while Section III extends them, and
Section IV proposes our case study, focused on accessible
and usable tourism, autistic-friendly website. Finally, Section
V describes the experimentation made with a group of autistic
users and the related results. Section VI ends the paper with
future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The improvement of the quality of life for autistic people
is a big challenge. In this section we analyse the state of art
related to two aspects:
•
Autism and tourism;
•
Website usability and accessibility for people with
ASD.
A. Autism and tourism
Some issues that have to be considered are: social inclu-
sion, e.g. in community activities, emotional well being, e.g.
happiness, interpersonal relations, e.g. friendship, and physical
well-being, e.g. leisure [14]. All this, may be achieved with a
well planned tourism trip, being it an experience that stimulates
all the above domains. However, this is not trivial since all
the different activities related to a trip, i.e. transportation,
accommodation, etc. have to be adjusted to meet special needs.
The ﬁrst issue that has to be considered is the preparation
phase since it is well known that autistic people get stressed
in unknown, unexpected situations, thus everything has to be
previously planned, and the user has to be prepared to tackle
each of the trip steps.
In [14] [15] the authors identify some of the issues that
a travel agency or whoever organises the trip should consider
while planning it for an autistic user:
- Survey phase: A questionnaire should be provided so to
identify which are the main physical, sensory, or language
problems the user has, and which are his/her main interests.
According to this, the agency can suggest suitable tourism
destinations or trips. E.g., a person that gets stressed in very
crowded, loud or noisy placed should avoid amusement parks,
crowded exhibitions, etc..
- Trip planning: At this point a trip may be planned by
taking into consideration all the provided information. The ﬁrst
thing is transportation, so how to move from a home place to
the destination. This can be achieved in different ways, what
is important is that all the steps are previously explained to
the user. If the transportation is by air the airline company
has to be contacted. Some airports offer some pre-planned
visits of the airport [15], the airport of Dublin also offers some
very interesting on-line material which visually describes the
different parts of the airport, following a logical sequence of
actions which a traveller is supposed to do. It also provides
interesting tips on how to face all the different situations while
being at the airport and also some general rules to follow
during a trip [16].
- Accommodation: What seems to be more suitable for
autistic users, are small size accommodations, such as small
hotels and motels, or preferably the renting of a condo where
the user can ”feel at home”. In the USA, there are some hotels
that already provide ”autism-friendly accommodations” with
special rooms, staff, and meals [14].
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

- Tours: What concerns the tourism activities, is obviously
based on the preference of the user. Thus, following the
guidelines of the survey is a good starting point. Here, we
have to distinguish between one day trips which obviously
have to be planned in the surrounding area, avoiding too much
stress for the trip, and longer trips of two or more days. There
are obviously different options, depending on the preferences
and also considering the sensory problems which autistic users
might have. Possible options are sightseeing in scenic areas
since autistic users often like silent places and love taking pic-
tures, visiting historical and cultural sites, museums, aquariums
etc.. Some museums are “Autism-Friendly Museums”, and are
prepared to host these special tourists. An example is the Royal
air force museum in London which offers an autism friendly
trail that can be downloaded from the site, and has won an
Autism Access Award [17], or the Metropolitan museum of
art in New York which offers e.g., a social narrative (PDF)
about visiting the Museum with tips, and a Sensory Friendly
Map of the museum with the list of quiet and less crowded
areas [18].
Obviously, general considerations are that ﬁrst one should
prepare the autistic user to very simple day trips, then these
trips might be planned for a longer time. Daily activities should
not be too intense, locations should be visited in times of the
day during which places are not too crowded, i.e., stressful
situations should be avoided as much as possible. A good
idea, is also to prepare the user for the changes of routine
by illustrating the trip using brochures, photos, videos, etc.
A last consideration is that, often, things might not go as
expected, thus the trip should be planned with ﬂexibility so
to consider last minute changes of planes, i.e., alternative
destination, activities and so on.
The site [19] encourages families with people with ASD
to travel around the world; it provides interesting hints for
travelling, e.g., how to let a person with ASD pack his/her
luggage, interesting destinations and hotels, and so on. It also
states that the beneﬁts of travelling outweigh the problems
one will face. For instance, travelling provides a hand on
experience on some topics which are studied in books at school
(also normal people would beneﬁt from it). Mathematics for
calculating money exchange or tips, art by visiting museum
and galleries, geography by physically moving from a city to
another, literature by visiting homes of famous authors, and
so on. It increases ﬂexibility not only in the daily routine but
also in the dietary restrictions by encouraging the experience
of tasting different food, in the interaction with other people
by enhancing social and language skills, in raising family
bondings, etc..
B. Website usability and accessibility for people with ASD
An interesting reading [20] is provided by Jamie Knight,
autistic developer and senior accessibility specialist: he dis-
cusses on cognitive accessibility and provide some practical
guidelines.
While the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, WCAG
1.0 and WCAG 2.0 [1] represent the international standard
reference model in this research domain, different practical
and operative guidelines have been proposed [1] [2] [20]-[21].
Given that most of them consider similar aspects, we have
analysed and summarised all of them in the following list:
a) Graphical layout: Users with ADS may easily be
distracted by secondary contents, thus webpages should be
very simple and should not contain information, images,
frames that create distractions. The page layout should be
consistent throughout the website. Images and white space
should be copiously used in order to focus the user attention
and to simplify the concepts absorption. Background sounds,
moving text, blinking images and horizontal scrolling should
be avoided.
b) Structure and Navigation: The website should have
a simple and logical navigation structure, links should be easy-
to-access and to ﬁnd, and few options should be given in order
to avoid the user confusion. The navigation inside the site
should be limited by three clicks. Each page should contain
the navigation information and navigation buttons at the top
and the bottom of the page.
c) Fonts and colours: Words should be easily read-
able, thus should usually be written in plain Sans-serif fonts
(e.g., Verdana) of at least 12 points. To emphasise words,
bold should be used. The choice of the right color is very
important, people with ASD may avoid the navigation in sites
with particular predominant colours, e.g., red. Foreground and
background colours should have sufﬁcient contrast but not too
much, some ASD users ﬁnd e.g., that black on white, is too
visually stimulating.
d) Language:
The language should be simple and
precise so that it does not create ambiguity, secondary and
irrelevant information should be avoided. The text should be
short and self-contained. The words should refer to things that
“can be seen”, acronyms and abbreviations, together with non-
literal text, and jargon should not be used since people with
ASD literally interpret the text content.
III.
SPECIALISING THE GUIDELINES FOR AUTISM
The guidelines proposed in previous subsection II-B deﬁne
a set of general features; in this section we specialise them,
integrating new features, speciﬁc for the ASD characteristics.
We list them, following the four aspects introduced above:
Graphical layout: Limit the text to very few, simple
sentences, and add many images in a PECS-like style so to
describe concepts and actions through sequences of images.
This is the most important feature, i.e., the copious use of
images throughout the site, in order to transmit all messages.
Repeat concepts, and in the homepage write a sentence that
let the user feel it navigates in its “own” site.
Structure and Navigation: Use simple and sketchy sym-
bolic pictures. If the site is directed to a group of young users,
add, when possible, some simple games to involve the user,
and also to check his/her level of attention.
Fonts and colours: Write sentences in bold, of big size and
uppercase.
Language: Use simple and minimal sentences, and illus-
trate concepts through images, and not though the written text.
To summarise, the main feature that we think should be
added is the use of many ﬁgures to explain situations, illustrate
actions, etc.. This choice is based on an Augmentative and Al-
ternative Communication (AAC) approach that is widely used
to improve standard communication. Moreover, we enforce
the involvement of the user on the site navigation by adding
sentences that personalise the site, and by adding games that
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

increase his/her curiosity. As we will describe in Section V,
this choice has been proved to be winning in our testing phase.
IV.
SCOPRIRIETI: A TOURISM WEBSITE FOR AUTISTIC
USERS
As we have mentioned in the previous Section II, there are
sites that provide tourism destinations for people with ASD,
or that give some tips on how to develop an autistic-friendly
website, however, we could not ﬁnd sites whose aim was the
independent (or almost-independent) planning of a trip by a
user with ASD.
In [22], we have thus proposed the Scopririeti (literally,
“Discover Rieti”) site [23], an autistic-friendly site, that the
user may use to simply search information, or, what is more
interesting, to independently choose one among different possi-
ble destinations of a one-day tourism trip in the neighbourhood
of Rieti, an Italian town in the north of Rome.
A. The website structure
While developing the site, we made sure that it met all
the accessibility and usability standards we have presented in
Section II-B and Section III. We did this in collaboration with
therapists and operators of the centre Nemo in Rieti, which
hosts different users with neurological and physical disabilities.
Graphical layout. The page layout is essential and simple
so to be enjoyable and comprehensible. The background is
white and it has just some simple bars in a ﬂexible colour
(blue and orange), so to avoid too much contrast on the
colour, and thus prevent visual discomfort. The header of the
website contains typical standards such as the logo, the primary
navigation menu and the search bar, as shown in Figure 1. We
Figure 1. The header bar of our website. The menu contains four main
items: nature, sport, history, and religion.
have inserted many pictures and photos in order to increase
the full comprehension of the site content, which is simple,
repetitive and synthetic. We have also followed the guidelines
and the suggestions proposed by the therapists, and we have
included travel itineraries that well suited the users. In the
homepage we have written a sentence “Sei un ragazzo del
Centro Nemo? Questo sito `e stato realizzato proprio per te”
(Translation: “Are you a guy of the Nemo center? This site has
been developed for you”) that would let the user feel happy
to navigate inside his “own” site.
Fonts and colours. We have used simple fonts, big size
and uppercase for letters in order to facilitate the reading (see
Figure 2. Translation: Discover several new places of Rieti and
organise a tour with your friends or your family. What do you
like?).
Language. The language used is simple, sentences are
minimal and do not contain acronyms or abbreviations (see,
e.g., Figure 2). Note that, the site is in Italian since it had
Figure 2. The fonts.
to be accessible by Italian disabled users. We have preferred
to illustrate all the tourism experience with a sequence of
pictures, rather than with some text (see the entire home page
in Figure 3). This prepares the user with ASD to a sequence
of practical experiences and actions which he/she has already
visualized and pre-processed, and thus reassures him/her.
Structure and navigation. The site is organised in at most
four levels. From the logo, the user can go back to the
homepage. In some pages, there is a back command. We
have not included pop-ups in Javascript, background sounds,
moving images so to avoid sensory annoyance.
The user may navigate from the homepage to the secondary
pages by clicking (a) on the images or (b) on the green smiles
below, or from the main menu in the header (see Figure 3).
Figure 3. The homepage.
We have discussed with the psychologists, and opted for
the use of simple and sketchy symbolic pictures. The idea is
that if a user with ASD sees a picture with a bike inside a
bike trail (see Figure 4) s/he will conclude s/he can practice
this sport.
In the homepage, the user faces a decision “Cosa ti piace?”
(“What do you like?”), and has to choose one of the four
itineraries, each of one has the same structure and contains: a
simple question, an image that represents the general content
of the page, links to pictures, videos, four images that link to
subsections which include information on where it is located,
how we can go there, what can we do there, and what to bring
(see Figure 4). All these links can be used to prepare the user
to the trip by visualising in advance a map of the location, the
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. A bike trail tour.
way the trip will be done (by car, by bus, with relatives, etc),
how to behave, and what to see. The last link, a backpack,
contains instructions on how pack it and what to bring on that
speciﬁc itinerary (see Figure 5).
Some sections contain some games, in which we can check
the level of attention of the user. There are questions as: “Have
you seen this image during the itinerary?” and so on (see
Figure 6).
Finally, at the end of most of the pages we can ﬁnd a print
command (“stampa la pagina”) and a back command (“torna
indietro”), see Figure 7.
Itineraries. We have chosen four possible itineraries, for
a one day tourism trip in the neighbourhood of Rieti and the
options are: nature, sport, history, and religion. These topics,
well ﬁt these users since people with ASD like to explore
quiet and relaxing places (nature and religion), love to move
around (sport), are very good at memorising dates and images,
Figure 5. What to bring in the backpack.
Figure 6. A partial screenshot of the game, S`ı, No (literally Yes, No).
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 7. A print and a back command.
and often like to take pictures (history). As we will mention
in Section V, all these itineraries have all been very much
appreciated by the users of the experimentation.
All these itineraries can be done in one day, having as a
starting position the centre Nemo, and given that some are
urban tours we have pointed out known places inside town to
facilitate the comprehension of the destination location.
V.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We ﬁrst describe the methodology we have used and we
then illustrate our experimental results.
A. Methodology.
The development of the Scopririeti (literally, “Discover
Rieti”) site [23] has followed different steps:
Collection of medical material.
The ﬁrst phase was the search for the medical material
on the speciﬁc disability, and the study of the characteristics
that deﬁne these speciﬁc users. This is important both to well
meet the accessibility requirements, and for the choice of the
appropriate content for the site.
Literature survey.
In the second phase, we have collected all the information
about usable and accessible websites for users with ASD, and
we have proposed some new interesting features that the site
should include (e.g., pictures, games, etc.)
Interviews.
In the third phase, one of our group members (Elisa) has
interviewed a group of specialised therapists and professionals
of the centre Nemo of Rieti, Italy. This centre hosts people
with different neurological and physical disabilities. Elisa has
collected information about the different disabilities and about
the limits and expectations one could meet while developing
the site. She has also participated to different meetings in
order to analyse the methodology used by the professionals for
approaching these users. What we have realised in this phase
is that the site had to be developed for users which were not
“too much serious”, given that it is not easy to include users
with big behavioural problems in tourism activities outdoor.
Thus, we have developed our site for users with non-serious
or mild disabilities, that had some elementary ability with the
use of a computer and with reading.
Website development.
The forth phase was the development of the website
applying the four categories of guidelines (discussed in sub-
section II-B and in Section III), and the hints and suggestions
collected in the two previous phases.
Preliminary test on a single user.
The ﬁfth phase was a preliminary test on a single user. We
wanted to ensure that the site had been appropriately developed
and was comprehensible. We have collected the impressions
both of the user and the therapist that was following the
meeting. We have thus accordingly adjusted and improved the
site.
Test on a group of 9 users.
In the sixth phase, we have then presented this new version
to a wider set of users which were ﬁrst instructed, and were
then left free to navigate and explore the site. We have then
collected their impressions.
Assessment questionnaire.
The last phase, was the collection of the impressions from
the relatives of the users by an assessment questionnaire.
B. Outcomes of the tests and of the assessment questionnaire.
We have tested the site with a set of 9 users (1 female and
8 male) with non-serious or mild disabilities, with different
backgrounds and general expertise, with some computer skills,
and with some interest on this touring activity.
Disabilities. Our 9 users (whose names have been omitted
for privacy reasons) had the following disabilities:
•
U1 (19 years old), U2 (18 years old), and U3 (18 years
old)
ASD and medium mental retardation;
•
U4 (19 years old)
ASD and mild mental retardation;
•
U5 (14 years old), and U6 (15 years old)
Asperger syndrome;
•
U7 (22 years old) ASD and psychosis;
•
U8 (15 years old)
medium mental retardation
•
U9 (17 years old)
mild mental retardation.
We have excluded from this group users with serious
mental disabilities.
Computer skills. All the users had some basics skills on
how to use the computer. Depending on the skills, we have left
the users to either autonomously navigate, or we have partially
helped them. Some have been able to type the name of the site,
others have found it already opened. We made sure that could
navigate without external distractions.
Test results. We have tested the site with one user at a time.
•
User U1 has shown very good computer skills; she
was able to autonomously navigate inside the site; she
has chosen the historical itinerary, and has navigated
inside it in a non sequential way, being intensely
involved. She has spent a lot of time looking at
pictures and videos.
•
User U2 was able to autonomously navigate; he has
shown interest for the religious itinerary, and, in
general, for the preparation of the backpack in all the
different itineraries.
•
User U3 was almost independent in the navigation
phase. He chose the historical itinerary, and got so
involved by looking and photos and videos and com-
pleted the test saying “I want to go there!”. He really
liked the proposed games.
•
User U4 has navigated inside the sport section; he
has intensely observed pictures and videos, and has
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

autonomously discussed which places he had already
explored, and which were new.
•
User U5 has shown very good computer abilities. He
has chosen the historical itinerary, and has explored
it following the sequential sequence, observing all
the pictures, and enthusiastically playing the proposed
games.
•
User U6 had more difﬁculties on the use of the
computer; thus he had found the homepage open. He
has chosen the naturalistic itinerary which he had
already visited with the school. He has intensively
observed all the pictures, and declared that he wants
to go back there with his family.
•
User U7 has chosen the religious itinerary; he was
very curious about all the churches and saints (he did
not know about), thus asking many questions during
the navigation and observation of the photos.
•
User U8 has chosen the naturalistic itinerary. He was
not very skilled in the use of the computer, thus
followed some verbal suggestions. He was enthusiastic
about the pictures of lakes, plant and animals. We
are not sure wether he has really understood all the
information, as, e.g., the location of the lakes.
•
User U9 has chosen the historical itinerary; he was
enthusiastic about the pictures of the underground trail
and has declared he wanted to do it soon. Even in
this case he needed some verbal help, and we are not
sure he has completely understood all the information
collected during navigation.
To summarise, the result is that all the users were able
to complete the test up to the end. All the users, except a
couple of them, had previous navigational experience on the
Web, and were able to follow the itineraries and to use the
mouse. Figure 8 shows the percentages related to the chosen
itineraries. All the users were enthusiastic, and have really
Figure 8. The typologies of chosen itineraries.
liked the site and all the itineraries. In particular, the elements
they have preferred are: the pictures, an explanation on how to
prepare the backpack, the proposed games. All of them have
also asked questions about speciﬁc pictures, have discussed
the site contents, and some of them really wanted to try the
real itinerary right away. The use of the mouse facilitated the
navigation. We also tried to run the tests using touch screens,
but this seemed to complicate it.
As a limit, we have found that some users have shown
some small difﬁculties on ﬁnding the location of some speciﬁc
pictures, and on the sequences of some itineraries.
Assessment questionnaire. We have ﬁnally proposed an
assessment questionnaire to the families. We have ﬁrst met
them and we have illustrated and shown the site. Some of
them had already seen it previously and had given suggestions
on the development of it. This project and the site have
been really appreciated, since relatives were happy to have
a site where their kids could “autonomously navigate”. What
emerged is that some of the itineraries were known, others
were new. Parents really liked the section on the preparation
of the backpack, and the indications on how the trip evolves in
order to stimulate their kids orientation capabilities. Globally,
the site has been really appreciated both for the contents and
for its graphical design, and parents have claimed they will
surely use it for future trips.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we analysed how an accessible and usable
website should be developed in order to be enjoyable by a
user with ASD. We have also considered, how such a user can
beneﬁt of travelling around the world, and which tips it should
follow in order to be able to face in serenity the trip. We have
ﬁnally presented, an interesting accessible and usable website
we have developed for users with ASD. With this site, the
users were able to plan and almost independently decide the
trip they wanted to do. We have also shown the appreciation
results it has received while experimented on a group of users
with ASD. This work represented a pilot, prototypal project
and the encouraging feedbacks allow us to plan future work:
•
validate the usability and the accessibility of the
website on a systematic analysis of data collected on
a statistically signiﬁcant sample of users. This will
require: (a) the creation of new websites that will
use our conceptual model; they will contain as case
study other cities; (b) the deﬁnition of the features
of potential user proﬁles, in order to generating a
taxonomic analysis of the experimentation results.
•
implement a mobile app, that will contain all the
case studies and will become a concrete tool for the
tourism; it should be an adaptive and ubiquitous app
able to follow the users on their trips. We will collect
all the information generated by the use of the app,
like navigation paths, user proﬁles, user preferences,
geo-localisations, etc.; the aim will be to analyse these
data and deﬁne a reference model for an adaptive, and
semantic app for the tourism of speciﬁc class of users.
•
implement the social aspects, in such a way users
could vote their preferred pages, insert a personal
comment or share their trips and their experience.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We want to thank centro Nemo, all its therapists and
operators, the families, the users, and all the people that
collaborated to this project.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Web content accessibility guidelines (wcag) 2.0,” 2008, https://www.
w3.org/TR/WCAG20 [accessed: 2016-02-01].
[2]
“W3 consortium,” 2016, http://www.w3.org [accessed: 2016-02-01].
[3]
“Act n. 4 of 9.01.2004,” 2004, http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?
urn:nir:stato:legge:2004-01-09;4!vig= [accessed: 2016-02-01].
[4]
American Psychiatric Association, Ed., The Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM 5.
BookpointUS, 2013.
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[5]
K. Still, R. Rehfeldt, R. Whelan, R. May, and S. Dymond, “Facilitating
requesting skills using high-tech augmentative and alternative commu-
nication devices with individuals with autism spectrum disorders: A
systematic review,” Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, vol. 8,
2014, pp. 1184–1199.
[6]
A. Dattolo and F. Luccio, “Modelling volo, an augmentative and
alternative communication application,” in The Eighth International
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI
2015).
Lisbon, Portugal, February 22 - 27, 2015 2015.
[7]
A. Bondy and L. Frost, “Mands across the water: A report on the
application of the picture-exchange communication system in Peru,”
The Behavior Analyst, vol. 16, 1993, pp. 123–128.
[8]
T. Grandin, “How does visual thinking work in the mind of a person
with autism? A personal account,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society, vol. 364, no. 1522, May 2009, pp. 1437–1442.
[9]
C.
Sicile-Kira,
“What
is
sensory
processing
disorder
and
how
is
it
related
to
autism?”
2010,
https://www.
psychologytoday.com/blog/the-autism-advocate/201003/
what-is-sensory-processing-disorder-and-how-is-it-related-autism
[accessed: 2016-01-09].
[10]
“Convention
on
the
rights
of
persons
with
disabilities,”
2006,
http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml
[accessed: 2016-25-01].
[11]
“Web accessibility and usability working together,” 2010, w3C, http:
//https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/usable [accessed: 2016-01-25].
[12]
J. Nielsen, “Usability 101: Introduction to usability,” 2012, https://
www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-101-introduction-to-usability/ [ac-
cessed: 2016-03-24].
[13]
J. Nielsen and R. Budiu, Mobile Usability.
New Riders, 2013.
[14]
H. Hamed, “Tourism and autism: An initiative study for how travel
companies can plan tourism trips for autistic people,” American Journal
of Tourism Management, vol. 2, 2013, pp. 1–14.
[15]
A. Goehner, “Six tips for traveling with an autistic child. time spe-
cial.2012.” 2012, http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/
0,28804,1893554 1893556,00.html [accessed: 2016-20-01].
[16]
“Autism asd, travelling through the airport,” http://www.dublinairport.
com/gns/at-the-airport/autism-asd.aspx [accessed: 2016-20-01].
[17]
“Royal air force museum, london, autism friendly trail,” 2016, http:
//www.rafmuseum.org.uk/london/things-to-see-and-do/autism.aspx [ac-
cessed: 2016-20-01].
[18]
“Metropolitan museum of art in new york, resources for visitors on the
autism spectrum,” 2016, http://www.metmuseum.org/events/programs/
met-access/visitors-with-developmental-and-learning-disabilities/
for-visitors-with-autism-spectrum-disorders [accessed: 2016-20-01].
[19]
“Autistic globetrotting, autism travel made easy,” 2016, http://www.
autisticglobetrotting.com/ [accessed: 2016-21-01].
[20]
“An
interview
with
jamie
knight:
autism
and
accessible
web
design,” 2015, http://www.iheni.com/an-interview-with-jamie-knight-
autism-and-accessible-web-design/ [accessed: 2016-25-01].
[21]
“Cognitive accessibility user research,” 2015, w3C, http://www.w3.org/
TR/coga-user-research/ [accessed: 2016-02-01].
[22]
E. Pirone, “Turismo e autismo: realizzazione di un sito web turistico
per soggetti autistici,” Master’s thesis, Universit`a Ca’ Foscari, Venezia,
2015.
[23]
——,
“Scopririeti,”
2015,
http://www.wordpress.scopririeti.it/
[ac-
cessed: 2016-20-02].
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

