Using Social Media for Collaborative Learning in Higher Education: A Case Study 
 
Na Li, Sandy El Helou, Denis Gillet 
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 
{na.li, sandy.elhelou, denis.gillet}@epfl.ch 
 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates the acceptability of using 
social media for collaborative learning in the context of higher 
education. A social media platform, Graasp, is used to support 
students’ learning activities in a project-based course. An 
evaluation 
of 
Graasp 
regarding 
its 
usefulness 
as 
a 
collaboration platform, a knowledge management site, and a 
gadget container, was conducted with the course participants. 
Quantitative and qualitative assessment methods used in the 
evaluation, as well as the main findings are presented. 
Keywords-social media; collaborative learning; knowledge 
management; E-Learning 2.0 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the rise of social media, Web users have become 
co-producers of social content rather than passive 
information consumers. Next to its wide usage for social 
interactions among young people, social media is also 
increasingly used to support learning activities. Many efforts 
have been made to incorporate social media into students’ 
overall learning ecology, which leads to the emergence of E-
Learning 2.0. The concept of “E-Learning 2.0” [1] refers to 
the adoption of social media in learning or education where 
learners are empowered to create and organize their own 
learning activities.  
In practice, higher education institutions are still 
primarily relying on traditional learning management 
systems (LMS) that do not fully capitalize on the potential of 
social media for enabling participation in global learning 
networks, collaboration and social networking [2] [3]. 
According to a previous study by Clark et al. [4], while Web 
2.0 participatory technologies have become an essential part 
of young learners’ daily lives, very few learners are taking 
full advantage of these technologies to support their learning 
processes. Similarly, Greenhow & Robelia also argued in 
their study [5] that students do not perceive a connection 
between their online activities and institutional learning. 
Overall, the studies suggest that the potential benefits of 
using social media to create learner-centered education 
systems need to be further exploited and well understood by 
learners. 
In this paper, we investigate the added value of using 
social media for collaborative learning in the context of 
higher education. A social media platform, namely Graasp 
(formerly Graaasp http://graasp.epfl.ch), is introduced to a 
number of undergraduate students, and then used in one of 
their courses to support project-based collaborative learning. 
The acceptability and expectation of such social media 
supported learning solutions is examined through a user 
study. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 
II discusses the existing attempts of integrating social media 
into students’ learning experience. Section III presents the 
structure and features of Graasp. The context of the user 
study is described in Section IV. Graasp’s acceptability in 
sustaining collaborative learning is evaluated and analyzed in 
Section V. Finally Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Compared to traditional learning management systems 
that provide few opportunities for learners to develop and 
maintain their own learning activities, learning platforms 
based on social media paradigms place the control of 
learning into the hands of learners themselves [6]. A growing 
number of research efforts have been made to support 
teaching and learning using a variety of social media tools. 
For example, Silius et al. [7] developed a social networking 
site for college students, aiming at enhancing both 
collaborative study and social interaction. Their research 
reveals that making social media tools a part of traditional 
learning is attractive to students and can motivate their 
participation in the learning process. In other similar studies, 
a social bookmarking tool [8], a blogging platform [9], or 
wiki software [10] have been used to engage students in 
collaborative projects and encourages creating, editing, and 
sharing content. The research suggests that, it is promising to 
adopt social media in the context of learning as it promotes 
collective knowledge generation and encourages active user 
participation. However, the application of social media to 
enhance learning solutions is still in its early phase and needs 
to be further explored. In our previous work [6], we have 
presented the social media platform Graasp, and investigated 
its potential role for sustaining collaborative learning 
activities through scenarios. In this paper, a real-world 
experiment has been conducted to evaluate the added value 
of using Graasp for students’ collaborative work in a 
project-based course. 
III. 
A SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORM: GRAASP 
Graasp is a Web 2.0 application developed at Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL in 
French). It can serve simultaneously as an aggregation, 
contextualization, discussion, and networking platform, a 
shared asset repository, or an activity management system. 
The structure of Graasp relies on the extension of the 3A 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

interaction model [11], which is intended for designing and 
describing social and collaborative learning environments. 
The 3A model consists of three main constructs or entities: 
Actors represent entities capable of initiating an event in a 
collaborative environment, such as regular users or virtual 
agents. Actors create personal or collaboration spaces where 
they conduct personal and group Activities to reach specific 
objectives. In each of these activities, actors can take 
different roles with different set of rights. In addition, actors 
produce, edit, share and annotate Assets in order to meet 
activity objectives. Assets can consist of simple text files, 
RSS feeds, videos or audio files. The 3A model is extended 
to incorporate a fourth entity, namely Applications, to 
account for widgets or gadgets [12] that can be added and 
executed within activity spaces. SALT is an acronym 
adopted to describe the social media actions of Sharing, 
Assessing (i.e. rating and commenting), Linking, and 
Tagging that can be performed by actors on assets and 
applications in the context of activity spaces. These actions 
are believed to encourage contribution, collaboration, and 
reflection [11]. In Graasp, Actors, Activities, Assets, and 
Applications are mapped to People, Activity Spaces, 
Resources, and Apps respectively. Graasp’s main features 
that facilitate collaborative learning are discussed hereafter. 
A. Collaboration within Spaces 
The design of Graasp follows a bottom-up flexible 
approach that releases hierarchical and constraining default 
structures when it comes to managing joint projects. Instead 
of having a top-level administrator in control of all project 
spaces, everything is managed at the space level. Both tutors 
and students are entitled to create activity spaces. Spaces 
owners are free to choose between hierarchical or completely 
flat structures. In a flat-structured space, every member 
shares equal rights so that no one acts as a supervisor who 
superintends the learning process. As an example, a team of 
students is able to create a project space where all members 
share, discuss, organize learning resources (using tags or 
sub-spaces), and collaboratively coordinate the project’s 
activities. Additionally, Graasp also enables top-down 
hierarchical structured spaces where members can take 
different roles. For instance, tutors can create a course space 
to define the course milestones, post learning materials, and 
organize the learning activities. In order to keep users aware 
of the ongoing activities, Graasp enables them to subscribe 
to RSS feeds within a space to trace changes. 
B. Collective Knowledge Generation and Management 
Unlike traditional learning management systems where 
learners are only allowed to access the curriculum given by 
the tutor, Graasp empowers students to create, aggregate, 
share, and organize the learning resources by themselves. 
Graasp offers typical social media features such as tags, 
ratings, comments, wikis, and bookmarks. Tags enable users 
to classify their collections in the ways they find useful, and 
also facilitate building a folksonomy in the learning 
community 
[13]. 
Such 
bottom-up 
classification 
is 
particularly helpful for efficient search and recommendation 
since user-defined tags make it easier to discover relevant 
items. With respect to ratings and comments, they provide an 
easy way for users to express their preferences and thus help 
evaluating the quality of user-generated content from the 
community perspective. As far as wiki is concerned, it 
enables users to co-create social content and cooperatively 
work towards common goals. It is worth mentioning that 
Graasp provides a bookmarking feature, “GraaspIt!”, with 
which users are able to grab and link external Web pages 
into their Graasp spaces. This feature facilitates knowledge 
aggregation from a variety of public sources. 
C. Learning-Oriented Gadgets 
Not only does Graasp serve as a knowledge management 
and collaboration platform, but also as a gadget container. 
Gadgets can run and communicate within Graasp. This 
capability reinforces the learning experience because it 
enables useful learning-oriented tools to be added and 
launched during the learning process. Different collections of 
gadgets can be associated to different spaces, making the 
aggregation contextual. Thanks to this feature, Graasp’s 
provided functionalities are made flexible and extendable. 
For instance, in a project space, students can add a calendar 
gadget configured with a series of milestones and deadlines. 
Other gadgets such as notepad, to-do list, and learning plan 
application could be useful as well. 
D. Privacy Control Scheme 
Since Graasp provides a relatively open learning 
environment, there is a clear need for effective privacy 
control mechanisms that protect against unauthorized access 
to social data. Instead of adopting complicated privacy 
management schemes that are difficult for users to cope with, 
the privacy settings are maintained at the space level. Based 
on its purpose and its owner’s choice, a space can be public, 
closed, or hidden. Public spaces are globally visible and 
allow every user to join. Closed and hidden ones are only 
accessible upon explicit invitations. Hidden spaces are not 
searchable and they are only visible to space members. 
Closed and hidden spaces are especially useful when 
students want to carry out their peer-based projects without 
being disturbed by others or feeling that they are “observed” 
by the tutor. 
Within a specific space, users are allowed to take 
different roles: owner, editor, and viewer. Each role is 
associated with a set of rights allowing users to perform 
diverse actions such as moderating the space, adding new 
assets 
in 
the 
space, 
commenting, 
rating, 
tagging, 
bookmarking, and so on. Only space owners are entitled to 
assign roles to other space members. Assigning different 
roles in a collaborative space makes users aware of their 
duties and gives them the opportunity to concretely 
collaborate by being allowed to perform specific actions. 
Finally, the access permissions of assets and gadgets inherit 
from the space they belong to. 
IV. 
USING GRAASP FOR COLLABORATIVE LEARNING 
To examine the acceptability and user satisfaction of 
Graasp in terms of supporting collaborative learning, it was 
used as a collaborative work platform in a project-based 
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

course of Human Computer Interaction offered at Tongji 
University in China. 28 undergraduate students were 
involved in the course and they were divided into 8 teams. 
Each team was required to accomplish a group project. 
Graasp was introduced to the students at the beginning of 
the course. Since it is an intensive course, the students’ 
teamwork was limited to two 4-hours face-to-face sessions 
and a 30 minutes’ final presentation spread over a three-
week period. As a result, the total usage of Graasp was not 
expected to be very high. 
After a brief introduction of Graasp, students were 
shown how they could create their project spaces, share 
resources with each other, play different roles in the project, 
and work with different gadgets. An example of a project 
space is illustrated in Fig. 1. The “Human Computer 
Interaction Course Project” space is shown on the left side 
of the user interface, and the recommended items are shown 
on the right side. The space members, sub-spaces, posted 
assets (resource), and added gadgets (app) are displayed in 
the “Pad” of the space. 
During the course, each group of students was entitled to 
create their project space (as shown in Fig. 1), and invite all 
the team members to join. They then chose a privacy type for 
their space, and assigned different permissions to the team 
members depending on their different roles. Within the 
space, students could co-edit the wiki and make discussions 
through comments. Course resources were added into the 
space either through direct creation within Graasp or by 
grabbing external data using “GraaspIt!”. Space members 
could also create sub-spaces in order to organize and 
structure their collaborative work if necessary. A few 
gadgets (e.g., mockup gadget and project management 
gadget) that were believed to promote the learning process 
were provided to the students to work with. Students could 
also “grasp” more gadgets from online gadget repositories 
such 
as 
iGoogle 
(http://www.google.com/ig/directory?type=gadgets). 
V. 
EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS 
To investigate the acceptability of Graasp as a 
collaborative learning platform, a user study was conducted 
with the students participating in the course described in 
Section IV. The evaluation methodology and main findings 
are addressed in this section. 
A. Evaluation Methodology 
The evaluation consists of two parts: a quantitative 
assessment relying on students’ action log throughout the 
period of the course, and a qualitative assessment through a 
user questionnaire distributed after the course.  
In the first part of the evaluation, students’ activities 
within Graasp are analyzed in the following aspects: the 
number of entities (people profiles, activity spaces, assets, 
and apps or gadgets) created, the number of invitations sent 
to join a space, the number of tags, comments, ratings, and 
wiki generated, and the use of privacy control feature. The 
objective is to examine the general usage of Graasp and 
students’ online interactions during the course. 
In the second part of the evaluation, an online 
questionnaire was distributed to the course participants after 
the final presentation of their teamwork. The user 
questionnaire is composed of Likert-scale questions [14] 
Figure 1. A project space in Graasp 
!
 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

with 5-point preference scale (strongly disagree, disagree, 
neutral, agree, and strongly agree), multiple choice questions 
and open questions. The questions can be grouped into the 
following categories: the general usefulness of Graasp, the 
usefulness of Graasp as a collaboration platform, the 
usefulness of Graasp as a knowledge management system, 
the usefulness of learning-oriented gadgets, and the user 
satisfaction regarding the privacy control scheme. The user 
questionnaire is summarized in Table I. In addition, we also 
used the Desirability Toolkit approach [15], where the study 
participants were asked to select 5 adjectives that can best 
describe their personal experience with Graasp, from a list of 
118 words. Through this approach, we got a depth of 
understanding and authenticity in participants’ experience 
and opinions on Graasp. 
TABLE I.  
USER QUESTIONNAIRE 
I 
General usefulness 
 
Generally speaking, I find Graasp useful for my teamwork. 
I think Graasp is useful for the following reasons (Easy sharing, 
Project management, Resource organization, Resource 
aggregation, and Gadgets integration) 
Using Graasp improves my motivation for carrying out my 
teamwork. 
I predict that I would frequently use Graasp in the future. 
II 
Usefulness as a collaboration platform 
 
I feel comfortable to do teamwork with my classmates in a 
project space. 
I find it useful to add an item in a space and share it with space 
members. 
Have you organized your people connections using spaces? 
Why? 
III 
Usefulness as a knowledge management system 
 
I like to use spaces to organize my resources. 
I think it is useful to aggregate different resources into Graasp 
using “GraaspIt!”. 
Have you used the wiki? Why? 
Have you used tags? Why? 
IV 
Usefulness of learning-oriented gadgets 
 
I think the following gadgets are helpful for my learning or 
working activities (Project management gadget, Mockup gadget, 
and Other gadgets I found). 
I think it is a good idea to integrate gadgets into my learning or 
working process. 
What other gadgets will be useful for your collaborative learning 
and teamwork? 
V 
User satisfaction of privacy control scheme 
 
I am satisfied with having control over the privacy settings 
(public, closed, hidden) of my spaces and profile. 
I feel it is necessary to assign different permission (owner, editor, 
and viewer) to others over my resources. 
I would like to have an option to specify more detailed 
permissions, such as “who can tag on me”, “who can comment 
on my space”, and so on. 
 
B. Study Participants 
The user study was conducted with 28 undergraduate 
students, who were the intended audience of the Graasp 
system. All participants were frequent Web users who were 
familiar with social media platforms and Web 2.0 
technologies like blogging, wiki, rating, tagging, and 
bookmarking. However, most of them did not have much 
experience of using online learning systems. Instead, the 
most common tools used for teamwork were instant 
messenger and email. A few students claimed to use shared 
calendars for collaborative projects. 
C. Results and Discussion 
The quantitative results extracted from students’ action 
log and the qualitative feedback collected through user 
questionnaires are discussed in this section. The number of 
items created throughout the course period and the 
proportion of students using the corresponding feature are 
illustrated in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 respectively. 
As shown in the figures, 25 out of 28 students registered 
with Graasp, 35 new spaces were created by 19 students (25 
home spaces were also created by default when the users 
registered), 62 assets were posted by 17 students, and only 6 
gadgets were added by 5 students in total. The results 
indicate that the overall usage of Graasp was not high, which 
matches our initial expectation since students were given 
only a few hours to carry out their teamwork. In contrast to 
the other entities, the reason why a small number of gadgets 
 
 
Figure 2. Numbers of items created during the course period 
 
 
Figure 3. Proportion of students using the features 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

were created might be the lack of course relevant gadgets in 
the online gadgets repositories. Within 35 spaces, 30 
invitations were sent, and 22 of them were accepted. This 
suggests that although the general usage of Graasp was not 
high, some active users utilized space as a place to 
collaborate with each other.  
Regarding the use of typical Web 2.0 features, 20 tags, 
41 wiki, 4 comments, and 4 ratings were generated (as 
shown in Fig. 2). Students later in the user questionnaire 
explained that they thought tags were helpful to search for 
relevant items, and also facilitate describing and classifying 
content. Students also pointed out that wiki played an 
important role in providing basic information of an item and 
defining the learning context. This is consistent with the fact 
that the use of tags and wiki was relatively active (as shown 
in Fig. 3). The reason behind the low usage of comments and 
ratings was explained to be the fact that there was not 
sufficient social data in the current system to evaluate.  
As for the use of privacy control feature, among 60 
spaces including 25 default home spaces, 19 of them were 
set to public, 17 ones were closed, and 24 ones were hidden. 
The diversity of privacy settings confirms the students’ 
answers in the questionnaire that it is necessary to set 
different privacy levels to spaces depending on what a 
specific space is used for. 
In addition to the quantitative assessment through the log 
of students’ actions, user questionnaires were also collected 
and analyzed after the course. All the 28 user questionnaires 
were successfully completed. The results and findings are 
presented hereafter. 
With respect to Graasp’s general usefulness, 64% 
participants considered Graasp useful as a platform for 
sharing and organizing resources, 46% of them perceived it 
as an adequate place to collaboratively manage their projects, 
and 46% of them recognized its usefulness as a system 
aggregating content from various sources. Slightly over a 
half of the students (52%) confirmed that Graasp improved 
their motivation for carrying out their teamwork. A reason 
why the result is not satisfying enough is due to the technical 
problem of slow network connection in the campus. Also, 
the students pointed out that they felt less motivated since 
there were not sufficient peer connections besides the rest of 
their classmates attending the course. Furthermore, the lack 
of social resources in the current system somehow 
disappointed them as well. To solve this problem, the 
capability of exchanging social resources and personal 
contacts with popular social media platforms could be a 
possible direction. The interoperability with such platforms 
needs to be further explored in Graasp. 
The rest of the questionnaire was intended to investigate 
students’ satisfaction of Graasp’s usefulness in different 
aspects. The qualitative results shown in Fig. 4 reveal that 
the majority of the students were satisfied with using Graasp 
for those purposes. More specifically, regarding the 
usefulness of Graasp as a collaboration platform, 57% of the 
students expressed their preference for carrying out 
teamwork within project spaces. 74% of them thought it 
useful to share items with others using spaces. 17 
participants claimed that they organized their people 
connections by placing them into different spaces. Students 
pointed out that it was an effective way to classify personal 
contacts depending on different context. However, 11 
students never used this feature. The reason given was that 
there were not yet many contacts to classify, and all their 
contacts were their classmates. In short, the role of Graasp in 
supporting collaborative work is quite satisfying. Most 
people thought it comfortable to undertake teamwork using 
Graasp. 
From the perspective of supporting collective knowledge 
management, 59% of the participants considered it 
convenient to structure and organize resources using 
different spaces, and a slightly higher proportion of them 
(67%) affirmed the usefulness of aggregating resources using 
“GraaspIt!” feature. Moreover, 17 out of 28 students stated 
that tags helped them to describe and classify content easily, 
while the remaining said that there was no need to use tags 
due to the lack of data existing in the system. 
When asked whether learning-oriented gadgets can 
enhance their learning experience or not, 63% of the students 
confirmed that the integration of gadgets into their learning 
process was helpful. It is worth mentioning that there is a 
huge difference between the percentage of users’ preference 
(63%) and their real usage in practice (18%). This implies 
that although users are hoping to use gadgets for 
collaborative learning, it is difficult for them to find useful 
gadgets intended for learning activities in online repositories. 
Therefore, more efforts are needed to develop project-
management and learning-oriented gadgets that could 
comply with learners’ learning requirements. In the 
questionnaire, students also proposed a few potential gadgets 
that could help them achieve their learning goals, such as 
online chatting tool, learning plan application, to-do list with 
reminder, and so on. 
As far as the privacy control feature is concerned, 74% of 
the students were satisfied with having control over the 
privacy levels of spaces and user profiles. Granting different 
permissions to others over their personal resources was 
perceived as an essential feature as well. In the current 
Graasp system, only three types of permissions are allowed: 
owner, editor, and viewer. It was suggested by the 
participants that more fine-grained permission rules should 
be added. Users should be capable of defining their own 
 
 
Figure 4. Students’ satisfaction of Graasp’s usefulness 
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

permission rules, such as “who can tag on me”, “who can 
comment on my space”, and “who can link my resources by 
drag and drop”. This requires further evaluation, and raises 
the challenges of a trade-off between more fine-grained 
choice and an increased system complexity. 
Finally, we asked the participants to pick 5 adjectives 
that closely matched their personal reactions to Graasp from 
a list of positive and negative words. A word cloud, showing 
the frequency of the selected adjectives, is presented in Fig. 
5. Among a variety of words, the most frequently picked 
ones were accessible, personal, trustworthy, reliable, and 
slow. The overall assessment is quite encouraging with a few 
negative opinions like slowness. One should note that the 
performance problem is mainly due to the limited network 
bandwidth in the campus and the cross-country data 
transmission. 
VI. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
This paper discussed the usage of social media in 
learning contexts. A social media platform, namely Graasp, 
simultaneously offering as a bottom-up project management 
platform, a resource repository, a collaboration site, and a 
gadget container, is presented.  The evaluation of its 
acceptability among students taking a HCI course is also 
discussed. Despite a technical problem of bandwidth that 
causes slow server response, results show that students were 
satisfied with using Graasp to enhance knowledge 
management and collaboration. Organizing content using 
subspaces or tags was less exploited due to the lack of data in 
the platform. Students mentioned that to be able to use 
Graasp outside the scope of the course, it would be useful to 
be able to import contacts from other popular sites. Future 
work will focus on interoperability efforts to ease the 
exchange of resources and contacts with other social media 
platforms based on standards such as OpenSocial, already 
used for inter-gadget communications.  
Within the framework of another research project, 
Graasp is now being deployed and increasingly used by 
students from the Universities of Geneva and Fribourg. 
Large-scale evaluations involving courses that span over a 
longer period of time will be conducted to further examine 
the added value of using Graasp for collaborative learning. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research work described in this paper is partially 
funded through the ROLE Integrated Project; part of the 
Seventh 
Framework 
Program 
for 
Research 
and 
Technological Development (FP7) of the European Union in 
Information and Communication Technologies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Safran, D. Helic, and C. Gütl, “E-Learning practices and 
Web 2.0,” Proc. International Conference on Iteractive 
Computer Aided Learning, vol. 1, pp. 1-8, 2007. 
[2] N. 
Dabbagh 
and 
A. 
Kitsantas, 
“Personal 
learning 
environments, social media, and self-regulated learning: A 
natural formula for connecting formal and informal learning,” 
Internet and Higher Education (2011), in press. 
[3] C. McLoughlin and M. Lee, “Personalised and self regulated 
learning in the Web 2.0 era: International exemplars of 
innovative pedagogy using social software,” Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 26, pp. 28-43, 2010. 
[4] W. Clark, K. Logan, R. Luckin, A. Mee, and M. Oliver, 
“Beyond Web 2.0: mapping the technology landscapes of 
young learners,” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 
25, pp. 56-69, 2009. 
[5] C. Greenhow and B. Robelia, “Informal learning and identity 
formation in online social networks,” Learning, Media and 
Technology, vol. 34, pp. 119-140, 2009. 
[6] N. Li, C. Ullrich, S. El Helou, and D. Gillet, “Using social 
software for teamwork and collaborative project management 
in higher education,” Proc. International Conference on Web-
based Learning, vol. 6483, pp. 161-170, 2010. 
[7] K. Silius, T. Miilumäki, J. Huhtamäki, T. Tebest, J. 
Meriläinen, and S. Pohjolainen, “Students’ motivations for 
social media enhanced studying and learning,” Knowledge 
Management & E-Learning: An International Journal, vol. 2, 
pp. 51-67, 2010. 
[8] T. M. Farwell and R. D. Waters, “Exploring the use of social 
bookmarking technology in education: an analysis of 
students’ experiences using a course-specific Delicious.com 
account,” Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, vol. 6, 
pp. 398-408, 2010. 
[9] D. Rosen and C. Nelson, “Web 2.0: a new generation of 
learners and education,” Computers in the Schools, vol. 25, 
pp. 211-225, 2008. 
[10] S. Hazari, A. North, and D. Moreland, “Investigating 
pedagogical 
value 
of 
wiki 
technology,” 
Journal 
of 
Information Systems Education, vol. 20, pp. 187-198, 2009. 
[11] S. El Helou, N. Li, and D. Gillet, “The 3A interaction model: 
towards bridging the gap between formal and informal 
learning,” Proc. International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interactions, pp. 179-184, 2010. 
[12] Gadgets 
Specification, 
http://code.google.com/apis/gadgets/docs/spec.html, retrieved 
Sep. 2011. 
[13] S. Sen, S. K. Lam, A. M. Rashid, D. Cosley, D. Frankowski, 
J. Osterhouse, F. M. Harper, and J. Riedl, “Tagging, 
communities, vocabulary, evolution,” Proc. Anniversary 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 
181-190, 2006. 
[14] R. Likert, “A technique for the measurement of attitudes,” 
Archives of Psychology, vol. 140, 1932. 
[15] J. Benedek and T. Miner, “Measuring desirability: new 
methods for evaluating desirability in a usability lab setting,” 
Redmond, WA: Microsoft Corporation, 2002. 
 
 
Figure 5. A word cloud based on frequency of selected adjectives 
 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

