Exploring Engagement in Distributed Meetings during COVID-19 Lock-down
Fahad Said
Faculty of Computer Sciences
Østfold University College
Halden, Norway
Email: fahads@hiof.no
Klaudia Carcani
Faculty of Computer Sciences
Østfold University College
Halden, Norway
Email: klaudia.carcani@hiof.no
Abstract—Meetings are an important part of articulation work
in cooperative groups. Thus, engagement in meetings inﬂuences
cooperation. In the case of distributed cooperative meetings,
engagement is inﬂuenced by the spatial distance among members.
Building on the existing literature, we introduce a framework
for analyzing engagement in distributed cooperative meetings
and
study
the
phenomenon
speciﬁcally
for
the
period
of
the nationwide lock-down due to COVID-19, where remote
meetings were the only choice. We interviewed 11 professionals
experiencing
home
ofﬁce
during
the
nationwide
lockdown,
documenting their experiences on engagement in distributed
cooperative meetings, and conducted ﬁve participant observations
in meetings with 8, 4, 6, 4, and 13 subjects as a direct investigation
of engagement. Findings suggest that the use of social cues,
meeting facilitator and personal interest are inﬂuential factors
that regulate engagement in distributed meetings. The suggested
framework has potential for detecting engagement, as we discuss
the implications of our ﬁndings for digital meeting platforms. This
paper contributes in the ﬁeld of Computer supported cooperative
work and Human Computer Interaction, with discussions and
future research in how to detect, obtain, and sustain engagement
in the context of cooperative work.
Keywords–Engagement; CSCW; Digital Meeting Platforms;
Distribued Cooperation Work; Distributed Meetings; Attention;
COVID-19; HCI; Participation; Conversation roles.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Meetings have become a standard arena to come together,
discuss, and divide the labor for upcoming work in most
workplaces, being those in organizations ranging from small to
medium to large, or the public sector [1]. Until recent times,
meetings have been associated with a physical location, where
participants can coordinate and interact more ﬂuently [2]. Due
to the increase in Information and Communication Technologies,
the perception of meetings has changed, as people participate
in virtual meetings. Participation in virtual meetings is optimal
when physical alternatives are exhausted [3].
”The need for group decision making has never been so
important”, as a single individual’s perspective on their work
is limited in isolation [4]. Due to a diverse specialization and
demand for expertise, people are increasingly cooperating to
achieve a common objective [5]. Despite the use of supportive
technologies for cooperative work, meetings are the most
popular and optimal way for group decision applications [6].
Recent developments in supporting meetings have worked
exclusively on technologies that support access to meeting
content to distributed participants. However, to the extent of
our knowledge, there has been little research on technologies
that support the activity of discussion and decision making
in settings where participants in the meeting are involved
in cooperative work, where they articulate, delegate, and
coordinate tasks. We will refer to these meetings as cooperative
meetings. Researchers within the ﬁeld of Human-Computer
Interaction (HCI) and Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW) have been exploring strategies and tools to support
group meetings through teleconferencing technology [7]–[10].
Engagement is deemed important in multi-party interactions
as it operates as a key component and condition to assure that
a participant is immersed and receptive to shared information
[11]. Frank et al. [12] outlined engagement as a key factor
for meeting success. Furthermore, one must understand what
inﬂuences a user’s engagement in meetings in order to operate
cooperative sessions productively.
In the early months of 2020, multiple countries enforced
nationwide shutdowns due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic,
reducing physical interactions to a minimum. A signiﬁcant
number of workers around the world were immediately faced
with technology as the only option to do work. Meetings
are now operated using digital tools, such as Skype, Zoom,
Microsoft teams, etc. Previously, these digital tools were
considered to only be a secondary option. The co-located
cooperative meetings were now moved into the digital realm,
into what we deﬁne as distributed cooperative meetings. In this
context, we do not include educational lectures, conferences,
and informative meetings as they are not of direct relevance
for our study.
Considering the immediate shift towards distributed
cooperative meetings amid in the lock-down, and the relevance
of engagement in these sessions, we investigate these research
questions:
RQ1:
What is
inﬂuencing engagement
in distributed
cooperative meetings?
RQ2:
How to enhance engagement in distributed cooperative
meetings?
We have investigated engagement as a concept and how it
has been deﬁned in the relevant literature. Moreover, we have
explored how previous research has discussed the factors that
inﬂuence engagement in the context of physical and distributed
meetings. Based on a critical reﬂection of the literature, we have
conceptualized a two-dimensional framework of engagement
in distributed cooperative work. Our data collection is based
on 11 semi-structured interviews with professionals involved
in cooperative work within different workplaces along with
participant observations of ﬁve distributed cooperative meetings.
The ﬁndings provide insight into engagement on two parallel
dimensions. The ﬁrst being on the interaction between humans
in the cooperative space, and the second focuses on the
interaction between the human and the digital platform that
provides the distributed meeting, which affects engagement
on the ﬁrst level. The ﬁndings contribute to the ﬁelds of HCI
and CSCW by discussing the elements of engagement that
should be taken into consideration in the development of future
technologies and research that can support distributed work.
The research questions are aimed at distributed cooperative
meetings as they are the only option for work for the time
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

being, but they are also essential for organizations operating
distributed cooperative work as part of an accelerated digital
transformation.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section II,
we review related work on the different perspectives of meetings
and engagement. In Section III, we present a framework that
will be used to analyze engagement in distributed cooperative
work based on critical reﬂection from the previous section. In
Section V, we present a qualitative evaluation from participant
observations and interviews. This will lead to discussions about
the effects of distributed meetings on one’s engagement in
Section VI, followed by implications for development with
theoretical grounds in Section VII.
II.
BACKGROUND
In this section, we present a review of the literature related
to our main concepts. As CSCW is the ﬁeld concerned with
cooperative work, we initially present how meetings have been
studied in CSCW. We then present engagement as a concept
and how it has been discussed in HCI. Furthermore, we outline
how engagement in meetings has been previously studied.
A. Meetings and CSCW
Meetings take an important part of our workdays. They are
used to coordinate with colleagues with whom we cooperate
toward common goals either in the same sites or when we
are distributed in different sites [13]. Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW) according to Bannon and Schmidt
is the endeavor to understand the nature and characteristics
of cooperative work, with the aim of designing technology.
Interdependence is an important topic within CSCW as people
engage in cooperative work when they are mutually dependent
and are required to cooperate in order to get the work done
[5].
In the context of cooperative work, a distributed group
is characterised by work activity where members’ work
is not co-located with the support of technology [14].
Distributed cooperative work concerns the support of people’s
interdependence of work with others as they aim to complete
tasks in meetings [7]. Thus, we deﬁne distributed cooperative
work as group activity characterized by spatial and temporal
distance, supported by CSCW technology. The style and
speciﬁcations of said technology depend on the nature of the
cooperation between members. According to Mills [15], space
and time are dimensions within CSCW that a system should
adapt to, as they are uncontrollable constraints for remote,
cooperative work.
Previous studies claim that CSCW can save resources
while improving interaction [16]. In a cooperative work setting,
meetings can be used to distribute labor and discuss progress.
We will refer to these meetings where all participants contribute
to discuss and divide labor as cooperative meetings.
Joris et al. [17] argued that physical attendance in
face-to-face meetings aids in reaching a shared understanding
during distributed meetings. Related work suggests that human
interactions depend on physical presence as a mode of
communication. Hence, thousands of people worldwide travel
for business daily [18]. However, during the lock-down, the
normal way of doing cooperative work has been compromised.
Topics that have been discussed previously in last-minute
meetings with colleagues become an invitation for a distributed
meeting, with digital meeting platforms that use rich media to
provide representations of participants in a virtual room [19].
In addition to video calls, there are options to send messages
and ﬁles, along with screen sharing, which has been outlined to
be important in the context of content sharing [15]. Zoom has
gained a rise in popularity at the time this study was conducted,
due to its simplicity in conﬁgurations [19]. Figure 1 illustrates
how the interface operates in a distributed cooperative meeting
for two people.
Figure 1.
Zoom as the digital meeting platform to illustrate the interface for
distributed cooperative work.
Rodden and Blair [20] claimed that the majority of
CSCW applications are fundamentally distributed, stressing
the importance of assessing the support these systems provide
[21]. Previous work also shows the use of group support systems
to empower cooperation, whether it be in co-located [22] or
distributed applications [23].
Finally, in our study, we have focused on investigating
engagement and its relevance in distributed cooperative
meetings, where we explore aspects of engagement that are
relevant to get work done.
B. Engagement
Engagement is derived from social and cognitive psychology.
Doherty and Doherty’s [24] review of engagement encountered
102 deﬁnitions used in HCI. The most-cited deﬁnition of
engagement is that of Sidner et al. [25]: ”By engagement,
we mean the process by which two (or more) participants
establish, maintain and end their perceived connection.”
This framing implicitly places the deﬁnition within the
context of a conversation between at least two agents, where
both parties involved in the engagement are active and receptive
participants in a continuous, synchronous process with a
clearly deﬁned beginning and end. This is relevant in the
context of meetings where the underlying context is that of a
multi-party conversation. Cooperation within group meetings
requires participants to interact with each other by participation,
especially in the context of the workplace.
In the analysis of conversation, Goffman [26] deﬁned
different roles in face-to-face conversations: the participant
who makes the utterance is labeled a speaker, and the listener
is referred to as an addressee. Sidner et al.’s deﬁnition of
engagement in this context implies that the speaker and the
addressee are actively engaged in the conversation. Dobrian
et al. [27] claim that engagement is a reﬂection of user
involvement and interaction. This is also supported by Glas and
Pelachaud [28] who argue that involvement and engagement
are closely related. The more involved the user is, the stronger
the interaction with other participants. Based on this, we can
argue that a participant that takes the role as a speaker exhibits
involvement and is therefore engaged.
Goffman introduces side participants, who are not addressed
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

by the speaker. Researchers have conceptualized a state of
engagement without inheriting the role of the speaker or
addressee, focusing on exhibiting attentive behavior in the
conversation. While involvement in the context of engagement
appeals to the speaker and addressee, passive participation
in the conversation includes side participants as well. In
cooperative work, a speaker would want to ensure that all
participants are understanding the message directed towards
an addressee [29]. Clark [30] emphasizes the importance of
side participants as they shape how speakers and addressees
act to one another. In order to achieve engagement for side
participants, we look for factors that contribute to participation.
Peters et al. [31] argues that selective attention is necessary
to establish engagement, explaining further that the level of
attention regulates the level of engagement, creating a lower
threshold for involvement at a later point in the conversation.
Turner [11] argues that engagement is the state in which one is
immersed, accompanied by positive emotions. Findings from a
study by O’Brien and Toms [32] show that participants lose
their mental surroundings when concentrating in an activity,
showing a form of engagement. Furthermore, personal interest,
attention, control, motivation, and feedback are established
attributes of engagement, which can lead to direct involvement
at a later point [33]. These factors are suggested to establish a
precedent for increased participation at a later point [34].
While we have presented engagement above in the context
of a conversation, in the ﬁeld of HCI, engagement has been
discussed extensively on how users engage with the technology
and the content provided to them. However, engagement has
been addressed differently in HCI throughout the years, found
mostly as ”user engagement”. Bouvier et al. [35] state that
deﬁnitions of engagement are used broadly, and are dependent
on context. This is also supported by Salam and Chetouani [36]
as their ﬁndings suggest that the mental and/or emotional state
of the user varies depending on the context of the interaction,
meaning the deﬁnition of engagement varies as well. Within
this ﬁeld, engagement as a concept has multiple angles to
consider as engagement has been deﬁned in the context of the
qualities of an interface [37], and as a state of captivation and
immersion in social media [38]. In both cases, engagement
has been interpreted as a state, where interest is captured, with
control over an individual’s attention, and keeping them in a
state of immersion [39]. Doherty and Doherty [24] associate an
engaged agent with commitment, intent, attention, immersion,
and motivation. Meaning that engagement is not a state that
occurs in isolation. Engaged agents that are labeled to be
motivated are said to include reasons for action.
Engagement has also been studied in the context of gaming
[40], education [41], [42], administration [43], creativity [44],
and other applications using modern day technology [45].
C. Engagement in meetings (multiparty settings)
Related work has outlined that engagement can be boost
using meeting structure accompanied by a facilitator. [46]. Sauer
and Kauffeld [47] study suggested that meeting facilitators
should ensure active interaction from all participants in the
session. In addition, technology should be able to coordinate the
interactions, by identifying the current speaker [48]. Frank et
al.’s [12] study on engagement detection in meetings presented
indicators of engagement using attributes, such as physical
motions, facial expressions, and vocal responses.
Frank et al. associates disengagement with distractions and
lack of attention [12]. Furthermore, the author presents a form
of relaxed engagement with side participants, characterised by
observant behavior, receptive to information shared without
direct involvement. The study outlines apparent attributes of
engagement, accompanied by a feeling of excitement and
constant commitment to content. Furthermore, Frank et al.’s
study outlined similar attributes of engagement to that of
O’Brien and Toms [32].
Previous
literature
emphasized
the
importance
of
engagement in face-to-face settings. It is therefore essential
to investigate elements that inﬂuence engagement in remote
settings. Distributed meetings provide ﬂexibility for participants
in terms of saving resources and traveling time [49], and
have been traditionally viewed as support for cooperation,
in addition, these systems should be enabling when doing
cooperative work [20]. The use of these systems has increased
since their development as they save time and money, however,
some researchers have focused on challenges and limitations
to improve its usability in several applications [50] [51].
Mark et al. [51] considers engagement in addition to mental
presence to be determining factors for remotely based teams
to operate optimally.
Related work has highlighted the effects of the barriers
and limitations of the technology used. For instance, poor
audio quality(background noise, poor speakers) leads to
disruptions in the ﬂow of conversation [52]. It may also be
challenging to know who is active in the room by just looking
at the screen. Kuzminykh and Rintel’s ﬁndings show that
participants are attentive to social information such as facial
expressions to conﬁrm their engagement to what has been
said, addressing also the challenges of ﬁnding them through
a video feed [49]. Another underlying theme within studies
concerning engagement in distributed engagement is trust.
According to Jarvenpaa and Leidner [3], shared experiences
and consistent social norms inﬂuence trust between group
members in co-located settings. These are factors that are
partially diminished in virtual meetings. The authors suggest
that groups need to create norms and give feedback to invite
interaction and reduce isolation.
Looking back at Kuzminykh and Rintel’s study, lack of
identifying non-verbal cues make it difﬁcult to shift speakers
naturally compared to a physical meeting, according to one
of their interviewees, as they have to be addressed directly
in remote meetings [49]. Based on their ﬁndings, Kuzminykh
and Rintel argue that remote participation would contribute
to a sense of engagement, as well as assessment to shared
information by demonstrating purposeful attentive actions. Most
participants in Mark et al.’s study relied on video feeds of their
remote participants [2]. Cutler et al. suggests that technology
must correctly visualize who is speaking and where they are
located, so that meeting participants can get a sense of the
current speaker [16].
Due
to
the
freedom
of
using
distributed
systems,
multitasking occurs in the current session. Multitasking has a
signiﬁcant impact in participating relationships in virtual as
well as physical meetings [53]. It can enhance the meeting
experience when it comes to distributed cooperative work,
as it can provide beneﬁts, such as effectiveness and efﬁcacy
[51]. However, this comes at the cost of participation, level of
attention and thus, engagement [54].
Video feeds allow participants to express understanding
by using gestures and nodding which do not disrupt the
meeting, but rather enhance the experience. Isaacs and Tangs’
ﬁndings show that in contrast to audio, video interactions
make it easier for participants to come to an agreement [55].
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In addition, their ﬁndings show that turn-taking is easier to
do with video compared to audio. Sharing documents live
in distributed systems seemed to strengthen coordination and
direct attention to relevant discussion areas and to some degree,
increase participation [2].
III.
A FRAMEWORK TO ANALYZE ENGAGEMENT IN
DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE WORK
Considering a lack of a deﬁnition for engagement and
analysis of engagement in distributed work, we conducted a
critical reﬂective analysis of the background literature presented
above and propose a deﬁnition for engagement accompanied
with a framework for analyzing engagement in distributed
meetings.
We deﬁne engagement in distributed cooperative work as:
A process using technology as a medium where at least
two parties involved are established as active and receptive
participants in a continuous, synchronous process with a clearly
deﬁned beginning and end.
Figure 2.
Illustration of the proposed engagement framework for analyzing
engagement in distributed cooperative work
Figure 2 is an illustration of the framework for analyzing
engagement in distributed cooperative work with the technology
at the center of all interactions between participants. By active
participants, we refer to participants that take the role of
the speaker, who addresses participant(s) during a turn. Due
to being addressed by the speaker, the addressee is active
as well. Receptive agents operate as side participants, being
immersed and attentive to the conversation between the speaker
and the addressee(s). Furthermore, we adopt Frank et. al’s
[12] deﬁnition of relaxed engagement as passive engagement
illustrated in ﬁgure 2 with yellow arrows from side participants.
Involved engagement will be interpreted as direct engagement,
illustrated by the green arrows which are exclusive to the
speaker and addressee. A disengaged participant is illustrated
with black dotted arrows as they are still be connected to
the technology but not immersed in the meeting like the side
participants. There are two dimensions within engagement in
distributed cooperative work. Figure 2 is inspired by Goffman’s
[26] description of conversation roles, and illustrates the level
of engagement between the user, their peers, and the technology.
The ﬁrst dimension is about the interaction between the
participants themselves through the distributed system (green
area), which is inﬂuenced by the content of the meeting, other
participants’ behavior, social norms, trust, and personal interest.
The second dimension (white area) is about the inﬂuence of
technology towards the user’s engagement, which is inﬂuenced
by factors such as video feed, microphone usage, and internet
connection.
The speaker is initially engaged and will primarily use the
digital meeting platform’s inputs (web camera, microphone, or
messages) as a medium to communicate with other users. The
same applies when other functions within the system (written
messages and screen sharing) are in use, regardless of context. A
participant shows passive engagement by expressing non-verbal
responses to the conversation (nodding, facial expression). On
the other hand, one can be in a state of disengagement by late
responses as a result of their mental absence or even possibly,
technical disruptions.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
This section begins with the process of how data was
collected. The second part pertains to the analysis of the ﬁndings
concerning to the research questions deﬁned in section I.
A. Data Collection
Due to the exploratory nature of this study, we have taken
a qualitative approach to investigate this matter during the
nationwide lock-down for authenticity. We applied two data
collection methods: semi-structured interviews and participant
observations, which we will explain in detail below. Figure 3
summarizes the data collection process.
Figure 3.
Summary of the data collection process using semi-structured
interviews and participant observations.
Semi-structured
interviews
provide
an
in-depth
understanding of exploratory topics [56]. We conducted
10 semi-structured interviews with professionals working in
Norway and 1 interview with a subject working in the United
States. All interviewees were working in national and global
organizations and operated at a home ofﬁce. The selection of
the interviewees was made carefully to ﬁt the target group of
the research. We recruited interviewees through the personal
contacts of both authors.
The interview guide we created was divided into main
topics with a set of sub-questions and probes, with themes
such as the frequency of cooperative sessions, nature of work,
norms during meetings, the transition to operating cooperative
work in remote settings, multitasking and it’s implications on
their engagement. In addition, we asked questions about the
interviewee’s experiences using digital meeting platforms and
their level of involvement, and engagement from their peers as
well as themselves. Furthermore, we asked interviewees about
their use of multimedia extensions such as, video feed, screen
sharing, and messages. Follow-up questions had been also
planned to further investigate speciﬁc episodes. The structure
of the interview was inspired by the theoretical ground above,
investigating factors that inﬂuenced one’s engagement in the
two levels outlined from our suggested framework. During the
interview, the ﬁrst author adapted to the ﬂow of the session
based on the answers of the interviewee. We transcribed the
interviews using verbatim transcription guidelines.
In order to capture the natural engagement of participants
in distributed cooperative meetings, we used also participant
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

observations as a second method for collecting data. Participants
observations is a technique in which the researcher enters the
research setting and is involved with her/his user group activities
as well [57]. The ﬁrst author took the participant role in the
observation of ﬁve online meetings, the structure of which
resembles distributed cooperative work sessions, where a group
of co-workers had to coordinate activities within a shared
project. The ﬁrst author was an active meeting participant. As
the ﬁrst authors was the one involved in the observations, we
have chosen to write about the application of this method in a
personal matter. We ﬁnd the personal perspective to be helpful
in the reﬂections and analysis on how the method was applied
and what impact it had on engagement in cooperative work
meetings. Thus, when referring to the observations, we will
use the auto-ethnographic storytelling ﬁrst person “I”, to report
on the process. In the next subsection, where we present the
process of analyzing raw data, we return to the analytical “we”.
The sessions that I participated in were groups and teams
that had recently had a transition to digital, remote meetings
due to social distancing. All of the groups would normally
have cooperative work in co-located environments. Participants
in the meetings were familiar with each other as they had been
working for almost one year, and had already established social
norms, which had been translated to the digital realm. I kept
handwritten notes during the meetings, which were expanded
furthermore after each session. In addition, for each meeting I
drew a schema of each participant and kept the notes for the
engagement of each of the speciﬁc participants in the meeting.
This was done in analogy with the theoretical framework
presented above. I chose to use traditional note taking to collect
data because participants commented that they would not feel
as comfortable participating while being recorded. Furthermore,
the recording would increase the awareness of being monitored,
which could signiﬁcantly alter the level of engagement that
would normally be in natural sessions.
The number of participants I observed were respectively 8,
4, 6, 4, and 13. Since I was an established and familiar member
of these groups, the people involved did not alter their threshold
to participate in the sessions due to my presence. I took notes
in instances where one participant assumed the role as the main
speaker, as well as how the addressee was receiving information.
I documented the behavior of side participants that were reacting
to the dialogue between the main speaker and the addressee and
also made note of the time between dialogue exchanges. When
the response time was relatively high, I identiﬁed the reason
to why a member of the meeting was absent. The same was
applied to immersive dialogue between multiple participants. In
some cases, I evaluated my own engagement when multitasking
between data collection and the content of the meeting itself.
The participant’s eye gaze and head movement as an
addressee, speaker, and side participant when using live video
feed was also documented. On the other hand, I documented
participants that did not use video feed, focusing on their vocal
responses and interaction with the chat platform. Participating
in the meetings and observing the others behavior and their
engagement was challenging but helped me in achieving a more
realistic scenario and build a critical self-reﬂection of my own
engagement along with the others in the meetings.
In summary, the two selected data collection methods
complemented each other and gave us a wider overview of
the issues we investigate in this paper. The results of the data
collection and analysis will be presented in the next section.
B. Data Analysis
After collecting data from interviews and observations, we
used open coding and grounded theory as our analysis method.
Grounded theory allows researchers to systematically break
down raw data and conceptualize theories from ﬁndings that can
be interesting for discussion or future work [58]. In addition,
the method is beneﬁcial in generalizing ﬁndings and ensures
credibility in the emerging theory [59].
As the study had two research questions, the ﬁrst step
was to review the notes the from observations along with the
transcripts from the interviews by looking for similarities and
relevance towards our theoretical background. This was done by
remarking codes on data from our observations and expressions
made by our interviewees that were deemed relevant. On our
ﬁrst iteration, we created 13 codes covering aspects within
participation, levels of engagement, and the use of technology.
Using our established understanding of raw data, we continued
expanding our analysis by reviewing the results in multiple
iterations, ending up with 26 codes. We created ﬁve categories
addressing the ﬁrst research question and four categories aimed
towards the second one. Our categories were grouped through
continuous analysis and reﬂection to themes which are further
presented in our ﬁndings below.
V.
FINDINGS
In this section, we present the ﬁndings in an attempt to
address our research questions from Section I. Firstly, we
cover elements that inﬂuence engagement in meetings among
participants (RQ1). Then we present elements of technology
that inﬂuence the engagement (RQ2). We end this section with
a set of strategies to encourage engagement retrieved from the
data collection in Section IV.
A. Elements that inﬂuence meeting engagement
Here we address our ﬁrst research question by presenting
factors that affect an individual’s interaction with other
participants, and how that can stimulate or disrupt their
respective meeting engagement.
1) Personal interests: Eight interviewees express that the
content of the meeting has an inﬂuence on their participation
in the meeting with varying degrees. They state that they
are invested in topics and discussions that concern them by
answering direct questions or waiting for a mediator to address
them personally. Findings also show that a comprehension
of what is being discussed contributes to more involvement.
A priority for the meeting facilitator is for the topics to be
relevant for all participants, speciﬁcally remote settings. It was
noted in all ﬁve observations that the speaker tends to address
a participant by announcing their name ﬁrst, in order to gain
their attention.
For two interviewees, if the interactions of the session do not
reﬂect their expectations in terms of context, then there would
be less engagement as a result. Remote participation requires
incentive, compared to physical meetings, where social factors
and norms can almost force a contribution according to one
interviewee, noting that eye contact is an incentive to engage.
The observations correlate with this when two participants
directed their gaze towards the screen as the current speaker
focused on the camera lens.
2) Turn Taking: Findings from the interviews show that
involvement occurs when members provide a signal to take the
role as the next speaker. This is done by either communicating it
to others visually or by using the meeting facilitator. The latter
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

being used the most in our observations, which is also veriﬁed
by one interviewee that implied the importance of a meeting
facilitator as their group depended on one person to lead the
conversation. This varies based on the size of participants in
the session, which was the case for four interviewees. Having
too many participants in the session decreases the threshold
for involvement. Turn taking helps coordinate speaker roles,
and guides the discussion towards a goal, which also avoids
derailing away from the current topic that can be a potential
cause for disengagement.
3) Structure in the meeting: Agendas, systems, and norms
make it easier to participate in meetings. This has been the case
in four observations as participants notiﬁed each other on the
order of the agenda when others start to derail from the current
topic. There is also a set of constraints in terms of time per topic.
The importance of a facilitator that moderates the meeting by
keeping control of these rules has been essential for members.
As one interviewee explained, the mediator sets the scene for
the meeting. According to two interviewees, the facilitator is
the most engaged person in the meeting, furthermore, seven
interviewees expressed that one to one communication in such
arenas provides comfort in involvement. For all interviewees, it
is normal to use a mute function to ensure that one participant
can speak at a time without disruptions. One interviewee
explains that using the chat function to signalize that you
want to speak is an alternative. This was also conﬁrmed in
the observations, when one participant forgot to mute their
microphone, three other participants sent a message in the
common chat, instructing them to activate the mute function.
The chat was also used for turn taking, as the participants were
required to write their names to provide a signal to not just the
facilitator, but the rest of the participants. Clariﬁcation on who
is to be given the role as the speaker provides convenience
to anyone who wants to speak at any given time. In addition,
the session’s duration has an impact as longer discussions can
disrupt the focus if a conclusion is not met, which leads to
loss of interest, withheld progress, and disengagement.
B. Technology factors inﬂuencing engagement
This part of the analysis focuses on the technical aspects
of digital meetings that inﬂuence the engagement in meetings,
addressing the second research question from Section I. We
have identiﬁed the use of video, messaging, and compatibility
between participants through the digital meeting platform as
factors.
1) Visibility: Nine interviewees claimed that the use of the
camera feed in their meetings enhances engagement operating
as an indicator of their mental presence. Findings also show
that a majority of interviewees would prefer a video feed of all
participants in the meeting in order to participate more, as it
helps regulate their tone, observe their reaction, and response
to what is being said.
One can tell that a participant is less engaged using eye
gaze to interpret the direction of where the focus is. A video
presentation creates presence, ensures that that participant is
present, and establishes an incentive to engage as all attention
will be locked to the one who is speaking at the time as
explained by one of our interviewees.
On the other hand, two interviewees argued that the use
of video can be inconvenient as what is being recorded in the
background can turn into distractions themselves. Partial use
of the camera or the digital platform’s inability to visualize all
participants on one display can lead to uncertainty for some
participants, which discourages them to express their thoughts.
In our interviews, we discovered that taking turns using video
simpliﬁes the process and creates more transparency to the
meeting compared to physical meetings.
It seems easier to read people and change the setting of
the meeting based on their reactions. However, for some, it
seems that there is still a limitation to the use of video as poor
visuals restricts small reactions. Furthermore, depending on the
platform being used, the display of the speaker is scaled to
be larger so that it becomes the focus of the display for all
participants, making it clear who always has control.
It can seem difﬁcult to engage naturally when there is no
video feed as one interviewee pointed out if they were to not use
audio as a backup. A simple nod from the head, hand gestures,
and even facial expressions helped some continue speaking. In
three of our observations, we notice multiple participants using
gestures with their thumbs to conﬁrm the tasks they have been
articulated. Four interviewees have experienced live sharing of
ﬁles with others, explaining that it helps other members look
at relevant content at the same time.
2) Communication between members: There are a variety
of exchanges between members during a meeting. Everything
from vocal responses to messages in the chat area on the
same platform. Writing a message to participants while another
member is speaking does not seem to disrupt the ﬂow, but
rather create room for positive responses. Six interviewees
have experienced that writing a short message builds on a
discussion and clariﬁes misunderstandings so that the debate
is still relevant to the topic.
However, most interviewees present the chat function only
as a supplement in these sessions, primarily for turn taking
and troubleshooting. Images, GIFS, and illustrations invite
interaction, even in lenient moments during group meetings.
This was also the case in three of our observations.
Three interviewees feel that there are limitations to
adequately expressing themselves due to the fear of not being
understood. A lack of conﬁrmation from other participants in
larger meetings led to shorter and more concise sentences.
Disruption of the conversation due to a problem with
the internet effects the organic ﬂow of the conversation
greatly for some interviewees and repeated incidents discourage
participation, which leads to disengagement. As conversations
become stunted, members deviate from what has been said and
resolve to do other activities. This has been the case in two of
our observations.
3) Trust: The freedom of being able to do other things
during a meeting has been expressed by most interviewees
in the form of multitasking. In some cases, participants and
interviewees used programs such as Microsoft Word to take
notes of what is being said, which can disengage one from
active participation, while others have been on social media
and other irrelevant websites after being disengaged.
The duration of being mentally absent creates uncertainty
and distrust according to three interviewees. Remote members
rely on each other to be attentive to the topic at hand, however,
in distributed meetings, trust may decrease as one cannot be
certain of what others are doing. Members do not know if the
reactions from others are genuine, which can lead to constraints
in engagement on their part. Being a listener appears to be a
heavier responsibility for speakers in digital meetings, as they
require conﬁrmation to maintain their level of engagement.
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Strategies to encourage engagement
This part of the analysis pertains to suggestions and
strategies from participants based on experiences that contribute
to enhancing and sustaining engagement in distributed meetings.
For most interviewees, being able to see all faces provides
comfort and a lower threshold to participate in the meeting.
In addition, the technology should minimize background
noises or notify that one should be in a quiet location.
Seven interviewees suggested that the digital platform should
disable all notiﬁcations on the computer during the session.
One interviewee suggested that the platform should show
all participants on the same display, in order to encourage
users to turn on their video feed. Indicating that some
programs may not have this feature yet. Notifying participants
of who is the next speaker can help enhance the ﬂow in
cooperative work. Technologies that enhance the conversation
experience through virtual reality has also been suggested. One
interviewee suggested measuring engagement from the meeting
and provide oversight over which members need guidance or
more encouragement after analyzing reports of retina graphs
for instance.
Social norms in meetings can help reduce distrust among
distributed groups. As mentioned earlier, a mediator can
enhance engagement in meeting through constant interaction,
good content, direct questions and turn taking. One interviewee
created temporal constraints for tasks in an online session,
informing them that one participant will present their work at
random. Two interviewees suggested that the meeting duration
could be shorter, which would give incentive to provide
additional input and discourage derailing as there are constraints.
VI.
DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss our ﬁndings regarding elements
that inﬂuence engagement in distributed cooperative meetings
in relation to elements of engagement found in the literature.
Based on our ﬁndings, indicators of engagement from our
suggested framework have an inﬂuence on the cooperative
nature of meeting participants. Speakers show commitment to
being involved as they become the center of the meeting. Most
participants are engaged in the meeting when the topic concerns
them personally. Personal interest, feedback, and motivation
operate as incentives for engagement. This is compatible with
the attributes of engagement outlined by O’Brien and Toms
[32] and thus serve as mechanisms for the facilitator to sustain
engagement with side participants. While the relationship
between the meeting participant’s involvement and engagement
is not conclusive, Glas and Pelachaud argue that the concept of
these two to be closely related [28]. Meeting participants inhabit
direct engagement through involvement when initiating an
utterance. Based on this reﬂection, involvement is an indicator
of engagement in the context of meetings. In addition, speakers
are sharing their resources with the rest of the group, which
promotes productivity.
In our observations, side participants exhibit passive
engagement using non-verbal cues from their video feed, which
veriﬁes Liu et al.’s [29] view on participation. This form of
remote participation leads to engagement, which is compatible
with Kuzminykh and Rintel’s [49] ﬁndings on attentive actions
in video meetings. We see that head nodding and non-verbal,
reactive responses from the video feed foreshadow involvement,
conﬁrming Isaacs and Tang’s claim on video interactions [55].
We ﬁnd that there is a higher threshold for involvement
when there are multiple parties in the digital room, speciﬁcally
when there are challenges acquiring reactive information as
a speaker. Furthermore, some groups that prefer to only use
audio and chat over video, that still maintain a certain level
of presence in the meeting, partially contradicting Tang and
Isaacs’s study [55].
The implications of being disengaged due to multitasking
support the results from Lyons and Kim’s study, implying that
multitasking has a negative impact on engagement [53]. Another
indicator of disengagement is the lack of visibility from video
feed. Participants that do not use video lack the social presence
required to interact with others, creating barriers for reaching
shared understanding. Most attendants that used audio could
not demonstrate engagement unless they were addressed by the
facilitator. Op den Akker et al.’s [52] study emphasizes the need
for feedback from participants in order to coordinate turn taking
and topic management, two characteristics of meeting structure
which have an impact on a participant’s level of engagement
in meetings [60].
We found that the facilitator has an inﬂuential role in
prompting attendants in the meeting. This coincides to the
recommendations and strategies for meeting facilitators to
engage participants from Sauer and Kauffeld’s study [47]. Four
observations illustrated that the meeting facilitator was the one
coordinating the meeting. One session in our observations show
that there was no clear meeting facilitator, however, there were
only four participants using video and established routines for
turn taking. This may indicate that the need for a facilitator is
dependent on the size of participants, however, this could also
be due to the level of trust and social relationships between
participants.
In our ﬁndings, interviewees expressed the need for feedback
on their contribution from other participants. Jarvenpaa and
Leidner’s perception of shared experiences in this context
indicates that social norms play an important role in enhancing
engagement [3]. However, turn-taking norms in the meetings
accompanied by a focused view of the current speaker as
suggested by Bohus and Horvitz [48] and Cutler et al. [16]
complies with the required meeting structure in disturbed
meetings, which encourages participation. Based on this, we
argue that if facilitators did not institute strategies of turn taking,
then it would be difﬁcult for them to control the ﬂoor [55].
The ﬁndings highlight conﬂicting opinions of participants
deviating from the meeting platform due to multitasking. Some
participants use other applications due to loss of interest in
the meeting, while others have other tasks they would want to
complete while attending the meeting. Mark et al.’s ﬁndings
are closely related when it comes to these perspectives [51].
Lyon and Kim’s results correlate with our observations, as the
participants that seemed to be mentally absent were looking
downwards, away from the screen. [53].
The ﬁndings indicate that distractions caused by audio
problems disrupt the ﬂow in the conversation, leading to
frustration and a loss of engagement. Our observations conﬁrm
this as participants were less active after a series of audio
problems occurred. This is listed as one common problem
that people experience in Yankelovich et al.’s [50] study of
telepresence. However, it seems that such problems can be
solved relatively quickly by other participants who use the
messaging function for troubleshooting.
A. Implications for engagement in distributed meetings
Our study presents a set of elements that can inﬂuence
engagement in distributed cooperative work. Moreover, we
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

presented a framework, based on extensive theory for
investigating engagement in distributed cooperative work.
The ﬁndings and suggestions contribute as implications for
developing future technology that aim to facilitate distributed
cooperative meetings.
One implication for development is ﬁnding methods to
conceptualize the context of the current speaker along with
the topic. Ørebæk et al.’s [10] study developed a prototype
that enhances the context of the current topic of the meeting
with temporal constraints. This can appeal to a predictable and
sustainable structure for those who need a sense of context
to maintain engagement. Furthermore, there is potential for
augmenting the meeting platforms by regulating turn-taking in
an interactive matter.
Digital tools should also address multitasking, by handling
notiﬁcations outside of the meeting. Alternatively, a facilitator
can implement methods that allow groups to do work while
maintaining the interdependence of cooperation. To the extent of
our knowledge, there is a functionality within digital meeting
platforms that creates breakout rooms. Using these rooms,
the meeting participants are separated from each other, with
the intention of returning to the meeting after a duration and
thereafter continue doing cooperative work where they can
provide feedback. We suggest that CSCW tools support meeting
facilitators in order to keep track of when participants can work
on their tasks during the session.
A study by St˚ahl [61] explored experiences of VR(Virtual
Reality) in project meetings. To the extent of our knowledge,
there is no clear relationship between virtual reality and
engagement. However, based on our ﬁndings, we see a need to
visualize expressions so that speakers can adjust the dialogue
to maintain engagement.
As for interaction between participants, trust between remote
participants can contribute to an increase in participation, and
thus engagement. Szewc [62] suggests that managers should
maintain frequent contact with members. Our ﬁndings on the
facilitators’ role in cooperative work support this.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we investigated the concept of engagement
in the distributed cooperative work setting. We introduced
a thorough review of the literature on engagement and
engagement in meetings, followed by a proposed framework
for analyzing engagement in distributed meetings. The
framework was used later in gathering empirical data. From
the ﬁndings, we can state that the framework is promising
and can contribute as a conceptual ground for studying
engagement in cooperative meetings. Moreover, the framework
for investigating engagement in distributed meetings shows
potential for adjusting today’s digital meeting platforms.
Engagement in meetings is an important factor for groups to be
able to do cooperative work in a productive matter, especially
when there are no alternatives during the lock-down. The list
of factors that inﬂuence engagement in distributed cooperative
meetings can be used to design future technology that can
support these speciﬁc meetings, contributing in this way both
in HCI and CSCW.
The aim was not to exhaust the issue of engagement in
distributed cooperative meetings, but rather open discussions
into developing and assessing digital meeting platforms that
address the relevant issues within distributed cooperative
work. The number of interviews and the observations can be
considered as a limitation, but was adjusted due to the situation.
In addition, it would be beneﬁcial to explore engagement based
on the nature of the meeting. Thus, in the future, we plan to
investigate more on this issue and possibly observe a group
meeting in both co-located and remote settings and comparing
how engagement elements might differ in this setting.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. M. Fox and J. H. Brockmyer, “The Development of the Game
Engagement Questionnaire: A Measure of Engagement in Video Game
Playing: Response to Reviews,” Interacting with Computers, vol. 25,
no. 4, Jul. 2013, pp. 290–293, publisher: Oxford Academic.
[2]
G. Mark, J. Grudin, and S. E. Poltrock, “Meeting at the desktop: An
empirical study of virtually collocated teams,” in ECSCW’99, 1999, pp.
159–178.
[3]
S. L. Jarvenpaa and D. E. Leidner, “Communication and trust in global
virtual teams,” Journal of computer-mediated communication, vol. 3,
no. 4, 1998, p. JCMC346.
[4]
E. McFadzean and A. O’Loughlin, “Five strategies for improving group
effectiveness,” Strategic Change, vol. 9, no. 2, 2000, pp. 103–114.
[5]
K. Schmidt and K. Schmidt, “Riding a Tiger, or Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work (1991),” in Cooperative Work and Coordinative
Practices.
London: Springer London, 2008, pp. 31–44, series Title:
Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
[6]
S. Rogelberg, J. Allen, L. Shanock, C. Scott, and M. Shufﬂer, “Employee
satisfaction with meetings: A contemporary facet of job satisfaction,”
Human Resource Management, vol. 49, Mar. 2010, pp. 149–172.
[7]
K. Schmidt, “Taking cscw seriously: Supporting articulation work (1992),”
in Cooperative Work and Coordinative Practices.
Springer, 2008, pp.
45–71.
[8]
T. Robertson, J. Li, K. O’Hara, and S. Hansen, “Collaboration
Within Different Settings: A Study of Co-located and Distributed
Multidisciplinary Medical Team Meetings,” Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 19, no. 5, Oct. 2010, pp. 483–513.
[9]
I. Rae, G. Venolia, J. C. Tang, and D. Molnar, “A Framework for
Understanding and Designing Telepresence,” in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing - CSCW ’15.
Vancouver, BC, Canada: ACM Press, 2015,
pp. 1552–1566.
[10]
O.-E. Ørebæk, D. Aarlien, F. F. Said, K. Andreassen, and K. Carcani,
“BEACON: A CSCW Tool for Enhancing Co-Located Meetings Through
Temporal and Activity Awareness,” Mar. 2020, pp. 243–250.
[11]
P. Turner, “The anatomy of engagement,” in Proceedings of the 28th
Annual European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics - ECCE ’10.
Delft, Netherlands: ACM Press, 2010, p. 59.
[12]
M. Frank, G. Toﬁghi, H. Gu, and R. Fruchter, “Engagement detection
in meetings,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08711, 2016.
[13]
S. Kauffeld and N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, “Meetings Matter: Effects
of Team Meetings on Team and Organizational Success,” Small Group
Research, vol. 43, no. 2, Apr. 2012, pp. 130–158, publisher: SAGE
Publications Inc.
[14]
G. Mark, “Conventions and Commitments in Distributed CSCW Groups,”
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 11, no. 3-4, Sep.
2002, pp. 349–387.
[15]
K. L. Mills, “Computer-supported cooperative work,” in Encyclopedia
of Library and Information Sciences (2nd Edition).
Marcel Dekker,
2003, pp. 666–677.
[16]
R. Cutler et al., “Distributed meetings: A meeting capture and
broadcasting system,” in Proceedings of the tenth ACM international
conference on Multimedia, 2002, pp. 503–512.
[17]
J. de Rooij, R. Verburg, E. Andriessen, and D. den Hartog, “Barriers
for shared understanding in virtual teams: A leader perspective,” The
Electronic Journal for Virtual Organizations and Networks, vol. 9, 2007,
pp. 64–77.
[18]
P. L. Mokhtarian and I. Salomon, “Emerging travel patterns: Do
telecommunications make a difference,” In perpetual motion: Travel
behaviour research opportunities and application challenges, 2002, pp.
143–182.
[19]
M. Mohanty and W. Yaqub, “Towards seamless authentication for
zoom-based online teaching and meeting,” 2020.
[20]
T. Rodden and G. Blair, “CSCW and Distributed Systems: The Problem
of Control,” in Proceedings of the Second European Conference on
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Computer-Supported Cooperative Work ECSCW ’91.
Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 1991, pp. 49–64.
[21]
T. Rodden and G. S. Blair, “Distributed systems support for computer
supported cooperative work,” Computer Communications, vol. 15, no. 8,
1992, pp. 527–538.
[22]
J. Lee, “Sibyl: a tool for managing group decision rationale. proceedings
of the conference on computer supported cooperative work, (cscw 90),”
ACM, New York, 1990, p. 28.
[23]
C. Heath and P. Luff, “Collaborative activity and technological design:
Task coordination in london underground control rooms,” in Proceedings
of the Second European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work ECSCW’91, 1991, pp. 65–80.
[24]
K. Doherty and G. Doherty, “Engagement in HCI: Conception, Theory
and Measurement,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 51, no. 5, Jan. 2019,
pp. 1–39.
[25]
C. L. Sidner, C. Lee, C. Kidd, N. Lesh, and C. Rich, “Explorations in
engagement for humans and robots,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 166,
issues 1-2, August 2005, pp. 140-164, 2005.
[26]
E. Goffman, Forms of Talk.
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1981.
[27]
F. Dobrian et al., “Understanding the impact of video quality on user
engagement,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review,
vol. 41, no. 4, 2011, pp. 362–373.
[28]
N. Glas and C. Pelachaud, “Deﬁnitions of Engagement in Human-Agent
Interaction,” in International Workshop on Engagment in Human
Computer Interaction, Xi’an, China, Sep. 2015, pp. 944–949.
[29]
P.-J. Liu, J. M. Laffey, and K. R. Cox, “Operationalization of technology
use and cooperation in CSCW,” in Proceedings of the ACM 2008
conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’08.
San
Diego, CA, USA: ACM Press, 2008, p. 505.
[30]
H. H. Clark, Using language.
Cambridge university press, 1996.
[31]
C. Peters, G. Castellano, and S. de Freitas, “An exploration of user
engagement in HCI,” in Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Affective-Aware Virtual Agents and Social Robots - ’09.
Boston,
Massachusetts: ACM Press, 2009, pp. 1–3.
[32]
H. L. O’Brien and E. G. Toms, “The development and evaluation of
a survey to measure user engagement,” vol. 61, no. 1.
Wiley Online
Library, 2010, pp. 50–69.
[33]
H. L. O’Brien, P. Cairns, and M. Hall, “A practical approach to measuring
user engagement with the reﬁned user engagement scale (UES) and new
UES short form,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
vol. 112, Apr. 2018, pp. 28–39.
[34]
C. Peters, S. Asteriadis, K. Karpouzis, and E. de Sevin, “Towards a
real-time gaze-based shared attention for a virtual agent,” in Workshop
on Affective Interaction in Natural Environments, ACM International
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI’08), 2008, pp. 574–580.
[35]
P. Bouvier, E. Lavou´e, and K. Sehaba, “Deﬁning Engagement and
Characterizing Engaged-Behaviors in Digital Gaming,” Simulation &
Gaming, vol. 45, no. 4-5, Aug. 2014, pp. 491–507, publisher: SAGE
Publications Inc.
[36]
H. Salam and M. Chetouani, “A multi-level context-based modeling of
engagement in human-robot interaction,” in 2015 11th IEEE international
conference and workshops on automatic face and gesture recognition
(FG), vol. 3.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[37]
W. Quesenbery and W. I. Design, “Dimensions of usability: Deﬁning
the conversation, driving the process,” in UPA 2003 Conference, 2003,
pp. 23–27.
[38]
A. Jaimes, M. Lalmas, and Y. Volkovich, “First international workshop
on social media engagement (some 2011),” in ACM SIGIR Forum,
vol. 45, no. 1.
ACM New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 56–62.
[39]
M. Chen, B. E. Kolko, E. Cuddihy, and E. Medina, “Modeling but NOT
measuring engagement in computer games,” in Proceedings of the 7th
international conference on Games + Learning + Society Conference,
ser. GLS’11.
Madison, Wisconsin: ETC Press, Jun. 2011, pp. 55–63.
[40]
E. A. Boyle, T. M. Connolly, T. Hainey, and J. M. Boyle, “Engagement
in digital entertainment games: A systematic review,” Computers in
Human Behavior, vol. 28, no. 3, May 2012, pp. 771–780.
[41]
C. Beer, K. Clark, and D. Jones, “Online student engagement,” 2010,
pp. 75–86.
[42]
B. De Carolis, F. D’Errico, N. Macchiarulo, and G. Palestra, “Engaged
Faces: Measuring and Monitoring Student Engagement from Face
and Gaze Behavior,” ser. WI ’19 Companion.
Thessaloniki, Greece:
Association for Computing Machinery, Oct. 2019, pp. 80–85.
[43]
D. L. Strom, K. L. Sears, and K. M. Kelly, “Work engagement: The roles
of organizational justice and leadership style in predicting engagement
among employees,” Journal of leadership & organizational studies,
vol. 21, no. 1, 2014, pp. 71–82.
[44]
N. Bryan-Kinns and F. Hamilton, “Identifying mutual engagement,”
Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31, no. 2, 2012, pp. 101–125.
[45]
H. A. Voorveld, G. van Noort, D. G. Muntinga, and F. Bronner,
“Engagement with social media and social media advertising: The
differentiating role of platform type,” Journal of advertising, vol. 47,
no. 1, 2018, pp. 38–54.
[46]
N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, S. G. Rogelberg, J. A. Allen, and J. E. Kello,
“The critical importance of meetings to leader and organizational success,”
Organizational Dynamics, vol. 47, no. 1, Jan. 2018, pp. 32–36.
[47]
N. C. Sauer and S. Kauffeld, “The Structure of Interaction at
Meetings: A Social Network Analysis,” Zeitschrift f¨ur Arbeits- und
Organisationspsychologie A&O, vol. 60, no. 1, Jan. 2016, pp. 33–49.
[48]
D. Bohus and E. Horvitz, “Dialog in the open world: platform and
applications,” in Proceedings of the 2009 international conference on
Multimodal interfaces, ser. ICMI-MLMI ’09. Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Nov. 2009, pp. 31–38.
[49]
A. Kuzminykh and S. Rintel, “Classiﬁcation of Functional Attention
in Video Meetings,” in Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems.
Honolulu HI USA: ACM, Apr.
2020, pp. 1–13.
[50]
N. Yankelovich, W. Walker, P. Roberts, M. Wessler, J. Kaplan, and
J. Provino, “Meeting central: making distributed meetings more effective,”
in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported
cooperative work - CSCW ’04.
Chicago, Illinois, USA: ACM Press,
2004, p. 419.
[51]
G. Mark, S. Poltrock, and J. Grudin, “Virtually collocated teams in
the workplace,” in CHI’00 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, 2000, pp. 370–370.
[52]
R. op den Akker, D. Hofs, H. Hondorp, H. op den Akker, J. Zwiers,
and A. Nijholt, “Supporting engagement and ﬂoor control in hybrid
meetings,” in Cross-Modal Analysis of Speech, Gestures, Gaze and
Facial Expressions.
Springer, 2009, pp. 276–290.
[53]
K. Lyons, H. Kim, and S. Nevo, “Paying attention in meetings:
Multitasking in virtual worlds,” in First Symposium on the Personal
Web, Co-located with CASCON, vol. 2005, 2010, p. 7.
[54]
K. K. Stephens and J. Davis, “The Social Inﬂuences on Electronic
Multitasking in Organizational Meetings,” Management Communication
Quarterly, vol. 23, no. 1, Aug. 2009, pp. 63–83, publisher: SAGE
Publications Inc.
[55]
E. A. Isaacs and J. C. Tang, “What video can and cannot do for
collaboration: a case study,” Multimedia systems, vol. 2, no. 2, 1994,
pp. 63–73.
[56]
B. L. Leech, “Asking questions: Techniques for semistructured
interviews,” PS: Political science and politics, vol. 35, no. 4, 2002,
pp. 665–668.
[57]
B. B. Kawulich, “Participant observation as a data collection method,”
in Forum qualitative sozialforschung/forum: Qualitative social research,
vol. 6, no. 2, 2005.
[58]
B. G. Glaser, A. L. Strauss, and E. Strutzel, “The discovery of grounded
theory; strategies for qualitative research,” Nursing research, vol. 17,
no. 4, 1968, p. 364.
[59]
M. El Hussein, S. Hirst, and V. Salyers, “Using Grounded Theory as
a Method of Inquiry: Advantages and Disadvantages,” The Qualitative
Report, vol. 19, Jan. 2014, pp. 1–15.
[60]
N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, J. A. Allen, and D. Belyeu, “Our love/hate
relationship with meetings: Relating good and bad meeting behaviors to
meeting outcomes, engagement, and exhaustion,” Management Research
Review, vol. 39, no. 10, Jan. 2016, pp. 1293–1312, publisher: Emerald
Group Publishing Limited.
[61]
O. St˚ahl, “Meetings for real—experiences from a series of VR-based
project meetings,” in Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual
reality software and technology - VRST ’99.
London, United Kingdom:
ACM Press, 1999, pp. 164–165.
[62]
J. Szewc, “Selected Success Factors of Virtual Teams: Literature
Review and Suggestions for Future Research,” International Journal
of Management and Economics, vol. 38, no. 1, Oct. 2014, pp. 67–83.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

