Emergent Design System  
Using Computer-Human Interactions and Serendipity 
 
Akira Kito, Yuki Mizumachi 
Graduate School of Science and Technology 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
fa0kitou@hotmail.co.jp, yuki-mb@jcom.home.ne.jp 
Koichiro Sato, Yoshiyuki Matsuoka 
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
Koichiro_Sato@a3.keio.jp, matsuoka@mech.keio.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a basic study on an emergent 
design system in which serendipity occurs from interaction 
between computer and human. Serendipity is a natural ability 
to unexpectedly make interesting or valuable discoveries. The 
possibility of generating new design ideas will increase if we 
can utilize serendipity. Therefore, we propose an emergent 
design system that produces serendipity by using form 
organizing phenomenon seen in nature and three-dimensional 
modeling like clay-modeling. Then, we perform elementary 
experiments with designers. Thus, this system prompts the 
chances of getting inspirations and unexpected discoveries in 
the process of deriving ideas. As a result, we show the 
possibility of generating new design ideas by using this system. 
Keywords-emergence; design system; interaction; serendipity 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The design process can be roughly divided into two 
categories: the early process which consists of conceptual and 
basic designs, and the late process which consists of detailed 
design [1]. In the early process, novel and diverse design ideas 
must be obtained from a global solution search under unclear 
design conditions. Thus, in previous study, we propose an 
emergent design system. This system is based on the concept 
of emergence, which is a natural phenomenon that creates 
diverse organism. We demonstrate diverse design proposals 
are derived using the system [2]. On the other hand, designer’s 
experience and knowledge earned through trial and error are 
the key elements in designing. When highly-experienced 
designers generate design ideas using a representation method, 
such as a sketching or clay modeling, sometimes unexpected 
values are discovered by chance. This ability to find 
something interesting or valuable by coincidence is called 
serendipity [3]. A previous study on serendipity reported that 
design ideas not originally envisioned by the designer emerge 
when designers are devoted to sketching [4]. Therefore, design 
proposals derived by the emergent design system should 
enable designer’s serendipity to occur.  
In this research, an emergent design system which uses 
computer-human interactions is proposed to support idea 
generation. This system consists of two fundamental 
functions: a self-organizing function based on the concept of 
emergence, and a three-dimensional modeling function 
imitating clay modeling. During the iterations of these 
functions, designers should be inspired by self-organizing 
design proposals. Therefore, generating novel and valuable 
design ideas will become easier. Additionally, we conduct 
elementary experiments to test the effectiveness of this 
system. As a result, we confirm the possibility that the 
proposed system has ability to support the idea generation. 
The paper’s structure is presented as follows: first, we 
describe about the concept of emergence, and propose an 
emergent design system. Then, we describe about the 
methods and the results of elementary experiments. Finally, 
the results are examined and our conclusion is presented. 
II. 
EMERGENCE AND EMERGENCE DESIGN  
In nature, various organisms exist in the same 
environment. In the fields of biology and ecology, scientists 
have hypothesized that various species have been created 
through the process of emergence. The concept of 
emergence is as follows: a new function, the character, and 
the action acquired by an interactive dynamic process where 
global order appears by local interactions between 
individuals, 
which 
behave 
autonomously, 
with 
the 
environment. On the other hand, this order restrains the 
behavior of an individual [5]. Herein, the appearance of 
global order is a bottom-up process, whereas the process of 
restraining individual behavior is a top-down process. 
There are two similarities between the early design process 
and the emergence process. First, the process to generate 
design ideas through evaluation using certain standards is 
similar to the bottom-up process which generates the entire 
feature by the interaction of autonomous components in 
emergence. Second, the process to optimize detailed parts of 
the design proposal is similar to the top-down process, which 
binds the components by entire feature in emergence. Thus, 
the concept of emergence may be applicable to design, and 
diverse novel design proposals can be derived by "emergent 
design" where bottom-up and top-down processes interact. 
III. 
EMERGENT DESIGN SYSTEM  
In this section, first the previous emergent design system 
is described. After that, an emergent design system which 
uses computer-human interactions is proposed. 
A. Previous Study in Emergent Design System 
The emergent design system consists of bottom-up 
process and top-down process. In the bottom-up process, 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

diverse design proposals meeting the low standard set by the 
designer are derived by self-organizing, while the top-down 
process satisfies the constraint conditions, and optimizes 
proposals that satisfy the constraints. This system derives 
diverse designs by going through these two processes. 
1) Bottom-up process: In the bottom-up process, forms 
are generated self-organizationally using Cellular Automata 
(CA) [6]. In the incidental method, the states of cells in the 
lattice are updated following a local rule. More specifically, 
at time t, the state of an element is St and the state of the 
neighborhood (mostly Von Neumann neighborhood or 
Moore neigborhood) is Nt. The state of the element at time 
t+1 describes as 

St+1 = f (St, Nt) 
(1) 
where, f is the transition function which influences the 
behaviors of the elements.  
In the emergent design system, the diversity of an 
organism is noted, and rules refering to two propoerties for 
diverse organism morphogenesis, “induction” and “apical 
dominance”, are the input vectors for the CA [7].  
An organism is formed by interactions between 
neighborhood cells. These neighborhood cells affect each 
other, causing a cell to change and exhibit different features 
(Figure 1(a)). This property is called ‘induction’. The first 
input is defined as the neighborhood information vector vn, 
which is expressed as 



26
1
i
biwi
n
n
e
v
 
(2) 
where, i is the surrounding element number, bi indicates the 
existence or non-existence of an element (1 or 0), wi is the 
coefficient of the vector direction, and ei is the unit vector of 
the direction to the object element. 
In the developmental process, a certain tissue dominates, 
such as the bud of a plant or the head of an animal. Such 
tissues are called the apex, and the dominant action by the 
apex is called ‘apical dominance’ (Figure 1(b)). The second 
input is defined as the positional information vector vp, 
which is expressed as 
d
p
e
v
d )
(d


max
 
(3) 
where, dmax is the distance between the apex and the most 
distant cell from the apex, d is the distance between the 
apex and the object element, and ed is the unit vector of the 
direction to the object element. Moreover, the form 
operating parameter k is set and input vector vin is defined 
as expressed in Eq. (4). 
p
n
in
v
v
v
k )
(
k



1
 
(4) 
Diverse forms can be generated by changing the form 
operating parameter k. If the value of k is near unity, then 
induction tends to strongly influence k. In contrast, if k is 
near 0, then k is strongly influenced by apical dominance, 
and a rhomboid or board form tends to be generated. The 
input parameters in the bottom-up process are the position 
of apex, form operating parameter k, form generation space, 
element size, initial element, and evaluation item. The apex 
position becomes the center of action for apical dominance, 
and the form generation space is a space that allows CA to 
be generated. The element size is a voxel and is composed 
of form. Thus, reducing the element size causes the output 
to be in a detailed form. The initial element position is 
where the form generation of CA begins. Thus, diverse 
design proposals are generated self-organizationally in the 
bottom-up process. 
2) Top-down process: In the top-down process, diverse 
design proposals generated by the bottom-up process are 
optimized or modified to satisfy design constraints such as 
strength or stiffness. For example, the modification method 
by increasing and decreasing elements, which is inspired by 
an adaptive function of bone remodeling, is applicable [8]. 
B. Emergent Design System Using Computer-Human 
Interactions  
We propose an improved emergent design system to 
support idea generation. Figure 2 shows the flow of the 
proposed emergent design system. This emergent design 
system consists of incidental form generation and 
representation methods. Induction and apical dominance, 
which are concepts from the previous design system, are 
Figure 1.  Model of the input vectors 
w6e6 
w1e1 
vn 
Induction 
Neighborhood information 
vector 
(a) 
Induction 
vp 
dmax－d 
d 
dmax 
Apical dominance  
Positional information 
vector 
Apex dominant  
tissue 
(b) Apical dominance 
Form generation space 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Interaction between a cell and 
neighborhood cells 
Dominant action by apex 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

used in self-organizing form generation because these self-
organizational concepts enable serendipity. 
1) Generate self-organized form in real time: We 
reconstruct an emergent design system with the Processing 
programing language, which is benefical to create images, 
animations, and interactions. In this system, we can see the 
form generating in real time by increasing elements 
autonomously. There are two ways to generate forms 
autonomously. First, selecting a element,  and increase 
elements (Figure 3(a)). Second, elements which increased at 
last step become the trigger of self-organization. These 
functions should enable designer’s serendipity to occur by 
revealing diverse and incidentally derived forms. 
2) 3D-modeling like clay modeling: In this section, we 
describe the representation method, which designers can use 
to generate design ideas. Representation methods are used 
not only to visualize specific design concepts, but also to 
convey designers intentions and to adjust design concepts. 
Our research focuses on a three-dimensional modeling, e.g., 
clay-modeling, to establish a public image of an idea. In this 
system, forms can be modified by adding or deleting 
elements (Figure 3(b)). In order to add elements, you should 
select an element, subsequently elements at Von Neumann 
neighborhood or Moore nighberhood will increase. By 
selecting elements, you can delete the elements. 
Three-dimensional models provide information such as 
depth, which is not intuitive in two-dimensional models. 
Additionally, through trial and error with representation 
methods, the likelihood of new ideas from chance or 
serendipity 
increases. 
Hence, 
three-dimensional 
representation methods can create new design ideas as well 
as improve visuospatial cognition. 
IV. 
ELEMENTARY EXPERIMENTS 
In this section, we describe elementary experiments to 
test the effectiveness of the system. 
A. Experimental Condition and Methodology 
We conduct form generation experiments to clarify the 
features and effectiveness of the proposed system, including 
the occurrence of serendipity. In this experiment, we use a 
chair as a design object. Because a chair design must 
consider structural features of material mechanics or 
mechanical dynamics as well as industrial design, a chair is 
an appropriate application for a basic study to evaluate 
design idea generation. Four subjects, who are professional 
designers, participated in the study.  
Design proposals are derived using introduced functions 
via two different patterns. In pattern 1, an initial form, which 
means the basic form of idea generation, is generated 
autonomously, and a design proposal is derived using three-
dimensional modeling. In pattern 2, an initial form is 
generated autonomously same as well. Then a design 
proposal is derived using a three-dimensional modeling and 
self-organizing form generation. Finally, in both patterns, 
each subjects draw design ideas within their mind induced by 
using the system. 
 Herein the form operating parameter k is set at three 
levels; 0.1, 0.5, and 0.9. For each ratio, two design proposals 
are derived by each subject. Then, overall 48 design 
proposals are derived. To analyze the process of deriving 
design proposals and characteristic forms, the number of 
times serendipity occurs is counted: the number of times 
subjects change his design concept influenced by inspirations 
and unexpected discoveries. For the same reason, we write 
Figure 3.  Examples of form generation 
(a) Self-organization from selected element 
(b) Add and delete elements 
Figure 2.  Flow of the emergent design system 
Input conditions
Design problem
Final Design Proposal
Add or Delete Elements
Finish 
Generating
Analyzing Design Problem 
Objective Knowledge
Subjective Knowledge
Designer’s 
Knowledge
Self-organizing
Self-organizing
Get 
Inspirations
Analyzing Design Proposal
Continue 
Generating
Human’s 
Operation
Computer’s
Operation
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Unexpected 
Discoveries
Yes
No
Serendipity
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

down the remarks of subjects while they are generating 
design proposals. Additionally, we asked the subjects about 
the usability of this system after the experiments. 
B. Evaluation of the Proposed System 
Figure 4 shows the examples of the final design 
proposals derived by the proposed system, and Table 1 
shows the number of times serendipity occurs. To clarify the 
characteristics of the proposed system, we analyze the 
results from three different perspectives: influence of form 
operating parameters, influence of form generating pattern, 
and differences between proposed system and previous 
system. Analysis from these three perspectives can 
determine whether the proposed system efficiently supports 
design idea generation. 
1) Difference of form characteristics related to input 
parameter: To analyze the difference of the form 
characteristics related to the form operating parameter k, 
design proposals are derived for three different form 
operating parameters; 0.1, 0.5, and 0.9. Figure 5 shows 
examples of derived design proposals for each form 
operating parameter. When parameter is set to 0.1, rod 
shaped design proposals are derived. In addition to rod 
shape proposals, aggregated forms are derived when it is set 
to 0.5. When it’s set to 0.9, aggregated forms with numerous 
elements are derived. Consequently, most design proposals 
depend on the initial form when form operating parameter is 
set to 0.9. Similar to the previous system, the value of the 
form operating parameter controls the form characteristics 
of the derived design proposals. Thus, the parameter affects 
the form characteristics of the derived design proposals in 
proposed system. 
When we asked the subjects which form operating 
parameter provides more inspiration and discoveries, most 
indicated that it is difficult to judge. However, one subject 
indicated the process depends on the form operating 
parameter, confirming the initial form affects the form 
generation process: increasing elements, or decreasing 
elements. When form operating parameter is set to 0.9, the 
system produces aggregated forms, and they are the most 
geometrically similar forms. Hence, the value of the form 
operating parameter affects the chance of finding inspiration 
and discoveries. One method to improve control using the 
form operating parameter is to restrict the surplus increase 
in the number of elements. Additionally, one subject 
suggested changing the form operating parameter while 
deriving design proposals, indicating that the proposed 
system needs a new function to change the value of the form 
operating parameter.  
2) Difference of form characteristics related to the 
form generation pattern: In the experiments, two patterns 
are used to generate forms. Pattern 1 employs a three-
dimensional modeling as a representation method, while 
pattern 2 uses both three-dimensional modeling and self-
organizing. 
Figure 6(a) shows the process and final design 
proposals derived by designer B in pattern 2. Table 2(a) 
contains the remarks of designer B. Although the 
proposals are as designer B intended, he does not 
comment on inspiration or unexpected discovery during 
the experiment. Similar to Figure 6(a) and Table 2(a), 
Figure 6(b) and Table 2(b) show the process and 
proposals and comments of designer B in pattern 2, 
0.1
2
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
1
2
2
3
1
5
1
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
3
0
0
0.9
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
Subject C
Subject D
Pattern 2
Pattern 1
Pattern 2
Pattern 1
Pattern 2
Subject A
Subject B
k
Pattern 1
Pattern 2
Pattern 1
TABLE I.  
THE NUMBER OF TMES SERENDIPITY OCCURS 
Figure 4. Examples of the derived design proposals 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

respectively. The inclusion of the self-organized form 
generation function inspired a new idea, which designer 
B used to derive a novel design proposal.  
We asked which pattern provides more inspiration and 
discoveries during the experiments. All four subjects 
answered that pattern 2 provokes inspiration and 
discoveries. Although there are no significant difference 
between pattern1 and pattern 2 as Table 1 shows, there is 
the potential that generating forms self-organizationally 
yields unexpected novel forms, inspiring new design 
ideas. Thus, the subjects uses serendipity in pattern 2 
because serendipity more likely occurs when using two 
form generation functions (representation and self-
organizing). Hence, results of the experiment and 
interviews demonstrate that increasing of chance leads to 
unexpected discoveries.  
3) Use of serendipity: Figure 7 shows design 
proposals of chair derived by the previous system and the 
sketches of design ideas generated from the proposals. 
Although designer can generate a design idea by 
watching the derived proposal, serendipity happens once, 
if it occurs at all. Figure 8 shows the process of deriving 
a design proposal by proposed system and the sketch of 
design idea generated from the proposal. Table 3 shows 
the remarks during the experiment. The subject used 
serendipity several times, and various inspiration and 
discoveries helped generating ideas, confirming that the 
proposed system allows forms to be generated as 
designers intended and serendipity emerges during the 
process. 
We asked the subjects which system is easy to generate 
new design ideas. Half of the subjects answered that the 
proposed system is easier, but the other half stated that they 
TABLE II. 
REMARKS DURING THE EXPERIMENT 
Figure 6. Differences in form generation pattern 
Figure 5. Differences in form operating parameter 
(a) Pattern 1 
(b) Pattern 2 
Process
Remarks
Initial Form
"It's like a bench."
Process
"Need legs for stability."
Final proposal "Bench at park."
Process
Remarks
Initial Form
"It's like a bench."
Process 1
"Need more space for several people."
Process 2
"Use this form for the roof."
Final proposal "Bench with a big roof."
(a) Pattern 1
(b) Pattern 2
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

could not judge. According to designer D, “The proposed 
system provides chances of finding inspirations and 
discoveries, generating new design ideas. However, the 
design idea depends on the final design proposals, which is 
why it is difficult to say which system is easier to generate 
new design ideas.” Compared to the previous system, the 
proposed system provides more serendipitous opportunities 
for inspiration and discovery, but the unfinished design 
proposals are rejected. Consequently, it is concluded that 
new design ideas are easier to generate using the proposed 
system. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Herein an emergent design system which uses computer-
human interactions is proposed. Additionally, generation 
experiments to analyze the effectiveness of the system were 
performed. Compared to the previous system, novel and 
valuable design ideas are easier to generate in the 
proposed system. The achievements of this research are 
described below.   
 
By enabling interactions in the emergent designs 
system, designer can generate intended forms via 
representation method.  
 
Indicating 
that 
both 
self-organization 
and 
representation method help designers to generate 
novel and valuable design ideas by inspiring 
designer’s serendipity. 
 
Confirming the possibility that the proposed 
emergent design system has ability to support the 
idea 
generation 
through 
iterations 
of 
self-
organization and representation. 
For future researches, we should clarify the mechanisms 
of how serendipity occurs by studying representation 
methods which can inspire designer’s serendipity. Then, 
further experiments with larger quantity of subjects to derive 
statistical consequence should be conducted. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Research Grant of Keio 
Leading-edge Laboratory of Science & Technology and the 
Grant in Aid for the Global Center of Excellence Program 
for "Center for Education and Research of Symbiotic, Safe 
and Secure System Design “from the Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sport, and Technology in Japan. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Sato, Y, Ujiie, Y. Matsuoka, “A Extended Algorithm for 
Generation of Fibrous Form in the Emergent Design System,” 
ASME 2009 International Design Engineering Technical 
Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering 
Conference(IDETC/CIE 2009), San Diego, CA, USA, 
DETC2009-86444, pp. 473-480. doi:10.1115/DETC2009-
86444. 
[2] Y. Matsuoka, “Design science,” Maruzen, Tokyo, pp. 82-91, 
p. 105, 2010. 
[3] Y. 
Maeda, 
“Hypotheses 
for 
Human 
Potential 
to 
Miscellaneous Mysterious Phenomena (2) -Considerations of 
Synchronicity and Serendipity-,” Society for Mind-Body 
Science, vol.14, no.1, pp.61-65, 2005 
[4] T. Sunaga,” Why do designers draw sketches?,” Special Issue 
of Japanese Society for the Science of design, vol.12, no.3, 
pp.12-13, 2005. 
[5] S. Kitamura, “Emergent systems-soward a new paradigm for 
artificial systems. toward system theory of function 
emergence,” Journal of the Society of Instrument and Control 
Engineers, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 492–495, July 1995. 
[6] A. Ilachinski, Cellular Automata. A Discrete Universe, World 
Scientific, 2000. 
[7] Y. Matsuoka, T. Fujii, “Form-generation method applying 
properties in the developmental process of organism generating 
the morphological diversity,” Japanese Society for the Science 
of Design, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 93-102, September, 2002. 
[8] A.Kito, Y. Mizumachi, M. Sekiguchi, K. Sato, Y. Matsuoka, 
“Modification method by increasing and decreasing elements 
in the emergent design system,” International Conference 
Advanced Materials Research, vol.422, pp.807-810, 2012, 
doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.422.807. 
Figure 8. Design idea generated from the proposed system  
TABLE III. 
REMARKS DURING THE EXPERIMENT 
Process
Remarks
Initial form
"Use self-organization."
Process 1
"Delete elements to make sitting position."
Process 2
"Use self-organization to make a leg."
Final proposal
"An artistic chair."
self-organizing form generation
intended form generation
Initial form
Process 1
Process 2
Design idea
Final proposal
self-organized form
Figure 7. Design ideas generated from the previous system  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

