Scalable Projection-Type Three-Dimensional Display by Using Compensation of 
Geometric Disotrtion 
Youngmin Kim, Sunghee Hong, Sangkyun Kim, Hyunmin Kang, Jisoo Hong, Sangwon Lee, and Hoonjong Kang 
Realistic Media Platform Research Center 
Korea Electronics Technology Institute 
Seoul, Korea  
e-mail: rainmaker@keti.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— We proposed an image compensation method of 
geometric 
distortion 
in 
multi-projection-type 
three-
dimensional display. Projected images from optical modules 
could be distorted by toed-in configuration of array; we 
analyzed this relationship by using homography matrix. To 
verify our method, we designed zigzag configuration of multi-
projectors and applied our proposed method. Experimental 
results will be provided to verify the proposed method.  
Keywords-Three-dimensional display; Geometrical optics 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Projection-type display has been widely used in three-
dimensional display field because it can be spatially 
multiplexed and is separated from the screen. The most 
representative projection-type three-dimensional display 
approach is Holografika, which adopted multiple projectors 
to provide adequate number of views to the viewers. 
Holografika used a specially arranged array of optical 
modules and asymmetrically diffusive screen, where the 
large angle is Vertical Field of View (FOV) and the 
horizontal diffusion angle is equal to the angle between the 
optically neighboring modules and it corresponds to the 
angular resolution [1]-[4]. However, the projected images 
from a specially arranged array of optical modules can be 
distorted as the number of optical modules increase because 
the optical modules are positioned as toed-in configuration. 
Each point of the asymmetrically diffusive screen transmits 
the distorted images into different directions, so three-
dimensional image can be deteriorated [5][6].  
In this paper, we propose a compensation method of 
geometrical distortion in projection-type three-dimensional 
display by using multi-aperture optics. In Section II, we will 
analyze geometrical distortion due to perspective effects. In 
Section III, the compensation method will be discussed and 
practical approach of the compensation method will be 
described. In Section IV, we will provide simulated results 
from the compensation method using homography matrix 
and experimental results. 
II. 
SCALABLE DIRECTIONAL-VIEW DISPLAY BY USING 
MULTIPLE PROJECTORS 
Three-dimensional 
display 
technology 
has 
been 
developing since the unprecedented success of the three-
dimensional 
movie 
‘AVATAR’. 
Among 
the 
three-
dimensional display technologies, holography is the only 
way to express three-dimensional whole information of 
objects because the wave-front of object can be reconstructed. 
However, until now, it is practically hard to develop 
holography 
because 
of 
massive 
three-dimensional 
information contents manipulation and absence of high 
definition display device. As an alternative, super multi-view 
display was expounded by enthusiastic researchers. The 
advantage of the super multi-view display can provide 
motion parallax as well as binocular disparity because the 
interval among the views is small enough to provide smooth 
motion parallax.  
 
Figure 1.  Relationship among the exit pupil, physical dimension, and gap 
between exit pupils in the array of conventional projection optical modules 
Recently, we designed scalable directional-view display 
technique which is theoretically similar to super multi-view 
display by using compact and convenient subminiature 
projectors [5]. The reason why the super multi-view display 
is easy to be applied practically is effective size of physical 
projection 
optical 
modules. 
The 
exit 
pupil 
from 
commercially available projectors is too small compared 
with physical overall size of projector as shown in Figure 1. 
When an array of small exit pupil of projection lens is 
adopted in the super multi-view display, the rearranged 
three-dimensional rays from asymmetrically diffusive screen 
present an appearance of a black striped pattern like 
discontinuous image [6].  
To solve this issue, it seems necessary to consider a use 
of multi-dimensional alignments of projection optics. In the 
previous paper, we designed zigzag configuration of 
projection optics by using disassembled commercial 
projectors for the three-dimensional display as shown in 
Figure 2. Since the horizontal interval of projection lens of 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the proposed method is same as the exit pupil of the 
projection lens, this configuration allows us to provide 
continuous directional-view images. Furthermore, to enlarge 
FOV of this configuration, a curved array of projection 
optics, so-called toed-in configuration, was installed in the 
proposed method.   
 
Figure 2.  Schematic of proposed method by using an array of 
disassembled commercial projectors. 
III. 
GEOMETRICAL DISTORTION IN TOED-IN 
CONFIGURATION 
In the toed-in configuration of projection-type three-
dimensional display, each projected image can be distorted 
due to their relative position from the screen. Therefore, it is 
important to compensate such distortions. In this section, the 
key issues regarding multiple projectors-asymmetrical 
diffusive screen calibration will be discussed. As shown in 
Figure 3, the fixed screen and multi-directional optical 
modules are adopted in a typical scheme of multiple 
projection-type three-dimensional display. We assumed that 
1) the asymmetrically diffusive screen is flat although this 
method can be extended to non-planar screens, 2) the 
projection angle of the images emitted from each optical 
module is same, and 3) the projectors and the screen can be 
modeled by perspective transforms.   
 
 
Figure 3.  Schematic of the proposed method for the distortion analysis. 
Consider a point (x, y) in the projector image plane. This 
point will be projected to unknown point (x’, y’) on the 
screen. Primitive goal in this section is to find out a 
relationship between two corresponding points. We are able 
to exploit the fact that all of unknown point (x’, y’) on the 
screen, and this can be established by a 3×3 homography 
matrix between the corresponding points of two different 
planes. Therefore, it can be expressed by a single projective 
transform [7], 
                
0
0
0
cos
0
sin
0
cos
R
H
R
R
q
q
q
é
ù
ê
ú
= ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û                (1) 
 
with eight degrees of freedom; R denotes the distance 
between the center of screen and each projectors, θ indicates 
the angle between normal vector of the screen plane and 
projector image plane. The simple example (R = 500 mm, θ 
= 30º, and the pixel size of the screen plane is 0.2 mm) of 
above case can be shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  An original image of the projection optical module (left) and 
distorted image due to the toed-in geometry (right). 
 
Figure 5.  A distorted image from far right position (left) and compensated 
image by using homography matrix (right). 
Since the homography matrix H represents the 
relationship 
of 
geometrical 
distortion 
between 
two 
coordinates (the projector image plane and the screen plane), 
the distortion can be compensated by multiplying 
coordination of original image by inverse matrix of 
homography. The relationship between pixels of original 
image and compensated image can be given by 
 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
0
0
0
0
cos
(
,
)
(
,
)
sin
sin
p
p
R
R
x
y
x
y
R
x
R
x
q
q
q
=
-
-
      (2) 
where (x, y) and (x’, y’) denote the pixel position of the 
original image and compensated image, respectively. Using 
(2), the simulation was performed as shown in Figure 5. We 
can confirm that the distortion compensation results on the 
screen are same as original image when the distortion 
compensation image was projected on the screen. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMETNAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
To verify our method based on compensation of 
geometrically distorted images in multi-aperture three-
dimensional display, we designed a curved array of multiple 
projection optical modules with 60º of field of view, which 
was called as toed-in configuration as well. As a projection 
optical module, commercially available pico-projectors with 
the resolution of 1280(H) × 720(V) (native resolution: 640 
(H) × 480(V)) were used. This projector does not satisfy the 
requirement which was mentioned in Section 2, so we 
disassembled these projectors to provide scalable directional 
rays. The angular resolution of the toed-in configuration is 
0.75º and the exit pupil of the projection optical module was 
3.5 mm, as shown in Figure 6. Each projection optical 
module was connected with single-board computer, which 
was especially optimized in graphic performance and cost 
effectiveness.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Experimental setup for verifying our compensation method (up) 
and enlarged image of toed-in configuration of disassembled projection 
optical modules (down). 
 
To experimentally verify that the proposed method can 
successfully compensate directional-view images, we 
coordinated the parameters of the cameras in the virtual 
space by using Unity 3D. The field of view of the virtual 
cameras was set to be same as that of projection optical 
modules. The captured directional-view images in the system 
were rearranged for pseudoscopic-orthoscopic conversion. 
We applied the homography matrix into the rearranged 
directional-view images for compensation as shown in 
Figure 7. However, the images still need compensation 
practically since all projection optical modules are not under 
the same conditions. So, we compensated this slight 
difference by using an image capturing device. We set the 
reference image from center of the optical module, and the 
projected images from other optical modules were captured. 
The captured images were compared with reference image 
from center optical module, and finally we could acquire 
compensated image in front of the asymmetrically diffusive 
screen. These findings, therefore, verify the compensation 
method of the proposed method.  Based on the compensated 
results, we can apply this method for the toed-in 
configuration. Unlike Holografika method [1][2], this toed-in 
configuration provides improved FOV because the angle 
made by toed-in configuration could increase total FOV of 
the system. Therefore, we could establish distortion-free 
scalable three-dimensional display by using multi-aperture 
optics with enhanced FOV. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Experimental results before geometrical compensation (up) and 
after correction (down). 
  
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed compensation method of 
geometrical distortion in three-dimensional display by using 
multi-aperture optics. To verify our compensation method, 
we designed a toed-in configuration of projection optical 
modules and the contents was acquired by means of 
computer generated method. Captured directional-view 
images were compensated by using proposed homography 
matrix and a detailed compensation was performed by 
comparing with reference images from center of projection 
optical module. Further research directed toward real object 
contents acquisition will be required. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was supported by the IT R&D program of 
MSIP/Giga Korea. [GK13D0200, Development of Super 
Multi-View 
(SMV) 
Display 
Providing 
Real-Time 
Interaction]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Balogh et al., “The holovisio system new opportunity 
offered by 3D displays”, In I. Horvth and Z. Rusk, editors, 
Proceedings of the TMCE 2008, pages 1-11. IEEE.  
[2] T. Balogh, “Method and apparatus for displaying 3D images,” 
U.S. patent 6,999,071 (14 February 2006). 
[3] Y. Kajiki, H. Yoshikawa, and T. Honda, “Hologram-like 
video images by 45-view 
stereoscopic display,” 
In 
Proceedings of SPIE 3012, 1997, pages 154-166. 
[4] T. Honda, D. Nagai, and M. Shimomatsu, “Development of 3-
D display system by a fan-like array of projection optics,” In 
Proceedings of SPIE 4660, 2002, pages 191-199. 
[5] Y. Kim et al., “Scalable directional-view display and contents 
acquisition approach”, In Imaging and Applied Optics 2014, 
OSA Technical Digest (online), paper Jtu4A.5.  
[6] Y. Kim, J. Hahn, and B. Lee, “Hologram-like display without 
crosstalk and discontinuity problem by using a holographic 
diffuser”, In Proceedings of International Conference on Fiber 
Optics and Photonics, 2008, pages 421-424. 
[7] R. Sukthankar, R. G. Stockton, and M. D. Mullin, “Smarter 
presentations: Exploiting homography in camera-projector 
systems”, In Proceedings of International Conference on 
Computer Vis. 2001, pages 247-253.  
  
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

