Creating Added Value for Smart Card Applications:  
The University as a Case Study 
 
Hsiao-Chi Wu  
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
hciwu69@gmail.com 
Jen Wel Chen 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Dept. of Business Administration 
Chinese Culture University  
Taipei, Taiwan 
d95725009@ntu.edu.tw 
Ching-Cha Hsieh 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—Studies on smart card applications, in addition to 
focusing on instrumentality and practicality, should also 
consider 
the 
importance 
of 
social 
construction. 
The 
implications of actors with different roles on technology 
directly influence the developmental direction of smart card 
applications. This study examines smart card applications, 
using a private university in Taiwan as a case study. It 
attempts to understand and interpret how the university 
handles problems arising from smart card applications, from 
the perspective of schools and suppliers, during the planning 
and design phases of implementation. Additionally, it uses the 
Social Construction of Technology (SCOT) as an analytic lens. 
The results of this study show that when the university 
developed a new interpretation of smart card applications, it 
focused on value-added e-services. This emerged and 
unexpected consequences arose from actual work-practice 
situations; smart student ID cards were not merely tools for 
identification and payment, but also the means to shape 
student lifestyles.  
Keywords - smart card application, SCOT, e-service, 
university 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Smart card technology is widely applied within our daily 
lives, from electronic payments, transportation, and 
telecommunications to healthcare, entertainment, and 
education [1, 3]. Smart cards are capable of accessing, 
storing, and calculating data, as well as providing an 
immediate exchange of necessary information to facilitate 
data security, identification, and authentication.  
This study discusses the application of smart cards within 
a university setting. Existing studies on smart card 
applications in schools [5, 6] and students’ technological 
acceptance of smart cards [1, 7] focus primarily on users and 
usage. Villano [8] claims that between 1997-2002, there 
were nearly 50 schools implementing smart card programs in 
the U.S.; however, only a few actually benefited from their 
advantages [4, 5].  
Holmstrom & Stalder indicated that the drifting of 
technologies depends on actor interactions. Implementation 
of technologies do not always follow the original plans [2]. 
In schools with smart card applications, although students 
are the primary users, the perspectives of schools, designers, 
and suppliers should also be considered. During the planning 
and designing stages of smart card applications, schools and 
suppliers play particularly important roles. Past research 
focuses 
primarily 
on 
technological 
aspects 
of 
implementation, 
especially 
the 
instrumentality 
and 
practicability of smart cards in schools, without considering 
the importance of social construction. For example, smart 
cards could be implemented in a variety of ways, based on 
the interests and implications of technology on actors with 
different roles. Some researchers tend to neglect the 
interpretation of design and configuration of technology, and 
thus fail to consider certain practical relations [12].  
The questions posed by this study are: why do schools 
issue smart cards? What are the obstacles? How should 
schools adjust to their implementation and take advantage of 
their added-value? In answering these questions, this study 
examines the first case of smart student ID cards at a 
Taiwanese university. Discovering three different rollouts of 
student ID cards, it explains how the university treated and 
coped with the problems arising from the smart card 
applications. Furthermore, this study uses tools of Social 
Construction of Technology (SCOT) as an analytic lens.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the 
literature related to smart cards in university applications. 
Section III describes the data collection strategies and 
introduces the analytic lens -- SCOT. Section IV explains 
case background. Section V analyzes the case and discussion 
follows in section VI, and then conclusions are offered. 
 
II. 
SMART CARD IN UNIVERSITY APPLICATIONS  
Smart cards are commonly applied within universities [1, 
5, 6], which often provide the best opportunity for promoting 
smart card technology. For universities, smart cards can 
enhance administrative efficiency [1], reduce administration 
costs, and increase incomes [9]. Mirza & Alghathbar [5] and 
Flwler, Swatman & Welikala [6] investigated smart card 
applications in universities around the world, including 
North America, West Europe, and Asia. They surveyed 20 
universities with 34 applications, and developed four 
categories for the most popular applications: student ID cards, 
176
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

book borrowing, and access to library and printers [5]. 
Related applications can be generalized into three categories: 
(1) student ID cards as identification; (2) entrance cards for 
libraries, buildings, parking lots, etc.; and (3) e-purses for 
consumption (e-purse [3] is a prepaid card which can be used 
for payment or small retail instead of coins). 
Schools adopt different types of smart cards, such as 
magnetic stripe cards, contact-less cards, or hybrid-cards, 
each with different versatilities [6]. Services also vary, as 
some function as debit cards, have store-value, or other 
payment types [5]. Clark [9] discussed the key successful 
factors of e-purse smart card applications, and concluded that 
cost, interoperability (applications outside of schools to 
replace coins, or to be integrated with other cards), and a 
critical mass of users and merchants are most important.  
There are many examples of both successful and failed 
micropayment applications with university smart cards. 
Mcard of the University of Michigan was launched in 1995, 
but suffered from poor promotion and was suspended in 
2001. Smart cards at the University of Central Florida, first 
issued in 1998, provide valuable discounts and benefits to 
students on campus [9].  
In some cases, schools use more than one smart card 
system. The library of the City University of Hong Kong 
introduced the Octopus card (one of the most successful 
debit cards in the world [2]) as a payment mechanism for 
copying, laser printing, and overdue fines, rather than use the 
existing student CitySmart card. On one hand, the CitySmart 
system was plagued by a non user-friendly interface and 
limited numbers of debit devices on campus. And on the 
other hand, over 98% of the students at the City University 
of Hong Kong possess the Octopus card [4].  
Beyond the focus on the university perspective, other 
studies [1, 7] examine this issue in terms of student 
acceptance of technology.  In sum, the promotion and 
development of smart card applications in universities are 
not simple technical issues, but rather involves social and 
economic factors, as well as users’ behaviors and preferences.  
Although these studies have provided an understanding 
of smart card applications in universities, they have 
neglected the purpose of schools implementing such cards. 
Purpose may influence both the functional design of smart 
cards, as well as the appearance of potential problems and 
corresponding solutions during implementation [4]. In fact, 
smart card application has different meanings to different 
users and usage stages. Different visions for smart card 
application by schools influence the developmental direction 
of these cards on campus. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
A. Strategy of data collection  
This study focuses on one case study, allowing the 
researcher to connect research phenomenon with actual 
situations [11], in order to recognize the dynamics of these 
phenomenon. The main methods for data collection include 
participant 
observation, 
semi-structural 
interviews, 
conference records, and file data (see Table I). One of the 
authors works at SCE, he has completely participated in the 
development of smart card applications. We conducted 
interviews and collected secondary data from March 2006 to 
May 2010. Through these multiple sources of data collection, 
the authenticity of the data was repeatedly validated.  
TABLE I.  
THE TYPES AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF EMPIRICAL DATA 
Data type 
Illustrations 
Participation 
observation 
Observation period: 1998.5-2010.5. One of the 
authors works at SCE. 
Semi-structure 
interview 
There 
are 
ten 
person-interviews. 
Each 
interview lasts 90 to 120 minutes. Some of the 
interviewee is interview twice depends on 
situation. 
Meeting minutes
There are 32 minutes, such as cooperation and 
negotiation 
of 
enterprises, 
technology 
discussion meeting, managers’ meeting, and 
technology group meeting. 
Documents 
There are 54 files like project reports, technical 
documents, 
memorandums, 
official 
documents, presentations, and historical data. 
 
B. Analytic lens—Social Construction of Technology 
This research employs SCOT as the analytic lens for 
understanding how the interpretation of smart card 
applications by schools and suppliers influences the 
developmental direction of these cards during planning and 
design, and how they deal with related problems.  
SCOT suggests that technology is a social structure that 
allows researchers to analyze technological artifacts through 
social situations. The developmental process is the selection 
of changes and eliminations. It is based on a multi-
directional model, rather than a linear model. In other words, 
technology can have more than one developmental result. 
SCOT opens a “black box” of technology and examines the 
selection process in order to understand how people consider 
the problems and solutions of technological devices under 
different circumstances. The main concepts of SCOT are 
shown below [10]. 
• Relevant Social Groups (RSG): relevant social groups 
are key to understanding that technology is a social 
product. Each social group has a different interpretation 
on technological artifacts that results in different 
problems and solutions. For instance, young people may 
view bicycle riding as exercise, while mothers and older 
people only focus on riding safety. Thus, the 
development of bicycles should be versatile. The 
developmental direction of technology is limited to the 
shared implications among all members; RSG will 
define the technological problems and solutions.  
• Interpretive flexibility: besides considering how RSG 
view and interpret technology artifacts, interpreting 
“flexibility” also refers to the design of technology 
artifacts; there is more than one best design. Interpretive 
flexibility helps to explain how different RSG treat and 
construct the problems and solutions arising from 
technology in order to expose the “black box” of 
technology.  
177
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

• Closure & stabilization: with regard to technology, 
closure includes artifact stabilization and problem-
solving. It refers to whether RSG are certain about 
problems being solved or whether main problems have 
been redefined by RSG (indicating that RSG have given 
a meaning to the solution of a technology artifact). For 
instance, use of pneumatic tires on bicycles was 
originally intended for solving problems with vibration, 
but later contributed to faster bicycle speeds. Higher 
wheels are used on high-speed bicycles, but are less safe 
for women or the elderly. For different groups, the 
development process of bicycles involves different 
dimensions, and their chosen artifacts vary. Thus there 
are degrees of artifact stabilization. Relevant social 
groups will form the regulation and values of artifacts, 
and further influence the meaning and development 
direction of artifacts.  
 
IV. 
CASE BACKGROUND 
This study examines a private university in Taiwan 
(anonymous: CU) as the subject, and ascertains how the IT 
department developed smart cards to provide on-campus 
services and position the university as a pioneer of 
information  technology innovation in Taiwan. Since 1995, 
CU has actively pursued the goal of “lifelong education,” 
particularly within the School of Continuing Education 
(SCE). There are eight teaching centers in SCE, located in 
the center of the city with convenient transportation. In order 
to attract students and provide multiple learning services, the 
dean of SCE set “e-campus” as a major goal of SCE 
organizational development.  
CU issued smart student ID cards to enhance campus 
service efficiency and quality, as well as school resource 
management. Since SCE operates independently, smart card 
applications were first implemented by the teaching centers 
of SCE, under the planning of the SCE IT department. The 
development process of CU smart student ID cards includes 
three stages:  
A. Issue of smart student ID cards -- UPass 
In 1998, CU was the first university in Taiwan to issue 
smart student ID cards. A local bank (Bank C) issued UPass 
smart student ID cards with debit card functions and a 
magnetic strip. In contrast to laminated paper IDs, smart 
cards allow data access, storage, and calculation, all of which 
support e-services on the CU campus. Initially, smart student 
ID cards (UPass) were designed for identification, entrance 
access to specific locations, the disbursement of fellowship 
money and student refunds, book borrowing in libraries, and 
automatic transfers of tuition. Due to financial regulations at 
the time, UPass could not support multi-functional 
transactions, but with changes to regulations in October 2001, 
transaction features were also added.   
B. Multi-purpose multi-function of E-service (Campus’s 
application services) 
SCE attempted to develop more services for UPass. In 
2002, CU was funded by Bank C to change UPass cards 
from simple magnetic strip cards to RFID cards with 
magnetic strip and Mifare standards. The SCE IT department 
recommended that in addition to access control to buildings 
and parking lots, UPass should also allow access to reserved 
venues. Teachers and students could directly reserve 
classrooms or discussion rooms online, and access these 
places by UPass. Such functions would save on both 
managerial manpower and administration costs, as well as 
improve the efficiency of the campus’ learning environment.  
SCE and entrance access suppliers cooperated and 
applied RFID to micropayments for photocopy, vending 
machines, overdue book fines, and online applications for 
school services, in order to provide multi-purpose multi-
functional campus e-services. They also applied RFID 
readers to lighting, electricity, and air conditioning controls 
via iBOX.  
C. Changes in debit smart student ID cards 
In 2005, CU again served as a pioneer and cooperated 
with the largest transportation card system (EasyCard) in 
northern Taiwan. CU changed smart student ID cards(UPass) 
from smart debit cards into RFID smart cards, which serve as 
store-value cards with contact-less Mifare standards. E-purse 
was developed for off-line micropayments. The technical 
specifications of EasyCard were the same as the original 
smart student ID cards, thus removing potential technical 
problems with transferring the original services to the new 
student ID card system. A required pin code was established 
to ensure the confidentiality of the cards. Therefore, CU 
expanded the services of UPass beyond the campus to 
incorporate public transportation. There are twelve compus 
services of UPass, as shown in Figure 1, which can be 
classified 
into 
three 
categories, 
i.e., 
identification, 
administration information services, and spatial security.  
CU and EasyCard held a press conference on the 
integration of EasyCard with campus services, and allowed 
participants to experience the twelve campus services of 
UPass (see Figure 1). After that, some schools show their 
great interests, and they asked CU to promote the UPass’ 
integrative campus services for their own schools. The 
conference enhanced the competitiveness of service 
innovation at CU, and enhanced the school’s reputation. 
Since April 2010, EasyCard has extended its services to 
transactions at over 10,000 locations, including four major 
convenience store chains, coffee shop chains, drug store 
chains, restaurants, fast food stores, and parking lots.  
CU has actively developed innovative applications of the 
original RFID technique. For instance, in 2008, SCE 
cooperated with banks, telecommunication companies, and 
Austrian scholars to apply for a special government 
technology program, and proposed plans to incorporate 
mobile phone devices from plastic student ID cards in order 
to further facilitate e-commerce. The dean of SCE stated:, 
“Our technology is ready. In the future, students can use and 
purchase things outside the campus through mobile phones 
as student ID cards, entrance access cards, and e-purse, thus 
creating ubiquitous services.”  
178
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Applications of Smart Student ID Card for CU 
 
V. 
ANALYSIS  
After CU issued the first smart student ID card (UPass) 
system in 1998, three versions of smart cards have been used, 
as shown in Table II. This study focuses on the planning and 
designing stages of smart card applications from the 
perspectives of schools and suppliers. This section will 
analyze the development and innovation of CU smart card 
application using SCOT as the analytic lens.  
TABLE II.  
SMART STUDENT ID CARDS  ISSUED BY CU  
Stages 
Interval  
Payment 
solution 
Technical type 
Forms of  
e-purses 
1 
1998-
2002 
Debit 
card 
contact 
-- 
2 
2002-
2005 
Debit 
card 
contact 
contactless 
(RFID, Mifare) 
On-line dollars 
3 
2005~ 
Store 
value 
contactless 
(RFID, Mifare) 
On-line dollars 
Off-line dollars 
Pre-paid value of 
EasyCard  
 
A. Relevant Social Groups  
In order to realize that technology development is a 
process of social construction, SCOT prioritizes defining the 
major relevant social groups within technology development. 
Groups directly influence technology planning and design. In 
this case, relevant social groups involved in planning and 
designing smart card applications are divided into two 
categories:  
• 
University: the first category includes card holders, 
including faculty and students; the second involves 
the IT Department of SCE, which was in charge of 
planning and implementing smart card applications. 
Their views on smart card application directly 
influence development and innovation.  
• 
Suppliers: this includes suppliers who participate in 
smart card applications, including smart cards 
issuers such as the bank and EasyCard Company, 
and suppliers who provide technical support to SCE 
smart card applications, such as entrance access 
suppliers. 
B. Interpretive flexibility  
The views of the university and suppliers on smart card 
application directly determine planning and design, and 
influence the direction of development and innovation. Their 
views are summarized in Table III.  
For CU, the issuing of smart student ID cards aimed to 
realize campus services by an all-in-one card, which 
provides multi-purpose and multi-function e-services. The IT 
Department of SCE thus planned and designed smart card 
applications. However, the IT manager stated: “the purpose 
of UPass entrance access is not to control the people coming 
in and going out; it is about spatial management.” Thus, e-
services incorporating spatial use in teaching buildings were 
developed, and resulted in the integration of campus 
information, cash flow, and resources.  
Regarding the suppliers of these services (the bank, 
EasyCard Company, and entrance access suppliers):  
• For the bank, it could increase the number of banking 
customers and provide agency services on tuition, 
thus earning more income and developing financial 
transactions on campus.  
• For the EasyCard Company, it can utilize EasyCard as 
a means to connect with campus activities, thus 
expanding services to fulfill their vision of “traveling 
around Taiwan with one card.”  
Security
Identity
Consumer goods 
Services
Certification 
Cash flow 
Identification 
CCooppyy  m
maacchhiinnee  
VVeennddiinngg  m
maacchhiinnee  
KKiioosskk  
UUppaassss  
Applications of Smart Student ID card 
G
Geenneerraall  
Q
Quueerryy  
RRoollee  CCaallll  
ATM  
AAddm
miinniissttrraattiivvee  
iinnffoorrm
maattiioonn  
CCllaassssrroooom
m  sseeaarrcchh  
VVaalluuee  ddeeppoossiitt  
LLiibbrraarryy  
VVooIIPP  
PPaarrkkiinngg  
PPKKII  
AAiirrccoonn  
CCllaassssrroooom
m  
AAcccceessss  
SSM
MSS    
179
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

• For entrance access suppliers, it is the opportunity to 
develop 
new 
markets 
in 
customized 
spatial 
management, in addition to standardized entrance 
access.  
TABLE III.  
INTERPRETIVE FLEXIBILITY OF RELEVANT SOCIAL GROUPS 
FOR SMART STUDENT ID CARDS  
category 
Interpretive Flexibility of RSG 
SCE:  the strategy to develop application services and 
entrance access is interpreted as spatial management.  
University 
Card holders: convenient; campus pass with one card 
Bank:  increase income and create new applications 
for financial services. 
EasyCard: a means to connect with campus activities, 
and expand the original application service as a 
transportation card, to multiple services.  
Suppliers  
Entrance access suppliers: a way to develop new 
markets and redefine marketing positioning of the 
companies. 
 
C. Closure and stabilization 
This study aims to understand how key RSG—SCE 
coped with the problems encountered and redefined them 
when implementing smart card applications. CU originally 
expected that UPass could have transaction functions on 
campus. However, due to the limitations of financial 
regulations, students could initially only use their cards to 
pay tuition.  Thus, SCE tried to develop other possibilities 
for smart card applications.   
When SCE treated UPass entrance access as spatial 
management, it redefined the development of smart card 
applications, seeking the technical support of entrance access 
suppliers and developing e-services for the spatial use of 
academic buildings. iBOX is the main engine for entrance 
access systems that control lighting, electricity, and air 
conditioning by smart management in order to provide safety 
services on campus, effectively use campus space,  reduce 
manpower, and avoid wasting resources.  
SCE did not give up on the transaction functions of 
UPass. Since transaction amounts on campus were small and 
debit smart cards would be more useful, in 2005, they 
eliminated debit card UPass and chose EasyCard as their 
new UPass system. When the transaction functions of UPass 
extended beyond the campus, SCE redefined the ubiquity of 
its UPass application scope.  
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
After three issuances of smart student ID cards, CU 
adopted different applications and attempted to select the 
more suitable plan for the university. As mentioned above, 
SCOT plays a significant role when implementing smart 
cards. The development of smart cards is not simply 
interpreted by instrument-oriented technology viewpoint. 
From SCOT perspective, its social implications can also be 
examined. 
A. Development of emerging and unexpected smart card 
applications  
Technology development and implementation are target-
oriented activities. However, when IT design cannot fulfill a 
goal, there will be unexpected results [15]. SCE encountered 
difficulties in developing the transaction functions of UPass, 
and treated UPass entrance access as spatial management to 
construct the infrastructure of campus services. This outcome 
was emerged and unexpected given the school’s initial plans.  
In comparison with the investigation of smart card 
applications by Mirza & Alghathbar [5] in university settings, 
UPass’ compus services are richer and more widespread (see 
Figure 1). It is because SCE gives smart card applications 
new interpretations so that various campus services are 
created and unexpected results emerge. 
The findings of this study verify the situated change 
model proposed by Orlikowski, who indicated that 
organizational chage emerges in work-practice situations; it 
is not a planned or technology-oriented change[13]. 
Likewise, the development of CU smart student ID cards 
was not an original goal, and was not led by technology, but 
rather was an emerging and unexpected result of practical 
adjustments made by SCE.  
B. Creating value-added e-services  
Porter suggested that the competitiveness of companies is 
based on the creation of customer values. One strategy is to 
develop 
internal 
activities 
of 
companies 
through 
technological development in order to coordinate activities, 
create value, and realize cost advantages [14].  
The findings of this study support Porter’s ideas. SCE 
redefined the meaning of smart card applications as spatial 
management, cooperated technically with entrance access 
suppliers, integrated spatial use and managerial activity, and 
further created value-added e-services, as shown in Figure 2. 
In addition, for SCE, the planning and design of smart card 
applications was cost-oriented. They suggested that “in 
campus application, managerial costs rather than service 
costs are high.” The development of smart card application 
integrated campus information, cash flows, and resources, 
thus saving managerial manpower and administration costs 
for CU. While SCE interprets the function of UPass’ 
entrance access, it means not only to control member’s 
entrance, but also to manage classroom usage, and venue 
reservations. 
It 
enables 
threefold 
IT 
application 
developments so that SCE further applies the technique of 
entrance access (e.g., iBOX) to provide safety services on 
campus and keep creating more value-added e-services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2   The creation of the value-added e-services from entrance access, 
spatial management, to campus safety 
           
 
                                
Spatial management ; 
Smart management of 
classrooms; 
Classroom usage;  
Entrance 
access 
Venue reservations; 
Campus safety; 
180
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

C. Smart student ID cards: from identification to forms of 
life 
Regarding technological artifacts, Winner suggested that 
artifacts are not neutral in values, and their design and 
construction imply specific social intentions. They are 
treated as forms of life and regulate people’s behaviors [12]. 
Smart student ID cards at CU support this argument [12].  
After transforming from paper student ID cards to smart 
cards, SCE endowed meanings to smart card applications. 
Besides providing campus services, the smart cards have 
shaped students’ activities, learning, and consumption, both 
inside and outside of the campus, thus reflecting students’ 
lifestyles. Smart student ID cards are not simply tools for 
identification and payment, but also could regulate students’ 
disciplines and behaviors. With more services made 
available by the university and smart card issuers, the 
regulation of card holders’ daily living will continue to 
expand. Smart ID cards also influenced the work of staff, 
such as safety control on campus, by helping monitor 
important systems.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
Smart cards application in schools is not only for 
implementing all-in-one card and convenient services. As 
this case study shows, after the university encountered 
difficulties in providing transaction services, it redefined the 
direction of smart card application to spatial management. It 
further integrated campus information, cash flow, and 
resources, in order to save managerial manpower and 
administration costs, thus creating value-added e-services:  
• 
Smart card application is not completely motivated 
by instrumental characteristics and practicality of 
technology, rather it is the process of social 
construction. When relevant social groups give new 
meanings to smart card application, services emerge 
from practical situations and result in unexpected 
outcomes.  
• 
Regarding technology artifacts, smart student ID 
cards provide campus services, and shape students’ 
lifestyles and behaviors.  
 
Future development strategies of smart card application 
are as follows. The first is to enhance the mobility of smart 
card applications, such as technical development of mobile 
devices and increasing self-service machines on campus for 
added values and information searches. The second is to 
develop services upon the activities [17], such as planning 
daily activities for students and staff on campus; applications 
for specific locations, such as libraries, gymnasiums, and 
academic buildings; or socio-spatial dimensions, such as 
considering urban form, consumer preference, and cultural 
attributes [18].  
Although this study used a university campus as a case 
study, the findings can also serve as reference to some large 
corporations that issue smart cards for identification and 
entrance access. Future studies can discuss how relevant 
social groups, such as schools (or enterprises) and suppliers, 
interact with each other to form network relationships by in-
depth case analysis in order to contribute to the development 
of smart card applications.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. H. M. Lee, Y. W. Cheng, and A. Depickere, “Comparing smart 
card adoption in Singapore and Australian universities,” International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 307-325, 
2003. 
[2] 
J. Holmstrom, and F. Stalder, “Drifting technologies and multi-
purpose networks: the case of the Swedish cashcard,” Information 
and organization, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 187-206, 2001. 
[3] 
J. K. Lee, and C. Y. Yang, “Evolutionary Business Models of E-Cash 
with Smart Cards,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Electronic Commerce, Seoul, Korea, 2000. 
[4] 
S. Ching, A. Tai, J. Pong et al., “Don't Let Micropayments Penalize 
You--Experience From The City University Of Hong Kong,” The 
Journal of Academic Librarianship, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 86-97, 2009. 
[5] 
A. A. Mirza, and K. Alghathbar, “Acceptance and Applications of 
Smart Cards Technology in University Settings,” Eighth IEEE 
International Conference on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure 
Computing, pp. 746-748, 2009. 
[6] 
D. C. Fowler, P. M. C. Swatman, and J. Welikala, “Issues Affecting 
the Implementation of Multiple Application Smart Card Systems,” 
"CollECTeR USA" -- 4th CollECTeR Conference on Electronic 
Commerce, 
Breckenridge, 
Colorado, 
USA, 
http://www.collecter.org/collUSA/Fowler.pdf., April 11, 2000. 
[7] 
M. Arami, M. Koller, and R. Krimmer, “User Acceptance of 
Multifunctional Smart Cards,” The European Conference on 
Information 
Systems, 
Paper 
18, 
2004, 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2004/18. 
[8] 
M. Villano, “Campus cards: Too smart for their own good,” 
University 
Business, 
March 
2004, 
http://universitybusiness.ccsct.com/page.cfm?p=475. 
[9] 
C. Clark, “Shopping Without Cash: The Emergence of the E-purse,” 
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, issue Q IV, 
pp. 34-51, 2005. 
[10] T. Pinch, and W. Bijker, “The social construction of facts and 
artefacts: or how the sociology of science and the sociology of 
technology might benefit each other,” Social studies of Science, vol. 
14, no. 3, pp. 399-441, 1984. 
[11] R. Yin, Case study research: Sage publications Newbury Park, Calif, 
1994. 
[12] L. Winner, “Do artifacts have politics?,” Daedalus, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 
121-136, 1980. 
[13] W. Orlikowski, “Improvising Organizational Transformation Over 
Time: A Situated Change Perspective". Information Systems 
Research vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 63-92, 1996. 
[14] M. E. Porter, Competitive advantage: creating and sustaining superior 
performance, The Free Press, 1985. 
[15] M. Markus and D. Robey, “Why stuff happens: Explaining the 
unintended consequences of using IT”, The Past and Future of 
Information Systems, K. V. Andersen and M. T Vendelo ed., Oxford: 
Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 2004, pp. 61-93. 
[16] L. V. Hove, "Electronic purses in Euroland: why do penetration and 
usage rates differ?," SUERF Studies, M. Balling, ed.: Vienna, Austria: 
Société Universitaire Européenne de Recherches Financières, 2004. 
[17] S. Balasubramanian, R. Peterson, and S. Jarvenpaa, “Exploring the 
implications of m-commerce for markets and marketing,” Journal of 
the academy of Marketing Science, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 348-361, 2002. 
[18] Y. Aoyama, “Sociospatial dimensions of technology adoption: recent 
M-commerce and E-commerce developments,” Environment and 
Planning A, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1201-1222, 2003 
 
 
181
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

