Application of User Involvement and Quality Function Deployment to Design 
Intelligent Service Systems 
Víctor Acinas Garzón 
Communications Division 
Instalaciones Inabensa S.A. 
Madrid, Spain 
victor.acinas@inabensa.abengoa.com 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a new method for capturing 
user needs in product design. The method links user needs to 
product design by combining user involvement techniques 
together with Quality Function Deployment (QFD). The 
methodology is applicable for product development as well as 
the design of novel products that cannot base its design on 
incremental 
improvements 
of 
existing 
products. 
The 
methodology is illustrated through application to the design of 
a novel intelligent service system that aims to create channels 
for communication and interaction between people with some 
kind of special need and their environment. 
Keywords-intelligent 
service 
system 
design; 
user 
involvement; 
quality 
function 
deployment; 
accessibility; 
inclusion. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The information and knowledge society provides scant 
attention to users with special needs, despite the increase in 
number and needs [1], [2]. The information and knowledge 
society should not only cover mainstream user’s demand, 
but also individuals needs through software services. It is of 
great importance to develop new methodologies that take 
users with special needs into consideration from the early 
steps of product design. 
A widely adopted product design methodology is Quality 
Function Deployment (QFD). QFD is spread across different 
fields, 
including 
software 
development 
[3][4]. 
This 
methodology translates the voice of the customer into design 
requirements and product specifications through the House 
of Quality Matrix, see Fig. 1. However, QFD tool can find 
difficulties to capture [5], understand and organize user 
needs [6] as well as connecting technical requirements and 
setting targets according to quality of service [7]. Moreover, 
QFD can not be used in multiple product design [8] and 
innovative interactive systems [9]. 
To improve QFD and exploit its flexibility [10], QFD is 
combined with other methodologies such as Kano Model, 
FMEA, 
KC 
and 
TRIZ 
[10][11][12][13]. 
However, 
modifications to QFD lack from an active user involvement 
that is of special relevance for social applications [14]. 
For these reasons, INREDIS (RElationship INterfaces 
between the environment and DISabled people) project [15] 
developed a design methodology that on one side researches 
user needs, including user with special needs, in connection 
with the information and knowledge society and, on the 
other, current and emerging technological solutions that can 
meet user needs through tailored software services. 
The design methodology was used to design an 
intelligent service system that creates channels for 
communication and interaction accessible to all users. 
INREDIS on-going work is to develop the intelligent 
service system that will enable the creation of channels for 
communication and interaction among people with special 
needs and the information and knowledge society according 
to the design methodology results. The intelligent service 
system goal is to deliver accessible software services that 
meet a wider range of needs than current technological 
solutions and is capable of evolving in relation to the needs 
of the users and the environment. As a result, in this paper 
INREDIS design methodology is illustrated in connection 
with the design of INREDIS intelligent service system 
design. Thus, in connection with the design of INREDIS 
intelligent service, Section II describes the design 
methodology, Section III presents the design methodology 
results and Section IV the conclusions and future work. 
II. 
DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
INREDIS design methodology consists of four major 
steps as outlined in Fig. 1. These steps represent a 
comprehensive analysis of technological solutions and users, 
including those with special needs. This methodology 
overcomes traditional QFD difficulties in capturing [5] 
understanding 
and 
organizing 
user 
needs 
[6] 
by 
complementing traditional methods used in QFD [5] with 
user involvement. Furthermore, by relying on user 
involvement, it is possible to develop novel products [9] 
[16]. 
The first step of the intelligent system design is to 
research the relationship between users, including those with 
special 
needs, 
and 
technology, 
in 
particular 
with 
technologies that are characteristic of the information and 
48
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

knowledge society. This analysis seeks to identify the main 
barriers that users with and without functional diversity 
encounter in using technology. 
For this, user tests [17][18], heuristic analysis [19], 
surveys [20], interviews [14][21] and the people led 
innovation methodology [16] were carried out in order to 
understand the real-world problems in interaction between 
users, devices and technologies in the environment and 
pinpoint interoperability issues among devices and systems 
in different contexts. This step yields a list of user 
requirements as well as importance values of each 
requirement. 
 
Figure 1. INREDIS intelligent service system design methodology outline. 
The contexts of study are: telecare, domestic, urban, 
banking, buy/sell, educational and work. Furthermore, six 
types of user profiles with specific special needs are 
evaluated, visual, hearing, mobility, handling, cognitive and 
elderly. These contexts and profiles are considered across all 
the design steps. 
The second step is to analyze the current technological 
environment, taking into account different emerging 
technologies that may contribute to the development of the 
technological environment and to further the state of the art 
of these technologies. Thus, this step investigates the 
phenomenon of converging technologies in the information 
and knowledge society and relevant to users with special 
needs, while it takes into account other usage social 
considerations. This step yields a list of technical 
requirements as well as their correlations. 
Hence, the results from step one and two are analyzed in 
step three to select the most relevant issues for the design 
and development of an intelligent service system for users 
with special needs. This analysis yields the values to include 
in the QFD, which are, on one side, the technical 
requirements, priorities, targets and competitive benchmarks 
with other solutions, and, on the other, the planning matrix. 
The selection of these is done through different group 
sessions that include experts from INREDIS project with 
user and technical backgrounds. The resulting issues form 
the starting point for the next and final step.  
Drawing from the information gathered to this point, the 
fourth step ensures relating user and technical perspectives 
through a QFD [3][22]. The House of Quality function 
deployment matrix provides a cornerstone to engage 
technical and user experts in a discussion on the relative 
importance and relationship among technical characteristics 
and customer attributes when designing and developing an 
intelligent system for users with special needs. Furthermore, 
this will enable to prioritize technical solutions requirements 
relevant to the information and knowledge society and in line 
with users with special needs. This is done by weighting the 
importance of the user input together with the technical 
requirements and their relation. 
III. 
DESIGN METHODOLOGY RESULTS 
The described design methodology surfaced accessibility 
and usability barriers as well as preferences with 
interconnected with technical characteristics. These shows 
the way to develop novel solutions or implementations that 
break down barriers with the information and knowledge 
society to provide more efficiently and effectively software 
services. The design yielded that the most relevant technical 
characteristics when designing an intelligent service system 
to create accessible channels for communication and 
interaction are: 
 
1. Openness: must be based on standards and/or free 
and open source technologies to ease adoption. 
2. Interoperability: the intelligent service system has 
to interoperate with the widest range of software 
services and technological solutions. 
3. Portability: the intelligent system must be able to 
operate on different devices with different platform 
solutions. 
4. Implementation cost: the intelligent service system 
must be easy to access/install and use as well as to 
update. 
5. IT architecture compatibility: the intelligent service 
system must be compatible with other IT 
architectures and paradigms such as service 
oriented, event driven and intelligent agent 
architectures. 
Interestingly, these technical characteristics can be 
summarised, leaving implementation costs aside, as a surge 
49
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

towards an intelligent service system that interoperates with 
current or upcoming solutions whether open, private or 
standardised. Furthermore, as to integrate its usage and 
functionality in the daily life of the user and the contexts 
under study, it shall also be available everywhere. For these 
reasons, the main focus shall be placed on creating an 
intelligent service system that is accessible, interoperable 
and ubiquitous to users with special needs, and, thus, to 
everyone, see Figure 2. 
 
 
Information Knowledge Society
Work
Telecare
Bank
Urban
Education
Smart 
Home
Buy/Sell
Accesible, Interoperable and Ubiquitous 
Intelligent Service System
People with individual 
needs and wishes
 
Figure 2. Outline of intelligent service system design. 
Only by implementing an intelligent service system 
focused on accessible, interoperable and ubiquitous 
technical characteristics users will adopt it to impact daily 
life. Ultimately, users with special needs can communicate 
and interact with the information and knowledge society in 
virtually all contexts.  
A. Current software services market   
Despite the growing needs and number of users with 
special needs, according to the design studies in step 1 and 
step 2, the current market scenario does not offer accessible 
software services that fulfil all needs. So far, the trend has 
been to incorporate technological advances as adaptations to 
existing software services that make them accessible and 
usable by e.g. elderly and people with disabilities. However, 
the studies show that, often, adapted software services do 
not even entirely cover targeted user needs. Since these 
services were planned from inception to mainstream users, 
adaptations to cover other needs are at best, troublesome 
and costly and at worse, unattainable. Fig. 3 shows the 
current market situation, software services depicted in a 
fading colour indicate needs not fully covered. 
Users
Needs
Mainstream services
Adapted mainstream services
Unsatisfied demand
Service 1
Service 2
Service 1 Adapted
Service n
Service 3
Service 2 Adapted
Service 3 Adapted
Service n Adapted
 
Figure 3. Market software services situation according to the number of 
users and needs. 
For instance, despite banking software services may 
increase the fonts to enable its use for people with visual 
impairments; the user may require plain language to fully 
understand what is shown.  Even more, adaptations often 
involve heterogeneous modifications that hinder the 
development of standardized technologies that can operate 
with any type of device [23]. This creates a fragmented and 
non-structured market jeopardising user involvement in the 
information and knowledge society. 
B.  Future software  market 
For these reasons, the future market of software services 
should address fully the user needs and overcome software 
service adaptation deficiencies [24]. Hence, according to the 
design methodology an intelligent service system has to 
create channels for communication and interaction which 
provide tailored services to fulfil user's special needs 
comprehensively through accessible, interoperable and 
ubiquitous software services. In doing so, the services may 
need to be, not only aggregated with others but 
complemented with assistive technologies. Fig. 4, illustrates 
the composition of tailored software services. 
 
 
Figure 4. Example of tailored software service composition. 
Interestingly, tailored software services are not only of 
use for people with special needs. A common example is the 
difficulties everyone experiences when looking rich-colour 
50
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

interfaces under direct sunlight. It would be of help to all 
users if the interface changed automatically to a high-
contrast. Fig. 5 shows how tailored software services 
generated 
through 
an 
accessible, 
interoperable 
and 
ubiquitous intelligent service system can fullfil users’  needs  
demand through service aggregation.  
 
 
Figure 5. Market scenario according to the number of users and needs. 
 
Thus, rather than developing or modifying software 
services an accessible, interoperable and ubiquitous 
intelligent service system builds on existing software 
services and creates, in line with user needs, channels for 
communication and interaction with the information 
knowledge society [25]. Furthermore, this design leaves the 
door open to all software service providers to interoperate 
with the intelligent service system and, thus, improves user 
satisfaction, while co-existing with current mainstream 
(adapted) software services. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The application of user involvement together with the 
Quality of House function deployment presented in this 
paper enables building an intelligent service system to meet 
comprehensively user needs for software services. This 
approach points out the importance to create tailored 
software services that meet not only mainstream users but 
also users with special needs. These tailored software 
services can be created through the design of an intelligent 
service system that implements the characteristics of 
accessibility, interoperability and ubiquity and takes into 
account the user preferences. In this way, current software 
services can be accessed and use anywhere together with 
others to provide tailored services that match with the user 
needs and wishes. 
In line with the presented design, the next step is to 
develop INREDIS intelligent service system to build 
tailored software services that meet both mainstream users 
and users with special needs. Later on, INREDIS intelligent 
service system will be validated in real life tests within the 
considered project scenarios; mobility, electronic media, 
telecare, domestic, urban, banking, shopping, educational 
and work. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research described in this paper arises from a 
Spanish research project called INREDIS (INterfaces for 
RElations 
between 
Environment 
and 
people 
with 
DISabilities) [http://www.inredis.es]. INREDIS is led by 
Technosite and funded by CDTI (Industrial Technology 
Development Centre), under the CENIT (National Strategic 
Technical 
Research 
Consortia) 
Programme, 
in 
the 
framework of the Spanish government's INGENIO 2010 
initiative. 
The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the 
authors and are not necessarily those of the INREDIS 
project’s partners or of the CDTI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] MeAC. Measuring Progress of eAcessibility in Europe. Assessment 
of the Status of eAccessibility in Europe. Main Report. October 
(2007). 
[2] Ageing characterises the demographic perspectives of the European 
societies. Eurostat report 72/2008.  
[3] L. Chan and M. Wu, “QFD: a literature review”, European Journal of 
Operational Research, Vol. 143, pp.463-497, 2002. 
[4] J. R. Sharma, S.A. Tabarno, and A. M. Rawani, “Integrating QFD 
with software development engineering for higher customer 
satisfaction”, Indian Journal of Information Science & Technology, 
May, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp.35-43, 2006. 
[5] R. E. Zultner, “Objectives: The missing piece of the requirements 
puzzle,”  Proc. Structured Development Froum XI, pp. 1-11, 1990. 
[6] J. J. Cristiano, J.K. Liker, and C. C. White, “Key factors in the 
succesful application of quality function deployment,” IEEE Trans. 
Eng. Manag., vol.48, no. 1, pp. 81-95, 2001. 
[7] L. Xiaoqing and Z. Lianzhang, “Design of SOA Based Web Service 
Systems Using QFD for Satisfaction of Quality of Service 
Requirements,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on Web 
Services, pp. 567-574, 2009. 
[8] Y. Sireli, P. Kauffmann, and E. Ozan, “Integration of Kano's Model 
into QFD for Multiple Product Design,” IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management, 54(2), pp.380-390, 2007. 
[9] A. Dearden, S. Howard, “Capturing user requirements and priorities 
for innovative interactive systems,” Computer Human Interaction 
Conference, pp. 160–167, 1998.    
[10] A. Hassan, A. Siadat, J. Y. Dantan, and P. Martin, “Interoperability of 
QFD, FMEA, and KCs methods in the product development process,” 
IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and 
Engineering Management, pp. 403-407, 2009. 
[11] S. Li, Y. Ma, G. Yang, and Y. Li, “An Integrated Mode Research of 
QFD and TRIZ and Its Applications,” Second International 
Workshop on Computer Science and Engineering, vol. 1, pp.548-552, 
2009. 
[12] C. Ankur, R. Jain, A. Singh, and P. Mishra, “Integration of Kano’s 
Model into quality function deployment (QFD),” International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, pp. 268-278, 2010. 
[13] K. S. Chin, L.S. Zheng, and L. Wei, “A hybrid roughcut process 
planning 
for 
quality,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology, vol. 22, pp. 733–743, 2003. 
[14] M. Valles, Técnicas cualitativas de investigación social. Reflexión 
metodológica y práctica profesional. Síntesis. Madrid, 1997. 
[15] INREDIS: INREDIS project, www.inredis.es last visited on 
December 2010. 
[16] Institute 
of 
Innovation 
for 
Human 
Well-being 
(I2BC), 
http://www.i2bc.es/inicio/pli last visited on December 2010. 
51
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

[17] J. Lores, T. Granollers, and S. Lana, Introducción a la interacción 
persona-ordenador. AIPO. Madrid, 2002. 
[18] K. Pernice and J. Nielsen, How to Conduct usability Evaluations for 
Accesibility: Methodology Guidelines for Yesting Websites and 
Intranets With Users Who Use Assistive Technology. Freemont: 
Nielsen Norman Group, 2001. 
[19] J. Nielsen, Usability engineering. London, UK: Academia Press 
Profesional, Boston, MA., 1993. 
[20] F. Alvira, La encuesta: una perspectiva general metodológica. CIS. 
Madrid, 2004. 
[21] L. Alonso, La mirada cualitativa en sociología. Fundamentos. 
Madrid, 1998. 
[22] Y. Akao, Quality Function Deployment: Integrating Customer 
Requirements into Product Design. Productivity Press. Cambridge, 
1990. 
[23] A. Sloane, Home-Oriented Informatics and Telematics, Springer-
IFIP, pp. 323-335. Springer Boston, 2005. 
[24] C. A. Velasco, Y. Mohamad, and J. Pullmann, “Dynamic Adaptation 
of Web 2.0 Applications by Combining Extended Device Profiles. 
Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Applications and 
Services,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 5616, pp. 
797-802, Springer, Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009. 
[25] M. Pous and L. Ceccaroni, “Multimodal Interaction in Distributed 
and Ubiquitous Computing,” Fifth International Conference on 
Internetand Web Applications and Services (ICIW), pp. 457-462, 
Barcelona, 2010. 
52
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

