Exploring the User Security Experience of Mobile Payment in China 
 
Jiaxin Zhang and Yan Luximon* 
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hung Hom, Hong Kong 
e-mails: jx.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, *yan.luximon@polyu.edu.hk 
 
 
Abstract— Mobile payment services are in widespread use in 
China, but with them come growing concerns about security. 
Although 
the 
security 
of 
mobile 
payment 
has 
been 
demonstrated, a sample of user experience derived from real 
world data must be collected to understand the complex use 
context. This study aims to contribute to the current research 
by providing qualitative data through in-depth semi-structured 
interviews. The research explores the user security experience 
in a variety of use contexts by investigating mobile payment 
services in a mature market. The findings showed that users 
view their security experience as composed both financial and 
privacy aspects. The key user experience for mobile payment 
security was divided into five components: online mobile 
transaction, in-store payment, peer-to-peer payment, payment 
interaction in the physical world, and the network environment. 
Useful elements were also identified for enhancing security 
experience 
for 
mobile 
payment. 
Investigating 
security 
experience and user needs when designing mobile payment 
systems in context will provide a more holistic picture of the 
security needs surrounding mobile payment. 
Keywords-mobile payment; security; user experience; use 
context. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Advances in mobile technology have led to the increased 
popularity of mobile services in recent years. Mobile payment 
is vital to the development of mobile services, allowing for 
numerous diverse electronic transactions, such as online and 
offline purchasing, payment of bills and peer-to-peer transfer 
[1][2]. As China is one of the largest mobile payment markets 
in the world, it has drawn a great deal of attention from both 
practitioners and researchers [3]. According to the 40th China 
Statistical Report on Internet Development [4], there are 502 
million mobile payment users in China. 90% of users (463 
million) use mobile payment in offline situations, resulting in 
a variety of use contexts; these include payments made at 
physical stores, large retailers, vending machines, restaurants, 
hotels and public transportation. Mobile payment platforms, 
such as Alipay and WeChat Pay [5] have not only reduced the 
use of cash, but have also provided other supporting functions, 
including account and money management, location 
information and financial services, which enhance user 
experience while using mobile payment [2]. It is not surprising 
that mobile payment has become a part of everyday life in 
China. However, this widespread adoption has created 
multiple transaction scenes, leading to increasing security 
concerns in both the financial and privacy aspects [6][7]. 
This paper focuses on the security experience of mobile 
payment in a well-developed mobile services market, where 
various mobile payment scenarios can be identified and 
discussed. The purpose of this study is to investigate the 
specific user experiences of mobile payment to explore the 
associated factors and use contexts related to specific security 
experience. The study also tried to determine the user 
perspective of mobile payment security. The findings of this 
research could provide a comprehensive understanding of 
users’ security needs in different mobile payment scenarios 
and past experiences of the users in a mature market of mobile 
payment. The following sections of this article are organized 
as follows: Section II introduces the state of the art in mobile 
payment and security research. Section III describes the 
method applied for the study. Section IV outlines the 
participants’ demographic information and results of the 
interview. Section V compares the current results with 
previous research outcomes. Section VI presents the 
conclusion of the main findings and indicates the possible 
fields for future research. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Previous studies have found a strong relationship between 
perceived security of electronic commerce and user attitudes 
toward its adoption [7]-[9]. Research studies have reported 
that security risks have been an important factor influencing 
customer’s willingness in using mobile payment in China 
[10]. Although this consumer “adoption” study has 
demonstrated the importance of mobile payment security, 
simply using “adoption” research to investigate the impact of 
mobile payment security might not be effective enough for 
evaluating the overall situation and gaining broader insights 
about this area [11].  
With the increasing adoption of mobile services, 
researchers have emphasized on the importance of studying 
the relationship between use context and security of mobile 
payment. For instance, Figge [12] is concerned about 
information 
confidentiality 
regarding 
the 
context 
computation. Since consumer information is sent out for 
improving mobile services in different use contexts, service 
providers could access to a lot of personal information. 
Dahlberg et al. [11] have mentioned the research value of 
understanding use context and security in mobile payment, 
and suggested the need to map the use context of mobile 
payment with security methods, which can be regarded as a 
promising research area.  
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Today, the use context of mobile payment in China is more 
and more complex, as the platforms such as Alipay and 
WeChat Pay have created a mobile lifestyle rather than simply 
providing a service. This calls for studies to understand of 
security experience of mobile payment usage in a particular 
situation. As compared to provious empirical studies, 
interviews can help in collecting data regarding user attitude 
and experience regarding the daily use of mobile payment 
services in use contexts. This contributes to an overall 
understanding of the formation of security experience 
depending on the scenarios and provides insights for 
enhancing mobile payment interaction. 
III. 
METHOD 
Semi-structured in-depth interviews were adopted for this 
research to investigate the user security experience of mobile 
payment in order to form a holistic understanding of the 
phenomenon. 
A. Participants 
In order to identify the most cases across various payment 
scenarios, we conducted the research in a mature market to 
collect as much user experience as possible. We recruited 10 
participants (5 male and 5 female users) in Guangdong 
province in China, where mobile payment services are widely 
used. 
B. Interview Design 
A semi-structured in-depth interview was conducted for 
each participant individually. Each interview ranged from 25 
to 45 minutes, depending on the participant’s experience in 
the topic. The interview was conducted either in person or by 
phone. Before the interview, each participant completed a 
questionnaire on their demographic information as well as 
their experience with using mobile payment, including the 
platforms they had used, the frequency and duration of use and 
the transaction amount per month. At the beginning of the 
interview, all participants were asked if they believe mobile 
payment is secure. Next, we asked participants about their 
security concerns when using mobile payment. The purpose 
of these two questions was to determine what users want to 
protect most when using mobile payment, thus allowing us to 
identify user concerns regarding mobile payment security 
more accurately. Participants were then required to think 
about previous secure or insecure experiences in different use 
contexts of mobile payment. Finally, the interviewer asked 
participants what factors they believed to influence their 
perception of security in mobile payment, and to identify their 
reasons. All interviews were recorded for data analysis. 
C. Data Analysis 
The coding method applied in this study is that of Strauss, 
which requires grounding to the data [13]. First, the voice data 
were transcribed to text. We examined the data, made notes 
and coded according to three themes: security concerns in 
mobile payment, security experience and use context and 
other elements related security experience. Labels and themes 
were developed based on each topic to create categories and 
generate theory. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The findings that emerged from the interview are as 
shown. The results section presents a detailed explanation of 
how user security experience is formed, as well as the 
important elements that influence it. 
A. General Information 
The average age for participants is 25.6 years (SD=2.12; 
age range: 21-29). All participants had experience using 
mobile payment, such as WeChat Pay, Alipay, UnionPay 
Online, Apple Pay, Baidu Wallet, JD Pay, Tenpay, 99 Bill or 
Mobile Banking. 70% are customers with more than 3 years’ 
experience using mobile payment; 20% are users with 1-3 
years’ experience; and 10% have less than 1 year of 
experience. The percentage of monthly expenditure through 
mobile payment ranges from 7.5% to 100% of their monthly 
income. 
B. Security Concerns in Mobile Payment 
All participants were asked at the beginning “Do you think 
it is secure to adopt mobile payment service and what are your 
security concerns with it?” 5 participants (50%) responded 
that they believe it is secure, while 4 participants (40%) 
believe it is insecure. 1 participant (10%) stated that it depends 
on the reputation of the service provider. 8 participants (80%) 
said that they considered both financial and privacy aspects; 
of these, 3 participants concluded that financial security was 
more important, 2 participants stated that information security 
was more essential, and 3 participants thought that financial 
and information security are equally important. 2 participants 
considered only one or the other of financial or information 
security. Surprisingly, 2 participants (20%) stated that they 
had few worries regarding potential financial loss, due to the 
small amounts of their transactions and high popularity of the 
mobile payment platform. 
TABLE I.  
PRIVACY INFORMATION CONCERNS 
Privacy Information concerns 
Privacy information 
Frequency 
Phone number 
7 
ID number 
5 
Consumption record 
3 
Address 
2 
Cookies 
2 
Account 
1 
Job information 
1 
Name 
1 
Financial information 
1 
 
According to the above responses, most participants 
emphasized the importance of their privacy. We explored the 
reasons for this with further questions, and 3 participants said 
it was because relationships can be traced through 
information. For example, they believe that a person’s mobile 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

payment account could reflect a behavior pattern, or a 
dishonest browsing history might have a negative influence on 
their personal credit. Participants also mentioned the specific 
privacy information they would be reluctant to disclose, as 
shown in Table I. 
C. Security experience and use context 
This section describes the security experience mentioned 
by participants in the interview process in order to present a 
comprehensive picture of security in daily life. We explored 
the security experience of our participants mainly by asking 
“In what situation do you use mobile payment service” and 
requiring them to “describe secure and insecure use contexts 
of mobile payment usage according to your own experience”. 
In the case of mobile payment platforms, such as WeChat Pay 
and Alipay, participants in our study indicated a variety of 
user experiences that structured their perception of the 
security of these systems. Based on our analysis, user 
experience can be divided into five payment situations: online 
mobile transaction, in-store payment, peer-to-peer payment, 
payment interaction in the physical world and network 
environment. Online transaction focuses on payment 
scenarios made entirely on a mobile device. In-store payment 
involves a face-to-face transaction between merchants and 
consumers, while peer-to-peer payment describes a transfer 
made between parties with relatively strong ties. Payment 
interaction in the physical world involves payment between 
users and machines in the public space, and the final category 
refers to users’ selection of network environment for mobile 
payment. 
1) Online mobile transaction: The major experiences 
with online mobile transaction are associated with online 
shopping. In this situation, participants responded with two 
security considerations. The first relates to payment system 
usability. A system that runs smoothly and can provide 
efficient feedback during a transaction is necessary to ensure 
a positive user security experience. The second user security 
experience derives from the reputation of the merchant or 
payment service developer. In the case of developer 
reputation (with 70% of participants’ concern), participants 
mainly worried about the security of their information. In 
terms of merchant reputation (with 50% of participants’ 
concern), most of participants worried about the quality of 
goods bought online. Of note, 2 participants stated that  
insurance for account security was provided by certain 
platforms, such as WeChat Pay, Alipay and JD Pay, which 
enhanced their perception of the security of the system. 
     We also asked our participants to compare the platforms 
they have used in order to further understand the relationship 
between user experience and reputation. Alipay and WeChat 
Pay are the most popular mobile payment platforms in China. 
5 respondents (50%) stated their belief that both of them are 
secure, while 5 respondents (50%) perceived that their 
security levels are different. 3 respondents indicated that 
frequency of use of a platform influenced their perception of 
security, which could lead to their belief that either Alipay or 
WeChat Pay is securer. Another factor is the different brand 
images of Alipay and WeChat Pay. U2 participant explained, 
“Alipay looks like a large platform with various kinds of 
merchants in it. I am afraid that my privacy will be stolen and 
my money is insecure… Compared with Alipay, WeChat Pay 
is a platform for transferring between friends…Also, I 
usually use WeChat to keep in touch with my friends. I prefer 
to use WeChat Pay in my daily life since it is convenient and 
secure.” 
2) In-store payment: In the context of the physical store, 
mobile payment systems enable consumers to pay by 
scanning a merchant’s QR code or by having their account’s 
QR code scanned by a merchant. In the first case, users scan 
a QR code provided by the merchant, then input the charge 
as well as a password to settle the payment (Figure 1). In the 
second case, merchants input the amount of money first, 
while the consumer provides their account’s QR code for the 
merchants to scan (Figure 2). This second transaction can be 
settled without the user inputting a password. The security 
experience is formed through the interaction between 
merchant and customer, as well as the physical environment. 
2 participants (20%) said they felt insecure when paying by 
having their QR code scanned by merchants. They worried 
that merchants would charge them an amount of money 
higher than the actual price; in addition, this method of 
payment does not require their password to pay. These factors 
decrease their perception of security.  
     In addition, 2 participants (20%) felt the physical 
environment could be a risk for mobile payment users. Since 
surveillance cameras are installed in public places, users 
cannot avoid being recorded every time they input their 
password. U9 gave a detailed description of the situation: 
“There are surveillance cameras in supermarkets or banks. 
When I use mobile payment to pay in these places, I input my 
passwords in a hurry sometimes. The charging process needs 
to be quick, so I am not able to use my hand to cover it, or my 
phone screen is too large to cover. My password would be 
easy to record.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  User scanning merchant’s QR code for payment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Merchant scanning customer’s QR code for payment 
3) Peer-to-peer payment: One particular advantage of 
mobile payment is that it supports peer-to-peer transfer, 
 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

leading to the convenience of transaction between 
individuals. Peer-to-peer payment can occur between 
strangers, such as buying food at a kiosk or paying a taxi bill, 
or between friends, such as sharing a dining fee or sending 
“gift money” [14]. Specifically, 1 participant (10%) 
mentioned their belief that the method of transferring money 
within a chat group is secure, where sender and recipient 
already know each other. This method allows immediate 
feedback, as well. U2 added that transactions among friends 
provide a much more secure experience in terms of mobile 
payment. For this reason, the participant prefers to use 
WeChat Pay rather than Alipay for peer-to-peer payment, as 
WeChat is also a chat application. In the case of payment 
between strangers, the participant stated that it is better to pay 
using paper money than to use mobile payment at a kiosk, 
because this might avoid the privacy being stolen. 
4) Payment interaction in the physical world: The 
adoption of mobile payment has encouraged the development 
of self-service equipment, such as ticket machines, vending 
machines and bike sharing. This allows transactions not only 
from person to person, but also between man and machine. In 
this study, however, we found particular concerns when 
participants interacted with these machines in the physical 
world, as the transaction context has become more complex.  
     This consideration is not only restricted to the user 
interface, but also applies to the physical environment. 
Mobile payment for bike sharing was mentioned by several 
participants. Currently, users can pay to share bikes in the city 
by scanning a QR code using a mobile payment system. 
Unlike the QR code scanning that happens between users in 
person, self-service payment in public places may pose more 
risks. One concern is about the legitimacy of QR codes 
(Figure 3). When a QR code is used for payment in a public 
place, it is possible for users to become involved in fraudulent 
activities. For example, 2 participants stated they cannot tell 
whether a QR code is the original or one pasted on by 
criminals in order to steal the users’ money.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Scanning a bike-sharing QR code in a public place 
Figure 4.  Payment settled in Mobike system 
Figure 5.  Payment settled in OfO system 
     Another concern is usability. Users have less experience 
when adopting a mobile payment system in a new context. 
The various payment processes across different services can 
cause an insecure experience. For example, in the bike-
sharing system OfO, users must manually stop the charges 
after they return a bike, while Mobike (another bike-sharing 
system) stops charging the user automatically after returning 
a bike (Figure 4 and Figure 5). One participant worried that 
the manual system (OfO) might overcharge them if they 
forget to stop the charges after returning a bike. However, 
another participant thought the automatic system (Mobike) 
might secretly charge more than it should, as the system does 
not allow users to confirm the amount before payment is 
settled. This inconsistent process is likely to create an 
insecure experience, as users need more time to adapt to 
various payment processes despite the similar use context. 
5) Network environment: Our research showed that 
participants are also concerned about the network 
environment when using mobile payment. 70% of 
participants emphasized that they would not use mobile 
payment on public Wi-Fi networks to avoid risk, while 5 
participants (50%) said they would not connect to public Wi-
Fi at all. It is clear that the mobile wireless network is a 
necessary trusted context for mobile transactions.  
D. Other elements that relate to the security experience 
In addition to user security experience, participants also 
mentioned other possible elements that influence the 
perceived security of mobile payment. 5 participants (50%) 
expressed the need for the customization of mobile payment 
platforms in order to improve their security experience. 
Different use contexts should be tailored to the particular user 
in terms of authentication methods for mobile payment. For 
instance, users require more complicate authentication 
methods (multi-factor authentication) to protect the payment 
of large transaction amount, while they want simpler methods 
to facilitate the payment of a small transaction amount. 
Participants also revealed that they are not being told what 
personal information is being disclosed by mobile payment 
platforms, but that they need to be made aware so that they 
can make choices that avoid disclosures of privacy. Another 
consideration is that designers need to think about users’ 
capability of customizing the user interface. One participant 
said, “If there are too many user settings, it will be a mess. I 
  
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

would be afraid that the device cannot run smoothly. Also, I 
will forget my settings.”  
What is interesting to note is that participants developed 
certain self-directed approaches to help themselves “feel more 
secure” when using mobile payment, such as hiding 
unfamiliar functions in the platform, regularly deleting 
records of mobile payment usage on their device, linking a 
credit card to their mobile payment user account or using two-
step authentication on two different devices. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Security concerns 
We investigated user concerns about security in mobile 
payment in both the financial and privacy aspect. As users 
connect with various kinds of services, including food take-
out or delivery services, DiDi taxi, online and offline 
purchasing and social media, personal data is collected by 
mobile payment platforms to understand the particular user’s 
behavior pattern and provide a more efficient service. A 
previous study revealed that social network services can 
expose user behavior patterns, known as privacy disclosure 
patterns [15]; our research found that users believe mobile 
payment platforms pose a similar risk to user privacy [16]. 
Based on the responses of our participants, a focus on intent 
to disclose private information through mobile payment, 
rather than concerns about financial losses, might have a more 
effective impact on user security experience. While some 
participants discussed the personal information they provided 
on mobile payment platforms, future research could 
investigate the importance of different types of personal data 
accessed by mobile payment systems and the possible 
consequence of privacy disclosure in mobile payment. 
B. Weakening or strengthening user security experience 
In examining the use context of mobile payment, we 
identified experiences that could strengthen or weaken 
perceived user security in particular situations. According to 
our participants’ responses as well as the previous research 
[17], reputation is an important factor in the adoption of 
mobile commerce, especially in online shopping. A good 
reputation guarantees the security of possession and privacy. 
A readily available payment record will enhance the user’s 
security experience, while delayed feedback or lack of 
information will weaken it. Regarding the payment process, 
participants added that when they pay without a password or 
have their codes scanned by a merchant to pay, they felt 
insecure. This is because they cannot confirm the transaction 
amount before the payment settled. These scenarios indicate 
that users expect to have better control over managing their 
accounts or the transaction process in order to enhance their 
security experience when using mobile payment. Unlike 
actual control, which refers to the capability of changing a 
situation, perceived control emphasizes the user’s feeling of 
their ability to maintain a coming event [18]. Previous studies 
have demonstrated the importance of perceived control on 
security problems in other contexts [18][19]. The results 
presented in this study lead us to recommend more studies to 
investigate the influence of perceived control in mobile 
payment. 
In addition, users felt more secure when money was 
transferred to their friends, rather than to strangers or 
merchants. Similar to the findings of a previous study [20], 
participants perceived the social relations in WeChat to be 
based on real life, while the social relations in Alipay are 
mostly based on virtual situations. The strong ties built in a 
user’s actual life develop a sense of trustworthiness in mobile 
payment. According to previous studies [21], social influence 
can not only affect the user’s intention of adopting mobile 
payment by enhancing its perceived usefulness, but also 
reducing user’s perceived risk of mobile payment. The 
responses in this study reveal a relationship between social 
influence and perceived security in mobile payment. 
C. The need for customization in the security experience 
The interviews revealed the need for customization to 
enhance the security experience of mobile payment. Based on 
our results, setting authentication methods according to the 
use context holds the greatest attraction for participants. 
Authentication methods are a vital issue when it comes to the 
tradeoff between convenience and security in technology 
usage [22]. While customization of authentication methods is 
crucial for a positive security experience, use context is an 
important element. In this case, tailoring would occur 
according to “location, time or resources” [23]. The complex 
nature of mobile payment usage means designers must 
consider the extent to which users be given permission to 
customize the platform, in terms of the user’s cognitive 
capabilities and the limitations of the mobile device. The 
creation of self-directed approaches in order to feel secure as 
reported by participants in the interviews may present possible 
solutions to this problem. Under this approach, a method of 
participatory design could be created to study the details for 
customization. Designers could learn from users’ experience 
and knowledge, formed within the use context, in order to 
develop a comprehensive understanding of the users’ needs 
[24]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Although mobile payment has been adopted across many 
aspects of life in China, users have security concerns in 
different use contexts. In this study, we explored users’ 
perspectives of mobile payment security in various use 
contexts, and discussed factors that could enhance user 
security experience. Through the interview process, we 
identified five use contexts for mobile payment to present a 
more holistic picture of mobile payment in China The study 
finding also recognized the need of design customization for 
improving the security. The result of this research could 
provide a reference to enhance security experience design 
according to users’ needs and different use contexts in mature 
markets of mobile payment, while its effectiveness in 
developing markets of mobile payment will still require to be 
verified.  
Future research on the user security experience of mobile 
payment can be focusing on determining what can be user 
security concerns in various payment scenarios and 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

categorizing their security experience for better experience 
design.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the support of the UGC 
Funding Scheme from the Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Goeke and K. Pousttchi, “A scenario-based analysis of 
mobile payment acceptance,” Mobile Business and 2010 Ninth 
Global Mobility Roundtable (ICMB-GMR), 2010 Ninth 
International Conference on, IEEE Press, Jun. 2010, pp. 371-
378, doi: 10.1109/ICMB-GMR.2010.81 
[2] T. Oliveira, M. Thomas, G. Baptista, and F. Campos, “Mobile 
payment: Understanding the determinants of customer 
adoption and intention to recommend the technology,” 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 61, pp. 404-414, Mar. 
2016, doi: doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.03.030 
[3] A. Y. L. Chong, “Understanding mobile commerce 
continuance intentions: an empirical analysis of Chinese 
consumers,” Journal of Computer Information Systems, 
vol.53(4), 
 
pp. 
22-30, 
Dec. 
2015, 
doi: 
dx.doi.org/10.1080/08874417.2013.11645647 
[4] CNNIC, the 40th China Statistical Report on Internet 
Development, 
2017, 
http://www.cnnic.net.cn/hlwfzyj/hlwxzbg/hlwtjbg/201708/P0
20170807351923262153.pdf [retrieved: Feburary, 2018] 
[5] iiMedia Research, The report for mobile payment market 
research of the first half year of 2017, retrieved from: 
http://www.iimedia.cn/53957.html [retrieved: Feburary, 2018] 
[6] G. de Kerviler, N. T. M. Demoulin, and P. Zidda, “Adoption of 
in-store mobile payment: Are perceived risk and convenience 
the only drivers?” Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 
vol. 
31, 
pp.334-344, 
May 
2016, 
doi: 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2016.04.011 
[7] P. G. Schierz, O. Schilke, and B. W. Wirtz, “Understanding 
consumer acceptance of mobile payment services: An 
empirical analysis,” Electronic commerce research and 
applications, vol. 9(3), Aug. 2009, pp. 209-216, doi: 
doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2009.07.005 
[8] M. H. Shah, H. R. Peikari, and N. M. Yasin, “The determinants 
of individuals’ perceived e-security: Evidence from Malaysia,” 
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 34(1), 
Nov. 
2013, 
pp. 
48-57, 
doi: 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinformgt.2013.10.001. 
[9] C. Kim, W. Tao, N. Shin, and K. S. Kim, “An empirical study 
of customers’ perceptions of security and trust in e-payment 
systems,” Electronic commerce research and applications, vol. 
9(1), Jun. 2009, pp. 84-95. 
[10] W. Xu, “The Study of WeChat Payment Users Willingness 
Factor,” Journal of Service Science and Management, vol. 
10(3), Jun. 2017, pp. 251-259, doi: 10.4236/jssm.2017.103021 
[11] T. Dahlberg, J. Guo, and J. Ondrus, “A critical review of 
mobile payment research,” Electronic Commerce Research and 
Applications, vol. 14(5), Jul. 2015, pp. 265-284, doi: 
doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2015.07.006 
[12] S. Figge “Situation-dependent services —a challenge for 
mobile network operators,” Journal of Business Research, 
vol.57(12), 
Dec 
2004, 
pp. 
1416-1422, 
doi: 
doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963(02)00431-9 
[13] A. L. Strauss, Qualitative analysis for social scientists. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987 
[14] Y. M. Kow, X. Gui, and W. Cheng, “Special Digital Monies: 
The Design of Alipay and WeChat Wallet for Mobile Payment 
Practices in China,” IFIP Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction, Springer Press, Sep. 2017, pp. 136-155, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-68059-0_9 
[15] K. Li, Z. Lin, and X. Wang, “An empirical analysis of users’ 
privacy disclosure behaviors on social network sites,” 
Information & management, vol. 52(7), Jul. 2015, pp. 882-891, 
doi: dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2015.07.006 
[16] Y. Zhuang, A. C. M. Leung, and J. Hughes, “Matching in 
Proximity Authentication and Mobile Payment EcoSystem: 
What Are We Missing?” International Workshop on Radio 
Frequency Identification: Security and Privacy Issues, Springer 
Press, Jul. 2017, pp. 163-172, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-62024-
4_12 
[17] K. Siau and Z. Shen, “Building customer trust in mobile 
commerce,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 46, Apr. 2003, 
pp. 91-94, doi: 10.1145/641205.641211 
[18] N. Hajli and X. Lin, “Exploring the security of information 
sharing on social networking sites: The role of perceived 
control of information,” Journal of Business Ethics, vol. 
133(1), Sep. 2014, pp. 111-123, doi: 10.1007/s10551-014-
2346-x 
[19] D. L. Huang, P. L. P. Rau, and G. Salvendy, “Perception of 
information security,” Behaviour & Information Technology, 
vol. 
29(3), 
Nov. 
2008, 
pp. 
221-232, 
doi: 
dx.doi.org/10.1080/01449290701679361 
[20] Y. Qu, W. Rong, Y. Ouyang, H. Chen, and Z. Xiong, “Social 
Aware Mobile Payment Service Popularity Analysis: The Case 
of WeChat Payment in China,” Asia-Pacific Services 
Computing Conference, Springer Press, Dec. 2015,pp. 289-
299, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-26979-5_22 
[21] S. Yang, Y. Lu, S. Gupta, Y. Cao, and R. Zhang, “Mobile 
payment services adoption across time: An empirical study of 
the effects of behavioral beliefs, social influences, and personal 
traits,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 28(1), Sep. 2011, 
pp.129-142, doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2011.08.019 
[22] N. Gunson, D. Marshall, H. Morton, and M. Jack, “User 
perceptions of security and usability of single-factor and two-
factor authentication in automated telephone banking,” 
Computers & Security, vol. 30(4), Dec. 2010, pp. 208-220, doi: 
10.1016/j.cose.2010.12.001 
[23] Y. E. Lee and I. Benbasat, “Interface design for mobile 
commerce,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 46(12), Dec. 
2003, pp. 48-52, doi: 10.1145/953460.953487 
[24] M. J. Muller, “Participatory design: the third space in HCI,” in 
Human-Computer Interaction: Development Process, A. Sears 
and J. A. Jacko, Eds. Boca Raton: CRC Press, pp. 165-180, 
2007. 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

