Home Monitoring of Mental State With Computer Games 
Solution Suggestion to the Mental Modern Pentathlon Scoring Problem 
 
Pál Breuer; Péter Hanák; László Ketskeméty; Béla 
Pataki 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
e-mail: {breuer,hanak}@emt.bme.hu, kela@cs.bme.hu, 
pataki@.mit.bme.hu 
Gábor Csukly 
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy 
Semmelweis University 
Budapest, Hungary 
csukly.gabor@med.semmelweis-univ.hu 
 
 
Abstract— As society is aging, an increasing number of elderly 
people is affected by cognitive problems. Early detection of 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is crucial for slowing down 
deterioration at an early stage. Improving detection would 
allow aging in place and thus more cost effective care. 
However, detection usually occurs too late. Clinical tests are 
expensive, not frequent enough, and give only a single snapshot 
of cognitive performance. Regular home monitoring of the 
changes in mental state would be important but clinical tests 
have not been developed for this purpose. In this paper, the use 
of computer games in measuring and maintaining mental 
wellness in a regular and voluntary way is proposed. Problems 
and potential solutions are presented, with special emphasis 
given on the sensor fusion problem caused by the various 
games present. 
Keywords-mental wellness; home health monitoring;  serious 
games,  Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI),  mixed data fusion. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As society is aging (by 2060 more than 28% Europeans 
will be over 65 [1]), an increasing number of elderly people 
is affected by cognitive problems. With earlier detection of 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) deterioration could be 
significantly slowed down at an early stage. Slow decay of 
mental abilities is a normal process, which affects already 
age group 40 of the population, and which increasingly 
progress with age. It is not easy to identify the stage at which 
the process becomes abnormal and the affected person 
requires serious attention, perhaps medical intervention. 
Cognitive tests are usually performed only if there are 
already some concerns in the family about someone's 
cognitive ability, but due to the natural denying effect (by the 
elder person, the family and the friends) detection typically 
comes too late. 
Traditional, validated, paper-based tests constitute the 
gold standard but they have several drawbacks. To begin 
with, such tests require specialist centers and highly trained 
professionals. Therefore, there is a growing interest in the 
development of computerized cognitive assessment batteries 
[2][3][4]. But clinical tests, using either paper-based or 
computerized methods, are made quite infrequently, 
providing too sparse snapshots of the cognitive performance. 
More frequent and regular population screening would 
require exceedingly many professionals. 
Regular home monitoring of changes in mental state 
offers a powerful alternative, even if it only allows relatively 
noisy and less targeted measurements. But, they have the 
advantage of frequent assessment and so the possibility of 
evaluating temporal trends. Current clinical tests are not 
suitable for this purpose. Therefore, new measurement 
methodology must be developed and validated specifically 
for this strategy. Given that need, recent years have seen a 
growing interest in the development of special computer 
games for cognitive monitoring or training purposes. Few 
such games have been developed; those aim to monitor and 
train a specific cognitive domain, e.g., verbal fluency [5], 
executive functions [6] or perceptual and motor functions 
[7]. A major challenge in this direction is that entertainment 
capability and measurement power pose contradictory 
requirements. There are three approaches to game 
development for older people:  
• 
well-known, 
popular 
games 
(e.g., 
chess, 
tangram or tic-tac-toe [8], memory, freecell [9]),  
• 
slightly modified special clinical tests (e.g., 
corsicube [9]) transformed into games, 
• 
brand new games specially designed for this 
purpose [6]. 
Regular monitoring may be (1) controlled or (2) 
voluntary. Most elderly persons prefer to lead independent 
life as long as possible. Moreover, in the early monitoring 
period (before detecting any problem) they are mentally 
healthy. 
Therefore, 
controlled 
monitoring 
seems 
an 
undesirable option for them; it is expected to undermine 
independence and works only for a highly motivated 
minority. As increasingly more people (even the elderly) use 
computers, and many of them regularly play computer 
games, gaming activity could be exploited for measuring 
their performance in those games. In turn, that performance 
is related to their cognitive state, according to some 
experimental studies. The basic idea is the following: with 
regular use of computer games developed or modified 
specifically for elderly persons, we may be able to measure 
their mental changes and tendencies over time in an 
entertaining way, therefore, regularly and voluntarily. 
The methods, problems, and possible solutions to those, 
that are presented in this paper, are based on a recent 
research project (M3W, Maintaining and Measuring Mental 
Wellness [9][10][11]). The final goal of the project is to 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

develop a method for home monitoring mental state of 
elderly people, which is a very complex task. Therefore, only 
some subproblems and suggestions are presented in this 
paper. The considerations leading to the proposed 
architecture, the basic conceptual architecture of the system 
and some of the challenges are discussed. Among the 
numerous problems, this paper focuses on the special sensor 
fusion problem, which arises in the voluntary home 
monitoring scenario when several games (sensors) are 
present. 
Due to the complexity of the project, some important 
problems, such as motivation of the players, are not 
addressed here in detail. However, some decisions were 
indeed influenced by motivational considerations, especially 
the use of several games, which gave rise to the sensor fusion 
problem, as noted earlier. Another hard problem just 
mentioned is game selection. The right balance must be 
found between entertainment capability and measurement 
power. Based on our pilot experiments, the game set is still 
evolving. 
In that one year pilot study, more than 50 volunteers 
registered to take part and help evaluate the framework and 
the games developed at that time. Due to the voluntary 
nature of the project only about 20 of them played regularly 
for nearly one year. Of course, the parallel development of 
the program package was a drawback for the players. The 
average age of these regular players was 70.3 years, the 
standard deviation was 10.9 years. People played at home or 
in an elderly home. Eleven games had been developed and 
tested (two card games: FreeCell, Solitaire, one psychology-
cal test: Corsi Test, two logical games: Graphs and Rabbits, 
three attention games: Fowler, Odd One Out, Pick One Out, 
one retention game: Memory Game, two language-skill 
games: Word Finder, Word Puzzle). The one year timespan 
has limited relevance on the timescale of mental aging, but 
some findings have already surfaced, which are clearly 
important for the long run as well. Parallel to the home 
monitoring pilot study, a clinical experiment on patients with 
mental problems (MCI, Alzheimer’s disease, etc.) has also 
been running; those results are not discussed in this paper. 
Section II describes the basic model of the suggested 
mental state evaluation system and describes the important 
problems. Section III gives the suggested basic detection 
method using a single computer game. Section IV addresses 
the special sensor fusion problem caused by the very 
different nature of games, and suggests a possible solution. 
Section V summarizes the findings and gives the directions 
for further work. 
II. 
BASIC MODEL, PROBLEMS 
The basic conceptual architecture of the proposed system 
is shown in Figure 1. The final goal is to provide appropriate 
long-term feedback to the user (or to the caregiver, family 
member, medical expert, etc.). Short-term feedback is for 
motivation to continue participating in the monitoring (“Well 
done!”, “Play some more games!”). Long-term feedback is 
the result of the change detection estimation: whether a 
significant change of mental state has occurred or not. 
 
Figure 1.  Basic conceptual model of the cognitive state estimation system 
Beyond the general problems of such systems (e.g., data 
privacy concerns), this approach has its special challenges, 
some of these are given: 
1) How to measure the cognitive performance using 
computer games? 
2) How to cope with the sometimes heavy noise of the 
uncontrolled (home) measurement environment? 
3) How to motivate people to take part in the long run? 
4) How to compare performance shown in different 
games, which is basically a special sensor-fusion 
problem? 
To measure the cognitive performance three principles 
are followed: 
• 
To ensure the opportunity of measurements, proper 
serious games are selected, special ones are 
developed or clinical tests are modified taking into 
account the special requirements. Usually, games are 
modified to improve measurement capability; and 
tests are modified to be more entertaining. Most of 
them are logical puzzles, or they need the intensive 
use of the short-term memory (which is one of the 
best indicators of MCI), but other important 
parameters (attention, execution, language skills, 
etc.) are targeted as well. Two basic parameters are 
measured: the solving time of the puzzle and the 
good/bad steps taken during the solution. Currently 
only successful solutions are measured, for future 
work there are possibilities in the evaluation of the 
failed ones as well.  
• 
Because the measurement of the mental state on an 
absolute scale is very hard, only the change in the 
person’s performance is to be detected. For 
measuring a change, a reference is needed. There are 
two 
possibilities: 
the 
performance could 
be 
compared to a reference group; or it could be 
compared to a previously measured reference of the 
same person. Because the inter-personal comparison 
is affected by several parameters unknown in this 
voluntary, uncontrolled method (education, physical 
abilities, family conditions, profession, environment, 
etc.) the comparison in time to his/her own previous 
Game #1 
 
Database 
Game #2 
• 
• 
• 
Noise #2 
Noise #N 
Short-term and long-
term feedback 
Noise #1 
Game #N 
Framework     (game server, user 
management, data management, etc.) 
Estimation 
of the 
mental state 
change 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

performance was chosen. (However, since many 
people like to compare their own abilities to others' 
and to compete with others, such functionalities will 
be offered as well.) 
According to our experiments, the noise can be modeled 
using two terms: (1) zero mean low level noise caused by the 
random differences between the consecutive puzzles and by 
minor environmental disturbances (2) major disturbances. 
This first term is eliminated by the averaging effect of the 
evaluation method (see section III): several game results are 
evaluated together. The second term is an impulse like noise 
caused by the physiological, environmental and social 
disturbances resulting in outliers (for example, the telephone 
is ringing; the person has to use the bathroom, a storm is 
arriving, neighbor is coming, etc.). This second problem is 
solved by a filtering step, the outliers are simply rejected; 
they are not used in further evaluation steps. 
Early detection is the purpose; but the main problem is 
that nobody knows when the abnormal change will happen; 
maybe in some persons’ life never. Therefore, the motivation 
must be managed probably for many years. It is a very 
complex problem itself; only some aspects are discussed 
here. Among several other aspects, one basic assumption is 
that although there is an extrinsic motivation that everybody 
wants to sustain mental abilities and an independent life of 
good quality, but generally it is not enough in the long-run. 
There must be intrinsic motivations too, e.g., entertaining 
ways of measurement, and short-term feedback (Figure 1) 
given to the user to encourage further playing (e.g., scoring 
or encouraging messages such as “Well done!” could 
generate motivation). Unfortunately, most people do not 
enjoy the same game for years. Therefore, in different time 
periods different games will be played by the same person. 
Not to destroy the level of motivation several games are 
offered (Figure 1); and the performance measured using 
different games should be somehow compared to each other 
(Figure 2). This implies a sensor fusion and estimation 
problem, where the games are the sensors. It is similar to the 
modern pentathlon scoring problem, where performances in 
very different sports (fencing, show-jumping, running, 
swimming, shooting) have to be measured in one unified 
scoring scheme. In our case, the problem is even more 
complex because the same game could be played using 
different settings (e.g., different number of cards in the well-
known memory game, see Figure 2); therefore, each setting 
creates a new game from the measurement point of view. All 
these games should be compared to each other. In Figure 2 
only the results of a given player in the 3 most frequently 
played games are shown. (In the figure different games are 
marked by different colors; different settings of the same 
game are marked by different symbols.) The proposed 
solution for solving this problem is detailed in Section IV. 
III. 
DETECTION OF THE MENTAL STATE CHANGE 
For detection of the mental state change, the comparison 
in time to the player’s own previous performance was 
chosen. First the evaluation method is considered when only 
one game (always with the same settings) is played.  
Because the two-term noise is present, the effect of the 
impulse noise, the outliers should be eliminated first. For that 
purpose, the time between two consecutive elementary 
events during the solution (e.g., mouse clicks) is analyzed. 
Because the impulse noise is usually caused by an extreme 
interrupt, if the longest time between two such actions is too 
high in comparison to the average action time, then this 
game was probably seriously disturbed: it is taken as outlier 
and is rejected. In Figures 2-5, only the results in outlier-free 
and successful games are shown. 
The other noise term, the small natural fluctuation must 
be coped with as well. For that reason, the change detection 
cannot be based on the performance measured in a single 
game; some sets of parameters should be compared. The 
goal is to detect the decline of performance, but in some 
periods improvements can occur as well. The assumption is 
that the decline is preceded by a period where no 
improvement is present; the situation is stable or 
deteriorating very slowly. Therefore, a reference set is 
selected, which is the group of consecutive games in which 
the person had stable performance (Figure 3).  
It is reasonably assumed that the short-term fluctuations 
due to tiredness, puzzle-hardness, etc., are zero-mean, stable 
independent random variables. The puzzle hardness is a 
zero-mean, stable random variable, because the same game 
is used with the same parameters, and the current puzzle is 
selected randomly. The short-term change of cognitive 
power is again a zero mean random variable, because it 
models the effects of the random changes of the 
environment, tiredness and health. The very slow long-term 
change of the cognitive state is modeled differently. 
Therefore, if a change is detected in one of the integral 
characteristics (mean, median, standard deviation) or 
generally in the distribution of the composite random 
variable (mental-state plus game-noise), it is caused by the 
slowly changing component modeling the mental state. 
Let the performance observation based on the game 
played in time tk be π(tk), k=1,2,…,K (this could be the score, 
the number of steps, etc.). Decrease in the values indicates 
decreasing performance. Significant change in the time series 
cannot be stated while this seems to be a realization of an 
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sample. 
Several statistical tests can be applied for testing the null 
hypothesis that the data is i.i.d. Such tests are the difference 
sign test, the turning point test and the rank test [12][13]. If 
the null hypothesis cannot be rejected, no significant change 
in the player's performance could be stated. 
A less rigorous requirement is that we cannot justify a 
change, if the time series is weakly stationary; i.e., 
uncorrelated with constant expected value and variance. This 
null hypothesis can be tested with the Dickey-Fuller test 
[14]. If the time series seems to be non-stationary the change 
of the player's performance is detected. 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Game #1: blue,  Game#2: black,  Game #3: red    
different settings of the same game:    *     >     o     +     .
Clicks 
needed
for
solution
Days since participating in the project
 
Figure 2.  Typical example of a player’s performance vs time. The time gaps are caused by travelling to realatives or by other reasons. 
 
Using the Mann-Whitney U or the Kolmogorov-Smirnov 
two-sample tests, the comparison of the distribution of the 
reference subset with the distribution of the currently 
examined subset of the time series could be performed. If we 
detect a difference between the distributions of the two sub-
samples; and the current part of the series has smaller 
average (of ranks, of scores, etc.), then the player shows 
performance degradation. 
These statistical hypothesis tests were used to check the 
distribution of the composite random variables. The tests 
were implemented in Matlab and SPSS. The following 
findings were obtained: 
• 
The resulting performance parameter is not normally 
distributed according to the Lilliefors test. 
• 
The time gaps (several users produced 7…60 day 
gaps) did not change significantly the distribution of 
the random variable examined (see Table I). 
• 
Several statistical tests were applied to compare the 
distribution of the reference period data to the 
current period data of users, who played some 
hundreds of games in the nearly one year period. 
(Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, Mann-
Whitney U test, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). The 
results confirm that both the stability and the change 
in the parameters are reliably estimated by the 
statistical tests. All these tests gave coherent results; 
later the performance of the different tests should be 
examined, and the best one should be selected. 
• 
As an alternative to the two-sample statistical tests, a 
runs test on the sequence of observations was 
performed to prove the null hypothesis that the 
values came in random order, against the alternative 
that they did not. The runs test gave the same result: 
if there was no significant difference between the 
distributions of the reference and the current subsets 
the runs test did not rejected the randomness 
hypothesis, if there was difference between them, the 
runs test rejected the hypothesis. 
• 
In some cases, when starting a new game a learning 
phase occurs, in which the results are improving. 
The reference is meaningful only when the 
performance has stabilized The stability could be 
defined the same way as the stationarity of the 
current performance. Evaluating these time series 
has proved that hypothesis testing detected the 
change of the cognitive performance as well. 
In Figure 4, a time series measured during the learning 
phase is shown. The hypothesis tests accepted the same 
distribution null hypothesis (the first 30 games’ data 
compared to the current set) for all the sets up to the 187th 
game; and rejected the null hypothesis for all the sets from 
the 260th game.  
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Days since participating in the project
Active play 
period #4
Active play 
period #5
Active 
play 
period
#1
Clicks
needed
for
solution
Active play 
period #2
Active play 
period #3
Reference set: *
Current data set: o
Figure 3.  The current performance is always compared to the reference set 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
game #3 results (sorted in time)
Play
time
[sec]
 
Figure 4.  Nonstationary series of play times in the learning phase 
IV. 
SOLVING THE SENSOR FUSION PROBLEM 
Computer games are proposed for detecting change in 
mental state as soon as possible. For motivational purposes 
several different games should be offered (and different 
settings of the same game could be used). Because of the 
voluntary nature there is no guarantee that the same person 
will play with the same game in the long-run. In our pilot 
only a few voluntary participants played continuously the 
same game for this nearly one year period. (Results shown in 
Figure 4 belong to a participant who played about 2 games 
per day with the same game for nearly one year!) Most of 
them changed the game or at least changed the settings of a 
given game (harder or easier). Therefore, in different – 
overlapping and non-overlapping – time periods different 
sensors (games) are available to measure some parameters 
connected to mental state. Because the more data we have 
the more reliable the detection of the cognitive state; 
therefore, every effort is worth to keep all the data. 
In this section, a possible solution of that sensor-fusion 
problem is proposed. The basic idea is that proper linear 
normalization of the performance measures results in 
parameters, which are compatible with the normalized 
parameters of other games. The normalization is based on 
the reference set of the current game. Let the performance 
observation using game m in time tk be πm(tk), the average of 
the performance measures of this game’s reference set be 
denoted by avg(πmREF), the standard deviation of this 
reference set is std(πmREF). The normalization: 
πmn(tk)   =  (πm(tk)− avg(πmREF))/std( πmREF) , m=1,...,Ν (1) 
After normalizing all the parameters of the different 
games the combined time series is constructed by simply 
sorting the data in time. 
{πCOMBn(t1),…,πCOMBn(tk)}={πm1n(t1),…,πmkn(tk) } 
t1 < t2 < … < tk 
(2) 
The block diagram of the suggested idea is shown in 
Figure 5. The resulting combined time series derived from 
the data of Figure 2 is shown in Figure6  
Using the time series of combined data gives very similar 
results as using the data of one game only. In Table I the null 
hypothesis of having the same distribution of the data subsets 
compared are shown in two ways. In both evaluations the 
reference set comes from the first 30 observations of the 
active play period 1, the comparison is made to the first 30 
observations of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th active play periods, 
respectively. The difference is that in the first experiment 
only the Game#3 data are used, and in the second experiment 
the combined data are used. 
 
Figure 5.  The normalized performance parameters of the different games 
are combined to form one composite time series 
 
 
Game 
#1 
Reference set of 
game #1 
Normal- 
ization 
• 
• 
• 
C 
o 
m 
b 
i 
n
a 
t 
i 
o 
n 
 
i 
n 
 
t 
i 
m 
e 
π1(tk) 
Game 
#N 
Reference set of 
game #N 
Normal- 
ization 
πN(tm) 
πCOMB(t) 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Game #1: blue,  Game #2: black,  Game #3: red     
different settings of the same game:    *    >    o    +     .
Days since participating in the project
Number
of
clicks
needed
for
solution
- NORMALIZED
Figure 6.  Normalized and combined data 
In Table I, the acceptance or rejection (on the p=0.05 
level) of the null hypothesis are shown.  
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF TWO-SAMPLE KOLMOGOROV-SMIRNOV TESTS: 
REFERENCE SET SHOWN IN FIGURE 2 (FIRST 30 OBSERVATIONS OF ACTIVE 
PLAY PERIOD 1) COMPARED TO THE FIRST 30 DATA OF EACH ACTIVE PLAY 
PERIOD 
 
Game #3 data only 
Combined data 
Reference: 
active play 
period 1 
compared 
with 
Null 
hypothesis 
accepted:0, 
rejected: 1 
Probability 
value: 
p 
Null 
hypothesis 
accepted:0, 
rejected: 1 
Probability 
value: 
p 
Active play 
period #2 
0 
0.43 
0 
0.11 
Active play 
period #3 
0 
0.76 
0 
0.20 
Active play 
period #4 
1 
0.03 
1 
0.01 
Active play 
period #5 
0 
0.54 
0 
0.06 
Although in the first experiment only Game#3 data were 
used and in the second one combined data were used, they 
resulted in the same acceptance/rejection scheme although 
the pure one-game only data gave higher probability values. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Home monitoring of changes in mental state using 
computer games was proposed in a regular, voluntary 
scenario; some of the problems were analyzed and solutions 
were proposed. The system assumes voluntary participation; 
therefore, several different games were developed to sustain 
motivation in the long run. In the game battery there are both 
well-known, popular games and modified clinical tests, it is 
continuously evolving. 
For cognitive performance change detection, the within-
subject comparison is proposed. The reference set of 
performance results are to be compared to the current set of 
results using statistical hypothesis tests. The null hypothesis 
is that the two sets came from the same distribution. Until the 
null-hypothesis cannot be rejected, the stability of mental 
state could be assumed. 
Because of the large number of diverse games, the 
problem of unifying the different data should be solved as 
well. This problem is basically a sensor fusion one. Proper 
linear normalization using the reference set of each game is 
proposed for producing a mixed time series that could be 
used for our detection purposes as well. 
In the future  
• 
a pilot has to be launched to validate the method 
using further clinical tests, 
• 
the most appropriate games for both entertainment 
and measurement should be investigated, 
• 
the feasibility of multiplayer games is to be 
analyzed, 
• 
the potential in the evaluation of the failed games 
should be investigated, 
• 
the best statistical hypothesis test is to be identified. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was performed in the Maintaining and 
Measuring Mental Wellness (M3W) project, supported by 
the AAL Joint Programme (ref. no. AAL-2009-2-109). The 
authors also gratefully acknowledge the contributions of 
their project partners in Greece, Luxembourg, Switzerland 
and Hungary. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Population structure and ageing. Eurostat, May 2014, 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php
/Population_structure_and_ageing [retrieved: January, 2015] 
[2] Cantab 
test 
battery, 
Cambridge 
Cognition, 
http://www.cambridgecognition.com/ 
[retrieved: 
January, 
2015] 
[3] MindStreams, 
http://www.mind-streams.com/ 
[retrieved: 
January, 2015] 
[4] T. Dwolatzky, “The Mindstreams computerized assessment 
battery for cognitive impairment and dementia”, PETRA’11 
May 2011, pp. 501-504, ISBN: 978-1-4503-0772-7. 
[5] H. Jimison, M. Pavel and T. Le, “Home-Based Cognitive 
Monitoring Using Embedded Measures of Verbal Fluency in 
a Computer Word Game” 30th Annual International IEEE 
EMBS Conference, Aug. 2008, pp. 3312-3315. doi: 
10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4649913 
[6] A. López-Martínez et al, “Game of gifts purchase: Computer-
based training of executive functions for the elderly”, IEEE 
1st International Conf. on Serious Games and Applications 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

for Health (SeGAH), Nov. 2011, pp. 1-8, Print ISBN:978-1-
4673-0433-7 DOI: 10.1109/SeGAH.2011.6165448 
[7] K. Ogomori, M. Nagamachi, K. Ishihara, S. Ishihara and M. 
Kohchi, “Requirements for a Cognitive Training Game for 
Elderly or Disabled People”, Int. Conf. on Biometrics and 
Kansai Engineering, Sept. 2011, pp 150–154, E-ISBN 978-0-
7695-4512-7, 
Print-ISBN 
978-1-4577-1356-9, 
DOI: 
10.1109/ICBAKE.2011.30 
[8] V. Menza-Kubo and A. L. Morán, “UCSA: a design 
framework for usable cognitive sstem for worried-well”, 
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. Vol. 17, Issue 6, Aug. 2013, pp. 
1135-1145. ISSN:1617-4909. DOI: 10.1007/s00779-012-
0554-x 
[9] Maintaining and Measuring Mental Wellness (M3W) AAL 
Joint 
Programme 
project 
(ref. no. 
AAL-2009-2-109) 
https://m3w-project.eu/ [retrieved: January, 2015] 
[10] E. Sirály et al., “Differentiation between mild cognitive 
impairment 
and 
healthy 
elderly 
population 
using 
neuropsychological tests”, Neuropsychopharmacol Hung. (3), 
Sept. 2013, pp. 139-46. 
[11] P. Hanák et al., “Maintaining and Measuring Mental 
Wellness”, Proc. of the XXVI. Neumann Kollokvium, Nov. 
2013, pp. 107-110 (in Hungarian). 
[12] P. Brockwell and R. Davis, Introduction to Time Series and 
Forecasting, Springer, New York, 1996. 
[13] M. G. Kendall, and A. Stuart, “The Advanced Theory of 
Statistics”, Vol. 3, Griffin, London, 1976. 
[14] D. A. Dickey, W. A. Fuller, “Distribution of the Estimators 
for Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root”. J. of the 
American Statistical Association 74 (366), Jun. 1979, pp. 
427–431. 
 
 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

