Are Current Usabilty Methods Viable for Maritime Operation Systems? 
Yushan Pan 
Maritime Human Factors Lab & 
Department of Informatics, 
University of Oslo,  
N-0316. Oslo, Norway   
yushanp@ifi.uio.no 
 
Sisse Finken 
Department of Informatics, 
University of Oslo, 
N-0316, Oslo, Norway 
Finken@ifi.uio.no 
Sashidharan Komandur 
Maritime Human Factors Lab, 
Ålesund, N-6025, Norway 
sash.kom@hials.no 
 
 
Abstract—Usability is strongly linked to loss of life in many 
technical and incident reports. Maritime operation systems are 
sociomaterial systems in which many operators work 
cooperatively on ship bridges and decks. However, current 
usability methods focus more on individual interaction. Hence, 
applying such methods to maritime operation systems leads to 
several problems. Moreover, a few evaluation methods are 
hard to duplicate from other research fields owing to various 
reasons. In this paper, we indicate that maritime operation 
systems should consider cooperative work for providing a 
complete picture of interaction issues. In addition, evaluation 
for maritime operation systems needs deeper understanding of 
the relationships between human beings and systems. We 
discuss several usability methods that have been extracted 
from other close field (e.g., aviation systems, fishing systems, 
maritime navigation systems, and nuclear power plants) and 
apply insights from such fields to our case – deep-water anchor 
handling operation. We assert that usability in maritime 
domain should be expended as interaction in ecosystems such 
as the maritime operation system. We suggest that interaction 
study in maritime operation systems can offer a path to draw 
and measure a complete picture of maritime operation rather 
than purely focusing on individual usability issues. 
Keywords-Interactions; 
usability; 
maritime 
operations; 
sociomaterial systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent decades, technological advancement has 
reshaped the patterns of maritime offshore vessel operations. 
Engineers design many types of offshore vessels for multiple 
operational requirements and environments. Ship bridge 
systems are divided into two different categories—maritime 
operation systems (after ship bridge) (Figure 1. Maritime 
operation systems) and maritime navigation systems (Figure 
2. Maritime navigation systems). The efficiency and 
effectiveness of maritime operations hugely influence 
mariner safety issues [1]. An increasing number of accident 
reports [2] identify dangerous system design characteristics 
and interactions among various embedded maritime 
operation systems as the main reasons for maritime accidents 
[3]. The usefulness of maritime operation systems is strongly 
linked to loss of life, significant property damage, or 
negative effects on the environment [4].  
Maritime operation systems are complex systems. 
Individual operators cannot accomplish maritime operations 
alone, and cooperation among multiple operators and 
subsystems 
are 
required. 
The 
associated 
operation 
environments involve greater levels of complexity than a 
regular office. Maritime work is more or less similar to a 
society, and it involves not only technical work, but also 
social communication from task to task [5]. Operators, 
systems, operational behavior and social communication 
build a sociomaterial system in maritime operations. IT 
designers consider such complex sociomaterial systems as an 
infrastructural setup [6] in which economy, technology, and 
system stakeholders are involved [7]. However, according to 
Pomeroy and Jones [8], maritime systems are a combination 
of human operators, technical elements, and physical 
equipment. In addition, they point out the necessity of 
considering sociomaterial systems in the broadest sense 
when dealing with marine safety. The study presented in this 
article is limited to usability issues within the scope of 
maritime operations, and we consider an abridged complex 
sociomaterial system comprising human beings (operators on 
the ship bridge and deck operators who work on maritime 
operation tasks) and maritime operation systems (Figure 3. 
Ship bridge). 
 
    
 
 
Figure 1(left). Maritime operation systems (Copyright: Kongsberg maritime, 
Norway); Figure 2. Maritime navigation systems (Copyright: Ocean 
Industry Concept Lab & Maritime Human Factors Lab, Norway). 
 
Traditionally, usability is not concerned with safety, but 
with understanding interaction mechanisms and using this 
understanding to improve design [9]. Usability refers to 
efficiency, effectiveness, and satisfaction [10], and it is 
widely used to evaluate web pages[11], mobile information 
systems [12], and general physical ergonomic issues [13]. 
Maritime operation systems involve many interrelationships 
among of multiple subsystems for different maritime 
operation tasks and challenging work environments. 
Consequently, they are much more complex than other 
sociomaterial systems. For example, dynamic positioning 
systems, drilling systems, alarm systems for operations, and 
dragging oil and deep water systems are integrated for 
maritime 
operations. 
Operators 
face 
many 
displays/subsystems (Figure 1. Maritime operation systems), 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and they need to communicate with other operators within 
and outside the ship bridge (Figure 3. ship bridge). Such 
distributed 
collaboration 
and 
complex 
sociomaterial 
interaction poses interesting questions for researchers—
whether current usability methods still make sense for 
increasingly complex sociomaterial maritime operations, and 
what are strengths and weakness of current usability 
methods?  
The usability of complex sociomaterial systems is rarely 
studied in the context of maritime operations. There are a 
few studies pertaining to usability in the maritime domain, 
for example, a study on fishing vessels [14] and one on 
maritime navigation [5]. Nevertheless, these studies focus on 
physical equipment as opposed to systems. In addition, 
consideration of usability issues in the design of most large 
and complex systems in the maritime domain is largely 
absent, for example, Henique et al. [15] largely neglected 
cooperative IT work in their research.  
 
 
Figure 3. Ship bridge: Complex, sociomaterial maritime system (Copyright: 
unpublished resource, Maritime Human Factors Lab, no copyright 
restrictions) 
 
This situation is understandable because we assume the 
current usability approach to be developed when the personal 
computer came into use, and it is applied to the Internet and 
various consumer electronics. Usually, there is no need for 
user cooperation when interacting with these products, and 
safety is not the first quality objective. However, maritime 
operation systems comprise many integrated subsystems 
with highly complex interrelationships, and, therefore, 
current usability methods are difficult to employ in such 
scenarios. However, maritime operation systems share strong 
similarities with other research domains such as aviation 
systems, maritime navigation, fishing systems, maritime 
rescue and coordination centers, and nuclear power plants 
[16]. Hence, it would be fruitful to borrow knowledge from 
other research domains to understand usability in highly 
cooperative work and complex systems.  
 Hornbæk [17] suggests that usability measures should be 
formulated on the macro, as well as the micro levels. In this 
manner, researchers can capture a global usability picture of 
complex systems. Thus, in the following text, we draw on 
the presentations described above to examine current 
research on usability in different disciplines. This 
consideration is necessarily both practical and theoretical 
because we aim at examining how current usability methods 
can be used practically at a micro level (individual and group 
usability testing) and the extent of theoretical understanding 
of usability for maritime operation systems at the macro 
level (a global usability understanding of entire maritime 
operation systems). While, it is still difficult for researchers 
to understand the relationships between humans and 
complex, 
sociomaterial 
maritime 
systems 
and 
their 
combinations from the two levels. Maritime operation 
system as an entire system for cooperatively operating by 
operators, it is important to obtain a picture of usability 
relations between each sub maritime task, which executed by 
each individual operator. Hence, interaction mechanism is a 
clear choice that can offer an opportunity to understand such 
relations, contrasts, problems, and opportunities in the 
maritime IT domain, e.g., the relations of several usability 
problems in one maritime task.    
Section II we present the method we use in this state-of-
art. Section III presents some cases within and outside the 
maritime domain. We apply current usability methods to our 
case of deep-water anchor handling in section IV. In section 
V we conclude that usability in maritime domain should be 
considered as interaction in complex environment.  
II. 
METHOD 
Getting a clearer idea of how to apply current usability 
methods to maritime operation systems is indispensable. 
Additionally, deliberating usability of entire maritime 
operation systems in a theoretical way is urgent because it 
would help ascertain unnecessary usability methods before 
the empirical studies.  
 Hence, we apply four research criteria to the research 
domain of usability evaluation in complex sociomaterial 
systems. Usability, ship bridge systems, maritime system, 
and sociomaterial system are the search keywords. We have 
searched databases such as ACM and IEEE Xplore Digital 
Library, Journal of Usability Studies, Marine Science and 
Technology Journal, Springer link, and Computer–Human 
Interaction Journal and Proceedings. Our goal is to map out 
the current usability methods used in maritime operation 
systems. Thus, by understanding usability methods from 
both other research fields and the maritime domain, we seek 
to find a way of promoting usability methods in the maritime 
industry. The paper includes a review of usability evaluation 
from the earliest to the most recent research on complex 
sociomaterial systems in control rooms, including aviation 
system, maritime navigation systems, fishing systems, 
maritime alarm systems, maritime rescue and coordination 
centers, and nuclear power plants. All work in these domains 
is highly cooperative among the operators, and several 
complex support systems are involved. In addition, in all 
these domains, the potential threats to human life and the 
environment in cases of abnormal system behavior are great. 
III. 
CASES WITHIN AND OUTSIDE OF MARITIME 
DOMAIN 
We chose the following cases because they cover most 
usability methods in terms of micro usability analysis. 
Moreover, the newest usability method—systems usability—
attempts to understand systems at the macro level.  
 As complex sociomaterial systems, aviation systems 
attract considerable attention in this field. Mahemoff et al. 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[19] evaluated an aviation system and described a pattern-
based usability approach that was adapted from Mahemoff 
and Johnston’s research [19]. They proposed that usability 
patterns should be robust; task–efficient; and effective in 
terms of user–computer communication, comprehensibility, 
and flexibility. This study concluded that heuristic 
evaluation, ‘think aloud’, and cognitive walkthrough are 
appropriate methods for a complex sociomaterial system and 
applied these methods to design an example alarm control 
system for flights. On similar lines, studies have been 
conducted for usability evaluation of systems such as the 
UK’s air defense control [20], industrial process control  
[21][22], healthcare [23], aviation and space [24], 
transportation [25], and nuclear power plants [26].  
 In the maritime domain, usability is not the first priority 
of research. Most studies in this domain focus on human-
centered design, with limited or no evaluation of system 
segments. In terms of usability in ship bridge systems, the 
most notable suggestions have been to design a useful ship 
bridge, navigation system, maritime mobile application, and 
so on. For example, researchers have used eye-tracking data 
to analyze usability issues on bridge systems [27]. Lützhöft 
et al. [28] conducted a series of navigation systems studies 
based on observation, interviews, questionnaires, and video 
recordings. They proposed that in a navigation system, large, 
shared interactive work surfaces could ensure good support 
for cooperative work planning and execution. In a parallel 
study, they present an application based on this type of a 
shared system to explore the potential of tabletops for 
maritime navigation.  
 In a study of maritime rescue and coordination centers, 
Mills [1] claimed that approximately 300 distress calls from 
both text entries and voice systems are sent in error every 
year; that is, the vessels sending these calls are not distressed 
but they did send emergency messages or distress alerts (e.g., 
‘Mayday’). Through heuristic evaluation and think aloud 
analysis, Mills found that the operators did not understand 
marine operation systems and made wrong system operation 
decisions. The most obvious fault was false alarms in the 
ships’ systems [1]. In a follow-up study, Mills [14] discussed 
the usability problems of acoustic fishing aids on small 
fishing vessels, with a focus on data interpretation and 
comprehension. Through sequential heuristic analysis, the 
study pointed out that many operation errors occur because 
of the poor usability of interfaces. Also, the study found that 
errors occur because operators do not correctly understand 
the presented information [14]. Wilkinson [29] stated that 
improving the usability of user interfaces could help 
operators understand presented information and convert it 
into a correct decision or control action within a maritime 
setting. However, both Mills and Wilkinson did not elaborate 
on methods of improving the usability of these operation 
systems. 
     To understand the interaction mechanisms, human 
activity, and how users live with technology, Savioja et al.  
[30] conducted a study of nuclear power plants. They 
developed a method called ‘systems usability’. This method 
builds on the activity theory [31]. Through this approach, 
researchers can understand and analyze different levels of 
operations and actions of individual users [30]. In practice, 
this method uses a predefined task. The evaluators observe 
the completion of this task to find certain measures such as 
errors and completion time. In addition, situation awareness 
is used to evaluate the user’s performance. In a follow-up 
study, these researchers explained that they used the activity 
theory in complex systems evaluations for the following 
reasons [31]: 
 
…. Activity is understood as historically and culturally developed. 
Hence, the central aim in the analysis is to find out the current state of 
affairs but also their historical roots and possible trends from which 
development is proceeding. The approach suits well the needs of control 
room evaluation in a state in which hybrid technologies have been 
implemented and more profound modernizations are under design. In 
order to understand whether the development of tools is proceeding in a 
good direction, the wider historical context tools must be understood. 
(p. 259) 
 
Two units of activity [32] are used for analyzing the 
work in nuclear power plants —object-oriented and 
mediated. By means of object-oriented activities, the 
systems-usability 
method 
analyses 
work 
execution 
sequences, way of acting, and experience in action. By 
means of mediated activities, this approach analyses the 
relationship between a subject and an object when mediated 
by tools (e.g. in the NPP studies, the user interfaces are the 
tools). The author’s logic behind this approach lies in the 
elaboration of on mediation by distinguishing between two 
different functions of tools in an activity—instrumental and 
psychological. 
Another 
type 
of 
activity 
used 
is 
communicative 
[31]. Through 
these 
three 
functions 
(instrumental, psychological, and communicative) and 
object-oriented activities, the systems usability approach 
tries to cover a system’s overall meaningful role in an 
activity, such as the manner in which humans conduct 
themselves in human–technology interactions and the global, 
society-defined purposes and objectives of a user’s different 
task levels. 
IV. 
APPLYING CURRENT USABILITY METHODS 
TO MARITIME OPERATION SYSTEMS 
To examine how current usability methods could help 
researchers in the maritime domain, we apply these methods 
from abovementioned various research domains to our 
example 
of 
deep-water 
anchor 
handling 
operations 
(DWAHO). In DWAHO, two groups of operators on two 
vessels operate two maritime operation systems during 
anchor-handling tasks. An additional anchor-handling vessel 
(AHV)—the secondary AHV—is used to relieve some of the 
chain weight held by the main AHV (Orange unit, Figure 4. 
Deep-water anchor handling operations). In this operation, 
two systems (on two vessels) perform one shared task 
(positioning an oil platform, shown in orange in Figure 4). 
The main AHV does more than simply holding the chain. 
Before holding the chain, the main AHV must follow several 
procedures, including, among others, drawing anchoring 
arrangements, offshore installation draught during anchor 
handling, and measuring water depth [33]. 
The operators of the main AHV perform different roles 
during operation. For example, two or more operators 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

conduct the different procedures. All operations use different 
subsystems simultaneously (Figure 4. Deep-water anchor 
handling operations), such as dynamic positioning systems, 
drilling systems, alarm systems for operations, and dragging 
oil and deep-water systems. 
A. Micro level of usability evaluation 
In an AHV, the interactions are not static. The 
combination of operators, operation systems, and ship deck 
operators change from task to task. Barrett [34] proposed that 
boundary relations such as boundary cooperation and strain, 
too, change from task to task. To test the usability of AHV 
systems, for each maritime task, we should consider a group 
of operators rather than an individual operator. Otherwise, 
the test would be too narrow and limited to determine the 
global usability of entire maritime operation systems.  
 
 
Figure 4. Main AHV is assisted by secondary AHV during DWAHO[33] 
 
However, in aviation system studies, Mahemoff et al [19] 
did not discuss the mechanism of interaction or the evidence 
gathered for the method that can best contribute to 
knowledge about general issues of collaborative work and 
the potential role of technology and users. Similarly, 
Lützhöft et al [28] discussed design for marine collaborative 
settings in their maritime cooperative application study but 
with minimal stress on efficiency, effectiveness, and 
accuracy. Even though Lützhöft et al [28] focused on the 
interaction mechanisms, the usability approach was more or 
less neglected. The NPP-based studies [30][31] do not clarify 
the definition of a boundary when an entire environment 
allows for dynamic changes in groups, systems, subsystems, 
and combinations of these. 
Anchor handling operation systems are special because 
they come from shipyards, thus requiring manufacturers to 
deliver assembled solutions, and these solutions are usually 
needed at different levels of integration, ranging from the 
physical proximity of equipment to full-scale data-level 
integration [35]. Furthermore, current system products are a 
an alternative manifestation [36] of component software 
elements. An evaluation of a different context of technology-
in-use [37] in the maritime domain requires an approach 
different from merely replicating methods meant for other 
research domains, where most systems are not developed by 
decomposition.  
B. Current usability methods in system fragments 
Current usability methods mostly are conducted at the 
individual level. Nevertheless, there exist differences at 
micro levels of usability evaluation between other complex 
sociomaterial systems and anchor handling operation 
systems in terms of their natural work environment context. 
Anchor handling operation environments are usually 
extremely unstable. Wind and stormy waves invariably 
affect usability experts evaluating maritime operation 
systems, which increases the difficulty involved in 
evaluating these systems. Therefore, usability experts are 
required to account for natural environmental factors that 
may affect their evaluation outcomes. In addition, the data 
collection methods used in another domain’s study cannot be 
duplicated directly because of the following reasons:  
• 
The observation of maritime operations is different 
from the observation of other research domains. Most 
anchor handling operators may have undertaken only 
several intensive training courses before they move 
onboard for hands-on learning [38]. Generally, 
experienced operators assist the new operators in 
performing their duties. In contrast, operators from 
other research domains are trained for several months 
before they operate systems independently [39]. Thus, 
observation processes vary, and errors are easier to 
spot in maritime operations especially when operators 
need training/supervision for completing a task. 
However, as outside observers, usability experts 
should play a role as participant observers to develop 
a descriptive understanding of the way of life of the 
study group [40]. Whether the interface, computer 
screen, procedures, and analogue indicators are 
simply very usable or seemingly smooth in operation 
should be judged not by the standards of usability 
experts but by the participants.  
• 
Most other studies are conducted in a simulator 
environment, and their usability evaluation is based 
on a new simulator in addition to the data obtained by 
methods of questionnaire and interview. In this 
context, it may be difficult for experienced operators 
to express realistic problems. However, the interfaces 
of anchor handling operation systems are computer-
supported tools used in a real environment. Thus, it 
could be easier for an experienced operator to provide 
detailed descriptions of a real working place, as well 
as conversations between researchers and their 
participants [41]. Therefore, from the productivity 
viewpoint, it would be better if researchers developed 
an evaluation method for maritime IT designers, who 
decide on future uses for maritime new products. 
Again, environments of other research domains are 
steady compared with a ship bridge. Normally, 
maritime operation systems are operated in unstable 
working conditions at sea. In addition, bridge 
operators have to communicate with other operators 
on deck or other vessels and oil platforms from time 
to time. Therefore, a greater number of recorders and 
usability evaluators would be required compared with 
those needed in the systems-usability method.  
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
Eye tracking can help researchers identify obvious 
usability problems, but eye-tracking data can only tell 
the interests of users as opposed to explaining why 
users pay attention to some information and ignore 
other items. Usability experts cannot go deeper into 
the user’s mind. It is difficult for these experts to 
capture personal meaning [31], so it would be 
difficult for researchers to evaluate user perceptions. 
• 
In addition, think aloud, cognitive walkthrough, and 
heuristic evaluations are difficult to conduct in a 
situation in which the dynamics of the process largely 
determine the pace of the situation [31][16]. 
Nonetheless, knowledge and expertise are embodied 
inherently in complex sociotechnical systems [6]. 
Think aloud has proved useful for identifying 
usability issue–related collaborative problems in 
mobile collaborative systems within the maritime 
domain [42]. We believe it depends on the manner in 
which researchers conduct interviews and ask 
questions [41] in their conversations with maritime 
operators. 
C. Macro level of usability evaluation 
From the interaction viewpoint, in nuclear power plants 
studies, the understanding of ‘object of activity’ continues to 
be focused on individual work. This can be understood as a 
micro level of usability evaluation [30][31]. In the action–
objective relationship, the focus is on the interactions 
between individual users and computer systems. The macro 
level 
of 
usability 
is 
evaluated 
using 
instrumental, 
psychological, and communicative analysis methods to 
investigate the manner in which a user interacts with user 
interfaces and environments in groupware. These ideas are 
explained using the term ‘communicative’ [31].  
 However, it is impossible to understand usability over an 
entire environment because a few aspects emerge in 
unfolding activities that cannot be understood in the absolute 
sense but only as ‘relative activities’ [43]. Evaluation of 
technologies-in-use cannot be carried out in a black box. 
Maritime operation is usually not only a collection of each 
individual operator’s work and its reflections on group work 
but also cooperative work among individual operators 
through interactions. For example, multiple operators 
manipulate different systems on the ship bridge in anchor-
handling operations. Moreover, these operators communicate 
with different operators on the ship deck during the same or 
different tasks at the same or different time. Different 
operators within and outside the ship bridge can be seen as 
different groups. Furthermore, maritime operation reflects 
different relations across each boundary between groups, 
including systems, operators, and social contexts evolving 
within these operational processes.  
 Hence, when considering systems usability in the 
maritime domain, we overlook group interactions and cross 
relations among different working groups. Schultze and 
Orlikowski [44] studied the performance perspective in 
globally distributed, immersive work and argued that in a set 
of activities and interactions engaged in by various actors, 
the actors’ relationships and mobilisations produce certain 
effects, such as actions and interactions that are no longer 
independent but deeply connected and grounded. We concur 
with this understanding and want to apply it to the maritime 
domain. We cannot see each maritime operation task as 
already defined and fixed because there are some invisible 
operators present in each maritime operation, and 
cooperation across operator groups is dynamic. For example, 
in an anchor-handling operation, deck operators assist an 
operator on the ship bridge; however, in another task, these 
deck operators may play another role in different operational 
processes with another operator on the ship bridge. We 
should treat the group interactions on the ship bridge in terms 
of the performativity [18] of the systems engaged in the 
operators’ practices. The performativity of maritime 
operation systems is sociomaterial [18][45], as established by 
different maritime tasks in which systems are designed and 
engaged in social practice of operators.  
As sociomaterial practices, maritime operation on the 
ship bridge is a significant source of information about why, 
when, where, and how maritime operators interact with the 
anchor handling system and communicate with which 
operator on the ship deck. This information is much complex 
than an experimental result that normally takes place in a 
laboratory. Researchers have no capability to grab the 
relationships 
between 
systems, 
operators 
and 
their 
combinations. Moreover, only a piece of system can be 
studied in a laboratory. There is a huge gap between reality 
and virtual environment. Keeping these questions in mind, 
operators within and outside ship bridges cooperating in each 
specific maritime operation task could help understand those 
invisible activities. The usability measurement idea then 
moves and reconfigures the dynamic and transformed 
relationships among interaction issues within and across 
groups. Such an idea also extends and intensifies usability 
measurements within maritime operations as an interaction, 
which would be very helpful for designers, who could then 
clarify dynamic boundaries for groups, systems, and the 
associated social context.  
D. From usability problems to interaction in ecosystems of 
maritime operations 
     After applying usability methods to a maritime case, we 
realize that current usability methods are insufficient for 
evaluating maritime operation systems. We assert that the 
term of usability makes less sense in maritime operation 
systems. The reason is that usability focuses more on 
individuals. Logic relations of each individual usability 
problem in a complex environment of maritime operations 
are overlooked. The relations between individual operators, 
system segments, and their combined interactions could not 
be fully understood in maritime operation systems. Hence, 
usability methods have little power to illustrate such 
relationship. In this case, researchers inadvertently lose 
focus on the entire maritime operating systems but pay more 
concentration on individuals, systems segments without 
deeply touching the interaction between operators and 
systems in maritime operations. On this occasion, usability 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

problems should be considered as interaction issues in an 
ecosystem [43] whereby operators live in their working 
contexts to reveal interaction issues. In this manner, a 
usability issue is not standalone but instead integrated into 
an interaction. From an interaction viewpoint, we can gain a 
complete picture of the maritime operation system.  
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Although 
we 
mapped 
the 
drawbacks 
of 
the 
abovementioned methods in evaluating complex systems, it 
does not mean that current usability evaluations are not 
useful; in fact, they may provide some useful data for 
understanding interaction in empirical investigation, such as 
observation and interview. To avoid the limitations of 
individual methods, Neale et al [46] recommend that a multi-
method evaluation approach, including observation among 
other methods, be used in an environment in which multiple 
users use systems in a work setting. Ship bridge systems are 
typical complex sociomaterial systems, so it is necessary to 
develop new usability measures for this special context-in-
use. The measures should not be restricted only to the micro 
level, covering only usability for individuals or group 
operators for one specific task, as is the case with most 
studies thus far. Instead, they should determine how specific 
technologies-in-use 
enact 
different 
sociomaterial 
environments. This is important in every maritime operation 
to ensure holistic evaluation of maritime operation systems. 
Based on the understanding of dynamic relationships in 
and across group interactions, in the future, what we call a 
“usability issues” could be a construed as an ‘interaction’ 
through the identification of boundary relations among 
different working groups and working environments. This 
should be treated as fundamental ‘interaction network [47]’ 
from the maritime operation systems viewpoint, where 
human beings and their working environments are 
investigated holistically. To achieve these assumptions, 
empirical studies on ship bridges that further investigate the 
relationship between interaction issues are needed. Hence, 
we will collect research data aboard in the future and to 
investigate the interactions as our second step of this project. 
To conclude, we suggest the following tips to help 
practitioners who plan to undertake interaction mechanism 
for maritime operation systems: 
• 
When studying complex systems, concluding usability 
results for an entire system should not only test 
segments of the system. Mapping out usability relations 
of systems’ segments is important. Hence, the focus 
should be shifted to interaction in ecosystems.  
• 
Understanding maritime work of interaction in a 
complex system is important and useful for outlining 
interaction relationships in a big system picture. The 
work in maritime operation systems may involve 
multiple tasks and operators. The relationship of 
operators, tasks, different operator groups, and their 
combination should be understood as a whole.  
• 
Humans and technology should be considered together. 
The relationship between human operators and 
technology is strongly connected. Understanding the 
ecology of this relationship will render a better 
understanding of interaction relations in interactions of 
series work as well as a complete system picture. 
Although we use sociomaterial practice [18] to interpret 
the relationships between humans and technology, other 
theories also can serve such analysis, e.g., actor-network 
theory (ANT) [48]. For example, ANT may better 
explain the network of operations in complex systems. 
 
     The future work of this project is to collect data on ship 
bridge rather than perform experiments in a laboratory. Our 
purpose is through interpreting the interaction in maritime 
operation systems to measure the current design of 
maritime systems in industries. In turn, we aim to use data 
analysis results to develop a way for the future evaluation 
of designing maritime systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We would like to thank all members of the DESIGN group 
at the University of Oslo and Maritime Human Factors Lab 
at Ålesund for their guidance and support. Our thanks also 
go to the 37th Information Systems Research Seminar in 
Scandinavia for suggestions and constructive comments. 
Last, we would like to thank all anonymous reviewers for 
invaluable comments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Mills, “To Live or Drown: When Information Systems 
become Critical,” Comput. J., vol. 38, no. 6, Aug. 1995, pp. 
413–417. 
[2] National Imagery and Mapping Agency, “Chapter 28 
Maritime Safety Systems,” United States Department of 
Defense, Technical, 2014. 
[3] N. A. Stanton, P. Salmon, D. Jenkins, and G. Walker, Human 
Factors in the Design and Evaluation of Central Control 
Room Operations. CRC Press, 2009. 
[4] J. C. Knight, “Safety critical systems: challenges and 
directions,” in Software Engineering, 2002. ICSE 2002. 
Proceedings of the 24rd International Conference on, 2002, 
pp. 547–550. 
[5] M. Lützhöft, “The technology is great when it works: 
Maritime technology and human integration on the ship’s 
bridge,” University of Linköping, 2004, Linköping, Sweden.  
[6] R. Kling and R. Lamb, “IT and Organizational Change in 
Digital 
Economies: 
A 
Socio-Technical 
Approach,” 
Computers and Society, Sep, 1999, pp. 17–25.  
[7] E. Mumford, “A Socio-Technical Approach to Systems 
Design,” Requir. Eng., vol. 5, no. 2, Sep. 2000, pp. 125–133. 
[8] R. Pomeroy and B. Jones, “Managing the human element in 
modern ship design and operation,” in Human factors in ship 
design and operation, October 2012, London.  
[9] J. M. Carrol, “Human-computer interaction: Psychology as a 
Science of Design,” Annu. Rev. Psychol., vol. 48, Feb. 1997, 
pp. 61–83. 
[10] ISO 9241 -11, “Ergonomic requirements for office work with 
visual display terminals (VDTs) - part 11: guidance on 
usability.” ISO, 1998. 
[11] K. Pernice and J. Nielsen, “Usability Guidelines for 
Accessible Web Design.”  
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[12] R. Budiu, “Usability Testing for Mobile Is Easy.” 
http://www.nngroup.com/articles/mobile-usability-testing/ 
access date: 06.01.2015  
[13] K. Grøndal, “Introduction to: Usability, Ergonomics, Human 
Factors, MMI...,” 2009. 
[14] S. Mills, “Usability problems of acoustical fishing displays,” 
Displays, vol. 16, no. 3, 1995,  pp. 115–121,  
[15] E. Henique, S. Lindegaard, and B. Hunt, “Design of Large 
and Complex Display Systems,” in Handbook of Control 
Room Design and Ergonomics, 0 vols., CRC Press, 2008, pp. 
83–138. 
[16] Y. Pan, S. Komandur, S. Finken, and H. P. Hildre, “An 
analytical review of usability evaluation for ship bridge 
multi-screen complex systems,” in Human factors in ship 
design and operation, London, 2014, pp. 109-114. 
[17] K. Hornbæk, “Current practice in measuring usability: 
Challenges to usability studies and research,” Int. J. Hum.-
Comput. Stud., vol. 64, no. 2, Feb. 2006, pp. 79–102,  
[18] W. J. Orlikowski, “Sociomaterial Practices: Exploring 
Technology at Work,” Organ. Stud., vol. 28, no. 9, 2009, pp. 
1435–1448. 
[19] M. J. Mahemoff and L. J. Johnston, “Principles for a 
usability-oriented pattern language,” in Computer Human 
Interaction 
Conference, 
1998. 
Proceedings. 
1998 
Australasian, 1998, pp. 132–139. 
[20] E. Hey, “Case Study: Conducting large-scale multi-user user 
tests on the United Kingdom Air Defence Command and 
Control system,” J. Usability Stud., vol. 1, no. 3, 2006, pp. 
121–135. 
[21] F. Nachreiner, P. Nickel, and I. Meyer, “Human factors in 
process control systems: The design of human–machine 
interfaces,” Saf. Des., vol. 44, no. 1,  Jan. 2006, pp. 5–26. 
[22] P. Nickel and F. Nachreiner, “Evaluation of presentation of 
information for process control operations,” Cogn Technol 
Work, vol. 10, no. 1, 2007, pp. 23–30. 
[23] Y. Dahl, O. A. Alsos, and D. Svanæs, “Fidelity 
Considerations for Simulation-Based Usability Assessments 
of Mobile ICT for Hospitals,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Interact., 
vol. 26, no. 5, Apr. 2010, pp. 445–476. 
[24] E. Huang, E. Mynatt, and J. Trimble, “Displays in the Wild: 
Understanding the Dynamics and Evolution of a Display 
Ecology,” in Pervasive Computing, vol. 3968, K. Fishkin, B. 
Schiele, P. Nixon, and A. Quigley, Eds. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 321–336. 
[25] H. Karvonen, I. Aaltonen, M. Wahlström, L. Salo, P. Savioja, 
and L. Norros, “Hidden roles of the train driver: A challenge 
for metro automation,” Cogn. Ergon. Situated Hum.-Autom. 
Collab., vol. 23, no. 4,  Jul. 2011, pp. 289–298. 
[26] L. Norros and M. Nuutinen, “Performance-based usability 
evaluation of a safety information and alarm system,” Int. J. 
Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol. 63, no. 3, Sep. 2005, pp. 328–361. 
[27] D. Papachristos, P. Koutsabasis, and N. Nikitakos, “Usability 
Evaluation at the Ship’s Bridge: A Multi-Method Approach,” 
in 4th International Symposium on Ship Operations, 
Management and Economics, 2012, Athen, Greece. 
[28] M. Lützhöft, M. Lundh, and T. Porathe, “On board ship 
management overview system - an information sharing 
system on board,” Int. J. Mar. Des., vol. 155 - part C, 2013. 
[29] G. R. Wilkinson, “III.—Ergonomics in Ship Design,” J. 
Navig., vol. 27, no. 04, 1974, pp. 471–478. 
[30] P. Savioja and L. Norros, “Systems Usability — Promoting 
Core-Task Oriented Work Practices,” in Maturing Usability, 
E. C. Law, E. Hvannberg, and G. Cockton, Eds. Springer 
London, 2008, pp. 123–143. 
[31] P. Savioja and L. Norros, “Systems usability framework for 
evaluating tools in safety–critical work,” Cogn. Technol. 
Work, vol. 15, no. 3, Aug. 2013, pp. 255–275. 
[32] A. Rizzo and M. Palmonari, “Context and Consciousness: 
Activity Theory and Human Computer Interaction,” User 
Model. User-Adapt. Interact., vol. 8, no. 1–2, pp. 153–157. 
[33] L. Wennersberg, “Modeling and Simulation of Anchor 
Handling Vessels,” Master thesis, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 2009. 
[34] M. Barrett, Boundary relations : technological objects and 
the restructuring of workplace boundaries. 2007. 
[35] M. Lützhöft and M. Lundh, “Maritime Application of Control 
Systems,” in Handbook of Control Room Design and 
Ergonomics: A Perspective for the Future, Second Edition, 
CRC Press, 2008. 
[36] R. E. Grinter, “Recomposition: putting it all back together 
again,” in Proceedings of the 1998 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work, Seattle, Washington, 
USA, 1998, pp. 393–402. 
[37] P. Thomas and R. D. Macredie, “Introduction to the new 
usability,” ACM Trans Comput-Hum Interact, vol. 9, no. 2, 
2002, pp. 69–73.. 
[38] Maritime Technology and Operation AS, “General steps of 
operational compentence.” Høgskolen i Ålesund. 
[39] United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Part 52—
Licenses, Certifications, and Approvals for Nuclear Power 
Plants.” NRC library. 
[40] J. Blomberg, M. Burrell, and G. Guest, “An ethnographic 
approach to design,” in The human-computer interaction 
handbook, J. A. Jacko and A. Sears, Eds. L. Erlbaum 
Associates Inc., 2003, pp. 964–986. 
[41] R. Madden, Being ethnographic - A guide to the theory and 
practice of ethnography. Sage Croydon, 2010. 
[42] J. Kjeldskov, et al, “Evaluating the usability of a mobile 
guide: the influence of location, participants and resources,” 
Behav. Inf. Technol., vol. 24, 2005, pp. 51–65(15). 
[43] V. Kaptelinin and L. J. Bannon, “Interaction Design Beyond 
the 
Product: 
Creating 
Technology-Enhanced 
Activity 
Spaces,” Human–Computer Interact., vol. 27, no. 3, Dec. 
2011, pp. 277–309. 
[44] U. Schultze and W. J. Orlikowski, “Research Commentary---
Virtual Worlds: A Performative Perspective on Globally 
Distributed, Immersive Work,” Info Sys Res., vol. 21, no. 4, 
2010, pp. 810–821. 
[45] W. J. Orlikowski, “The sociomateriality of organisational 
life: considering technology in management research,” Camb. 
J. Econ., vol. 34, no. 1, 2010, pp. 125–141. 
[46] D. C. Neale, J. M. Carroll, and M. B. Rosson, “Evaluating 
computer-supported 
cooperative 
work: 
models 
and 
frameworks,” in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work, Chicago, Illinois, 
USA, 2004, pp. 112–121. 
[47] E. T. Meyer, “Socio-Technical Interaction Networks: A 
discussion of the strengths, weaknesses and futhre of Kling’s 
STIN model,” IFIP Int. Fed. Inf. Process., vol. 223, no. 
Social informatics: An information Society for All?, pp. 37–
48. 
[48] B. Latour, “On actor-network theory. A few clarifications 
plus more than a few complications,” Soziale. Welt, vol. 47, 
1996, pp. 369–381. 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

