Development of a Flexible 3D Pointing Device with Haptic Feedback 
 
Koma Yoshikawa, Yuta Ono, and Oky Dicky Ardiansyah Prima  
Graduate School of Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University 
152-52 Sugo Takizawa, Japan 
email: {g231s035, g236s001}@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp, prima@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—With the increasing trend toward diversification of 
display devices, the development of displays with curved, folded, 
or spherical surfaces, has become popular in recent years. At the 
same time, a new Three-Dimensional (3D) pointing device is 
required to provide effective user interaction for 3D displays. 
This study attempts to develop a new 3D pointing device with an 
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensor, a flexible mechanism, 
and haptic feedback. For the haptic, we adopt both active and 
passive haptic feedback. Here, we perform experiments with the 
prototyped device to verify the effects of the flexible mechanism 
and haptic on 3D pointing. Experiments confirmed that the 
haptic has a significant impact on 3D pointing, enabling more 
accurate input operations. However, the flexible mechanism was 
not significantly assisting the adjustment of the input to the 
depth. 
Keywords-haptic feedback; flexible interface; stylush pen; IMU. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The use of virtual contents has become common in recent 
years, regardless of the field or application, such as 
entertainment, industry, and education. With the increase in 
the variety of displays, the interaction with virtual contents is 
becoming more extensive. Augmented Reality (AR) contents 
that can be viewed with commonly used mobile terminals, AR 
glasses, and head-mount displays are attracting attention. 
These devices have dedicated controllers with motion tracking 
capabilities and hand tracking that enable users to input 
operations intuitively without losing the sense of reality of the 
contents. 
In addition to AR devices, multi-view 3D displays are also 
being developed. These displays create the illusion of 3D 
content as if it exists in real space. Looking Glass [1] is the 
first personal holographic flat display that allows 3D content 
to be viewed at an effective viewing angle of approximately 
40-50°. The spherical display [2] uses motion parallax to 
project 3D images onto the 360° surface of the sphere and 
renders the images according to the viewing direction to 
achieve the same effect as the Looking Glass. Unlike AR 
devices, the surface of these displays can be touched directly, 
allowing for the adoption of input methods, such as touch and 
pointing interfaces. 
For the input interface of a multi-view 3D display, the use 
of existing mouse and touch interfaces in its original form is 
not intuitive. This is due to the limited information that can be 
input by these input interfaces, which is limited to Two-
Dimensional (2D) information, making it difficult to 
manipulate the contents in depth. Although the 3D pointing 
device proposed by Prima et al. (2020) was developed for 3D 
spherical displays, it is difficult for users to sense how much 
input they are making when performing 3D pointing to depth 
[3]. Therefore, a mechanism to enable input to the depth is 
necessary for this pointing device. 
This study aims to develop and evaluate a stylus-type 3D 
pointing device with a flexible mechanism and vibration 
actuators for intuitive input. Giving a haptic input sensation is 
expected to enable more accurate input for 3D pointing to 
depth. In addition, the introduction of a flexible mechanism is 
expected to make it easier to adjust the depth input. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.  In Section 
II, we describe the related works of 3D input interfaces. 
Section III introduces our approach to implement the pointing 
device. Section IV describes our experiment results. Section 
V discusses about the further enhancements to the proposed 
pointing device. Finally, Section VI presents our conclusions 
and future works. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
Haptic devices play an important role in human-computer 
interaction [4]. These devices are often used as interfaces to 
convey virtual tactile sensations to users using vibration, 
temperature, and pressure. 
There are two types of haptic devices: active and passive 
[5]. Active Haptic Feedback (AHF) uses the movement of 
computer-controlled actuators as feedback. The advantage of 
AHF is that it can be flexibly realized according to the content, 
such as reproducing the texture of an object or the sensation 
of collision through vibration. High performance actuators and 
 
Figure 1.  The configuration of the 3D pointing device in this study. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

complex controls can be used to generate high quality sensory 
feedback. In contrast, Passive Haptic Feedback (PHF) is a 
haptic that uses a real object to provide haptic feedback. The 
advantage of PHF is that it can easily generate high-quality 
sensory feedback at a lower cost than AHF because it uses 
physical properties such as the shape and weight of the object. 
However, it has the disadvantage of not being able to respond 
flexibly to content due to its strong dependence on physical 
properties. 
A haptic stylus with a flexible mechanism was presented 
as an interaction device for manipulating small-sized virtual 
reality contents on mobile devices [6]. To manipulate 3D 
content, the stylus needs to be tilted and rotated. However, 
these functions are not implemented. 
III. FLEXIBLE 3D POINTING DEVICE WITH HAPTIC FEEDBACK 
In this study, we modified the stylus with flexible 
mechanism proposed by Choi et al. (2021) [6] and 
implemented AHF and pose orientation feedback to create a 
3D pointing device. Therefore, our pointing device will have 
both AHF and PHF when manipulating 3D content in virtual 
space. To simplify the design of the device, we used Wacom 
Intuos Pros to detect the position of the pointing device tip 
relative to the touch point and the orientation of the device. 
The PHF is generated by the change in the length of the device 
due to the flexible mechanism and the repulsive force of the 
spring. AHF is implemented by Eccentric Rotating Mass 
(ERM) actuators that generate pulsing vibrations when the tip 
of the device touches a visual target in virtual space. PHF is 
intended to influence the perception of the amount of input, 
while AHF is intended to influence the perception of 
completion. 
Figure 1 shows the configuration of the 3D pointing device 
in this study. The device vibrates the haptic motor to provide 
AHF to the user when the device tip hits with the 3D content 
in the virtual space. To implement the flexible mechanism, we 
used a spring and a pressure sensor. The pressure value 
changed by the compression coil spring when the user pushes 
in is treated as the input value to the depth. Figure 2 shows an 
example of depth input operation by pushing the pointing 
device with the flexible mechanism. Here, the pressure and 
AHF sensors are controlled by M5Stick-C, which 
communicates with the software via Bluetooth Serial. 
M5Stick-C and the AHF sensor is attached to the user's arm 
using a band. The total cost of the proposed 3D pointing 
device is about $100.  
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
The use of haptic feedback in input operations to virtual 
contents is expected to enable more accurate 3D pointing by 
improving the input sensation. In this experiment, we will 
evaluate to what extent the input sensation improves 3D 
pointing and verify the effects of the flexible mechanism and 
haptic on the operation. In this experiment, we measure the 
accuracy and precision of 3D pointing to a visual target using 
the proposed device and evaluated its stability for depth input. 
Figure 3 shows our experimental environment. The pointing 
system was implemented in Unity3D. The pen tablet was 
mounted on a wall and the touch coordinates were obtained so 
that the front of the real world was the front of the content. 
Five subjects (male) between the ages of 23 and 27, 
participated in the experiment. Subjects were seated in front 
of a display while holding the proposed device. At first, the 
experimenter provided the subject with instructions on how to 
use the device to virtually touch the presented visual target. 
Next, subjects were given the opportunity to practice pointing 
the target using the device. The experiment was started after 
the subject were sufficiently familiar with the operation of the 
device. 
Figure 4 shows the procedure of 3D pointing in this 
experiment. At first, the experimenter presents the visual 
target on the display. Next, the subject touches the tablet with 
the proposed device and adjusts its angle toward the visual 
target. After feeling that the angle has been adjusted properly, 
 
Figure 2.  Depth input operation by pushing the pointing device with the flexible mechanism. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the subject presses the device and make a depth input, trying 
to make the tip just touch the center of the visual target 
virtually. The subject records the position of the tip by 
pressing a button on the keyboard when he felt that this 
operation was successful. 
In this experiment, 18 indicators were placed at equal 
intervals on the screen. During pointing, four patterns of 
combinations of with and without AHF and PHF were set up. 
The pointing precision and accuracy were evaluated with and 
without AHF and PHF. In case of using PHF, the pointing 
depth is adjusted by the flexible mechanisms of the device. On 
the other hand, when PHF is not used, the standard functions 
of the pen tablet are used for the input. 
Table I shows the accuracy and precision of 3D pointing 
for each pattern of AHF and PHF. The results show that more 
accurate 3D pointing can be achieved by using AHF. Figure 5  
shows a histogram of the resulting pointing z-scores for 
each pattern. Here, a negative Z-Error indicates that the 
pointing position is short, while a positive Z-Error indicates 
that the pointing position is longer than the target. Figure 5 (b) 
shows that the AHF allows pointing closer to the target. 
However, when both AHF and PHF were used, the pointing 
tended to be longer than when only AHF was used.  
V. CONCLUSION 
In this study, we have developed a flexible 3D pointing 
device with haptic feedback to evaluate the extent to which 
input sensation improves 3D pointing and to verify the 
influence of flexible mechanisms and haptics on the operation. 
Our experiment shows that the active haptic feedback enables 
pointing closer to the target.  
In the future, we would like to install an IMU on the 
developed device to obtain rotation and stretching information 
by itself to be used in actual 3D displays. 
 
 
(a) Equipment layout 
(b) A visual target and the virtual pointing device 
Figure 4.  Environmental experiment for this study. 
Operating
Object
Target
TABLE I.  3D POINTING PRECISION AND ACCURACY. 
 
 
Condition
Mean [mm] SD [mm]
None
7
5.3
PHF
8.2
6.3
AHF
4
3.3
PHF and AHF
4.7
4.3
 
Figure 3.  The procedure of 3D pointing in this experiment. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Numbers 20K12123. We also thank to the Iwate Prefectural 
University of Japan, for funding this project. We also thank 
the editor and three anonymous reviewers for their 
constructive comments, which helped us to improve the 
manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Looking Glass, https://lookingglassfactory.com. 
[retrieved: June, 2021] 
[2] J. Bolton, K. Kim, and R. Vertegaal, “SnowGlobe: A Spherical 
Fish-Tank VR Display,” In Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems - Proceedings, pp. 1159-1164, 2011. 
[3] O. D. A. Prima, K. Hotta, R. Takahashi, and H. Ito,“A Pointing 
Device for 3D Interactive Spherical Displays,” International 
Journal on Advances in Software, Vol. 13, No. 3 & 4, pp. 284-
293, 2020. 
[4] K. E. MacLean, “Haptic Interaction Design for Everyday 
Interfaces,” Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 2008, 4, 
pp. 149–194. 
[5] K. R. Vaghela, A. Trockels, M. Carobene, “Active vs Passive 
Haptic Feedback Technology in Virtual Reality Arthroscopy 
Simulation: Which is Most Realistic?,” Journal of Clinical 
Orthopaedics and Trauma, 16, pp. 249-256, 2021. 
[6] D. S. Choi, I. H. Yun, T. H. Kim, S. Byeon, and S. Y. Kim, 
“Development of haptic stylus for manipulating virtual objects 
in mobile devices,” Actuators, vol. 9, no. 2, 2020.  
https://doi.org/10.3390/act9020030.
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) None 
(b) Only AHF 
 
 
(c) Only PHF 
(d) AHF and PHF 
Figure 5.  Histogram of the resulting pointing z-scores for each haptic pattern. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

