A Participatory Design “Method Story”:  The Case of Patients Living With Mild 
Acquired Cognitive Impairments  
 
Klaudia Çarçani 
Faculty of Computer Science 
Østfold University College 
Halden, Norway 
klaudia.carcani@hiof.no 
Harald Holone 
Faculty of Computer Science 
Østfold University College 
Halden, Norway 
harald.holone@hiof.no 
 
Abstract - This paper presents a story on how patients with Mild 
Acquired Cognitive Impairment(s) (MACI) could be actively 
involved in Participatory Design (PD) sessions. A detailed 
description of what mild acquired cognitive impairments 
entitles is given, followed by an overview of PD and how it might 
be relevant in the design of new Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) solutions for this user 
group. The story on how we applied the method is presented as 
a description and reflection by the authors involved in 
redesigning the layout of a document in a rehabilitation 
hospital.  The paper aims to attract the attention of PD 
practitioners to the MACI user group and trigger discussion 
and questions about PD techniques for patients with MACI. 
Keywords-Participatory Design; Mild Acquired Cognitive 
Impairments; Method stories.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
There is an increase in chronic diseases in our ageing 
society and ICT is seen as means to cope with the increasing 
number of these patients. A notable case are individuals with 
chronic illness affecting cognitive capacities. For this user 
group, ICT has become a fundamental part of “their daily 
lives by providing a wide range of useful services and tools to 
use at home, work, or anywhere else” [1]. However, an 
essential factor for the design of these new ICT solutions is 
the involvement of users in the design of those solutions that 
will be used by them in the future. User participation 
constitutes the core of PD [2], and that is what we will focus 
on, in this paper.  
The user group in focus are people suffering from mild 
cognitive impairments after an Acquired Brain Injury (ABI). 
The abbreviation “mild acquired cognitive impairment(s)” 
(MACI), coined from [1], will be used to refer to the user 
group further in the paper. Note that this is not an official 
abbreviation for the clinical condition. 
Intensive research is ongoing regarding ICT support for 
patients with moderate or severe cognitive impairments [3]- 
[5]. However, less attention has been paid to patients with 
MACI and their needs, even though mild acquired cognitive 
impairments are a critical global public health problem and 
listed among the major causes of permanent impairments [6]-
[9]. MACI are usually described as invisible impairments and 
might include problems with memory, attention, executive 
functioning, language and fatigue. People suffering from 
MACI typically have a very challenging daily life, given the 
invisible nature of the condition. 
This paper aims to first bring the attention of PD 
researchers and practitioners toward this category of patients, 
by sharing reflections from a PD research project conducted 
with this user group. Moreover, as Hendriks et al. [10] state, 
a good way to go forward on a codesign approach for people 
suffering from some form of impairments is “facilitating 
researchers and designers to share experiences, best 
practices, lessons learned, and so on is considered very 
valuable”.  This approach aligns with Lee’s research [11]. She 
suggests that the design field “could reflect and re-specify its 
research direction for design methods, especially for 
empathic design methods, that is, not by developing new tools 
or pinning-down practices into recipes, but rather towards 
empowering designers to be more sensitive and comfortable 
with the design-led, local approaches that are essential to 
empathic design methods”. Thus, she suggests that designers 
should start presenting rich descriptions of as it is – what they 
actually did with methods in particular circumstances. She 
calls these descriptions method stories. Lee states that method 
stories help as a reflection tool for designers as the stories do 
not strip away the rich contextuality of actual use, including 
method application in and adaption to a specific context. In 
this paper, we are not aiming to present a new method and 
give a clear formula of how to actively involve people with 
MACI in PD sessions. Instead, we will share what Lee [11] 
calls a method story from a PD project with patients suffering 
from MACI. Thus, we will give a detailed description of a 
project that we did with patients with MACI and present some 
reflections and meta reflections related to that experience.  
The next section gives a more detailed overview of the user 
group, followed by a reflective section on why PD might be 
important for working with this user group. Further, we 
describe a project done with this user group in a rehabilitation 
hospital by the use of designer notes and methodological 
reflections [12], considering the reflections made before, 
during and after the workshops. The paper concludes with 
some meta reflections presented as design recommendation 
for applying PD with MACI patients.  
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
MILD ACQUIRED COGNITIVE 
IMPAIRMENTS AND THE IMPLICATIONS IN 
PATIENT’S LIFE 
In this section, we will initially describe what it means for a 
patient to live with MACI. Further, we will define what is 
cognitive rehabilitation and how this service is offered in a 
rehabilitation hospital in Norway, where we conducted our 
research.   
A. What it means to live with Mild Cognitive Impairments 
(MCI) after ABI? 
Cognition is defined as the individual’s capacity to 
acquire and use information to adapt to environmental 
demands [13]. Based on Cicerone et al. [14], cognitive 
impairments may be seen in a) reduced efficiency, b) pace and 
c) persistence of functioning, d) decreased effectiveness in the 
performance of routine activities of daily living, and e) failure 
to adapt to novel or problematic situations. Cognitive 
impairments may be associated with cognitive decline due to 
normal ageing, more-serious decline as dementia, or can be 
the consequence of an ABI. The latest is the category of 
patients involved in this study. 
ABI is brain damage acquired after birth. The causes of 
ABI can be “from a traumatic brain injury (i.e., accidents, 
falls, assaults, etc.) and non-traumatic brain injury (i.e., 
stroke, brain tumours, infection, poisoning, hypoxia, 
ischemia, metabolic disorders or substance abuse)” [15]. It 
can affect cognitive, physical, emotional, social or 
independent functioning. The consequences vary from mild 
to severe [16].  Thus, the spectrum of patients which have had 
an ABI is a mixed etiological group, based on the kind of 
acquired impairment and the severity of it.  
The focus of this research is patients suffering from 
cognitive impairments after an ABI and with mild severity of 
symptoms. Eghdam et al. [1] and Nilsson et al. [17] use the 
term mild acquired cognitive impairment for that category of 
patients. Eghdam et al. [1] states that “MACI is a new term 
used to describe a subgroup of patients with mild cognitive 
impairment(s) (MCI) who are expected to reach a stable 
cognitive level over time. This patient group is generally 
young and have acquired MCI from a head injury or mild 
stroke.” In this paper, we borrow this terminology. 
Cognitive impairments often persist after the ABI, and 
they can significantly affect an individual’s abilities to 
perform everyday tasks, fulfil former roles and maintain 
personal-social relationships [17]-[19]. Thus, patient life 
becomes challenging based on the severity of their injury. 
Often the reported symptoms are not related to specific 
problems. Instead, it can be in the form of a headache, 
tiredness, irritation, anxiety and memory problems. The 
patient can experience difficulties in cognitive and emotional 
processing, while having no or limited movement disorders 
and being independent in self-care [17][20].  
Nilsson et al. [17] referring to the clinical definition of 
mild acquired cognitive impairment, in line with the Mild 
Traumatic Brain Injury Committee of the Head Injury Special 
Interest Group and American Congress of Rehabilitation 
Medicine (ACRM) presented in [21] lists these criteria for 
classifying a person with MACI:  
• Minor motor dysfunction/no motor dysfunction 
• Appear to function well in social situations 
occasionally requiring support 
• May have some different cognitive disabilities, mostly 
within the area of attention, concentration and memory 
• May have some concomitant emotional problems 
In this paper, we will use these four points as criteria for 
including participants in the research. 
B. Treatment – Cognitive Rehabilitation 
“Cognitive rehabilitation can be defined as a learning 
experience aimed at either restoring impaired higher 
cerebral functioning or improving performance in “the real 
world” using substitution or compensation techniques.” [19]. 
Cognitive 
rehabilitation 
is 
offered 
in 
specialised 
rehabilitation institutions. The case presented in this paper 
relates to a project that we did with the Cognitive Unit (CU) 
of a rehabilitation hospital in Norway.  
The hospital offers multidisciplinary rehabilitation to 
people with complex functional impairments following 
illness or injury. We focused only on the cognitive 
rehabilitation process. The rehabilitation at the hospital 
(inpatient) is carried forward by a multidisciplinary team 
which helps the patient to define realistic and attainable goals 
for improvement and then define, in collaboration with the 
patient, a treatment plan based on the predefined 
rehabilitation goals. This is called the “rehabilitation plan”. 
The rehabilitation plan is imprinted in the “goal plan” 
document. This “goal plan” document is at the core of the 
rehabilitation process in the hospital. It coordinates the 
activities that both the patient and the multidisciplinary team 
get involved in during the patient’s hospitalisation period. In 
every activity at the hospital both the multidisciplinary team 
and the patient should refer to the goal plan document. The 
patient continues with the rehabilitation plan at home and 
returns to the hospital after 2-6 months for short follow up and 
further adjustments of rehabilitation goals. 
Now that an overview of the patient group symptoms and 
the rehabilitation process which he/she goes through 
(specifically the case of the rehabilitation hospital in Norway 
where we conducted our research), has been presented, we 
further give a description of PD and how that might be 
relevant for this user group.  
III. 
PARTICIPATORY DESIGN 
PD was established at the end of the 1970s with the aim 
to democratise both the working life and the design process 
of new information technologies [15].  PD emphasises the 
idea that, those who will be affected by the design of new 
information technologies or digital artefacts, should get 
involved and have a say during the design process of these 
technologies [22].  PD considers users as “domain experts” of 
the realities in which they live, so they must undertake the 
role of the designers [22].   
In Routledge Handbook of Participatory Design, 
Simonsen et al. [2] define PD as: 
“a process of investigating, understanding, reflecting upon, 
establishing, developing and supporting mutual learning 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

participants 
in 
collective 
“reflection-in-action”. 
The 
participants typically undertake the two principal roles of 
users and designers where the designer strives to learn the 
realities of users’ situation while the users strive to articulate 
their desired aims and learn appropriate technological 
means to obtain them.” 
At the core of PD is the idea of genuine participation in 
decision making. Genuine participation stands on a political 
rationale where the voice of marginalised groups is heard in 
the decision making that will influence them. Thus, designing 
technologies for patients with MACI require their 
participation in the design process. Their marginalised voices 
in a paternalistic healthcare system where the patient follows 
what the doctors says, should be raised and heard. By 
applying PD, patients can have a say and genuinely 
participate in the design of new ICT solutions which will be 
used by these patients.  
PD is applied as a set of general guidelines which should 
be adapted to the specifics of the project. Equalising power 
relations and democratised practices, two main principles of 
PD, arise due to the commitment that PD has in achieving 
genuine participation. Another important principle in PD is 
mutual learning. Mutual learning enables the establishment of 
a common understanding among different actors by finding 
common ways of working and exchanging knowledge and 
value [23]. Only through achieving mutual learning we can 
have genuine participation. 
In PD, a lot of research has been done regarding the active 
participation of people with disabilities in designing new 
technologies. Significant research has been done with 
dementia patients or specific severe clinical conditions 
affecting cognition (examples [10][24]-[26]). Regarding the 
mild cognitive impairments, the focus is on old adults or 
people with intellectual disabilities. Little has been done with 
patients suffering from MACI. Moreover, we are aware of 
only one paper which focus on the analysis and reflection on 
the techniques applied for active participation of patients 
suffering from mild cognitive impairments in design sessions 
[27].  
However, as also stated in Hendriks et al. [10], researchers 
are adjusting common PD techniques to involve “fragile” 
groups in PD sessions with the designers and researchers. 
This requires new techniques and new PD guidelines to be 
considered and to emerge in the future. Moreover, as a 
conclusion in their workshop regarding doing PD with people 
with disabilities Hendriks et al. [10] suggest the sharing of 
designers’ experiences through method stories [11] as the best 
way of moving forward in the crystallisation of design 
techniques suitable for people suffering from cognitive 
impairments. Hence, in this paper, we will share the method 
story of our project, by giving a rich description of our 
activities. In order to learn from our experience, we will take 
a reflective practitioner stand and present a set of reflections 
on our process.  
In this paper, we will use Schön’s [28] approach of the 
reflective practitioner to present some of the reflections-in-
action and reflection-on-action of how PD techniques could 
be applied in the case of patients suffering from MACI. 
Reflection-in-action is undertaken in the indeterminate 
zones of practice. The reflective practitioner thinks up and 
tries out new actions intended to explore the newly observed 
phenomena, test tentative understandings of them, or affirm 
moves invented to change things for the better. What 
distinguishes reflection-in-action from other kinds of 
reflection is its immediate significance for action. ([28], pp. 
28-29). This is also referred to as a reflective conversation 
with the situation. 
Schön's use of the term reflection-on-action refers to the 
process of making sense of an action after it has occurred. It 
serves to extend one's knowledge base. We will use 
reflection-on-action in two layers in this paper, the reflections 
made after each workshop in order to prepare better for the 
next workshop and reflection-on-action with the whole 
project as the analytical perspective. We will use the term 
meta-reflections for the latest.  
IV. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Above we presented the cognitive rehabilitation process 
in a hospital in Norway. The structure within the hospital 
which is specialised on cognitive rehabilitation for patients 
with MACI is the CU. One of the main working documents 
at the CU as explained above is the “goal plan” document. 
With the aim of empowering the patient, the CU wanted to 
redesign the layout of the document so it would fit more 
patients’ needs and consequently make the patients make 
more and a better use of the document during their stay at the 
hospital.  
The authors were involved in the project in the role of 
researchers and designers to investigate patients’ needs and 
together with the patients redesign a new version of the “goal 
plan” that would fit those needs. Both authors worked in the 
preparation phase and the reflective analysis presented in this 
paper, and the first author participated and facilitated the 
workshops described below. 
In collaboration with a project committee with 
representatives from the multidisciplinary team at the CU, we 
prepared and conducted three workshops with the patients.  
The title of the workshops was: Redesign the “goal plan”: A 
patient’s perspective. The workshops aim was to get an 
understanding of what experience the patient has had with the 
“goal plan” document and discuss ideas on how to redesign 
that document so that patients can integrate it more in the 
activities during their rehabilitation period at the hospital. As 
the document is given to the patient in a paper format, during 
the workshop we did not put any technological limitations, 
instead allowing the patient to be free to envision any 
solution.  
A. Preparations 
Designing the right workshop for people with mild 
cognitive impairments has specific challenges and requires 
thorough preparation. To plan and prepare the workshops, we 
worked in close collaboration with a multidisciplinary team 
at the CU. The team was assigned as the leading committee 
for this project and will be referred hereafter as the 
multidisciplinary project committee. It consisted of the CU 
staff members of different professions with high expertise and 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

longtime experience with the patients with MACI. We will 
refer to these people as the domain experts.  
Before planning the patient's’ workshop, the first author 
conducted a PD workshop with the multidisciplinary project 
committee. The PD workshop aimed to achieve the mutual 
learning [23] between the researcher designer (the first 
author) and the multidisciplinary project committee 
compounded by domain experts. The aim was to trigger a 
design thinking mindset and make the committee grasp the 
PD tools and techniques. The designer had expertise on the 
design methods and the PD approach, but lacked a thorough 
knowledge of patients’ clinical condition, functioning ability, 
as well as internal procedures and dynamics related to the 
usage of the “goal plan” in the hospital. On the other side, the 
domain experts knew the patients and their functioning 
abilities, but they lacked the knowledge of PD methods and 
techniques. Indeed, before the authors were involved in the 
project, the multidisciplinary project committee had planned 
to do interviews with the patients to map their needs. 
It was difficult for the multidisciplinary project committee 
at the beginning to understand the aim of the workshop, but 
slowly they started becoming more involved. All the 
subsequent meetings we had with the committee or specific 
members of the committee had a PD approach, where 
everyone was heard, and the common discussion challenged 
ideas. The domain experts entered a more creative mindset, 
and the authors in the role of researchers and designers 
learned more about the patient's group characteristics and the 
work procedures at the hospital. The participatory meetings 
were an essential factor in mutual learning.  
The multidisciplinary project committee expertise on 
their patients helped in “designing” better workshops. 
Among the things discussed in the planning phase were: 
1) Timing  
Based on the committee expertise the optimal workshop 
duration would be 1 hour, divided into two parts each of 20-
30 minutes with a 5-10 minutes break in between. In this 
way, it would be possible to have the patient concentrated all 
the time, without fatiguing him/her.  
2) Number of participants  
The committee suggested that the maximum number of 
participants for workshops was 4. In this way, the patients 
would feel more comfortable and had the right space to share 
their stories and their opinions.  
3) Ethical issues  
We decided together with the committee that no personal 
patient data would be recorded. However, the sessions would 
be audio recorded so we could analyse the data later. The 
data collected through recordings are considered not 
anonymous (they are unidentifiable data), so they need to be 
stored carefully in safe a location. The project agreement was 
to store all the digital data for the project in a personalised 
folder at the hospital servers, and that is what we did. 
Moreover, a consent form including an invitation to the 
workshop and a description of the project was given to 
patients by the CU staff members prior to the workshop. The 
consent form was written in a very simple language to make 
it easier for the patient to follow. However, it was a detailed 
and consequently long description, to make sure that all the 
ethical issues were covered. We agreed with the 
multidisciplinary project committee about the document. We 
were aware that the description might be excessive for the 
patient and could make him/her neglect reading it carefully. 
To make sure that the patient understood the consent form, 
one of the staff members at CU would spend time with the 
patient (that had expressed the willingness to participate) 
before the workshop, going through the document and 
provide further explanations where needed.  
4) Patients abilities  
A 
thorough 
review 
of 
the 
literature 
[6][9] 
[13][14][18][29][30] about the patients’ clinical condition as 
well as observing the patients in the unit, made clear that it 
is a very special user group. The symptoms were almost 
invisible at first sight. Moreover, this is a very diverse user 
group. When we discussed this with the committee they 
suggested to focus on the patients’ abilities and how to 
strengthen those during the workshops. The staff highlighted 
the patients’ willingness to share their stories and express 
themselves both through words and as visual imagery. 
Writing and visualisation was further combined in 
workshops. 
5) Facilitators  
As the number of participants in a session would be 
maximum four, we decided that only the first author would 
participate and facilitate the workshops.  Discussing the issue 
of facilitators with members of the committee we considered 
an extension of the workshop team by someone from the 
clinical side that knows how to work with the patient group 
but is not directly involved with the participating patients. 
The committee suggested a member from the Learning and 
Mastering Center at the hospital, which was specialised in 
providing patient with a deeper insight regarding their health. 
The member might have met the patients during other 
activities around the hospital but was not part of the CU staff 
and not directly involved with the patients. We will refer to 
this as the knowledgeable third-party. The knowledgeable 
third-party has the right knowledge and expertise to 
communicate easily with the patient in case help was needed 
from the first author. We decided that two facilitators (the 
first author having design skills and the knowledgeable third-
party having domain knowledge) would be sufficient in a 
workshop with four participants. We used the same 
knowledgeable third-party representative in the three 
workshops, so we did not need to explain the goal of the 
project and the methods in each workshop.  
B. Workshops 
Three patients’ workshops with patients suffering from 
cognitive impairments and hospitalised at CU were 
organised. In total, ten patients participated. In the first two 
workshops, we invited patients that had been at the hospital 
for more than a week, so they were familiar with the 
document to be redesigned. Four patients participated in the 
first two workshops. In the last workshop only two patients 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

participated, who were back at the hospital for their follow up 
week, six months after their discharge.  
1) Workshop 1 
The workshop was organized in two parts. The first part 
was “storytelling”. The title was “Sharing your experience.”. 
The participants were invited to talk about their experience 
with the “goal plan” document. They were asked to think and 
talk about: 
• 
When were they first introduced to the “goal plan” 
document? How useful was the document in 
making them better list their goals? 
• 
How had they used the “goal plan” until now, e.g. 
in a meeting or looking at it in their rooms? 
• 
How had their feelings toward the “goal plan” 
advanced? How useful was the document to keep 
them focused on their goals? 
The second part was: “What I want my “goal plan” to look 
like.” The technique chosen was drawing and discussion. We 
asked the patient to think if they had the chance to have a 
personal “goal plan” document:  
• 
How would they like that to be?  
• 
Think about the kind of information they would 
want to have there. 
• 
Think about how they could design it a way that 
could make them look at the document daily.  
• 
Think about how the new design would help them 
in meetings with the staff members, nurses or 
doctors. How could the “goal plan” enhance the 
collaboration? 
For the first part, a whiteboard with a print out of the old 
“goal plan” document in the middle and sticky notes in 
different colours were provided. The patients could use those 
to write down keywords to facilitate remembering what they 
had to say when their turn would come. For the second part, 
we removed the “goal plan” document and gave each of the 
participants a white sheet of paper, where they could design 
their ideal “goal plan”.  
Reflection-in-action: the patients did not use the sticky 
notes at all in the first part, and once provided the white sheet 
of paper for designing, they seemed to step back. Realising 
the hesitation, the designer and the second facilitator 
abandoned the drawing idea and started bringing up the 
questions listed above as discussion points to elicit ideas and 
needs from the patients. None of the patients designed 
anything. However, they got the white papers back in their 
rooms to think about. 
Reflection-on-action:  Opening the workshop by asking 
the patients to talk about their experience with the goal plan 
was problematic. It made the patient focus more on their goals 
and their specific problems rather than the main project aim, 
the “goal plan” document layout. Thus, we realised that a 
narrower approach toward the project aim was needed.  
The fear of white paper, the blank page syndrome [31]- 
[32], was made visible in the second half of the workshop. 
The patients were good at articulating their needs, but they 
were not able to create a visual image of their needs and 
consequently design ideas. They got the white paper with 
them, and only one of the patients came back the next day 
with a design suggestion and talked personally to the first 
author. Joyce [33] in her dissertation discusses the role of 
open option in creativity and finds how the openness of the 
design space can constrain creativity. Thus, we needed to 
provide some boundaries in the alternatives in order to 
increase the chances for creativity from the patients. 
The participants had different MACI, which meant they 
had 
different 
levels 
of 
articulation 
abilities 
and 
understanding. We noticed that the patients were more 
focused on discussing personal goals than contributing to the 
layout of the document. The reflection-on-action in this issue 
was that more preparatory work from the staff was needed to 
reinstate the goal of the project to the patient to make sure the 
patient would have a clearer understanding of the aim of the 
workshop before entering the room. 
After the workshop, project committee representatives 
met with the designer and the second facilitator and 
conducted the reflections-on-action as presented above.  
2) 
Workshop 2 
The reflections on action after the first workshop were 
taken into consideration before the second workshop. Thus, 
the nurses talked with the patients again in the morning of the 
workshop day, to make sure the patient understood the scope 
of the project. The workshop was divided into three parts. In 
the first part, the patients got a version of the old goal plan. 
Next, to each of the fields in the document, we added two 
icons, thumb up and down. We asked the patients to mark 
with thumb up those fields that they considered important for 
their rehabilitation. Then they discussed the choices among 
each other. To structure the discussion, the knowledgeable 
third-party facilitator started going from one field to another 
and asking patients for their choice. Thus, was easier for the 
participants to follow and contribute to the discussion. In the 
second part, the patients were asked to try to rewrite the fields 
that they found important, in a way that they thought would 
be easier to understand and read. The third part was called 
“rearrange”. In this part, the patients were asked to rearrange 
the fields as they wanted, add new fields or, change the 
structure of the document. At this point, the patient could use 
the template of the old “goal plan” or get a white sheet and 
design on it. Colored sticky notes and pens were provided.    
In the third part, the participants were also provided with 
some examples of design made by the multidisciplinary 
project committee in the workshop with the designer. The 
patient could have a look at those sketches for a short period 
for inspiration.  
Reflection-in-action: The workshop went well. The 
patients liked the task-oriented approach of the workshop 
and they got engaged in the discussion with each other and 
the facilitators. They started building on the ideas of each 
other. If someone brought up a new idea that would also 
spark the discussion among other participants. We observed 
that the patient could focus better on the general task, 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

marking thumb up and thumb down of the fields in the goal 
plan and relate their marking to personal stories. The sharing 
of the stories was very important because it gave the 
facilitators an opportunity to ask more questions to elucidate 
meaning of what the patient just said.   
Reflection-on-action: One of the lessons learned was that 
the workshop approach narrowed down to exactly the scope 
of the project and helped the patient to stay focused on the 
aim of the project and contribute significantly. While these 
reflections are not new, they appear very important in the case 
of patients with MACI. Moreover, the facilitators observed 
that more work in the pre-workshop phase was beneficial to 
prepare the patients better for the workshop and enable them 
to contribute better.  
The workshop was organised as a future workshop as 
presented by [34]. The future workshops have been widely 
used in PD. The aim is to make people critically discuss a 
current situation and then envision possible improvements for 
the issues critiqued in a fantasy phase. After a phase of 
envisioning any solution, it comes the realisation phase. In the 
realisation phase, feasible solutions based on what the 
technology allows are discussed further. 
In this workshop, we had a slightly changed version of the 
future workshop. In the critique phase our rhetoric was not 
regarding critique but more on what the patient liked or not. 
Providing both the thumb up and down options enabled the 
patient to think that some things needs to be improved but at 
the same time there are others that are extremely relevant that 
need to be preserved, so the patient did not enter a negative 
mindset. The second part of the future workshop is the fantasy 
phase. It was clear from the first workshop that the patient 
could not produce much information while moving directly to 
the fantasy phase. Thus, before jumping in the fantasy phase 
we introduced a transition phase, by asking the patient to 
rewrite some of the things that they thought could be better. 
By doing this, patients could start envisioning a better 
solution but still connected to the things that they knew, to the 
goal-plan that they had seen many times. That “teaser of 
future envisioning” made it easier to get involved in design in 
the “rearrange” part and be able design something new or on 
top of the goal plan or on a white paper. The white paper 
syndrome was defeated.  Figure 1 shows some of the design 
suggestions provided by patients.  
 
 
Figure 1. Workshop 2 - Patients’ design suggestions 
Moreover, the use of exemplars in the “rearrange” part 
of the workshop, might lead and influence patients’ ideas. 
We were sceptic about the usage of these exemplars, but we 
wanted to observe what their influence could be and how the 
patients would react toward that. However, screening the 
patients’ designs did not reveal a noticeable influence from 
the exemplars presented. Some reflections on this: First the 
exemplars were presented to the patients in the last part of 
the workshop, and the patients had already built up a mental 
vision of their goal plan in the previous phases. Second, the 
exemplars were exposed only for a short period and were a 
trigger for possible options of how a goal plan could look 
like. Integrating exemplars was inspired by research through 
design and Gaver et al. work with the ludic design [35]-[37]. 
Finally, looking at the amateur designs from the staff 
inspired the patients to get the colored pens and sticky notes 
and start designing, overcoming the fear of the white paper. 
However, this is a very delicate usage and more investigation 
of the use of exemplars in design sessions should be 
considered more carefully. 
3) 
Workshop 3 
The lessons learned in the second workshop helped in 
organising the third. As the third workshop had participating 
patients that were back at the hospital for a follow-up week, 
their cognition and understanding of the document was more 
advanced than the previous patients. We chose to focus more 
on a long perspective of the rehabilitation process and how 
the goal plan document could assist in that. The structure of 
the workshop was the same as workshop two, and the 
outcomes were comparable.  
Refection in-action: The two participants were of different 
natures. One of them was more expressive, and the other 
more reserved. Because of this, the facilitator had to make 
sure that both were getting the same time and attention.  
Reflections-on-action on this part where the same as 
workshop 2.     
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We will conclude this paper by presenting some meta 
reflections that we did regarding our experience of doing PD 
with people suffering from mild cognitive impairments. 
Through these conclusions we aim to open a discussion in 
PD regarding the work with this specific user group. 
Moreover, some of the reflections may also be useful in other 
contexts.  
Based on our refection-in-action and reflection-on-action in 
each of the workshops our suggestions are:  
1) The role of the multidisciplinary project committee 
compounded by domain experts - Working with patients 
with disabilities can be very demanding. Due to that 
challenge the patient is typically left out of the design 
process for technologies aimed for them. While PD 
promotes the participation of patient in PD sessions the 
designers and practitioner are aware of the challenges 
that they might face. Thus, help from domain experts 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

that know and have a long experience with the patients 
is vital for the designer. Moreover, the domain experts 
in most cases lack design knowledge and tends to fall in 
the trap of surveys as the only method to understand 
patient’s needs. Hence, both designers and domain 
experts should contribute in preparations of the PD 
workshops for patients.  
2) The role of the knowledgeable third-party facilitators in 
PD workshops – We observed that the presence of a 
domain expert that has the ability to communicate with 
the patients but is not directly involved with them had a 
positive effect. First the patient has someone from the 
hospital in the workshop so that they can feel safer. 
Moreover, that someone is not a doctor or anybody from 
the team that the patient is working with at the hospital, 
which made the patient feel freer to express themselves. 
Further, the first author felt more comfortable and in 
control of the situation with a hospital representative 
that would smooth any kind of situation that could be 
presented.  
3) Short workshop duration and Limited number of 
participants – Keeping the workshops in one-hour 
sessions and with up to four participants had positive 
results in our case. The patients expressed that they 
enjoyed the participation without fatiguing him/herself. 
4) Avoid the white paper syndrome – As described by [33], 
the white paper was a limit in the creativity of the 
patient. They were not able to envision a new layout. A 
more task oriented, and creativity evoking technique 
was needed.  
5) Positive rhetoric and the teasers of future envisioning – 
Applying future workshop technique in a more task 
oriented and transitional way than the original version 
of Jungk et al. [34] made the participants more engaged 
during the workshop and later able to design their 
version of the goal plan as presented in Figure 1. We 
applied two changes in the future workshop technique. 
First, we used a positive rhetoric in the critical phase and 
did not only focus on critique. For instance, we used 
words like good and better and focused on improvement.  
The other difference was that we presented what we 
called a teaser of the future envisioning, were the 
participants could think about a new version of future 
changes but keeping that still connected with what they 
knew, and they were familiar with (in connection with 
the old “goal plan”).  
6) Try out the power of exemplars as a way to enhance 
creativity – the usage of examples of designs needs more 
consideration and further study. However, we can state 
that it was helpful for our participants which had 
different MACI. It aided their creativity by making them 
think out of the box. Moreover, we found that the 
amateur examples presented helped the participants 
relate more to them and enhanced their ability to break 
the white paper syndrome and freely draw their ideas. 
Finally, in this paper, we aimed to present a story of how we 
applied PD with MACI. We used the reflective practitioner 
approach to present our reflection both in and on action. 
Moreover, we concluded with some meta-reflections on our 
process. These meta-reflections can be taken into 
consideration, discussed and expanded with more insights in 
other projects in the future.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Eghdam, J. Scholl, A. Bartfai, and S. Koch, “Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology 
to 
Support 
Self-
Management of Patients with Mild Acquired Cognitive 
Impairments: Systematic Review,” Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. e159, Nov-Dec 
 [2] J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, "Participatory Design: an 
introduction," 
Routledge 
international 
handbook 
of 
participatory design, pp. 21-38: Routledge, 2012. 
[3] 
S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, G. Schofield, and P. Olivier, 
"Engaging older people using participatory design." pp. 1199-
1208. 
[4] 
J. McGrenere, R. Davies, L. Findlater, P. Graf, M. Klawe, K. 
Moffatt, B. Purves, and S. Yang, "Insights from the aphasia 
project: designing technology for and with people who have 
aphasia." pp. 112-118. 
[5] 
K. Moffatt, J. McGrenere, B. Purves, and M. Klawe, "The 
participatory design of a sound and image enhanced daily 
planner for people with aphasia." pp. 407-414. 
[6] 
A. Eghdam, “Understanding how persons with mild acquired 
cognitive impairment use and experience information and 
communication technology: an exploratory study,” 2016. 
[7] 
B. Roozenbeek, A. I. Maas, and D. K. Menon, “Changing 
patterns in the epidemiology of traumatic brain injury,” 
Nature Reviews Neurology, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 231, 2013. 
[8] 
M. Majdan, D. Plancikova, A. Brazinova, M. Rusnak, D. 
Nieboer, V. Feigin, and A. Maas, “Epidemiology of traumatic 
brain injuries in Europe: a cross-sectional analysis,” The 
Lancet Public Health, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. e76-e83, 2016. 
[9] 
C. A. Taylor, “Traumatic brain injury–related emergency 
department visits, hospitalizations, and deaths—United 
States, 2007 and 2013,” MMWR. Surveillance Summaries, 
vol. 66, 2017. 
[10] N. Hendriks, K. Slegers, and P. Duysburgh, “Codesign with 
people living with cognitive or sensory impairments: a case 
for method stories and uniqueness,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 1, 
pp. 70-82, 2015. 
[11] J.-J. Lee, “The true benefits of designing design methods,” 
Artifact, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 5-1-5.12, 2014. 
[12] D. A. Schön, The reflective practitioner: How professionals 
think in action: Routledge, 2017. 
[13] J. 
Toglia, 
“Cognitive-perceptual 
retraining 
and 
rehabilitation,” Willard and Spackman’s occupational 
therapy, pp. 607-629, 2003. 
[14] K. D. Cicerone, L. C. Smith, W. Ellmo, H. R. Mangel, P. 
Nelson, R. F. Chase, and K. Kalmar, “Neuropsychological 
rehabilitation of mild traumatic brain injury,” Brain Injury, 
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 277-286, 1996. 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[15] G. Bjerknes and T. Bratteteig, “User participation and 
democracy: A discussion of Scandinavian research on system 
development,” Scandinavian Journal of information systems, 
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1, 1995. 
[16] L. Turner-Stokes, “Evidence for the effectiveness of multi-
disciplinary rehabilitation following acquired brain injury: a 
synthesis of two systematic approaches,” Journal of 
rehabilitation Medicine, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 691-701, 2008. 
[17] C. Nilsson, A. Bartfai, and M. Löfgren, “Holistic group 
rehabilitation–a short cut to adaptation to the new life after 
mild acquired brain injury,” Disability and rehabilitation, vol. 
33, no. 12, pp. 969-978, 2011. 
[18] J. Toglia, “A dynamic interactional approach to cognitive 
rehabilitation,” Cognition and occupation across the life 
span: Models for intervention in occupational therapy, vol. 2, 
pp. 29-72, 2005. 
[19] G. 
P. 
Prigatano, 
Principles 
of 
neuropsychological 
rehabilitation: Oxford University Press, 1999. 
[20] G. E. Carlsson, A. Möller, and C. Blomstrand, “Managing an 
everyday life of uncertainty–a qualitative study of coping in 
persons with mild stroke,” Disability and rehabilitation, vol. 
31, no. 10, pp. 773-782, 2009. 
[21] R. M. Ruff, G. L. Iverson, J. T. Barth, S. S. Bush, D. K. 
Broshek, N. Policy, and P. Committee, “Recommendations 
for diagnosing a mild traumatic brain injury: a National 
Academy of Neuropsychology education paper,” Archives of 
Clinical Neuropsychology, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 3-10, 2009. 
[22] T. Robertson and I. Wagner, “Engagement, representation and 
politics-in-action,” The Handbook of Participatory Design, 
edited by J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, pp. 64-85, 2012. 
[23] J. Greenbaum and F. Kensing, "Heritage: having a say," 
Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design, 
pp. 41-56: Routledge, 2012. 
[24] D. Corring, R. Campbell, and A. Rudnick, “Cognitive 
remediation 
for 
inpatients 
with 
schizophrenia 
or 
schizoaffective disorder using "smart" technology in a 
simulated apartment: a feasibility and exploratory study,” in 
Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Toward 
useful services for elderly and people with disabilities: smart 
homes and health telematics, Montreal, Canada, 2011, pp. 
286-289. 
[25] A. L. Culén and M. van der Velden, "The digital life of 
vulnerable users: designing with children, patients, and 
elderly." pp. 53-71. 
[26] R. B. Rosseland, “Design and evaluation of an interactive 
music system for exercise and physical activity with 
Alzheimer’s patients,” SoundEffects-An Interdisciplinary 
Journal of Sound and Sound Experience, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 4-
22, 2016. 
[27] I. Nakarada-Kordic, N. Hayes, S. D. Reay, C. Corbet, and A. 
Chan, “Co-designing for mental health: creative methods to 
engage young people experiencing psychosis,” Design for 
Health, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 229-244, 2017/07/03, 2017. 
[28] D. A. Schön, Educating the reflective practitioner: Jossey-
Bass San Francisco, 1987. 
[29] M. C. Greenaway, N. L. Duncan, and G. E. Smith, “The 
memory support system for mild cognitive impairment: 
randomized trial of a cognitive rehabilitation intervention,” 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 28, no. 4, 
pp. 402-409, 2013. 
[30] V. Lichtner, “The everyday ethics of field work research with 
vulnerable patients,” Studies in health technology and 
informatics, vol. 205, pp. 813-817, 2014. 
[31] G. A. Price, “Creative solutions to making the technology 
work: three case studies of dyslexic writers in higher 
education,” ALT-J, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 21-38, 2006/03/01, 
2006. 
[32] L. Zhu, I. Vaghi, and B. R. Barricelli, “A meta-reflective wiki 
for collaborative design,” in Proceedings of the 7th 
International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration, 
Mountain View, California, 2011, pp. 53-62. 
[33] C. Joyce, “The blank page: effects of constraint on creativity,” 
2009. 
[34] R. Jungk and N. Müllert, Future Workshops: How to create 
desirable futures: Institute for Social Inventions London, 
1987. 
[35] B. Gaver and J. Bowers, “Annotated portfolios,” interactions, 
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 40-49, 2012. 
[36] W. Gaver, "What should we expect from research through 
design?." pp. 937-946. 
[37] W. W. Gaver, J. Bowers, A. Boucher, H. Gellerson, S. 
Pennington, A. Schmidt, A. Steed, N. Villars, and B. Walker, 
"The drift table: designing for ludic engagement." pp. 885-
900. 
 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

