User Acceptance of Social Robots 
 
Ibrahim A. Hameed 
Dept. of Automation Engineering, Faculty of Engineering 
and Natural Sciences 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) 
in Ålesund 
Larsgårdsvegen 2, 6009 Ålesund, Norway 
E-mail: ibib@ntnu.no 
Zheng-Hua Tan, Nicolai B. Thomsen, Xiaodong Duan 
Section of Signal and Information Processing, Dept. of 
Electronic Systems, Aalborg University 
Fredrik Bajers Vej 7, 9220 Aalborg Ø, Denmark 
E-mail: {zt, nit, xd}@es.aau.dk  
 
 
Abstract— A mismatch between the user’s expectations and the 
actual reality of social robots may negatively impact the 
acceptance and use of the robot. Given that the use of personal 
robots may be expected to become a part of people’s everyday 
lives, it is critical to understand and consider the factors that 
may increase acceptance and adoption when robots are 
designed and introduced. How the robot is accepted by end 
users may be influenced by factors, such as: 1) the role 
assigned to the robot (i.e., robot function), 2) the robot’s social 
capabilities or skills such as the robot’s social intelligence and 
emotions expressions, and 3) the robot appearance. In this 
paper, an experiment is conducted to investigate, understand 
and identify the potential impact of these factors on user’s 
acceptance and adoption of social robots. The experiment is 
conducted in a culture night event where some of the 
attendances are voluntarily interacted with the robot and filled 
out a questionnaire. The questionnaire is designed to measure 
their expectations and impressions before and after interacting 
with the robot (i.e., to assess robot’s social skills), their 
preferences regarding the robot appearance (i.e., machine-
likeness or human-likeness appearance) and finally to assess 
the need for a secondary interactive touchscreen display on the 
robot chest to facilitate interface and hence improve the 
robot’s functionality. The goal of this paper is to understand 
the impact of these factors on user’s acceptance and adoption 
and giving the users a more effective role in the design of this 
type of technology. 
Keywords-human robot interaction (HRI); personal robots; 
iSocioBot; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the continuing technological advancements, 
robots have been increasingly designed for personal use to 
perform simple servant-like tasks (e.g., the robotic vacuum 
cleaner), assisting and caring for elderly people [1], 
providing therapy and teaching autistic children new life 
skills to improve their social behaviors [2]-[4], at homes and 
in classrooms for education [5]-[7], or to be used purely for 
entertainment [8], [9].  It is expected that personal robots 
may become a part of people’s everyday lives and therefore, 
it is critical to understand the factors that may increase its 
acceptance, adoption and use when designed and presented 
to its end-users. Despite the ever-growing development and 
public interest in robotics, a theoretical model specific to 
robot acceptance has not developed yet [10]-[12]. 
Acceptance has been widely studied for other forms of 
technology other than robotics such as the Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) [13], the Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and the Use of Technology model (UTAUT) 
[14], and the Chain Model (TPC) [15]. These models differ 
in complexity and content, however, their goals are to 
understand, explain and predict variables that contribute to 
user acceptance of various types of technologies. With the 
advent of technology acceptance models that can provide 
guidance for understanding the variables that influence robot 
acceptance, robot developers will be able to design robots 
that are more likely to be adopted. The goal of this paper is 
to identify the impact of some potential factors that might 
predict user acceptance of personal and social robots. These 
variables have been identified in the literature as potentially 
impacting 
acceptance; 
robot 
function, 
robot 
social 
capabilities, and robot appearance [10], [14], [15]. 
Functionality of the robot includes control and interface 
issues, such as the appropriateness of the control method for 
the task, the ease of use, and suitability and easiness of user 
interface. Social interactive skills, social intelligence, 
emotion expression, and dialogue system may influence the 
user expectations about the robot’s social capabilities. A 
mismatch between the user’s expectations and the actual 
social intelligence of the robot may negatively impact the 
acceptance and use of the robot [10]. Robot appearance is 
also expected to influence acceptance. The robot physical 
shape, such as the human-likeness, animal-likeness, 
machine-likeness, and robot’s gender are expected to 
influence perceptions of and attitudes of end-users towards 
robots. It has been believed that deep understanding of these 
factors may lead robot designers to develop personal robots 
that will be widely accepted and adopted. In addition to a 
believable appearance, the design of a social robot requires a 
sensory apparatus able to perceive the social and emotional 
world, and a control system able to generate fast and 
acceptable responses [16], [17]. 
This paper is organized as follows; an introduction to 
user acceptance and a review of literature is given in Section 
I. Section II gives a brief introduction to the build in-house 
robot’s platform called iSocioBot which will be used in the 
experiment, 
human-robot 
interaction 
system, 
factors 
impacting robot acceptance, and finally data collection 
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

process and the questionnaire. Results and the discussion of 
results are given in Section III. Concluding remarks are 
presented in Section IV. 
 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Robot Platform (iSocioBot) 
The autonomous robot platform used in this experiment 
is a newly developed in-house intelligent social robot 
(iSocioBot) using off-the-shelf standard components [18]. 
The main goal behind building iSociobot is to attempt to 
make service robots socially intelligent and capable of 
establishing durable relationship with their end-users [19]. 
iSociobot is designed to work side-by-side with people and 
therefore its body shape is built to resemble that of the 
human body, as it is shown in Figure 1. The robot is 1.49m 
tall, which is very close to the worldwide average human 
female height, 1.7m. This height makes its users more 
comfortable in interaction with it and gives the robot 
cameras, on top of it, a wider field of view (FOV) for more 
optimal and robust face detection and recognition. The 
human-like body frame, round face and nick of the robot is 
supported by a round face and a neck built on top of a low 
cost TurtleBot base able to move and turn around at a speed 
close to human speed [20]. The face is equipped with 32×32 
RGB matrix LED array to enable the robot to display 
different types of facial expressions, and three Pololu RGB 
LED strips for ears and necklace.  
 
!
!
!
Clothes(
Movement(
Base(
Computer(
Laser(
Scanner(
Loud(
Speaker(
Kinect(
Camera(
Face(
Ear(
Necklace(
 
Figure 1.  iSocioBot. 
With the aid of the face and ears, the robot can simulate 
expressions such as listening, thinking and speaking. Due to 
the limited payload capacity of the robot base, which is 
maximum 5kg, it is decided to build the body frame from 
light materials such as plastic and wooden sticks and 
covering it with acoustic clothes to allow sounds to reach the 
acoustic devices and for the robot to look more feminine and 
friendly. The robot is also equipped with a range of sensors 
and actuators including encoders, laser range scanner, gyro, 
bumpers, Xbox Kinect, color camera, microphone array, 
loudspeaker, Wi-Fi module, two-wheel drive (2WD), etc., 
which can give the robot massive capabilities to sense the 
environment, able to localize, mapping, and navigate, avoid 
collision, 
simulate 
human’s 
emotional 
and 
facial 
expressions, and have a dialogue system to verbally 
communicate with human end-users. iSocioBot software 
system is based on Robot Operating System (ROS) and 
Ubuntu. The software is a set of open source and newly 
written software frameworks running as a set of ROS-based 
processes. When all software modules are running, the robot 
is only limited by the capability of the onboard computer 
battery, which is around one hour, before the need for 
recharging. 
 
B. Human-robot interaction using speech 
In this section, we present our ongoing work in building 
and integrating technologies for natural and long-term 
human-robot interaction. The robot’s ability for establishing 
simple and natural interaction with its users is of central 
importance for all kind of applications of personal robots. 
The system consists of spontaneous automatic speech 
recognition (ASR), audio-visual perceptual system, speaker 
localization and tracking, dialogue system, and speech 
synthesis.  When a user speaks to the robot while they are 
not facing each other, the robot tends to slowly spin around 
until it can clearly face him/her. These components have 
been integrated on iSocioBot for real-time and long-term 
user interaction.  
Although the robot has a more sophisticated artificial 
intelligence (AI)-based dialogue with natural language 
understanding system, which is able to respond to users in a 
more human and natural manner, in this experiment and for 
the sake of providing all users with the same conditions, a 
very primitive, flexible, and answers-independent dialogue 
script is used. The dialogue script consists of a set of ordered 
groups of sentences and questions. In the experiment, the 
robot randomly chose a sentence or a question from each 
group in order. Detecting when the user starts and stops 
talking timely control the transition between each script item. 
The dialogue starts by greeting the user using one of the 
welcome statements, asking about his/her name, a few 
sentences and questions to discuss the cultural night event, 
and then it ends by wishing him/her a pleasant event. The 
dialogue was conducted in Danish. An English translation of 
a part of the Danish script is shown in Table I. 
 
C. Data collection and questionnaire 
Data 
will 
be 
collected 
through 
a 
paper-based 
questionnaire [21]. The questionnaire consists of a number of 
questions assessing the views and impressions of participants 
regarding the factors that could potentially impact robot 
acceptance and adoptions. These factors include robot 
functionality, robot social capability, and robot appearance. 
The questionnaire will also collect some demographic data 
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

about participants such as gender, age group and previous 
experience in interacting with personal robotics. For children 
or adults with a low literacy rate, it was allowed to fill out 
the questionnaire verbally with the help of a staff member or 
parents.  
TABLE I.  
DIALOGUE SCRIPT 
No. 
iSocioBot’s Dialogue Script 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
3 
 
Hello. Welcome to the cultural 
evening. I am SocioBot from Aalborg. 
What is your name?  
Hello. Welcome to this glorious 
event. My name is SocioBot and I come 
from Aalborg. What is your name? 
Hi there. Welcome to Culture Night. 
My name is SocioBot, and I come from 
Aalborg University. What is your 
name? 
1 
2 
3 
Great to see you. 
Nice to meet you. 
Om, it is nice to be with you. 
1 
2 
Where are you from? 
Where do you live? 
1 
 
2 
It's a good place. I have heard very 
well about it. 
It sounds like a nice place. I would 
like to visit it one day. 
1 
 
2 
What made you decide to attend the 
cultural evening? 
Why are you here tonight? 
1 
 
 
 
2 
I am glad you are here. There is much 
to see. I hope to get time to look 
around later, but so far I have to 
stand here and greet people. 
It is great that you are here. I have 
heard that there are many different 
exhibitions and stands around, so I 
hope to get time to try them later. 
For now, I greet people, when they 
come. 
1 
 
2 
How many people do you think there 
are here tonight? 
How many do you think there comes to 
culture tonight? 
1 
 
2 
It is a great event. I guess around 
3000 visitors. 
Yes, it's a great event. My best 
guesses are that there will be about 
3000 
1 
 
2 
What do you think about my appearance 
in general? 
What do you think of the way I look 
like? 
1 
2 
 
 
3 
It's good to hear. Thank you. 
Thank you, your opinion is important 
to me. I would probably just consider 
it.  
Thank you, it's good to hear your 
opinion. I way just think about it. 
1 
 
2 
It was nice to talk to you. I hope 
you get a lovely evening. 
It's been exciting to talk to you. I 
wish you a fun night. ' 
 
Before interacting with the robot, each participant has 
been given an introduction to iSocioBot, design, functions 
and its possible applications. They are also given a brief 
explanation about what kind of data the questionnaire will 
collect, why it is collected and how it will be used. A staff 
member provided explanations and guidance before and 
throughout the experiment to participants. 
The paper questionnaire consists of four main questions 
with a set of standard answers, a section for demographic 
information, and three illustrative pictures. The first two 
questions are addressing the social intelligence skills of the 
robot by assessing the user’s impressions and views before 
and after interacting with the robot, the third question is 
about the user’s preferences of the robot appearance by 
asking whether they would prefer the human-likeness or 
machine-likeness of the robot and how this can affect their 
engagement with and acceptance of the robot, and finally the 
fourth question is addressing the robot functionality by 
assessing the need for a touchscreen display on the robot’s 
chest to facilitate robot’s control and user interface issues 
and how this can affect robot acceptance.  
Culture Night 10 October 2014 
 
SocioBot Feedback Questionnaire 
 
 
Criteria 
Score 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
Disagree 
Nor Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
1 
You feel that SocioBot did NOT understand you. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Your impression about SocioBot is getting 
WORSE after interacting with it. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
SocioBot should have more mechanical 
appearance (left picture) than a soft appearance 
(right picture). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
SocioBot should NOT have a touch screen on its 
chest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Gender 
 
F 
 
 
M 
Age 
 
< 14 
 
15 - 24 
 
25 - 54 
 
55 + 
Do you have some previous experience in 
interacting with robot? 
 
Yes 
 
 
No 
 
 
Figure 2.  Paper questionnaire is designed to evaluate robot’s acceptance. 
For these types of questions, participants are provided 
with a set of categorical answers (i.e., Strongly Agree (SA), 
Agree (A), Neither Agree Nor Disagree (NAND), Disagree 
(D), Strongly Disagree (SD)) where he/she is supposed to 
choose only one answer for each question. Due to the fact 
that different age groups, genders, and educational and 
cultural background are expected to have different views on 
any given subject, and to get an idea of what kind of social, 
age, and gender groups are giving answers, the questionnaire 
276
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

asks each participant to identify his/here gender (i.e., 
male/female), choose an age group (less than 14, 15-24, 25-
54, and above 55 years old), and answer whether he/she has 
previously experienced a kind of interaction with social 
robots. Identity of each participant he been left anonymous. 
Due to the expected diversity of participants’ age and 
educational background, questions are formulated in the 
most simplest way and the questionnaire is provided with a 
number of illustrative pictures to help respondents to get 
directly to the subject of each question. An English 
translation of the Danish questionnaire is shown in Figure 2. 
The experiment has been conducted during the annual 
culture night event organized by the Danish Ministry of 
Higher Education and Sciences in the city of Copenhagen. In 
this event, doors are opened for children and adults of all 
ages to experience new technology beside a massive of other 
cultural activities [22]. Interested attendees were asked to 
voluntarily take part in a dialogue with the robot and 
optionally fill out the questionnaire thereafter. Among 
hundreds of attendees, a total of 97 persons decided to 
participate. 
III. RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
97 participants in total have decided to take part in a 
dialogue with iSocioBot and fill out the questionnaire with a 
response rate above 98% (2 participants decided not to fill in 
the questionnaire). It has been believed that the experiment 
participants were a fair representative sample of the cultural 
night’s attendees. In the following sub-sections, the collected 
data will be statistically analyzed. 
A. Participants’ analysis 
It is believed that age, genders, and cultural background 
may have a certain impact on the answers of each individual 
participant. 
Therefore, 
we 
will 
analysis 
the 
group 
participants and break it down into response groups 
according to gender, age, and cultural background, as 
follows:  
• 
Gender: among the 97 participants there are 40 
females (around 41.24%) and 57 males (around 
58.76%), as it is shown in Table II.  
• 
Age: 86.60% of the participants are less than 14 
years old, 1.03% from 15 to 24 years old, 9.28% 
from 25 to 54 years old, and 3.09% of the 
participants are above 55 years old, as it is shown in 
Table II. 
• 
Cultural background: 88 participants (around 
90.72%) of the sample have no previous experience 
in personal and social robots beforehand. Only 9 
participants (around 9.28%) of the sample have 
experienced personal robots before. Therefore, the 
participant’s previous experience in robotics will be 
considered insignificant in this study. 
It is obvious, as it is shown in Table II, that the majority 
of the experiment participants are children under 14 years 
old and this indicates that young generations are more 
curious for testing and experiencing new and sophisticated 
technologies including personal and social robots. This also 
implies that personal and social robots are capable of 
attracting children and this can open the door for more 
applications of these robots in areas such as in education as 
an effective learning tool in homes and in classrooms and in 
useful entertainment as well [23][24]. 
TABLE II.  
AGE VS. GENDER GROUPS OF PARTICIPANTS 
Age 
(years) 
Gender 
Total 
Female 
Male 
<14 
15-24 
25-54 
>55 
35 
- 
3 
2 
49 
1 
6 
1 
84 (86.60%) 
1 (1.03%) 
9 (9.28%) 
3 (3.09%) 
Total 
40 (41.24%) 
57 (58.76%) 
97 
 
B. Questionnaire analysis 
In this section, data collected through the experiment will 
be summarized and analyzed, as it is shown in Table III. The 
three factors that might affect robot acceptance and 
adoptions will be analyzed through the following 4 
questions: 
Q1: do you feel that that iSocioBot did not understand you? 
Q2: your impression is getting worse after interacting with 
iSocioBot? 
Q3: iSocioBot should have more machine-likeness than a 
human-likeness appearance? 
Q4: iSocioBot should not have a touchscreen display on its 
chest? 
1) Social Intelligence of the robot: Questions 1 and 2 
are used to ask participants about their views and 
impressions about the social skills of the robot. The first 
question asks whether the participant has the feeling that 
iSocioBot can understand him/her. This question implies 
evaluating the ability of the employed ASR system and the 
dialogue system to provide appropriate and logical answers 
corresponding to the user’s answers. The second question 
asks the participant whether he/she still has the same 
impression about social robot or it is getting worse after 
interacting with the robot. This question, in addition to 
assessing the social skills of the robots, it also assess the 
user’s previous believes and expectations of such kind of 
technology and to what degree its behavior matches its 
humanoid appearance. Participants’ answers (%) are shown 
in Table III.  
TABLE III.  
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 
Labels 
Frequency of questionnaire answers 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
SA 
A 
NAND 
D 
SD 
9 (9.28%) 
23 (23.71%) 
13 (13.40%) 
34 (35.05%) 
18 (18.56%) 
4 (4.12%) 
10 (10.31%) 
22 (22.68%) 
29 (29.90%) 
32 (32.99%) 
7 (7.22%) 
2 (2.06%) 
7 (7.22%) 
27 (27.84%) 
54 (55.67%) 
12 (12.37%) 
20 (20.62%) 
19 (19.59%) 
15 (15.46%) 
31 (31.96%) 
 
From Table III, 53.61% of the sample are disagree and 
strongly disagree on the hypothesis that iSocioBot cannot 
understand them compared to 32.99% who either agreeing or 
strongly agreeing that the robot cannot understand them 
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

clearly. 62.89% of the sample either disagree or strongly 
disagree that their impression about social robots is getting 
worse after interacting with iSocioBot. It could be concluded 
that the sample users are strongly satisfied about the current 
social skills of the robot and that there is a satisfactory 
matching between robot’s humanoid appearance and its 
social skills. In other words, the majority of the participants 
strongly agree that the robot looks like human and is able to 
behave similarly by identifying and reacting to human 
communications using voice and facial expressions. 
2) Robot appearance: Compared to industrial robots 
which are specifically designed for doing some specific 
tasks such as welding steel in specifically designed car 
factory or workshop, humanoid robots, on the other side, are 
designed for use by humans in daily life activities and in an 
unstructured and dynamic environment, therefore, these 
robots have to be adapted to the world in which humans are 
already live. However, It is not adequate that these robots 
would likely be designed to look like one of us, or just have 
a pleasing looking but it should be designed specifically for 
its intended function. Despite the reality that the majority of 
humanoid robots would have no use for their humanoid 
appearance and because people are naturally used to 
communicate and interact with other humans, people would 
be more accepting of these robots if they appeared and 
operated in a much more human manner. In this experiment, 
question number 3 is about user preferences regarding the 
robot appearance. It asks participants whether they would 
prefer the machine-like or human-like appearance of the 
robot? The majority of the participants in the interaction 
decided that they would prefer the human-likeness of the 
robot. 83.51% of the sample were either disagreeing or 
strongly disagreeing on the hypothesis that social robots 
should have a more machine-like appearance.   
3) Robot functionality: To improve robots acceptance 
and use, question 4 is used to ask participant their views 
whether the robot should not have a touchscreen display on 
its chest. 47.42% of the participants group either disagreeing 
or strongly disagreeing on that hypothesis compared to 
32.99% who see that it is not necessary for the robot to have 
a touchscreen display on its chest. Touchscreen would be 
used to facilitate communication with the robot and improve 
safety. Answers of participants are given in Table III. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Creating robots which look, communicate and maneuver 
like humans has partially become a reality. These robots are 
now able to adequately communicate with human users 
using voice, identify human communications patterns and 
reacts accordingly, simulate human’s facial expressions, and 
maneuvering like humans, however, it is still far to achieve 
the deep and complex level of human-to human 
communication and interaction.  These robots are designed 
to be used by humans and in the world in which humans are 
actually live.  In this regards, an experiment is conducted to 
measure the impact of some variables that are believed very 
effective for user acceptance and adoption of these robots. 
Data analysis showed that children less than 14 years old are 
more interested in interacting with robots. This complies 
with previous studies that indicated that young generations 
are more likely willing to experience and use new and 
sophisticated technologies specially robots. The success of 
the robot in attracting children is a signal of the usefulness of 
these technologies and it opens the door for employing this 
technology to work directly with human and operate in a 
variety of applications such as educating and entraining 
children at homes and in classrooms. If children will be 
major consumer of personal robots, they also should be 
given more effective role in designing these new 
technologies. 
Despite the reality that the majority of robots would have 
no use for its humanoid appearance, results showed a strong 
support for the human-likeness appearance of personal 
robots. Because people are naturally used to communicating 
and interacting with other humans, it would be ideal situation 
for any one trying to use a personal robot. If we can design a 
robot which is able to react and communicate in a similar 
way to humans, it would no longer be thought as a machine 
by its user, and people would naturally be more engaged and 
accepting it if it appeared and operated in a much more 
human manner. For user acceptance and adoption, a strong 
matching between the humanoid appearance of the robot and 
its behavior must be achieved, and vice-versa. Results 
showed a strong support for humanoid robots to have a 
secondary mean of user-interface and communication rather 
than the natural human communication by voice. A 
touchscreen display on the robot’s chest might give the 
robot’s users a better feeling of safety in case the ASR 
system failed to work properly. 
From this study, we can summarize the following 
concluding remarks; 1) in the area of social and humanoid 
robots, it is crucial to achieve a kind of matching between 
robot appearance and actions, if a robot’s designer will go 
for the human-likeness appearance, a satisfying degree of 
robot’s social intelligence and skills must be achieved, and 
vice versa, 2) in addition to the voice communication 
between the robot and its users, a secondary way, such as a 
touchscreen display on the robot’s chest, to communicate 
with the robot in emergency cases or in case of ASR failure 
is crucial, 3) children are more interested in experiencing 
new technology and therefore they should be given a more 
effective role in the design and development of such kind of 
technology, and finally, 4) personal robots are very well 
accepted product and therefore it can be employed to work 
with humans in very challenging environments such as in 
classrooms for educating children and in nursery homes for 
elderly care giving.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Durable Interaction with Socially Intelligent Robots 
(iSocioBot) is a research project supported by the Danish 
Council for Independent Research (Technology and 
Production Sciences) under grant number: 1335-00162. 
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. Roy et al., “Towards personal service robots for the elderly,” 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Robotics and 
Entertainment (WIRE), 25, 184, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2000. 
[2] 
J. Greczek, E. Short, C. Clabaugh, K. Swift-Spong, and M. J. Matarić, 
“Socially Assistive Robotics for Personalized Education for 
Children,” AAAI Fall Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and 
Human-Robot Interaction (AI-HRI), Nov 2014.  
[3] 
K. Dautenhahn, “Roles and functions of robots in human society: 
implications from research in autism therapy,” Robotica, 21, 2003, pp 
443-452.  
[4] 
J. Greczek, E. Kaszubski, A. Atrash, and M. J. Matarić, “Graded 
Cueing Feedback in Robot-Mediated Imitation Practice for Children 
with Autism Spectrum Disorders,” In 23rd IEEE Symposium on 
Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN '14), 
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 2014. 
[5] 
M. Cooper, D. Keating, W. Harwin, and K. Dautenhahn, “Robots in 
the classroom-tools for accessible education,” Assistive technology 
on the threshold of the new millennium, 1999, pp. 448-452. 
[6] 
I. R. Nourbakhsh, "Robots and Education in the classroom and in the 
museum: On the study of robots, and robots for study," IEEE Int. 
Conf. Robotic Automation, 2000.  
[7] 
D. P. Miller, I. R. Nourbakhsh, and R. Siegwart, “Robots for 
education,” in Springer Handbook of Robotics, B. Siciliano and O. 
Khatib, Eds. Springer, 2008, ch. 55. 
[8] 
M. Fujita and K. Kageyama, “An open architecture for robot 
entertainment,” In Proceedings of the first international conference on 
Autonomous agents (AGENTS '97), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
1997, pp. 435-442. 
[9] 
M. Nakamura and H. Sawada, “Talking robot and the analysis of 
autonomous voice acquisition,” In Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (2006 
IEEE/RSJ), 2006, pp. 4684-4689. 
[10] J. M. Beer, A. Prakash, T. L. Mitzner, and W. A. Rogers, 
“Understanding Robot Acceptance,” Technical Report HFA-TR-
1103, Georgia Institute s of Technology School of Psychology, 
Human Factors and Aging Laboratory, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2010.  
[11] M. Heerink, B. Krose, V. Evers, and B. Wielinga, “Measuring 
acceptance of an assistive social robot: a suggested toolkit,” In The 
18th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive 
Communication, RO-MAN 2009, Toyama, Japan, 2009, pp. 528-533. 
[12] K. Sääskilahti, R. Kangaskorte, S. Pieskä, J. Jauhiainen, and M. 
Luimula, "Needs and User Acceptance of Older Adults for Mobile 
Service Robot", 2012 IEEE RO-MAN: The 21st IEEE International 
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication. 
September 9-13, Paris, France, 2012, pp. 559-564.  
[13] F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user 
acceptance of information technology,” MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 1989, 
pp. 319-340.  
[14] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, “User 
acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified view,” MIS 
Quarterly, 27(3), 2003, pp. 425-478.  
[15] D. L. Goodhue and R. L. Thompson, “Task-technology fit and 
individual performance,” MIS Quarterly, 19(2), 1995, pp. 213-236. 
[16] C. Breazeal, “Socially intelligent robots,” Interactions, 12(2), 2005, 
pp. 19–22. 
[17] D. Mazzei, A. Zaraki, N. Lazzeri and D. De Rossi, "Recognition and 
expression of emotions by a symbiotic android head," Humanoid 
Robots (Humanoids), 2014 14th IEEE-RAS International Conference 
on, Madrid, 2014, pp. 134-139. 
[18] Z.-H. Tan, N. B. Thomsen, and X. Duan, “Designing and 
Implementing an Interactive Social Robot from Off-the-shelf 
Components,” submitted to The 3rd IFToMM Symposium on 
Mechanism Design for Robotics (MEDER 2015), Aalborg 
University, Aalborg, Denmark, 2015, pp. 1-8. 
[19] Durable Interaction with Socially Intelligent Robots (iSocioBot) 
(retrieved from http://socialrobot.dk/ in January 2015). 
[20] TurtleBot (retrieved from http://www.turtlebot.com/ in January 
2015). 
[21] E. Fanning, “Formatting a paper-based survey questionnaire: best 
practices,” Practical Assessment, Research and Evaluation, 10(12), 
2005, pp. 1–14. 
[22] Culture Night, Copenhagen, October 10th, 2014 (retrieved from 
http://www.kulturnatten.dk/en/culture-night/Culture-Night-2014 
in 
January 2015). 
[23] J. M. Roschelle, R. D. Pea, C. M. Hoadley, D. N. Gordin, and B. M. 
Means, “Changing How and What Children Learn in School with 
Computer-Based Technologies,” The Future of Children, Vol. 10, No. 
2, Children and Computer Technology, 2000, pp. 76-101. 
[24] A. Druin, “The role of children in the design of new technology,” 
Behaviour and information technology, 21(1), 2002, pp. 1-25. 
 
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

