Investigating Self-disclosure and the Amount of Speaking in an Online Meeting
Under the Rule of Casual Talking and Casual Listening
Yoshihiro Ichikawa∗, Satsuki Ayaya†, Shinichiro Kumagaya†, Fumihide Tanaka∗
∗Faculty of Engineering, Information and Systems,
University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577 Japan
Email: {ichikawa@ftl., tanaka@}iit.tsukuba.ac.jp
†Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo,
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8902 Japan
Email: {ayayamoon@live.jp, kumashin@bfp.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp}
Abstract—This paper investigates an online meeting under the
rule of casual talking and casual listening (CTCL). Four different
meeting styles with respect to spatial and temporal viewpoints
were compared by recruiting a total of 60 university students
using questionnaires. The results revealed the followings: (1) the
degree of participant’ self-disclosure in the online meetings was
not signiﬁcantly different from the baseline; (2) it was preferred
to use a more familiar interface like a timeline; (3) an online
meeting under the CTCL rule was more effective for people
with a lower disclosure than the case with a higher disclosure;
(4) it is important to provide an appropriate discussion subject
to improve the self-disclosure of participants; and (5) a Delay
function was suitable to talk with participants who had various
degrees of social anxiety.
Keywords–Tojisha-kenkyu; Social networking system; Text chat
system; Casual talking casual listening; Communication Interface;
Self-disclosure; Social anxierty.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Background
The Japanese word, tojisha-kenyu means a research by
interested persons for themselves. It is a practical activity in
which people with a difﬁculty or a mental disorder engage
in to recover from their problems. The activity consists of
sharing ways to deal with various difﬁculties and ﬁnding words
to explain what is happening to yourself [1][2]. The most
basic activity is to gather and share information with persons
who have the same difﬁculties. There is a fundamental rule of
casual talking and casual listening (CTCL) that is a facilitating
technique used by self-help groups, such as Alcoholics Anony-
mous. These activities are expected to uncover new ﬁnding.
However, it is not easy to increase the number of partici-
pants in tojisha-kenkyu because of the following reasons: (1)
when the number of participants increases, the recording effort
also increases; (2) it is often difﬁcult for many people to gather
at one site because of the constraints of location, time, and the
physical problems of participants; and (3) there is a limit to the
number of participants in a meeting because time and space are
limited. A web-based system for conducting a meeting online
will solve these problems. However, to the authors’ knowledge,
there is no research on online meetings with the CTCL rule.
B. Objective
The aim of this study is to investigate an online meeting
under the CTCL rule. From the study, we also expect to draw
out implications about designing a suitable online meeting
interface for each user.
C. Method
In this study, we conducted an experiment in which univer-
sity students participated in online meetings with the CTCL
rule using a web-based interface. Since it is important for
participants to be able to speak and hear more easily and this is
strongly affected by the interface, examining the effectiveness
of the interface was important. Then, we constructed four
interfaces that were different from each other on two aspects:
spatial and temporal. The spatial difference in the interfaces
was whether spoken texts were displayed on one line, which
is called a timeline, or at random positions. The temporal
difference was whether there was a delay in displaying a
text inputted by a user. The intention was to weaken the
relationship between multiple text messages. It was expected
that if the context became weaker, the conversation would
become difﬁcult to maintain. In addition, participants’ name
and ID were not visible to others (the meetings were held
anonymously). In the experiments, we ﬁrst evaluate whether
an online meeting using the standard interface led to a good
outcome for participants by measuring self-disclosure. Second,
to investigate the effect of different interfaces, we measured
the relationship between an index called self-disclosure and
social anxiety and the number of words inputted from the
participants.
D. Structure of this paper
This paper is organized as follws: In Section II, we intro-
duce to practice tojisha-kenkyu and CTCL rule. In Section III,
we show the experiment which is conducted in this paper, and
we also show the results of the experiment in Section IV. After
that, Section V discusses about the results. And, in Section
VI and VII, we mention about an implication and limitation,
respectively. In Section VIII, we conclude this paper.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II.
HOW TO PRACTICE TOJISHA-KENKYU
In tojisha-kenkyu, the most basic activity is to gather and
share information with persons with similar difﬁculties. This
section shows an example of a tojisha-kenkyu meeting with
the CTCL rule.
A. Proceess
An organizer announces information, date, place, meeting
theme, and basic precautions through a mailing list several
weeks in advance. If a receiver is interested in attending the
meeting, he or she can apply for participation. Cancelling the
participation is also allowed.
On the meeting day, participants gather at the venue and
conduct a face-to-face meeting with the CTCL rule. Partici-
pants seat in a circle along with the facilitator, who takes the
initiative. First, the participants are informed about the meeting
and the rules. Next, starting from the facilitator, the participants
speak one by one in turn to warm up. After that, they speak
about some topics in the same way. For convergence of the
meeting, a time limit (from 1 to 3 minutes) is imposed on
each speaker.
B. Keep talking and keep listening (CTCL) rule
It is recommended that the participants follow the CTCL
rule. The rule has two components: speaking and hearing.
According to the speaking component, the participants need to
speak based on their experiences and feelings. The participants
are recommended to try to speak even if it is difﬁcult for
them to express themselves. But the participants should not
be forced to speak. Participants are also allowed to pass their
turn. According to the hearing component, a participant needs
to hear the others’ stories without talking, nodding, or eye
contact.
C. Self-disclosure and CTCL rule
In a CTCL meeting, participants need to speak only about
the meeting theme. It is important that the speaking is based
on self-experiences and feelings. Such a speaking from a
subjective viewpoint, which is not based on an objective
opinion or knowledge, is closely related to a self-disclosure [3].
The word self-disclosure is deﬁned as “act of revealing per-
sonal information to others in phycology.” Autobiographies
that include an element of self-disclosure contribute to the
development of tojisha-kenkyu. However, it is not easy for
everyone to publish an autobiography. There is a function in
tojisha-kenkyu that gets the story out of many persons.
D. Social anxiety and CTCL rule
Audiences and being judged by them create anxiety in
people, called social anxiety [4]. The word social anxiety is
deﬁned as “anxiety resulting from the prospect or presence of
personal evaluation in real or imagined social situations.” In a
CTCL meeting, to reduce such a psychological anxiety, talking,
nodding, and eye contact is not allowed. An online meeting
system can also help reduce the anxiety. In particular, almost
all persons with developmental disabilities have such anxiety
because they have little experience sharing their difﬁculties.
III.
EXPERIMENT
This section describes the experiment to evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of a CTCL meeting using an online system and to
examine the effects of interfaces implementing our spatial and
temporal concepts.
A. Method
1) Analyzing data:
We analyzed the questionnaire re-
sponses and contents spoken by participants in meetings. The
meeting participants used one of four interfaces. The analysis
employed a between-subjects comparison. The participants
answered questions about self-disclosure and social anxiety in
their regular life in prior questionnaires. After the meeting, the
participants answered another questions about self-disclosure
for the online system using in the experiment.
2) Measuring self-disclosure: In order to measure the self-
disclosure of participants, we employed the questionnaire
ESDQ-45, which was developed by Enomoto [5] and translated
and inspired from JSDQ-60 [6]. It is a questionnaire in
Japanese on a 5-point Likert scale and consists of 45 items
belonging to 15 categories (c01, c02, . . ., c15). Points 1 to 5
mean respectively “do not disclose at all the contents,” “not
disclose much,” “neutral,” “disclose,” and “disclose enough
about the contents.” For example, one of the content is “own
current goal,” and it is categorized as c03 (“intentional aspect
of spiritual self”). In the experiments, to measure the degree
of disclosure in the usual living environment, we asked the
participants whether they have someone to talk about each
item. The revised meanings of points 1 to 5 are respectively
“have no one to talk about the contents,” “have few person to
talk” “neutral,” “have someone to talk,” and “have someone to
talk enough about the contents.” The aim was to evaluate how
much the online system can support a participant compared
to the existing environment. Therefore, in the questionnaire
after the meeting, we measured the degree of disclosure of
participants using the online system. Then, points 1 to 5 in this
case mean respectively “do not disclose at all the contents,”
“do not disclose much,” “neutral,” “disclose,” and “disclose
enough about the contents.” In both the cases, the value of
self-disclosure is expressed as the total score of the answers
to 45 questions. Thus, the value ranges from 45 to 225.
3) Measuring social anxiety: In order to measure the social
anxiety of participants, we used a questionnaire of Interaction-
Audience Anxiety (I-AA) scale translated and modiﬁed by
Okabayashi et al. [7] from Leary’s social anxiety scale [8].
It is questionnaire in Japanese on a 5-point Likert scale and
consists of 14 items about two aspects, audience anxiety and
interaction anxiety. Points 1 to 5 mean respectively “strongly
disagree,” “disagree,” “neutral” “agree,” and “strongly agree.”
The value of social anxiety is expressed as an average of the
answer to the 14 questions. For exsample, one of the questions
in audience anxierty aspect is “I usually get nervous when I
speak in front of a group.”
B. Using interfaces
In this study, we employed a text-chat system as a way
to conduct an online meeting. Text-based systems have higher
anonymity compared with sound- or video-based systems. If an
unspeciﬁed number of people participate through the system, it
is better to have high anonymity from the viewpoint of privacy.
We also employed a real-time chat system. It is close to the
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

concept of tojisha-kenkyu that participants share the same place
and time while discussing.
In a text-based communication system, the contexts of
conversations are constructed and arranged by time, space,
and user IDs such that texts are spatially arranged with time
stamps or user information. Computer-mediated communica-
tion (CMC) contributes to increasing the anonymity of people;
however, it also brings a behavior based on a lack of social
morality [9]. To suppress the problem and to let the participants
focus on the meeting obeying the CTCL rule, we think that it
is effective to blur the relationship between each text spoken
by participants. Such blurring can be implemented using two
kinds of ways that are spatial and temporal rearrangement.
Spatial rearrangement is to display texts spoken by partici-
pants without spatially organizing. A CTCL meeting is similar
to the brainstorming process because the participants do not
need to consider evaluation by others and they can speak freely
about the current topic [10]. In this method, it is important that
everyone just expresses their ideas without organizing them.
For this reason, displaying text without spatially arranging
may also promote speaking in a CTCL meeting. In order
to implement the concepts into a real-time chat system, we
propose the method of spatial rearrangement.
Temporal rearrangement is to intentionally delay for dis-
playing text spoken by participants. Conversation is con-
structed by turn-taking [11]. Such conversation causes unnec-
essary evaluation and advice from others. For this reason, to
complicate to do turn-taking between participants may promote
concentration on thinking and speaking of each person. In
order to implement the concepts into a real-time chat system,
we propose the method of temporal rearrangement.
These spatial and temporal concepts make it difﬁcult for
users to recognize contexts, and establish conversations. For
this reason, participants will not try to talk each other. There is
an etiquette of not replying to a malicious person in an online
system with higher anonymity. Our proposal is expected to
contribute to compliance with such etiquettes.
In our spatial rearrangement, the interface displays texts
at random positions as staggered rows without aligning in a
line, which is called “timeline” (Figure 1). In our temporal
rearrangement, the interface delays displaying of texts sent
from participants. Our proposal is to weaken relationship
between spoken texts. Then, we implemented four interfaces
that differ from two viewpoints, spatial and temporal, as shown
in Table I. In the case of Timeline (TL), new text is displayed
at the top of other texts. In the case of Random (RND), new
text is displayed randomly in blank spaces, which are tiled
constantly. In the case of No delay (Nodelay), new text is
displayed as soon as it is sent. In the case of Delay, new text
is displayed after a delay of few seconds after it is sent. In all
cases, the oldest text is archived when the display area becomes
full. Thus, there are four different combinations possible: TL-
Nodelay, TL-Delay, RND-Nodelay, and RND-Delay. These
can also be treated as experimental conditions.
C. Experimental settings and conditions
The participants (33 males and 27 females, having the
age between 19 and 24) were undergraduate and graduate
students in the university of the ﬁrst author. They were enrolled
in this experiment as part-time employees. The theme of
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Using interfaces: (a) shows an exsample of the timeline interface,
and (b) shows an exsample of the random interface.
TABLE I. IINTERFACES COMBINING SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL
REARRANGEMENT. THE INTERFACES ARE ALSO EXPERIMENTAL
CONDITIONS.
Spatial
Interfaces (Conditions)
Timeline
Random
(TL)
(RND)
Temporal
No delay
TL-Nodelay
RND-Nodelay
Delay
TL-Delay
RND-Delay
the meetings was “worries about interpersonal relationships,”
which has high commonality between the subjects. The setting
was close to the premise of tojisha-kenkyu that all participants
have the same worries or difﬁculties. Each interface was
an experimental condition, and each participant took part in
experiments in only one condition. Concretely, three meetings
with ﬁve participants each were hold for each condition, and
thus, the total number of participants was 60 (4 conditions ×
3 meetings × 5 participants/meeting). Each mechanism of the
interface was explained to the participants on ahead. In the case
of Delay, the delay time was set from 15 to 60 seconds during
the experiments. Each meeting was held about 36 minutes (the
ﬁrst half of 18 minutes and the second half of 18 minutes). A
topic of the ﬁrst half was about above theme, and a topic of the
second half was “what are you dealing with about worry about
interpersonal relationships and what do you want to do?”
IV.
RESULTS
A. Major relations
In order to outline the major relations between variables,
we show Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient between each data
point (N = 60) in Table II. “IAA” indicates the degree of social
anxiety, “ESDQpre” indicates the degree of self-disclosure
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE II. PEARSON’S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN EACH
DATA POINT (N = 60).
IAA
ESDQpre
ESDQsys
dESDQsys
#words
IAA
1.00
ESDQpre
−.28*
1.00
ESDQsys
−.02
.11
1.00
dESDQsys
.22
−.74***
.59***
1.00
#words
−.19
.24
.18
−.07
1.00
TABLE IV. PEASON’S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN IAA AND
OTHER DATA FOR EACH CONDITION (N = 15).
IAA
TL-Nodelay
TL-Delay
RND-Nodelay
RND-Delay
dESDQsys
.61
−.08
.16
−.03
#words
−.31
−.14
−.36
−.03
in the usual living environment, “ESDQsys” indicates the
degree of self-disclosure of participants in the online system,
“dESDQsys” indicates the difference between ESDQpre and
ESDQsys, and “#words” indicates the number of words in
texts posted by a participant. Note that the same base word
was counted only once and symbols were not counted, and
the morphological analysis was conducted using MeCab [12].
The test statistic of IAA and ESDQpre was p = .033; thus,
it met the signiﬁcance level of 5%. There is a weak negative
correlation between the two parameters. No correlation was
observed between IAA and ESDQsys, IAA and #words, ES-
DQpre and ESDQsys, and ESDQsys and #words. However,
there is a strong negative correlation between ESDQpre and
dESDQsys.
B. Interface effects
In order to investigate the interface effects, we show the
values of mean and standard deviation of each data for each
condition (N = 15) in Table III. The IAA of the persons in
TL-Nodelay and RND-Nodelay was high, but that of persons
in TL-Delay and RND-Delay was not high. The ESDQpre was
also different accordingly. This result conﬁrms that there is a
correlation between IAA and ESDQpre. Despite this result,
dESDQsys was positive in TL-Delay and negative in RND-
Nodelay. By the two-way factorial ANOVA for spatial and
temporal factors, it was found that there was no effect of
interaction between the factors and there was a signiﬁcant
difference between the spatial factors whether timeline or
random (p = .049 < .05).
C. Relevance between personality and interface
In order to investigate the relevance of the effects between
participants’ personality and interfaces, we show Pearson’s
correlation coefﬁcient between IAA or ESDQpre and other
data for each condition (N = 15) in Table IV and Table V. A
correlation was observed between IAA and dESDQsys in TL-
Nodelay. In TL-Nodelay and RND-Delay, there was a weak
negative correlation between IAA and #words. On the other
hand, there was no correlation between IAA and #words in
TL-Delay and RND-Delay. In TL-Nodelay and RND-Nodelay,
there was a very strong negative correlation between ESDQpre
and dESDQsys. The correlations in TL-Delay and RND-Delay
were lower than those in the other conditions. In TL-Delay,
there was a positive correlation between ESDQpre and #words.
TABLE V. PEARSON’S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN ESDQPRE
AND OTHER DATA FOR EACH CONDITION (N = 15).
ESDQpre
TL-Nodelay
TL-Delay
RND-Nodelay
RND-Delay
dESDQsys
−.88
−.68
−.91
−.67
#words
−.04
.64
.16
.14
V.
DISCUSSION
The interface of TL-Nodelay is baseline of online meeting
with CTCL rule, because it was made based on a conventional
interface. The results revealed that the degree of self-disclosure
for unfamiliar (anonymous) people on the system is almost
the same from the disclosure for the usual living environment.
The degree of self-disclosure was not only maintained but also
increased by using a system. We think there are two reasons
that are application of the CTCL rule and using the CMC
system. But, it is not only necessary to use an online system
but also preferred to use a more familiar interface like timeline.
On the other hand, the degree of self-disclosure in the usual
living environment is the major factor contributing to changing
of the disclosure in an online system. The online system and
the CTCL rule are more effective for a person with a lower
disclosure than a person with higher disclosure. It can be said
that the online system and the CTCL rule are useful for the
person who has many worries relatively.
Table VI shows the results about the ﬁfteen categories of
the self-disclosure assessment. The value of p indicates the test
statistic with student’s t-test of ESDQpre and ESDQsys. The
scores of categories c03 and c07 were especially increased
by using the conventional interface system. The student’s t-
test statistics of ESDQpre and ESDQsys are p = 0.059 and
0.063; thus, they met the signiﬁcance level of 10% (p < 0.1).
The categories c03 and c07 are “intentional aspect of spiritual
self” and an “informal interpersonal aspect of social self (same
sex),” respectively. We think that the results occurred because
several categories have high relevance to the meeting theme.
For this reason, to improve the self-disclosure of participants,
it is important to provide an appropriate theme. In contrast,
the category c15, which is about “rumors,” was not easy
to be disclosed in the online system. That is a reasonable
result because in the meeting, the participants spoke based
on their own experiences and feelings. Further investigation
is necessary to discuss the effect of self-disclosure for each
category.
The result that there was no correlation between IAA
and #words suggests that the participants with higher social
anxiety did not speak much in the meeting despite having
difﬁculties related to the meeting theme. However, there was a
weak negative correlation in TL-Nodelay and RND-Nodelay,
and there was no correlation in TL-Delay and RND-Delay
(Table IV). From the results, when the participants with higher
social anxiety use the Nodelay interfaces, they ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to speak. In contrast, since the Delay interfaces have no such
effect, they are suitable for all participants who have various
degrees of social anxiety.
VI.
IMPLICATION
The contents of the I-AA questionnaire administered before
the experiment were included the meeting theme, which was
about worries of interpersonal anxiety. As a result, it may have
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE III. MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF EACH DATA POINT FOR EACH CONDITION (N = 15).
TL-Nodelay
TL-Delay
RND-Nodelay
RND-Delay
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
IAA
2.97
0.96
3.21
0.74
2.99
1.00
3.32
0.79
ESDQpre
176.80
30.15
170.60
34.98
186.67
29.06
162.80
29.81
ESDQsys
189.13
21.93
183.53
30.39
173.73
25.01
158.20
22.63
dESDQsys
12.33
43.03
12.93
39.94
−12.93
48.39
−4.60
23.97
#words
97.73
35.63
123.47
59.34
121.80
44.00
103.80
41.65
TABLE VI. MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE FIFTEEN
CATEGORIES OF THE SELF-DISCLOSURE IN TL-NODELAY (N = 15).
TL-Nodelay
ESDQpre
ESDQsys
p
M
SD
M
SD
c01
12.93
1.87
13.40
1.88
.509
c02
11.20
3.26
12.47
2.83
.360
c03
11.73
2.69
13.33
2.23
.059+
c04
11.13
3.18
12.33
2.41
.294
c05
12.53
2.23
13.07
2.22
.502
c06
8.07
3.49
7.53
3.23
.636
c07
11.80
2.68
13.53
1.81
.063+
c08
10.53
4.02
11.80
2.51
.350
c09
12.73
2.60
13.27
2.02
.508
c10
12.93
2.22
13.67
1.29
.326
c11
11.87
2.50
12.40
2.82
.569
c12
11.47
3.09
13.20
2.04
.159
c13
13.67
1.72
14.53
0.92
.155
c14
12.60
2.41
13.60
1.68
.221
c15
11.60
2.23
11.00
2.45
.591
total
176.80
30.15
189.13
21.93
.302
promoted speaking or improved self-disclosure of participants.
It may have also biased the contents of speaking. However,
conducting a questionnaire before a meeting for the partici-
pants to have a deeper consciousness about meeting themes
may be useful. In the ﬁeld of tojisha-kenkyu, there is room for
consideration also in preparation for a meeting stage.
From the result, there is not necessarily a relationship
between the degree of self-disclosure and the number of
spoken words (Table II). The fact suggests that there is a
gap between feeling and actually action. From the subjective
viewpoint of a participant, it is a better environment where
self-disclosure tends to be higher. On the other hand, from the
objective viewpoint, it is better to have an active environment
where many things are spoken by others. Both factors are
important for constructing a better meeting environment for
tojisha-kenkyu.
The result that the TL interfaces improve self-disclosure
may be interpreted as RND deteriorates self-disclosure. In
RND, there is a risk of participants lacking concentration in
the meeting because the display position of the spoken text
is not ﬁxed. In contrast, it can be inferred that application of
the CTCL rule or the CMC environment greatly contributed to
improve self-disclosure. It is important to verify which factor
is more important in some way, e.g., by conducting a meeting
without the CTCL rule.
By comparing #words in TL-Nodelay, TL-Delay, and
RND-Nodelay, both spatial and temporal rearrangements seem
to have promoted speaking (Table III). However, #words are
the same in RND-Delay and TL-Nodelay. Since there is no
statistical difference anyway, the contribution of the interface
to promote speaking in a meeting may be small.
If we want to just increase the number of spoken text in
a meeting environment, introducing a bot agent using logs of
another meeting may be a solution. We are conducting research
on the construction of such agents [13].
According to previous research, gender affects self-
disclosure [14][15]. Speciﬁcally, females have higher self-
disclosure than males. In fact, the degree of self-disclosure
in the preliminary questionnaire tended to be higher in exper-
imental groups with more women. Considering the result that
the degree of self-disclosure in the usual living environment
is the major factor contributing to the disclosure change in an
online system, the system may be more effective for males.
VII.
LIMITATION
This experiment was conducted as a part-time job for
university students. It may be implicitly bringing conﬁdence
that the other participants are also in the same part-time job.
The implicit assumption that the participants belong to a close
community can also create security. It is undeniable that the
sense of security and responsibility as an employee may have
established the meetings online. It is necessary to investigate
the inﬂuence of these two factors by application to the groups
of tojisha-kenkyu or general population who are not part-time
employees.
For the same reason, few spoken texts ignoring the meeting
rule were observed. Therefore, similar veriﬁcation is required
for the relationship between interface and rule compliance.
Although we did not control the sex, such a control is
necessary for more precise evaluation.
In order to make university students a tojisha, we adopted
very general worries as a meeting theme. Since the difﬁculties
of tojisha-kenkyu are not general, their meetings are more
serious and useful.
The evaluation is based on the experimental result of only
one meeting by the participants who used the rule and the
system for the ﬁrst time. As tojisha-kenkyu is continual in
practice, the evaluation of the system by observations of a
number of meetings is necessary.
This paper does not discuss the content of the meeting. It
is interesting to study whether using the system essentially has
an inﬂuence on tojisha-kenkyu.
We assumed that participants access the web-system from
thier desktop or laptop PC in this experiment. It is desirable
that the system can also be used in other devices such as
smartphones so that a large number of people can participate.
However, it is difﬁcult to operate the RND interface when
using it on a device with a small screen.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Tojisha-kenkyu is used to share difﬁculties that many par-
ticipants cannot express well. In this research, to construct a
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

system to conduct CTCL meetings online, we investigated the
effect of an online meeting with the CTCL rule. Concretely,
we constructed four interfaces that are different from two
viewpoints, spatial and temporal, and we examined the effect
on the conventional interface and the relationship between
the effects of the proposed interfaces. From the experimental
results on undergraduate and graduate students, following
ﬁndings were obtained:
•
The degree of self-disclosure for unfamiliar people on
the system is almost the same from the disclosure for
the usual living environment. However, it is not only
necessary to use an online system but also preferred
to use a more familiar interface like TL.
•
The degree of self-disclosure in the usual living envi-
ronment is the major factor contributing to change the
disclosure in the online system. The online system and
the CTCL rule are more effective for a person with a
lower disclosure than one with a higher disclosure.
•
It is important to provide the appropriate theme to
improve the self-disclosure of participants.
•
The Delay interfaces are suitable for all participants
who have various degrees of social anxiety.
As future work, it is necessary to investigate the inﬂuence
of the sense of security and responsibility by application to
the groups of tojisha-kenkyu or general population who are
not part-time employees.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 24119003.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Ishihara, “Learning from tojisha kenkyu,” in Disability Research
Today: Interactional Perspectives.
London: Routledge, 2015, pp. 27–
42.
[2]
S. Ayaya and S. Kumagaya, Hattatsu Shougai Tojisha Kenkyu (A
Tojisha-Kenkyu of Developmental Disorders).
Tokyo: Igaku-shoin,
2008.
[3]
S. M. Jourard, Self-disclosure : An experimental analysis of the trans-
parent self.
New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1971.
[4]
B. R. Schlenker and M. R. Leary, “Social anxiety and self-presentation:
A conceptualization model,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 92, 1982, pp.
641–669.
[5]
H. Enomoto, Psychological study of self-disclosure.
Kyoto: Kitaohji-
syobo, 1997.
[6]
S. M. Jourard and P. Lasakow, “Some factors in self-disclosure,” Journal
of Abnormal & Social Psychology, vol. 56, 1958, pp. 91–98.
[7]
N. Okabayashi and H. Seiwa, “A study on the reliability and validity of
Learys social anxiety scale,” Studies in Information and the Behavioral
Sciences, vol. 15, 1991, pp. 1–9.
[8]
M. R. Leary, “Social anxiousness: The construct and its measurement,”
Journal of Personality Assessment, vol. 47, 1983, pp. 66–75.
[9]
L. Sproull and S. Kiesler, “Computers, Networks and Work,” Scientiﬁc
American, vol. 265, 1991, pp. 116–123.
[10]
A. F. Osborn, Applied Imagination. Charles Scribners Sons, Inc., 1953.
[11]
H. Sacks, E. A. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson, “A Simplest Systematics for
the Organization of Turn-Taking for Conversation,” Language, vol. 50,
1974, pp. 696–735.
[12]
T. Kudo, K. Yamamoto, and Y. Matsumoto, “Applying Conditional
Random Fields to Japanese Morphological Analysis,” in Proc. of the
2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-2004), 2004, pp. 230–237.
[13]
Y. Ichikawa and F. Tanaka, “Displaying Speeches Method for Non-
Crosstalk Online Agent,” in Proc. of the 2016 AAAI Spring Symposium
Series, 2015, pp. 354–355.
[14]
S. M. Jourard, The Transeparent Self.
New York: D. Van Nostrand,
1964.
[15]
D. M. Pedersen and V. J. Breglio, “Personality correlates of actual self-
disclosure,” Psycological Reports, vol. 22, 1968, pp. 495–501.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

