 
 
The Use of Digital Tools in Training to Real Estate and Building Sectors – a Study 
from French University 
 
Bourret Christian – Meyer Claudie   
Université Paris Est Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) –  
Dicen-idf – Ifis., France. 
e-mail: christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
e-mail: claudie.meyer@u-pem.fr 
 
Drapier Thomas  
Lycée François Mansart  
Val de Marne, France 
e-mail: thomas.drapier@ac-creteil.fr
Abstract - This paper presents an analysis of two 
complementary evolutions, in work situations in the real estate 
and building sectors, using new digital tools such as the ones 
based on digital tablets. It concerns a bachelor degree in  
individual home building and new interactions in master 
degrees, mixing and integrating real estate and Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) around the innovative 
Univcamp device. The latter promotes new real estate services 
with interactions between different actors in action-research 
situations. These evolutions correspond to a new approach of 
the French Universities, in particular the University Paris East 
Marne-la-Vallée and its component units Ile-de-France Services 
Engineering 
Institute 
(IFIS) 
and 
Information 
and 
Communication Devices in the Digital Era in Ile-de-France 
(DICEN idf).  They support a specific way of apprenticeship 
training with the use of a new intermediation artifact between 
students and companies, the e-booklet. This work may help to 
develop a specific observatory space from work situations in an 
action-research 
perspective 
to 
promote 
a 
new 
“ideas 
integrator” interface between universities and companies. This 
interface will also allow observing evolutions of professions 
facing the challenges of new digital uses, corresponding to new 
skills, at first in real estate and building sectors. 
Keywords 
- 
pedagogic 
innovations; 
interactions; 
apprenticeship; digital tools; skills; data 
I. 
INTRODUCTION: GENERAL CONTEXT 
ICTs strongly impact all our digital society and 
particularly companies and universities. Today Universities 
are not only producers of knowledge but also act to develop 
new skills for students, so they  may work more efficiently 
in the companies, by introducing specific way of 
apprenticeship with particular organization and pedagogical 
approaches: sandwiches courses,  use of an intermediation 
and traceability tool - the e-booklet. This new approach is 
particularly developed at the University of Paris East 
Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) with strong partnerships with 
other learning organizations and companies. The synergy 
challenges between training and research fields have also 
become essential, particularly the challenge of innovation, 
through association of one or more partners to Universities. 
In our case, in the UPEM, the teaching side is provided by 
the IFIS – Institut Francilien d’Ingénierie des Services   
while the DICEN idf – Dispositifs d’Information et de 
Communication à l’Ere Numérique en Ile-de-France is the 
Research team, located in the CNAM (Conservatoire 
National des Arts et Métiers), in the IFIS institute in UPEM 
and for some other researchers at Paris Nanterre University. 
ICTs also question all our society. They change all the 
working conditions, especially with new digital and 
intermediation tools (tablets, etc.), access to information and 
new uses of data (especially big data). The integration of 
young people of the “Y Generation” also constitutes an 
important challenge for the companies in their new ways to 
cooperate with older employees (older than 50 years). 
In this working paper, we propose to analyze these 
evolutions using case studies with students of two 
complementary degrees in the Building or Real Estate 
sectors: the Bachelor degree of Building of Individual 
Homes (CCBMI) and the Master degrees of Innovation 
Management in Real Estate (MIPI) and Digital Tools 
(MITIC). It is important to note that digital tools 
considerably change relations with customers with the idea 
of services co-production between all the stakeholders. 
This work is a first step to introduce, through Univcamp 
device, CCBMI Bachelor, and the e-booklet artifact 
mediator, different ways to develop a specific observatory 
space from work situations in an Action Research 
perspectives to promote a new “ideas integrator” interface 
between university and companies. This interface will also 
make it possible to observe evolutions of professions in the 
face of the challenges of new digital uses, corresponding to 
new skills, first in real estate and building sectors. 
After the introduction (section I), in a first step, we 
present the evolutions of the French Universities through the 
case of UPEM (section II) whose specificity is to bet on the 
apprenticeship. In a second step, we outline our scientific 
position, our goals and the methodology used (section III). 
Then, we show the specificity of the two degrees 
corresponding to this study. We also outline the challenge of 
ICTs for the considered companies and the importance of 
new ICTs tools (tablets) as levers of changes for better 
efficiency, developing new interactions with customers but 
also for new co-operations between employees (CCBMI) 
and for new interactions area for the Master degrees 
(Univcamp) (section IV is dedicated to results and section V  
to discussion). We also point out the importance of the e-
booklet as an interactive tool (section VI). In a conclusive 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
part (section VII), we will give some perspectives for our 
future work. 
II. 
TRAINING IN UPEM, REAL ESTATE AND BUILDING, 
ICTS AND SKILLS CHALLENGES 
 
Universities do not only produce general knowledge but 
try to train their students for specific jobs with specific 
skills. In France, it is particularly the case of the University 
Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM). More than 25 % of its 
students are trained through apprenticeship. They are 
students with job contracts with companies. In UPEM, IFIS 
is much involved in this specific training way with 600 
apprentice students. 
In different degrees, for apprentice students, the skills 
approach has become essential. It is not only a question of 
acquiring knowledge but also of acquiring professional 
skills in work situations (in a “learning by doing” way). 
With this in mind, a system of professional references built 
with 
professional 
advice 
provides 
the 
pedagogical 
frameworks for these professional diplomas.  
This is particularly the case of two different degrees in 
the Real estate and Building sectors: a Bachelor degree of 
Manager Building of Individual Houses - Conducteur de 
Chantier Bâtiment en Maison Individuelle (CCBMI) and 
Master degree of Innovation Management with two 
coordinated options in Real Estate Management - 
Management, Innovation de Services et Patrimoine 
Immobilier (MIPI) and in Digital Tools Integration - 
Management, Innovation de Services et Technologies de 
l’Information et de la Communication (MITIC). We 
particularly focus on tutored projects (a supervised work in 
a work situation) around the new use of tablets in the 
building sector in the Bachelor degree proposed with a 
partnership with Individual Houses Building Federation and 
François Mansart School. We also analyze the specificity of 
the Univcamp training / research relationship or interaction 
space born from a collaborative history initiated in these 
masters in 2006 to foster exchanges between students, 
business professionals and local community actors in the 
sectors of ICTs and real estate around new services 
designed and prototyped by students. It also finds its source 
in the construction of Sandbox, a collaborative space 
imagined in 2011 and realized in 2014 by the students of 
MIPI and MITIC, with their professors and some services of 
the university, as the first collaboration space of a French 
university, then extended to other IFIS degrees. 
The family home construction market accounts for 
135,000 operations per year in France. The profession 
played an essential role for the creation of the CCMI 
bachelor, expressing the lack of qualified personnel able to 
meet its requirements with both technical and management 
profiles: building technicians, facilitators of their sub-
networks and real business skills (communication / 
negotiation) in the relationship with customers.  The main 
skills to be given to apprentice students are especially 
technical: construction right and uses, management of sub 
contactors (coordination aspects), technical control of the 
construction, communication (negotiation) and relations 
with consumers and neighbors in the construction area, 
management of the construction budget of the individual 
house, etc. Until yesterday, largely absent in the 
construction of family homes, the uses of digital tools 
(especially tablets) are now strongly emerging, they also 
constitute an major challenge for the companies. We try to 
analyze new digital uses (tablets) in the essential economic 
sector of the building of individual houses [1].  
In the MIPI and MITIC Master courses, Univcamp has 
built an ecosystem set up in its current form in 2012. 
Univcamp develops a cross-reflection on the collaborative 
society of tomorrow and especially on the use of ICTs 
devices in the real estate sector around innovative services 
imagined by students [2].  
In these two degrees (bachelor and master), we 
particularly 
focus 
on 
the 
new 
Information 
and 
Communication challenges in companies around the 
development of new digital tools. We outline the idea of 
companies becoming “Digital Ecosystems”, i.e. being 
considered as systems built by the interactions between all 
their actors and new uses of information with new digital 
tools such as tablets or smartphones, etc. 
It also provides an opportunity to analyze the divided 
identity of the “Y generation” and its interactions with that 
of older workers, with the challenge of building new 
collective representations to improve performance in 
companies. We are also taking up the new challenge of the 
General Data Protection Regulation (GPDR). GPDR is a 
regulation of the European Union constituting the reference 
text for the protection of personal data when using personal 
and sensitive data in a global context of "augmented human" 
and data analysis for traceability and memory purposes. 
In an idea of services co-production, these evolutions 
also question the relations with customers, becoming more 
involved actors, with new relations with employees of 
building companies through digital interface tools. 
III. 
SCIENTIFIC POSITION  AND  METHODOLOGY 
 
In terms of scientific position, we situate ourselves at the 
crossroads of Information and Communication Sciences and 
Management Sciences, to produce knowledge for action in 
an Action Research (AR) approach. Action Research is a 
process to uncover solutions through progressive problems 
solving activities. This process involves investigation 
through activity rather than theoretical response. It is also 
called participatory action research [3]. 
We refer to a constructivist perspective of construction 
of the social reality by the actors themselves or 
Constructivism, emerging first in psychology, with the Palo 
Alto researchers as Watzlawick [4]. As a learning theory, 
constructivism 
explains 
how 
people 
might 
acquire 
knowledge and learning. It suggests that humans construct 
knowledge and meaning from their experiences [5]. Brown-
Martin [6] distinguishes “instructionism” (transmission of 
knowledge) from “constructionism” (reconstruction of 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
knowledge), or teaching versus learning. According to Noy 
[7], in education, constructivism is a ground practice and 
constant questioning. For us, this pedagogical approach 
promotes the participation and commitment of apprentice 
students in a process of empowerment by improving skills 
through interactions with human actors and non-human 
devices. It is also a way of observing changes in the 
companies. 
We also give special importance to the approach by the 
“complexity”. Following Morin [8] [9], “complexity” is a 
holistic and multidimensional thought to connect in a 
systemic way interacting elements (actors, socio-technical 
devices, etc.). Genelot [10] focuses on “managing in (and 
with) the complexity” with the challenge of converging 
different representations to build a collective meaning for 
the organization performance. “Complexity” converges with 
the idea of “reliance” at different levels (micron, meso and 
macro) between actors in a systemic approach. We try to 
understand how a social system works with actors who 
interact to form an ecosystem of interactions. According to 
Le Cardinal et al [11], we also focus on the importance of 
trust to better develop complex projects, particularly in 
information systems and communication devices. 
In the field of French Information and Communication 
Sciences (SIC), we are following Bernard [12] at the 
convergence of link issues (interactions), 
meaning, 
knowledge and action, in an Action Research way to 
produce knowledge for action, with all the importance of 
interactions [13].  As outlined by Gramaccia [14], project 
and quality management are two main tools in a more and 
more digitalized society. 
We also follow the specific paper of technical objects 
developed by Simondon [15], corresponding also to the 
Actor-Network Theory (ANT) and the sociology of 
translation, proposed by Callon [16], Akrich et al. [17]. 
Originally created by French researchers Latour and Callon, 
ANT is an attempt to understand processes of technological 
innovation and scientific knowledge-creation, emphasizing 
all surrounding factors and not only on the acts: tools, labs, 
cultural factors and environment, and various other 
technical and non-technical elements. It has been criticized 
to give too much importance to non-human actors [18]. We 
consider ANT as an interesting theory to highlight the 
importance of digital devices but not as an analytical tool. 
Our approach to using tools, better than Human-
Computer Interfaces (HCI), corresponds to Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). CSCW is a generic 
term, which combines the understanding of the way people 
work in groups with the enabling technologies of computer 
networking, and associated hardware, software, services and 
techniques [19]. We point out the specificity and 
ambivalence of ICTs devices, that is to say positive aspects 
to improve performance but also constraints and possible 
suffering at work (stress and burn out). It may correspond to 
the ambivalence of technology explained by Ellul [20].  
Following Goffman, we give special importance to the 
notion of situation, for a long time “too neglected” [21]. We 
also work in an idea of “situated action” as proposed by 
Suchmann [22]. We favor the notions of situation, context 
and meaning with the idea of “interactionist and situational 
semiotics” as Mucchielli [23]. We also position ourselves as 
Carayol [24] in an approach of analysis of changes, 
especially induced by the ICTs in daily organizational 
innovation as analyzed by Alter [25]. Innovation is also 
important to improve skills to promote the economic 
development of the territories as explained by Godet et al. 
[26]. Following Leleu-Merviel [27], we focus on the 
concept of “design”, particularly of jobs and skills, 
especially in services companies, to combine project 
dynamics, innovation and quality dynamics in an 
organizational ecosystem and on territory. We meet then the 
idea of competitive intelligence on a territory developed by 
Carayon’s report [28]. As well as CPDirSIC [29], we 
consider “Design” as “science of project” and tool to 
“organize the group”, an ecosystem or a territory.  
Extending the approach of Putnam and Nicotera about 
“The 
Constitutive 
Role 
of 
Communication” 
for 
organizations [30], we propose an ICOE approach: 
Information (new uses of data) and Communication 
(interactions, mediations) for Organizing Ecosystems 
(organizations, territories and also work situations, etc.).  
From 
a 
methodological 
point 
of 
view, 
during 
apprenticeship situations, we develop interviews with the 
main actors of these courses (universities and companies). 
For CCBMI Bachelor, we have also periods of participatory 
observations in the work situations of the apprentice 
students in their companies’ periods with their interactions 
with other workers and through the use of the e-booklet.  
Thus, for the CCBMI Bachelor, our case study focused 
on a group of 17 apprentice students from January to April 
2018. We help them answer to a survey (questionnaire), 
used as a prerequisite for individual interviews. During 
visits to apprentice students in the workplace, the training 
coordinator was also able to observe some of them in their 
work situations (9) and was able to talk with a majority of 
tutors (10). The results of this study were presented at the 
committee meeting of this degree in September 2018, where 
a majority of companies’ apprentice students tutors (10) and 
all apprentice students were present.  
The Univcamp interaction device is composed of three 
different phases. The first phase of nearly 4 months where, 
following a call for proposals drafting around a central 
theme (2019 theme: responsible ecosystems), “caring 
customers” propose topics to explore related to their 
professional and concrete needs. The call for projects is 
distributed in the Master's network companies.  
A work of definition and verification of compatibility 
with both the thematic and the university operation is 
carried out by a team of six teachers, who will then be 
university referents of the projects. The “caring customers” 
belong to organizations as different as SNCF (Railways) 
Development, the IT77 Association of the attractiveness 
cluster of the Seine-et-Marne department, the Digital 
Companies 
Federation 
(Syntec), 
etc,, 
the 
property 
management and the digital campus of the University Paris 
East-Marne-la-Vallée University, the University Paris-East 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
staff of the i-site project, CROUS (Services for Students), 
the intercommunity of Meaux area, etc..  
Then, there is a second 6-month phase, during which 
about 50 students will carry out 10 innovative and viable 
service projects. They form small groups of five or six 
students who deal with the problematic entrusted to each 
group by a benevolent customer from a user-centric 
approach to build a prototype and a sustainable model.  
Projects are designed and implemented with the help of an 
extended team of 10 teachers from resource classes (agile 
project, conflict management, design thinking, prospective) 
as part of a skills-based approach. 
The third phase (the heart of Univcamp process), more 
hectic, takes place during a day of interactions between all 
the actors. It is centered on dissemination and collaboration. 
The essential link between these three phases for the success 
of the whole system is managed by a team of 9 teachers and 
teachers-researchers of the Master. 
We have collected data as part of participatory 
observation approach. The team of 9 teachers (IFIS) took 
the lead role with other researchers of DICEN idf. They 
were helped by students to take notes. For the next years, to 
improve our observation of the restitution phase, we will use 
video recordings. 
 
IV. 
FIRST RESULTS 
 
Our observations, both in tutored projects for CCBMI 
Bachelor and Masters MITIC and MIPI interactions in the 
Univcamp device, have allowed interesting conclusions. 
ICTs question all our society, changing our identities, 
our representations, the work conditions and our relations to 
information and communication, introducing an important 
gap between Internet natives or “Y Generation” and other 
people, the challenge of making them working together is 
particularly important for the survival of the companies.  
The apprentice students of CCBMI Bachelor are 
“connected” people. They are especially interested in new 
digital uses in work situations. It is a new manner to 
discover their new job from their “apprentice” position. 
They also have a “lever” position, helping other older 
employees in their companies to discover these new tools 
and so their position is valued in a perspective of a “learning 
organization” (organisation apprenante) at two levels: 
training its employees but also developing their new skills 
especially digital ones. In this way, this approach is very 
appreciated by their companies, and especially by their 
apprenticeship supervisors. Customers are also interested 
because these digital tablets may favor information and 
knowledge sharing and, consequently, new ways of co-
operation in a co-production of services approach.  
The results of the survey and especially the interviews 
revealed 
different 
positions 
of 
apprentice 
students, 
according to their different situations of activities in the 
companies and their different corporate cultures. Some are 
very dependent on the guidance of their apprenticeship 
tutors (4), others have more autonomy and can take 
initiatives (6), others are in intermediate situations with 
more or less autonomy of action (7). 
 
The answers also bring differences in the dual identity of 
apprentice students: at the same time students, but largely 
co-constructing their knowledge as employees of a 
company, therefore already involved in the world of 
business. 
Our interviews and observations also outline the 
challenge of the digital gap (fracture numérique) between 
two generations of workers in the building companies: the 
young digital native workers and the older ones. This 
evolution changes the work relations, particularly regarding 
knowledge transmission and apprenticeship situations. In 
the past, especially in the building sector, the experience 
and the knowledge of older workers were very valued. The 
oldest passed on their knowledge to the youngest, especially 
in the guild or corporations companies. Now, with digital 
tools as tablets, in some situations, it is no longer the skill 
acquired by the experience that is essential but the ability to 
use these new digital tools. The change is important because 
the formerly highly valued workers (often over 50 years 
old) have now become partly dependent on the youngest, 
with virtually a reversal of markers or skills sliders. It is an 
interesting aspect of the ambivalence of technology [20] and 
its strong force in change [24] that can improve the 
companies' performances but can also, with new job design  
[27] [29], changes the old standards and hierarchies  and 
thus possibly cause stress and suffering situations at work. 
In the Univcamp device, three types of actors (students, 
professionals and teachers-researchers) meet to discuss the 
projects presentations and workshops. The debates are 
animated at the beginning of the morning by a jury of 6 
people composed of academics and professionals. The 
actors are then brought to the workshops designed by the 
students to allow each guest to experience the innovative 
service on the basis of model (s), prototype (s), proof of 
concept(s) and numerous media communication explaining 
the project. 
Since 2013, Univcamp device brings together, each year,  
more than one hundred and twenty people to imagine the 
society of tomorrow on such important topics as the 
University of tomorrow, smart and digital city, ecosystem 
on territories around the potential of digital and new 
collaborative spaces (station 2.0, workspace, telecentres, fab 
lab using open data, bots etc.). The format adapts year by 
year to the expectations of the public: from a two-days 
BarCamp, the event has evolved into experimental 
workshops around projects to test ideas and answer 
questions asked by benevolent customers. For the 2019 
edition that we are setting up a scientific committee whose 
objective will be to support the publication of a collective 
work bringing together scientific productions around 
Univcamp's subjects of recent years, and thus promoting co-
operations in an action research perspective. 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION: BEYOND THE ICTS, THE IMPORTANCE 
OF THE PROBLEM OF THE USES 
 
Real estate is tackling major challenges that are partly 
mediated by the issues raised by the concept of “smart city” 
around the idea of “smart building”. The smart city 
promises a more intelligent urbanized world to better 
control the irreversible growth of cities (and therefore the 
evolution of territories impacted by this urbanization) with 
at heart the global infrastructures and logistics issues: 
energy management, mobility, connection of buildings, and 
also societal ones such as healthcare, evolution of jobs, etc. 
The questions also arise inside buildings with life quickly 
changing with digital uses: new areas, new ways of working 
(co-working, third places, etc.). They constitute important 
levers of changes in territories [25] [26] [28]. In this 
context, ICTs participate in the emergence of three new 
trends: 
 
Using digital tools and technology to offer new 
services and facilitate access to improve the quality 
of life and live better. 
 
Putting users (building occupants / city inhabitants) 
in the center of the problematics, integrate them, 
make them participate and co-create, etc. 
 
Creating sustainable value, considering all actors 
and their responsibilities with all the importance of 
interdependencies. 
 
However, many digital projects at the building and city 
levels begin with organizational silos and transform them 
into digital silos. The challenge is to introduce more cross-
cutting approach and network with the new digital 
technologies to overcome the silos (platforms, data and 
open data, networks etc.) It is becoming important to start 
from the needs of the occupants of the houses and the 
inhabitants of the areas. All this in a balanced way with the 
organizational needs and to design the new interactions 
between all the actors, in particular from the data deposits 
offered by the large-scale digital deployment (Internet of 
Things, data storage, silos, etc.).  
We identify Univcamp as a global situation or 
ecosystem allowing the observation of the interactions and 
the CCBMI Bachelor as a favorable ground for the 
observation of job transformations. 
In this way, we refer to the emerging idea of HDI or 
Human Data Interfaces in order to analyze new mediated 
data carried between all the human actors (and from non-
human devices) and to promote new uses of these data to 
improve services in an interactive approach of services co-
production. 
For us, the constructivist approach is also an interesting 
way to observe the changes in the companies from the level 
of work situations in an attempt to tackle the invisible part 
or unformulated part of the work. 
The key question of the uses raised by this observation 
can be organized into three themes for reflection as shown 
in the figure below: 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An Ecosystem of Interactions Developed by New Uses of 
Digital Tools and Data. 
 
This figure is a synthesis of our analysis. It invites us to 
consider that a situation, consequence of the introduction of 
a technology, is for us the result of the information really 
mobilized by the actors in the situation, in relation to the 
questions of language, social representations, needs and 
skills and uses of new socio-technical devices. 
 
VI. 
A POTENTIAL LEVER FOR COOPERATION IN 
APPRENTICES SITUATIONS, THE E-BOOKLET  
 
In an approach based on the skills and competencies for 
collecting data in the workplace, we also wish, for future 
research, 
to 
attach 
particular 
importance 
to 
an 
intermediation tool in apprenticeship training: the e-booklet 
(e-livret). It is a compulsory tool to give traceability to the 
evolution of activities of the apprentice students during the 
year of their training, both in University and in companies 
in their work situations as analyzed by Bourret et al. [31]. 
Better used, the e-booklet may become an important 
interactions tool, focused on competencies and skills 
development, to show the evolution of the “employability” 
of the apprentice students during their training year, both in 
the university and in the company. It may also be an 
interesting support to collect new data about work in 
interactive situations.  
More globally, for the apprentice students, the e-booklet 
may constitute a first step for a comprehensive skills 
booklet throughout their working lives, in the same way, for 
example, as the Electronic Health Record (EHR) for the 
NEW DYNAMICS 
OF 
TERRITORIES 
ECOSYSTEM 
PLATFORM 
IDENTITY, 
SKILLS 
 
DATA, 
INFORMATIONS 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
digital health memory of all the citizens and for patient 
pathways including their travels or their new jobs in other 
countries during their lifetime.  
For us, these paths represent  interesting action research 
opportunities in a digital memory approaches to develop the 
traceability of our students’ skills, as a first step, especially 
in real estate and building sectors. 
 
VII. 
CONCLUSION: TOWARDS AN OBSERVATORY OF 
CHANGES IN WORK SITUATIONS 
 
Based on the promising results of Univcamp, around the 
Master degrees MIPI and MITIC and from the Bachelor 
degree CCBMI co-operations around new uses of digital 
tablets in the building sector, IFIS and DICEN idf wish to 
create an “incubator of ideas” space, as an interactions space 
between companies and university. It may correspond to a 
field of experimentation and innovation in order to analyze 
the changes in jobs, particularly around new digital uses. 
Our first steps concern the real estate and building sectors.  
Its mission would be to try to respond to the societal 
challenges of the East of the Ile-de-France region as part of 
the i-site project, on the sustainable and inclusive city, 
central topic of the development of the UPEM University 
into the new one Gustave Eiffel University (January 2020), 
in cooperation with the French research Institute on 
Sciences and Technologies, Transports, Planning and 
Networks - Institut Français des Sciences et Technologies 
des Transports, de l’Aménagement et des Réseaux 
(IFSTTAR).  
More globally, this interaction space aims to become a 
center of resources and expertise that federates the 
initiatives of the five Masters of the IFIS and some 
Bachelors (Licences professionnelles) for the development 
of new projects at two levels. First we will propose a label 
“incubators of ideas” for already existing initiatives as 
Univcamp or CCBMI Bachelor. Secondly we wish to 
develop new projects promoting transversal expertise 
between other IFIS Masters as digital tourism, quality, or 
healthcare and social welfare in the idea of analyzing jobs 
dynamics in specific ecosystems promoted by digital tools. 
In this working paper, we have analyzed some of the 
work situations developed by new uses of digital tools, 
especially in the building and real estate sectors, through 
two complementary university degrees in a French 
University (UPEM) very focused on apprenticeship way of 
learning. This work is the first step for larger-scale works, 
always observing work situations of apprentice students 
through co-operations with their companies and discussing 
their feelings and their requirements, to develop their 
employability, that is to say to improve their skills and 
develop their efficiency in work situations.  
IFIS Institute and Research Team DICEN idf plan also 
work together on a project of an observatory of job changes 
induced by digital tools, especially in the real estate and 
building sectors. We may begin with the idea of smart house 
or smart building linked for example to the use of Building 
Information Modeling (BIM) tool to an idea of Smart 
Building in a Smart City in a Smart Territory. It is a part of 
the new challenge of the UPEM in the i-site project of 
creation of a new federative establishment (Gustave Eiffel 
University) centered on the innovative, creative, integrative 
and sustainable city. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] C. Bourret and T. Drapier “Training in a Job Approach and 
Digital Uses in the Building Sector in France. The example of 
the Individual Houses in a French University Degree in An 
Apprenticeship Perspective”, Proceedings, EDULEARN18 
(10th annual International Conference on Education and New 
Learning Technologies), IATED, 2nd - 4th of July, Palma de 
Mallorca (Spain), pp. 2287 – 2290, 2018. 
[2] C. Meyer and C. Bourret, “Developing Learning / Research 
Interactions in a French University from the Univcamp 
Device (Paris East University)”, 11th Annual International 
Conference of Education, Research and Innovation – ICERI, 
Sevilla (Spain), 12 – 14th November, 2018. 
[3] Available 
from: 
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/action-
research.html/2018.12.26. 
[4] P. Watzlawick, The invention of reality. Contributions to 
constructivism / L’invention de la réalité. Contributions au 
constructivisme, Paris: Seuil, 1988. 
[5] Available 
from: 
http://sydney.edu.au/education_social_work/learning_teachin
g/ ict/theory/constructivism.shtml/2018.12.26 
[6] G. 
Brown-Martin, 
Learning 
(Re)imagined. 
How 
the 
connected society is transforming learning, Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2014, 328 p.  
[7] C. Noy, “ Constructivism part in university studies /  La  
place du constructivisme dans l’enseignement universitaire ” 
in A. Mucchielli dir.,  Conference Constructivism part for 
communications studies /  La place du constructivisme pour 
l’étude des communications, Béziers (France), pp. 225 – 238, 
2003.   
[8] E. Morin, Think global / Penser global, Paris: Flammarion, 
Champs-Essais, 2016. 
[9] E. Morin,  The seven necessary knowledges to education in 
the  future / Les sept savoirs nécessaires à l’éducation du 
futur, Paris: Unesco, 1999. 
[10] D. Genelot, Managing in (and with) the complexity / 
Manager dans (et avec) la complexité, Paris: Eyrolles, 2017. 
[11] G., Le Cardinal, J.-F. Guyonnet, B. Pouzoullic and J. Rigby, 
“Intervention Methodology for complex problems: The 
FAcT-Mirror method”, European Journal of Operational 
Research, Elsevier, n° 132, pp. 694-702, 2001. 
[12] F. Bernard, “Information and Communication Sciences 
(ICS) : an openness and decompartementalization discipline / 
Les SIC une discipline de l’ouverture et du décloisonnement”, 
in A. Bouzon,  coord.., The organizational communication in 
debate Fields, concepts, perspectives / La communication 
organisationnelle en débat. Champs, concepts, perspectives, 
Paris: L’Harmattan,  pp. 33 – 46, 2006. 
[13] L. Bègue and O. Desrichard, co-dir., Treatise of social 
psychology. The science of human interactions / Traité de 
psychologie sociale. La science des interactions humaines, 
Bruxelles: De Boeck, 2013. 
[14] G. Gramaccia, “Quality, project, digital : 3 symbolic 
variations of managerial efficiency / Qualité, projet, 
numérique : 
3 
variations 
symboliques 
de 
l’efficacité 
gestionnaire”, in C. Batazzi coord., Communication, 
organisation, 
symbols 
/ 
Communication, 
organisation, 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
symboles, Revue MEI n° 29, Paris: L’Harmattan, pp. 55-67, 
2008.    
[15] G. Simondon, The mode of existence of technical objects / Du 
mode d’existence des objets techniques, Paris: Aubier, 1958. 
[16] M. Callon, Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: 
Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc 
Bay. In John Law (ed.), Power, Action and Belief: A New 
Sociology of Knowledge. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1986. 
[17] M. Akrich, M. Callon and B. Latour, Sociology of translation. 
Founding texts / Sociologie de la traduction. Textes 
fondateurs, Paris: Les Presses Mines de Paris,  2006.  
[18] Available 
from: 
https://www.learning-theories.com/actor-
network-theory-a/2018.12.26 
[19] Available 
on: 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer-
supported_cooperative_work/2018.12.26 
[20] J. Ellul, The technique or the challenge of the century / La 
technique ou l’enjeu du siècle, Paris: Economica, 1990. 
[21] E. Goffman, “The Neglected Situation”, in J.J. Gumperz and 
D. Hymes dir., “The Ethnography of Communication”, 
American Anthropologist, Washington DC, pp. 133 – 137, 
1964. 
[22] L. Suchmann, Plans and Situated Actions. The Problem of 
Human-Machine Communication, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1987. 
[23] A. Mucchielli, Communication & Influence. Situational 
approach /  Communication & Influence. Approche 
situationnelle, Nice: Les Editions Ovadia, 2010. 
[24] V. Carayol, Organizational communication. An allagmatic 
perspective 
/ 
Communication 
organisationnelle. 
Une 
perspective allagmatique, Paris: L’Harmattan, 2004.  
[25] N. Alter, The ordinary innovation / L’innovation ordinaire, 
Paris: PUF, 2005. 
[26] M. Godet, P. Durance and M. Mousli, Unleash innovation on 
territories / Libérer l’innovation dans les territoires, Paris : 
Conseil d'Analyse Economique - La documentation Française, 
2010. 
[27] S. Leleu-Merviel and H., Boulekbache-Mazouz, Design 
Researches Conception processes, witings and representations 
/ Recherches en design. Processus de conception, écriture et 
représentations, Paris  ISTE Editions, 2014. 
[28] B. Carayon dir., Economic intelligence, competitiveness and 
social cohesion / Intelligence économique, compétitivité et 
cohésion sociale,  Paris :  La Documentation française, 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/rapports-
publics/034000484/index.shtml, 2003. 
[29] CPdirSIC (Permanent conference of lab directors in ICS / 
Conférence 
Permanente 
des 
Directeurs 
/ 
trices 
de 
laboratoires en SIC), Researches Dynamics in Information 
and Communication Sciences / Dynamiques de Recherches en 
Sciences de l’Information et de la Communication, Paris, 
2018.  
[30] L. L. Putnam and A.M. Nicotera, Building Theories of 
Organization. The Constitutive Role of Communication, New 
York and London: Routledge, 2009 
[31] C. Bourret, K. Fraoua, R. Eppstein, and B. Simon, 
“Knowledge 
construction 
and 
sandwiches 
trainings : 
reflections elements on monitoring lifelong leraning and skills 
around the new role of Universities in France /   Construction 
de connaissances et formations en alternance : éléments de 
réflexions sur le suivi des acquis de formation et des 
compétences tout au long de la vie autour du nouveau rôle 
des Universités en France”, Proceedings Xth international 
ISKO (International Society for Knowledge Organization,) 
Strasbourg, November 2015, Chevry-Pebayle E. dir, Paris : 
ISTE Editions, pp. 372 – 388, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

