A Case Study of Four IT Companies Developing Usable Public Digital Self-Service Solutions
Jane Billestrup, Jan Stage
Institute of Computer Science
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
{jane,jans}@cs.aau.dk
Marta Larusdottir
School of Computer Science
Reykjavik University
Reykjavik, Iceland
marta@ru.is
Abstract— This paper presents a case study of implementing a
user-centred approach in four software companies that, by
supporting the development process, provide the municipalities
with various self-service solutions for their citizens. This study
outlines the process of how four companies develop their
solution,
including
their
customer
involvement,
end-user
involvement, and product. The findings are compared to the
number of usability problems identified in the four self-service
applications developed by the software companies. This shows
a mismatch between the usability and utility in these four
solutions.
Keywords-Case Study; Self-Service Applications; Usability;
Utility; Development Process; User-Centred
I.
INTRODUCTION
European countries are currently developing digital self-
service solutions for their citizens. These efforts are being
launched to improve citizens' services and to reduce costs
[18]. Though public self-services have been on the agenda in
many countries for years, getting the end-users to use these
applications is not easily achieved. For citizens to accept
public digital services and websites, these sites need to have
a high degree of usability [11]. Wangpipatwong et al. found
that public digital websites in Thailand are lacking usability
due to poor design and non-employment of user-centred
design methodologies [7]. Several countries like United
States, United Kingdom, South Africa and Denmark have
developed guidelines to ensure the development of more
usable public digital applications and websites [2][3][14].
The
Digital
Economy
and
Society
Index
(DESI)
describes the level of digitalisation of the countries in EU.
This is measured in five areas, including digital public
services [18]. The total degree of digitalisation varies, from
Romania, Bulgaria and Greece at the bottom to Sweden,
Finland, and Denmark at the top [18]. Denmark is one of the
top 3 countries in regards to all other digitalisation areas in
EU and is one of the leading countries in the world [18].
Denmark has a population of 5.6 million people and is
divided into 98 municipalities as a single point of contact for
citizens in regards to the public sector [7]. In 2012, a
digitalisation process was launched with the goal that, by the
end of 2015, 80% of forms completed by citizens to the
municipalities are filled in and submitted digitally [1]. Until
2012, a contract based approach was used for digital public
services, where the software companies competed by bidding
to an offer. Since 2012, the individual municipalities have
been able to choose between competing designs for each
digitalisation area. Denmark has created guidelines to ensure
that public digital self-service applications and websites are
usable for the citizens [1].
This paper presents a case study of four competitors
implementing usable digital self-service solutions for the
same application area. We have focused on analysing the
customer
and
user
involvement
during
the
software
development process, and the characteristics of the 4
products developed and results of usability evaluations
thereof. Section 2 presents the related work. In Section 3, the
method of this case study is presented. Section 4 presents
the results, and, finally, Section 5 presents the discussion and
conclusion.
II.
RELATED WORK
Studies show that quality and cost are complementary,
e.g. [8][9]. But from the self-service providers' point of
view, focus on usability will increase the price of the
product, making the developed solution harder to sell [15].
This means that, to get public self-service providers to get
this focus, usability has to be made a requirement. Both
Jokela et. al. [13] and Mastrangelo [21] describe the
importance of usability being specified in the requirements
specification document. Mastrangelo describes that public
administration needs guidelines to help getting usability
placed in the requirements to get the intended impact [21].
There is a disagreement in the related work in regards to
what is the best approach. Jokela et. al. found that to acquire
usable digital self-service solutions the specified usability
requirements have to be performance-based, as only these
types of requirements would be verifiable, valid and
comprehensive [15]. Additionally, the usability of digital
self-service
solutions
should
be
validated
before
the
solutions are sold to the municipalities [15].
This does not correspond with what Tarkkanen et. al.
found. Formal and detailed criteria for validation will cause
usability workarounds by the self-service providers as they
will focus only on the verification of their application in
regards to the requirements, instead of focusing on getting
the usability of the digital self-service solutions validated and
finding and fixing usability issues [16].
III.
METHOD
This study was conducted as a multi-case study [5][22]
analysing four competitors implementing usable digital self-
service solutions for the same application area. Next, the four
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

cases are presented and the data collection and analysis are
described in more detail.
A.
The Cases
Below,
the
four
companies
are
described.
The
organisations have developed similar solutions and are
competitors in regard to the 98 municipalities in Denmark
who are the potential customers. To find the differences
between these companies as much as possible, we created
the scale shown in Table I.
TABLE I.
CATEGORISATION OF THE FOUR ORGANISATIONS AND
SOLUTIONS
Table I shows the placement of the four cases in regards
to maturity and if the digital self-service solution is new or
an optimisation of an existing solution. This shows the
placement of the four cases in regards to maturity and if the
digital self-service solution is new or an optimisation of an
existing. The organisations' maturity has been defined
according to their experience developing digital self-service
applications in general.
The SME scale (small and medium scale enterprise) [20]
has been used in regards to number of employees and
turnover, to categorise the size of the four companies
involved in this case study.
This area of self-service applications was chosen as the
application had a certain level of complexity. The four
companies
were
chosen
because
they
were
the only
companies
developing
this
specific
solution,
and
the
companies and their developed self-service solutions were
different in terms of maturity of the company and if the
company was developing a new solution or was optimising
an existing solution.
Case A is a micro/small organisation in regards to the
SME scale and the turnover and number of employees. The
organisation has not previously developed other public
digital self-service solutions, so it is categorised as immature.
They use SCRUM [27] as development method and their
digital self-service solution is categorised as new for the
same reason. This company is an independent consulting and
software company.
Case B is a large organisation in regards to the SME
scale. The organisation is categorised as mature in regards to
digital
self-service solutions
in
general as they have
developed
several
public
digital
self-service
solutions
previously. They use SCRUM as development method and
PRINCE2 [28] as project management method. This specific
solution is categorised as new, though they already have an
existing solution, as they redid both the analysis and design
phase, before developing this solution.
This company has
departments all over Scandinavia and creates and sells
software solutions to several different markets.
Case C is a large organisation on the SME scale. They
use their own development method, mainly staged but
sometimes with agile elements. The organisation is described
as both immature and mature in regards to digital self-service
solutions. In general, this area of application is fairly new to
them. They have an existing solution in this self-service area.
This company has departments all over Scandinavia and
creates and sells software solutions to different markets.
Case D is a large organisation on the SME scale. They
use a staged development method but have implemented
some agile techniques. The organisation is described as
mature in regards to digital self-service solutions and has
developed digital self-service applications for years. This
company
is
an
independent
consulting
and
software
company.
B.
Data Collection and Analysis
All data was gathered over a time period of a year.
Qualitative interviews were conducted by phone with project
managers from 11 of 12 identified digital self-service
providers, with the objective of how self-service providers
were accepting and using the user-centred materials and
learn about each company and their development approach
[19]. This lead to a focus on one public self-service area with
four identified self-service providers with the objective of
how the user-centred requirements were used, and we
conducted a redesign of the existing requirements [10].
For our case study, we had one half-day meeting with
each of the four companies. Present at this meeting was the
product owner or project manager. The agenda for these
meetings was an introduction to this study including a
discussion of their gain of participating, as we offered inputs
on their self-service solution and conducting a usability
evaluation, which they could use to improve their self-
service application.
After the introduction the company presented their
organisation overall and, more specifically, how they were
developing this chosen self-service application, including
development
process
and
method,
collaboration
with
stakeholders and end-user involvement. They also gave a
demonstration of the self-service application in its current
state. Lastly, it was discussed which people to interview in
the next part of our study to ensure we would cover all
perspectives. We had before the meetings identified the roles
of the people we would like to interview, as these roles were
named differently in each company and some people would
have more than one of these roles. We conducted a list of
people with the meeting. The roles we had identified were
the
following;
project
manager,
developer,
interface
designer, and the person responsible for the user experience
and usability of the public self-service application. We
interviewed 14 people distributed across the four companies.
The purpose of the interviews was to determine current
practice at each of the four companies in regards to customer
and citizen involvement, and how the end-users were taken
into consideration during the design and development
process. We found that interviewing people with different
roles and responsibilities would provide us with more data
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

on different perspectives and areas of expertise inside each
company.
All interviews were conducted by phone and transcribed
afterwards. All as semi-structured qualitative interviews as
described by Kvale [4]. After all, interviews were conducted,
the data was analysed in regard to the different perspectives
of each interviewee and their job function in to get an idea of
what each company did during the development process.
We completed a content analysis of relevant documents
from the companies. Both, interviews and documents were
analysed using Dedoose [6]. The aim of these activities was
to study the development process of the four companies
developing the digital self-service solutions in this specific
self-service area, into more detail. The cases were analysed
exploratively.
IV.
RESULTS
In this section, we present our results. Our findings are
divided
into
three
subsections,
focusing
on
costumer
involvement, end-user focus and their final product. Table II
shows an overview of the four companies in regards to these
three focus areas.
TABLE II. MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FOUR CASES
A.
Customer Involvement
In this section, it is described how the four companies
involve the customers in the development of digital self-
service applications. The section is written from the
perspective of the four companies.
1) Case A
The company collaborated with one municipality as a
customer and stakeholder. The company insisted that the
involved personnel should be case workers who understood
their own and the citizens' needs and not necessarily people
with IT skills. They use the case workers to learn about the
field of application. “We held a new workshop with the
municipality every couple of weeks, here we created mock-
ups that we used to design a new prototype, which was
evaluated and redesigned at the next workshop, [...] until we
were satisfied with the final prototype”. The company was
confident that they have developed a solution that lives up to
the wishes and needs of their on-site customer, but is less
confident that their solution is covering the needs of other
municipalities. “We have discussed if we should have created
a standardised solution covering the needs of as many
municipalities as possible.” They describe it as a problem for
them that they were not aware of the fact that the
interpretations of legislation are not the same in all
municipalities.
1)
Case B
The main focus of the digital self-service application is
on the back-end of the system, and to ease the workload of
the case workers. “Our primary focus is to simplify the
working procedures for the case workers, otherwise, this
would never be a priority for the municipalities”. Before
developing this solution the company hosted workshops with
the municipalities that are already customers, with the
purpose of analysing the working procedures, used for
creating a specification of requirements and a business case.
“On the first workshop we are not presenting anything,
typically we say – we don't know anything, tell us about your
work […] we use these workshops to learn how we digitally
can support the digital work flow.” This information is used
in the development phase, where first iteration is developed,
and a prototype is created. The prototype was presented at
the next workshop to the municipalities involved in the
development process. The prototype shows the flow from a
citizen filling out a form and until it lands with the case
worker. They also described sending emails to all existing
customers asking them to answer questions in regards to
their work flow.
309
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

2)
Case C
The focus of the company is creating a solution that all
municipalities can use. “It makes a very big difference if you
are designing something for a large or small municipality.
There is a very big difference in relation to how things are
done or used.” They describe developing an application that
fits all types of municipalities, by developing a blank form
that the municipalities can set up as they wish to get the
citizens' to provide the information that each municipality
finds important. This also means that each municipality
buying this solution has to write all the text going into this
digital self-service application.
Municipalities are involved in the development process
by a forum for the exchange of experience that the company
is hosting for the municipalities that are existing customers.
These workshops are hosted several times a year. “In
regards to this specific solution we already have a solution
that the citizens can access to fill out other applications or to
get an overview of their own records, so this new application
will be developed to be part of this existing system.” Existing
customers have been involved through these previously held
workshops but no customers are directly involved in the
development of this digital self-service application.
3)
Case D
The main focus of this company is on the back-end of the
digital self-service application. The company has involved
municipalities by conducting a workshop with people from
municipalities who are already customers. Representatives
from six municipalities participated as on-site customers.
The company hosted a workshop to learn about the number
of applications and generating of ideas. At the end of this
workshop, a specification of requirements was generated.
The municipalities were involved several times during
the development process but mainly through online meetings
or email. This was chosen as a consideration for the
employees. “Every time we have to pull the employees away
from doing their normal job in the municipalities [...] Online
meetings still gives them the ability to provide inputs. [...]
When ever we have a question we send an email asking if we
are doing the right thing.” They described that involving the
customers during the development process is a fairly new
procedure. They now see this as best practice as it means
they can do changes during the development process as
changes late in the process are expensive and complicated.
4)
Summary of Customer Involvement
Companies A, B and D asked on-site customers to
participate during both design and development process.
Companies A and B held continuously design workshops,
where company D held one at the beginning and later
primarily had remote access to the involved municipalities.
Company C gathered information from workshops before the
design phase but had no customer involvement besides that.
Companies B and D stated that they mainly focused on the
back-end of the system to be used by the case workers.
Companies B, C and D all stated that they were aware of that
the municipalities have different needs as it depends on the
size of the municipality and their interpretation of legislation.
Company A described that they learned eventually that the
municipalities have different needs, though learning this
quite late in the process.
B.
End-Users
In this section, it is described how the citizens as end-
users are taken into consideration through the development
of the citizens' digital self-service applications. Also, what
each company does in regards to ensuring the back-end
systems meet the requirements of the case workers.
1)
Case A
The citizens are not involved in the development process
but the company describes taking them into consideration by
ensuring that the procedures for sending an application are as
simple as possible. “We have created the solution so it
should be understandable for all types of people. We have a
good feeling here and our self-service application has been
verified several times (by case workers)”. They have built an
application that in the simple cases can send a decision back
to the applicant right away without a case worker having to
go through the application first. The company also described
that their main focus is on the customer and not the citizens.
“We have been focusing on the customers' needs and work
procedures, it have been important for us to understand what
they wanted the citizens to do”. This perspective was chosen
because the municipalities are the paying customers and not
the citizens.
2)
Case B
The
company
does
not
involve
citizens
in
the
development process but they involve the municipalities and
case workers as a representation of the citizens' needs. “The
municipalities give us feedback in regards to what is not
working for the citizens, e.g. parts of the application that
citizens consistently fill out wrong”. Though focus is not
directly
on
the
citizens
the
company
feels
that
an
optimisation of the back-end also brings value to the citizens
as this will give a better flow with the handling of their
applications.
The
company
finds
that
focusing
on
accessibility of the system is more important than focusing
on usability for the citizens.
They did describe testing the application with users
before launching the digital self-service application. “We
have some pilot municipalities […] they are part of a test
phase where we assemble data for statistics”. For the
municipalities and case workers, they focus on improving the
efficiency of the work flows.
3)
Case C
The
company
does
not
involve
citizens
in
the
development process. They describe creating a system that
the municipalities can change to fit their needs. “We have
structured it so the municipalities can make adjustments
where and if they see fit, e.g. in regards to rewriting
phrasings or functions that can be added or removed”. The
municipalities and case workers were involved prior to the
design and development phase. The design and work flow
were designed at workshops held prior to the redesign of this
digital self-service application. The company focuses on
usability by having usability specialists hired.
310
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

4)
Case D
For this digital
self-service solution, the
company
describes focusing on the citizens' needs and their flow
through the application. “We know that this system is
developed mainly for senior citizens, meaning that this
system needs to be as simple as possible. This includes that
all
descriptions
and
wordings
need
to
be
easy
understandable”. The company has discussed if they spent
too much time on the citizen angle. “The end-user is not the
one buying our product, it is the municipalities, [...] what
matters is if they think our self-service solution is good”. The
digital self-service application is described as being part of a
larger health care system, where citizens will have access to,
e.g. former applications and the municipality will have
everything in regards to one citizen in one record. For this
digital self-service application, they have used senior citizens
without much experience with computers, to fill out a digital
self-service application. In regards to the case workers and
municipalities, they described focusing on full automatic
digital self-service applications when possible. “
5)
Summary of End-User Involvement
Neither of the companies has citizens directly involved in
the design or development process, although companies B
and D described testing their developed public self-service
application on citizens after the development has been
completed. Companies A and D implemented automatic
decisions when possible, benefiting for both citizens and
case workers. Companies A, B, C and D all described that
focusing on the needs of the citizens has not been made a
priority, only the needs of the municipalities as customers.
Company D described that they needed to focus less on the
citizens and more on the municipalities as customers.
Companies A and D have mainly focused on the target
user-group in regards to keeping the design simple for the
citizens. Company B focused primarily on the flow of the
end-users in their solution, and company C has used usability
specialists to check if the design was usable for the citizens.
C.
Product
This section is about the strengths and weaknesses
perceived by the company about their own digital self-
service solution, both in relation to the municipalities, case
workers, and the citizens.
1)
Case A
The company perceives it as a strength that they have
developed what they describe as a “whole solution” covering
both the necessities for the case workers and the citizens.
“Our solution has a good flow for the citizens with
understandable screen displays. It is not heavy on wording
and we only ask for information that is actually relevant for
the municipalities to keep things as simple as possible.”
The company also identified some weaknesses in regards
to their digital self-service application. They described that
the fact that they only collaborated with one municipality
might have been an issue, although they did not see it as a
real option for them to have involved 3-5 municipalities in
the development process. The company also recognises that
there might be usability issues in the digital self-service
application but argues that this is substantiated in what the
municipalities are actually willing to pay for. “Reality is just
different than theory. If you want to pay for it, you can get
the great solutions focused on usability, but that is not what
the municipalities want to pay for”. The company describes
that if the customers do not care about usability they will not
focus on that either.
2)
Case B
The company perceives it as a strength of their digital
self-service application that they have involved different
kinds of professionals in the development process. They feel
that the role of the product owner creates more value as he
also has to ensure that the digital self-service application
follows the legislations even if it changes. They describe
ensuring to develop usable and intuitive digital self-service
applications.
Late changes are described as being possible because the
application
is
built
in
modules
making
changes
less
expensive. A perceived weakness is creating one solution to
fit all needs. This is done as updating or testing would be too
expensive if municipalities wanted something changed.
3)
Case C
The company perceives it as a strength of their digital
self-service application that they have developed a solution
where the citizens can do everything in one place. “The
citizens never leave their medical file when they need to fill
out the self-service application”. They also perceive it as a
strength that they have tried to cover all aspects of the needs
that both citizens and case workers have.
A perceived weakness is that they feel they might not
have spent enough time on usability when developing the
digital self-service application for the citizens. “The self-
service application might be kind of crude, people need to
have prior knowledge to be able to use it..” A concern about
if feeble citizens would be able to fill in the application was
raised.
4)
Case D
The company perceives it as a strength that they have
integrated this application in their general healthcare record
solution. “The citizens can see the full catalogue of the
services the municipality offers and, after they have applied
for something once, it is possible to make a reorder without
starting over with the application.” They feel that they have
simplified processes that otherwise might be difficult for
feeble citizens. For the case workers they see their solution
as a strength in regards to, when an application ends up with
the case worker, the system has already validated that the
citizens are entitled to what they have applied for.
It is perceived as both a strength and a weakness that they
always make applications that follow the legislation though
some
municipalities
might
have
other
requests.
It is
perceived as a weakness that they have been bound by an
existing design on the general healthcare record solution.
They feel this application might lack usability and that some
written information might be too small for the application.
5)
Usability of Products
To evaluate if the development process had resulted in
usable self-service applications for the citizens, a usability
evaluation
of
these
four
self-service
solutions
was
311
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

conducted. This was done as a think-aloud usability
evaluation in a usability laboratory, with eight test persons.
For the evaluations, all test persons received the same
instructions explaining what they were meant to do during
the evaluation, e.g. conduct a set of tasks and think aloud
during the evaluation. All participants received the same
tasks, and evaluated all four systems, but evaluated them in
a different order.
The test persons were chosen to represent a user segment
as large as possible. Our test persons ranged in age and had
different educational backgrounds. The test persons had
different level of experience with computers though all use
the Internet on a regular basis. They had different level of
experience
in
regards
to
public
services.
Most
had
experience with other public digital self-service areas but
not this specific area.
An overview of the test persons can be found in Table III
below.
TABLE III.
FOUND USABILITY PROBLEMS FOR EACH DIGITAL
SELF-SERVICE SOLUTION
Test
person
Gender
Age
Education
Experience with
public services
TP1
F
44
High school degree
(early retirement
because of health
issues)
Yes, also for this
application type, and
done digitally
TP2
F
31
Phd-student in
Social science
Yes, for other service
areas, and done
digitally
TP3
M
52
Accountant
Yes, for other service
areas, and done
digitally
TP4
F
64
Retired school
teacher
Yes, for other service
areas, but not digitally
TP5
F
66
Technical assistant
Yes, also for this
service area, and done
digitally
TP6
M
30
Msc. Engineering
Yes, for other service
areas, and done
digitally
TP7
M
65
Retired computer
assistant
Yes, for other service
areas, and done
digitally
TP8
M
22
Bachelor student in
computer science
No experience
All test persons received a small gift after participating
in the evaluation.
After conducting the evaluations the data was analysed
using the method Instant Data Analysis (IDA) [26]. The
usability problems
were categorised
after
the criteria
described in Table IV. The problems were categorised in
regards to levels of confusion and frustration of the
participants, and whether they were able to fill out the forms
correctly. These criteria and categorisations were described
further by Skov and Stage [17].
TABLE IV.
DEFINING
THE
SEVERITY
OF
THE
USABILITY
PROBLEMS IN THE DIGITAL SELF-SERVICE SOLUTIONS
Slowed
down
Understanding
Frustration or
confusion
Test monitor
Critical
Hindered
in solving
the task
Does not
understand how
the information
in the system
can be used for
solving the task
Extensive level
of frustration or
confusion – can
lead to a full
stop
Receives
substantial
assistance,
could not have
solved the task
without it
Serious
Delayed
in solving
the task
Does not
understand how
a specific
functionality
operates or is
activated
Is clearly
annoyed by
something that
cannot be done
or remembered
or something
illogical that
one must do
Receives a
hint, and are
able to solve
the task
afterwords
Cosmetic
Delayed
slightly in
solving
the task
Does actions
without being
able to explain
why (you just
have to do it)
Only small
signs of
frustration or
confusion
Is asked a
question that
makes him
come up with
the solution
An overview of the usability problems is shown in Table
V.
TABLE V.
FOUND USABILITY PROBLEMS IN EACH DIGITAL SELF-SERVICE
SOLUTION
Company A
Company B
Company C
Company D
Critical
2
5
0
1
Serious
17
18
11
15
Cosmetic
17
14
6
13
Total
36
37
17
29
Of the identified problems, 11 were found across all four
digital public self-solutions. Among these general problems
was lack of understanding of the purpose and flow of the
self-service solutions, problems with attaching files, test
persons getting annoyed or confused by not being able to
understand helping texts and the descriptions of the rules and
regulations of the application area, leading to test persons
filling in the wrong information in the text fields. And,
misunderstanding data fields, also leads the test persons to
fill in the wrong information in the text fields.
6)
Summary of Products
Companies A and D highlight simplified processes as
strengths in regards to their public self-service applications.
B and D find the fact that they focus on developing
applications that follow the legislation as a strength. C and D
both describe it as a strength that the self-service application
is integrated in one healthcare solution for all public
healthcare applications. Companies A, C and D believe that a
weakness of the citizen centred self-service applications
might be lacking usability. This has not been made a priority
by the companies as it was
not a priority for the
municipalities.
312
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The applications from C and to some extent D, were
significantly smaller and less complex than the applications
developed by companies A and B.
Both applications from companies C and D were part of
larger
healthcare
systems
and
therefore
much
less
information had to be filled in by citizens themselves.
Especially the application developed by company C was
very plain and did not address any of the issues that
companies A and B, and to some extent company D have
tried to solve in their solutions, like adding features
automatically generating decisions, or the possibility of
attaching
relevant
documents
to
the
application.
The
application from company C was created as a paper
application in pdf-form. Although C and D showed a higher
degree of usability, the utility of these solutions were
significantly lower than the applications from A and B.
V.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The Danish digitalisation effort has been taken to support
the development process and provide each municipality with
more digital self-service solutions to choose from, and
enhancing usability in these solutions. For this purpose, two
sets of guidance materials were created, a user journey and a
set of 24 usability criteria, respectively. The aim was that this
approach would facilitate competition between the self-
service providers, resulting in better and more user-centred
self-service applications for the citizens. All four companies
involved the municipalities in the design process both in
regards to the back-end of the system meant for the case
workers and in regards to the self-service applications meant
for the citizens. Two of the companies described involving
citizens quite late in the process for testing of the features,
either by going live in a few “pilot-municipalities” or
conducting a usability evaluation.
Though a user-centred approach has been taken, our
results correspond with the findings of Wangpipatwong et al.
who found that e-government websites are lacking usability
due to poor design and non-employment of user-centred
design methodologies [7]. The reason for this is that the
municipalities according to the companies are only focusing
on this to a small extent and are not willing to pay more than
the bare minimum. This shows a mismatch between what the
joint
IT
organisation
of
the
municipalities,
and
the
municipalities are trying to achieve. The public self-service
providers are focusing on what the municipalities are willing
to pay for and want the citizens to do and not taking the user-
centred approach with a citizens' perspective, unless this is
being requested by the municipalities. If the user-centred
approach should be a success it is important to involve the
municipalities as well. They need to understand that quality
and cost are complementary [8][9] and why usability needs
to be a focus area and why a usable system will be a good
investment though it might be a bit more expensive to
develop. Bruun and Stage have found that redesigning a
digital self-service application focusing on usability, can
reduce the amount of time the case worker has to spend on
each application, with more than 50% [23].
Jokela et. al. [13] and Mastrangelo [21] describe the
importance of usability being specified in the requirements.
It is questionable whether this approach will be successful
unless
the
municipalities
learn
the
values
of
these
requirements and get the understanding that usability will
reduce cost over time. It seems very clear that as long as the
municipalities are not demanding this focus on usability, the
self-service providers will not focus on this aspect either.
To gain an understanding of the development of public self-
service applications in Denmark, we have conducted a study
of one application area with four self-service providers. We
recognise this limitation in regards to drawing conclusions
in a broad term about the entire development process. Also,
we have conducted a case study involving the companies.
As future work, it would be interesting to learn the
perspectives of the municipalities from themselves, and not
only through the self-service providers.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank the four companies who
participated in this study and the joint IT organisation of the
municipalities. We would also like to thank Infinit, for
supporting this research.
REFERENCES
[1]
Organisation of the Municipalities in Denmark, http://www.
kl.dk/Administration-og-digitalisering/Lov-om-obligatorisk-
digital-selvbetjening-og-digital-post-er-vedtaget-id105354/
[retrieved: March, 2016]
[2]
M. Pretorius, and A. Calitz, “The South African user
experience maturity status for website design in provincial
governments”. Proceedings of the 12th European Conference
on eGovernment pp. 589-599, 2012.
[3]
Kombit, For self-service providers, http://www.kombit.dk/
indhold/leverand%C3%B8rer [retrieved: March, 2016]
[4]
S. Kvale, “Interview”, København: Hans Reitzel, (1997)
[5]
B. Flyvbjerg, “Five misunderstandings about case-study
research”, Qualitative inquiry 12.2, 2006, pp. 219-245
[6]
Dedoose, www.dedoose.com [retrieved: March, 2016]
[7]
S. Wangpipatwong, W. Chutimaskul, and, B. Papastratorn,
“Understanding citizen's continuance intention to use e-
government
website:
A composite view of technology
acceptance
model
and
computer
self-efficiancy”.
The
Electronic Journal of e-Government, vol. 6, nr. 1 2008, pp.
55-64
[8]
P. B. Crosby, “Quality is free”. Mcgraw-Hill, New York,
1979.
[9]
D. E. Harter, M. S. Krishnan, and S. A. Slaughter, “Effects of
process maturity on quality, cycle time, and effort in software
product development”. Management Science, vol. 46 nr. 4
2000, pp. 451-466.
[10] J. Billestrup, A. Bruun, and J. Stage, “UX Requirements to
Public
Systems
for
All:
Formalisation
or
Innovation”.
Workshop on Formalizing UX Requirements, 2015.
[11] T. Clemmensen and D. Katre, “Adapting e-gov usability
evaluation to cultural contexts”. Usability of e-government
systems. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, 2012, pp. 331-344.
[12] Z. Huang and M. Benyoucef, “Usability and credibility of e-
government websites”. Government Information Quarterly
2014, pp. 584-595.
313
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[13] T. Jokela, “Determining Usability Requirements Into a Call-
for-Tenders. A Case Study on the Development of a
Healthcare System”. Proceedings of NordiCHI 2010.
[14] B. Soufi and M. Maguire, “Achieving usability within e-
government websites illustrated by a case study evaluation”.
Proceedings of Human Interface, Springer-Verlag, 2007 part
II, pp. 777-784.
[15] T. Jokela, L. Juja, and M. Nieminen, “Usability in RFP's: The
Current Practice and Outline for the Future”. Proceedings of
HCI International, 2013.
[16] K. Tarkkanen and V. Harkke, “From Usability Workarounds
to Usability Around Work”. Proceedings of INTERACT
2015.
[17] M. B. Skov and J. Stage, Supporting Problem Identification in
usability Evaluations. Proceedings of OzCHI, 2005.
[18] DESI Index,https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/scoreboard/
[retrieved: March, 2016]
[19] J. Billestrup and J. Stage, E-government and the Digital
Agenda for Europe. Design, User Experience, and Usability.
User Experience Design for Diverse Interaction Platforms and
Environments. Springer International Publishing, 2014. pp.
71-80.
[20] SME definition. http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/
facts-figures-analysis/sme-definition/index_en.htm [retrieved:
March, 2016]
[21] S. Mastrangelo, R. Lanzilotti, M. Boscarol, and C. Ardito,
“Guidelines to Specify HCD Activities in the Call for Tender
for
Public
Administration
Websites”.
Proceedings
of
INTERACT 2015.
[22] R. Yin, R, “Case Study Research: Design and methods”. CA,
USA: Sage Publications, 1991.
[23] A.
Bruun
and
J.
Stage,
“Supporting
Diverse
Users:
Implementing Usability Improvements of an E-Government
Data Entry Website”. Unpublished, 2014.
[24] Kombit, User Journey for applying for a marriage certificate,
December 2014 http://www.kl.dk/ImageVaultFiles/id_60480/
cf_202/Illu.PDF [retrieved: March, 2016]
[25] The government agency for digitalisation in Denmark.
Criteria
for
usability
in
self-service
solutions.
http://www.kl.dk/ImageVault/Images/id_56064/scope_0/Imag
eVault Handler.aspx [retrieved: March, 2016]
[26] J. Kjeldskov, M. B. Skov, and J. Stage, “Instant Data Analysis:
Conducting Usability Ealuations in a Day”. Proceedings of
NordiCHI, 2004.
[27] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle. “Agilè Software Development
with Scrum”. Prentice Hall, 2001.
[28] Bentley, Colin. “Prince2: a Practical Handbook”. Routledge,
2010.
314
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

