Virtualization Technology for Multi-display Systems
Igor Petukhov, Lyudmila Steshina, Ilya Tanryverdiev 
Mari State Technical University, Deptartment of Radio Technical 
Yoshkar-Ola, Russian Federation 
Emails: {PetuhovIV@marstu.net, SteshinaLA@marstu.net, ili.tanryverdiev@gmail.com}
 
 
 
Abstract – The method for creation of multi-user multi-monitor 
systems designed for educational purposes is suggested. The 
method utilizes virtual machine technology which makes 
possible 
to 
create 
completely 
isolated 
user 
working 
environment, remote access to equipment and remote 
workstation administration. Standard interfaces like DVI, 
VGA or USB are used as data transmission channels along 
with network technologies. Such architecture facilitates the 
operator’s work, making it more comfortable, and improves 
the quality and capabilities of the distant access to remote 
resources. 
Keywords-multi-user multi-monitor systems; virtual machine 
technology; interface. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Intense progress in remote educational techniques and 
reformation of the existing intramural ones stimulates the 
information systems developers to seek for newer 
technologies to be convenient and beneficial for the 
educational process. First, it concerns the reformation of 
computerized student workstations organization, namely, 
their graphics architecture, ways of workstations interaction 
with each other and with the teacher’s workstation. 
Nowadays, tablet PCs, graphics systems having two or more 
displays, multi-user designs on the base of a single computer, 
etc. are being implemented together with non-removable 
computerized student workstations. 
Graphical systems having two or more displays are well 
known and successfully used by specialists in different 
spheres, especially where the human-operator has to deal 
with great amount of changing data. Such systems are used 
at stock exchanges, in monitoring different natural processes, 
in the systems of technological process automated control at 
industrial enterprises and in many other fields. 
Most of these systems are designed for the work with a 
single operator, i.e. they create common information space 
including a single operator. There are works on creating 
graphical systems with intelligent terminals and direct 
allocation of data processing function to several computing 
machines [1], systems with intelligent satellites [2], 
client/server models ‘host computer plus user terminals’ 
using  different types of PCs [3, 4]. 
Software programs like Citrix providing terminal access 
for Windows and UNIX and terminal services incorporated 
in server versions of Windows [5] are among the primitive 
mechanisms of terminal access known today. 
Heterogeneous 
distributed 
computer 
systems 
for 
decentralized machinery control using Web-server and 
remote web-client servers [6], multi-user system Multiseat 
implementation technologies [7], corporate solutions of 
distributed user systems in virtual environment on the base 
of Microsoft RemoteFX [8] are also of interest. 
Most of these systems are designed for the work with a 
single operator, i.e. they create common information space 
including a single operator. However utilizing multi-display 
systems in education may be still more efficient, if their own 
working environments are created for them. 
Moreover, implementation of 
distributed terminal 
systems gives an advantage of providing substantial financial 
saving on purchase of equipment, diminishing operational 
costs for system maintenance and, in a way, realizing ‘green’ 
energy saving concept [9, 10]. 
Thus, the fact of practicability of multi-user terminal 
systems implementation is becoming evident. 
Meanwhile there still exist a number of problems 
requiring special attention. They are the problems of 
providing the system processing speed and its productivity, 
the 
security 
of 
information 
communication 
when 
transmitting 
it 
through 
the 
open 
access 
networks,   
implementation of the ‘severe real time’ mode. 
The aim of the given work is to elaborate the way of 
creating a multi-user multi-monitor system with remote 
access capability designed to be used as information 
environment in education process. 
II. 
THEORETICAL ANALYSIS 
Multi-user multi-monitor systems are those built on the 
base of a single computer and having many monitors each 
meant to be used by one operator. 
In information systems, the so-called terminal principle is 
usually used to provide multi-user work, interaction of 
technical provision of operators’ workstations through local 
processing 
networks 
or 
other 
network 
technologies 
underlying the principle. 
This 
causes 
substantial 
delays 
in 
information 
communication and limits the communication bandwidth 
between operators. Technical provision of operators’ 
workstations is common user PCs having input/output 
devices for interaction with an operator and network adapter 
for adding a client to the network. Organization of user 
workstations without using the client PCs has limited 
implementation so far because of its low dynamic features. 
For example, ArtistaNEТ controller making possible to 
integrate LCD displays into a local area computer network 
without a client PC has for the time being the productivity 
[11] shown in the table below. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  
COMPARATIVE FEATURES OF ARTISTANEТ CONTROLLER 
PRODUCTIVITY 
Resolution 
Interface 
Image Transfer Rate 
VGA 
100 Mbps 
16 images per second 
SVGA 
100 Mbps 
12 images per second 
XGA 
100 Mbps 
5 images per second 
WXGA 
100 Mbps 
4 images per second 
SXGA 
100 Mbps 
3images per second 
 
 
Such communication bandwidth of data channels 
between the operators’ workstations is evidently insufficient 
for monitoring the quickly changing processes and creating 
the ‘real time’ for a user. 
There is another principle, suggested by the authors 
earlier and based on utilizing analog channels for data 
transfer. The essence of the technique is in setting a lot of 
video cards into the computer and connecting each of them 
with two monitors by a standard cable through DVI or VGA 
interface (Fig. 1) [12]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Scheme of separation of information and control functions 
 
Video data are transferred through the cable without any 
transformation and come directly to the monitor, which 
completely excludes delays in the channel of data transfer. 
From the view point of hardware, the method can be used to 
create small area multi-user information systems, since usage 
of even special shielded cable to connect the monitors on the 
operators’ workstations cannot provide total noise absence 
and, as a result, makes enhancing the coverage area 
infeasible. 
An important issue in using the method discussed is 
software support of isolated users work environment. Every 
operator usually performs his/her function that is loosely 
coupled with the function of some other operator. In this 
case, each operator requires specialized software or hardware 
at his/her workstation, e.g. access to the CAD-system being 
studied. Moreover, such a technology does not make it 
possible to bring tablet PCs into the information environment 
to create mobile computer workstations. 
Another burning problem appearing in creation of 
information environment for educational purposes is the 
problem of multiple access to hardware located in the 
university premises. It is common that demonstration of this 
or that effect or phenomenon in educational process involves 
complex technical means connected to a computer, be it an 
electronic microscope or some other specialized equipment. 
As a rule, the existing information systems used in distance 
learning are not able to supply a remote student with access 
to the equipment set in the university premises, limiting this 
by the access only to electronic resources. This results in the 
fact that remote students are unable to fulfill practical, 
laboratory and research work at distance and sometimes 
causes deterioration of distance education quality. 
 
III. 
VIRTUAL MACHINE TECHNOLOGY 
The analyses of the problems mentioned gives evidence 
that most of them depend on the implementation of network 
technologies, namely, local computer networks (LCN). Thus, 
the solution of the larger part of these can be provided via 
rejection of LCN usage and implementation of a terminal 
system through a new technology. According to this, the 
authors developed an alternative technology the essence of 
which is in creation of multi-user computational system 
based on a single computer. To identify such a system it is 
suggested to use the term ‘pseudo terminal system’ because 
of the absence of exteriorized terminals [13]. 
It is suggested that solving the problem of creating 
individual isolated environments in multi-user multi-monitor 
systems should be realized applying virtual machine 
technology. 
A unique virtual machine (virtual terminal) corresponds 
to each of a number of operators. The terminal has guest 
operating system and its unique input (keyboard, mouse, 
touch panel, etc.) and output (monitor, VR-headset, etc.) 
devices, as well as video adapter and information input 
interface controllers, as shown in Fig.2.  
Virtual machine monitor provides access of guest 
operating system of each operator to the hardware appointed 
to it (video adapter, input controller), while guest operating 
system works with the hardware offered via standard drivers.  
In this case, guest operating system of each operator 
forms a desktop and processes graphical elements in video 
processor of the appointed to it adaptor, puts the graphical 
information out by means of the interface of the same 
physical adaptor without applying virtualization of the 
device by the monitor of virtual machines. 
The information designed to be displayed for the user 
comes from the interface to the user monitor connected with 
the video adapter corresponding to this user.  
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 2.  Pseudo terminal concept 
 
When some user puts data in by means of a keyboard or 
other input devices connected with the input physical 
controller corresponding to this very user, virtual machines 
monitor does not capture data from the controller of data 
input, giving them to the processor of the user guest 
operating system.  
Every operator works with the virtual machine via IO 
devices appointed to him/her and ideates that s/he is working 
on a separate dedicated computer. 
Using the technology of virtualization it is possible to 
introduce mobile automated workstations based on tablet 
PCs, iPhon, etc. into the information system as well. 
Software-hardware links are presented schematically in 
Fig. 3.  
As such, the system provides “Desktop as a Service”, i.e. 
processing power of a computer with physically switched on 
hardware and working virtual machines monitor are “leased” 
to the remote user. The problem of multiple access with 
virtual machines is solved by appointing hardware to a 
virtual machine on demand of a user in real time mode as 
well. 
 
IV. 
TECHNICAL MAINTENANCE 
The main merit of the developed method for multi-user 
system organization is in the fact that it does not require 
modernizing 
of 
the 
existing 
computer 
arrangement 
architecture. The desired number of video adaptors and data 
input controllers are connected to the PCI-Express bus, while 
data IO devices necessary to each operator (monitors, touch 
panels, VR-headsets, keyboards, etc.) are set on the computer 
workstations and connected with the computer through 
transmission links of DVI interface for data output device 
and of USB interface for data input device (Fig. 4).  
The number of terminals is limited by the number of 
video adaptors of the computational server; the number of 
terminals equals the total number of server video outputs. In 
case modern computational systems with 6 video adapters 
are exploited, the number of terminals amounts 12. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   Software-hardware links 
 
Each of the users works on an individual virtual machine 
served by a hypervisor. It should be noted that in case 
hypervisor Xen is used practically no limitations are imposed 
on the operational systems exploited by users. Moreover, 
they may be completely different depending on the 
requirements of the user.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Virtualization technology for multi display systems 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Linux remains the main software platform of the 
complex, however, it is only the host-system for the virtual 
machines monitor, i.e. it provides the work of the most part 
of the computer and hypervisor hardware. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Thus, the method of building multi-user multi-monitor 
systems can be used for creation of information educational 
systems for educational establishments of different levels. 
Familiar alternative systems exploiting Userful MultiSeat 
Linux and Multiterminals technologies differ from the 
suggested one by fewer number of terminals (up to 10) and 
lower functional capabilities, which significantly limits the 
freedom of users in choosing software. In other words, 
alternative technologies, in contrast with the suggested one, 
make it possible that many users worked with one operating 
system simultaneously, which imposes limitations both on 
the software used and on the provision of the information 
security for the users. 
The method elaborated provides convenient and efficient 
user work in the close to real time mode thanks to the lack of 
delays in the channels of data transfer between the automated 
workstations. It also allows to significantly lower the cost of 
the information system at the expense of more efficient 
resources usage. 
Remote access broadens functional capabilities of the 
information system largely and improves the quality of 
distance education. 
Besides, the suggested structure of building terminal 
systems with improved dynamic features can be used for 
technological processes control by means of a small number 
of users, for creating “islands of automatization”, complex 
geographically-distributed automated control systems, as 
well as for creating computer workstations in computer-
aided design systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The results presented in the paper are obtained with the 
grant of the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR) 
10-08-97019-поволжье_а «Развитие теории адаптивного 
интерфейсного согласования человека с технической 
системой» (Development of the theory of the adaptive 
interface coordination of a person with a technical system) 
(Petukhov I.) and with the grant support under the analytical 
departmental target program «Development of scientific  of 
the 
higher 
school 
(2009-2010)» 
№ 
 
2.1.2/11701 
“Investigation of the stability and ensuring the invariance of 
energy-efficient systems, adaptive control of dynamic 
objects” (Steshina L.). 
REFERENCES 
[1] W.K. Giloi, J. Encarnacao, and S. Savitt, “Interactive 
graphics on intelligent terminals in a time-sharing 
environment,” Acta Informatica, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 257-271. 
[2] H.J. Lotz-Iwen and W. Steinborn, “The intelligent 
satellite-image information system ISIS,” Proc. AIP Conf., 
August 1993, vol. 283, pp. 727-734. 
[3] N. Mitrovic and E. Mena, “Adaptive User Interface 
for Mobile Devices,” Proc. of the 9th International 
Workshop on Interactive Systems. Design, Specification, and 
Verification (DSV-IS 2002), Springer Press, June 2002, pp. 
47-61. 
[4] E. Edelhauser, “Client server versus distributed 
network applications in human resource management,” Proc. 
of the International Conference on Theory and Applications 
of Mathematics and Informatics (ICTAMI 2004), pp. 129-
136. 
[5] C. Anderson and S. Greenberg, “Windows and UNIX 
on the Desktop: MetaFrame gives you the best of both 
worlds,” Windows & .NET Magazine, May 2003, pp. 65-67. 
[6] J.E. Pezoa, M.M. Hayat,   Zhuoyao Wang and  
S.Dhakal,  “Optimal Task Reallocation in Heterogeneous 
Distributed Computing Systems with Age-Dependent Delay 
Statistics,” Parallel Proc. 39th International Conference 
(ICPP), Sept. 2010, pp. 111–120. 
[7] R. Green, Expert CAD Management: The Complete 
Guide. San Francisco: Sybex, 2007.  
[8] J. Halscott, Desktop Virtualization and Evolving 
Strategies for IT Service Delivery. San Francisco: Realtime 
publishers, 2011. 
[9] Y. Weimin, “Network turns green,” Huawei 
Communication,  Sep. 2009, vol. 51, pp. 36-38. 
[10] H. Ikebe, N. Yamashita, and R. Nishii, “Green 
Energy for Telecommunications,” Proc. INTELEC 2007, pp. 
750-755. 
[11] W.E. Crawford, “High Performance Controller 
Electronics for Networked Digital Displays,” Proc. SID conf. 
Americas Display Engineering and Applications (ADEAC 
2006), SID Press, pp. 197-200. 
 [12] I. Tanryverdiev, L. Steshina and I. Petukhov, “The 
hardware and software platform for automated control 
systems,” Proc. of the Junior Scientist Conference 2010, 
April 2010, pp. 313-314.  
[13] I. Petukhov, L. Steshina and I. Tanryverdiev, 
“System of the distributed control and input of the 
information for automation of continuous technological 
processes in real time,” Bulletin of Mari State Technical 
University, vol. 1, 2009, pp. 72-80. 
 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

