User Centered Design of a Knowledge Management System for Production Workers
Gianni Campatelli, Sandro Mehic
Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Firenze
Firenze, Italy
e-mail: gianni.campatelli@unifi.it, sandro.mehic@unifi.it
Abstract—This paper depicts a knowledge management system
developed by the authors as a service to be used by workers of
the production sector. The service has been developed within
the framework of FACTS4WORKERS project, which aims to
provide software, hardware and organizational strategies to
improve the workers satisfaction. The approach to collect the
workers requirements is based on the creation of artifacts able
to support a smarter and easier communication with the end
users. The solution presented in this paper is a Knowledge
Management System developed to cope with the specific
requirements of manufacturing workers. It aims to provide a
real-time decision support to the workers and create a
collaborative and inclusive work environment. The solution
has been tested in a real production environment by the
project partners.
Knowledge
Management
System;
Workers
Satisfaction;
Smart Services.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the challenges that the European Community
must cope with in the next years is the low attractiveness of
jobs in the manufacturing sector. As highlighted in the
Factory of the Future agenda [1], the reduced interest on
younger generations for manufacturing jobs constitutes an
obstacle for the re-industrialization of many European
regions. In the last years, European Community has
promoted many calls for proposal for the development of
solutions to increase the satisfaction of workers in the
manufacturing areas, creating new approaches and tools to
empower and reskill the workers. One of the funded
initiatives
is
the
FACTS4WORKERS
project,
whose
outcomes are briefly presented in this paper.
The general picture is that young people are not excited
by the idea of working in a manufacturing plant since the
perception of this job is connected to “old fashion” activities
that are mainly focused on dirty-hands tasks without the use
of modern communication tools, common in everyday life.
Many strategies have been proposed to tackle this issue.
Figure
1 shows a priority list of the possible actions,
developed by the World Economic Forum [2]. Among these,
the most important is the reskilling of the operators. This is
not a trivial task since the operators that must be reskilled
come
from
very
different
demographic,
expertise,
educational, and skill background. The challenge is to
develop a smart approach that could be adopted proficiently
by most of the actual workforce and that could generate
interest and motivation for its continuous use.
Figure 1. Future strategies for manufacturing workers
Many companies are looking to invest in operator
reskilling while trying to keep low the costs, like the time
required and the impact on the organizational structure of the
workforce, especially in the Small and Medium Enterprises
(SMEs). The most common approach is to develop a vertical
solution based on the very specific requirements of a
company, creating a reskilling path that is only partially
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

reusable in other contexts. In all cases, the starting point
should be an analysis of the reasons that led the company to
implement a reskilling plan. The analysis starts with the
evaluation of the role of the manufacturing workers. This has
tremendously changed in the last decades: continuous
automation of manufacturing processes has reduced their
manual efforts, whereas managing the increasing complexity
of the production system requires them to acquire higher
skills. The Web has been one of the main sources of
inspiration for new tools that enable the sharing of
information and ideas; applications such as Wikipedia and
Facebook created a new “social” environment where people
could
exchange
information
using
new
approaches.
Nowadays, users do not only consume, but actively produce
information and engage with the information produced by
others in a collaborative way. This creates new possibilities
and challenges for the industrial sector. Whereas younger
workers
“expect”
to
be
able
to
work
with
recent
technologies, older workers must not be left behind by
creating a “digital divide” [3]. A growing number of studies
has shown how social and mobile technologies can help
capture and process social information [4]–[7].
When facing problems, especially of a technical nature,
in their daily life most people use social environments to
look for a solution. Some examples include repairing a
broken household appliance, consulting information about
the use of electronic devices, etc. The challenge of the
developed service is to transfer this approach to the shop
floor, enabling a smarter and faster problem-solving attitude
of the workers and creating a more motivating and
supporting social environment. A usability study of the
online training approach highlights how the perception of
new and innovative tasks could increase the satisfaction of
the users [8]. Hence, production workers, often involved in
manual work, could benefit from this innovative industrial
social environment.
To meet this goal, the creation of a social environment
within a manufacturing plant is required, supported by a
highly usable platform and infrastructure, that will adopt
smart services to enable the exchange of information among
peers. The system will be composed of a Web front-end,
able to run on a smart device, and a number of services that
provide communication service and access to consult,
generate and modify a knowledge database.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, the architecture of the developed solution is presented,
while Section III depicts the approach used for the collection
of worker requirements. Section IV describes the features of
the developed Knowledge Management System,
while
Section V concludes this work.
II.
FACTS4WORKERS PROJECT AND INDUSTRIAL
CHALLENGES
This activity has been developed within the larger frame
of FACTS4WORKERS project, whose aim is to create a
smarter and a more satisfying working environment for
manufacturing operators. The developed tool, able to support
the knowledge sharing among workers and sustain the
development of a collaborative environment, is only one of
the industrial challenges defined by the project. These are
summarized in Figure 2 and briefly described in the following
list:

Industrial Challenge 1: Provide a personalized and
augmented reality (AR) tools for the workers through
which they can get immediate, context aware and hands
free access to information on the shop-floor.

Industrial
Challenge
2:
Provide
a
worker-centric
knowledge management system through which the users
can capture and access the knowledge shared by the rest
of the coworkers, with main focus on the shop-floor level
flows instead of office centered functionality.

Industrial
Challenge
3:
Self-learning
manufacturing
workplaces
are
established
through
linking
heterogeneous information sources from the worker’s
environment and beyond, and extracting patterns of
successful production, transferring the result as decision-
relevant knowledge to the worker.

Industrial Challenge 4: The use of generated knowledge
through knowledge management system and insight
provided by the self-learning manufacturing workplace
for an in-situ mobile learning to instruct and support
operators during production.
Figure 2. Industrial Challenges of F4W project
The objective of the developed tool is to support the
workers in all the Industrial Challenges with different
approaches.
Industrial Challenge 1: The augmented operator will
profit from a social platform especially for the possibility to
define specific “channels” for the information posting. One
operator could decide to be updated about all the content
created by a specific operator, that has more experience with
the manufacturing process or is usually well trained in
problem solving. Moreover, the data fed to the operator
could be studied and analyzed thanks to the support of the
other workers that “animate” the social platform and, in the
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

past, have carried out similar task or have verified a similar
behavior in the collected data.
Industrial Challenge 2: the second challenge is about the
knowledge management and sharing. Here the developed
service has the aim to enable the sharing among the peers of
the knowledge about defect solving. In this case the class
“defect” must be considered in a broader sense: a defect
could be any issue that the production worker has to solve in
order to have the production running smoothly. The database
of the service stores all the encountered defects and the
solutions
adopted
by
the
operators.
The
descriptive
information will be augmented with multimedia content,
such as video and audio tracks that show and further improve
the provided solution. Additionally, social interactions will
be captured in the form of comments and ratings, that again
can include multimedia content to integrate the knowledge
content for further use. The success rate of each solution will
be calculated based on the feedback of the operators in order
to allow the selection of the best solution available based on
the evidence of the validity of the approach and the social
comments received.
Industrial Challenge 3: the third challenge is related to
self-learning; in this case the social exchange of data will
enable the training of the operator directly thanks to the
access to the data created by the other users. The availability
of comments, video and other media created by expert
workers will enable a self-learning of the operators. This will
allow an easier organization of the workforce at the different
machines in the shop-floor, incrementing the mobility of the
workers in the plant and empowering them into the use of a
larger number of machines/stations.
Industrial Challenge 4: the last industrial challenge wants
to deal with in-situ learning, for which the operator needs to
access a lot of different documents and multimedia contents.
In this case is crucial to have a system able to motivate the
production of media contents able to populate a training
platform. The social service backbone is going to support the
development
of
a
repository
of
peer-to-peer
process
information. This information will be highly usable by the
workers because produced by his peers. It is expected that
the material will be produced by workers for workers,
characterized by a very focused problem-solving attitude and
a
functional
language
and
representation
approach.
Moreover, the content rating and the associated success rate
of the solutions will allow the workers to select quickly the
most interesting material to use, avoid time-consuming
search and the reading of a lot of less-useful material.
After the definition of the objective of the service, an
analysis of “off-the-shelf” solutions has been performed,
highlighting the need to develop something smarter and
more focused on the specific case. In order to have a tailored
solution for the project objectives, many interviews have
been carried out with manufacturing workers, implementing
a user centered approach.
III.
USER CENTERED APPROACH TO DESIGN THE SERVICE
The knowledge management system could be a powerful
tool to be deployed in an industrial environment, but some
barriers could limit its successful introduction on the
shopfloor. For this reason, a user centered approach has been
designed and adopted in order to define the architecture of
the optimal solution, keeping always the workers within the
loop. Many authors, like Kukko [9], report that some barriers
must be overcomed to have an effective sharing system, that
otherwise lead to a knowledge mismanagement, responsible
for unsatisfactory performance. These are mainly related to
the users acceptance of the solution and a correct definition
of the rules
for
managing
the
knowledge.
However,
supporting the knowledge sharing is one of the main drivers
for continuous improvement actions [10]; it is one of the
most
useful
approaches
to
cope
with
fast
changing
environment and context.
To design the architecture of a solution that could
effectively support the workers and have a high degree of
acceptability, it is crucial to fully understand the daily tasks
and main issues that a worker must face. The approach used
to collect such needs is based on widely known standards,
like ISO9241-210, and human-centered design of interactive
systems and Design Research’s process model approach
[11]. Both approaches are based on the assumption that
complex problems [12] cannot be solved in a straightforward
way but needs usually many iterations.
The used approach is based on the development of an
initial context-of-use analysis that evolves in the definition of
application scenarios. These scenarios have been developed
by the researchers of the projects and later validated with the
operators. An interesting solution developed by Heinrich &
Richter [13] is the use of comics to contextualize the
developed scenario and facilitate the communication with the
workers, keeping the information level to its core and using a
simple and context aware language. After the definition of
the
scenarios,
the
software
developers
elaborated
a
preliminary solution to cope with the challenge, providing
mock-ups for its evaluation by the workers. Based on their
feedback, the final release of the software has been deployed
on the shop floor. During the whole process, the users are
kept in the center of the definition process, with the aim to
develop a user-centered application.
IV.
DEVELOPED KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The Knowledge Management System developed allows
the workers to share their experiences and knowledge. The
system supports a worker in case of a defect - general
definition for a problem in the production area - and provides
the support to deploy a corrective action. The study of
different industrial organization, carried out within the
framework of FACTS4WORKERS project has highlighted
how the knowledge required to support the worker’s activity
could be described in the form defect->solution. This is a
result exploited by many authors, like Vera et al. [14], that
recognized how the knowledge required in a production
environment
is
usually
in
the
form
problem/defect->
solution, since most of the cases that require a direct
operation
of
the
workers
are
related
to
the
events’
occurrence. Hence, the required knowledge is the causal
relation between an event (defect) and a possible corrective
actions (solution). This is not a univocal link since multiple
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

solutions could be adopted to solve the same problem. To
cope with this issue a solution ranking concept has been
introduced, where the ranking is a measurement of the
effectiveness of the suggested approach to resolve the
events’ occurance. General solution (e.g., “clean the device”)
could be applicable to a large variety of defects but have a
poor effectiveness in some cases. The solution ranking
allows the use of the same solutions based on their context
effectiveness. The ranking is measured thanks to the
worker’s feedback on the adopted solutions. As the amount
of the workers’ feedback increases over time through the use
of the system, the ranking functionality becomes more
rapresentative of the best solutions for the frequently
encountered defects.
The knowledge is initially generated by the users in term
of new solutions that are able to solve a specific problem.
After a training period in which the database is populated by
the workers, following use of the system will enable the
worker to receive a suggestion by the system about how to
solve a specific issue, with the indications and suggestions of
workers that have dealt with the same issue previously. In
case of no solution for a defect, the system will use a
semantic search engine to guess the best solution for the
specific case looking for similar problems or offer the
possibility to register a new solution. The algorithm uses
natural language processing approach in order to extract
information from the defect and solutions definitions, as
stated by the operators in its own language – usually without
a structured definition. Moreover, the Artificial Intelligence
of the system will keep track of the acquired experience of
the workers and suggest if the operator has enough
experience with the application of a specific solution and, if
necessary, will call a supervisor (Team Leader) to support
the implementation of the suggested solution. The basic
scheme of the solution is reported in Figure 3.
Defect detected by
Operator / Quality
Plant
AI search a
possible solution
HMI shows the
solution with ranking,
comments and who
implemented it
User tries the “most
valuable” solution and
reports the results
Database is updated
after each try
AI evaluate training of
operator
Operator
not capable
AI propose call
Team Leader
Figure 3. Scheme of how AI manage the workers generated knowledge
Moreover, the knowledge is filtered considering the
worker profile. Profiling is fundamental to provide the
correct/adequate information to a specific worker. The basic
idea is that some information is not useful, or sometimes
misleading, for people that do not have enough training to
correctly understand them or are not authorized to deploy the
corrective
action.
An
example
could
be
a
complex
maintenance operation. In general, the most skilled machine
operators have some experience in maintenance operations.
Based on the action required, the system recognizes if the
operator is able to carry out a specific maintenance operation
autonomously and provide all the needed instruction to him,
otherwise another skilled operator is called in order to solve
the problem as soon as possible.
The knowledge is generated by the workers thanks to a
visual approach; it allows them to use actual and high
usability technologies to insert the linked information
(defect->solution) into the database. Since the information
will be retrieved by a semantic search engine, it will be
possible to use free text and multimedia file (pictures and
videos) to describe both the problem and the solution. A
mock-up that explains the user interface for generating
knowledge is reported in Figure 4. Comment with text and
other multimedia (video) could be later added. The AI will
be able to select the optimal solution based on ranking. An
example of interface is reported in Figure 5. The ranking of
the solution is calculated by the system using the feedback of
the workers after the application of a specific solution. This
is a measure of the success of a specific solution to solve a
problem and could be used to suggest the best solution to a
worker to deal with a problem.
The developed system has been installed on-premise in
different working environments, thanks to the availability of
FACTS4WORKERS project partners. After a period of use,
the feedback of the workers has been collected. All workers
involved
in
the
test
of
the
prototype
declared
their
satisfaction about the functionality and potential support that
the KMS could provide. During this preliminary evaluation,
we received feedback about the organization of the content
on the HMI. This led to a reorganization of the information,
to avoid reporting data with low interest for the workers and,
in general, avoid distractions or low value added steps in the
software application. Some appreciated features are the low
intrusiveness of the system and its user friendly interface,
since it requires very low IT expertise to be operated. The
expected results for this implementation is not the reduction
of defect rate but an increased capability of the workers to
solve autonomously the problems/defects that could arise
during their daily tasks, with positive effects in production
rate (reduced down time of the production machines) and
increased autonomy of the workers that lead to their
empowerment and satisfaction. A more detailed presentation
of the developed service is reported in [15]. An important
characteristic of this service is the applicability of the
solution in a large variety of production contexts. During
FACTS4WORKERS project, the service has been deployed
and tested in different companies, with business ranging
from the assembly to the production of plastic and metal
parts. In every case only minor adjustments of the front-end
have been carried out, to comply with the different requests
of the workers in terms of available data.
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Unknown defect
Figure 4. Mock-up for the user generated information
Known
defect
Ranked solutions
57%
?
28%
Figure 5. AI suggests the feasible solution with ranking
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The
knowledge
management
and
sharing
system
proposed in this paper has been designed using a structured
approach that enabled the smart evaluation of the workers
requirements, allowing a faster and more user centered
design of the service. The developed service has been
installed on premises by many industrial partners, allowing a
testing and validation phase of the effectiveness of the
approach. The formalization of the knowledge has been
carried out by the definition of a casual relation among
defects and solutions, integrating in the system the tools to
search and rate all the content introduced in the service
database. At the end of the test phase, the developed service
has been fine-tuned and the feedback form the workers have
been very positive. In most of the cases, the proposed
solution enabled the workers to solve the problem and
promoted the culture of exchanging data and knowledge
among
peers,
creating
a
more
collaborative
working
environment.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This
research
was
developed
within
the
FACTS4WORKERS project, founded from the European
Community’s
Horizon
2020
Research
and
Innovation
Programme (H2020-FoF-04-2014) under grant agreement n.
636778.
REFERENCES
[1]
EFFRA, “Factories of the Future: Multi‐annual roadmap for
the contractual PPP under Horizon 2020,” 2014.
[2]
World Economic Forum, Accelerating Workforce Reskilling
for the Fourth Industrial Revolution An Agenda for Leaders
to Shape the Future of Education, Gender and Work. 2017.
[3]
J. B. Pick and T. Nishida, “Digital divides in the world and its
regions: A spatial and multivariate analysis of technological
utilization,” Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change, vol. 91, pp. 1–
17, Feb. 2015.
[4]
A. Majchrzak, C. Wagner, and D. Yates, “The Impact Of
Shaping
On
Knowledge
Reuse
For
Organizational
Improvement With Wikis,” MIS Q., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 455–
469, 2013.
[5]
G. Von Krogh, “How does social software change knowledge
management? Toward a strategic research agenda,” J. Strateg.
Inf. Syst., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 154–164, 2012.
[6]
S. Faraj, S. L. Jarvenpaa, and
a. Majchrzak, “Knowledge
Collaboration in Online Communities,” Organ. Sci., vol. 22,
no. 5, pp. 1224–1239, 2011.
[7]
E. M. Jennex, S. Smolnik, and D. Croasdell, “Knowledge
management
success
in
practice,”
in
47th
Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, HICSS 2014,
2014, pp. 3615–3624.
[8]
A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, and M.
Wosnitza, “A usability evaluation of a blended MOOC
environment: An experimental case study,” Int. Rev. Res.
Open Distrib. Learn., vol. 16, no. 2, 2015.
[9]
M. Kukko, “Knowledge Sharing Barriers of Acquisitioned
Growth: A Case Study from a Software Company,” Int. J.
Eng. Bus. Manag., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 1, 2013.
[10] H. J. Quesada-Pineda and J. Madrigal, “Sustaining continuous
improvement: A longitudinal and regional study,” Int. J. Eng.
Bus. Manag., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 1, 2013.
[11] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, Rothenberger A. Marcus, and S.
Chatterjee, “A design science research methodology for
information systems,” J. Manag. Inf. Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp.
45–77, 2007.
[12] J. Pries-Heje and R. Baskerville, “the Design Theory Nexus.,”
MIS Q., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 731–755, 2008.
[13] P. Heinrich and A. Richter, “Captured and structured
practices of workers and contexts of organizations - Project
Report - FACTS4WORKERS: Worker-Centric Workplaces in
Smart Factories,” 2015.
[14] A. Vera-Baquero, R. Colomo-Palacios, and O. Molloy, “Real-
time business activity monitoring and analysis of process
performance on big-data domains,” Telemat. Informatics, vol.
33, no. 3, pp. 793–807, Aug. 2016.
[15] G. Campatelli, A. Richter, and A. Stocker, “A collaborative
knowledge management approach to empower manufacturing
workers,” Int. J. Knowl. Manag., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 37–50,
2016.
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

