User Attention in Mobile Devices 
 
 
Pekka Isomursu 
School of Music, Dance and Media 
Oulu University of Applied Sciences 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: pekka.isomursu@oamk.fi 
Minna Isomursu and Mari Ervasti 
Technical Research Centre of Finland 
VTT 
FIN-90571 Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: minna.isomursu@vtt.fi 
mari.ervasti@vtt.fi
 
 
Abstract— The multichannel information (over)flow emerging 
in modern mobile multimedia devices creates a situation where 
the user’s attention is a valuable asset for which different 
channels have to compete. This paper explores issues that help 
in effective use and maintenance of the user’s attention level in 
such environment. We demonstrate with examples how the 
user’s attention level can maintain high at different stages of 
task switching and execution. 
Keywords-mobile Internet; attentive user interface; user 
interface; UI; ambient notification; human factors; design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today’s mobile communication has come a long way 
from simple voice calls. People are blending channels and 
media in a device-agnostic way, using mobiles not only for 
communication but also for being informed and entertained 
as well as for creating and maintaining their social networks. 
Web2.0 is turning mobile. Users’ communication threads 
may 
include 
both 
synchronous 
and 
asynchronous 
communication that may not have clear temporal start and 
end points. The number of participants may vary during a 
single communication thread.  
Digital interruptions and related disruptions have been 
extensively studied in the desktop world. In the desktop 
environment, the interruptions disrupt digital activities, as 
the user is working with PC and is rarely doing other 
activities. However, interruptions in mobile and ubiquitous 
environments interrupt us in our everyday tasks such as 
sleeping, working or enjoying the opera. Therefore, design of 
interruptions for mobile and ubiquitous communication 
technology requires special research and design attention.  
On a related work from the desktop context, Jackson et 
al. [8] have studied the effect that the incoming flow of 
emails has in people’s work efficiency. They found out that 
the way most users handle incoming email causes far more 
interruption than what is commonly assumed. The common 
reaction to the arrival of an email message is not to delay the 
response to a time that is more convenient to the user but to 
react within six seconds. The time it took to recover from 
email interrupts and return to the interrupted work task at the 
original work rate was on average 64 seconds.  
All this multichannel information (over)flow creates a 
situation where the user’s attention is a valuable asset for 
which different channels have to compete. Some see 
attention as new currency for business and individuals [3].  
In our current research, we are looking at novel ways to 
minimize disruption in mobile devices. This paper explores 
issues that help in effective use and maintenance of the 
user’s attention level in a mobile environment. We first 
briefly look at theoretical models of attention in Section II. 
Then, in Section III we discuss the principles of minimizing 
disruption and maximizing comprehension that help in the 
design of alerts and notifications, and the tools that we have 
identified to support those principles. In Section IV, we 
describe use scenarios that exploit the principles and tools 
described in Section III. Finally, we draw conclusions and 
discuss possible future work in Section V. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
Attention is the cognitive process of selectively 
concentrating on one aspect of the environment while 
ignoring other things. Human attention is very complicated 
both psychologically and physically. Current understanding 
of attention divides it into several phases and concurrent 
processes that co-operate in complicated ways. A clinical 
model by Sohlberg and Mateer [13] divides attention into 
five classes with growing difficulty of execution: 
 
Focused attention: responding discretely to specific 
visual, auditory or tactile stimuli.  
 
Sustained attention: maintaining a consistent 
behavioral response during continuous and repetitive 
activity.  
 
Selective attention: maintaining a behavioral or 
cognitive set in the face of distracting or competing 
stimuli.  
 
Alternating attention: shifting the focus of attention 
and moving between tasks with different cognitive 
requirements.  
 
Divided attention: responding simultaneously to 
multiple tasks or multiple task demands.  
An investigative model by Posner and Fan [10] includes 
the following attentive networks that coexist in the human 
brain:  
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Alerting network: perceiving an incoming stimulus, 
which leads to a state of raised alertness.  
 
Orienting network: selecting relevant information 
from the stream of incoming stimuli, i.e., focusing 
attention to the sensory events.  
 
Executive network: exercising voluntary control 
over thoughts, feelings and actions, in order to 
maintain behavioral goals, i.e., maintaining attention.  
Posner and Fan’s model corresponds to the typical steps 
taken when the user switches tasks in the mobile context: 1) 
the user is alerted to pay attention to an event, 2) she orients 
her attention towards understanding what it is about, and 
then 3) decides how to respond and discards or executes the 
related task. As a simple example, the user pays alert 
attention when she hears the beeping of the phone and 
flashing of an email icon on the device screen. At a suitable 
moment, she then orients her attention to check the 
information content of the alert, e.g., sender and the topic of 
the email. Executive attention comes to action when she 
starts reading and processing the content. Each of these three 
attentive networks has its own role in the attention process 
and they can act simultaneously. 
III. 
MINIMIZING DISRUPTION, MAXIMIZING 
COMPREHENSION 
Alert and notification design needs to balance between 
minimizing the caused disruption and at the same time, 
maximizing comprehension. A notification causes an 
interruption, which may cause disruption to whatever the 
user is doing. The level of disruption depends on several 
things, e.g., user context, how focused the user is on her 
current task, how strong the notification signal is, how 
similar the notification is to the current task, and what 
interaction modality (sound, visual, vibration, etc.) is used 
for the notification. 
The user interface (UI) and the notification itself should 
support the user in responding to the notification in an 
appropriate manner. Response options should be clearly 
presented, and the desired action should be easy to perform. 
Similarly to alerts and notifications, also the execution of 
user responses can be designed to disrupt as little as possible, 
giving the user the possibility to continue with the primary 
task as smoothly as possible. 
Alerts and notifications cause interruption (prompting 
transition and reallocation of attention focus) that can cause 
disruption. For the user, the disruption can mean the 
following: 
 
It draws the user’s attention away from current 
activity. 
 
It requires cognitive processing and/or physical 
activity. 
 
It makes it difficult to return to the primary task. 
Additionally, in mobile environments the mobile device 
can interrupt and disrupt not only the user of the device, but 
also other people that are physically or virtually nearby. This 
can create socially challenging (e.g., embarrassing) situations 
and tension. 
Notification cues that take into account the needs of both 
the user as well as other people in the vicinity of the user are 
both subtle and public [5]. Successful subtle and public cues 
can help avoiding attention overload and misinterpretations 
in social context. Often they enable a combination of 
different kinds of notification cues, including new ways for 
devices to notify their users that also enable people to 
express themselves in various ways. 
The following tools can be identified in minimizing 
disruption and maximizing comprehension of notifications 
and alerts: 
 
Filtering 
 
Choosing modality 
 
Interruptibility status of others 
 
Attentive UI, and 
 
Support for task switching. 
In the following paragraphs, we will discuss these tools 
in detail. 
Filtering can be done by setting priorities and rules on 
the handling of notifications. Simple examples are the rules 
to filter spam out of incoming emails and directing certain 
emails to different folders [11]. One might also control the 
rhythm of the information flow, e.g., by having clear 
intervals between non-urgent notifications so that the user is 
not disrupted continuously, and thus is able to concentrate on 
her primary task more efficiently. The eWatch system [12] is 
a wrist watch with vibration motor and sensors. This 
wearable device is aware of user activities and context. It 
combines an interruptibility measure, email priority level, 
and cybersensor data to decide how and when to notify the 
user. 
Choosing modality of the notification cue according to a 
person’s context or foreground task. The device could 
identify user’s context, for example, according to measured 
ambient noise levels or usage level based on time since the 
user’s last interaction with the device, and choose the most 
optimal modality to present notification cues. Also, research 
suggests that the notification creates most disruption if it is 
very similar to the modality of the foreground task [4], e.g., 
when the user is in the middle of the conversation, speech 
cues would be more disruptive than, for example, visual 
color coded cues.  
Brown and Kaaresoja [2] have investigated vibrotactile 
messages that communicate multidimensional information in 
mobile phone alerts. They enable communication of more 
information through phone alerts, information to be 
communicated discretely without disturbing others, and 
alerting users in noisy environments.  
Ambient soundscape by Jung and Schwartz [9] subtly 
notifies mobile users in a multi-user environment by offering 
an artificial sound environment and ambient notification 
service. For example, an incoming email is announced by 
enhancing background music with a personal non-speech 
audio cue (favorite notification instrument) that is played 
from the loudspeakers near the user’s current position with 
increased volume. The service avoids distraction of other 
people, increases privacy and confidentiality, and prevents 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the audio cue to be identified as a notification cue by 
outsiders. 
Interruptibility status of others. Users of mobile phones 
tend not to be aware of the status of interruptibility of the 
person they are trying to contact. There is also limited 
freedom in choosing alternative channels of interruption, and 
channels that do exist do not allow for any subtlety of 
expression. The system could set the appropriate notification 
level, e.g., message, vibration, private knock or public ring, 
of the user’s cell phone and also show the user’s level of 
haste [14]. This profile would then be available to the users’ 
contact network, thus helping callers to choose an 
appropriate level of interruption. 
Attentive UI. With Attentive UI, the device exploits the 
measurement of user’s attention level and focus. It can, e.g., 
alert the user for a non-urgent notification only when it 
realizes the user is not concentrating on another task and 
after that show more information on the location where the 
user’s attention is focused. The concept of attentive UI is 
utilized in AuraOrb [1]. It is an ambient notification display 
that uses social awareness cues, such as eye contact to detect 
user interest in an initially ambient light notification. Once 
detected, it displays a text message with a notification 
heading visible from any direction. Touching the orb causes 
the associated message to be displayed on the user’s 
computer screen. When user interest is lost, AuraOrb 
automatically reverts back to its idle state. 
Support for the switching between the old and the new 
task, i.e., for alternating attention. Recovery tools can help 
the user to re-focus attention easier and faster. These tools 
can include, for example, visual indicators of occluded 
application windows, saving and displaying task context at 
the time of disruption, and playback of actions [7]. 
We next describe use scenarios that exploit the principles 
and tools described above. 
IV. 
MOBILE SCENARIOS 
The first scenario described below, “Gaining User 
Attention”, supports subtle alerting. The second scenario, 
“Supporting task switching”, helps the user orient on the new 
task and rapidly switch to the Execution Attention mode. 
A. Scenario: Gaining User Attention 
Angela is meeting her friends, with her monoblock phone 
in her pocket when a message arrives (Fig. 1). The phone 
recognizes that she has the phone in a tight pocket and thus 
vibrates gently, in a sequence that indicates it’s a non-urgent 
message and not, e.g., a phone call. If she had baggy trousers 
the skin contact would be weaker and the vibration would be 
stronger. 
At her convenience, Angela picks up the phone. The 
device recognizes that it is been held in hand, and checks if 
there is a face in the view of its camera, eyes facing the 
phone. If this is the case the device automatically displays 
the message details. 
In a variation of this scenario, Peter is in a meeting, with 
his foldable phone opened up on the table. A message 
arrives. The phone beeps quietly and changes its screen 
color. Peter recognizes that a message arrived but is in the 
middle of a lively discussion. After a few minutes there is a 
suitable micro break and Peter looks at the phone. With its 
secondary camera facing Peter, the device recognizes the 
gaze and displays message details. 
Additionally, if the device has enough processing power 
and good-enough camera to identify that the gazer is Peter, 
this would add security to the system as the message would 
not be shown to others that might glance at the device 
display. 
B. Supporting task switching 
Jill is in the middle of editing a Smiley image when her 
business acquaintance John calls. On display (Fig. 2), Jill 
sees 
pointers 
to 
John’s 
business 
information, 
her 
correspondence with John as well as the document she 
wanted to discuss with her next time they speak. Just by 
glancing at all this, she gets better oriented back to her 
business with John. If she desires so, before answering she 
can also use a precious moment to open and check some 
related data. This can be done fast since everything is readily 
available behind the shown links. 
After the call, Jill switches back to her image editing. But 
now she is disoriented as her mind still wanders on what she 
discussed with John. To help her orient back into her 
previous task the device shows on the screen an animation of 
the last edits she made (Fig. 3). Now her thoughts are back to 
her previous task 
 
Figure 1.  Gaining and recognizing user attention. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Associative UI. 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 3.  Animating last edits of user’s disrupted task. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To tackle the mobile multichannel information overflow, 
we have shown examples about how user attention can be 
supported at different stages of task switching and execution. 
In our future work we wish to extend the tools described in 
Section III and their usage in the mobile environment. 
We would also like to better understand the pitfalls in the 
user experience of these technologies. For example, on one 
hand, due to its appeal to the basic instinct of survival 
humans have a natural inclination to seek for moving, bright, 
eye-catching, and rapid access to information even if it 
distracted them. Even when we know what is best for us we 
do not always act accordingly, as is demonstrated, e.g., by 
Jackson’s observation [8] that most people let the constant 
flow of email distract their work, or by the common habits of 
smoking and unhealthy diet. On the other hand, being 
focused requires effort, willpower and practice, and we 
easily loose our attention to spontaneous thought. Designers 
of attentive UI’s may face a problem of balancing between 
calm and attentive UI’s that allow us to focus, and our 
natural inclination for craving constant stream of new, 
mobile and flashy interruptions that create the illusion of 
being connected and informed, but at the same time corrupt 
our possibilities to concentrate and focus. 
In this paper, we have focused on switching from one 
task to another. In the future, we would also like to study 
divided attention, i.e., how to support situations where 
people wish to simultaneously execute multiple tasks.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We gratefully acknowledge the support to our work from 
the following sources: Nokia Corporation and, at Oulu 
University of Applied Sciences, both Focus Area of Internet 
and ICT (Mr. Kimmo Paajanen) and the InnoMajakka 
project (Ms Sanna Oja), funded by the European Social Fund 
of the European Union. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Altosaar, M., Vertegaal, R., Sohn, C., and Cheng, D. (2006) 
AuraOrb: Social Notification Appliance. Proc. ACM SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 
2006, April 22-27, Montréal, Québec, Canada, pp. 381-386.  
[2] Brown, L.M. and Kaaresoja, T. (2006) Feel Who’s Talking: 
Using Tactons for Mobile Phone Alerts. Proc. ACM SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 
2006, Montréal, Québec, Canada, pp. 604-609.  
[3] Davenport, T. and Beck, J. (2001) The Attention Economy: 
Understanding the New Currency of Business, Harvard 
Business School Press.  
[4] Gillie, T. and Broadbent, D. (1989). What makes interruptions 
disruptive? A study of length, similarity, and complexity. 
Psychological Research (50), pp. 243-250.  
[5] Hansson, R. (2001) Subtle and Public Notification Cues for 
Mobile Devices. Proc. Ubiquitous Computing: International 
Conference, Ubicomp 2001, Atlanta, Ga, USA. Springer. Pp. 
240–246.  
[6] Hudson, S.E. and Smith, I. (1996) Electronic Mail Previews 
Using Non-Speech Audio. Proc. ACM SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 1996, 
Vancouver, Canada., pp. 237–238.  
[7] Iqbal, S. and Horvitz, E. (2007) Disruption and Recovery of 
Computing Tasks: Field Study, Analysis and Directions. Proc. 
ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems CHI 2007, San Jose, California, USA, pp. 677 – 686.  
[8] Jackson, T. W., Dawson, R., and Wilson, D. Understanding 
email interaction increases organizational productivity. 
August 2003/Vol. 46, No. 8 Communications of the ACM. 
pp. 80-84  
[9] Jung, R. and Schwartz, T. (2007) A Location-Adaptive 
Human-Centered Audio Email Notification Service for Multi-
user Environments. Human-Computer Interaction, Part III, 
Proc. 12th International Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction HCII 2007, Beijing, China, pp. 340-348.  
[10] Posner, M. I. and Fan, J. (2001) Attention as organ system. J. 
Pomerantz 
(ed), 
Neurobiology 
of 
Perception 
and 
Communication: From Synapse to Society the IVth De Lange 
Conference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
[11] Röcker, C., Bayon, V., Memisoglu, M., and Streitz, N. (2005) 
Context-Dependent Email Notification Using Ambient 
Displays and Mobile Devices. Active Media Technology 
2005 (AMT 2005), pp. 137-138.  
[12] Smailagic, A., Sieworek, D., Maurer, U., Rowe, A., and Tang, 
K. (2005) eWatch: Context Sensitive System Design Case 
Study. Proc. IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on 
VLSI, ISVLSI 2005, pp. 98-103.  
[13] Sohlberg, M. M. and Mateer, C. A. (2001) Cognitive 
Rehabilitation: An integrative neuropsychological approach. 
New York: Guilford Press.  
[14] Vertegaal, R., Dickie, C., Sohn, C. and Flickner, M. (2002) 
Designing Attentive Cell Phones Using Wearable EyeContact 
Sensors. Proc. ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems CHI 2002, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
USA, pp. 646-647. 
 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

