Colourful Privacy 
Designing visible privacy settings with teenage hospital patients 
Maja van der Velden 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
majava@ifi.uio.no 
Margaret Machniak 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
margarma@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—The paper reports from a qualitative study based on 
the analysis of semi-structured interviews and Participatory 
Design activities with hospitalised teenagers with chronic 
health challenges. We studied how teenage patients manage 
their online privacy, with a focus on the design and use of 
privacy settings. We found that the majority of participants 
preferred to visualise privacy settings through the use colours 
and to personalise access control. They also considered these 
necessary on more secure patient-centred social media. As 
proof of concept, we implemented some of the findings in a 
patient social network setting. We conclude that visualising 
and personalising privacy settings enable young patients to 
have more control over the sharing of personal information 
and may result in a more effective use of privacy settings. In 
addition, privacy-aware default settings may prevent teens 
from unintended sharing of personal information. 
Keywords-Facebook; participatory design; patient social 
media; privacy settings; teenage patients; visualisation of privacy 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
From a developmental perspective, the teenage years (12-
18 years old) are characterised by a quest for identity, 
independence, and autonomy [1]. New digital technologies, 
such as social media and mobile phones, are described as 
supporting this quest [2], [3]. These technologies are 
therefore now also explored as platforms to provide support 
to teenagers who are dealing with chronic health challenges, 
such as diabetes, asthma, cancer, chronic organ diseases, rare 
diseases, etc. There is a growing interest in the design and 
development of new applications, and several initiatives 
actively involve young patients in the design process [4]–[9]. 
 Chronically ill teens are born with a medical condition 
or they develop such a condition during their childhood or 
their teenage years. More and more children born with 
chronic diseases survive into their adult years [10]. As a 
result, the teenage years are seen as a transition period, in 
which teens begin to take more responsibility for the 
treatment and other activities required by their diagnosis 
[11]. They may therefore have additional information and 
communication needs and interests because of their chronic 
diagnosis and treatment. 
In Participatory Design, new interactive technologies are 
not only designed for young patients – they are designed 
with them [9], [12], [13]. Designing with young patients and 
other vulnerable users is perceived as difficult as additional 
ethical issues may arise because of particular circumstances 
[14], [15], or it may be difficult to include teenage patients 
because of self-esteem or identity issues [16]–[18].  
In our study, we met teenage patients while they were 
receiving treatment in the hospital. This decision was based 
on our earlier experiences in research with teenage patients. 
In a 2011 field study, we looked among other things at the 
use of a closed social network for young patients in Canada 
[18], which was often only accessible from a computer 
inside the hospital. An user account could only be obtained 
from hospital staff. In order to meet some of the users, we 
needed to implement the study in one of the participating 
hospitals. 
 We were especially interested in understanding how 
teenage patients practice privacy on social media. The 
practice of privacy can be understood as an expression of 
their autonomy [19]. We found that many teens don’t discuss 
their diagnosis and treatment with their friends and followers 
on social media. The reason for this was that they often tried 
to be “normal” or “regular” teens [18], [20]. Being 
chronically ill wasn’t something they would discuss in social 
media or sometimes not even outside the physical 
surroundings of the hospital or the security of the direct 
family: 
“I guess I just pretend I am normal and I don't have it 
when I am outside the hospital.” (girl, 17 yrs.) 
“I like to be as regular as I can, so I don't want to talk 
about it.” (boy, 13 yrs.) 
We explained this as a form of self-protection and self-
presentation [19]. For the outside world, the teens separate 
their identity as patient from their identity as teenager. Thus, 
we decided to implement the new study again in the 
Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO). In order to 
meet the teens as patients, we needed to meet them where 
they felt secure to talk from a patient perspective. 
This study is part of a larger research and design project 
called KULU [21]. The objective of KULU is to support 
young patients (12 – 25 yrs.) with chronic health challenges 
in their autonomy. One of the KULU projects is the design 
of a closed social network for teenagers with chronic health 
challenges. In this paper we present and analyse the design 
of privacy settings for such a social network. The rest of the 
paper is as follows: In the next section, we briefly discuss 
some of the research done on this topic. In Section III, we 
describe our methodology, methods, and some of the 
challenges we encountered. In Section IV, we present our 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

findings, which we discuss in Section V. In Section VI, we 
implement some of the findings in a prototype for a closed 
social network for teenage patients. In the final section we 
present our conclusion and future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The use of personal health information is regulated by 
national policies and guidelines in order to prevent 
inappropriate use. Social media and other online sites 
seriously challenge this regulation: patients voluntarily share 
their health information online to gain advice and support, or 
to support others [22], while some medical personnel post 
images of patients or discuss particular cases with colleagues 
[23]. Insufficient use of a system’s privacy settings, or the 
copying of information to a site with a less restrictive privacy 
policy, 
may 
unwantedly 
disclose 
sensitive 
health 
information. This may affect the patient’s access to work, 
insurance, and relationships [24].  
A. Design of privacy settings 
There is a large body of literature reporting on privacy 
management, privacy practices, and privacy settings on 
social networking sites, e.g., [25]–[28], but only a small 
portion has the design of privacy settings as its focus [29]–
[33]. Privacy settings on social networks are the 
customisable options and technologies that regulate the 
accessibility of personal data to other users and to third 
parties. In this context, privacy can be defined as “a set of 
practices in negotiating the public and private divide” [29]. 
The design of privacy settings of social networks thus refers 
to the design of options and technologies that enable users to 
negotiate this divide. Existing patient social networks, such 
as Upopolis, PatientsLikeMe, and Mayo Clinic Connect 
don’t use (customisable) privacy settings. 
B. Visualising privacy through use of colours 
Only a few studies address the use of colours to visualise 
privacy levels to users of Internet services [34]–[36].  
PrivacyDefender, now discontinued, introduced as a 
Facebook app in 2010, helped Facebook users to understand 
their privacy settings, but is no longer available [34]. C4PS, 
now discontinued, was a Firefox browser plug-in using 
colours to help represent privacy settings on Facebook [32]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This study takes a qualitative approach towards the study 
of teenage patients, social media, and privacy and is guided 
by the following questions: 
• 
Can design interventions support teenage patients in 
managing their privacy settings? 
• 
Does a closed social network for young patients 
need privacy settings? 
A. Participatory Design 
This study is based on Participatory Design principles 
[37], [38]: 
• 
Those who will use the technology should have a 
voice in the design 
• 
Mutual learning between users and designers based 
on their respective skills, interests, values 
• 
Starting the design process in the practice of the 
users 
We build forth on the teens’ existing social networking 
experiences and skills by using examples from Facebook. 
B. Ethical challenges 
In the study we adhered to the research ethics and 
privacy requirements stipulated by the Norwegian Data 
Inspectorate and the Research Ethical Board of CHEO. 
There were two additional ethical challenges we needed to 
deal with, on-going consent and parents. On-going consent is 
especially important in situations in which the participant is 
not able to leave the research setting without help. Secondly, 
most of the teens were accompanied by a parent or other 
adult relative. The Youth Council of CHEO reminded us to 
ask the teens if they wanted their parent(s) present or not. 
C. Logistical challenges 
The particular way in which hospital patients were 
recruited for the study had an important effect on the design 
of the study. It was known from the onset that we could not 
count on more than 30-40 minutes contact time with a 
patient and that we would meet each teen individually. The 
majority of meetings took place in a treatment room in the 
polyclinic or a patient room on one of the wards. In all these 
cases, the teens were lying in bed and the majority was 
receiving intravenous treatment while participating in the 
study. This means that they weren’t mobile and had minimal 
use of one arm. 
The rooms were furnished with hospital tables, which 
could be used for design activities. The size of the tables was 
40 x 80 cm and could be installed over the bed. The tables 
had to be used for the audio equipment of the researcher, to 
record the session, and storage and use of design materials. 
The table had to be movable at all times, in order to make 
room for hospital staff. The design materials themselves 
needed to be made of materials that could be disinfected 
when they were used by different patients. 
TABLE I.  
SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW 
Interview themes 
1. Technology used in the hospital (mobile phone, 
laptop, etc.) 
2. Favourite sites or things to do on the Internet 
3. Age when starting to use Facebook 
4. Do you know your privacy settings?  
5. Does a closed social network for young patients 
need privacy settings? 
D. Methods 
The limited contact time, small workspace, and the need 
to be flexible in terms of being able to pack things up 
quickly, if needed, affected our choice of methods. We used 
semi-structured questions and re-design activities based on 
paper prototypes as our main methods: 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

1) Semi-structured interviews 
The interview was based on a set of questions that would 
support the analysis of the paper prototyping (see Table I).  
 
2) Paper prototyping 
 We based the prototyping activities on the example of an 
existing social network site (Facebook). The first activity 
was the comparison of three options for locating privacy 
settings. The first one was the existing situation and the two 
others presented possible new situations. The comparison 
was presented as a game (see Fig. 1), which was used to 
elicit a discussion about the visibility of privacy settings. 
The second activity was prototyping privacy settings, 
with a focus on access control: Who on Facebook can see 
your status update? The participants were introduced to 
using colours to make privacy settings visible. They were 
given a box with 12 colours and a paper-based image of a 
status update window. The first image showed the status 
update window in Facebook. The second image showed the 
status update window in which the privacy settings were 
made visible through colours and through self-assigned 
levels of access. The colours were based on the colour 
scheme designed by [32]. The participants could use the 
same colours or personalise the colour scheme. 
This prototyping exercise was used to investigate if 
colours and groups could support the management of their 
privacy settings. The teens could use Facebook’s existing 
accessibility settings (e.g., ‘friends-only’, ‘friends-of-friends’ 
etc.) or customise these settings so they would better fit their 
own preferences. We also discussed the need for privacy 
settings for a closed social network for young patients. 
E. Recruitment and participants 
The recruitment of the teenage patients participating in 
the study was undertaken by the Child Life Specialists of 
CHEO. They knew the teens personally or they could consult 
their doctor or nurse. Teens were recruited from the wards 
and from the medical day clinic. They needed to be well 
enough to participate in a 30 to 40 minute meeting with the 
researcher. They would receive a leaflet with information 
and a consent form. The leaflet mentioned that the interview 
is anonymous, that the teen’s diagnosis is not a topic in the 
interview, and that the researcher has no access to the teen’s 
medical file. Both participant and researcher would sign the 
consent form. If the teen was younger than 16 years old, a 
parent also had to sign the consent form.  
F. Sample size 
In qualitative research, sample sizes differ widely. It is 
perceived as acceptable to have a small sample size, between 
4 and 10 in studies with participants with impairments or 
other vulnerabilities [39], [40]. In this study, sixteen 
teenagers participated in the study: nine girls and seven boys. 
Their ages were between 14 and 18 years old. They 
participated in the study in the autumn of 2012, while 
receiving treatment in the hospital. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Technology and Internet use in the hospital 
All participants brought their personal technologies to the 
hospital. In addition, some patients used equipment provided 
by the hospital (see Table II). 
TABLE II.  
TECHNOLOGIES IN USE 
Technology 
Owned by 
patients 
Owned by 
CHEO 
Used for 
Internet 
Mobile phone 
16 
 
15 
Laptop 
6 
2 
2 
MP3/4 player 
6 
 
1 
Tablet 
1 
 
1 
Video game  
1 
2 
 
Computer 
 
1 
1 
DVD player 
1 
 
 
 
Facebook and Twitter were the most popular social 
media. All 16 teens were active on Facebook and nine had a 
Twitter account. Fifteen out of the 16 Facebook users used 
their smart phones to receive Facebook notifications and to 
check their Facebook account while in the hospital. 
In order to start a Facebook account, the user needs to 
confirm that s/he is 13 years old or older. Eight of the 16 
teens answered they lied about their age when they registered 
for their Facebook account. Four of them said they were 13 
 
Figure 1. Spot the difference 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

years and four teens said they were adults, i.e. over 18 years 
old, while they were all 11 or 12 years old. 
B. Privacy settings 
Most teens changed their privacy settings only after they 
started using Facebook. The majority has Friends-only as 
privacy settings (11), while 3 teens have Friends-of-friends 
and one teen had Public. One teen had closed down her 
Facebook account, and was using her boyfriend’s account. 
Many of the teens were concerned with having the right 
privacy settings. They would check regularly or find had 
other tactics to make sure they knew what they were: 
“I’ve set them up, but I’ve heard you can make it much 
more complicated and complex and I read this article about 
it and it seems very difficult and hard to understand. I don’t 
really find it easy to use [them]” (girl, 14 yrs.) 
“It is not difficult to get your privacy settings the way you 
like” (girl, 16 yrs.) 
“I only post if it is for everyone to see and I just keep 
everything I post on Facebook to a minimum so if everyone 
sees it it’s not like I’m showing like myself to the entire 
world” (girl, 14 yrs.) 
C. Making privacy visible 
Many teens needed some time to spot the difference 
between the real situation and the two designed options for 
locating privacy settings. All but one participant preferred a 
more visible privacy settings button on all Facebook pages: 
“I already have my privacy settings done, but if I was 
joining a new social networking program and it had that 
button, I would definitely click on it” (boy, 17 yrs.) 
“Because it makes people more aware of their privacy 
and makes them take initiative I guess you could say instead 
of it being an afterthought” (boy, 18 yrs.) 
In the case of prototyping privacy settings, all but one 
participant wished to use colours to make their privacy 
settings more visible and to dedicate one colour to one 
particular group of Facebook contacts. One teen was 
satisfied with how Facebook provided privacy settings for 
status updates.  
Fifteen teens chose to customise their privacy settings: 
“That would be cool to set them yourself. […]. I really do 
like the idea of personalising those colours” (girl, 17 yrs.). 
They created between 2 and 5 categories to organise their 
Facebook contacts: two participants created 2 categories; 
five participants created 3 categories; seven participants 
created 4 categories, and one participant created 5 categories.  
Fourteen out of 15 teens created a Public category and 
two teens created an Only me category. Most diversity was 
found in organizing friends. Eight teens created a Close 
friends category and eleven teens created a Friends category. 
Five teens had a Family category while one teen created a 
Friends without family and a Friends with family category. 
Five teens created a Custom category. This category allows 
the user to select names from the list with all friends. This 
customised list would change, depending on the content of 
the message (status update, photo, etc.) (see Table III). None 
of the teens used the colour scheme of the example; all 
preferred to personalise the colour scheme. The most popular 
colours were the same colours as used in the example, but 
they were used in combination with other colours.  
TABLE III.  
CATEGORIES 
Participants 
Categories 
14 
Public 
11 
Friends 
9 
Close friends 
5 
Family  
4 
Custom 
4 
Friends of friends 
2 
Only me 
1 
Friends and family 
D. Are privacy settings needed? 
Eleven of the sixteen participants were asked about the 
need for privacy settings in a closed social network for 
teenage patients. Ten mentioned that such settings were 
needed, “Oh, of course, there are some things you shouldn’t 
share obviously” (boy, 18 yrs.). 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Studies have shown that most teenagers with chronic 
health challenges don’t like talking about their experiences 
outside their direct family and best friends environment [18], 
[20]. It isn’t cool to be different. Teenage patients are careful 
sharing their personal health information in social media 
[18]. This was not different with this group of patients: 
“Last time I was in the hospital, I really didn’t want 
anyone to know what was going on because I didn’t want 
rumours to spread” (girl, 17 yrs.) 
The participants in the study were all interested in more 
immediate access to privacy settings (a large button) and 
simpler and transparent privacy settings. Several of the teens 
were not able to locate the privacy settings on Facebook, 
which (at that time) only became visible after selecting a 
very small triangle at the top of the page. 
Using colours to have an immediate and visible 
indication of one’s privacy setting before sharing a status 
update was perceived as very helpful and easy to understand. 
The chosen colour scheme could be used for a variety of 
purposes, such as visualizing access to one’s profile 
information, photos, etc. Many teens mentioned that they 
would like the option to personalise their Facebook page, 
which is not possible at the moment. Choosing one’s own 
favourite colours for privacy settings was therefore perceived 
as cool. Many of them wanted the same colour scheme for 
use in a closed patient social network. 
Although all 15 colour schemes were different, red, 
yellow, green, and blue were the most used colours. 
Interestingly, the colours red (5x) and green (6x) were both 
used to indicate the Public setting. In [32], which builds forth 
on the traffic light colour combination, the colour green is 
used to indicate Public. Some of the participants in our study 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

indicated that green meant ‘safe’, i.e. the opposite of Public: 
you know exactly who can read your posting. Some of the 
participants, who used the colour red for Public, understood 
this colour to mean ‘attention’: “I kind of see red as, eh, it’s 
something you should be a little more careful about” (g/16).  
There is a clear need for privacy-friendly default settings. 
Many of the teens lied about their age when they first started 
using Facebook. New Facebook users have to confirm that 
they are 13 years or older, and then provide their date of 
birth in the account settings. Users who were 13-18 years 
old, had Friends-of-friends as default settings and could 
changed this only into Friends-only. The Public setting was 
not available to this age group (this has changed in 2013). 
Those who used an age over 17 ended up with Public as 
default privacy settings. In addition, several of the 
participants have made mistakes on Facebook, sending a 
status update or photo to the wrong person(s). 
A. The meaning of colours 
Red, green, blue, and yellow, the four most popular 
colours for privacy settings, are chromatically unique colours 
and universal in terms of their colour terms [41], [42], but 
the associations with these colours differ widely [43]. The 
traffic light colour scheme (red, yellow, green) may have 
gained universal meaning in the context of traffic, but fails to 
do so in other contexts. The study made clear the 
contradictive meaning of the colours red and green in the 
context of the design of privacy. Colours should thus always 
be accompanied with a textual indication of their meaning in 
the particular context. 
B. Limitations of the study 
The particular context of this study, teenage patients in an 
hospital setting, marks the findings. The study offers 
meaningful insight into the privacy understandings and needs 
of this particular group of social media users. 
VI. 
PROOF OF CONCEPT 
We have implemented the findings of the study in one of 
our prototypes of a closed social network for teenagers with 
health challenges. Only three categories and three colours 
were used: Public, i.e. all users of the closed social network, 
(green), Friends (yellow), and Only me (red), see Fig. 2. The 
default privacy setting for all users is Only me. Users can 
configure these settings by selecting the large ‘Settings 
button’, visible on every page (see Fig. 2). The default 
setting for all status updates, photos, etc., always remained 
Only me, forcing the user to make a choice every time 
something new is shared with other users. The different 
settings can be applied to all types of content on the site as a 
response to higher privacy demands on a closed social 
network as opposed to Facebook. 
The prototype was evaluated by a group of teenagers in 
Norway, patients and non-patients. The teens appreciated the 
possibility to alter the privacy settings for each new piece of 
information. They especially liked the combination of overall 
settings, which could be altered using the ‘Settings button’, 
and the flexibility to choose the audience for each post in 
situ. 
The teens appreciated that all default settings were set to 
Only me. They elaborated that this was cool and gave them 
the feeling of control: they didn’t have to share anything 
about themselves if they didn’t feel like it. The participants 
thought that the choice of colour was appropriate, as the red 
colour indicating the Only me setting was more prominent 
and drew their attention to it. This applied only because the 
default setting was Only me and had to be changed in order 
for others to see the post.  The teens also suggested that the 
Only me settings could be used to expand the functionality of 
the site – the posts marked as Only me could for example 
function as a diary. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The 
combination 
of 
the 
participants’ 
Facebook 
experiences and skills and the researchers’ design skills 
resulted in privacy-aware designs for a closed social network 
for young patients: 
• 
A large button for configuring privacy setting 
• 
Privacy-aware default setting for sharing new 
information (status update, posting, photo) 
• 
Use of colours to visualise privacy settings 
Personalisation, being able to choose one’s own colours 
to visualise privacy settings, may motivate teens to use 
privacy settings more effectively.  
In our on-going research on the design of privacy 
settings, we focus on the use and meaning of colours. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Maja gratefully acknowledges the support of the Child 
Life Specialists of the Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario 
(CHEO) and Dr. Khaled El Emam, head of the Electronic 
Health Information Lab (EHIL) at the CHEO Research 
Institute, during the implementation of the study. We thank 
all participating teenagers for sharing their experiences and 
creativity. The study is funded with a research grant from the 
Norwegian Research Council. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Steinberg and A. S. Morris, “Adolescent Development,” J. Cogn. 
Educ. Psychol., vol. 2, no. 1, Jan. 2001, pp. 55–87. 
Figure 2. Proof of concept 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[2] 
C. Davies and R. Eynon, Teenagers and Technology. Hoboken: 
Taylor and Francis, 2013. 
[3] 
S. Livingstone, “Taking risky opportunities in youthful content 
creation: teenagers’ use of social networking sites for intimacy, 
privacy and self-expression,” New Media Soc., vol. 10, no. 3, Jun. 
2008, pp. 393–411. 
[4] 
M. J. Allsop, R. J. Holt, and M. C. Levesley, “The engagement of 
children with disabilities in health-related technology design 
processes: Identifying methodology,” Disabil. Rehabil. Assist. 
Technol., vol. 5, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1–13. 
[5] 
L. S. Franck and G. Noble, “Here’s an idea: ask the users! Young 
people’s views on navigation, design and content of a health 
information website,” J. Child Health Care, vol. 11, no. 4, Dec. 2007, 
pp. 287–297. 
[6] 
J C. M. Ruland, J. Starren, and T. M. Vatne, “Participatory design 
with children in the development of a support system for patient-
centered care in pediatric oncology,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 41, no. 
4, Aug. 2008, pp. 624–635. 
[7] 
A. R. Lang, J. L. Martin, S. Sharples, J. A. Crowe, and E. Murphy, 
“Not a minor problem: involving adolescents in medical device 
design research,” Theor. Issues Ergon. Sci., 2012, pp. 1–12. 
[8] 
E. Mazzone, J. C. Read, and R. Beale, “Design with and for 
disaffected teenagers,” in Proceedings of the 5th Nordic conference 
on Human-computer interaction: building bridges, New York, NY, 
USA, 2008, pp. 290–297. 
[9] 
A. Waller, V. Franklin, C. Pagliari, and S. Greene, “Participatory 
design of a text message scheduling system to support young people 
with diabetes,” Health Informatics J., vol. 12, no. 4, Dec. 2006, pp. 
304–318. 
[10] S. E. McLaughlin et al., “Improving Transition From Pediatric to 
Adult Cystic Fibrosis Care: Lessons From a National Survey of 
Current Practices,” Pediatrics, vol. 121, no. 5, May 2008, pp.1160-
l166. 
[11] S. T. Callahan, R. F. Winitzer, and P. Keenan, “Transition from 
pediatric to adult-oriented health care: a challenge for patients with 
chronic disease,” Curr. Opin. Pediatr., vol. 13, no. 4, 2001, p. 310. 
[12] D. M. Berwick, “What ‘Patient-Centered’ Should Mean: Confessions 
Of An Extremist,” Health Aff. (Millwood), vol. 28, no. 4, Jul. 2009, 
pp. w555–w565. 
[13] C. I. Reis, C. S. Freire, J. Fernández, and J. M. Monguet, “Patient 
Centered Design: Challenges and Lessons Learned from Working 
with Health Professionals and Schizophrenic Patients in e-Therapy 
Contexts,” in ENTERprise Information Systems, M. M. Cruz-Cunha, 
J. Varajão, P. Powell, and R. Martinho, Eds., Berlin, 2011, pp. 1–10. 
[14] A. R. Lang, J. L. Martin, S. Sharples, J. A. Crowe, and E. Murphy, 
“Not a minor problem: involving adolescents in medical device 
design research,” Theor. Issues Ergon. Sci., 2012, pp. 1–12. 
[15] A. L. Culén and M. van der Velden, “The Digital Life of Vulnerable 
Users: Designing with Children, Patients, and Elderly,” in Nordic 
Contributions in IS Research, M. Aanestad and T. Bratteteig, Eds. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 53–71. 
[16] P. Chira et al., “Living Profiles: Design of a health media platform 
for teens with special healthcare needs,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 43, 
no. 5, Supplement, Oct. 2010, pp. S9–S12. 
[17] R. Mack, E. Giarelli, and B. A. Bernhardt, “The Adolescent Research 
Participant: Strategies for Productive and Ethical Interviewing,” J. 
Pediatr. Nurs., vol. 24, no. 6, Dec. 2009, pp. 448–457. 
[18] M. van der Velden and K. El Emam, “‘Not all my friends need to 
know’: a qualitative study of teenage patients, privacy, and social 
media,” JAMIA, vol. 20, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 16–24. 
[19] M. van der Velden, “In/Visible Bodies. On patients and privacy in a 
networked world,” in Cultural Attitudes Towards Communication 
and Technology 2012, M. Strano, H. Hrachovec, F. Sudweeks, and C. 
Ess, Eds. Murdoch: Murdoch University, 2012, pp. 199–211. 
[20] M. A. Applebaum, E. F. Lawson, and E. von Scheven, “Perception of 
transition readiness and preferences for use of technology in 
transition programs: teens’ ideas for the future,” Int. J. Adolesc. Med. 
Health, vol. 25, no. 2, Jan. 2013, pp. 119-125. 
[21] “KULU” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.kulu.no/english.php. 
[Accessed: 07-Jan-2014]. 
[22] S. Fox, “Social Life of Health Information,” Pew Research Center 
[Online]. 
2011. 
Available 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports 
/2011/Social-Life-of-Health-Info.aspx [Accessed: 07-Jan-2014]. 
[23] T. Lagu, E. J. Kaufman, D. A. Asch, and K. Armstrong, “Content of 
Weblogs Written by Health Professionals,” J. Gen. Intern. Med., vol. 
23, no. 10, Oct. 2008, pp. 1642–1646. 
[24] C. L. Anderson and R. Agarwal, “The Digitization of Healthcare: 
Boundary Risks, Emotion, and Consumer Willingness to Disclose 
Personal Health Information,” Inf. Syst. Res., Apr. 2011, pp. 469-
490. 
[25] M. Anwar, P. W. L. Fong, X.-D. Yang, and H. Hamilton, 
“Visualizing Privacy Implications of Access Control Policies in 
Social Network Systems,” in Data Privacy Management and 
Autonomous Spontaneous Security, J. Garcia-Alfaro, G. Navarro-
Arribas, N. Cuppens-Boulahia, and Y. Roudier, Eds. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 106–120. 
[26] M. Madejski, M. Johnson, and S. M. Bellovin, “The Failure of Online 
Social Network Privacy Settings,” Columbia University Computer 
Science Technical Reports, 2011. 
[27] S. Z. Ibrahim, A. Blandford, and N. Bianchi-Berthouze, “Privacy 
Settings on Facebook: Their Roles and Importance,” in IEEE 
International Conference on Green Computing and Communications, 
2012, pp. 426–433. 
[28] M. Netter, M. Riesner, M. Weber, and G. Pernul, “Privacy Settings in 
Online Social Networks – Preferences, Perception, and Reality,” in 
2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS), 2013, pp. 3219–3228. 
[29] S. F. Gürses, R. Rizk, and O. Günther, “Privacy Design in Online 
Social Networks: Learning from Privacy Breaches and Community 
Feedback,” in ICIS, 2008, p. 90. 
[30] J. Ausloos, “Guidelines for Privacy-Friendly Default Settings,” 20-
Feb-2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://lirias.kuleuven.be/handle 
/123456789/416312. [Accessed: 11-Nov-2013]. 
[31] P. Kaur, “Designing User Centric Online Privacy,” in Aalto 
University, Seminar on Network Security, Fall, 2011, vol. 4, p. 83. 
[32] T. Paul, M. Stopczynski, D. Puscher, M. Volkamer, and T. Strufe, 
“C4PS - Helping Facebookers Manage Their Privacy Settings,” in 
Social Informatics, K. Aberer et al., Eds. Berlin: Springer, 2012, pp. 
188–201. 
[33] H. R. Lipford, G. Hull, C. Latulipe, A. Besmer, and J. Watson, 
“Visible Flows: Contextual Integrity and the Design of Privacy 
Mechanisms on Social Network Sites,” in International Conference 
on Computational Science and Engineering, 2009. CSE ’09, vol. 4, 
2009, pp. 985–989. 
[34] “Facebook Privacy Settings Made Easy with PrivacyDefender,” 
Walyou. [Online]. Available: http://walyou.com/facebook-privacy-
settings-privacydefender/. [Accessed: 21-Nov-2013]. 
[35] P. G. Kelley, J. Bresee, L. F. Cranor, and R. W. Reeder, “A ‘nutrition 
label’ for privacy,” in Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Usable 
Privacy and Security - SOUPS ’09, Mountain View, California, 2009. 
[36] Web of Trust, “Safe Browsing Tool | WOT.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.mywot.com/. [Accessed: 21-Nov-2013]. 
[37] J. M. Greenbaum and M. Kyng, Design at work: cooperative design 
of computer systems. Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1991. 
[38] J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, Routledge international handbook of 
participatory design. New York: Routledge, 2013. 
[39] D. J. Lazar, D. J. H. Feng, and D. H. Hochheiser, Research Methods 
in Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[40] I. Holloway and S. Wheeler, Qualitative Research in Nursing and 
Healthcare, 3rd ed. Oxford: John Wiley and Sons, 2010. 
[41] T. Regier, P. Kay, and R. S. Cook, “Focal colors are universal after 
all,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., vol. 102, no. 23, Jun. 2005, pp. 
8386–8391. 
[42] F. Ratliff, “On the Psychophysiological Bases of Universal Color 
Terms,” Proc. Am. Philos. Soc., vol. 120, no. 5, Oct. 1976, pp. 311–
330. 
[43] P. Russo and S. Boor, “How Fluent is Your Interface?: Designing for 
International Users,” in Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI 
’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 1993, pp. 342–347. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

