Resocialization and Metaphor of Social Networks 
Co-construct with the user relevance of relational technologies 
 
Treton Cécile 
Paris Est University 
Paris, France 
e-mail: Cecile.treton@paris.fr 
 
Bourret Christian  
DICEN IDF/-CNAM – UPEM (Paris Est University Marne-
la-Vallée) 
Paris, France 
e-mail: bourret@u-pem.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract— The subject of this publication focuses on the 
isolation problem. This can be considered a health and social 
problem since it has adverse health consequences to seniors. 
The objective of this research is to identify the relational 
patterns of the elderly in order to help recreate a network of 
relationships suited to their unique needs. The research 
method questions relationship dynamics, which include 
interactions with for example, alliances and desalliances, 
common points and affinities, meeting places including the use 
of social networks on the web. We study the new relational 
technologies around the notion of situation, described by Alex 
Mucchielli. The proposed work will rely on observation 
methods and interviews with isolated elderly. We want create a 
model of intervention which uses narrative methods for 
understand how the person built its social network. 
Keywords- ICT; social networks; isolated elderly; situation; 
frames; life stories; empathy; relational technologies 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The heat wave of 2003 and its consequences, 15 000 
deaths, revealed in France as well as in Europe the problem 
of the loneliness of the elderly in our urban societies. 
Social 
networks 
based 
on 
Information 
and 
communications technologies (ICT) can perhaps offer the 
means to rebuild a new social relation with the seniors, their 
entourage and their caregivers (actual or potential) to fight 
against loneliness.  
This is the central hypothesis of a work in progress and 
the major axis of a doctoral thesis that we would like to 
present in this paper. Our theoretical context of research uses 
Alex Mucchielli [1] theory about “situational semiotic” and 
the principles of “engaging communication” described by 
Françoise Bernard [2]. The text is composed of five parts: 
position and method, definition of the problem, and axis of 
research declined through three chapters: empathy, networks 
and socialization and forms of socialization. 
II. 
POSITION AND METHOD 
This work is in the field of Science of Information and 
Communication (SIC), as proposed by Françoise Bernard 
[2], which revolves around questions of meaning, 
relationships, knowledge and action. We have adopted a 
constructivist approach with reference to Jean-Louis Le 
Moigne [3] that considers social reality as constructed by the 
actors involved, with questions about social representations 
and interactions.  
We propose an approach of resocialization of isolated 
people, particularly the elderly, with the new relational 
technologies around the notion of situation, describe by Alex 
Mucchielli [1] like “situational and interactional semiotics”. 
Motivation for the action of an individual is built around 
different settings and contexts. We use narratives methods to 
understand how the elderly conceive friendly relationship. In 
order to facilitate the analysis, we will design a board with 
various criteria to define. A. Mucchielli proposed breaking 
down this situation, for background interpretation, into 
“frames”.   
These frameworks are defined intentions and perceived 
stakes by actors, culture and standards of reference (values 
and representations), their positioning in relation to other 
actors, the quality of relationships maintained, historical and 
current framework, sensory part. Previously, all different 
actors have been identified. 
Jean Jouet [4] explains that ICT change the social 
relationships and question of the planned, desired  ICT uses 
while questioning the logic of diversion or unforeseen uses.  
Our position of researchers is that defined by Nathalie 
Heinich [5] "commitment by neutrality": "engage in 
neutrality, produce action - not just knowledge - by 
highlighting coherence, logic, links, which, beyond the 
conflicts, make possible on at least a dialogue, and perhaps 
result in an inventive acceptable compromise "(analytical-
descriptive perception). This work is also aimed at 
professionals and volunteers. The principles of “engaging 
communication” described by Françoise Bernard [2] can 
help us to describe a method for changing perceptions.   
 
III. 
ISOLATION, A SOCIAL PROBLEM 
A study of the Fondation de France [6], points out a 
decline in the integrative capacity of family, friends and 
neighborhood networks. It focuses on increasing situations 
of loneliness, which affect the entire population, especially 
the elderly. Between 2010 and 2013, the share of individual 
isolation increased from 20% to 23%. The study considers a 
person to be isolated when she has little or no social relations 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

with any of five following social networks: family, 
professional, friendship, and territorial affinities. Loneliness 
is expressed by a feeling of boredom, loss of meaning of life 
and uselessness.  If loneliness can affect people with healthy 
relationships (4.1%), it is felt most when the person is alone 
(11.5%).  
Health experts point out that loneliness has consequences 
on the health of the person since it creates depression, 
hygiene problems, various somatic diseases. 
In response to this problem, public and private sectors  
focus on two types of intervention. The public sector focuses 
on the implementation of an organization that relies on 
communities of professionals or volunteers in a pre-
determinated, organized manners. The conclusions of 
Monalisa report [7] to Michelle Delaunay, Minister Delegate 
to the Minister of Social Affairs and Health, in charge of the 
elderly and autonomy in France, reflect this approach. It 
recommends a regular schedule of visits to old people by 
teams of local volunteers. The private sector develops 
technology solutions and telecommunication security, 
installed in the person's home. These are designed from the 
geolocation techniques and objects identification and 
telecommunications. These facilitate the transmission of 
messages and detect unusual movements (falls, etc.). 
Robotics, in the form of androids, are now being added to 
these technologies; they look similar to humans in order to 
facilitate human interaction. They reproduce the behavior 
and expressions, vocal inflections, and even are be able to 
move hands, etc. 
Both of these approaches are limited by their inability to 
take into account the complexity of the relationship, even if 
they can generate a network of solidarity and caregivers for 
the person alone or enhance interactions and alertness.  
Monalisa Report [7] states: "To overcome the lack of 
family relationships, friends or neighbors, people with loss of 
autonomy and who feel lonely, try to forge friendships with 
caregivers and housekeepers they did not choose and who 
must 
adopt 
professionals’ 
postures. 
This 
emotional 
dependence is rarely satisfactory and difficult to live on both 
sides”. 
Sometimes, the accumulation of interventions triggers the 
feeling of loneliness. Catherine Audibert [8] criticizes the 
services organization characterized by: "The fragmentation 
of cares" that "... not only does not permit therapeutic 
projection to a person of choice but keeps the patient in 
distress of loneliness." 
The organizational and technological can only formulate 
programmed models. They are limited they cannot adapt on 
a variety of cultural and social contexts, life stories and 
ruptures biographical, emotions and motivations of personal 
life. 
It appears that these models could be integrated into a 
more comprehensive approach, which reinstates the 
centrality of the individual. It seems necessary to ask about 
the problem of relational dynamics itself. From social ties to 
the emergence of friendly cooperation, it is question to build 
a relationship with expectations, needs, and values of the 
person. 
IV. 
OF FRIEND SHIPS TO EMPATHY 
The study of the forms of friendship not only reveals a 
kaleidoscope of elements but also and especially its vital 
necessity for humans. Claire Bidart [9] who studied the 
structuring contexts of friendship emphasizes the important 
role of identity projection in friendship: “The network of 
friends would reflect the multiple identities of being, in 
which relations can play their ambivalences, their identities 
ambiguities.” 
Friendship appears as a space of self-reflexion that 
allows us to exist in the eyes of others and gives us the 
opportunity to fully experience our intimate part. Catherine 
Audibert [8] highlights how emotional and elective 
relationship with a chosen person allows a "serene solitude" 
that is to say, freedom to "grow its own solitary garden." 
Friendship raises the relationship to oneself, through the 
other, as a participant in self-estime. The self-awareness with 
that part of intimacy, never revealed, is developed through 
the other one. It allows us to experience ourselves as existing 
in our uniqueness. 
Finally, Serge Tisseron [10] emphasizes the comforting 
aspect of friendship. He notes: "The more we move away 
from what we look like to go to what is different from us, the 
more psychological stability is testing." 
Friendship generates awareness of each other and by 
extension the sensation of an external world, with which one 
exist because, as Merleau Ponty [11] writes: "The world is 
not a subject, which I have the law of the constitution, it is 
the natural place and scope of all my thoughts and all my 
explicit perceptions (...) the man lives in the world, it is in 
the world he knows himself. ". 
Perceive the other is to understand and feel him. The 
relationship with the other enhances the emotional, affective 
and cognitive abilities. Serge Tisseron [10] says this 
empathetic knowledge is composed of four dimensions: “The 
ability to feel the emotions of others, the ability to have a 
mental representation of its thoughts, the tendency to 
imagine oneself as different characters reals or fictionnals, 
concern for the other, which mobilizes support behaviors.” 
From these initial observations, the approach would be to 
establish the basis for a reflection on the possibilities of 
reconstruction of relational models around the elderly. 
Older people are not without of these desires to 
communicate, but they prefer "elective" relations [8] in the 
sense that they are centered primarily on common affinities. 
About the needs of the elderly, Genevieve Arfeux-Vaucher, 
Director of Research at the National Foundation for 
Gerontology Paris, notes that: "It is more appropriate to 
speak of a social role rather than social ties”. 
V. 
CONTRIBUTION OF SOCIAL NETWORKS TO 
SOCIALIZATION 
We note the singular coincidence between the wishes of 
the elderly and those of websocial users. For Bernard 
Spiegler [12], the success of social networks (Facebook, 
Google +, web 2.0, sharing sites, etc.), shows relationships 
lacking in a highly individualized and fragmented society. 
Social networks are a necessary socializing invention. By 
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Leroi-Gourhan, Bernard 
Spiegler considers that 
the 
technology is anticipating needs. 
McLuhan [13] wrote: "Any extension of human faculties 
is the reaction to irritation caused by the environment and 
comes in the form of requirements (...) The new medium is a 
drug for the save in the social balance. » 
Bernard Spiegler [12] highlights how "relational 
technologies' answer inherent need for everybody to 
participate in the class. Philosopher Gilbert Simondon [14] 
considers that each individual part is connected to a 
"collective individuation," because "The unity of life is the 
whole group and not the isolated individual." 
Technologies are often perceveid as a factor of 
dissolution of social ties. This common perception is 
included in the Monalisa [7], which reports: “these 
precarious relationships are a (...) phenomenon associated 
with the rise of individualized behavior, (...), the role played 
by television Internet and at the expense of direct social 
relations ... ". 
Instead, Web 2.0 becomes vector relationships and 
interactions empathic level. Jeremy Rifkin [15] writes that 
through the mass use of social networks "... we learn that 
human nature is not to seek independence (...) but rather 
company, affection, and privacy. » He added: "The empathic 
approach is the existential awareness of the vulnerability we 
all share." 
VI. 
REDEFINING FORMS OF SOCIALIZATION 
We seek to redefine forms of resocialization of the 
elderly according to the individual requirement, personal 
relationships, taking into account their physical disabilities 
(loss of hearing, sight, the mobility, etc.) and their levels of 
vulnerability. 
I would be possible to consider a complementary 
approach based on formalization of social networks. 
It means to recognize the limits of the distance 
introduced by virtual communication but also to know its 
potential. Pierre Boutinet [16], with reference to Lucien Sfez 
[17] asks: "With communication, contrary to what happens 
in interpersonal relationships, finally the most important is 
the technical medium, which separate as it unites. This 
medium has a connected function tends to build screen 
playing fascination mirror game that transmitter and receiver 
each to his own loneliness. " 
This function makes necessary an analytical approach to 
direct and indirect relational modes in order to consider the 
degrees of relational opportunities depending on the chosen 
media and contexts observed. 
Bernard Stiegler [12] notes that social networks do not 
rely on deep friendships but increase the "relationships" or 
"vectors reputation", multiple “weaks links” made public in a 
"declarative".  They obey specific relational rules. In this 
context, the need for elective affinities should be 
reconsidered. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The objective of the paper is to consider scenarios of 
communication and interaction through social spaces defined 
by Catherine Delory-Momberger [18] “as spaces of growing 
together", which could be virtual and face to face. In the first 
case, the use of relational technologies may be required but 
appropriately integrating a set of elements related to lifestyle. 
In sum, our hypothesis is not so much to consider about the 
elderly a network of solidarity but to convince them to 
develop their own emotional network and reconstruct a 
confortable community, around their. Collecting data with 
narrative methods and analyzing it with tables based on 
different criteria can contribute to thinking of another way to 
consider the treatment of loneliness. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Muchielli, “Situation and Communication”, Ed. Ovadia, 
Nice, 2010, p.170.  
[2] F.Bernard, “ICT, 
discipline 
openness 
and 
decompartmentalization“, in A. Bouzon: “Organizational 
communication debate. Fields, concepts, perspectives”, Paris, 
L’Harmattan, 2006, pp. 33 - 46.  
[3] J.L. Le Moigne,  “Constructivist Epistemologies”, Ed. PUF, 
1995  
[4] J. Jouet, “Critical review of the sociology of uses, Networks”, 
n° 100 Paris, CENT / Hermès, 2000, pp. 487 – 521.  
[5] N. Heinich, “Committed to neutrality”, Communication 
issues, Records 3,  2006, pp. 83 – 96.  
[6] Study “Loneliness in France”, Fondation de France, Paris, 
June.2013.http://www.fondationdefrance.org/Outils/Mediathe
que/Etudes-de-l-Observatoire 
[7] J.F. Serres, “Recommendation for a national mobilization 
against social isolation of older people”, Report Monalisa, 
Paris, July 2013. 
[8] C. Audibert , “The inability to be alone, essay on love, 
loneliness and addiction”, Ed. Payot, Paris, 2008, pp. 98 - 
139.  
[9] C. Bidart,  “Friendship, social ties”, Ed. La découverte, Paris, 
1997.  
[10] S.Tisseron,  “Empathy in the heart of the social game”, Ed. 
Albin Michel, Paris, 2010, pp. 75.  
[11] M. Merleau Ponty,  “Phenomenology of perception”, Ed. 
Gallimard, Paris, 1945.  
[12] B.Stiegler, 
 “The 
most 
valuable 
at 
the 
time 
of 
sociotechnologies”, Social networks, Ed. FYP, 2012, pp.14-
36.  
[13] M. Mac Luhan,  “From eye to ear, the New galaxy” Ed. 
Hartubise, Montréal, 1977.   
[14] G.Simondon,  “The individual and his hysico-biological 
genesis”, Ed. Jérôme Milliam, Paris, 1997, pp. 156.  
[15] J. Rifkin,  “A new conscience for a world in crisis, to a 
civilization of empathy” , Ed. Actes Sud, 2011, pp. 33.  
[16] J.P. Boutinet, “The immaturity of adulhood”, PUF, Paris, 
1998.   
[17] L. Sfez ,   “Critical communication ”, Ed. Seuil, Paris, 1988. 
[18] C. Delory – Momberger,  “The subject in the city, social 
policies in the territories and spaces recognition”, Ed. Plein 
Feux, Paris, 2009. 
 
 
 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

