Design of an Interactive System for Immersive Movie Watching Experience 
 
Yaochi Liu, Tsai-Yen Li 
Computer Science Department 
National Chengchi University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
email: {lyc780226,li.nccu}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—As new technologies for creating digital contents are 
developing, more and more innovations about reading and 
listening are emerging. In film making, simple visual and audi-
tory effects may not satisfy the audience any more. Besides, as 
home entertainment systems are becoming more popular, peo-
ple see a movie not only in the theater but also at home. In this 
work, we present an interactive film watching system allowing 
a viewer to move her body in an intuitive way to change the 
viewing angle of the film as well as the development of the sto-
ry. The system aims at using ingenious content design and im-
mersive interaction to enhance user’s viewing experience. A 
regular computer with a webcam is used to detect the position 
of the user, which is then used to control the viewing angle of 
the video taken through a fish-eye lens. At some specific point 
in the story plot, different viewing angles would automatically 
determine the selection of different story branches, which can 
greatly increase the replay value of an interactive story. We 
have conducted an experiment to study the effectiveness of the 
system. Ten users were invited to experience our system. The 
evaluation result shows that most users agreed with the design 
idea and enjoyed the new viewing experience. We believe that 
the system provides a new way of communication between the 
storyteller/director and the audience. We hope that this pre-
liminary work can shed some lights on the future development 
of video-based interactive storytelling. 
Keywords- Movie Space; Immersive Experience; Human-
computer Interaction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the development of new multimedia technologies, 
“audience” behaviors are no longer limited by the traditional 
audio and video environments in the past. For example, sim-
ple visual and audial effects in a traditional theater cannot 
satisfy the audiences any more. Therefore, the design of wid-
er surround screen, such as the Image MAXimum (IMAX) 
screen and devices to stimulate multiple senses (such as 
movement and smell) has emerged to bring the audience’s 
experience to a next higher level.  
On the other hand, due to the increased network band-
width at home and the price drop of home entertainment sys-
tems, more and more people choose to watch a movie at 
home on a TV or on a computer [18]. Nevertheless, the 
watching experience at home is still not comparable with the 
one in a high-end theater because of the small watching 
screen. The dark environment in a theater helps the audience 
focus on the film, and the wide screen also makes people 
immerse into the scene more easily. Instead of changing the 
equipment and environment at home, in this research, we 
propose to design an interactive video watching system on a 
regular computer with contents of greater interactivity to 
enhance the immersion experience of an audience when she 
watches a movie on a small screen.  
Persson thought that interaction was the main difference 
between movie and digital space. That is, screen can become 
an interactive interface instead of a simple projection surface 
[12]. Recently, the meaning and definition of audience start-
ed to receive new attentions [10]. The discussions about sub-
jectivity of a film have changed the definition and behavior 
model of an audience. The transfer of authorship has made a 
passive audience become an active participant. The subjec-
tivity of a film now includes the participation of the viewer.  
Based on such a motivation, we hope to release the limi-
tation on the traditional imaginations about film [11]. We 
hope to allow the audience to view the film in an intuitive 
and interactive way such that the whole information of the 
film can be acquired through active interactions. With such a 
system, we cannot only create a new way to watch films, but 
also deliver deeper meaning through user participation.  
Therefore, the main objectives of this research include: 
(1) Implementing a good interactive mode to provide a 
narrative framework allowing a user to immerse in 
the film-watching experience. 
(2) Using computer vision techniques to see if the hu-
man-computer interaction can enhance the viewing 
experience and provide better enjoyment about the 
story. 
(3) Investigating how screen and space can be used to-
gether in digital media for storytelling and learning 
what kind of story could be more appropriate. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next 
section, we will review the work pertaining to this research. 
In Section III, we will describe the design and implementa-
tion details of our system. In Section IV, we will present the 
experiment that we have conducted to evaluate our system, 
and in Section V, we will analyze the results obtained in the 
experiment. In the last two sections, we will present the pos-
sible future extensions as well as the conclusion of the paper. 
339
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Our work pertains to previous research in immersive ex-
perience, content presentation in ‘Movie Space’, and Hu-
man-Computer Interactions (HCI) research on natural user 
interface. 
A. Immersive Experience 
Csikszentmihalyi was the first one to propose the theory 
of immersion. He regarded a person to be in an “immersion” 
state when he focused on the activities of a given scene by 
filtering out irrelevant noises [2][3]. Later researchers further 
remarked on the definition and considered immersion as the 
state when a user concentrated on the activity and enjoyed 
the process.  
Trevino and Webster extended Csikszentmihalyi’s work 
to consumer navigation on a digital system and proposed 
four properties in the state of immersion: [15] 
(1) Control: Individuals experienced the feeling of 
control not only on himself but also the interactions 
between human and computer.  
(2) Attention Focus: Attention was focused on an in-
volving activity. An individual’s focus can be nar-
rowed down by filtering out irrelevant thoughts and 
stimuli. 
(3) Curiosity: During the immersive state, an individu-
al’s sensory or cognitive curiosity can be aroused. 
(4) Intrinsic Interest: Individuals were involved in an 
activity for the pleasure and enjoyment it provided 
instead of for instrumental purposes only. 
Additionally, 
Hoffman 
and 
Novak 
thought 
that 
telepresence and interactivity were important because they 
could increase immersive experience [7].  
(1) Interactivity: Interactivity is about the cycling pro-
cess of multiple users performing listening, thinking, 
and speaking. Daniels regarded an Exemplary 
Viewer as an active participant in addition to pas-
sive viewer [4]. Webster et al. indicated that immer-
sion emerged through interaction with the computer 
[15]. Johnson and Wiles also pointed out that con-
trollability in a game brings positive affective expe-
rience [9]. 
(2) Telepresence: Presence is “the natural perception 
of an environment,” and telepresence is “the medi-
ated perception of an environment [5].” The more 
controllability on one’s movement and viewpoint, 
the more degree of presence [19]. In addition, it was 
reported that the sense of presence also elicited the 
feelings of a user [13]. 
B. Movie Space 
Movie space can be divided into ‘on-screen space’ and 
‘off-screen space’ [1]. On-screen space can be simply de-
fined as all you can see on the screen while off-screen space 
is more complicated because it allows a user to interact with 
the objects outside the screen and allows them to suddenly 
enter the screen to deliver some special meaning. The camera 
often represents the opinion of a narrator, and a shot is a way 
to deliver emotions to the audience. The techniques of shoot-
ing and camera movement, especially the composition of a 
shot, affect our perception of the narration in the story. Our 
system attempts to break the boundary between the off-
screen and on-screen spaces and solves the aspect-ratio prob-
lem when a movie is displayed on a different screen. 
C. Natural User Interface 
The definitions between 'Natural User Interface' and 
'Tangible User Interface' are often confused. A good way to 
distinguish the two could be on if the user is able to forget 
the existence of the interaction device after the user becomes 
familiar with it. In other words, a natural user interface be-
comes invisible to the user to a certain extent. An excellent 
interface design should allow a user to seamlessly move be-
tween the physical and virtual spaces without feeling the 
existence of the technologies [6][8]. For example, when a 
video camera is used in a system to perform image capturing 
and analysis, a user of such a system may often forget the 
existence of the camera and concentrate on the screen after 
some time of practice. This kind of interface can facilitate 
the sense of telepresence and immersion in a virtual envi-
ronment.  
Most of the previous interactive storytelling systems fo-
cused on the automatic generation of story contents based on 
user mouse selection and texts or speech inputs [14]. How-
ever, these types of interactions usually required a user to use 
a different modality other than simply viewing. Consequent-
ly, the switches of modality often affected the flow of view-
ing, which was the main modality in film watching [17]. 
Therefore, in this work, we hope that navigation in a digital 
space can be incorporated with the narrative of a film such 
that the enjoyment of film watching can be enhanced based 
on the interaction of the system. 
 
Figure 1.  Illustration of the proposed interactive system. Screen is like a window, through which the world is observed. 
340
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section, we will describe how the interactive mode 
for the immersive viewing experience is designed, what 
kinds of technologies have been used to facilitate the design, 
and how the movie is produced. 
A. Interactive design 
We hope that a user moves her body in a natural way to 
change her view angle interactively and to make a decision 
on how the story is branched. In other words, we hope that 
the development of the story, which was originally con-
trolled by the director, can be partially returned to the audi-
ence with the aim of enhancing the recognition of the story 
by the users. 
We view the computer screen as a window and the film 
content is what happens outside the window. From different 
viewing angles, one can see different parts of the world, as 
illustrated in Figure 1. The spaces inside and outside the 
window frame can then be blurred and merged. Traditional 
meaning of a shot through framing can be extended through 
interaction.  
Another important factor in such a system lies on the 
clever design of the content such that the scene inside the 
window is not complete and the actors move through the 
boundary of the frame. The design of the layout, viewing or 
moving directions of the actors, and the sound effects also 
play an important role in enhancing the sense of suspense to 
trigger the curiosity and peeping desire of the user for them 
to move their bodies to explore the space.  
Besides moving the body to change the viewing angle, at 
some branching point of the plot in interactive storytelling, 
the user can also use the viewing angle to select a specific 
branch, which is accomplished by attaching a separated film 
fragment that is deliberately designed for seamless transition. 
Consequently, a user may see different story plots at differ-
ent runs, which increase the replay value of a film. 
B. Hardware and Software 
A computer with a webcam is the only required equip-
ment in our system. We use computer vision technologies to 
detect the position of the viewer, and through the detected 
position, we interactively change the viewing angle of the 
film. Compared to tangible equipment and surround virtual 
environments, such as 3D CAVE, interacting with a web 
cam is not only cost effective but also intuitive. Nevertheless, 
the extent of the changes that can be made is somewhat lim-
ited. 
In our system, we have adopted a web-based approach 
with HTML5 technologies to increase the accessibility of the 
system. The image of the user captured through the web cam 
is acquired from the getUserMedia API and analyzed by the 
open source package, called clmtrackr , released by MIT. In 
this package, a user’s face is detected, and its position is de-
termined to select an appropriate streaming video fragment 
to display on a 3D plane implemented in WebGL [16]. The 
plane is then moved according to the detected face position 
of the user, as shown in Figure 2. In order to mimic the view-
ing effect of a human eye, we have implemented a nonlinear 
mapping between the viewing direction and the field of view. 
When the viewing direction is farther away from the central 
direction, the field of view also becomes wider. In addition, 
we have designed a light-weight test interface at the upper 
right corner of the screen, as shown in Figure 3, to check the 
face detection and system settings, and this interface can be 
hidden when the experiment is conducted. 
 
  
Figure 2. System flowchart 
 
Figure 3. A screenshot with the system diagnosis tool displayed. 
C. Movie Production 
The video used in the main experiment is five minute 
long, and the style is suspense. In addition to the main plot 
line, there are two branches in the story that can be used as a 
result of user interaction. This design of interactive narra-
tives is to increase the replay value of the film such that a 
user has a higher motivation to watch the film repeatedly.  In 
most of the footages in the film, we have used long shots to 
allow the users to have more time to digest the contents on 
the screen.  
 
Figure 4. Sample footage taken through a fisheye lens.  
 
341
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In the composition of the shots, we have tried to connect 
the on-screen and off-screen spaces to increase the possibil-
ity of communication between the film and the user. In order 
to facilitate the production of the film for a wider viewing 
angle, we have used a fish-eye lens to take the shots and ad-
justed distorted region of the shot through a post-production.  
As shown in Figure 4, the red rectangle is the initial view 
window and can be moved to a different position through 
user interaction. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
To understand the feasibility of our interactive mode de-
sign and user experience, we have designed a series of steps 
in our experiment as shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Experimental process diagram. 
A. Experimental Subjects and Location 
In order to understand the immersion of users during the 
interactive film viewing process, we have conducted experi-
ments with ten subjects. These users were selected by a pre-
test survey about their film watching habits, such as the fre-
quency of viewing a film at home and in a theater, to ensure 
that the subjects have a good span of user diversity.  
In order to create a film watching atmosphere at home 
while controlling the experimental settings, we have con-
ducted our experiments in a research laboratory as shown in 
Figure 6. The laboratory is decorated like a living environ-
ment such that the experiments can be conducted without 
disturbance and the participants can feel relaxed. In addition, 
the researchers can observe and analyze the behaviors of the 
participants through one-way mirror and a high-resolution 
video recording device. 
 
Figure 6.  Pictures comparing the behaviors of different participants in the 
interactive film viewing experiment. 
B. Experimental Process 
In the first step of the process, we gave the participants 
an instruction describing the experimental process in order to 
help them understand the purpose and operational notes.  
Before the formal experiments were started, we showed 
the participants a short film and allowed them to practice 
how to interact with the system by moving their bodies. 
When a participant felt confident about the interaction, she 
could initiate the formal experiment by herself. During the 
film viewing process, the researchers observed the partici-
pant’s behavior in a control room and recorded the whole 
session for further analysis. When the film ended, there was 
a “replay” button on the screen to allow the participant to 
watch the film again. The participants can watch the film as 
many times as they want.  
After the participants finished watching the film, a survey 
and interview session followed. The interview started with 
some pre-defined questions and was then followed by open 
discussions to understand their experience and suggestions. 
C. Questionnaire Design 
According to the reference and research purpose, we put 
together the elements related to immersive experience. We 
have used ‘The Antecedent of Immersion’ by Hoffman and 
Novak and ‘The Features in the Immersive State’ by Trevino 
and Webster to design the main schema of our questionnaire 
in the Likert 5-point scale (from 1 for “totally disagree” to 5 
for “totally agree”). The means and standard deviations of 
the scores for these questions were then calculated for further 
analysis. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULT AND ANALYSIS 
The user feedbacks are divided into two parts: content 
analysis and immersive experience.  
A. Content Analysis 
Most participants agree that the designs of actor’s sight 
(Figure 7), actor movement (Figure 8), cropped screen (Fig-
ure 9), and scene (Figure 10) affect a viewer’s behavior in 
watching the video.  
  
Figure 7.  Character's sight may be used to catch a viewer’s eyes.  
 
Figure 8.  A character moves from the on-screen space to the off-screen 
space. 
 
Figure 9.  The cropped video invites the viewer to change the view angle. 
342
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

As shown in Figure 10, a T-junction was used in a scene 
where the character tracked someone but got lost. He could 
turn left or right. If the user looks toward to left side, he will 
meet a stranger; otherwise, he will find a dumped garbage 
bag. In addition, the less complete a shot is, the more desire a 
user may have for moving her body. However, the infor-
mation in a shot cannot be too diverse such that the focus of 
what the director would like to show is lost. Furthermore, in 
the shot used for branch selection, it is important to give the 
user a strong motivation (e.g. with life threat events) to move 
her body and look around. 
 
Figure 10.  Scene design for different story development  
B. Immersive Experience Analysis 
In this section, we will analyze the questionnaire in two 
groups: ‘The Antecedent of Immersion’ and ‘Properties in 
the Immersive State.’ According to the experimental data, 
we have also conducted in-depth interviews with the users to 
acquire their feedbacks behind the questionnaire. 
TABLE I. THE ANTECEDENTS FOR ENTERING THE IMMERSION STATE. 
 
Question 
avg.
Interactivity 
There is no need to spend too much time to get 
familiar with the system. 
4.5
The interactivity of this system is interesting. 
4.5
The interactivity of this system is intuitive. 
4.1
The mode of operation of this system is smooth. 
3.5
Every shot design make me want to move my body 
to see the outer part. 
4.8
Every time the screen through my options is 
different, it makes me feel surprised. 
4 
Telepresence 
I think that the viewport is like my eyes. 
4 
Sometimes I feel myself in the scene when I 
watching the movie. 
3.3
Sometimes I think that I am one of the characters in 
the story when I watching the movie. 
2.8
 
As shown in Table I, in the interactivity section of the an-
tecedent conditions for immersion, most users consider our 
system as intuitive, interesting, and easy to understand. 
However, the user may get tired after some time of engage-
ment. It is suggested that the vertical movement may be re-
placed by leaning forward or backward for zooming in and 
out. 
In the section of telepresence, the scores we get are lower 
than the ones in the other section (especially for question #9). 
Some of the subjects consider that the window frame indeed 
may prevent them from entering the state of immersion. 
However, we think this may be improved by adopting more 
first-person shots in the cinematographic design. 
TABLE II. THE FEATURE METRICS IN THE IMMERSIVE STATE. 
Question 
avg.
Control 
10. I feel that I can freely manipulate the system. 
3.8
Attention Focus 
11. My perception of the external environment will 
be reduced when I watching the movie. 
4.2
12. Compared with watching movie on the 
radetional computer, the system made me fo-
cus on more the details on the screen. 
4.3
13. Compared with watching movie on the 
radetional computer, the system put me in 
more the story. 
3.8
Curiosity 
14. The interaction of the system will deepen my 
curiosity about the movie. 
4.6
15. It satisfy my desire to watch movie by watch-
ing the outer side of the screen.  
4.4
Intrinsic Interest
16. The system made me want to watch the movie 
again and again. 
4.3
17. Compared with watching movie on the tradi-
tional computer, the system gave me more fun.
4.3
 
In the section of features metrics for the immersive state 
as shown in Table II, we have received some unexpected 
interesting feedbacks. For a same shot, users of different 
personalities or genders may pay attention to different ob-
jects or places. For example, a female subject may pay atten-
tion to the layout of a male actor’s room. This demonstrates 
the importance of allowing a user to have control since they 
may choose a different view point when interacting with the 
film.  
However, in content design, it is still important to retain 
the property of storytelling and get a balance between inter-
action design and content creation since it is, nevertheless, a 
film instead of a game. In addition, sound tracks are as im-
portant as visual images since sound can attract the attention 
of a user on the screen. It could be even a better idea if we 
can implement surround sounds or better background music 
to enhance the audial sensation. 
VI. 
FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we have collected many suggestions and 
comments about the system design and film contents from 
the user survey. In the future, there are several directions that 
we can work on to improve the quality of the design and 
conduct more in-depth studies: 
(1) Studying the effect of film genre: Based on the 
analysis of user feedbacks in this study, we will try 
to change the styles of the film and conduct the ex-
periments again to compare and understand how 
genre may affect the immersive experience of a user.  
(2) Studying the effect of film length: We will con-
duct experiments to compare the effect of film 
343
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

length on the immersive experience. In this study, 
we have used a 5-min film to do the experiment. 
However, different film lengths (such as 30-sec ad-
vertisements, 10-min microfilms, 30-min short 
films, etc.) should also come with different interac-
tion designs. For example, in a long film, a user 
may get tired easily if she needs to move her body 
to control the development of the story throughout 
the film. Instead, the interaction may be desired on-
ly in some critical sessions of the story.  
(3) Developing further applications: In addition to 
applying the concept of interactive view changes to 
film watching, there could be many other applica-
tions that can adopt this kind of design. For example, 
the street view mode on Google Map can also use 
this method to replace mouse input in a guided tour. 
Other applications include on-line shopping and 
booking, serious games for navigation training, etc. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this work, we have used “interaction” to allow an au-
dience to participate in a film and make the film watching 
experience more natural and intuitive. Consequently, richer 
immersive experience and better replay value have been ob-
served in the conducted experiments.  
Although the control of watching and story development 
have been somewhat transferred to the audience, the director 
still plays an important role in film making in such an inter-
active storytelling setting. This is because the role of director 
has been transformed to make the story convey more effec-
tive emotions through the use of interaction and story 
branching. We hope that, in the future, the design of more 
natural and intuitive interaction and seamless transitions be-
tween video segments can bring more and more possibility to 
the video-based interactive narratives. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Ministry of Science 
and Technology in Taiwan for their financial support under 
project contract MOST 104-2221-E-004-006 -. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Burch, Theory Of Film Practice. Princeton: Princeton Univ 
Press. 
[2] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Beyond Boredom and Anxiety: 
Experiencing Flow in Work and Play. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1975. 
[3] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal 
Experience. New York: Harper & Row, 1990. 
[4] D. Daniels, “Strategies of Interactivity,” Media Art 
Interaction. Vienna and New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000, pp. 
170-198. 
[5] J. J. Gibson, The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co, 1966. 
[6] D. L. Hoffman and T. P.  Novak, “Marketing in Hypermedia 
Compute 
r-Mediated 
Environments: 
Conceptual 
Foundations,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 60, no. 3, pp.50-68, 
1996. 
[7] D. L. Hoffman and T. P. Novak, Measuring the Flow 
Experience Among Web Users. Palo Alto: Interval Research 
Corporation, 1997. 
[8] T. Jeng, “Social and Interaction Issues in a Human-Centered 
Reactive Environment,” Proc. of 7th CAADRIA,  Cyberjaya, 
Malaysia: Multimedia University Malaysia, 2002, pp. 285-
292. 
[9] D. Johnson and J. Wiles, “Effective Affective User Interface 
Design in Games,” Journal of Ergonomics, vol. 46, pp. 1332-
1345, 2003. 
[10] L. Manovich, An Archeology of a Computer Screen. 
Kunstforum International, 1995. 
[11] D. Parkinson, 100 Ideas that Changed Film. Laurence King 
Publishing, 2012. 
[12] P. Persson, “A Comparative Study of Digital and Cinematic 
Space with Special Focus on Navigational Issues,” Exploring 
Navigation: Towards a Framework for Design and Evaluation 
of Navigation in Electronic Space  Kista, Sweden: Swedish 
Institute of Computer Science, pp. 173-188, 1998. 
[13] H. T. Regenbrecht and T. W. Schubert, “Measuring Presence 
in Virtual Environments,” HCI International 1997, San 
Francisco, CA, 1997. 
[14] U. Spierling, D. Grasbon, N. Braun, and I. Iurgel, “Setting the 
scene: playing digital director in interactive storytelling and 
creation,” Computers & Graphics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.31-44, 
2002. 
[15] L. K., Trevino and J. Webster, “Flow in Computer-Mediated 
Communication Electronic Mail and Voice Mail Evaluation 
and Impacts,” Communication Research, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 
539-573, 1992. 
[16] WebGL, https://www.khronos.org/webgl/ 
[17] J. Webster, K. L. Trevino, and L. Ryan, “The Dimensionality 
and Correlates of Flow in Human-Computer Interacitons,” 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 411-426, 
1993. 
[18] W. Williams and M. E. Shapiro, “A Study of the Effects In-
Home Entertainment Alternatives Have on Film Attendance,” 
Current Research in Film：Audiences, Economics, and Law, 
vol. 1, pp.93-100, 1985. 
[19] B. G.Witmer and M. J. Singer, “Measuring presence in virtual 
environments: 
A 
presence 
questionnaire,” 
Presence: 
Telreeoperators and Virtual Environments 7, Cambridge: The 
MIT Press, pp. 225-240, 1998. 
 
344
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

