Applying Design Thinking to Address Users ATM Deposits Needs
A Case Study on the Financial Sector
Arturo Moquillaza
Pontifical Catholic University of Peru
Lima, Peru
email: amoquillaza@pucp.pe
Joel Aguirre
Pontifical Catholic University of Peru
Lima, Peru
email: aguirre.joel@pucp.pe
Fiorella Falconi
Pontifical Catholic University of Peru
Lima, Peru
email: ffalconit@pucp.pe
Freddy Paz
Pontifical Catholic University of Peru
Lima, Peru
email: fpaz@pucp.pe
Abstract—Nowadays, people can use their nearest Automated
Teller
Machine
(ATM)
to
perform
different
banking
transactions, such as cash withdrawals, cash deposits, bill
payments, and transfer of funds between accounts and other
banks. However, the total of deposits and cash payments that
are made are still low, since ATMs do not give change, and in
that sense, everything depends on the total to be paid be equal
to the bills the client has available to deposit. This is due to
what Shy calls “the burden of receiving and carrying change”.
In this study, we used Design Thinking, as part of a
development team, to address a problem as a challenge for the
ATM channel of a well-known bank in Peru. As the problem,
we found that the denominations an ATM could dispense
generate a significant amount of not withdrawable change that
makes people avoid the ATM, forcing to clients and not clients
look for a human bank teller to make their operations. This
bank adapted and incorporated Design Thinking into its
Design practice inside and outside its corresponding division. A
solution
was
proposed
from
the
application
of
the
methodology, giving encouraging results and motivating the
financial customer to use other financial products to manage
change in ATM cash operations.
Keywords – Human Computer Interaction; Interaction
Design; Self-Service; Automatic Teller Machine; Cash Deposit;
Design Thinking; Cash Payment; Banking; Innovation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The introduction of Automated Teller Machines or ATM
was intended to decongest the banking halls as people can
now go to the nearest ATM to perform their financial
operations [1]. Odusina opined that ATM is a technological
product developed to enhance quick service and diversified
financial services, such as deposits, withdrawals, funds
transfer, and payments [2]. However, according to Shy,
experts consider that paying with bills subjects the user to
what is known as “the burden of receiving and carrying
change”. This burden is more substantial when the change is
farther away from multiples of the available bills at an
ATM, where customers look for smaller denomination coins
[3].
About the "burden of receiving and carrying change"
experienced by clients of banking institutions, this refers to
the cost of obtaining cash, counting and receiving change
after each transaction. Shy explains that there is a cost
proportional to the difference between the available cash
and the payment amount. Shy also explains that Knotek
called this problem the "relative inconvenience of price" [3].
In that sense, it is expensive for clients to have the exact
cash to make the payments that they must make in cash, and
in addition, it is unlikely that the payment amount is in
multiples of 10, and that no change is required at the end of
the transaction. This means that, in the long run, clients end
up entering the branch looking for a human teller to perform
their deposit or cash payment operation. The first suggestion
would be to allow ATMs to give change, but technical and
economic restrictions consider this solution as unfeasible in
the context of a well-known bank of Peru.
In the past, digital developments were traditionally
dedicated to the IT (Information Technology) Departments,
but since customer behavior is changing, it is not enough
simply to offer new digital services, or just copy the existing
ones of the competition [4]. The concept of Design
Thinking has driven successful
innovation in several
industries [5]. Adopting Design Thinking enables bankers to
bring customers into consideration so they can know what
the clients need and how the service should be delivered to
be the most beneficial for its users [6].
In addition, there is insufficient consideration of user
centered design guidelines or methodologies in the design of
the interfaces for embedded systems in the ATM. This
factor is critical to overcoming the complex financial
environment [7]. This paper presents a case study, held in
BBVA Peru, a leading bank in that country, where a Design
Thinking approach is applied to bring a solution for “the
burden of receiving change” its customers face when
performing deposits and cash payments at an ATM, and,
therefore, enter the branch for assistance.
The conducted Design Thinking process consisted of
four stages: Comprehension, Ideation, Prototyping, and
Evaluation. This was part of a Design Challenge organized
in BBVA Peru by Design UX division. The paper is
organized as follows. Section II describes other successful
cases where Design Thinking was applied in the banking
industry. Section III describes in detail the problem that was
addressed in this Design Challenge. Section IV describes,
330
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

step by step, the process conducted. Section V concludes
this work.
II.
DESIGN THINKING IN THE BANKING INDUSTRY
According to Brown, Design Thinking is a human-
centered approach to finding the best ideas and solutions
[8]. In the literature, there is some evidence of the
application of Design Thinking in the financial sector.
Klepek [6] made a study of five banks that implemented this
approach. In that study, he mentioned the following cases:

The ANZ Banking Group developed [6] a cutting-
edge mobile app for their employees and changed
the organizational culture to be more user-centered.

The Juniper Bank redesigned [6] its Web banking
making it more user-friendly by changing its
customer service strategy.

The PNC Bank developed [13] a new concept of
Virtual Wallet with a powerful visualization to help
customers with their savings management.

The Suncorp used Design Thinking [6] visualization
to successfully merge with the insurance giant
Promina with a 94% rate of employees who
understood the new post-merge vision.

The Bank of America brought the “keep the
change” [12] idea that enables customers to transfer
small amounts of cents from every purchase they
make, enrolling more than eight million users.
However, this kind of cases where banks include
customers in the innovation process, usually engage with a
specific business division, such as retail banking, but rarely
with
divisions
such
as
IT
[9]. The
Deutsche
Bank
understood this need and adopted Design Thinking allowing
them to get final user feedback on quickly developed or
incomplete prototypes of new services [9]. To align to these
ideas, the BBVA is focusing on implementing Design
Thinking in the IT divisions.
III.
CONTEXT AND THE REAL PROBLEM
For the BBVA Peru Bank, as in the rest of local banks,
the ATM channel is still the most used by its customers.
Despite the fact that it has more than 300 deposit ATMs,
more than 40% of its bank branches are still crowded. This
affects the digitalization of the bank, having only 40% of the
deposit and payments made through this channel because of
“the burden of change”.
According to Shy [3], when people face financial
transactions that involve cash, they carry the burden of
receiving
and
carrying
their
change
(coins
and
low
denomination bills). This is what he calls “the burden of
change”, based on his study [3]. Paying with cash subjects
the clients to receiving and carrying change, depending on
the payment amounts. Shy observed that people tended to
change to debit and credit cards when the amount exceeded
the threshold of $20. This affects directly the services an
ATM could offer, such as payments in cash and cash
deposits, making people employ other channels.
Following the adoption of Design Thinking started by
other banks, a few years ago, it was adopted by BBVA as
the way of working for all its Design teams worldwide, as
part of its digital transformation process. In addition, Design
Ambassador Programs are carried out for all teams of the
organization. In this sense, in BBVA Peru, teams other than
the
Design
team
are
applying
Design
Thinking
or
adaptations in their own design and development processes
[10] [11]. According to this, the ATM developing team from
BBVA Peru is adopting those approaches and others in
order to find an innovative solution to problems and pain-
points. In this context, the proposed challenge was to solve
the “burden of change” that final users of ATM face at the
time of depositing and paying. This burden makes the users
decide to look for a human-teller and stop using the ATM
channel.
IV.
CASE STUDY: APPLYING DESIGN THINKING
Tim Brown mentioned that Design Thinking is a system
of space rather than a predefined series of orderly steps [8].
This case study was developed in the context of a Design
Challenge inside the Bank. For this case study, the Design
Thinking approach used was the adaptation the BBVA made
[10] and socialized via Design Challenges for the local
Banks as BBVA Peru. This motivates every team to align to
the objectives of the organization. These Design Challenges
had the constraint that the teams must employ the methods
and approaches the organization had. In this particular case,
the constraint was to use Design Thinking to design an
innovative solution for the ATM channel.
Figure 1.
Phases of design thinking. Adapted from BBVA.
331
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The following subsections, from A to D, detail the
methods employed in this case of study. Subsection E
details the results of the application. Finally, in subsection
F, the experience is discussed. The phases followed were
Comprehension, Ideation, Prototyping, and Evaluation, as
we illustrated in Figure 1.
A. Comprehension
This phase consisted of two steps: the first one was
about research and the second was about the analysis of the
research made. The objectives of this last step, and in
general of the first phase, were to empathize with the
problem and obtain insight from the users. We detail
methods and techniques we used in each step, as follows:
1)
Research
a)
Defining the Objective:
The first step for the
comprehension consisted in making the team aware of what
they know, what they do not know, and who can give
relevant information to the project. For this, a Field
Study/Observation was held in two bank offices located at
crowded avenues. We visited two bank branches that had a
Deposit ATM inside. We observed that 3 out of 5 people
who approached the ATM with cash in hands ended up
performing their operations with a human teller. All the
Service Payments were performed in the office instead of
the ATM because the payment amount was not exact and
the change was not withdrawable. On the other hand, all the
users who made deposits showed familiarity and ease of use
when performing this operation at the ATM. The customers
who approached the branches did not know the operations
that could be done at the ATM, in those cases the human
teller helped them to migrate.
b)
User Profile: Three user profiles were made to
reflect the typical user of the Deposit Operation on ATMs.
These profiles were ideated based on the users observed in
the previous step. A man with technical studies who pay
bills, a woman who manage the economy at home, and an
elder woman not so familiar with technology and still
carries cash. For all the profiles, gender and age were
described, and why is important to talk to that profile.
c)
Interviews:
A
semi-structured
interview
were
conducted and addressed to people who matched the user
profiles created. We selected six different final users, three
young people, two men and a woman, with technical
knowledge, two middle-age women, and one elder with low
technical knowledge. The interview consisted in open
questions about four main things, what they worry, what
they wish, how they imagine the future, and what they need.
The participants were customers from BBVA Peru and other
leader banks in the country. We add time for a free
conversation where each participant could talk about the
problems they face when performing financial operations
that involves cash and change in coins or bills. From all the
interviewed customers, five out of six participants preferred
using the ATM when carrying cash instead of the bank
office, but all of them agreed on the idea of an ATM that
can give the exact change with coins if possible.
d)
Competitor Analysis: The last step of the research
consisted in the analysis of other solutions that the
competitors might have implemented already. Three leading
local banks were analyzed and the BBVA Spain. The
analysis was aimed to find which competitor offers a
solution to the “burden of change”. The results showed only
one Peruvian bank that gives change in their ATM that
dispense coins. This ATM with coins dispenser is also used
in BBVA Spain; however, it is expensive to implement in
the Peruvian context, and were given as a constraint for this
experience.
2)
Analysis
a)
Empathy Map: The first step was empathizing with
the final users and understanding their motivations in order
to have a process guided by the user needs. The empathy
map generated considering four aspects:

What they think and feel. This aspect showed that
clients were not comfortable with carrying cash
after making operations. This affected to their
sense of security directly. In addition, the fact that
ATM dispense only multiples of twenty made them
to prefer a bank teller to the self-service.

What they see. Throw observation, the team could
evidentiate what the final users actually see in their
daily visits to an office bank. Crowded offices,
ATM that captured bills occasionally, and in most
of
the
cases,
their
relatives
influenced
into
selecting the bank-teller as a better way to perform
their transactions.

What they hear. The bank-tellers always tell the
users that using the mobile banking is easier and
safer now, but the observed sample claimed that
they did not feel that was true. In addition, they
heard about fraud stories, other people complaining
in social media and others having trouble with the
ATM. On the other hand, they are aware of a new
type of ATM that dispense coins and that more
people employ a debit or credit card.

What they decide to do. They only used the ATM
when the office was really crowded. If the office
seemed empty to them, they went straightforward
to the bank-teller inside the office. However, they
were opened to the idea of not entering the account
number (hard to remember), to the idea of not
going to the office, and to use another attention
channel with the same services as in the office.
b)
Insights Discovery: In the Empathy Map, we
identified what the customer felt and thought, what he or she
saw and heard, and what he or she actually decided to do.
This lets us identify the greatest pain points of the final
users interviewed, which are listed as follows:
●
People would continue looking for a human teller
while the ATM did not offer any solution to the
“burden of change”.
332
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

●
The customers who paid at the ATM were not very
digitized.
●
The most important aspects for the clients to
consider were security and fastness.
●
The final users associated the word “change” with
“money in cash” or “coins”.
●
There was inadequate communication between the
bank
and
its
customers
about
the
available
channels.
●
The final user did not perceive the value of the
ATM for deposit operations when he or she was at
the office due to the insufficient ubiquity about this
type of ATM.
B. Ideation
After analyzing the context and comprehending the final
user’s problem, it was necessary to define the exact
necessity that would be solved. After that, the ATM team
started the ideation of possible solutions. Finally, a meeting
was held to converge all the different ideas.
1)
Rethinking the challenge
a)
New
challenge:
Based
on
the
six
insights
discovered in the last phase of comprehension, and the
constraint mentioned, the team defined the following
specific challenge: “How could we give alternative options
to physical change, quickly and safely, to achieve greater
digitalization of our clients and non-clients?”
2)
Generating Ideas
The ideation was started with a brainstorm performed
between all the ATM team. For this collaborative idea-
generation task, the team started with a divergent process,
but later the ideas were filtered through a convergent
process.
a)
Divergence: All the member proposed different
solutions; for instance, using typical operations, payments in
advance and commission discounts, transfer change to a
“savings account” without account number, integration with
a
“saving
goals”
program,
convert
the
change
into
redeemable “bank points”, and a complex system where the
change is transformed into coupons.
b)
Convergence: In this process, the team classified
ideas by their relevance. For this, each member assumed a
role in the judgment: one member assumed the role of a
positive and optimistic customer, the second member
assumed the role of a negative and pessimistic customer,
and the third one assumed the role of an internal user of the
bank who ensured that the business goals were met. At the
end of the process, the team made an election of the most
relevant ideas. One was discarded and, from the rest, the
team took the top three into consideration for the solution:
transfer to accounts without the need of account number,
integration with a “saving goals” program, and using typical
operations.
C. Prototyping
Once the ATM team formulated, filtered and selected
ideas, the next step was prototyping. First, a low fidelity
prototype was made. Here, the user interaction was needed
so we could progress to the high fidelity prototype.
1)
Low Fidelity
The low fidelity prototype was a result of a paper
prototyping. All the workflow for this operation was drawn.
Examples of this are shown in Figure 2 through Figure 4.
Figure 2.
Low fidelity prototypes (I).
Figure 3.
Low fidelity prototypes (II).
Figure 4.
Low fidelity prototypes (III).
2)
High Fidelity
The high fidelity prototypes were made taking into
consideration what was found by evaluating the low fidelity
prototypes. The team added a message for the user in order
to notify in advance about the change they would receive.
After finishing the operation, the team asked what the user
would like to do with the change.
In Figure 5, we show how we notify the user differently
for the payment amount and the deposited cash. With this
information, the users will know in advance the amount of
change they would receive, so they could make a better
choice of what to do with this amount.
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 5.
Notifying the user about the change.
Figure 6 shows the last screen of the payment operation
where a sub-menu was introduced, giving the user options
to manage the change. Also, we added messages to make
clear to the user what would be done to their change. These
options corresponded to the ideas selected in the last phase.
Figure 6.
Asking the user what to do with the change.
D. Evaluation
This phase started with the elaboration of a list of
activities. The users were recruited following the user
profiles defined in the first phase of comprehension. The
participants were internal users that were interested in the
Design Challenge and wanted to collaborate.
1)
User Testing
The user testing was held using the installations of the
ATM laboratory of the BBVA Peru. Five final users were
invited
and
asked
to
interact
with
the
high-fidelity
prototypes and complete a cash payment simulation where
they had to transfer the change to a different account, but
without using the account number, instead, they were asked
to use another financial product that requires only a phone
number.
For these tasks, the prototypes were displayed in a real
ATM located in the ATM Laboratory. The “thinking aloud”
method helped in the tests. The participants had to raise
their voice and tell the evaluator their feelings and ask
questions, if they had any.
After
completing
the
operation
proposed,
the
participants were asked about the first impressions they had,
the positive and negative aspects they found, and a final
appreciation on a scale from 1 to 5. In the evaluation phase,
the users found some improvements were needed in the
iteration of the prototype. These changes were focused on
the button of “return of change”, some text boxes that were
confusing, and the last screen where the details of the
completed transfer were shown in a non-friendly way.
Figure 7 shows the participants during this evaluation.
Figure 7.
User Testing.
2)
Design Iteration
The participants liked the solution proposed. They found
some confusing texts and images in the interfaces that had
to be fixed through a design iteration. Some of the problems
found in the interfaces were, for example, a button that
confused the user with an image that might not relate
correctly to the functionality of the button itself. Some texts
were displayed repeatedly over more than one screen, and
the final information about the change transfer was unclear
to the user because a lot of unnecessary information was
displayed. These errors are shown in Figure 8 and Figure 9,
with a red circle to emphasize them.
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 8.
Problem in the button.
Figure 9.
Problems in the text box and information.
E. Results and Valuable Final Proposal
A redesign was done after the user testing, so we could
fix the problems they had. After another interaction the
users had with the redesigned interfaces, we could finally
accept a final proposal that really adds value. Figure 10 and
Figure 11 show the final valuable proposal.
F. End of the Experience
The design experience using Design Thinking ended
with the delivery of the prototypes in the context of the
Design Challenge mentioned. After this, the most relevant
projects were selected to be presented to a panel composed
of all the departments of the bank, especially the business
department. This project was selected as one of the finalists.
In the presentation, the experience and everything learned
was shared, and valuable feedback could be obtained from
the
business
areas,
as
well
as
plans
for
future
implementations of the presented work.
Figure 10. Valuable Final Proposal (I).
Figure 11. Valuable Final Proposal (II).
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V.
CONCLUSIONS
The Design Thinking approach allowed us to propose an
innovative solution to the problems that users discovered,
adding value to the prototypes. This assured that the final
prototypes improved the experience of the final user
because the whole design process was user-centered. At the
end of the process, we made an analysis of the results and
could identify what we learned.
In general, the participants of the evaluation found added
value in the new proposed interfaces, considering using
them
according
to
their
necessities.
However,
the
participants opined that the solutions only solve the “burden
of change” partially. They mentioned that, in the Peruvian
context, the users who paid in cash expect their change to be
in cash so they could use it somewhere else, for instance,
transportation or groceries.
From this challenge, we learned that Design Thinking is
an approach that seeks innovation. Adopting the approach
proposed by the organization brought encouraging results
and created an expectation in the impact it would have if we
integrate it into the whole construction process. However, it
is a constraint and different results could be delivered by
adopting different design approaches, but this first step
aligned
with
one
of
the
principal
strategies
of
the
organization helped the ATM team to be more emphatic
with the final customer.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We want to thank the DUXAIT research group for all
their support throughout this experience. We also want to
thank BBVA Peru, its Design team, and especially the
development and discipline ATM teams in Engineering,
with whom we constantly work, committed to improving
the User Experience and the reliability of the ATM channel.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. O. C. Mkpojiogu and E. A. Augustine, “The user
experience of ATM users in Nigeria: a systematic review of
empirical papers,” International Journal of Science and
Engineering Applications, June 2018, ISSN 1596-8303.
[2]
A. O. Odusina, “Automated Teller Machine usage and
Customers’ Satisfaction in Nigeria,” Type: Double Blind Peer
Reviewed International Research Journal Publisher: Global
Journals Inc, 2014, 14(4), ISSN: 2249-4588.
[3]
O. Shy, “How the ATM Affects the Way We Pay,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Working Papers, February 2019,
doi:10.29338/wp2019-02.
[4]
P. Fehér, and K. Varga, “Using design thinking to identify
banking
digitization
opportunities
–
Snapshot
of
the
Hungarian banking system,” 30th Bled E-Conference: Digital
Transformation - From Connecting Things to Transforming
Our Lives, BLED 2017, December 2017, pp.151–168,
doi:10.18690/978-961-286-043-1.12.
[5]
A. J. H. Chia, and J.-J. Lee, “Banking Outside-in: How
Design Thinking is Changing the Banking Industry ?” IASDR 
2019, October 2019.
[6]
C. Klepek, “Design Thinking: The case of Banking Services,”
Proceedings of The 5th International Conference Innovation
Management, Entrepreneurship and Sustainability, IMES
2017,
pp.416–425,
2017,
Available
from
https://www.ceeol.com/search/chapter-detail?id=544899
[7]
J. Aguirre, A. Moquillaza, and F. Paz, “A User-Centered
Framework for the Design of Usable ATM Interfaces,”
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics),
11583
LNCS,
July
2019,
pp.163–178.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-23570-3_13.
[8]
T. Brown, “Design Thinking,” Interaction Design Foundation
1,
Available
from
https://www.interaction-
design.org/literature/topics/design-thinking,
retrieved:
January, 2020.
[9]
C. Vetterli, F. Uebernickel, D. Stermann, and C. Petrie, “How
Deutsche Bank’s IT Division Used Design Thinking to
Achieve Customer Proximity,” MIS Carterly Excutive, March
2016.
[10] A. Moquillaza, F. Falconi, and F. Paz, “Redesigning a Main
Menu
ATM
Interface
Using
a
User-Centered
Design
Approach Aligned to Design Thinking: A Case Study,”
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction,
pp. 522-532, July 2019, Springer, Cham, doi:10.1007/978-3-
030-23535-2_38
[11] BBVA, “Design Thinking. Serie Innovation Trends. BBVA
Innovation
Center,”
2015,
Available
from
https://www.bbva.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/ebook-
cibbva-design-thinking_es_1.pdf, retrieved: January, 2020.
[12] Keep the Change Savings Program from Bank of America.
Retrieved
March
17,
2020,
from
https://www.bankofamerica.com/deposits/keep-the-change/
[13] Virtual Wallet is Checking & Savings. Together. PNC.
Retrieved
March
17,
2020,
from
https://www.pnc.com/en/personal-banking/virtual-wallet-
overview.html
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

