Adaptive Serious Gaming for the Online Assessment of 21st Century Skills in Talent 
Selection 
 
Gabrielle Teyssier-Roberge 
School of Psychology 
Université Laval 
Québec, Canada 
gabrielle.teyssier-roberge.1@ulaval.ca  
Sébastien Tremblay 
School of Psychology 
Université Laval 
Québec, Canada 
sebastien.tremblay@psy.ulaval.ca 
 
 
Abstract— 21st century skills are key factors sought by 
organizations in the 4th Industrial Revolution. Our objectives 
are twofold: 1) To test the use of serious games for detecting 
the 21st century skills among highly qualified personnel 
(HQP); and 2) To develop an adaptive and gamified system for 
boosting skill acquisition and for talent selection of HQP 
candidates. The main findings represent a first encouraging 
step towards measuring skill proficiency through serious 
gaming which in turn could serve to trigger personalized 
content and interactivity.  
Keywords-serious gaming; cognition; non-technical skills; 
human resources; talent selection. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The number of ways interactive games can be used is 
expanding beyond the traditional areas of entertainment and 
education. Serious games and gamified simulations are 
widely recognized for their potential to foster learning and 
the acquisition of non-technical skills. Serious games can be 
a very powerful tool for developing skills such as an 
analytical capacity for decision making. There is growing 
interest in making serious games adaptive – games that 
would adjust their content, storyline, difficulty level and 
feedbacks to the players’ interactivity, preferences and 
fluctuating affective-cognitive state. We wish to present 
innovative ideas related to the use of such adaptive systems 
in talent selection. These ideas have emerged from an 
ongoing research endeavor concerned with the development 
of adaptive serious gaming and the capability to monitor 
human performance, behavior and functional state in near 
real-time. Adaptive games could boost the ability of serious 
games to contribute to the training and assessment of 21st 
century skills such as systemic thinking, creativity and 
cognitive flexibility. In the present project, one key objective 
is to establish whether adaptiveness could be based on the 
monitoring of indicators of skill acquisition and mastery. We 
seek to identify a set of gaming behaviors and measures of 
the functional state that can provide an assessment of the 
ability to think in a critical manner, to be creative and to be 
flexible in making decisions.  
Personnel selection is based on the use of traditional tools 
(e.g. interviews and questionnaires) to assess the suitability 
of a candidate for one position. Among highly qualified 
personnel (HQP), the 21st century skills – systemic thinking, 
adaptability and creative problem solving – are key factors 
sought by organizations in the era of the 4th Industrial 
Revolution [12][8]. While the selection interview – including 
the 
semi-structured 
job-oriented 
interview 
– 
and 
psychometric testing represent the most common ways 
organizations use to determine the best candidate to fill out a 
position, the shortcomings raised by several authors (e.g. 
traditional tools are not adequate to assess whether the 
candidate holds one or more 21st century skills – see [13]) 
denote the importance of reviewing how to carry out the 
selection process by using new tools such as serious games 
[2]. Considering that a large number of organizations 
worldwide are using at least one serious game as a training 
tool, it is relevant that research now focus on serious games 
as a way to select candidates as opposed to conventional 
staffing methods [1]. In the present project, we wish to use 
serious games in order to detect the 21st century skills 
among HQP and develop an adaptive and gamified system 
for talent selection and assessment of HQP candidates. 
II. 
MEASUREMENT 
In order to provide an assessment capability, a game 
should be capable of capturing a variety of in-game user 
behaviors such as “information seeking”, “making a 
decision”, or “reviewing alternatives”, as well as the context 
in which those behaviors occur within the game [5]. It should 
capture context at a high level, such as the level of difficulty, 
the level of stress that the user is under [6], or the number of 
decision constraints the user is facing [4]. The focus should 
also be on measuring changes in performance and skill 
indicators under different conditions (e.g., high/low time 
pressure) and over time (e.g., track progress). The choice of 
human performance measures depends in part on the 
importance of the underlying skill in the context of a specific 
scenario. For cognitive dimensions such as information 
seeking and the management of workload, systems that track 
head and eye movements can provide unobtrusive 
information about the current locus of visual fixation that 
enables inferences about the locus of attention [10]. Eye-
tracking data can provide a large range of metrics that can be 
very informative about dynamic decision making. For 
instance, scanpath measures – which relate to saccade-
fixation-saccade sequences of eye movements – can index 
the efficacy in information seeking, while fixation metrics, 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

which measure how long the gaze is relatively stationary, can 
help estimate the processing (or encoding) time [11]. 
Combinations of behavioral measures can also provide 
information about time-sharing and multitask performance. 
A key dimension of the measurement – psychometrics at the 
basis of the skill assessment – is to operationalize each skill 
in measurable indicators imbedded within the game [5]. 
 
III. 
PRELIMINARY STUDY 
As an initial step towards the development of the adaptive 
serious gaming approach to non-technical skill assessment, 
we designed a study looking at the convergent validity. In 
this section, the method and the preliminary results of the 
study are described. 
A. Method 
Ten participants were candidates going through the 
selection process of a small high-tech company. All had 
engineering, AI or computing backgrounds. Participants first 
played four times 12 rounds of the game Democracy 3. In 
this game, the player is a head of government, must manage 
state affairs and the end goal is to be re-elected. Democracy 
3 portrays complex decision-making and requires systemic 
thinking, creative problem solving and cognitive flexibility 
(see [3]). Each game test was followed by a subjective 
assessment of skill acquisition (self-report and observer 
ratings on a scale of 1 to 10). Order of tasks was counter-
balanced – across self and peer assessment, each skill to be 
assessed and playing Democracy 3. 
 
B. Results 
 
Performance scores were calculated as a product of re-
election polls and financial budget. 60% of the participants 
managed to be re-elected with an average poll of 52%. 
Performance scores proved to be sensitive to individual 
differences. There was little relation between the results 
associated to the assessment of the skills and those 
associated with playing Democracy 3. Interestingly, overall, 
re-elected participants seem to show greater skill assessment 
– save for the self-reporting of adaptability (see Table I).  
 
TABLE I.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The delta between the self-assessment questionnaires and 
the peer assessment varies considerably across participants 
(see Table II). Our findings represent a first encouraging step 
towards measuring skill proficiency through serious gaming 
which in turn could serve to trigger personalized content and 
interactivity. 
 
TABLE II.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. 
ARCHITECTURE OF THE ADAPTIVENESS 
The components of the adaptive system would be 
comprised of modules for content delivery, online 
assessment of skills and for directing adaptation. The 
purpose of the content delivery module is to present the 
game and tests content to the candidate [7]. This is the 
component of the system with which the candidate (player) 
interacts. The presentation of the game content is controlled 
by the adaptation module. The delivery module must report 
outcomes and user interactions as required by the evaluation 
module. The purpose of the evaluation module is to update 
the model or assessment profile of the candidate based on 
measurements of the candidate. In the case of a first 
assessment through the system, the model of the candidate 
does not contain any data besides initial self-reports. The 
evaluation module should be capable of direct measurements 
using eye tracking, physiological and “face reading” devices, 
as well as indirect monitoring of performance from user 
interactions reported by the content delivery module, such as 
key presses, decision accuracy, timings, quiz results, and so 
on. The purpose of the adaptation module is to adapt the 
delivery of content based on the evolution of the candidate 
model (profile). The adaptation module must examine the 
difference between the candidate’s performance and skill 
evaluation with the expectations and desired skill profile of 
potential employers. Mechanisms of adaptation may include: 
adapting the pace of information delivery; adapting the 
complexity of the game; altering the assessment content and 
objects that are presented. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Initial results are promising in validating the assumption 
according to which performance at playing Democracy 3 is 
related to other means of assessing non-technical skills. The 
recommended architecture would be the foundation of the 
adaptive serious game for the assessment of non-technical 
skills. Such a customizable system that takes into account 
inputs from potential employers and focuses its assessment 
on skill proficiency and attitude rather than expert 
 
Mean 
Standard 
Deviation 
Adaptability Self 
0.76 
0.19 
Adaptability Peers 
0.72 
0.10 
Creative Self 
0.71 
0.23 
Creative Peers 
0.77 
0.09 
Systemic thinking Self 
0.87 
0.10 
Systemic Thinking Peers 
0.74 
0.11 
 
 
Re-elected 
Not Re-elected 
Nb 
6 
4 
Average Poll 
52% 
6% 
Adaptability Self 
0.70 
0.88 
Adaptability Peers 
0.73 
0.69 
Creative Self 
0.76 
0.60 
Creative Peers 
0.80 
0.71 
Systemic Self 
0.86 
0.70 
Systemic Peers 
0.75 
0.72 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

knowledge will greatly contribute to improve the efficiency 
and user-friendliness of the talent selection process.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank B. Bussière, S. Savage 
and E. Guillemette for their contribution to the empirical 
work and to G. Foin for proofreading. This work was funded 
by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of 
Canada (SSHRC). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. B. Armstrong, R. N.  Landers and A. B. Collmus, 
“Gamifying 
Recruitment, 
Selection, 
Training, 
and 
Performance 
Management: 
Game-Thinking 
in 
Human 
Resource Management”, in Handbook of Research Trends in 
Gamification, H. Gangadharbatla and D. Z. Davis Eds. 
Pennsylvanie, PE: IGI Global, pp.140-165, january 2016. 
[2] M. Fetzer, “Serious Games for Talent Selection and 
Development”, The Industrial-Organizational Psychologist, 
vol. 52, pp.117-125, january 2015. 
[3] D. Lafond, J-F. Gagnon, S. Pronovost, M. Ducharme and S.  
Tremblay, “Behavioral test for prediction of individual 
differences in dynamic decision making ability,” Proceedings 
of the 7th International Conference of AHFE, Orlando, CA, 
july 2016. 
[4] D. Lafond, B. R. Vallières, F. Vachon and S. Tremblay, 
“Judgment analysis in a dynamic multitask environment: 
Capturing non-linear policies using decision trees,” Journal of 
Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making,  vol. 11, 
pp.122-135, 2017.  
[5] C. S. Loh and Y. Sheng, Y. “Measuring expert-performance 
for Serious Games Analytics: From data to insights,” in 
Serious Games Analytics: Methodologies for Performance 
Measurement, Assessment, and Improvement, C. S. Loh, Y. 
Sheng and D. Ifenthaler, Eds. New York, NY: Springer, 
pp.101-134, 2015. 
[6] M. Parent, J.-F. Gagnon, T. H. Falk and S. Tremblay, 
“Modeling the operator functional state for emergency 
response management,” Proceedings of the 13th International 
Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and 
Management (ISCRAM). Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, may 2016. 
[7] M. Peeters, K. Van Den Bosch, J-J. C. Meyer and M. A. 
Neerincx, “Situated cognitive engineering: The requirements 
and design of directed scenario-based training,” Proceedings 
of the 5th International Conference on ACHI, Valencia, 
Spain, pp.1-8, 2012. 
[8] M. Romero, M. Usart and M. OTT, “Can Serious Games 
Contribute to Developing and Sustaining 21st Century Skills? 
,” Games and Culture, vol. 10, pp.148-177, 2015. 
[9] H. A. Spires, “21st Century Skills and Serious Games: 
Preparing the N Generation,” in Serious Educational Games: 
From Theory to Practice, L. A. Annetta, Eds. Rotterdam, The 
NetherlandsArticle in a journal, pp.13–23, january 2008. 
[10] S. Tremblay, D. Lafond, C. Chamberland, H. M. Hodgetts 
and F. Vachon, “Gaze-aware cognitive assistant for 
multiscreen surveillance,” in Advances in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing, vol. 722. Intelligent Human Systems 
Integration, W. Karwowski and T. Ahram, Eds. Basel, Suisse: 
Springer International Publishing AG, pp. 230-236, 2018. 
[11] F. Vachon and S. Tremblay, “What eye tracking can reveal 
about dynamic decision-making,” in Advances in Cognitive 
Engineering and Neuroergonomics, K. Stanney and K. S. 
Hale, Eds. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 157-165, 2014. 
[12] E. van Laar, A. J. van Deursen, J. A. van Dijk, J. de Haan, 
“The relation between 21st-century skills and digital skills: A 
systematic literature review”, in Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol.72, pp.577-588, march 2017. 
[13] J. VOOGT and N. P. Roblin, “A comparative analysis of 
international frameworks for 21st century competences: 
Implications for national curriculum policies,” Journal of 
Curriculum 
Studies, 
vol. 
 
44, 
pp.299–321, 
2011. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

