Automated and Connected Driving
in Urban Scenarios
Maximilian Flormann, M.Sc.∗, Adrian Sonka, M.Sc.∗, Priv. Doz. Dr.-Ing. Roman Henze∗
∗Institute of Automotive Engineering
TU Braunschweig
Braunschweig, Germany 38106
Email: m.ﬂormann@tu-braunschweig.de
Telephone: +49 531 391-2619
Abstract—Scenarios for automated driving in inner-city applica-
tions differ heavily from highway or rural road scenarios. Various
challenges like obstacles in the sensors ﬁeld of view and actions
beyond the vehicles sensory reach can be overcome by using
wireless communication. This paper focuses on current develop-
ments in Car2X communication standards. Therefore, the various
communication protocols and standards are described and their
applications are detailed. The described wireless technologies
involve basic communication standards like Bluetooth and Wi-Fi,
as well as advanced implementations, such as cellular data and
the IEEE standard 802.11p WAVE. The approach presented here
focuses on the evaluation of these wireless technologies for various
vehicle applications in urban scenarios. The advantages, as well
as the challenges of the different protocols are determined and
their suitability for different use-cases is described and validated.
Concluding, the implementations are described exemplary by
detailing the developed applications at the Institute of Automotive
Engineering, TU Braunschweig.
Keywords–Car2X communication, 802.11p, WAVE, wireless ve-
hicular systems, automated , cooperative driving
I.
INTRODUCTION
Automated vehicles, as well as human drivers have to
deal with similar issues when it comes to inner-city driving.
Sharp corners and obstacles like buildings, plants and city
infrastructure limit the automated vehicle’s sensory ﬁeld of
view. Furthermore, objects out of the vehicle sensors’ reach
are not detectable, yielding a potential hazard. Other than
the human driver, the vehicle can overcome this issue by
connecting to other vehicles and surrounding infrastructure.
This connected vehicular systems compensate the potential
drawbacks mentioned beforehand by exchanging relevant dates
with other trafﬁc participants. Especially the need for cooper-
ative driving, i.e., driving in cooperation with not connected
and automated road users, in urban scenarios yields this Car2X
communication to adapt to the ever changing scenarios.
Comprised in this communication can be, among others,
informations each trafﬁc participant sends about himself, such
as speed, planned trajectory and position [1]. Furthermore,
the communication partners can send object lists and other
information regarding their surroundings.
Equipping automated vehicles with advanced communication
units massively increases the adaptability of these vehicles and
vehicular networks.
This paper focuses on the communication protocols for con-
nected vehicles as implemented at the Institute of Automotive
Engineering (IAE), TU Braunschweig. Therefore, the used
communication protocols are described and their usage is
detailed. The introduced standards include Bluetooth, WiFi,
cellular data and the dedicated IEEE standard for Car2X-
communication, 802.11p.
After detailing these protocols and giving a short overview
of current exemplary applications at the IAE, the assets and
drawbacks of each standard are stated. Concluding, a lookout
on potential challenges and future developments is presented.
II.
HARDWARE BASE AND USED COMMUNICATION
STANDARDS
The introduced communication systems are all imple-
mented on two test vehicles at the Institute of Automotive
Engineering. The ﬁrst vehicle is called Testing and Engioneer-
ing of Automated driving SYstems (TEASY III), the second
vehicle Testing of Integrated Automation and MOnitoring
Systems (TIAMO). Both vehicles are equipped with various
sensors and controllers in order to develop automated driving
functions. These sensors include mono and stereo cameras,
radars and 360° laserscanners for advanced object detection.
This sensor and controller setup enables these vehicles to drive
automatically in various scenarios, such as highways, rural
roads and urban environments.
Especially automated driving in urban environments has a
much higher amount of relevant data compared to other driving
environments. Since the ego-vehicles sensors have a limited
reach and their line of sight can be blocked by various
obstacles, vehicles in urban scenarios have to constantly adapt
their trajectory planning to the ever changing boundary condi-
tions. This yields the need for connected vehicular systems as
described in the following sections.
A. Bluetooth
The IEEE standard 802.15.1 Bluetooth is a dedicated short
range wireless communication protocol [2]. Since most modern
mobile devices support Bluetooth connections, this standard is
very suitable to transfer real time vehicle data quickly and to
control various vehicle functions remotely [3]. Since the range
of Bluetooth connections is fairly short, the applications at
the IAE comprises mainly of quick and modular connections
within the vehicle. Among these applications is the linkage
between vehicle electronics and the passengers mobile devices,
as well as a the communication between the vehicle’s central
controller and a test manager [4]. This makes it possible to
control the vehicles automated driving functions remotely and
comfortably from mobile devices.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Since Bluetooth has been developed as a wireless alternative to
RS-232, connections can be set up fairly quick and with only a
basic handshake between the participating systems. This makes
it highly suitable for short and very sporadic data transmissions
between vehicles and mobile devices or other vehicles over
very short distances.
B. 802.11 b/g/n WLAN
Another widely spread wireless communication is the IEEE
standard 802.11b/g/n for Wireless Local Area Networking [5],
often abbreviated to Wi-Fi or Wireless Fidelity. This commu-
nication standard combines high data rates with intermediate
range. Due to this features, this protocol is highly suitable
for transferring large amounts of data between vehicle and in-
frastructure. Since WLAN requires the participants to register
in the network before the beginning of the communication,
it takes relatively long until actual payload can be transferred.
This network protocol is used at the IAE to update the vehicles’
software modules remotely, to transfer measured data and to
establish a communication between to vehicles. This enables
applications like platooning. Hereby, two cars travelling in the
same direction connect via such a local network in order to
transfer vehicle data or join their trajectory planning.
C. Cellular Data
Cellular Data (i.e., LTE as state of the art and 5G as a
future developmen) enables the test vehicles to communicate
over very long distances [6]. Since every vehicle dials into the
closest cellular radio cell and changes the cells dynamically
when driving, cellular data allows the connected vehicles to
establish a stable long-term connection over long distances.
A downside of this dynamic changing of cells is that the
connection can be disturbed for a short time while driving.
Thus, the test vehicles can connect to distant city-infrastructure
via cellular data and communicate less time-critical data. The
IAE’s vehicles use this communication standard to transmit
their positions and planned trajectory to other trafﬁc partic-
ipants and the involved infrastructure. This enables the test
vehicles to adapt their track planning to potentially occurring
obstacles or trafﬁc peaks.
D. 802.11p WAVE
The most advanced standard in Car2X communication
is the on the IEEE Norm 802.11p based WAVE protocol
(Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments) [7]. This version
of the WLAN-Norm utilizes a special frequency band at 5.9
GHz and forgoes the process of registering to the network.
Every trafﬁc participant broadcasts their messages to all other
participants in reach.
In order to enable the messages to reach targets further away,
the WAVE protocol uses knot-hopping similar to delay tolerant
networks (DTN) [8]. Hereby, messages are conﬁgured to be
forwarded a deﬁned number of times. The ﬁrst test vehicle
sends a message, which is then received and forwarded by all
other participants in reach. These participants can be other test
vehicles or infrastructure units. The messages can be divided
into two main types for different applications [9]:
•
CAM: Cooperative Awareness Message:
This message contains cyclic status information send
by every participant continuously
Examples:
Ego
vehicle’s
position,
personal
identiﬁcation, sensory information
•
DENM: Decentralized Environmental Notiﬁcantion
Message:
This message contains non-cyclic information on spe-
cial events
Examples: Position of obstacles or potential hazards,
incoming emergency vehicles
This communication concept makes 802.11p WAVE very suit-
able for dynamic applications, such as connected driving in
urban scenarios. Trafﬁc participants can communicate quickly
and without the need to conduct a registration to the network.
While this speeds up the communication establishment, it also
can lead to messages not reaching their destination because of
missing links. The absence of such registration process yields
the use of other methods for securing the communication, this
is speciﬁed in the corresponding security norm IEEE 1609.2
[9].
At the IAE, this communication protocol is exclusively used
for urban scenarios. The test vehicles exchange their driving
intentions with each other quickly. Since this information is
broadcasted, the test vehicles can communicate with each other
or city infrastructure even when crossing each other or passing
by quickly.
III.
CONCLUSION AND LOOKOUT
Automated driving in urban scenarios demands for spe-
cial communication standards. This Car2X communication
increases the automated vehicles’ performance by extend-
ing the on-board sensors with infrastructure information and
the sensory data of other trafﬁc participants. By equipping
automated vehicles with these communication modules, the
adaptability on the ever changing urban driving environment
is increased heavily. However, when increasing the amount of
connectivity and adaptability it has to be taken care of not to
impair the security and safety of such systems.
This paper describes the Car2X communication standards used
at the Institute of Automotive Engineering and details on the
current applications in the context of urban automated driving.
The described variants cover Bluetooth, 802.11b/g/n WLAN,
Cellular Data and 802.11p WAVE. These four communication
standards are detailed regarding their assets and drawbacks.
This comparison yields various applications for which each
described variant is variously suitable.
The focus of future work on this promising topic of Car2X
communication is the combination of these different network
interfaces in order to achieve a higher amount of adaptability
by automated connected vehicular systems. Furthermore, it
has to be made sure that while adding connectivity and
adaptability, security is key to increase these systems safety.
In order to achieve this, the ongoing research described in
this paper has to further investigate the potentials of Car2X
communication with special regards to security issues. Partic-
ularly, 802.11p and its security norm IEEE 1609.2 [9] has to
be evaluated further.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Steubing, M. Bechler, D. Heussner, T. May, I. Radusch, H. Rechner,
and P. Vogel, “simtd: a car-to-x system architecture for ﬁeld operational
tests [topics in automotive networking],” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 48, no. 5, May 2010, pp. 148–154.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

[2]
J. C. Haartsen, “The bluetooth radio system,” IEEE Personal Communi-
cations, vol. 7, no. 1, February 2000, pp. 28–36.
[3]
J. r. Lin, T. Talty, and O. K. Tonguz, “On the potential of bluetooth low
energy technology for vehicular applications,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 53, no. 1, January 2015, pp. 267–275.
[4]
H. Znamiec, B. Reuber, R. Henze, and F. K¨uc¨ukay, “A Method for the
Efﬁcient Testing of new Automated Driving Functions,” Fast Zero, 2017.
[5]
“Ieee standard for information technology–telecommunications and infor-
mation exchange between systems local and metropolitan area networks–
speciﬁc requirements - part 11: Wireless lan medium access control (mac)
and physical layer (phy) speciﬁcations,” IEEE Std 802.11-2016 (Revision
of IEEE Std 802.11-2012), Dec 2016, pp. 1–3534.
[6]
E. Hossain, M. Rasti, H. Tabassum, and A. Abdelnasser, “Evolution
toward 5g multi-tier cellular wireless networks: An interference man-
agement perspective,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 3,
June 2014, pp. 118–127.
[7]
D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, “Ieee 802.11p: Towards an international
standard for wireless access in vehicular environments,” in VTC Spring
2008 - IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, May 2008, pp. 2036–
2040.
[8]
M. Doering, S. Lahde, J. Morgenroth, and L.Wolf, “IBR-DTN: An
Efﬁcient Implementation for Embedded Systems,” Chants ’08, 2008, pp.
117–120.
[9]
T. Sch¨utze, “Automotive Security: Cryptography for Car2X Communi-
cation,” Rohde + Schwarz, 2011.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

