Personalized Learning Coach: 
An adaptive application for mindset and motivation 
 
Rachel Van Campenhout 
Dept. of Instruction and Leadership in Education 
Duquesne University 
Pittsburgh, United States 
email: vancampenhoutr@duq.edu 
 
 
Abstract—This paper outlines an idea for an adaptive 
application which would integrate with other digital learning 
platforms to generate a profile for a learner on their mindset, 
goals, and motivation. This adaptive system would then 
provide personalized coaching through prompts based on the 
learner’s profile and engagement within the learning platform, 
in order to shift mindsets and increasing learning outcomes. 
Keywords—learning; motivation; mindset; goals; outcomes; 
adaptive; prompts. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Digital technology is revolutionizing every industry, 
creating pathways to new efficiencies and more effective use 
of resources. The education industry is changing as well with 
personalized learning, blended classrooms, virtual reality, 
and a variety of other technology advances [1]. There are 
decades of research on how and why we learn, but the 
internet as a learning tool allows for data to be gathered, 
analyzed, and acted upon. What if the body of research on 
learning mindset and motivation could be utilized as a 
personal adaptive learning coach for any online learning 
tool? A Personalized Learning Coach (PLC) could integrate 
with online learning system such as language learning apps, 
children’s coding apps, massive open online courses 
(MOOCs), professional training, and more. The PLC would 
gather information on a learner’s goals and mindset and then 
adaptively deliver advice, reinforcement, and encouragement 
based on the learner’s unique profile and actual engagement 
with the learning content, all with an aim to improve the 
learner’s outcomes.  
This proposed application is an idea resulting from my 
learning and motivation research as a doctorate student, and 
experience working in educational technology. While the 
technical implementation is beyond the scope of this paper, I 
will outline the motivation and learning theory which would 
drive the functionality of the application (Section II), the 
proposed adaptive behavior of the application (Section III), 
and the outcomes and significance (Section IV).  
II. 
LEARNING AND MOTIVATION THEORY 
Motivation is a complex and multifaceted concept with 
significant research looking at types and approaches within 
an educational setting [2]. While there are many approaches 
to motivation, the PLC would target shifting mindsets and 
beliefs to better support motivation to learn, as learners with 
this type of motivation continue to engage in activities even 
if not immediately interested do so because they find the 
program valuable and desirable [8]. “Motivation to learn 
refers to a student’s propensity to value learning activities: to 
find them meaningful and worthwhile, and to try to get the 
intended benefits from them. In contrast to intrinsic 
motivation, which is primarily an affective response to an 
activity, motivation to learn is primarily a cognitive response 
involving attempts to make sense of the activity, understand 
the knowledge that it develops, and master the skills that it 
promotes” [2]. The PLC would utilize many strategies to 
help students increase or maintain motivation to learn. 
A critical theory behind the PLC is understanding the 
mindset and beliefs of the user. Learners who believe they 
can learn new things (incremental theory) often display 
better learning outcomes and self-esteem than those who 
believe their abilities to learn limited (entity theory) [3][4]. 
Intervention studies have shown that shifts can occur from 
entity to incremental thinking through stimulation [5]. One 
main strategy of the learning coach would be to attempt to 
replicate these findings that mindsets can be shifted from 
incremental to entity. 
Understanding a learner’s goals can illuminate why they 
are engaged with a particular learning activity and how to 
best support them. There are two distinct types of goals 
which are useful for this project: purpose goals which 
explain why something is being learned, and target goals 
which express how something will be learned [6]. Explicit 
goal setting can be especially helpful for learners struggling 
with motivation or self-efficacy. Guiding students through 
the process of setting goals and reflecting on their own 
learning can lead them to engage in activities with 
motivation to learn. With a model for setting goals and 
significant reinforcement, learners have shown development 
and growth of motivation to learn [7].  
III. 
AN ADAPTIVE APPROACH 
Computer tutoring systems focused on content are nearly 
as effective as human tutoring [9], so an adaptive program 
aimed at addressing non-domain specific content could be 
equally as effective. This PLC could integrate with any 
digital learning application for which a user creates an 
account, and could track a user from one learning tool to the 
next. A critical component of integration with other learning 
platforms would be the ability to receive and analyze data as 
learners answer practice questions and engage with the 
content in the native platform.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

The purpose of the Personalized Learning Coach is to 
shift mindsets and improve learning outcomes by gathering 
information about the learner and adaptively delivering 
prompts and content based on the learner’s profile and 
subsequent learning actions. The first step, then, is to create 
the learner’s profile. The learning coach would begin by 
delivering a battery of validated surveys on growth mindset, 
self-efficacy, goals, and motivation. The learner would be 
asked to enter their purpose goal for why they want to learn 
the material, and decide on target goals for the content. 
Based on the learner’s answers, the coach would provide an 
analysis of the learner’s mindset and beliefs, and suggestions 
for learning strategies. This profile and the resulting 
suggestions (derived from learning theory) is the first 
personalized set of content delivered to the learner. 
With the learner’s profile established, the PLC would 
then engage with the learner periodically through notification 
pop-ups, or prompts. Adaptive prompts have shown 
promising results and could help shift mindsets and improve 
learning outcomes [10]. One type of notification would be 
based on performance on formative learning activities such 
as answering questions or completing tasks. For learners who 
indicated they had a fixed/entity mindset about learning and 
their abilities, the coach would periodically congratulate 
correct answers and remind the learner that learning is an 
achievable process. Incorrect responses would elicit prompts 
reminding the learner that mistakes are part of the learning 
process, and to keep going. The purpose of these PLC  
notifications is to shift to growth and incremental mindsets.  
The PLC could also respond to the learner’s progress by 
delivering prompts to help learners identify themselves as the 
active controller in the learning process. The causal 
attribution of success or failure can impact motivation for 
learners. Learners demonstrate more sustained effort and 
persistence when attributing success to internal forces, 
namely sufficient ability and reasonable effort [2]. If learners 
with fixed mindsets or low motivation can see their 
outcomes as a mix of their current knowledge and level of 
effort, then they can shift their mindset to understand that 
learning is controllable.  
Using a learner’s goals to reinforce motivation to learn is 
also a tool the PLC can act on. Every learner will have 
different goals for the content they are trying to learn, and 
the number and types of goals have shown to have an 
impact on how successful learners are [11]. The coach can 
use those goals to determine when and how to encourage 
continued engagement and reinforce goals. The coach can 
also use the learner’s goals to cultivate motivation to learn 
by 
emphasizing 
authentic 
activities, 
phrasing 
goal 
statements in terms of learning accomplishments rather than 
tasks completed, revisiting goals post-activity, and creating 
summaries of the learner’s accomplishments [2]. Each of 
these methods would be personalized to each learner 
depending on their profile and how the learner answers 
practice questions and works through the content. 
The PLC would deliver the same validated surveys 
toward the end of the learning experience to determine if the 
adaptive prompts were able to successfully shift mindsets 
where applicable. Learners would be notified if their results 
changed. The PLC cycle is delivering surveys to generate a 
profile, tracking data from the native learning environment, 
adaptively delivering prompts, and re-evaluating learners. 
The PLC could do this process on many learning platforms 
for a single user.  
IV. 
FURTHER RESEARCH  AND SIGNIFICANCE 
Further research is needed to determine the technical 
requirements to develop an application such as this. The PLC 
would need integration tools for current learning technology, 
and a database to store user profiles and learning data. 
Machine learning tools would need to be tested to determine 
the best method of analyzing data and make decisions on the 
type of prompts to deliver. A review of artificial intelligence 
techniques could help the PLC determine when to deliver 
prompts to different types of learner profiles.  
Any person of any age should know that learning is a 
process which is accessible and achievable. Children should 
grow up knowing that they can learn anything they set their 
minds to. Adults looking to grow or make a change in their 
lives should understand how best to engage with learning 
content. Research into learning mindsets and motivation 
have shown that certain beliefs and practices help people 
learn more efficiently, persist longer, and have better self-
concepts [2]. Could an adaptive application incrementally 
improve global learning through surfacing mindsets, goals, 
and motivation to learners of all types?  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Newman, Top 6 digital transformation trends in education, 
Retrieved from Forbes.com, 2017. 
[2] K. R. Wentzel, and R. E. Brophy, Motivating students to 
learn. New York, NY: Routledge, 2014 
[3] L. Blackwell, K. Trzesniewski, and C. Dweck, “Implicit 
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an 
adolescent 
transition: 
A 
longitudinal 
study 
and 
an 
intervention” Child Development, 78, 2007, pp. 246–263.  
[4] R. Robins, and P. Pals, “Implicit self-theories in the academic 
domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, 
and self-esteem change” Self and Identity, 2002, pp. 313–336. 
[5] C. Dweck, “Can personality be changed? The role of beliefs 
in 
personality 
and 
change” 
Current 
Directions 
in 
Psychological Science, 17, 2008, pp. 391–394. 
[6] J. Harackiewicz, and A. Elliot, “The joint effects of target and 
purpose goals on intrinsic motivation: a mediational analysis” 
Personality and Social Psychology, 24, 1998, pp. 675–689. 
[7] A. Assor, “Allowing choice and nurturing an inner-compass: 
Educational 
practices 
supporting 
students’ 
need 
for 
autonomy.” In S. L. Christenson, A. L. Reschly, and C. Wylie 
(Eds.), Handbook on student engagement, pp. 421–440. New 
York: Springer. 2012 
[8] M. Nisan, “Beyond intrinsic motivation: Cultivating a “sense 
of the desirable.” In F. Oser, A. Dick, & J. Patry (Eds.), 
Effective and responsible teaching: The new synthesis, pp. 
126–138. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 1992 
[9] K. VanLehn, “The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, 
intelligent tutoring systems, and other tutoring systems” 
Educational Psychologist, 46, 2011, pp. 197-221.  
[10] R. Schwonke, S. Hauser, M. Nückles, and A. Renkl, 
“Enhancing computer-supported writing of learning protocols 
by adaptive prompts” Computers in Human Behavior, 22, 
2006, pp. 77-92.  
[11] A. Valle, R. Cabanach, J. Nunez, J. Gonzalez-Pienda, S. 
Rodriguez, and I. Pineiro, “Multiple goals, motivation and 
academic 
learning” 
British 
Journal 
of 
Educational 
Psychology, 
73, 
2003, 
pp. 
71–87.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

