Tailored Digital Twins for Lifecycle Assessment & Management 
Stakeholder centered Digital Twin Framework Design for Product Lifecycle Managements and 
Assessment 
 
Dominique Briechle, Marit Mathiszig, Nelly Nicaise Nyeck Mbialeu, Ali Piriyaie, Argianto Rahartomo 
Institute for Software and Systems Engineering 
University of Technology Clausthal 
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
Email: dominique.fabio.briechle@tu-clausthal.de; marit.elke.anke.mathiszig@tu-clausthal.de; 
nelly.nicaise.nyeck.mbialeu@tu-clausthal.de; ali.piriyaie@tu-clausthal.de; argianto.rahartomo@tu-clausthal.de 
 
Abstract— The notion of sustainability is gaining more 
attention across the whole world, thereby serving as a 
predictor of future economic gain. Emerging technologies like 
Digital Twins (DT) could help meet Circular Economy 
objectives such as the UN Sustainable Development Goals. 
Although using a framework to develop DT is widespread, it is 
often 
not directly suited 
to answer the information 
requirement that the stakeholders desire fully. Shortcomings in 
design are therefore discovered to late when the concept of the 
Twin is already implemented. As such, this paper aims to 
provide a requirement-based framework for designing a 
sustainable Digital Twin that satisfies several parties involved 
in its conception and use. The proposed framework is therefore 
designed on the one hand to filter out the most valuable 
information requests for the stakeholders. On the other hand, 
the design requests are turned in the design phase to 
recommendations for the outlaying of the architectural 
implementation. This is shown as an example application for 
an e-bike with different stakeholders involved. Therefore, the 
use case features five different stakeholder groups with their 
own information request to show how these influence the final 
setup of such a twin. The proposed framework lays the path 
for improving the current lifecycle assessment while ensuring 
the optimization of Digital Twin design flexibility and therefore 
its application for a variety of different products. 
 
Keywords - Stakeholder Information Requirement; Digital 
Twin; Product Lifecycle; Framework Design, Circular Economy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The current product usage leads globally more and more 
to a massive production of waste. Therefore, the question of 
product life prolonging techniques and measurements is on 
an all-time high. Especially in the context of Circular 
Economy, the condition assessment of products is a 
frequently mentioned topic.  
Sustainable consumption and production are also 
important topics for society and ecology in general 
regarding the increasing world population [1]. Furthermore, 
the UN defined 17 sustainability goals in order to accelerate 
environmental and socially friendly usage of resources and 
products [2]. However, in order to apply the measurements 
detailed information about a product’s current state, product 
life and usage are required. For example, the correct 
assessment of a product’s condition is needed to decide, if a 
product can be used further or if the manufacturing of a new 
product would be more beneficial. This is where Digital 
Twins can come into usage; digital counterparts of physical 
products which can be used to monitor its state and optimize 
its usage. However, it is not simply sufficient to just monitor 
a product randomly. In order to gain the most out of a 
Digital Twin, its usage and functionality should be 
determined before implementing the potential architecture. 
The framework is therefore laid out to help stakeholders 
designing a Digital Twin for their expense with the most 
beneficial information generation capabilities. The target of 
this paper is to support the conception process of Digital 
Twins for a product and satisfy specifically the stakeholders 
information request due to a new framework design. The 
question of a suitable approach for Digital Twin Design in 
order to improve information value by simultaneously 
decreasing expense is tried to be answered while also 
addressing the limitations of the framework. This lie 
especially in the limited generation of new, unpredicted 
information that may be gained due to correlation of sensor 
data. This is addressed in a subchapter in order to discuss 
the limitations of the framework approach. It should be 
stated, however, that this is a concept which still needs 
validation and testing. 
The paper consists of different subsections, describing the 
initial structure of the research work. In section II the 
current State of the Art of the Digital Twin-based research 
in terms of framework design is summarized. The section III 
describes the initial problem, followed by the used research 
methodology described in section IV. The main part 
consists of the framework design explained in section V and 
its use case application in section VI. The paper closes with 
a final conclusion in section VII. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
This section aims to provide a brief overview of some of 
the currently proposed frameworks for digital twins, 
highlighting relevant studies and works related to the 
present paper. Over the years, the digital twin concept has 
evolved from just being the virtual mirror of a physical asset 
[3] to include digital twin data and services for static as well 
as dynamic information flow between both entities [4][5]. 
Over the time various digital twin frameworks have been 
proposed as the digital twin concept has been extending to 
more scientific and industrial fields. 
Tao et al. [4] define a framework known as Digital Twin-
driven Product Design (DTPD), which focuses on creating 
the digital twin of a physical asset, then applying the 
acquired generated knowledge in the redesigning process of 
the asset. In essence, it is a design framework that 
transforms big data into useful information that are used in 
the following process to guide decisions during the different 
design phases of the asset. 
Zhang et al. [6] worked on a data- and knowledge-driven 
framework for the Digital Twin of a Manufacturing Cell 
(DMTC). The physical, digital, data, knowledge, and social 
spaces make up the five-dimensional space of this 
framework, which collectively promote the capacity of the 
digital twin for self-control functionalities as well as self-
assessing capabilities. Thereby, rendering the manufacturing 
cell autonomous while maintaining flexibility and lowering 
cost. 
D’Amico et al. [7] propose a conceptual framework for 
the evaluation of the Remaining Useful Life (RUL) of a 
product. The aim is to improve the availability of the 
product and minimize expenses throughout its life cycle by 
increasing the level of understanding of this asset. Thus, this 
framework focuses on an efficient exchange of information 
through its three main layers, which include the data 
architecture, modules, and connection of the modules to one 
another. 
Onaji et al. [8] provide a framework that supports some 
essential functionalities in digital twin applications such as 
tools and functionalities for prognosis and diagnosis of 
behavior, simulations of the related system, monitoring and 
controlling of the system as well as its optimization 
[6][9][10]. It is made up of six components that work 
together to enable the manufacturing sector to benefit from 
features like integration, interconnectivity, flexibility, 
analytics, and supported decision-making. 
A three-layered structure is conceived by Traoré [11] that 
combines the various perspectives on Digital Twins to 
clarify the concept that already has diverse understandings. 
This framework has a data layer, a capability layer, and a 
service layer, which provide a modular conceptual 
foundation that can aid in the adaptive or dynamic design of 
specific solutions. Practically, the framework was sampled 
to create the Digital Twin of an energy-efficient building 
and a smart manufacturing shop floor. 
A proposal of a structure which incorporates the basic 
functionalities, initial requirements and guiding definitions 
for standardized components of Digital Twin is proposed by 
Nwogu [12]. It is a requirement-driven, technology-agnostic 
structure that can be applied to different situations based on 
their unique requirements. Hence, creating a close 
relationship between the Digital Twin requirements and the 
components in the suggested framework.  
Zhao et al. [13] noticed issues with the usage of digital 
twins in the Construction industry, such as the misalignment 
of data integration and data standards, and a lack of 
information within each component. To tackle those 
obstacles, a conceptual framework is suggested to enable a 
broader application and implementation of digital twins for 
facility 
management 
throughout 
the 
Operation 
and 
Maintenance phase. Also, the framework takes into 
consideration stakeholders who are struggling with facility 
management decision-making processes. Moreover, the 
framework has six layers: preparation layer, data acquisition 
layer, data processing layer, data transmission and modeling 
layer, model logic layer with intelligence tools, and 
application presentation layer. 
The aforementioned brief literature review shows that 
multiple specific frameworks for various uses exist that 
integrate existing Digital Twin viewpoints in one way or 
another. Our research is distinctive in that it suggests a 
framework that facilitates the process of evaluating product 
conditions 
to 
improve 
sustainability 
with 
special 
consideration of the stakeholder requirements.  
III. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Stakeholders have in general a high interest in acquiring 
information regarding the product and its usage by the 
consumer. In the case of a Digital Twin this is usually the 
virtual counterpart of the physical product which, when 
combined to one another, creates a cyber-physical entity. 
The kind of information extracted from the Digital Twin and 
received by the stakeholders can therefore vary widely and 
is usually limited by the technological borders of the 
respective product like data acquisition methods, product 
features or transmission capabilities [31]. However, before 
the information can be transmitted and processed, the 
governing question regarding the kind of information the 
stakeholders want to receive out of their Digital Twin must 
be answered in order to achieve a model which not only 
satisfies the specific stakeholders’ needs but also is 
sustainable in terms of the selection and shortage of an 
unnecessary information overflow (redundancies). This 
leads to the two assumptions that can therefore be stated:  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

1. 
The 
selection 
of 
stakeholder 
information 
requirements is a highly important factor when 
designing Digital Twins  
2. 
The use of a “smart” digital twin framework design 
could prevent insufficient or over-dimensioned DT 
designs that lead to more resource wastage and 
consumption than necessary  
The later proposed framework takes the physical entity 
properties and its environment into account and ties them 
directly to the framework design considerations. The 
information generation is therefore highly guided by the 
stakeholders needs and can be separated based on the two 
governing principles of the utilizability of a specific type of 
information for the targeted Stakeholder group and the 
technical capabilities of the information generation system 
[32]. To highlight the needs of the stakeholders, the type of 
stakeholder connected to a specific product must be 
determined first. Based on the number of information 
interests in(1…m)(1…n) for each of the stakeholders 
(1….m), the result of the total number of relevant 
information factors can thereby be determined. This 
setup/configuration has a significant impact on the general 
sensing capabilities of the digital twin, as well as the overall 
structure of the framework [33]. The next section will 
describe the initial situation of a product with a diverse 
stakeholder composition. 
A. Initial Scenario: E-Bike Sharing Service 
In order to explain the procedure of designing a tailor-
made Digital Twin, a e-bike sharing ecosystem is selected 
as use case. E-bikes are on an all-time rise since the 
increased transition of urban traffic ecosystems towards 
more sustainable mobility services [22].  
In general, such ecosystems consist of a variety of 
different stakeholders [23][24]. Manufacturers, Clients, 
Service Providers and Product Maintainers as well as 
Recyclers and even Resellers can be viewed as examples of 
stakeholders that are part of the bike sharing ecosystem. In 
terms of the application of a digital twin of an e-bike, all of 
those stakeholders have specific information requests which 
they are interested in being fulfilled. On the one hand, these 
demands are not necessarily the same and are therefore of 
different value for each of the stakeholders. On the other 
hand, there are information demands, which are shared 
mutually by different shareholders and therefore have a 
higher value for all of them. Therefore, it is necessary to 
deal with the information requests of the stakeholders in 
order to find the highest information benefit at a given cost 
for the achievement of the former. Disregarding the 
stakeholder’s information request can lead to unsatisfying 
decisions concerning the product’s life because of a lack of 
information, that is not in the sense of a sustainable product 
usage and the Circular Economy in general. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  
In order to acquire a sufficient knowledge base on 
different types of information requests served by Digital 
Twin technology and framework designs, the authors used 
research papers and articles which were acquired by 
searching for different keyword combinations in order to 
create search strings to find suitable research papers. The 
search was conducted using google scholar and science 
direct as main tools in order to find suitable references. For 
the acquiring process the reference search for Digital Twin 
related papers was conducted by the setup sections of the 
digital twin and their relevance for Circular Economy 
related topics. The proposed frameworks in the state of the 
art section were assessed based on the following five key 
features [28][29]:  
- 
Communication (between Digital Twin, physical 
entity and entity environment) 
- 
Data acquisition 
- 
Data processing  
- 
Application Services  
- 
Adjunct Adaption and reutilization 
Based on the above-named features, the referenced 
papers were selected as research foundation for the designed 
Digital Twin framework. The main setup of the proposed 
frameworks was analyzed and the above-mentioned key 
features were further concretized in order to specify the 
layer 
structure 
of 
the 
later 
proposed 
information 
requirement-driven Digital Twin Framework. 
Digital Twins have been used vastly within the last few 
years. However, most of the proposed Digital Twin Designs 
are centered around the product and the information that can 
be extracted by configuring data acquisition tools for the 
specific cause [30]. The goal of this paper is the design 
approach for a stakeholder requirement-driven framework 
which allows the configuration based on the final 
information that is desired by the stakeholders in order to 
use them in their field of application. The section therefore 
clarified the used research methodology and outlined the 
purpose of the work. The following section of the paper 
outlines the various requirements that stakeholders may 
have based on their branch and endeavors to establish a 
categorization of the required information. 
V. 
FRAMEWORK COMPONENTS  
The design of a framework for Digital Twins must 
necessarily address the needs of its stakeholders, that require 
the information which will be generated by it. Therefore, it 
is of uttermost importance to take the environment and its 
stakeholders into account when setting up the framework. 
The general environment of the Digital Twin is highly 
versatile and will change drastically depending on the 
product which is subject to the Twin. This is not only 
caused by the different products affecting the properties of a 
specific Twin but as well by the types of stakeholders and 
their 
specific 
information 
requests. 
Further, 
the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

environmental influence is governed by the technical 
limitations of the sensing and acting devices, which results 
in a highly specific environmental composition for each 
product type. The idea of requirement-driven frameworks, 
however, is not totally new and has already been described 
by Nwogu et al. [34]. The basic difference between the 
approach presented by Nwogu et al. and the framework 
design stated here is the integration of the Stakeholder Layer 
necessary to form not only the requirements addressed to the 
required features but as well the requirements based on the 
basic information type. The Digital Twin Framework is as 
well not restricted merely to the data flow from the 
Framework to the adjunct sensing and acting systems but is 
receiving, as well a stream based on additional information 
and knowledge generated by preceding systems. However, 
the general foundation of the proposed framework is based 
on the one presented 2020 by Lu, C. et al. [35]. 
The proposed framework, shown in Figure 1 integrates a 
Product Stakeholder Layer (1), where the Stakeholders 
along with their information requests will directly contribute 
to the setup of the Digital Twin. The classification of the 
Stakeholders as well as their individual information request 
are thereby guiding the information generation boundaries 
of the resulting Digital Twin. Possible Stakeholders of 
physical products are 
for example 
the Designers, 
Manufacturers, 
Distributors, 
Maintenance 
Service 
Providers, Remanufacturers, Recyclers and of course the 
actual users of the product. The Stakeholders have different 
requests for information since they influence the product at 
different stages of its lifecycle [36]. The goal of the Layer is 
therefore the determination of the stakeholders’ information 
demands as well as the selection of those demands based on 
the governing cost of the information generation. This will 
result however in a catalogue of information demands, 
which are then used in the adjunct Design & Conception 
Layer to create the architecture of the Digital Twin. 
Due to the main driving requirement of information-
based framework design, the Design phase of the actual 
structure is integrated as a central part of the concept. This 
results in an initial Design Block (2) integrated into the 
framework. In the Design & Conception Layer the 
Stakeholder request are evaluated and sorted in order to 
select the proper design of the resulting Digital Twin. 
Therefore, the exact setup of the respective Twin is 
modelled in terms of the establishment of communication 
between 
the 
different 
subsystems 
(synchronization 
frequency, type of transmission), the usage of different tools 
to produce the required information and the implementation 
of the generated results and the thereby resulting control 
over the actuation systems [37]. The planned design is 
therefore affecting the subsequent systems of the framework 
to a large extend. After setting the governing features of the 
respective Digital Twin for a product, the in-depth planning 
of the subsequent systems is conducted. The first section 
which is thereby accounted is the Data Block (3) with the 
Data acquisition, Data processing and Data validation 
Layer. The type of data acquisition is naturally limited by 
the technical limitations of the information request type and 
the necessary data collection system which is used in this 
context. Data acquisition therefore covers all types of data 
transmission whether it might be collected via sensing 
devices or by other data sources like historical usage data, 
production and design data or data concerning the product’s 
usage after reaching the end of its lifecycle. The Data 
acquisition Layer is hereby the foundation of the Digital 
Twin and is therefore highly affecting the quality of the 
resulting information and knowledge. Data processing is 
equally important to the acquisition of the data since it adds 
the necessary properties to generate the desired information 
which allows the classification of the raw data. The 
processing is therefore a crucial task in order to use the data 
in the subsequent applications. The first step is hereby the 
data preparation, where the raw data is cleansed of flawed 
values and redundancies in order to use them in the process 
of information generation. The type of processing used is 
based as well on the initial information requirement and can 
as well differ drastically between its processing cycle and its 
amount of processed data in one iteration. The location of 
the processing step is also a governing factor for the Digital 
Twin, although the development of scalable far- and near-
edge technology are currently bridging the selection of the 
processing 
location 
and 
therefore 
enabling 
system 
scalability [38]. The next step is the validation of the data 
and its transmission to the adjunct Evaluation block. Data 
validation is the third column of the data concerned block 
and is the “reality check” of the generated information to 
prevent the transmission of illogical and false information. 
The validation is therefore the second iteration of the 
transmission check. The basic difference between the 
processing and validation layer is the “item” which is 
evaluated: whereas the processing layer evaluates and filters 
the raw data, the validation layer accounts the plausibility of 
the initial databased and generated information. As well as 
the adjunct processing layer, the other data and information 
transferred to the acquisition layer by the different systems 
are also evaluated [39]. The Service Block (4) is the 
subsequent unit after the data-concerned section. In this 
section, the previously created data and information are 
transmitted to the different service branches in order to 
generate follow-up information to answer the initial 
information requests. For example, the question for lifecycle 
estimation, future product life assessment, and construction 
optimization can be answered. The block is separated into 
three distinguished layers: Preassessment, Prognosis, and 
Evaluation. The preassessment layer is used for the 
preparation of the gathered information in order to use it in 
the subsequent application. This includes the refrainment of 
the validated information and the classification in order to 
use them for simulations, prognosis, or recommendation 
functionalities. The selection of the right setup is here as 
well highly dependent on the type of required information 
and, subsequently the digital service which is selected 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

afterward [40]. These services are implemented in the 
Service 
Layer. This layer is in contrast to the 
beforementioned layer more versatile since it can consist of 
a high variety of different tools, tailor-made for the specific 
use case, and therefore complex in its internal structure. The 
layer is the core section of the Digital Twin in terms of 
adjunct functionalities, and combines the features around 
the utilization of the generated information for the specific 
application [41]. Therefore, the layer is built in a modular 
approach which can integrate different types of simulation 
systems that can be separated based on their calculation 
methodology and the overall model, on which they are built. 
Examples here for are modular dynamic simulations and 
Monte-Carlo Simulations, which are used in a variety of 
different simulation applications [42]. This concept is 
already in use and is carried out for different types of 
products and systems. As an example, the usage of Object-
Oriented Modelling and Simulation (OOMS) can be seen as 
an 
approach 
to 
tackle highly 
complex 
simulation 
environments [43]. Further, the usage of prognosis tools is 
highly anticipated in order to assess the products behavior 
throughout its lifetime. As an example, this was already 
described in order to predict the behavior of bearing 
components used in the railcar industry. The conducted 
research clearly showed, how Artificial Intelligence (AI) is 
already in use in order to prognosticate the behavior and 
wear of components and can therefore be integrated and 
coupled to its adjunct layers [44]. The last layer of this 
block is the evaluation layer. This layer can as well be based 
on AI technology, but in contrast to the prediction layer, it is 
the third subsystem of the proposed framework and is used 
for validation of the two preceding layers of the block. The 
newly generated, and mostly artificially created information 
is therefore undergoing a last reality check in order to assess 
meaningfulness. This step is highly important regarding the 
overall acceptance of AI based systems and their capability 
of managing and deciding process steps.  
The last block implemented in the internal framework is 
 
Figure 1: Stakeholder Driven Digital Twin Framework Design (inspired by [35]) 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

the Distribution Block (5). This layer ensures the storage 
and communication with the adjunct entities outside the 
internal Digital Twin framework towards the environment. 
The Transfer layer is affected as well by the neighboring 
subsystems, especially in terms of the processing of the 
different types of data and information. Due to the different 
processing requirements of the product the overall 
complexity of the Transfer Layer can vary. This variety 
includes the usage of edge and cloud computing and the 
distribution of tasks to the different processing devices [38]. 
Further, the selection of a fitting transmission technic is as 
well part of the Layer.  
The two sections that complete the overall framework 
proposal are the Action and Adaption Blocks (6). These 
blocks are responsible of adjusting the Twins behavior via 
the actuators and managing the generated information in 
order to transform it into wisdom which is reused by the 
Stakeholders in the different application like design, 
manufacturing or maintenance [45]. The actuator block 
consists therefore of the actuator systems of the physical 
product and carries out the control tasks in order to optimize 
the product usage in case of automated subsystems. 
Therefore, a life-prolonging operation state of the product 
can be enabled and changes in the product’s environment 
can be tackled accordingly to prevent increased wear [46]. 
The Adaption concerned block consists of all methods that 
implement 
generated 
wisdom, lessons learned, and 
guidelines 
into 
the 
Stakeholders’ 
processes. 
The 
transformation of the transferred information is thereby as 
well highly dependent on the stakeholders’ need and is 
subject of the overall design process of the Digital Twin. 
However, the two beforementioned blocks are hybrids 
between the environment, the physical product, and the 
digital twin and are therefore located in the overall 
framework between the different subframes. In the 
following subchapter, the presented Framework and its 
Layers illustrated in Figure 1 are applied onto the initially 
mentioned use case. 
VI. 
USE CASE APPLICATION  
The application of the framework is utilized in the 
following section onto the initially described use case and is 
shown graphically in Figure 2 As described in the 
framework introduction, the first step is the determination of 
the information demands. Therefore, the participating 
stakeholders of the specific product environment have to be 
assessed at first. 
In order to reduce the complexity of the presented use case, 
the Stakeholders are summed up in groups based on their 
common information requirements [33][47, p. 4]: 
1) Designer & Manufacturer 
While the product designer and the product manufacturer 
don´t have to be necessarily the same Stakeholder, this is the 
case for a variety of different products. The information 
requirements for this Stakeholder group cycles around the 
possibility to increase the monetary value and the 
improvement of their product. This leads us to the general 
assumption, that the majority of the information a producer 
is interested in will be information on current usage 
lifecycles of a product as well as the overall condition of 
products throughout the same. Further, the Stakeholder 
might be interested in information regarding the saving of 
material by optimized design based on the information of 
the Digital Twin.  
2) Distributor and Maintenance 
The products’ distributor is the second Stakeholder group 
and is directly in contact with the user of the given product. 
While the distributor has a high interest in increasing its 
monetary outcome by selling the product, the overall 
information required regarding the actual product and its 
usage might not be as high when compared to the other 
stakeholder groups. This is mainly caused by the fact that 
the main interest lies in the actual distribution and sale of 
the product. This changes when the maintenance of the 
 
Figure 2: Framework applied to E-Bike 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

product is included as well in the assumption. The 
information requirement is therefore shifted to a lifecycle-
centered one with focus on duration and maintenance 
optimization information of the regarding Product. 
3) User & Sharing Service Provider  
The third basic stakeholder group is the user & the service 
provider. The user’s interaction with the product will greatly 
influences its overall condition and thus directly influences 
the product lifecycle. Nonetheless, the information interest 
of the digital twin is requested in terms of current usage 
behavior and information for lifecycle prolonging measures. 
Further the possible failure of different parts under the 
current usage profile is a highly valued information for the 
user of a given product. In the case of a ridesharing service, 
users are mainly focused on the reliability and availability of 
the product. These two factors will as well directly affect the 
sensing and transmission design of the hardware setup and 
therefore the Digital Twin itself. 
4) Repairer, Remanufacturer & Refurbisher 
The fourth basic stakeholder group consists of the 
stakeholders, that are involved in the handling of the e-bike 
after reaching its End-of-Life (EoL). However, the focus of 
this group is to enable the product to be used further in its 
original context. The focus is therefore reinstating the 
original functionality of the bike. The stakeholders have 
therefore a major information request regarding the current 
and future condition of the e-bikes and its parts as well as 
the potential time of disfunction in order to assess the 
requirements for reinstating the functional state. For the 
Digital Twin, this requires a high accuracy of the prognosis 
service as well as the EoL recommendation in order to 
satisfy the information requirements.  
5) Recycler 
The last stakeholder group deals with the inevitable fate 
of a product, when it is damaged beyond any form of repair. 
Recyclers are therefore mostly interested in information 
regarding the product type and its potential hazards in order 
to plan the dismantling and recycling process as well as the 
quantity of valuable resources which were used in the 
products manufacturing process. The recycler requires the 
information when the product reaches its EoL and the 
reinstating of its functionality is not desirable.  
Generally speaking, the most desirable information for the 
different stakeholders can therefore be summarized as all 
information concerning the product life, usage and 
optimization. These information types are subsets of a lot of 
information labels and can therefore be seen as supergroups 
for the subsequent information [48].  
     For the product of the mentioned use case this concerns 
especially the monitoring of the motor, the accumulator and 
the frame of the bike, since these are the most expensive 
parts of an e-bike. Therefore, the sensor array should be 
designed to acquire condition information about the bike 
based on usage behavior and environmental influences [49]. 
The sensor array should on the one hand monitor the 
condition of the parts and on the other hand it must monitor 
the user behavior and environmental impact on the 
components. In order to deliver the data required to answer 
the questions above, the sensor array could consist of 
temperature, humidity, and photosensitive sensors for the 
evaluation of the environmental conditions and of strain 
gauge, triaxial sensors, and data from the Battery 
Management System (BMS) for the monitoring of the 
components [50]. 
     In case of the E-Bike, the location of the Digital Twin 
and the transmission frequency will influence the overall 
setup greatly. As mentioned before, the Stakeholders may 
have different requirements based on the frequency of the 
transmissions and must find an agreement. For example, for 
the E-Bike, the highest frequency need would be the 
advisable way to plan the data transmission installations. 
For the previously described use case of Bike Sharing, the 
transmission could be established, for example either by the 
user’s mobile device via mobile communication or while 
loading the E-Bikes at the different sharing points via 
wireless LAN.  
     The service concerned applications can differ as well 
widely based on the composition of the Stakeholders. 
Possible service applications for the E-bike could be for 
example DT data-based Finite Element Method (FEM) 
simulations to determine component wear over time or the 
prognose of accumulator loading capacity decreasement 
over time due to the usage behavior (Loading cycles, 
loading environments etc.) [51]. These applications can 
deliver information desirable for the different Stakeholders 
and can thereby enable subsequent services like predictive 
maintenance or future-life-planning of the components.  
The transmission technology onto the Adaption and 
Action concerned block will usually in the case of E-Bikes 
be the same as the one that connects the Data and Service 
concerned block to one another (since the E-Bike will most 
properly not be outfitted with a processing device powerful 
enough to carry the simulations out on spot). Therefore, the 
information will be transmitted once again via the Transfer 
Layer to the above-mentioned Layers. The Actuator Layer is 
in case of the E-Bikes restricted to the optimization of the 
running conditions of the electrical motor and the battery 
system, since these two components are the only devices 
outfitted with controlling and managing subsystems. The 
Adaption concerned Layer integrates, as described in the 
corresponding section in the previous chapter, the 
information into knowledge or lessons learned. In case of 
the 
use 
case, 
the 
Layer 
could 
provide 
specific 
recommendations on how to optimize the components in 
order to increase their durability and overall lifetime as well 
as create patterns in order to enhance the stakeholder’s 
services like the maintenance operations carried out by the 
provider or the business model adjustments regarding the 
distribution of the rented E-Bikes after reaching their 
technical obsolescence [51]. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

B. Tailor Made vs Research Driven DT-Design  
The presented design is faced to provide a framework 
solution under two major premises: the first one is the DT-
design for Digital Twins which are used in applications 
were a scarcity of resources is expected and therefore 
careful design approaches are mandatory. The second one is 
the extensive domain knowledge of the stakeholders 
regarding the overall Digital Twin Design. This includes as 
well the requirement of a well-researched domain, where 
there are nearly no unknown factors which could affect the 
physical entity in its usual environmental behavior. 
However, it should be noticed that the framework is 
therefore not suitable for use cases which are still not well 
researched and where domain knowledge is limited. The 
framework can be deployed in digital twin applications like 
the above-mentioned E-Bike, where the physical counterpart 
and its usual environmental influence have already been 
researched widely. In other applications however a different 
Digital Twin design approach, which is targeted more 
clearly to increase the overall data acquisition by measuring 
a lot of different parameters with a broad sensor array might 
be the better solution. The described tailor-made framework 
has on the other hand the benefit of decreasing resource 
input by pre-selecting the measuring capabilities. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The main motivation of this research is to provide a 
framework usable to design tailor-made Digital Twin 
systems based on the initial requirement of the stakeholders. 
The proposed framework was set in context with a described 
use case regarding the lifecycle management of an E-Bike. 
The application of the initially described use case showed 
clearly, on one hand, the necessity of requirements- driven 
Digital Twin Frameworks in order to fulfill the needs of the 
Stakeholders as well as the functionality of an architecture 
setup for Digital Twins based on the proposed design 
pattern. 
The 
governing 
factor 
of 
the 
information 
requirement proved to be essential for designing fitting and 
energy optimized Digital Twins. The integration of the 
design of the Digital Twin as central part of the Framework 
design allows the initial collection of information requests 
and allows simultaneously the retrofitting of already in use 
architectures for the own purpose by reconsidering the 
previously made selections in the design phase. However, 
the selection of the required information by the Stakeholders 
in order to assess the final architecture of the physical 
entities’ corresponding Digital Twin is still up for debate. 
The information selection phase therefore requires its own 
set of rules and algorithms in order to grant a fair and even 
distribution of information interest among the different 
Stakeholders. In general, the hereby proposed framework 
concept can be seen as a first step in order to conduct 
research in the area of stakeholder information requirement 
driven DT design. Using requirement driven frameworks 
could therefore not only pave the way for an enhancement 
of current lifecycle assessments but can as well optimize 
Digital Twins in general in terms of energy consumption, 
sensor 
implementation, 
and 
data 
and 
information 
redundancy based on the approach of tailor-made 
architecture designs for different products. However, it 
should be stated, that the concept still needs testing and 
validation in order to confirm its general expressiveness. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Elke, F. Swiaczny, A. Genoni, N. Sander, and R. Westermann, 
“Global population development. Facts and Trends” Bundesinstitut für 
Bevölkerungsforschung, Jul. 2021. doi: 10.12765/bro-2021-01. 
[2] Redaktion: Lois Jensen, Vereinte Nationen, “Goals for a sustainable 
development Report 2022.” 2022. [retrieved: Mai, 2023] Available: 
https://www.un.org/Depts/german/millennium/SDG-2022-DEU.pdf 
[3] M. Grieves and J. Vickers, “Digital Twin: Mitigating Unpredictable, 
Undesirable 
Emergent 
Behavior 
in 
Complex 
Systems,” 
in 
Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Complex Systems: New Findings and 
Approaches, F.-J. Kahlen, S. Flumerfelt, and A. Alves, Eds. Cham: 
Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 85–113. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
319-38756-7_4. 
[4] F. Tao et al., “Digital twin-driven product design framework,” Int. J. 
Prod. Res., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3935–3953, 2019. 
[5] Q. Lu et al., “Developing a Digital Twin at Building and City Levels: A 
Case Study of West Cambridge Campus,” J. Manag. Eng.-ASCE, vol. 36, 
no. 3, 2020. 
[6] C. Zhang, G. Zhou, J. He, Z. Li, and W. Cheng, “A data-and 
knowledge-driven framework for digital twin manufacturing cell,” 
Procedia CIRP, vol. 83, pp. 345–350, 2019. 
[7] D. D’Amico et al., “Conceptual framework of a digital twin to evaluate 
the degradation status of complex engineering systems,” Procedia CIRP, 
vol. 86, pp. 61–67, 2019. 
[8] I. Onaji, D. Tiwari, P. Soulatiantork, B. Song, and A. Tiwari, “Digital 
twin in manufacturing: conceptual framework and case studies,” Int. J. 
Comput. Integr. Manuf., pp. 1–28, 2022. 
[9] G. S. Martinez, S. Sierla, T. Karhela, and V. Vyatkin, “Automatic 
generation of a simulation-based digital twin of an industrial process 
plant,” in IECON 2018-44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial 
Electronics Society, 2018, pp. 3084–3089. 
[10] C. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, and D. T. Pham, “A 
reconfigurable modeling approach for digital twin-based manufacturing 
system,” Procedia Cirp, vol. 83, pp. 118–125, 2019. 
[11] M. K. Traoré, “Unifying Digital Twin framework: simulation-based 
proof-of-concept,” IFAC-Pap., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 886–893, 2021. 
[12] C. Nwogu, G. Lugaresi, A. Anagnostou, A. Matta, and S. J. Taylor, 
“Towards a Requirement-driven Digital Twin Architecture,” Procedia 
CIRP, vol. 107, pp. 758–763, 2022. 
[13] J. Zhao, H. Feng, Q. Chen, and B. G. de Soto, “Developing a 
conceptual framework for the application of digital twin technologies to 
revamp building operation and maintenance processes,” J. Build. Eng., vol. 
49, p. 104028, 2022. 
[14] F. Tao, B. Xiao, Q. Qi, J. Cheng, and P. Ji, “Digital twin modeling,” J. 
Manuf. 
Syst., 
vol. 
64, 
pp. 
372–389, 
Jul. 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.06.015. 
[15] D. Piromalis and A. Kantaros, “Digital Twins in the Automotive 
Industry: The Road toward Physical-Digital Convergence,” Appl. Syst. 
Innov., vol. 5, no. 4, p. 65, Jul. 2022, doi: 10.3390/asi5040065. 
[16] A. Martínez-Gutiérrez, J. Díez-González, R. Ferrero-Guillén, P. 
Verde, R. Álvarez, and H. Perez, “Digital Twin for Automatic 
Transportation in Industry 4.0,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 10, p. 3344, May 
2021, doi: 10.3390/s21103344. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

[17] Y. K. Liu, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee, “State-of-the-art survey on 
digital twin implementations,” Adv. Manuf., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–23, Mar. 
2022, doi: 10.1007/S40436-021-00375-W/TABLES/8. 
[18] K. Schade, M. Hübscher, F. zur Lage, J. Schulze, and J. Ringel, 
“Integrating Retail into an Urban Data Platform from a Stakeholder 
Perspective: Network Approaches in Leipzig (Germany),” Sustainability, 
vol. 14, no. 10, p. 5900, May 2022, doi: 10.3390/su14105900. 
[19] A. Luthfi, M. Janssen, and J. Crompvoets, “Stakeholder Tensions in 
Decision-Making for Opening Government Data,” in Business Modeling 
and Software Design, vol. 391, B. Shishkov, Ed. Cham: Springer 
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 331–340. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
52306-0_23. 
[20] V. Gitelman, “Exploring safety-related behaviours of e-cyclists on 
urban streets; an observational study,” Eur. Transp. Eur., no. 85, pp. 1–15, 
Dec. 2021, doi: 10.48295/ET.2021.85.2. 
[21] J. Jiao, H. K. Lee, and S. J. Choi, “Impacts of COVID-19 on bike-
sharing usages in Seoul, South Korea,” Cities, vol. 130, p. 103849, Nov. 
2022, doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2022.103849. 
[22] T. Koska, “The Path to Sustainable Mobility Systems – 8 Theses on a 
digital mobility transition,” p. 33. 
[23] L. Aarikka-Stenroos, D. Chiaroni, J. Kaipainen, and A. Urbinati, 
“Companies’ circular business models enabled by supply chain 
collaborations: An empirical-based framework, synthesis, and research 
agenda,” Ind. Mark. Manag., vol. 105, pp. 322–339, Aug. 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.indmarman.2022.06.015. 
[24] L. Saari, J. Heilala, T. Heikkilä, J. Kääriäinen, A. Pulkkinen, and T. 
Rantala, Digital product passport promotes sustainable manufacturing. 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 2022. 
[25] X. Chen and H. Jiang, “Detecting the Demand Changes of Bike 
Sharing: A Bayesian Hierarchical Approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. 
Syst., 
vol. 
23, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
3969–3984, 
May 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1109/TITS.2020.3037791. 
[26] C. H. Lee, J. W. Lee, and Y. J. Jung, “Practical method to improve 
usage efficiency of bike-sharing systems,” in ETRI Journal, Apr. 2022, vol. 
44, no. 2, pp. 244–259. doi: 10.4218/etrij.2021-0408. 
[27] M. Bertoni and A. Bertoni, “Designing solutions with the product-
service systems digital twin: What is now and what is next?,” Comput. Ind., 
vol. 138, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2022.103629. 
[28] W. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Deng, Z. Liu, and J. Tan, “Digital twin: a state-
of-the-art review of its enabling technologies, applications and challenges,” 
J. Intell. Manuf. Spec. Equip., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–34, Aug. 2021, doi: 
10.1108/JIMSE-12-2020-010. 
[29] M. Bertoni and A. Bertoni, “Designing solutions with the product-
service systems digital twin: What is now and what is next?,” Comput. Ind., 
vol. 138, p. 103629, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2022.103629. 
[30] D. Jones, C. Snider, A. Nassehi, J. Yon, and B. Hicks, “Characterising 
the Digital Twin: A systematic literature review,” CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. 
Technol., vol. 29, pp. 36–52, May 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.cirpj.2020.02.002. 
[31] D. Adamenko, S. Kunnen, R. Pluhnau, A. Loibl, and A. Nagarajah, 
“Review and comparison of the methods of designing the Digital Twin,” 
Procedia 
CIRP, 
vol. 
91, 
pp. 
27–32, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procir.2020.02.146. 
[32] A. Kantaros, D. Piromalis, G. Tsaramirsis, P. Papageorgas, and H. 
Tamimi, “3D Printing and Implementation of Digital Twins: Current 
Trends and Limitations,” Appl. Syst. Innov., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 7, Dec. 2021, 
doi: 10.3390/asi5010007. 
[33] S. Lawrenz, M. Nippraschk, P. Wallat, A. Rausch, D. Goldmann, and 
A. Lohrengel, “Is it all about Information? The Role of the Information 
Gap between Stakeholders in the Context of the Circular Economy,” 
Procedia 
CIRP, 
vol. 
98, 
pp. 
364–369, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procir.2021.01.118. 
[34] C. Nwogu, G. Lugaresi, A. Anagnostou, A. Matta, and S. J. E. Taylor, 
“Towards a Requirement-driven Digital Twin Architecture,” Procedia 
CIRP, vol. 107, pp. 758–763, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2022.05.058. 
[35] Q. Lu et al., “Developing a Digital Twin at Building and City Levels: 
Case Study of West Cambridge Campus,” J. Manag. Eng., vol. 36, no. 3, p. 
05020004, May 2020, doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000763. 
[36] R. Rasor, D. Göllner, R. Bernijazov, L. Kaiser, and R. Dumitrescu, 
“Towards collaborative life cycle specification of digital twins in 
manufacturing value chains,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 98, pp. 229–234, 2021, 
doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2021.01.035. 
[37] J. Friederich, D. P. Francis, S. Lazarova-Molnar, and N. Mohamed, “A 
framework for data-driven digital twins of smart manufacturing systems,” 
Comput. 
Ind., 
vol. 
136, 
p. 
103586, 
Apr. 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compind.2021.103586. 
[38] J. Protner, M. Pipan, H. Zupan, M. Resman, M. Simic, and N. 
Herakovic, 
“Edge 
Computing 
and 
Digital 
Twin 
Based 
Smart 
Manufacturing,” IFAC-Pap., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 831–836, 2021, doi: 
10.1016/j.ifacol.2021.08.098. 
[39] M. Pregnolato et al., “Towards Civil Engineering 4.0: Concept, 
workflow and application of Digital Twins for existing infrastructure,” 
Autom. 
Constr., 
vol. 
141, 
p. 
104421, 
Sep. 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104421. 
[40] Y. Yu, D. M. Yazan, V. Junjan, and M.-E. Iacob, “Circular economy 
in the construction industry: A review of decision support tools based on 
Information & Communication Technologies,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 349, p. 
131335, May 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.131335. 
[41] Benjamin Schleicha*, Marc-André Dittrichb, Till Clausmeyerc, Roy 
Damgraved, John Ahmet Erkoyuncue, Benjamin Haefnerf, Jos de Langed, 
and Denys Plakhotnikg, Wieben Scheidelh, Thorsten Wuest, “Shifting 
value stream patterns along the product lifecycle with digital twins.” 
[retrieved: 
Mai, 
2023] 
https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S2212827120300639?token=4058
F61DD11A9AB2896848BF7756F22597A54B0D6AD3B05F9AABF1DF8
AA149180EF2E6521509C796DBDD1B53895F6BE9&originRegion=eu-
west-1&originCreation=20220609142727  
[42] K. Binder, “Ein drittes Standbein der Forschung neben Experiment 
und (analytischer) Theorie,” Phys. J., p. 6, 2004. 
[43] C. Cimino, A. Leva, E. Negri, and M. Macchi, “An integrated 
simulation paradigm for lifecycle-covering maintenance in the Industry 4.0 
context,” IFAC-Pap., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 307–312, 2020, doi: 
10.1016/j.ifacol.2020.11.049. 
[44] I. Daniyan, R. Muvunzi, and K. Mpofu, “Artificial intelligence system 
for enhancing product’s performance during its life cycle in a railcar 
industry,” 
Procedia 
CIRP, 
vol. 
98, 
pp. 
482–487, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procir.2021.01.138. 
[45] Y.-X. Zhang et al., “Digital twin accelerating development of 
metallized film capacitor: Key issues, framework design and prospects,” 
Energy 
Rep., 
vol. 
7, 
pp. 
7704–7715, 
Nov. 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.egyr.2021.10.116. 
[46] D. Romero, T. Wuest, R. Harik, and K.-D. Thoben, “Towards a 
Cyber-Physical PLM Environment: The Role of Digital Product Models, 
Intelligent Products, Digital Twins, Product Avatars and Digital Shadows,” 
IFAC-Pap., 
vol. 
53, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
10911–10916, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ifacol.2020.12.2829. 
[47] Ostfalia University of Applied Sciences, 38302 Wolfenbüttel, 
Germany, L. Kintscher, S. Lawrenz, H. Poschmann, and P. Sharma, 
“Recycling 4.0 - Digitalization as a Key for the Advanced Circular 
Economy,” J. Commun., pp. 652–660, 2020, doi: 10.12720/jcm.15.9.652-
660. 
[48] S. Blömeke et al., “Recycling 4.0: An Integrated Approach Towards 
an Advanced Circular Economy,” in Proceedings of the 7th International 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Conference on ICT for Sustainability, Bristol United Kingdom, Jun. 2020, 
pp. 66–76. doi: 10.1145/3401335.3401666. 
[49] A. P. Barquet et al., “Sustainable Product Service Systems – From 
Concept Creation to the Detailing of a Business Model for a Bicycle 
Sharing System in Berlin,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 40, pp. 524–529, 2016, 
doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2016.01.127. 
[50] C. Kiefer and F. Behrendt, “Smart e‐bike monitoring system: real‐time 
open source and open hardware GPS assistance and sensor data for 
electrically‐assisted bicycles,” IET Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 
79–88, Mar. 2016, doi: 10.1049/iet-its.2014.0251. 
[51] T. Buchert et al., “Design and Manufacturing of a Sustainable 
Pedelec,” 
Procedia 
CIRP, 
vol. 
29, 
pp. 
579–584, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procir.2015.02.168. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-047-6
ADAPTIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

