Coalition-based Multi-agent Approach for Implementing Ethics 
An assistive application case-study 
 
Nadia Abchiche-Mimouni 
IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, 
91025, Evry, France 
email: nadia.abchichemimouni@univ-evry.fr 
Etienne Colle 
IBISC, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, 
91025, Evry, France 
email: etienne.colle@univ-evry.fr
Abstract— This paper presents an adaptive multi-agent 
approach based on coalitions for ambient assisted living 
applications. Adaptation is crucial because the challenge is to 
deal with a dynamic environment in order to provide adequate 
services to an elderly or a sick person at home. Moreover, it is 
necessary to take into account constraints such as degree of 
urgency of the service, intrusion level of the system and 
person’s privacy. Ethical dimension is then important for the 
acceptability of such applications. The evolution of the degree 
of intrusion based on the degree of urgency and the availability 
of the communication devices of the ambient environment are 
particularly targeted by considering ethical dimension. The 
results show that not only ethics consideration allows better 
acceptability of the system, but also the performances are 
improved. 
Keywords-adaptation; agents coalitions; ethics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Adaptivity is widely studied as a capability that makes a 
system able to exhibit intelligent behavior. Moreover, 
software increasingly has to deal with ubiquity, so that it can 
apply a certain degree of intelligence. Our specific context is 
to assist an elderly or a sick person in loss of autonomy at 
home by providing assistive applications based on 
cooperation among a robot and Communication Objects 
(CO). Maintaining such people at home is not only beneficial 
to their psychological conditions but helps to reduce the 
costs of hospitalizations. Ambient assistive robotics can be 
defined as an extension of ambient intelligence, which 
integrates a mobile and autonomous robot and its embedded 
sensors and the CO present in the house. The interaction 
among the components in such systems is fundamental. 
Arnand & al. [2] the authors presented a coalition-based 
multi-agent system (MAS) for implementing an ambient 
assistive living framework that takes advantage of an 
Ambient Environment (AE): a robot and its embedded 
sensors, cooperating with a network of COs. The aim is to 
provide a service to the person in an adaptive way. A 
coalition of agents proposes a set of data and the way of 
combining these data in order to offer the desired service. 
Adaptation is needed because the context is dynamic and 
difficult to predict. Depending on the context, the same 
service can be achieved by different combination of the data. 
A MAS reifies the sensors, the CO and the robot, allowing 
the cooperation by means of coalitions formation. The agents 
combine the data according to their availability and the 
relevance. Moreover, the system has to deal with privacy and 
intrusion level so that one minimizes causing inconvenience. 
This work is based on our previous system COALAA 
(Coalitions for Ambient Assisted living applications), which 
is a coalition-based approach for implementing ambient 
assisted applications [1]. An improvement is proposed by: 
(1) embedding a Rule-Based Reasoning (RBR) module in 
the agents in order to reason about the coalition formation 
criteria, and (2) extending the scope of the adaptiveness to 
ethical, functional... The new approach can be considered as 
a general approach for implementing adaptation in ambient 
assisted applications. New CO can be added in a dynamic 
way and the way of forming the coalitions can be tuned by 
the user by introducing new rules in the system. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents an ambient assisted living approach based on multi-
agent coalitions. Section III presents a generalized approach 
which deals with ethical dimension. Section IV highlights 
its benefits and shows the results validation. Section V 
concludes with some improvements and perspectives. 
II. 
COALITION-BASED APPROACH AMBIENT 
The principle of coalitions aims at temporarily putting 
together agents for reaching a common goal. The works 
[6][8][9] 
illustrate 
the 
relevance 
of 
coalition-based 
approaches for adaptiveness. The methods are various: either 
incremental, random or centralized. But, all of them proceed 
in two stages: (1) the formation of agent coalitions according 
to their ability to be involved in achieving a goal and (2) the 
negotiation stage among the coalitions in order to choose the 
one that provides the closest solution to the goal. The 
interests of the coalition-based formation protocols are the 
flexibility 
with 
which 
coalitions 
are 
formed 
and 
straightforwardness of the coalition formation process itself. 
The coalitions can get rid of dynamically reorganize with 
local and simple rules defined in the agents. 
A. COALAA 
COALAA is MAS-based on a coalition-based approach for 
ambient agents. Each agent in COALAA encapsulates a CO 
and decides in a local and proactive way when and how to 
contribute to the required service to the person. A more 
general notion than a service, called an effect has been 
introduced. An effect can be a particular lighting at a precise 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

place of the residence or the localization of a robot. The 
MAS configures itself for providing a solution according to 
the availability of the CO and the respect of criteria. Note 
that the goal is not to find the optimal solution but a solution 
close to the required effect. In the coalition formation 
protocol, the obligation to obtain the required effect and an 
intrusion level depending on the urgency of the situation, 
are the most important considered criteria. They are also 
used during the agent reorganization while trying to achieve 
a desired effect. The effect obligation criteria is used in 
priority while the level of intrusion is modified only if 
needed, i.e., to acquire new data and thus to activate the 
sensors likely to cause discomfort to the person. 
Figure 1. Architecture of COALAA 
As shown in Figure 1, several kinds of components are 
necessary to deal with the complexity of COALAA. An 
effect is modelled in the form of a triple <t;c;f> where: 
-t Є T, c Є C 
-T a set of task labels: localization, enlightening… 
-C a set of criteria: accuracy, efficiency, neighbourhood 
-F a list of factors: intrusion level, urgency degree… 
The designer of the system statically assigns the criteria, 
while the influencing factors are assigned by the end-user. 
The information handled by the system is classified into 
two types. This so-called persistent information, related to 
the application domain, puts together data about the 
structure of the residence and the features of the CO. The 
second type concerns volatile data mainly the measures 
provided by the sensors and the orders sent to actuators. The 
volatile data are distributed in each agent, while persistent 
data are stored in an ontology named AA (Ambient 
Assistance) [5][4]. The AA ontology contains four 
categories of information related to the application domain: 
The Home category for defining the structure of the 
environment, 
the 
CO 
category 
for 
knowing 
their 
characteristics and their operating mode, the User category 
for defining the user profile and the Task category that puts 
together the tasks and Services achieved by the system. 
The Gateway is a module for the standardization of 
information exchanged between the ambient environment 
and the MAS. Its role is to make the agents manipulating the 
common information format. This standardization is 
necessary because of the heterogeneity of protocols from 
different manufacturers. 
B. Agent internal architecture 
The agents of the MAS are created according to the 
ontologies concepts. Each agent is assigned an internal 
architecture able to take in charge the agent adaption and 
reactivity by using three main parameters that are: 
neighborhood, history, and ability. The neighborhood sets 
the list of agents that are close to this agent at a given time, 
according to the topological distance. The history stores 
previous perceived information that comes from the sensors. 
This is a simple succession of perceived data, which helps to 
consider the timescale during the process of coalition 
formation. The ability identifies the skills of the agent, which 
are directly related to the encapsulated CO. 
C. Agent behaviors 
In the process of the coalition formation, an agent may 
be either initiator or candidate. Any agent whose ability can 
partially meet the desired effect can be a coalition initiator. 
The initiator exchanges messages with other agents, 
potential members of the coalition, called candidate agents. 
The communication is based on exchanges of messages 
between the initiator agent and candidate agents. As soon as 
the overall ability of the coalition is close to the desired 
effect, the initiator agent is pending the negotiation phase. 
At the end of the coalition formation, each initiator agent 
that is the referent of a coalition is negotiating with other 
initiators agents to select the winning coalition. The 
coalition whose ability is the closest to the desired effect is 
the winning one. The concept of ability is generic. In the 
localization application example, it is instantiated by the 
measure precision. The principle is simple. Each initiator 
agent sends a message that contains the ability obtained by 
its coalition. On receipt of this message, each initiator agent 
compares the ability of the coalition it received to its own 
one. If its ability is lower than that received, the coalition 
will be no more considered, otherwise, it is a winning 
coalition up to receiving a new message. Apart from the 
desired effect, the formation of coalitions uses other criteria 
such as the topological neighborhood to reduce the response 
time or the obsolescence of a measure when the desired 
effect depends on sensor data. Thus, the first step is the 
identification of candidate neighbors according to its own 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

location in the environment (defined by the topological 
distance) and the desired effect. The aim of this strategy is 
to ensure that a result will be provided. For that purpose, the 
first selection criteria considered is the topological distance. 
Once all candidate agents are known, each initiating agent 
continues the selection of candidates based on the recent 
measures criteria. When no coalition is able to meet the 
desired effect, a new search for a successful coalition is 
restarted after having relaxed the constraints on certain 
criteria. Indeed, it is possible to increase the level of 
intrusion of the system despite of the tranquility of the 
person at home. This authorization to increase the level of 
intrusion allows, for example, operating a pan-tilt camera of 
the robot in order to acquire new measures and restart the 
process of searching for a winning coalition. This point is 
sensitive because there is a risk of violating the person’s 
privacy. The protocol of coalition formation is composed of 
two distinct steps. The first step consists in forming 
coalitions of agents according to their ability. The second 
step is a negotiation and refining phase so that the best one, 
in satisfying the desired effect criteria, is chosen. Figure 2 
summarizes the agents’ behaviors. The baseline algorithm 
proceeds in three steps. After initialization, the exchanges 
among agents follow three main actions: formation of all 
possible coalitions for each referent, selection of the best 
coalition according to the coalition precision, deployment of 
the winning coalition. 
The agents’ interaction semantic is based on speech act 
theory [11], allowing the agents to assign a semantic to each 
message by defining a message a type. The most important 
types are: Request, Response, Initiate, Acknowledge, 
Accept and Negotiate. 
Figure 2: Agent behaviors 
D. Discussion 
 COALAA shows the feasibility and the relevance of 
coalition-based MAS for ambient assisted scenario. It also 
shows that it is possible to deal with privacy criteria while 
building the coalitions. This is due to the high degree of 
adaptability of the coalition formation algorithms. To fit the 
obligation for the system to give a result, COALAA 
required the user for manually assign a priority to the 
criteria and the bounds for the values of the criteria. The 
next section illustrates this weakness and shows a 
generalized way of solving this problem. 
III. 
A GENERALIZED CRITERIA MANAGEMENT COALITION 
FORMATION (COALAA-GEN) 
Figure 3 shows an example scenario. A robot in the 
person's home; the patient has fallen. To move towards 
her/him and to guide its camera to the remote caregiver, the 
robot has to be located first. A visual contact will then help 
the remote caregiver to perform a correct diagnosis of the 
situation. Depending if the robot is the room P1 or the room 
P2, the CO required are different. 
Figure 3: Fall detection scenario 
Figure 4 illustrates how the MAS solving this problem. 
More details can found in [3]. Three kinds of CO are 
involved: a robot pan-tilt camera, a fixed camera and a 
presence detection sensor. Three respective ambient agents 
encapsulate these three CO: a Presence Detector Agent 
(APD), a Fixed Camera Agent (AFC) and a Pan-Tilt 
Camera Agent (APTC). Visual markers like Data matrix are 
associated with each camera. Following the fall of the 
patient, a request for a localization effect is generated in the 
form of a triple <t;c;f> where t is a localization task which 
matches with the desired effect, c matches with a singleton 
containing the precision criterion needed for the localization 
task and f matches with a set containing two influencing 
factors that are the intrusion level and level of urgency. In 
the considered scenario, we have considered a precision 
equal to 0.1, a level of urgency equals to 3 (three levels of 
urgency are considered: low=1, medium=2, high=3) and an 
intrusion level initialized to 0 (the less intrusion level). So, 
the triple becomes: <Locate;f0:1g;f3;0g>. The Interface agent 
(AI) has received the desired effect and then broadcasts the 
request InitCoal (<Locate;0:1g;f3;0g>) to all the agents of the 
MAS. As soon as each agent receives the desired effect, it 
checks its ability. As all sensors in the environment have a 
precision that is not better than the desired effect, each agent 
initiates a coalition with immediate neighborhood. In this 
figure, only interactions with APD agent are shown. 
Assuming that all agents are topologically close, APD 
broadcast a coalition formation request by sending an 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

InitCoal message. Each agent receiving the initialization 
message checks if its ability is adequate with the request of 
coalition formation. If yes, it sends an acceptance message 
labelled AcceptCoal to be a candidate. Such a message 
contains the precision of the agent. APD adds progressively 
answer acceptance, and accumulates the abilities, which are 
the precision in the considered localization task. By this 
way, it calculates the overall ability of the coalition until it 
reaches that of the desired effect. Then, it sends ACKCoal 
acceptance to confirm the membership of the candidate to 
the formed coalition. The next step is to activate the 
coalition. The robot moves to the place designated by the 
coalition and guides its pan-tilt-camera to the remote 
caregiver. First of all, the distant user has to verify that the 
person is in his field of vision, so it can perform a correct 
diagnosis of the situation and adopt an adequate action. 
Conversely, if the person is not well located the system 
restarts searching for a new result, after having increased the 
intrusion level. This allows the cameras to be moved 
randomly so that the chances of getting a visual marker are 
increased. The consequence will be improving the precision 
of the result. 
Figure 4: Interaction diagram 
A. Agent rule-based reasoning module 
The previous scenario shows that criteria management is 
critical. Indeed, obtaining a successful coalition depends on 
the order in which the criteria have been considered. In the 
above scenario, if the first considered criterion was the level 
of intrusion (instead of the precision), then the first result 
would have been the correct one. Then, the question could 
be the following: why can one not have a management 
criteria step integrated in the coalition formation process? 
This is the main contribution of this work. We have 
introduced into each agent of COALAA a Rule-Based 
Reasoning (RBR) module responsible of determining a 
priority of the criteria to consider according to the context. 
The RBR is also responsible of assigning and adjusting the 
criteria values. The RBR is used for interleaving the 
execution of the behaviors in a dynamic way. 
The RBR is composed of a Knowledge Base (KB) and an 
inference engine. The KB contains a set of rules and a set of 
facts. The rules are given in the form of implications. The 
facts describe the state of the world. The inference engine is 
a special interpreter that controls the triggering of the rules 
according to the KB. The form of a rule is: IF <antecedent> 
THEN <consequent>, <antecedent> is the condition that 
must be satisfied to trigger the rule, <consequent> is the 
performed action when the rule is triggered. Antecedent is 
satisfied if the condition matches the facts in the KB. 
Instead of having a procedural control, each behavior is 
modelled by a production rule whose activation condition is 
precisely the context of its execution. The behaviors of the 
agents are associated with trigger conditions. These 
conditions represent the context that makes behaviors 
possible to be executed. Explicit chaining between the 
behaviors is no more needed since the inference engine 
triggers the rules. For example, the AcceptCoal behavior is 
chained with the InitCoal behavior. So, the InitCoal behavior 
is executed once the AcceptCoal behavior is terminated. The 
rules below express in Jess syntax [12] that if an agent has 
in its working memory an InitCoal message and if the agent 
has an ability ?x, so the rule can be triggered. In this case, 
the core of the behavior associated with the rule is executed. 
(defrule check-ability"accepts to join coalition if required ability" 
(Message InitCoal ?x)(Ability ?x)=>(assert (Behavior AcceptCoal ?x))) 
(defrule perform-ability"Create an accept message" (Behavior 
AcceptCoal ?y) => (bind ?m (createMessage (AcceptCoal ?y))) 
As said earlier, agent architecture is endowed with a 
RBR module responsible of a declarative reasoning process. 
It consists in an inference engine that implements a decision 
module. The facts represent the knowledge that have been 
extracted from the ontology, the perceived data and the 
exchanged messages among the agents. For that purpose, a 
set of rules is defined to determine, depending on the 
context, the most relevant criteria to consider first at each 
step of the coalition formation process. When the coalition 
proposed by the system is not a correct one, the RBR is in 
charge of determining the most relevant criteria to relax or 
to modify. The involved rules in this case are some kinds of 
heuristics that guide the coalition process in managing the 
criterion. For example, if a coalition does not include a CO 
whose precision is sufficient, it is advisable to relax the 
intrusion level. This increases the degree of freedom of the 
system regarding to its actions allowing the cameras to be 
activated or lights to be switched on. Another use of the 
RBR for the management criteria concerns the addition of 
new criterion such as data freshness. It is sometimes more 
relevant to consider not sufficiently precise data if they are 
very recent. For example, a presence detector can only 
inform that the person is situated in a particular room. 
Suppose that a particular presence detector "informs" that 
the person is in the room R1 and a camera "shows" that the 
person is in the right corner of the room R2. Obviously, the 
information given by the camera is more accurate, but if it is 
too old it should be obsolete and will not help correctly 
locating the person. It is suggested here to consider the date 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

of perceived information for determining the priority of the 
criteria. 
Note that exception handling is not provided in the 
current version of the system. 
IV. 
ADAPTIVENESS MULTI-DIMENSIONALITY 
The results are obtained in a real environment composed 
of heterogeneous sensors and markers. The platform 
includes several sensors of the market and dedicated sensors 
developed in our laboratory. The environment is composed 
of three rooms equipped with a set of sensors and the robot 
with its own sensors. The localization is based on 
goniometric measurements provided by robot on-board 
sensors and environment sensors. These can provide 
localization information allowing the localization of the 
robot in its environment using real-time data either from the 
robot on-board sensors or from the sensors in the 
environment. COALAA-GEN has been implemented using the 
Jade multiagent platform [5], where each agent embeds an 
instance of Jess. The production rules are given as a text file 
input parameter to the agents. 
A. Computational adaptiveness 
COALAA-GEN and COALAA have been compared to the 
well-known CNP protocol [7]. The Figures below shows the 
obtained results. The tests have been performed with a 
dozen scenarios. Each scenario has been executed with 
CNP, COALAA and COALAA-GEN. For COALAA and 
CNP, different values for the criteria have been 
experimented. COALAA-GEN has been tested with the 
same collected data, without any user intervention for 
criteria management. The figures below summarize the 
results.  
Figure 5 shows the number of formed coalitions 
depending on the number of agents present in the MAS. The 
preferred strategy in our approach is to obtain a maximum 
number of coalitions that meet the selection criterion. The 
goal is to maximize the number of solutions to meet the 
request to increase the chances of securing a result. The 
number of coalitions is less than or equal to the number of 
initiators. In terms of the number of formed coalitions, the 
Contract Net protocol is less efficient than COALAA. 
COALAA-GEN gives the result with fewer numbers of agents. 
This can be interpreted by the fact that "intelligent" criteria 
management helps the agents to be more relevant for 
coalition formation. The response times are compared (see 
Figure 6). This time corresponds to the time spent in 
calculating the coalitions, including the message exchanges. 
The fact that the number of coalitions that the CNP can form 
is lower than the number of initiators has a direct effect on 
the response time. It also impacts the number of exchanged 
messages (Figure 7). The curve representing the number of 
exchanged messages follows the same rate for CNP, 
COALAA and COALAA-GEN. However, COALAA-GEN 
shows a higher number of exchanged messages. Unlike the 
CNP, COALAA and COALAA-GEN avoid system crashes, 
by a progressive coalition formation, which in contrast 
increases the number of exchanged messages. In terms of 
time response COALAA, COALAA-GEN and CNP are 
almost similar; CNP is slightly better in terms of response 
time. But in terms of obtained COALAA-GEN is the best. 
Indeed, a failure can be catastrophic and thus the few 
milliseconds delay in the response time may be 
insignificant, if success to complete the task is assured. This 
is explained by the fact that COALAA-GEN continues 
reorganizing until a solution is found (even with 
deteriorated criteria). 
Figure 5. Formed Coalitions 
Figure 6. Response time 
Figure 7. Exchanged messages 
B. Methodological and functional adaptiveness 
The genesis of the MAS is done automatically in 
COALAA-GEN. This is a very important feature of the 
system. In fact, modifying the AE, by adding or suppressing 
CO, automatically updates the ontology and triggers 
automatic 
MAS 
reconfiguration. 
In 
case 
of 
such 
modifications, the user does not need to do any specification 
to make the system adapting its architecture to AE dynamic 
updating. This ability is qualified by methodological 
adaptiveness. We refer to functional adaptiveness while 
dealing with services that the system can offer to the user. 
The description of the ability of the CO used by the agents 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

to construct services according to the "effect description" is 
included in the "task" ontology part. This allows the agents 
to perform an automatic detection of their ability to perform 
an effect. 
C. Ethical adaptiveness 
An original specificity of our system is that it deals with 
ethical dimension in an adaptive way. Adding ethical values 
as criteria for forming the coalitions ensures this specificity.  
The level of intrusion of the system is modelled in such a 
way that it is upgraded only in case of emergency and if the 
user wishes to. Moreover, the personal data are stored in the 
equipment of the house and are uploaded only if needed by 
the distant caregiver and if the user has agreed. The degree 
of intrusion of each CO is modelled in the ontology as an 
attribute associated to the CO concept. The personal data are 
kept locally in the agent and are not stored in the distant 
ontology. But if the distant caregiver needs it (in case of 
emergency), the private data are uploaded, with a special 
status that is, volatile. This means that they are deleted from 
the distant storage as soon as they have been used. In the 
presented scenario, only two ethical criteria have been 
considered: the level of intrusion and the data privacy. They 
have been modelled as criteria for coalition formation. 
Adding new criteria is performed by adding new rules: 
(defrule crit-manag-001"add new criteria" (Crit ?type ?name) 
=>(assert (Coal Crit ?name))) 
(defrule crit-manag-002"assign new criteria for coalition formation" 
=>(modify (Coal Crit ?name))) 
D. Control adaptiveness 
The fact that an inference engine has been employed 
instead of a procedural algorithm has a direct effect on the 
intelligence of the system. The behaviors are involved only 
when their associated rules are triggered, which are 
themselves triggered when some declarative conditions are 
met. Since the conditions of the rules can be modified 
without any procedural modification, the control of the 
execution of the behaviors is completely adaptive. The user 
can control and modify the execution of the behaviors even 
at run time. Furthermore, the system is also able to detect 
missing information that is able to lead to the execution of a 
particular behavior. This is ensured by backward chaining 
rules. The engine seeks steps to activate rules (when 
necessary) whose preconditions are not met. This is 
illustrated by the given below: 
(defrule ctrl-001"alarm occurred, but no behavior to trigger" 
(Alarm ?x ?y)(not (Behavior ?z ?t))  
=> (assert (Backward ?z ?t))) 
More generic the rules are, more the system intelligence 
can be improved. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
We have introduced a new general approach for 
improving adaptiveness in ambient assistive applications by 
adding ethical dimension. A RBR module has been 
embedded in the agent architecture to dynamically assign 
the criterion to consider during the coalition formation 
process and we proposed to deal with the adaptation at 
different levels. The adaptiveness has been considered 
according to four dimensions: (1) computational dimension: 
during the coalition formation process, (2) functional and 
methodological dimension: while service modelling, (3) 
ethical dimension: associating the intrusion level to the 
degree of emergency, (4) control dimension: for behaviors 
triggering and criteria management. We have compared the 
obtained results with those previously obtained without the 
RBR, and we have observed that the adaptiveness has been 
improved without any performance degradation. The 
feasibility of this general approach has been showed on a 
usage scenario to remove the doubt of a false alarm in fall 
detection. The first results are promising. Current and future 
work concerns modelling of ethical criteria in the ontology 
so that one can deal with various situations and contexts. 
Indeed, recent works [5][10] links ethics and automated 
reasoning in autonomous systems and artificial intelligence. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Andriatrimoson., N. Abchiche-Mimouni, E. Colle, and S. 
Galerne, “An adaptive multi-agent system for ambient 
assisted living,” in ADAPTIVE 2012, Copyright (c) IARIA, 
2012. ISBN: 978-1-61208-219-6 ThinkMind, July, pp. 85–92, 
http://www.thinkmind.org/ 
[2] R. Anand, E. M. Robert, H. C. Roy, M. and Dennis, “Use of 
ontologies in a pervasive computing environment,” in 
Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 18, 2003, pp. 209–220. 
[3] F.L. Bellifemine, G. Caire, D. Greenwood, Developing Multi-
Agent Systems with JADE. Wiley Eds. 2007. 
[4] V. Bonnemains, C. Saurel, C. Tessier, “Embedded ethics: 
some technical and 
ethical 
challenges,” 
Ethics and 
Information Technology. SSN: 1388-1957 (Print) 1572-8439 
(Online) 10.1007/s10676-018-9444-x, 2018, pp. 41–58. 
[5] A. Kivela and E. Hyvonen, “Ontological theories for the 
semantic web,”. in Semantic Web. Finland, May, 2002, pp. 
111–136. 
[6] M. Sims., C. Goldman, and V. Lesser, “Self organization 
through bottom up coalition formation,” Proc. of the 2nd 
international joint conference on Autonomous agents and 
multiagent systems, 2003, pp. 867-874. 
[7] R. 
Smith, 
“The 
contract 
net 
protocol: 
High-Level 
Communication and Control in a Distributed Problem 
Solver,” Journal IEEE Transactions on computers, Volume 29 
Issue 12, December 1980, pp. 1104–1113. 
[8] L.-K. Soh and C. Tsatsoulis, “Reflective negotiating agents 
for real-time multisensor target tracking,” IJCAI’01, 2001, pp. 
1121-1127. 
[9] L. Soh and C. Tsatsoulis, “Allocation algorithms in dynamic 
negotiation-based 
coalition 
formation,” 
AAMAS02 
Workshop 7 ”Teamwork and coalition formation”, pp. 16–23. 
[10] Y. Han, S. Zhiqi, M. Chunyan, C. Leung, V. R. Lesser and Q. 
Yang, “Building Ethics into Artificial Intelligence,” in Proc. 
of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-18), 2018, pp.. 
[11] J. Searle, “Speech acts. an essay in the philosophy of 
language,” Cambridge University Press, 1969. 5527-5533 
[12] E. Friedman-Hill, Jess in Action: Java Rule-Based Systems 
(In Action series) Paperback – July, 2003 by Ernest 
Friedman-Hill. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

