An Adaptive Approach to Self-Healing in an Intelligent Environment 
Guanitta Brady, Roy Sterritt, George Wilkie 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
University of Ulster 
Jordanstown, Northern Ireland 
brady-g6@email.ulster.ac.uk, {r.sterritt, fg.wilkie}@ulster.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we address the management of sensor 
faults in an intelligent environment. Our proposed approach 
aims to introduce self-healing as a method of fault 
management. This approach is based on the use of adaptive 
finite state machine automata which handle suspicious sensor 
behavior. These state machines communicate with a mobile 
robot which investigates the error states detected through the 
sensors in the environment in order to learn from the 
anomalies and adapt to the changes in sensor behaviors. 
Additionally, we have determined that two types of fault may 
arise: systemic faults which the system may learn from and 
adapt to, and random faults which the system may compensate 
for through the use of a mobile robot as a sensor substitute.  
Keywords-fault tolerance; self-healing; sensor substitution; 
intelligent environment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since the introduction of the concept of intelligent 
environments, we have seen an increase in the applications 
of the sensor technologies synonymous with these 
environments. A promising application of those technologies 
is within the smart home for the delivery of pervasive care 
[1]. These environments aim to facilitate the monitoring of 
elderly occupants who suffer from cognitive impairments or 
degenerative conditions, such as dementia [2], and to support 
independent living [3]. In order for these environments to 
function effectively they must be tolerant of faults. The 
efficient functionality of sensor technologies in care homes 
for the elderly is crucial to ensuring the safety of the 
environments occupant. Those who suffer from dementia are 
often prone to wandering behavior [4]. As a consequence, 
there is great potential that those who leave their homes 
undetected may place themselves in danger [2]. For this 
reason, this research focuses on the monitoring of activity 
about a door in an intelligent environment. This work is 
motivated by the widespread instances of dementia patients 
who have left their care homes undetected [5] [6].  
The prevalence of sensor technologies coupled with the 
increasing complexity of information systems is leading us 
to the need for systems that are capable of self-management 
and self-adaptivity [7]. Our approach aims to take the initial 
steps in introducing the first of four key properties of an 
autonomic system: self-healing. This research aims to 
achieve this through the introduction of sensor substitution 
and adaptivity to the sensor technology about a door in an 
intelligent environment in order to provide the self-healing 
and self-management of sensor faults and anomalous 
behavior respectively. The proposed approach makes use of 
multiple finite state machines coupled with the use of a fuzzy 
logic rule base and adaptive learning techniques in order to 
provide intelligent adaptive fault management. This is 
achieved through the systems own investigation of its error 
states from which the system may learn new behaviors and 
adapt its policies accordingly. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II provides an overview of related work. In Section 
III we present our design. Section IV discusses some 
preliminary results. We conclude with Section V in which 
our future work is outlined. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A comprehensive summary of the use of finite state 
automata in the design of reliable software is presented by 
Wason et al. [8]. Whilst the use of finite state machines for 
the purpose of introducing fault tolerance is not a new 
concept [9], there exists a research gap in terms of the need 
to further explore the extent to which a system may be made 
autonomic through the use of state machines so that a system 
may investigate and learn from its error states [8], in order to 
create a stronger awareness of the conditions under which 
the system is expected to perform. In order to achieve this, a 
system must be both self-aware and environment aware [10]. 
A popular approach to the management of faults is the 
use of redundancy [11]. These approaches focus on the use 
of additional hardware as a fail over mechanism when their 
counterparts degrade. These sensors are capable of 
measuring identical or closely related values. This approach 
does not resolve the underlying fundamental problem that 
hardware is subject to failures and even redundant 
components have the potential to be subject to a fault or 
failure; particularly if their data is only incorporated into the 
monitoring process periodically. For this reason, we propose 
that the use of adaptable software to compensate for the 
shortcomings of hardware devices as their behavior degrades 
is a practical and cost-efficient approach. Indeed, the large 
volume of research that is undertaken in the area of robotics 
for pervasive care suggests that in the future robots will have 
a more prevalent role [12], particularly in care home 
environments. We can utilize these robots to not only assist 
in the delivery of pervasive care, but to also assist in 
ensuring fault tolerance in an intelligent environment by 
providing a mobile means of delivering sensor substitution 
and the investigation of anomalous sensor behavior at the 
point of need. 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

III. 
DESIGN 
In this section, we will describe the design of our system 
in terms of both the hardware and software topologies. 
A. Hardware Topology 
In our previous work [13], we investigated the viability 
of using an ultrasonic array mounted on a mobile robot as a 
means of substituting for a radio-based door mounted contact 
sensor. From this work, we concluded that two door states, 
opened and closed, could reliably be determined by the 
mobile array. Previously, our topology consisted of a radio 
contact sensor, pressure mat and the mobile robot Pioneer 3-
DX from Adept Mobile Robots [14]. We extended this to 
include an additional pressure mat in order to detect when a 
person had passed through the door threshold. Our hardware 
topology is depicted in Figure 1. 
1) Static Sensors: Based on our observations of the 
sensor data generated by the static sensors, we determined 
that these sensors may be viewed as “black and white” 
sensors as their readings dictate one of two states; the radio 
door contact sensor can return a “door opened” or a “door 
closed” value. Similarly, the pressure mats can return a true 
or false binary value to denote their activation or dormancy. 
2) Mobile Sensors: In contrast to the static sensors the 
mobile sensors with which the robot is equipped, which 
include an ultrasonic array and an infrared sensor, may be 
viewed as “grey” sensors. This stems from the fact that 
whilst the static sensors can provide a simplistic piece of 
information depicting that they are in one of two possible 
states, the mobile sensors require pre-processing in order to 
derive information from their data about their perception of 
the world. 
 
Figure 1.  Hardware topology in experimental environment. 
B. Software Topology 
A high-level conceptual overview of the software system 
structure is presented in Figure 2. It is made up of two 
communicating finite state machines and two feedback 
loops. Each of the state machines communicates with the 
static sensors and mobile sensors respectively. It is through 
this continuous feedback that the states in the machines are 
driven. This is discussed in the following sub-section.  
 
Figure 2.  High-level overview of self-healing system structure. 
1) Finite State Machines: We have designed two finite 
state machines based on our physical topology. It was 
determined that two state machines were required in order to 
allow for the concurrent monitoring of normal activity and 
the investigation of anomalous sensor behaviour. By 
designing the state machines to facilitate concurrency, 
effective monitoring can be delivered irrespective of the 
detection and investigation of anomalous behavior. 
a) Normal Activity State Machine: The first finite state 
machine is the Normal Activity State Machine (NASM). 
This machine handles the expected pattern of static sensor 
activations about a door. It was determined that based upon 
the combinations of the static black and white sensors that 
eight possible states could exist, given that each sensor 
could be determined to be in one of two states, which denote 
normal activity about a door. The number of possible sensor 
events is: 2^3= 8 possibilities, where there are two possible 
events which may fire for each of the three sensors and no 
event may be repeated in the course of a normal traversal of 
a doorway. The states in the NASM are: 
 
S0 Door closed 
 
S1 Door opened 
 
S2 Person inside & closed 
 
S3 Person outside & closed 
 
S4 Person inside & outside & closed 
 
S5 Person inside & open 
 
S6 Person outside & open 
 
S7 Person inside & outside & open 
The states S2, S3, S5 and S6 correspond to a single person 
approaching the door. The states S4 and S7 correspond to 
the possible presence of another person on the outside 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

pressure mat in addition to the presence of a person on the 
indoor pressure mat. These states are driven by seven 
events: six of these events are the static sensor events and 
the seventh is a reset event which may restore the state 
machine to a specified state. The Reset event may only be 
generated by the Error Handling State Machine (EHSM).  
b) Error Handling State Machine: The second state 
machine; the EHSM, consists of nine states and ten events 
which drive those states. The states in this machine are 
derived from the combinations of the environment sensors 
which may exhibit anomalous behaviour. The events in this 
state machine stem from two sources. The first source is the 
NASM from which events are generated via its actions to 
the EHSM upon the receipt of anomalous sensor readings. 
The second source of the events in the EHSM is the mobile 
robot. Upon the detection of anomalous behaviour the 
mobile robot is deployed to the site of the sensor failure 
where its role is twofold: in the first instance the robot must 
deliver feedback of its sensor readings. This data is 
processed in order to provide a corresponding value for the 
sensor it is investigating so that normal monitoring of 
activity about a door can continue whilst the anomaly is 
being investigated. The results of this analysis are input to 
the EHSM through a feedback loop. This, in turn, generates 
an event into the NASM via a second feedback loop 
instructing it what state to transition into based on the 
robot’s sensor readings. Secondly, the robot’s sensor data is 
processed in parallel with the monitoring activity in order to 
identify patterns in changes in sensor behaviour. It is 
through this reflective analysis over time that adaptive 
learning is facilitated. 
2) Anomaly Identification: From our observations of our 
static sensors’ behaviour over time, we determined that two 
types of anomaly may be exhibited: random anomalies and 
systemic anomalies. 
a) Random Anomalies: Random anomalies are defined 
as those which occur sporadically such as the absence of an 
expected sensor activation. These anomalies are addressed 
directly through the mobile robot, which positions itself at 
the door and provides substitution of the sensor in question. 
Whilst providing substitution, the robot feeds back its own 
sensor data. This data is then pre-processed and correlated 
with that of the static environment sensors for anomaly 
verification and fault diagnosis. 
b) Systemic Anomalies: Systemic 
anomalies are 
defined as those which occur as sensor behaviors change 
over time. Our current research leads us to believe that these 
changes in behavior may be attributed to the degradation of 
hardware resulting in behaviors such as slower relay time, 
battery deterioration or the receipt of multiple sensor events 
for one real-world event. This requires further investigation 
in order to verify the validity of this hypothesis. It is these 
anomalies that the system must investigate fully in order to 
learn about the changes in the behavior of the sensors in the 
environment. To this end, adaptive learning [15] must be 
applied so that the system may adapt its policies. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
When an anomalous sensor reading is received by the 
NASM, a corresponding action, dependent on sensor type, 
inputs an event to the EHSM. A feedback loop operates 
between the NASM and EHSM whereby, upon successful 
investigation of the anomaly, the EHSM may then generate a 
Reset event into the NASM in order to restore its function. 
Alternatively, the EHSM may generate a new action into the 
NASM which corresponds to a systemic anomaly which has 
been detected in a given static sensor so that the NASM may 
handle the occurrence of that sensor behavior in future 
without reporting the event to the EHSM as a new anomaly.  
By utilizing a feedback loop, actions may be dynamically 
generated into the NASM. These actions are the result of the 
investigation by a mobile robot and analysis by the system of 
the sensor behaviors. By providing the dynamic generation 
of actions into the NASM, the adaptivity of the state 
machines policies can be achieved. This approach has the 
potential to bring greater flexibility to the system and more 
robust fault tolerance without the need for human 
intervention. Therefore, the adaptivity in this system will be 
achieved through the NASM. This is facilitated by the 
feedback of the results of the robot’s investigation of the 
environment sensors via the EHSM. 
When the EHSM receives an event from the NASM, it 
will then trigger a transition to the relevant state dependent 
on the sensor or sensors that have been deemed suspicious. 
The EHSM then performs an action relevant to the 
anomalous sensor. Initially, the EHSM’s action will instruct 
the robot to navigate to the site of the sensor. In order to do 
this, the robot requires a-priori knowledge of the 
environments structure. The method of navigation is not 
pertinent to this research piece as it is an area which is 
widely covered by roboticists. We are concerned only with 
the fact that the robot can consistently navigate to a pre-
designated position, which is dictated by the unique 
identifier of the specific sensor in question, using a map of 
the environment and collision avoidance. Before the results 
of the robot’s observations can be fed back to the EHSM, 
pre-processing and analysis is required.  It is through this 
pre-processing and analysis that investigation of the 
anomalous behavior takes place. This, in turn, facilitates the 
systems learning about anomalies and changes in sensor 
behaviors. 
The analysis of the data received from both the robot and 
the static sensors provides the system with the ability to 
begin to identify systemic anomalies. Subsequently, the 
system may then learn about its faults and adapt its policies 
to account for the new behaviors exhibited by the static 
sensors. For example, if the door contact sensor develops 
behavior whereby it fires three sensor events for one real-
world door opened event instead of once, as would ordinarily 
be expected, from the correlation of the robot’s observations 
with the static sensor events the system may then learn that 
this pattern is a systemic anomaly and accordingly adapt its 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

policy to allow three door opened events to occur, through 
the adaptation of actions in the NASM, before an anomalous 
contact sensor event is passed to the EHSM in future.  
In the course of our research we have observed the door 
contact sensor which is part of our system topology. From 
these observations, we have determined that there are 
instances in which sensor events are not received. During our 
experiments, it became evident, for example, that the sensor 
signals were lost on occasion when a door was closed. 
However, this occurrence was not consistent. As a result it is 
difficult to adapt to this system behavior. Consequently, the 
mobile robot was instructed to navigate to the door site 
location. Once there the robot’s role is two-fold in this 
instance: it must use its ultrasonic array to determine the 
door state and it must also verify the anomalous behavior. 
When the robot’s data from its ultrasonic array is fed back it 
takes over the role of the contact sensor in the finite state 
machines, following pre-processing of the data, until the 
issue with the door contact can be verified as either a random 
or systemic anomaly.  
It is evident from the above that the utilization of a 
mobile robot as a means of investigating and verifying 
anomalous sensor behavior has the potential to address two 
types of anomalous behavior in the sensors about a door. We 
have used anomalous readings from the door contact sensor 
by way of example here, however; our approach would also 
hold for the investigation of anomalous pressure mat 
readings. Whilst the implementation is incomplete, we 
believe that we can contribute to the adaptive management of 
sensor faults in an intelligent environment through our 
utilization of a mobile robot for investigation of the 
anomalous behavior coupled with the dynamic adaptation of 
system policies following the systems own investigation and 
analysis of its suspected error states. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, a proposed approach to the self-healing of 
door based sensors in an intelligent environment was 
presented. This research utilizes a mobile robot in order to 
provide sensor substitution and verification of anomalous 
sensor behavior. By utilizing a mobile robot to investigate its 
anomalies, the system may determine the nature of the 
anomalous behavior. We have devised that this behavior may 
be categorized into two types of anomalies based on 
observations of a mobile robot over time; systemic and 
random anomalies. It is through this process of investigation 
of its own anomalous events that the system may learn from 
the behavior of the sensors contained therein and adapt its 
policies accordingly.  
The ideas presented in this paper are in the process of 
being implemented, and subsequently require further 
evaluation. The preliminary results are promising and appear 
to offer a useful means of introducing self-healing through 
sensor substitution and software adaptation into an intelligent 
environment in order to ensure the tolerance of static sensor 
faults. 
Our future work will consist of experimentation and 
evaluation of our approach, following the completion of our 
implementation. The performance of the proposed approach 
will be qualitatively evaluated in order to establish a clear 
picture of the performance of our approach in the real world. 
Adaptive learning for the dynamic generation of system 
policies through the use of a fuzzy rule-base [16] will be 
further investigated in order to establish how well the system 
learns using this approach.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Guanitta Brady’s PhD research is funded by DEL 
(http://www.delni.gov.uk) and has been awarded the 2012 
Annual Research Bursary from HISI (http://www.hisi.ie/).  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. E. Pollack, “Intelligent Technology for an Aging 
Population: The use of AI to Assist Elders with Cognitive 
Impairment,” AI Magazine, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 9-24, Summer 
2005, doi: 10.1609/aimag.v26i2.1810 
[2] A. J. Bharucha et al., “Intelligent Assistive Technology 
Applications to Dementia Care: Current Capabilities, 
Limitations, and Future Challenges,” The American J. of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 88-104, Feb. 2009, 
doi: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e318187dde5.  
[3] F. Sadri, “Ambient Intelligence: A Survey,” ACM Computing 
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 43, pp. 36:1-36:66, Oct. 2011, doi: 
10.1145/1978802.1978815. 
[4] C. K. Y. Lai and D. G. Arthur, “Wandering Behaviour in 
People with Dementia,” J. of Advanced Nursing, vol. 44, pp. 
173-182, Oct. 2003, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.2003.02781.x. 
[5] S. Davies. (2013, November 4), Wife's anger after 
Southampton care home unaware dementia patient has walked 
out 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.dailyecho.co.uk/news/10782832.Wifes_anger_ov
er_care_home_blunder/  
[6] CTV British Columbia. (2013, December 9), Family wants 
answers after senior leaves care home, dies outside [Online]. 
Available: 
http://bc.ctvnews.ca/family-wants-answers-after-
senior-leaves-care-home-dies-outside-1.1582407  
[7] P. Horn. Autonomic Computing: IBM Perspective on the State 
of Information Technology [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.research.ibm.com/autonomic 2001.10.15 
[8] R. Wason, P. Ahmed, and M. Q. Rafiq, “Automata-Based 
Software Reliability Model: The Key to Reliable Software,” 
Int. J. of Software Engineering & Its Applications, vol. 7, no. 
6, pp. 111-126, Nov. 2013, doi: 10.14257/ijseia.2013.7.6.10. 
[9] R. Leveugle and L. Martinez, “Design Methodology of FSMs 
with Intrinsic Fault Tolerance and Recovery Capabilities,” 
Proc. Euro ASIC 1992 (AISC 92), IEEE Press, June 1992, pp. 
201-206, doi: 10.1109/EUASIC.1992.228024. 
[10] R. Sterritt and D. Bustard, “Towards an Autonomic 
Computing Environment,” Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop on 
Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA 03), IEEE 
Press, 
Sept. 
2003, 
 
pp. 
694-698,, 
doi: 
10.1109/DEXA.2003.1232103. 
[11] V. P. Nelson, “Fault-Tolerant Computing: Fundamental 
Concepts,” Computer, vol. 23, pp. 19-25, July 1990, doi: 
10.1109/2.56849. 
[12] A. M. Okamura, M. J. Matari , and H. I. Christensen, 
“Medical and Health-Care Robotics,” IEEE Robotics & 
Automation Magazine, vol. 17, pp. 26-37, Sept. 2010, doi: 
10.1109/MRA.2010.937861. 
[13] G. Brady, R. Sterritt, and F.G. Wilkie, “An Investigation into 
the Viability of a Mobile Ultrasonic Array as a Sensor 
Substitute in an Autonomic Intelligent Environment,” Proc. 
IEEE Int. Conf. on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC 13), 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

IEEE 
Press, 
Oct. 
2013, 
pp. 
577-582, 
doi: 
10.1109/SMC.2013.104. 
[14] Adept MobileRobots LLC., Pioneer 3 Operations Manual. 
Amherst, NH, 2010. 
[15] R. M. Bahati, and M. A. Bauer, “An Adaptive Reinforcement 
Learning 
Approach 
to 
Policy-Driven 
Autonomic 
Management,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Autonomic and 
Autonomous Systems (ICAS 09), IEEE Press, April 2009,  
pp. 135-141, doi: 10.1109/ICAS.2009.58. 
[16] I. B. Türkşen, “A Review of Developments in Fuzzy System 
Models: Fuzzy Rule Bases to Fuzzy Functions,” Scientia 
Iranica, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 522-527, June 2011, doi: 
10.1016/j.scient.2011.04.001. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

