MeUI - Machine Learning Enhanced Adaptive User
Interaction
Marc Kurz
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria
Department of Mobility & Energy
4232 Hagenberg, Austria
email:marc.kurz@fh-hagenberg.at
Erik Sonnleitner
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria
Department of Mobility & Energy
4232 Hagenberg, Austria
email:erik.sonnleitner@fh-hagenberg.at
Abstract—This position/vision paper describes the idea of
a novel approach/research agenda of interacting with mobile
devices. Usually, users have to learn how to interact with a
mobile device adhering to rules that need to be learned. We
intend to challenge and question this approach – we rather want
the device to adapt to the needs and the behavior of the user.
Thus, the idea is to use machine learning and artificial intelligence
technologies to reverse the core principal of device utilization by
providing a distinct, personalized and dynamically self-adaptive
foundation towards modern human computer interaction. This
position paper summarizes the core idea, provides an overview
of related work and identifies and discusses research challenges.
Index Terms—Mobile device interaction; human computer
interaction; machine learning, adaptive user interfaces
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine-Learning (ML) [1] and more generally Artificial
Intelligence (AI) [2] are ever more present in different dis-
ciplines and industries. Disruptive innovations [3] change
established technologies and markets, whereas - very often
- ML and AI play a vital role in this phenomenon. Examples
for such disruptive innovations are Uber [4], Spotify [5] or
Netflix [6]. All of them build upon a strong fundament of
massive data that is being processed with different AI/ML
approaches in order to maximize the user experience and
comfort. This allows for the advent of new technological
innovations opening new markets and business models.
The core idea of this position paper entitled MeUI –
Machine-Learning Enhanced Adaptive User Interaction in-
tends to challenge the classic approach of interacting with
mobile devices [7], [8]. Usually, users have to determine how
to interact with a device adhering to rules that need to be
learned. Following the trend of maximizing user experience
and user comfort by radical new technological approaches, the
idea is to use ML/AI technologies to reverse the core principal
of device utilization by providing a distinct, personalized and
dynamically self-adaptive foundation towards modern human
computer interaction [9]–[11].
The rest of the paper further discusses this idea and provides
an overview of conceivable use-cases that would allow for
reversing this traditional approach of interacting with mobile
devices. Furthermore, research challenges are defined consist-
ing of hypotheses and questions that build the base for this
novel approach. Since this is meant to be a position/vision
paper, the authors strongly believe that this is a novel approach
and has potential to radically transform the field of research
of mobile device interaction by reversing the classic one-size-
fits all approach to a personalized experience and that the
discussed interaction aspect could build a fundamental new
scientific field in the broader area of human machine/mobile
interaction.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
discusses relevant use-cases, section III identifies the core
research challenges and formulates research questions. In
section IV potential methodological approaches are discussed
and section V closes the paper with a conclusion and outlook.
II. SPECIFIC CONCEIVABLE USE-CASES
Although interface design and user experience are both
important and long-standing branches [12]–[14] within prod-
uct design on a broad scale, the elemental concept of such
interfaces remains to reflect a learning task for the users with
varying learning curves. Individual needs and requirements,
such as disabilities or impairments [15], but also custom usage
habits are hardly taken into account. Moreover, situational
factors like body posture during certain activities, general body
physique, location and more generally the context of the users
[16] and the form factor of different devices may dramati-
cally alter the requirements towards design, composition and
organization of user interfaces.
With those non-ideal conditional factors in mind, modern
machine-learning methodologies can help to acquire an under-
standing of how a user actually uses a device, including the
detection and adaption to erratic behaviour and the repeated
inversion of particular tasks or steps (e.g., repeatedly typing
a particular character, while immediately afterwards deleting
it again in order to type the correct one). Furthermore, the
general adaptation of the keyboard on different mobile de-
vices for specific users constitute the first relevant use-case:
UC1: Self-Learning Keyboard Adaptation. The keyboard
for textual input is adapted to the specific needs of the users -
whereas this adaptation could range from simply highlighting
specific characters (e.g., by resizing or colouring) to a different
keyboard layout optimized for the user’s habits.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Among other use-cases, certain interface elements, such
as buttons and sliders may not be placed and scaled in the
optimal and most efficient way possible for the behavioural
characteristics of the utilizing person. For example, certain
clickable elements may be out of reach for single-handed use,
or sliders may be placed along the entire width of the available
screen-space which may result in particular areas not being
reachable in a comfortable way. On the other hand, slider
elements which provide a horizontal scale being too narrow
can undermine the precision required in order to set desired
values. Interface configuration parameters like scrolling speed
and, if supported by the respective device, touch sensitivity
resemble adjustable values whose configuration may also be
subject to being configured autonomously after a machine-
learning algorithm has learned how the user likes to handle a
device. This recomposition of interface components according
to a specific user is the second relevant use-case: UC2:
Adaptive Interface Component Recomposition.
Another specific use case worth mentioning tackles the or-
dering and grouping of applications on mobile devices. Recent
studies show that users in Germany usually have around 90
apps installed on their smart phones but use only around
30 of them [17]. Furthermore, specific apps are only used
on dedicated occasions (e.g., when travelling) - thus, besides
other personal data, the context of the user could be an im-
portant factor regarding preferences for specific applications.
If an intelligent component built from AI/ML technologies
would manage to order and group applications autonomously
according to the user’s behaviour and context, user experience
could increase dramatically. This aspect constitutes the third
specific use-case: UC3: Personalized and Context-Aware
App Arrangement.
Generally, the traditional one-size-fits-all approach of the
past decades which aims to treat all users the same regardless
of their needs has shown to coerce users to adapt their
behaviour according to device expectations, while we believe
that machine learning and AI approaches may in fact reverse
this procedure and allow devices to adapt to their users.
Summarized, within the idea we intend to focus on the
following specific use-cases that have been described above
(whereas of course further relevant use-cases are imaginable
and thus are not excluded from being investigated):
• UC1: Self-Learning Keyboard Adaptation
• UC2: Adaptive Interface Component Recomposition
• UC3: Personalized and Context-Aware App Arrangement
III. RESEARCH CHALLENGES
Generally, the following hypothesis and research questions
build the foundation for the approach of reversing the tradi-
tional way of interacting with mobile devices, whereas the
three use-cases described above build the core baseline for
these challenges:
• Hypothesis: ML/AI technologies allow for a significant
change in the (mobile) device interaction in terms of us-
ability. The classic approach of one-size-fits-all approach
can be reversed towards a personalized experienced and a
self-learning adaptation of interaction increasing the user
experience.
• RQ I: which ML/AI technologies are suited for enhanc-
ing mobile device interaction?
• RQ II: to what extent can the user experience be im-
proved focusing on the three described use-cases?
• RQ III: which differences concerning different mobile
devices (e.g., smart phones and tablets) are relevant
when improving the customer interaction with ML/AI
technologies?
• RQ IV: which data and contextual information of the
user is relevant for improving the customer interaction
based on a self-learning ML/AI approach?
More and more people tend to use their mobile phone on
a daily basis, which transforms the device into a constant
companion [18]. With the advent of global interconnected
mobile-devices, which offer significant computational power,
applications running on mobile phones could gather huge in-
formation about the user. Thus, we believe that it is possible to
turn the device into a self-adaptable, user-specific device that
is constantly adapting to the user’s needs and also the user’s
context [19] in order to maximize the customer experience and
device-interaction. To the best of our knowledge this is a novel
approach and has potential to radically transform the field of
research of mobile device interaction by reversing the classic
one-size-fits all approach to a personalized experience. We
believe that the combination of ML/AI technologies with the
discipline of human-computer interaction opens a new research
field and has potential to (i) raise new research questions, (ii)
to radically change the paradigm of interacting with mobile
devices, and (iii) to build the foundation for a new era of
technological inventions. The following paragraph summarizes
the transformative potential of the idea.
A. Transformative potential
Long-established research concerning user interfaces and
experiences primarily focused on the static and global layout
structure as well as element selection, placement and feed-
back characteristics in order to create efficiently utilizable
UIs, without taking the individual user needs into account.
Longing for major progress within this field of research may
consequently create an entire new niche of research questions
and applications relevant to UX researchers as well as software
development and manufacturing companies on a global scale.
The currently predominant understanding of having to learn
and adapt to predefined interfaces rather than smart devices
getting used to how users actually employ, avail and devote to
interfaces not only needs to be questioned but may also see a
paradigm-shifting amendment in terms of how the interaction
between humans and computers can be shifted towards a
cooperative, device-reactive accommodation in the near future.
As an example, whereas some major manufacturers of
smart mobile devices have gone through a development during
the last decade, where they started to present their users a
personalized user experience in terms of what information
will be displayed when certain actions are performed. These
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

advancements, however, merely represent a contentual and
data-driven personalization rather than changing the elemen-
tal opportunities of device usage to the user’s benefits and
needs. A novel modal approach, restructuring and renewing
the prototypical concept of the actual interfaces by allowing
them to change and adapt dynamically allows us to move
post the archetypical one-size-fits-all approaches regarding
human-computer interaction in general, and user interfaces in
particular by making software learn from and adapt to needs,
adjust to and correct input errors and provide a meaningful
and assisting individualization for every user. Using ML/AI
technologies, the device has to gain knowledge of how it is
used, rather than to dictate it.
IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In order to investigate the hypothesis as well as the intended
research questions as stated in the previous section, the fol-
lowing methodological approach seem to be applicable. First
and foremost, relevant mobile devices of different kinds and
manufacturers (e.g., smart phones, tablets) have to be identified
and their suitability for the different use-cases needs to be
secured. For example, it needs to be clarified, if the keyboard
layout can be easily changed - in case this is not necessary,
a self-implemented keyboard mockup for evaluation can be
developed. In detail, the most prevalent devices seem to be
relevant, like (i) Apples iPhone, (ii) Android phones (e.g.,
Google Pixel 3, Samsung Galaxy S10), (iii) Apples iPad, (iv)
Samsung Galaxy Tab.
Fundamental implementations on the intended different de-
vices need to be done in order to enable the planned use-cases.
Furthermore, ML/AI technologies need to be researched for
investigating the suitability of the intended use-cases. In detail,
classical approaches (e.g., Support Vector Machines (SVM),
Naive Bayes, k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) and Random Forest)
[20] will be considered, as well as neural networks, deep
learning [21] and long-short-term memory [22]. This is closely
related to the identification of relevant user- and contextual-
data that is of high value for the intended approach. Proto-
typical implementations of the use cases will be subject for
user-studies and evaluations. The following Figure 1 illustrates
the targeted steps for the research approach.
Summarized, the following methodological fragments need
to be considered and constitute the base for the proposed
research plan:
(i) Mobile device eligibility evaluation
(ii) User data identification and ML/AI technological quali-
fication
(iii) Prototypical realization of the three identified use-cases
(iv) Conducting experiments and user-studies
(v) Evaluation of hypothesis and research questions
(vi) Identification of future potential and use cases
As it can be seen in 1 we intend to identify future potentials
and also novel UX research paradigms by following the idea of
reversing the traditional approach of mobile user interaction.
A. Risks and Challenges
The landscape of modern smartphone operating systems is
rather limited, with only two major systems running on 98%
of all such devices. As such, the applicability of dynamically
adaptive interfaces may not be able to function on its full
extent due to the fact of backend services and frameworks
limiting the degree of freedom towards running applications
(apps) when changing essential elements like GUI widgets at
runtime. In such cases, the desired adaptability has to be either
integrated through a transparent virtualized UI emulation layer,
or by using technological capabilities beyond regular apps in
order to acquire the desired results.
One such possibility would be to chose web-applications,
whose UI elements consist largely of locally rendered HTML
output which can elegantly be manipulated at runtime, even
when the user is currently using the application – so-called
Progressive Web Apps. While showing several major advan-
tages compared to regular apps, progressive web-apps do not
provide the capabilities of mobile operating systems in its
entirety, by, e.g., not being allowed to access various hardware
elements like I/O devices and sensors.
Another risk regarding technological feasibility is the pos-
sibility to manipulate tightly integrated and security-relevant
core components like software keyboards. These are, at least
in the case of Apple’s iOS, not easily interchange- or manipu-
latable. Such limitations could be bypassed easily by creating
dedicated applications for testing and evaluation purposes only,
while not directly conveniently and efficiently suitable to be
used by either third party applications, or any other native
applications at all. Despite the fact that this may represent a
potential outcome, the subsequent learning potential regarding
the insights gained during research would unequivocally be of
intrinsic significance, like described below.
B. Learning potential in case of failure
Failures within this research approach can be twofold, either
technically or regarding the conceptual methodology of our
main hypothesis.
If the technical evaluation proves that our approach provides
benefit to users, but is not applicable to the current technical
opportunities and status of mobile operating systems, having
gained the expected knowledge advancements about ML-
enhanced interfaces will hopefully start a discussion about how
programmers and manufacturers can remove these limitations
and barriers in order to allow more individualized device
handling. If the prototypes manage to effectively show a major
benefit towards user experience, a measurable decrease of
erratic usage and an increased degree of contentment among
device users, leading to a heightened awareness within both,
the research community as well as commercial providers of
frameworks and operating systems, the latter are expected to
realize and appreciate the potential augmentation of market
value and customer satisfaction and eventually begin to include
the technical foundations needed to proceed.
If, however, our principal hypothesis along with the research
questions proves to be incorrect, we gain insight into the
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Fig. 1. The methodological aspects constituting the research agenda.
particular reasons thereof using the data and evaluation results
generated during the pathway of our research and can hence
help to steer further community efforts into different directions
which may nevertheless incorporate various findings.
V. CONCLUSION
In our position/vision paper we presented the idea of revers-
ing the classic approach of mobile user interaction. Instead
having users to learn interaction and thus adapt to the mobile
device, we envision systems that instead adapt to the user in
an intelligent way, allowing to interact in the most possible
intuitive way. Mobile device technology nowadays is able to
deliver a variety of relevant user and context data - with
machine learning and artificial intelligence mechanism it is
our believe that smart devices can become really ”smart” by
adapting to the user. This aspect is perfectly summarized in
our postulated hypothesis:
ML/AI technologies allow for a significant change in the
(mobile) device interaction in terms of usability. The classic
approach of one-size-fits-all approach can be reversed towards
a personalized experienced and a self-learning adaptation of
interaction increasing the user experience.
We have presented a research agenda constructed around
identified use-cases. We intend to investigate our hypothesis
in order to identify future potentials and also to put novel UX
research paradigms on the table.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Michie, D. J. Spiegelhalter, and C. C. Taylor, “Machine learning,
neural and statistical classification,” vol. 13, 1994.
[2] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial intelligence: a modern approach.
Malaysia; Pearson Education Limited,, 2016.
[3] C. M. Christensen, The innovator’s dilemma: when new technologies
cause great firms to fail.
Harvard Business Review Press, 2013.
[4] Uber Technologies Inc., https://www.uber.com, 2022 (accessed April 6,
2022).
[5] Spotify AB, https://www.spotify.com, 2022 (accessed April 6, 2022).
[6] Netflix, Inc., https://www.netflix.com, 2022 (accessed April 6, 2022).
[7] A. K. Karlson, B. B. Bederson, and J. Contreras-Vidal, “Understanding
single-handed mobile device interaction,” Handbook of research on user
interface design and evaluation for mobile technology, vol. 1, pp. 86–
101, 2006.
[8] J. Roth, “Patterns of mobile interaction,” Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 282–289, 2002.
[9] J. Preece, Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, D. Benyon, S. Holland, and T. Carey,
Human-computer interaction.
Addison-Wesley Longman Ltd., 1994.
[10] A. Dix, Human-computer interaction.
Springer, 2009.
[11] S. K. Card, The psychology of human-computer interaction.
Crc Press,
2018.
[12] J. Gong, P. Tarasewich et al., “Guidelines for handheld mobile device
interface design,” in Proceedings of DSI 2004 Annual Meeting, 2004,
pp. 3751–3756.
[13] N. Ocak and K. Cagiltay, “Comparison of cognitive modeling and
user performance analysis for touch screen mobile interface design,”
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 33, no. 8,
pp. 633–641, 2017.
[14] L. Punchoojit and N. Hongwarittorrn, “Usability studies on mobile user
interface design patterns: a systematic literature review,” Advances in
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 2017, 2017.
[15] Z. Sarsenbayeva, N. van Berkel, C. Luo, V. Kostakos, and J. Goncalves,
“Challenges of situational impairments during interaction with mo-
bile devices,” in Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on
Computer-Human Interaction.
ACM, 2017, pp. 477–481.
[16] A. K. Dey, “Context-aware computing,” in Ubiquitous computing fun-
damentals.
Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2018, pp. 335–366.
[17] A. Annie, “The state of mobile in 2019,” Jan. 2019.
[18] M. Kurz, B. Hiesl, and E. Sonnleitner, “Real-time activity recognition
utilizing dynamically on-body placed smartphones,” in The Eleventh
International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and
Applications (ADAPTIVE 2019), 2019.
[19] T. Lemlouma and N. Layaida, “Context-aware adaptation for mobile de-
vices,” in IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data Management,
2004. Proceedings. 2004.
IEEE, 2004, pp. 106–111.
[20] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern classification.
John
Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[21] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[22] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

