EC4MAS: A Multi-Agent Model With Endogenous
Control for Combinatorial Optimization Problem
Solving
Ga¨el Clair, Fr´ed´eric Armetta and Salima Hassas
GAMA Laboratory,
Universit´e Lyon 1
Lyon, FRANCE
Email: (gael.clair; frederic.armetta; salima.hassas) @univ-lyon1.fr
Abstract—Since a couple of years, new approaches are pro-
posed to solve combinatorial optimization problems: multi-agent
systems. In this paper, we propose a new model, EC4MAS, to
build self-organizing multi-agent systems with more endogenous
control. We start presenting a representative set of solving
methods and we highlight what are the key elements of these
solving processes and how they are used to construct a new
representation of the problem to solve it. Generally, this represen-
tation is based on the characteristics of the method implemented
but the construction of this representation could happen in the
system without so much external intervention. This has been
illustrated by some work in psychology that we present. Based
on this observation, we propose and illustrate in this work a self-
organizing multi-agent approach that tries to construct itself this
representation, in an endogenous way. It is organized into a social
organization of the different local solving behaviors and a spatial
organization that represents the different structural/topological
characteristics of the problem. The objective of the system is thus
to ﬁnd a good coupling between these two organizations to get
the best possible representation.
Keywords-multi-agent
system;
self-organization;
endogenous
control.
I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a model for more endogenous
control in multi-agent systems for combinatorial optimization
problem solving. First, we will present standard methods to
solve this kind of problems. We highlight how they try to
construct a new representation of the problem. Then we deﬁne
how to create such representation in a multi-agent system to
control it. We propose to set up an endogenous control system
in order to design self-organizing systems not limited to a
single kind of problem. Such control allows the system to
adapt its own behavior according to its environment. This
is similar to the natural process of learning and cognitive
development which allow an individual to create his own
knowledge to adapt more easily to problems. Our model
introduces this development in multi-agent systems through
the use of social representations.
We developed our model on this basis and we expose in
this paper how we deﬁne all the elements to get a suitable
representation for the control. Our model to create Endogenous
Control for self-organized Multi-Agent System, EC4MAS, is
based on a social and a spatial organization of agents and
their coupling. These two organizations provide informations
about the current solving strategy and on its outcome while
the coupling allows the control system to dynamically adapt
its own strategy.
Section II is a description of standard methods for optimiza-
tion problem solving. Section III explains the notion of rep-
resentation in these methods and informatics and psychology.
The proposed model is then deﬁned in Section IV. Section
V presents and discusses results of experiments on a graph
coloring problem. Section VI concludes the presented work
and draws some perspectives.
II. SOLVING COMBINATORIAL OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS
Combinatorial optimization is a domain which main interest
is the solving of complex problems with high combinatory
structure. We point out in this section well-known solving
methods for this kind of problem.
Constructive approaches are initialized with a partial solu-
tion, generally empty, and try to build a complete solution
widening the partial solution one variable at once. In these
methods the only possible mean to direct the search is often
the next variable to assign and its value. Like in greedy or
backtracking methods some heuristics could help to determine
the next variable to consider. Branch and bound method [1] is
an implicit enumeration of the solution space, that is all the
possible solutions can be examined but thanks to pruning tech-
niques it can avoid to explore large subsets of bad solutions.
These methods use local information and do not consider the
global optimality making these more approximative ones.
Methods using the concept of neighborhood start with a
complete assignment, which is not necessarily a solution, and
make some changes to reach a different conﬁguration. Changes
needed to obtain new conﬁgurations deﬁne the possible neigh-
bors, it is called the neighborhood function. Local search or
Tabu search [2] are basic ones. In these methods one variable
is changed at one time and we could use mechanisms like a
tabu list to forbid examination of previous variables in a ﬁxed
period of time to get out from local optimum more efﬁciently.
In Simulated annealing [3], neighbors are generated, evaluated
and selected or not. Acceptation of a neighbor is conditioned
by its improvement level and the moment of the search. A
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

temperature is decreased and used to get acceptation level,
it is the mean to control and direct the evolution of the
search. In these methods locality and local optimum are also
problematic and mechanisms such as tabu list have to be used
to improve the quality of solutions found. Simulated annealing
tries to deal with an important problem, the balance between
exploration and exploitation.
Evolutive algorithms are based on individual natural evo-
lution principle. They are based on a population which is
a set of individuals where each one represents a possible
solution, an evaluation function which measures the adaptation
level of one individual to its environment and an evolution
process with some operators. An initial population is randomly
generated, then each individual is evaluated and some of
them are selected, ﬁnally new individuals are created using
the evolution process. Algorithms using evolution strategies
had been initially proposed by [4]. In Genetic algorithms [5]
evolution operators, such as crossover and mutation are applied
at random on one or several selected individuals. Genetic
programming [6] uses a coding no more generic but speciﬁc
to the handled problem, so is the only operator used, mutation.
Here, population is the basis for the solving like in multi-agent
systems but the use of individuals in these two approaches are
different. Evolutive approaches make the population evolve
in a centralized manner and select some individuals to survive
which is not always the case in the multi-agent systems where
agents are autonomous.
Besides standard solving methods, there are many other
methods which want to use complex systems characteristics,
like distribution of the solving process, and they need to be
considered from this point of view. We can cite Ant colony
optimization algorithms [7] and Particle swarm optimization
[8]. Ant colony optimization algorithms are based on the ant
natural behaviors where ants could solve a problem (ﬁnd-
ing the shortest path) indirectly communicating with only
pheromones, it is called stigmergy. In Particle swarm opti-
mization the ﬁrst objective is to represent social interactions
between agents which have a given objective in a common
environment. It is important to notice that these methods are
not evolutionary ones at the literal sense because they use
cooperation between individuals instead of competition and
ﬁnally no selection is done on the population. They are quite
similar to multi-agent systems from this point of view.
III. REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL
In this section, we explicit the global principle used to solve
a problem which is to construct a new representation of it.
A. Construction of a representation for the solving process
When we want to build a solving method, we have to
construct a new representation of the problem to work with.
This new representation is a mean to understand the problem
and to deﬁne all the elements we want to use to get a solution.
First, the search space and its characteristics (roughness,
dynamic, wideness ...) is used as a support for the solving
process since it deﬁnes the elements to consider.
Then, the neighborhood function deﬁnes how the solving
process gets from a solution to another, and is directly depen-
dent on the search space characteristics.
Finally, the evaluation function, based on the nature or the
type of expected objective, optimal or not for example.
B. Psychology and control
Creating a representation is a way to better understand a
problem in order to solve it with limited capabilities. This
principle is the one used by real individuals to solve real
problems in their life. In this case the representation can be
seen as the intelligence of this individual.
Cognitive development has been studied by Piaget [9]. He
said that intelligence is no more than a more elaborate form of
biological adaptation of an individual to its environment. It is
a continuous process that rebalances structures of intelligence
(schemas and operations) using two parallel processes, assim-
ilation to interpret new facts and accommodation to change
the cognitive structure.
Jean-Claude Abric [10] deﬁnes social representation ”as a
functional vision of the world, which allows the individual or
group to make sense of his actions, and understand the reality
through its own reference system, so to adapt to it, to ﬁnd its
place in it”. It can be interpreted as a decision-making tool as
”It becomes the framework by which the rest of attitudes and
judgments are adjusted so that everyone is on the same line
as the group” [11] so it is an attractor from individuals’ point
of view and it controls them. For more formal details we refer
the reader to [12].
C. How to use social representation for endogenous control
Control in a self-organizing multi-agent system guides
agents’ choices. This guidance can not be exclusively based
on purely local information but on a wider vision because it
is involved in a group of agents which purpose can be seen
as creating and maintaining a social representation.
Looking at the characteristics of social representations and
those of an endogenous control, we see that these two concepts
have much in common. Both systems have the task to control
individuals’ decisions in the group, dynamic and emerging
characteristics. On this basis of strong ties we propose to use
them to build a new model for endogenous control for multi-
agent systems.
IV. ENDOGENOUS CONTROL FOR MULTI-AGENT SYSTEM
In this section we present the construction of our model
for endogenous control in self-organizing multi-agent based
complex problem solvers (EC4MAS), its components, the
social organization, the spatial organization and the coupling,
and how they interact.
A. General organization of the model
Like seen in the previous section, to solve a problem
we have to build a new representation of it, so the solving
process can understand it to ﬁnd a solution. The endogenous
characteristics of our control means that a minimum, or in
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

the best case no, external interventions are needed to build
the control system (or representation). In order to deﬁne the
general organization of our model, or the general organization
of the representation of the problem, we use the problem
decomposition of Fig. 1.
Problem
Structure
Behavior
Dynamic
Structure
Behavior
Dynamic
(Control)
Solution
Fig. 1: Problem and solution organization
A problem is based on three key elements. First we can get
informations on its structure which regroups directly available
informations, like variables, domain of the variables, direct
constraints and so on. The behavior mostly regroups indirect
informations like inﬂuences between variables, indirect con-
straints or search space structure. These characteristics of the
problem deﬁne how the problem will behave when we use its
structure to solve it. Finally, the dynamic of the problem is
the link between its structure and its behavior, it appears with
the solving and it is the mechanism that links the elements of
the structure to the ones of the behavior.
We used this problem organization to deﬁne the global
organization of our model. The representation structure of the
solution is used to model topological/structural characteristics
of the current solution. The representation of the behavior of
the solution is used to model the solving strategy currently
used by the solving system. The dynamic which can be seen
as the control of the solution is used to couple the structure and
the behavior of the solution, to permanently adapt the current
strategy to the current solution.
In a multi-agent system, all the agents only have access to
limited informations and the global solution/strategy emerges
from all the local acts or interactions of agents, so we model
the structure and the behavior with organizations of agents. An
organization can model an agent situation/strategy, or role, in
the context of a particular situation/strategy and can use these
relations to mark the mutual inﬂuences between them.
B. Structure: spatial organization
The structure or spatial organization is used to model the
current situation in the search space. To get spatial infor-
mations on the problem structure we have to deﬁne several
sensors. These sensors are used by the agents to perceive
their spatial environment, so to deﬁne their spatial role. Agents
can also communicate informations of these sensors to their
neighbors. The spatial role reﬂects the current position of
the agent in the search space and allows it to apprehend the
difﬁculty of its situation. The spatial organization which can
be observed and interpreted is based on:
• a set of m spatial roles Rsp = {Rsp1, ..., Rspm}
• a conﬁguration Csp = {a1, ..., aj} with Csp ∈ SP
where ai is an agent state and SP is the search space
• a function fRsp : SP → Rsp
The organization of a group of agents in the environment
or physical organizations of agents Csp, can highlight basic
characteristics of the problem relevant to the solving. In order
to capitalize these informations, it is necessary to allow their
identiﬁcation and use by the system. The spatial organization is
based on the fRsp function which associates a spatial role to
an agent from the current spatial conﬁguration. This function
uses sensors, given to the agents to capture their situation,
to determine the Rsp. The sensors could be speciﬁc to the
problem to solve or more generic.
Spatial roles are about the effect of the solving process in
the physical environment. The role is essentially descriptive of
the problem and the situation of the system during its solving.
The spatial organization connects particular conﬁgurations of
the problem. In some cases, the problem deﬁnition may give
access to speciﬁed elements to deﬁne spatial roles such as
topology of the graph for graph coloring. In other cases this
information is not identiﬁable from the outset but may appear
during the search.
C. Behavior: social organization
The multi-agent system with multiple interacting agents,
must be addressed in a more extended view than of a single
agent. The overall activity is dependent on all individual
actions but also on the interactions between agents. The group
of agents is a reﬂection at a given time of the search activity of
the system. This activity has to be captured by the system and
has to be used to direct and control the research. Observation
of these perceptions is deﬁned by:
• RSo = {Rso1, ..., Rson}, a set of n social roles
• Lso
=
{Lso11, ..., Lsonn}
where
Lsoij
=
(Rsoi, Rsoj),
∀i, j ∈ [1, ..., n], a set of relations between social roles
• ∀Lsoi ∈ Lso, Cso = {Lso1, ..., Lsoi}, a set of social
contexts
• a social organization Oso =< Rso, Lso >
Roles Rso act as guides for the agent to determine the
appropriate strategy and dictate it a predeﬁned behavior. The
adoption of a social role by an agent implies that it adopts
the guidelines and directives of that role. The action of the
agent, so its social role choice, could have been inﬂuenced by
other agents, this result in the relation Lsoij. A relation Lsoij
exists if an agent with the role Rsoi has encountered another
agent with the role Rsoj. The social organization involves a
set of roles Rso and relations Lso between them. The activity
of a single agent can not be isolated from other agents and
therefore the social roles are linked within the organization.
The social organization Oso gives information on situation of
the agents within the solving process at a given time. The
situation of an agent, and more precisely the adequacy of its
social role, is directly dependent on its environment. To locate
an agent of a social perspective, relations between it and its
neighbors deﬁne a context Cso. The context is a part of the
social organization, with a limited size around one particular
agent. It provides information on relations between different
social roles So in a particular situation of the search.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Formally, the social organization is used to represent the
solving strategy of the system. Relations of social roles are
based on the activity of the system, and more particularly, on
the action of the agents. This dynamic updates permanently
the organization to adapt the search.
D. Dynamic: coupling
Social and spatial organizations both provide information
of a different nature. The ﬁrst one is particularly interested in
the mechanisms of the solving looking to the ﬁttest behavior
of the agents. The second one provides information on the
status of the system in search space. These two elements are
strongly linked because social roles deﬁne how agents act in
the environment and spatial roles represent their situation in
the environment. The coupling of these two organizations is
deﬁned by:
• a coupling function fC : Cso×Rsp → R with ∀x ∈ Cso
and ∀y ∈ Rsp, 0 ≤ fC(x, y) ≤ 1
• a ﬁtness function fT : (Cso×Rsp)×Time → R where
Time is the number of cycles of the solving
The coupling fC is dynamic and allows the relations
between spatial and social roles to evolve according to the
ﬁtness function fT evolution. To ﬁnd the best couple (Rso,
Rsp) for an agent in a given situation, is the key to success.
This coupling is determined by evaluating and storing the pairs
(social role, spatial role) created by agents during the search in
the previous cycles (a cycle is an amount of time where each
agent acts one time). A look back at previous choices with fT
allows to update the coupling fC to adapt the control system.
E. EC4MAS principle
The general principle of our model is, to ﬁrst represent
the current situation (spatial organization), then to represent
the current strategy (social organization) and ﬁnally, to couple
these two organizations to permanently and dynamically adapt
the solving process.

	






 




		




		




 !

"






"#
#
"

$
"
Fig. 2: EC4MAS Meta-Model
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present an example of the use of
two different implementations of EC4MAS to solve a graph
coloring problem.
A. Simpliﬁed version of EC4MAS
This version of the model is qualiﬁed as simpliﬁed because
some shortcuts had been made as the roles and the organiza-
tions are predeﬁned and explicitly implemented in the system.
1) Experimental Setup: Agents of the system represent the
nodes of the graph to color. A solution is found when all the
agents have no conﬂicts with their neighbors, so each two
connected nodes are assigned different colors.
The main solving strategy of the agents is based on the Min
Conﬂict heuristic [13]. Two social roles are used, the ﬁrst is the
exploitation strategy and the second is the exploration strategy.
Exploitation tends to decrease the number of conﬂicts between
an agent and its neighbors. Exploration can randomly take a
color or apply the exploitation strategy (Min Conﬂict with
exploration). The social organization is modeled with a static
tree, where one role is represented at a level. The children are
based on the representation amount percentage of the role in
a situation divided in two (less or more 50%).
Spatial roles are based on the degree of the nodes (static).
Each role regroups nodes with similar degree. The spatial
organization follows the graph topology.
Coupling is done using matrices to link social and spatial
organization. Matrices could be found as leafs in the social
organization tree. These matrices have one column per social
role and one row per spatial role. The values in the matrix
are ﬂoat numbers between 0 and 1 and are normalized on the
row. An agent ﬁnds from its spatial role and its social context
the associated matrix to get a social role. Higher the value in
a social column, higher the probability for the social role to
be selected is.
2) Results and analysis: To test our model we generated
100 different graphs with different seed. We used equi-partite
4-colorable graphs with 300 nodes, that means that the 4 color
sets have the same size or can only be different from one node.
An edge connectivity (ec) of 0,02333 (7/300) is used to get
hard problems like seen in [14]. Each solving is done 1000
times with a maximum of 1000 cycles. The performance is
the number of cycles to get a solution, if no solution is found
1001 is used.
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Performance improvement
Problems
Average
Performance
Fig. 3: Performance improvement of EC4MAS on 100
problems with 300 nodes, ec = 0,02333, 4 colors.
a) Performance: First, we randomly picked a problem
(ref-problem) among generated graphs, a genetic algorithm is
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

used to get coupling values and to ﬁnd the best exploring rate
for Min Conﬂict with exploration (17,7% for ref-problem).
Then we used this tuning to solve all the generated problems.
Fig. 3 shows the performance improvement on all the 100
problems which is the difference between Min Conﬂict with
exploration results and EC4MAS results. The problems are
ordered by the number of cycles of the solving process. We
can see that EC4MAS can generally improve the solving on a
set of problems with similar characteristics since the average
improvement of EC4MAS is about 12,4%. There is a big
difference of performance between easier problems (at the
beginning) and more difﬁcult ones (at the end). The number of
cycles to solve ref-problem with EC4MAS is 234, most of the
problems with a negative improvement are under this value.
This is due to the coupling used for ref-problem which is a
representation of the problem and gives speciﬁc informations
on it. With problems much easier than that, the solving process
is too specialized and instead of guiding the search process it
introduces too much perturbations.
TABLE I: Performance and efﬁciency
Method
Perf.
Tuning time
Efﬁciency
Min Conﬂict (17,7%)
100%
4
-
Optimal Min Conﬂict
124,71%
333
1,50%
EC4MAS (17,7%)
112,14%
22
20,39%
b) Tuning: In addition to the performance gain, we also
focus on the tuning time of the system. Table I presents the
performance gain of three different tunings and the efﬁciency
of each method. The Min Conﬂict with 17,7% of exploration
is taken as a reference for the measures. The tuning time is
the sum of the time to ﬁnd the optimal exploring rate for each
problem for Optimal Min Conﬂict, and is the time to ﬁnd the
optimal exploring rate and the coupling values for ref-problem
for EC4MAS. In the ﬁrst case the tuning time is dependent on
the number of problems and their hardness, in the second case
only on the hardness of ref-problem. We can see here that the
performance is much higher with optimal exploring rate, about
2 times more than EC4MAS, but the tuning time (in minutes)
is about 15 times higher. In the end, the global efﬁciency
(performance gain divided by tuning time) of EC4MAS is
almost 13 times higher than Optimal Min Conﬂict. This shows
that EC4MAS can learn the characteristics of a particular
problem and is able to use this knowledge to really well solve
similar problems with a limited tuning cost.
c) Genericity: ECM4AS uses the degree of nodes to
create spatial roles. EC4MAS has been developed to be as
generic as possible. To illustrate the genericity we introduce
here a new type of sensor for spatial role, the local clustering
coefﬁcient. It is a good indicator for graph coloring problem
hardness as seen in [15]. This coefﬁcient is based on triangles
between neighbors of the node and the node itself.
Table II shows the performance on ref-problem with the Min
Conﬂict with exploration, EC4MAS with degree and clustering
coefﬁcient for spatial role. We can see that the most speciﬁc
sensor which is the clustering coefﬁcient is more efﬁcient than
the others, about 17% than Min Conﬂict while the degrees
are only 11,5% better than Min Conﬂict. EC4MAS is generic
TABLE II: Improvement of spatial roles over Min Conﬂict
Spatial role
Perf. (cycle)
Improvement
Degree
234
11,5%
Clustering coefﬁcient
223
17,04%
so it could support several types of sensors for spatial roles,
from more general one like degree to more speciﬁc one like
clustering coefﬁcient.
B. EC4MAS
We present a second version of EC4MAS with no explicit
spatial/social roles and organizations.
1) Experimental setup: Organizations are seen here like
graphs, oriented graph for spatial organization, weighted graph
for social organization and weighted and oriented graph for
coupling.
+1
+2
0
-1
-2
+1
+2
+1
0
+2
-1
+2
+1
+2
0
-1
-2
+1
+2
+1
0
+2
-1
+2
Coupling : oriented and 
weighted graph
Environment : 
graph to color
Spatial organization : 
oriented graph
Social organization : 
weighted graph
Fig. 4: Organizations of EC4MAS
In this version, spatial sensors are used to construct an
oriented graph on the basis of the graph to color. They provide
information on degree of the node and its color, so an agent
can get a degree of freedom which can be interpreted as spatial
role. When a color is selected by an agent, it may create some
new conﬂicts. Social roles are interpreted as the global action
of the agent when it chooses its color. If the color is not in
conﬂict with the neighbors we can say that the conﬂicts are
removed by the agent, if the number of conﬂicts of the agent
is increased/decreased we can say that the agent add/remove
some conﬂicts from the system. The impact of the choice of a
color on the system is marked through the weights in the social
organization (weight of the links between neighbors), increase
of the weight if perturbations are removed and decrease of the
weight if perturbations are created or transmitted. The coupling
associates weights of the social organization to the oriented
edges of the spatial organization, it represents the ﬂow of the
perturbations in the system. It may direct the perturbations
through the best path (nodes and edges) to be sure that they
will be removed as quickly as possible.
2) Results and analysis: We present here the ﬁrst results
of this version, further experimentations will be made in the
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

future. We compared this version to a model exposed in [16].
In this model agents compute in a centralized way, a value
for their environment in a ﬁxed range to get informations on
the possibles conﬂicts introduced by a speciﬁc color, as in
EC4MAS agents use the coupling graph.
TABLE III: Improvement of EC4MAS over Min Conﬂict
Model
Perf. (cycle)
Improvement
MinConﬂict
211
multi-agent for K-coloring
180
15%
EC4MAS
201
5%
Table III presents results with Min Conﬂict, the model
described in [16] and E4CMAS. We can see that the speciﬁc
model for k-coloring improves the solving by 15% while our
model only over 5%. We can explain this result by the high
dynamic of the system during the solving. The evolution of
the weights in the social organization has to evolve quickly to
be always adapted to the current strategy otherwise, it slows
down the solving process providing it no more appropriate
data. A good setting of the different changes of the weights
have to be found to get optimal informations for the system.
The ﬂow graph, or coupling, gives informations to decrease
the number of perturbations (or conﬂicts) in the system but
it has to be updated as quick as the system to be controled
evolves, which is not totally the case in this version.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present our model, EC4MAS, for more
endogenous control in multi-agent based solvers for combi-
natorial optimization problems. We started from well-know
methods of solving for this kind of problems and used them to
deﬁne a general approach to solve combinatorial optimization
problems. The main idea is to deﬁne a new representation of
the problem more easily understandable and more adapted to
the limited knowledge we have at the moment we conceive the
solving process. This representation is based on the problem
structure, its behavior and its dynamic. If we want to build a
new representation of the problem we have to take into account
these elements and to base the conception process on them.
Some works in psychology have shown that this process is
the one used by an individual to develop his intellect. This
emergence of a representation could also be seen in groups of
individuals to understand and work with some concepts.
Our model, EC4MAS, is based on theses observations and
uses it to construct a control system in an endogenous way.
This model is based on a social and a spatial organization and
their coupling. These two organizations provide information
on the current solving strategy of the system and on its result,
and the coupling allows the control system to dynamically
adapt the strategy of the system more efﬁciently.
EC4MAS is a generic model and could be used to solve
different kind of problems. The spatial organization could be
adapted to use speciﬁc informations to let EC4MAS be able
to solve different kind of problems. On more harder problems
EC4MAS gives good improvements since the characteristics
of the problem are used to better tackle it. EC4MAS makes
the tuning of the system robust in front of changes in a
problem and the coupling of social and spatial organization
provides pertinent solutions to already encountered situations
with a speciﬁc strategy. The tuning has not been changed when
new problems are submitted. This is a great point because
individual optimization is very expensive and could not be
always used, more particularly when problems are dynamic.
The endogenous self-organized characteristic of EC4MAS
could efﬁciently limit the amount of time and resources to
solve a problem, this is shown by the simpliﬁed version.
The second presented version shows us the importance
of the speed of the adaptation of the coupling (or control)
system. To get the system oriented the coupling must be as
quick as possible to construct the representation, because it
has to represent the current situation/strategy and also the
consequences of the previous ones to guide the system.
In Future work, we will focus on this speed characteristic
and we will implement the model with new problems like the
jobshop problem.
REFERENCES
[1] A. H. Land and A. G. Doig, “An automatic method of solving discrete
programming problems,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
Society, pp. 497–520, 1960.
[2] F. Glover and M. Laguna, Tabu search.
Springer, 1997.
[3] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, and
E. Teller, “Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines,”
The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1087–1092, 1953.
[4] I. Rechenberg, “Cybernetic solution path of an experimental problem,”
Royal Air Force Establishment, Tech. Rep., 1965.
[5] J. H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems: An Intro-
ductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control, and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
The MIT Press, 1992.
[6] N. Cramer, “A representation for the adaptive generation of simple
sequential programs,” in Proceedings of the 1st International Conference
on Genetic Algorithms table of contents.
L. Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1985, pp. 183–187.
[7] A. Colorni, M. Dorigo, and V. Maniezzo, “Distributed optimization
by ant colonies,” in Proceedings of the First European Conference on
Artiﬁcial Life (ECAL), F. Varela and P. Bourgine, Eds.
MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1991, pp. 134–142.
[8] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Neural
Networks, 1995. Proceedings., IEEE International Conference on, vol. 4,
1995, pp. 1942–1948.
[9] J. Piaget, Psychologie de l’intelligence.
Paris: Armand Colin., 1947.
[10] J.-C. Abric, Pratiques sociales et repr´esentations. Presses Universitaires
de France, 1994.
[11] S. Moscovici and W. Doise, Dissensions et consensus: une th´eorie
g´en´erale des d´ecisions collectives.
Presses universitaires de France,
1992.
[12] L. L. Carvalho, G. Clair, S. Hassas, and E. M. Braga, Essais (im)
pertinents sur repr´esentation mental et cognition.
Synopsis, 2011, ch.
Repr´esentations : Du Contrˆole Endog`ene pour des Syst`emes Complexes
Adaptatifs.
[13] S. Minton, M. Johnston, A. Philips, and P. Laird, “Minimizing conﬂicts:
a heuristic repair method for constraint satisfaction and scheduling
problems,” Constraint-Based Reasoning, vol. 58, no. 1-3, pp. 161–205,
1994.
[14] A. Eiben, J. Van Der Hauw, and J. van Hemert, “Graph coloring with
adaptive evolutionary algorithms,” Journal of Heuristics, vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 25–46, 1998.
[15] A. A. Tsonis, K. L. Swanson, and G. Wang, “Estimating the clustering
coefﬁcient in scale-free networks on lattices with local spatial correlation
structure,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol.
387, no. 21, pp. 5287 – 5294, 2008.
[16] B. Smati, F. Armetta, and S. Hassas, “R´esolution par syst`eme multi-
agents de probl`emes combinatoires: une application `a la k-coloration,”
Laboratoire LIESP, Tech. Rep., 2008.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

