Fungi as Metaphors for Resource Management
Eilidh McAdam, Ruth E Falconer and James Bown
University of Abertay
Dundee, UK
Email: e.mcadam@abertay.ac.uk, r.falconer@abertay.ac.uk,
j.bown@abertay.ac.uk
John Crawford
University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia
Email: john.crawford@sydney.edu.au
Abstract—Modern societies are heavily dependent upon a
number of critical infrastructure networks that allow our
societies to function, including water, power and transportation.
These networks are open to failure through a range of processes
including shortage of essential resources, breakdowns at key
nodes and surges in demand and this means that effective
management of such networks is challenging. The fungi, an
entire kingdom of life, epitomise successful networks in nature,
demonstrating pervasive growth in harsh environments and a
capacity to optimise resource distribution in space over time.
We detail a graph-based implementation of an established
model of fungal colony growth and recycling that provides a
scheme for efﬁcient resource allocation and distribution. Local
processes of uptake of resource, growth and biomass recycling
lead to non-local emergent patterns of biomass distribution
and colony functioning. This colony growth and recycling in
response to changes in resource supply leads to highly ﬂexible
spatio-temporal resource balancing in the natural world. In our
simulations, we identify fungal colonies that have genotypes
that maximise throughput from prescribed sources to sinks in
a spatial environment, and provide a biological interpretation
to reveal the link between the observed macro-scale pattern
and the micro-scale processes that effect a given solution. This
interpretation is then contextualised in the domain of critical
infrastructure management.
Keywords-adaptive systems; critical infrastructure; biological
metaphors.
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern societies are heavily dependent upon a num-
ber of critical infrastructures, including energy, transport,
water and telecommunications, that allow our societies to
function in an effective manner [1]. These infrastructures
are interconnected and often have common resource de-
pendencies [2], and have often evolved over long periods
of time without foresight of the extent of future demands
or system interconnectivity [3]. Rinaldi et al. characterise
this interconnected, interdependent mix of networks as a
complex adaptive system [4] where the behaviour of the
whole system is not describable in terms of the component
parts alone but in terms of emergent properties of the whole
system. Ulieru highlights that to preserve functioning across
this adaptive system, a management system must be able to
dynamically reconﬁgure itself through self-organisation and
self-repairing processes to effect resilience to perturbation
[5], and in later work suggests that natural systems may
offer routes to solutions [6] since natural systems have many
of the properties sought after in complex adaptive systems
management.
The use of biological metaphors to inspire algorithms for
solving complex problems is already a well developed ﬁeld
with a long history [7]. Ant colonies have been used as
a metaphor for routing algorithms in telecommunications
networks [8]. Recent work in this ﬁeld has extended the
metaphor to consider ad-hoc networks [9] and trust provision
in wireless networks [10]. Other biological metaphors for
network management include bees [11] and cell biology
[12]. In the ﬁeld of biological metaphors, a little explored
but highly successful organism that exhibits features that
are desirable for protecting societys critical infrastructures
are fungi.
Fungi are an entire kingdom of life and are one of the
most successful organisms on the planet, with estimates
suggesting that there may be as many as 1.5 million species
of fungi globally [13]. A fungal colony is a highly successful
organism, demonstrating pervasive growth through and sur-
vival in harsh environments such as soil. They achieve this
through their capacity to operate in a decentralised manner,
reacting locally to changes in context while interoperating
at the colony scale and with other organisms and the
environment [14].
Fungi are decentralised transport networks of hyphae that
grow and branch at micrometre scales through the tortuous
porous structure of soils [15]. Resource is taken up locally
through the tips of the hyphae and then redistributed globally
through translocation within the colony [16]. Colonies can
recycle biomass: resource that is converted into hyphal
structure may be remobilised through degradation of local
regions of hyphae and translocated elsewhere in the colony
[17]. This provides fungi with a highly plastic phenotype,
where biomass investment may be dynamically linked to
external resource availability, and local behaviour impacts
on and is impacted by non-local behaviour in the colony
resulting in emergent phenotypes [14].
Bebber et al. recognise that understanding how decen-
tralised, highly ﬂexible fungal colonies that are capable of
pervasive growth, emergent behaviour and self-healing may
inform the design of man-made networks [18]. They show
20
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

that fungal colonies are effective transport networks that
allocate limited resource efﬁciently. However, models of
fungal colonies from which algorithms may be developed
are scarce [19].
Like fungi, critical infrastructures can be modelled as
graphs [20], i.e. a set of vertices and edges that represent the
critical infrastructure components and connections. Graphs
provide a proven way of representing critical infrastructures
under a wide range of conﬁgurations and for many different
domains [2], [20], [21].
Given the superior resource management strategies fungi
adopt we expore the fungi as a metaphor for efﬁcient re-
source management in critical infrastructure networks. Here,
we examine the trait set that could lead to the development
of a novel bio-inspired algorithm based on [17] for resource
allocation in network structures, exploiting key properties
of fungal colonies to establish a decentralised resource
management. Consequently, an important ﬁrst step is to
generalise the formulation of the computational model from
the existing 3D lattice implementation to a graph-based
implementation. We show that modelled graph-based fungal
colonies still exhibit the essential emergent phenomena that
make fungal colonies such attractive metaphors.
In our ﬁrst simulations, we identify the genotypes of
fungal colonies that perform well with regards to network
throughput and provide a biological interpretation to reveal
the link between the observed performance and the model
parameters that effect a given result. This interpretation is
then contextualised in the domain of critical infrastructure
management.
II. METHODOLOGY
As a fundamental step in understanding the origins of the
fungal phenotype we developed a model of fungal colony
dynamics and interactions that includes an explicit account
of the physiology of organisms in order to link properties
of the emergent phenotype to underlying physiological pro-
cesses [17]. The model formulation represents individual
mycelial networks growing in the environment as comprising
three fractions: insulated biomass, non-insulated biomass
and mobile biomass. These essentially relate to but are not
limited to older inactive biomass, active hyphal tips and
internal resource respectively. The relative proportion of
these components is dynamic and determined by four physi-
ological processes: uptake, inter-conversion between mobile
and insulated/non-insulated phases (recycling of biomass),
redistribution of mobile biomass and growth. Further, a
fungal individual is characterised by a trait set (genotype)
which regulates the physiological processes and its inter-
action with the environment. The model is based on a set
of partial differential equations (Figure 1) which represent
the interdependencies amongst the types of biomass - non
insulated (bn), insulated (bi) and mobile biomass (n) and
Figure 1.
Mathematical model describing colony growth and resource
management based on [17]
external resource (s) - and how these change over space
and time [17].
The continuous model outlined above was discretised and
solved using a square lattice. In order to obtain a discrete
graph based approach to fungal colony growth space is now
represented as a hexavalent lattice. The colony is represented
by a set of edges constrained by the architecture of the
hexavalent lattice and each edge may contain all three
fractions of biomass: insulated, non-insulated and mobile
as detailed above. The edges can also possess a prescribed
level of external resources. The key biological processes
described by Falconer’s model [17] are also implemented
over the graph based colony.
Here, simulation of the dynamics of a single colony is
performed and measurement is carried out using resource
sources and sinks. Sources of resource, loosely simulating
patches of concentrated organic material, can be placed
in set locations in the colony allowing the uptake process
to take place and mobile biomass to be introduced to
the colony. Resource sinks represent areas of the colony
investing in, for example, fruiting bodies or colony defenses
and remove mobile biomass at a constant rate. Strategically
placed sources and sinks are used to measure the throughput
and response of the colony.
The complex interplay between the trait values and the
size of the search space led to a genetic algorithm being
used to ﬁnd the genotypes which performed best. During
the simulation, external resource was introduced into colony
through three sources. Three sinks on the opposite side of
the colony were set up to remove all mobile biomass that
diffused into them. Because the amount of resource going
into the colony was constant, the ﬁtness used was simply the
total amount of biomass that came through the sinks. Table
I lists the traits that were being altered and the meaning of
each. Selection was performed using linear rank selection
and stochastic universal sampling [22].
A population of 40 individual colonies were used in
each generation of the genetic algorithm. With regards to
simulation time, two scenarios were examined: 100 and
21
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

Trait
Description
αi
Insulated immobilisation [0-1]
αn
Non-insulated immobilisation [0-1]
βi
Insulated mobilisation [0-1]
βn
Non-insulated immobilisation [0-1]
ζ
Insulation of non-insulated biomass [0-1]
θ
Non-linear term [1-3]
Table I
ANNOTATED LIST OF TRAITS (WITH SEARCHABLE RANGES) FROM THE
COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF [17] WITH RESPECT TO THE EQUATION SET
IN FIGURE 1
300 time steps. These values were derived from preliminary
studies (not shown). The initial run of 100 time steps resulted
in individuals that had a peak of sink activity just before
simulation termination. To determine whether other trait sets
would outdo the ﬁttest in this scenario if given more time
to become established, the genetic algorithm was also run
with the simulation for each individual being run for 300
time steps.
III. RESULTS
Falconer et al. (2005) reproduced observable growth pat-
terns in fungal colonies and demonstrated plausible emergent
behaviour. Qualitative comparison of fungal phenotypes us-
ing the same parameters as in Falconer et al., 2005 also
showed good correspondence between the continuous and
graph-based implementations (ﬁgure 2). In particular, we
looked for the continuous model’s “fairy ring” pattern and
concentric rings (Figure 2) as well as a plateau biomass pro-
ﬁle. These patterns were also observable in the discretised
graph-based model.
In both scenarios, the average ﬁtness in a generation of
the genetic algorithm went up over time. While we tried a
run using 200 generations, we found that the average ﬁtness
plateaued before reaching 100 generations and so the results
from this are not included. While the actual values of the
traits of the ﬁttest individuals differ, when the ratio of αi/αn
and βi/βn (insulated/non-insulated immobilisation and mo-
bilisation traits) are viewed by ﬁtness, a clear separation is
found. Figure 3 shows each individual’s immobilisation and
mobilisation ratios against their ﬁtness and shows that ﬁt
individuals tend to have an immobilisation ratio of between
0 and 1 and a mobilisation ratio between 1 and 2. No strong
trends were found involving the two remaining traits, ζ and
θ.
IV. DISCUSSION
Different colony foraging strategies, i.e. the way in which
the colony extends itself in space over time and the manner
in which the colony growth pattern responds to resource
acquisition - are reﬂected in the physiological trait set. Con-
sequently, different trait sets may be deﬁned to determine
different resource management strategies - manifest through
dynamic patterns in growth - in critical infrastructures.
We demonstrate the use of a genetic algorithm search to
identify colony trait sets that provide optimised solutions
to a speciﬁc resource management task. Here, in our initial
exploration to determine the most efﬁcient trait sets asso-
ciated with maximising throughput with constant source-
sink relationships the recycling trait ratios (αi/αn, βi/βn)
converged to [0 -1] and [1-2] respectively across the multiple
runs of the GA.
For this scenario we may interpret this as the fastest
investment (in terms of spatial extent) into a ﬁxed and evenly
distributed infrastructure. This even distribution occurs via
the reallocation of resources from places where it already
exists (recycling of insulated structural biomass, i.e. αn > αi
) to areas where it is required to be established (periphery
of colony, i.e. αn > αi ). This localised, dynamic recycling
behaviour thus maximizing throughput at the global level.
We expect this relation to be different, or at least the mag-
nitude of the ratios to be different, for maximum throughput
associated with changing source-sink relationships and/or
damage to the network. In these contexts the resource
allocation and distribution mechanism must be adaptive in
space over time. We propose that our framework provides
a platform to explore how the colony traits may interact to
promote plasticity in form. This plasticity can allow rapid
switches in foraging strategy and we suggest that a fungal
colony inspired resource management approach may offer
potential in protecting societys critical infrastructures.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The results reported here consider only a static environ-
ment and the capacity of a dynamic colony structure to
optimise resource throughput. Clearly, a static solution may
be identiﬁed a priori to such a problem. The most compelling
motivation for using fungi as a metaphor for resource
management in critical infrastructures is the capacity of
colonies to react dynamically to a changing resource regime.
Importantly, our modelling framework does indeed allow
conﬁguration of dynamic environments and simulation of
colony behaviour in that dynamic environment. We will use
the same discretised colony growth and recylcing model
coupled to the genetic algorithm search approach to optimise
traits for dynamic, challenging problems. In particular, we
will consider two main classes of problems. First, we
will identify colonies that are able to deal well with the
challenges of load balancing. To explore this we must vary
over time the level of resource at the sources and measure, as
here, the resource at the sinks. The genetic algorithm search
may optimise throughput in the same way as detailed here.
Second, and more interestingly, we will identify colonies
that are resilient to damage. Damage will be effected by
removing sections of the network and again optimising on
throughput. In both cases, we will undertake systematic
experimentation and seek biological interpretations of the
resulting optimised trait sets.
22
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

Figure 2.
Comparison between continuous model (left) and graph based model (right).
Figure 3.
Trait ratios - 100 time step (left) and 300 time step (right) scenarios
It is anticipated that these analyses will reveal fungi to
be a useful, versatile scheme upon which to base man-
agement algorithms in network-based contexts characterised
by uncertainty and variance in demand loading and by the
requirement to function in the face of partial failure.
REFERENCES
[1] E. M.-K. A. Boin, P. Lagadec and W. Overdijk, “Critical
infrastructures under threat: Learning from the anthrax scare,”
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 99–104, 2003.
[2] N. K. Svendsena and S. D. Wolthusen, “Connectivity models
of interdependency in mixed-type critical infrastructure net-
works,” Information Security Technical Report, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 44–55, 2007.
[3] M. Amin, Automation, Control and Complexity: An Integrated
23
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

Approach.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2000, pp.
263–286.
[4] J. P. S. Rinaldi and T. Kelly, “Identifying, understanding and
analyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies,” Control
Systems, IEEE, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 11–25, 2001.
[5] M. Ulieru, “e-networks in an increasingly volatile world:
Design for resilience of networked critical infrastructures,”
in Proc. The Inaugural IEEE International Conference on
Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, Cairns, Australia, Feb.
2007, pp. 540–545.
[6] M. U. V. Vyatkin, G. Zabelova and D. McComas, “Toward
digital ecologies: Intelligent agent networks controlling inter-
dependent infrastructures,” in Proc. 1st IEEE Conference on
Smart Grid Communications, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Oct.
2010, pp. 589–594.
[7] J. d. L. J. Martin and D. Maravall, “Adaptation, anticipation
and rationality in natural and artiﬁcial systems: computational
paradigms mimicking nature,” Natural Computing, 2009.
[8] M. B. M. Dorigo and T. Stutzle, “Ant colony optimization,”
Computational Intelligence Magazine, IEEE, vol. 1, no. 4, pp.
28–39, 2006.
[9] F. D. G. di Caro and L. Gambardella, “Anthocnet: An adap-
tive nature-inspired algorithm for routing in mobile ad hoc
networks,” European Transactions on Telecommunications,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 443–455, 2005.
[10] G. P. F. Marmol, “Security threats scenarios in trust and
reputation models for distributed systems,” Computers &
Security, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 545–556, 2009.
[11] S. K. M. Saleem and M. Faroog, “A formal performance mod-
eling framework for bio-inspired ad hoc routing protocols,”
in Proc. 10th annual conference on genetic and evolutionary
computation, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Jul. 2008, pp. 103–110.
[12] F. Dressler, “Efﬁcient and scalable communication in au-
tonomous networking using bio-inspired mechanisms - an
overview,” Informatica, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 183–188, 2005.
[13] D. Hawksworth, “The fungal dimension of biodiversity:
magnitude, signiﬁcance, and conservation,” Mycological Re-
search, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 641–655, 1991.
[14] J. B. et al., “Evidence for emergent behaviour in the
community-scale dynamics of a fungal microcosm,” Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society B, vol. 266, no. 1432, pp. 1947–
1952, 1999.
[15] K. Ritz and I. M. Young, “Interactions between soil structure
and fungi,” Mycologist, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 52–59, 2004.
[16] A. Ashford and W. Allaway, “The role of the motile tubular
vacuole system in mycorrhizal fungi,” Plant Soil, vol. 244,
no. 1-2, pp. 165–175, 2002.
[17] N. W. R.E. Falconer, J.L. Bown and J. Crawford, “Biomass
recycling and the origin of phenotype in fungal mycelia,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B, vol. 272, no. 1573, pp.
1727–1734, 2005.
[18] D. Bebber, J. Hynes, P. Darrah, L. Boddy, and M. Fricker, “Bi-
ological solutions to transport network design,” Proceedings
of the Royal Society B, vol. 274, no. 1623, pp. 2307–2315,
2007.
[19] T. R. A. Schnepf and P. Schweiger, “Growth model for
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi,” Journal of the Royal Society
Interface, vol. 5, no. 24, pp. 773–784, 2007.
[20] V. Latora and M. Marchiori, “How the science of complex
networks can help developing strategies against terrorism,”
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 69–75, 2004.
[21] A. Krings and A. Azadmanesh, “A graph based model for
survivability applications,” European Journal of Operational
Research, vol. 164, no. 3, pp. 680–689, 2005.
[22] F. Herrera, M. Lozano, and J. Verdegay, “Tackling real-
coded genetic algorithms: Operators and tools for behavioural
analysis,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, vol. 12, no. 4, pp.
187–204, 2000.
24
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

