Attainable Capacity Aware Routing Metric for Wireless Mesh Networks
Nemesio A. Macabale Jr.1,2, Roel M. Ocampo2 , Cedric Angelo M. Festin3
namacabale@up.edu.ph
 
 ,   roel@eee.up.edu.ph
 
 , cedric@cs.up.edu.ph
 
 
1Dept of Information Technology
Central Luzon State University
Science City of Munoz, Philippines
2Electrical and Electronics Engineering Institute
3Dept of Computer Science
University of the Philippines – Diliman
Quezon City, Philippines
Abstract—  We  propose  a  new  metric,  called  the  attainable 
capacity  (ACAP)  aware  routing  metric,  to  address  issues  on 
throughput, interference and load imbalance in wireless mesh 
networks. In contrast with  previously proposed metrics, ACAP 
takes into account the busyness and shared nature of the wireless 
channel together with the combined effect of the transmission 
rates of the nodes that share it.  Accordingly, paths with highest 
attainable capacity are chosen as the best paths.  In the process, 
regions  with  higher  degree  of  congestion  are  also  avoided  to 
improve throughput and load distribution across the network. We 
present an analysis of the above interaction and uses it to define 
ACAP. We expect ACAP to be significantly better than existing 
metrics in  discriminating congested regions and in finding higher 
capacity routes. Like many of these existing metrics, APAC is 
suitable  to  both  multi-radio  and  multi-channel  wireless  mesh 
networks. 
Keywords  -  wireless  mesh  networks,  routing,  routing  metric, 
congestion awareness, attainable capacity
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wireless mesh networks (WMN) have emerged to be a cheaper 
and flexible alternative for quick deployment of wireless services 
for  a  large  variety  of  applications  such  as  broadband  home 
networking and  automation  [1] , community and neighborhood 
networking  [2],  transportation  systems  [3],   spontaneous 
(emergency/disaster) networking[4], and others. 
However,  despite  advances  in  this  field,  many  research 
challenges remain [5]. One issue  is the use of routing metrics that 
do not scale well, such as hop count:  network throughput drops 
significantly  as the  number  of  nodes or  hops increases in  the 
network [6]. This paper proposes the attainable  capacity (ACAP) 
aware  routing  metric  to  address  issues  on  throughput, 
interference,load imbalance, and congestion problems as networks 
grow.
The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Section  II 
discusses the motivation and related work, while Section III presents 
an analysis that lead to the design of ACAP. Section IV discusses 
ACAP's  implementation details. Finally,  Section V concludes.
II.
MOTIVATION AND RELATED WORK
In  both  wired  and  wireless  networks,  a  routing  algorithm's 
function is to discover a path for a packet to traverse from its  source 
to its destination. A routing algorithm in return may find more than 
one route. To decide which is best, it uses routing metrics [7]. In a 
multi-hop  WMN,  routing  becomes  more  critical  than  in  wired 
networks, because the wireless medium is shared and is highly 
dynamic [8]. Different packet flows may interfere with each other 
even  when  they  do  not  necessarily  traverse  the  same  path, 
consequently congesting that direction thus lowering throughput 
significantly.
The simplest and most commonly-used routing metric in WMN 
is the hop-count metric, as used in DSR  [9] , AODV  [10], and 
DSDV[11]. It reflects the path- length in hops, and in many cases 
the shortest physical path is used. However,  it is insensitive to the 
quality of links between hops and to the degree of congestion on the 
link [12]. 
ETX [12] and ETT [13] on the other hand are able to measure 
quality of links but not congestion. Some load balancing protocols 
like WLAR  [14] and DLAR  [15] can avoid loaded nodes, but 
cannot determine link capacities.
Among the metrics that are similar to ACAP in functionality, 
ALARM [16] identifies paths with better capacity and nodes with 
less load. However, it cannot measure interfering transmissions 
from neighboring nodes. Thus, it may avoid loaded nodes but not 
necessarily congested regions of the network. The ILA routing 
metric  [17] claims to have solved this issue. However, its metric 
measures congestion in terms of the average load of nodes within a 
collision domain (see Fig.  1). In this case, it will not be able to 
distinguish between regions having more interfering nodes over 
regions having less, as long as the average loads are the same. Thus, 
it can not determine capacity accurately since a domain with less 
nodes that share a channel can provide higher achievable data rates. 
ACAP, on the other hand, solves these issues by estimating the 
achievable capacity in proportion to the load of the channel, and in 
conjunction with  the  transmission rates (minus  packet losses) of 
the individual nodes that share it. 
III.
DESIGN OF THE PROPOSED METRIC
We begin our analysis by looking at a node j's collision domain. 
It is comprised of j's neighbor nodes within its carrier sensing range 
that operate on the same channel. All transmissions of these nodes 
interfere with  that of  j's. See Fig.  1, assuming circular  carrier 
sensing range.
Because of the shared nature of the channel within j's collision 
domain, the capacity of the link that may be achieved in choosing j 
as a next hop node depends on the activities happening in the 
channel. If the channel is idle, the achievable capacity is close to the 
full capacity of the link, less overhead and packet losses. If there are 
activities in the channel, then the link's achievable capacity is less.
A.
Channel Busyness and Utilization
In determining the ACAP of the link in considering a node j as 
the next-hop from a node i, we quantify the degree of busyness of 
the  channel  within  i and  j's collision  domain.  Although  other 
authors define the degree of busyness as the fraction of time the 
channel is inferred to be busy  [18], in our work, we refine this 
definition of busyness to pertain to the fraction of time the channel 
is sensed (rather than inferred) to be busy. 
Busyness,  as  used  in  our  work,  is  different  from  channel 
utilization. Channel utilization is typically defined as the achieved 
throughput related to the capacity of the communication medium [7] 
10
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

[16],  which  could  achieve  a  maximum  value  less  than  100%, 
because of overhead, packet losses, and queuing issues. On the other 
hand, channel busyness is defined as the fraction within a given 
period when transmission occurs over the wireless medium, which 
may attain a maximum value of 100%.
B.
The Attainable Capacity Aware (ACAP) Routing Metric
In a simulation  study, it is observed that channel busyness 
increases linearly with aggregate input traffic until channel saturates 
[18]. When the channel is saturated, although input traffic increases, 
throughput does not increase because all time slots are utilized. In 
[19], a channel saturates when the aggregate input traffic reaches 
80% of the nominal bit rate. In a separate study [20] that looks onto 
the saturation throughput between a 802.11b access point and a 
laptop, similar behavior was observed except that the saturation 
throughput reached only 50 to 70% of the channel capacity (5 
different wireless brands were individually tested). In these studies, 
the  input  traffic  approximates  the  throughput  linearly  until 
saturation.  At  saturation,  as  more  input  traffic  is  injected,  the 
throughput  either  hovers  around  a  constant  value  [18] or 
asymptotically drops to a lower one  [18]. In the context of this 
work, the  studies imply two things. First, that the rated capacity of a 
channel  is  never  reached  even  if  there  is  only  a  pair  of 
communicating nodes, because of packet losses, overheads, and 
delays. Secondly, it can be said that the capacity that a channel may 
offer decreases linearly until saturation. The second implication is 
summarized in Fig. 2. Using methods from analytic geometry [21], 
the ACAP in connecting to j is  derived as: 
ACAP j=ACAP  jidl−CB j ACAP jidl−ACAP jsat 
(1)
where :
ACAP jis theattainable capacity  ACAP in connectingto j
ACAP jidl isthe ACAPwhenthechannel isidle
ACAP jsat isthe ACAPwhenthechannelis saturated
CB jis thedegree of channel busynessof node j' s collisiondomain
ACAP(i) is obtained following the same analysis. In turn, the 
ACAP of the link k between nodes i and j is defined as:
ACAPk=
1
1
ACAPi
1
ACAP j
 
(2)
where :
ACAPkis theattainable capacity of link betweennodesi and j
ACAP jis theattainable capacity in connecting to j
ACAPkis theattainable capacity in connectingto i
Consequently the attainable capacity of the path between a pair 
of source and destination is given in 3. If the routing algorithm finds 
more than one path, it selects the path with the highest ACAP 
metric. 
ACAPP=
1
∑
k∈P
1
ACAPk
 
(3)
where :
ACAPPisthe attainable capacity on pathP
ACAPkis theactualattainable capacity of link k
k isalink on path P
We do not make any assumption about the operating channel of 
a collision domain; we only require to consider i and j's collision 
domains to operate on the same channel as that of link k. If some 
collision  domains  operate  over  different  channels,  the  analysis 
would follow the same process. Therefore, (2) can determine the 
ACAP of a link and  (3) can determine ACAP of a path. Thus, 
ACAP is suitable for multi-radio and multi-channel mesh networks. 
At the moment, our analysis assumes negligible  channel switching 
cost. 
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we define both the attainable capacity and the 
channel busyness when the channel is idle and when it is saturated. 
We assume that all nodes in a collision domain have a packet to 
transmit at saturation. In doing so, we use 802.11 equipped nodes 
operating  using  the  basic  access  mode   of  the  distributed 
communication function (DCF) of the 802.11 [22].
A.
The value for the ACAP when the channel is idle 
(ACAPidl)
When the channel is idle, the ACAP in choosing  j as the next-
hop node can never be more than, and usually is less than, the 
nominal bit rate of the link between i and j due to overheads and 
packet losses [19],[18],[20]. Discounting overheads, but considering 
packet losses, the ACAP of the link k connecting i and j when the 
channel is idle can be defined as:
ACAPkidl=pij p ji rij
(4)
where :
ACAPkidlis the attainablecapacity whenthe channelisidle
pijand p jiare the forwardandreverse packet delivery ratios
rijis thenominal bit rate betweeniand j
Here, we do not include the overhead in the definition of the 
ACAP because we are not trying to come up with an accurate value 
for the attainable capacity that a path may provide. Rather, we 
would  like  to  compute  relative  values  that  may  be  compared 
1.0
0.0
ACAP(j)sat
ACAP(j)idl
Channel
busyness (CB)
Attainable
Capacity (ACAP)
Node i's collision 
domain
01
02
03
04
05
06
i
08
09
10
11
12
j
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Node j's collission 
domain
k
Figure  2:  Attainable  Capacity  (ACAP)  vs.  Channel 
busyness (CB)
Figure 1: A Wireless Mesh Network with 25 nodes 
11
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

between candidate routing paths. The overhead is common to other 
links and so its effect, hence, the omission is justified.
The use of forward and reverse packet delivery ratios is due to 
channel asymmetry and to estimate them periodic probe packets can 
be used [12],[13].
B.
The value for the ACAP when the channel saturates
At channel saturation, the 802.11 distributed communication 
function (DCF) provides equal transmission opportunities among 
nodes in a collision domain [23]. Following the analysis  made in 
[24],[25], and again discounting overhead but considering packet 
losses, this value is  defined as:
r jsat=
1
∑
n ∈Dj∧n≠ j
1
pnj p jnrnj
 
(5)
where :
r  jsatis thechannel ' s saturationdatarate within
j' scollisiondomain
D jisthe set of nodes within j' s collisiondomain
nisa nodewithin j' scollisiondomain
pijand pjiare the forwardand reverse packet delivery ratios
rnjis thenominal bit rate of nodenin connectingto node j
jisthe nodebeingconsidered
Rewriting (5) in terms of ACAP, ACAP(j)sat is defined in (6). 
ACAP(i)sat should be obtained in the same manner.
ACAP jsat=
1
∑
n∈D j∧n≠j
1
ACAPnjidl
 
(6)
where :
ACAP jsat is j' s collisiondomain attainablecapacity at saturation
r  jsat is thechannel ' s saturationdatarate
D jis theset of nodeswithin j' s collisiondomain
n isa nodewithin j' scollisiondomain
ACAPnjidl= pnj p jnrnj
However,  it  should  be  noted  that  (6)  gives   an  ACAP  at 
saturation that does not take into account the effect of collision 
domains of nodes outside the path but whose range overlaps with 
those of the nodes along the path. We presume that extending the 
definition to include their effect will increase the complexity of 
finding the solution. We opted to initially have a workable one, as 
given by (6) and tackle such scenario as part of a future work.
C.
The channel busyness (CB)
Channel busyness in a collision domain is defined as the fraction 
of time within a given period where the channel is being used  for 
transmission. A previous definition was presented in [18] that seems 
simpler to implement, because it is obtained from just observing the 
collision  probability  within  the  channel  as  opposed  to  actually 
monitoring the channel for a given period (that we intend to do). 
However, this may not be accurate  since the DCF of 802.11 
actually avoids collision through its back-off mechanism, and this 
value is kept at minimum until saturation point. Nevertheless, their 
result showed some accuracy even in the presence of other causes of 
packet loss (like fading). We are currently validating this, as the 
simplicity of their definition might prove useful in this work.
We intend to monitor activity on the channel through  carrier 
sensing. A node determines the channel as busy when a node (not 
necessarily the sensing node)  is sending a message to another node, 
or the sensing node itself is actually transmitting data, whether 
transmission is successful or not. For a given period, (equal to 
100ms synchronized with the transmission of the 802.11 beacon 
frame [22]), the degree of busyness from the perspective of a node j 
is defined in (7).
CB j=
∑ T busy∑ Ttransmitting
∑ Tidle∑ Tbusy∑ Ttransmitting
(7)
where :
CBjis thechannel busynessratiofrom within j ' s collisiondomain
∑ Tidle isthe durationthat node j senses thechannel asidle
∑ Tbusyis the durationthat node j sensesthe channelasbusy
∑ Ttransmittingis thedurationthat node jis transmittingframes
Here T idle, T busy and T transmitting   are computed as follows [22],[18]: 
Tidle = number of slot-time sensed as idle * 20 s 
Tbusy =  number of slot-time sensed as busy * 20 s
Ttransmitting = Tsuccessful + Tcollision
Tsuccessful = data/bitrate + ack/bitrate + SIFS + DIFS + 2* Tpr
Tcollision = data/bitrate + ack-timeout + SIFS + DIFS + 2* Tpr
Based  on  802.11b[22] values  and  without  using  RTS/CTS 
mechanism, the constants above are slottime = 20µs; ack = 14-byte 
frame;  ack-time  out  =  22µs,  (as  used  in  [26]); SIFS  (short 
interframe sequence) = 10 µs; PIFS (point interframe sequence) = 
SIFS + slottime = 30 µs; DIFS (distributed interframe sequence) = 
SIFS + 2 x slottime = 50 µs; Tpr = 96  µs, is the PLCP (Physical 
Layer Convergence Protocol) preamble and header. The short PLCP 
is put here, since it is used for most available nominal bit rates in 
802.11
DIFS is the amount of time a station must sense a clear radio 
before beginning a new transmission sequence. SIFS is the amount 
of time a station must wait before sending or beginning to receive a 
ACK frame,  RTS, or CTS. Tpr is the time occupied by the PLCP 
header introduced by the physical layer for mapping MPDU (mac 
protocol data unit) into a suitable PDU (Physical Data Unit)[23]. 
However, we need to smoothen the impact of the sudden 
changes in traffic.  We employ a moving average for the channel 
busyness using a tunable parameter α. To make it simple, we will 
initially use 0.5. The channel busyness is, thus, defined as:
CB jt=1−×CB jt−1×CB j
(8)
where :
CB jtis the current value of the movingaverage of thechannel
busynessratiowithin j' scollisiondomain
αis atunable parameter: 0≤α ≤1,here 0.5is used
CB jis thecurrent computedchannelbusyness
CB jt−1isthe previoussmoothed average channelbusyness
t refersto the current measuring period
D.
ACAP Summary
ACAP is a measure of the attainable capacity of a link based on 
the shared nature and busyness of a channel.  The more busy a 
channel, the less it is capable of accepting input traffic without 
dropping packets. Its shared nature, on the other hand, is affected by 
the quantity  of  nodes sharing  the channel  and  their  respective 
transmission rates. The more nodes that share a channel, the less 
share a node gets on the channel capacity. Further, in a self-
configuring WMN that implements a distributed channel access 
mechanism, similar to 802.11's DCF, the node with the lowest 
nominal-bit-rate penalizes the high-bit-rate ones: at saturation, each 
node gets a bit rate that is no more than the lowest bit rate [27]. Put 
together, using the analytical model presented above, the ACAP of a 
12
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

link is obtained. The ACAP of the path becomes the sum of the 
ACAP's of the links that comprise the path. This value is then used 
as basis for choosing the best path among candidate paths.
ACAP  is  suitable   for  both  multi-radio  and  multi-channel 
wireless mesh networks as pointed out earlier. We compute the 
ACAP one link at a time, per collision domain.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We  proposed  a  new  routing  metric  called  the  Attainable 
Capacity   Aware  routing  metric  (ACAP)  for  wireless  mesh 
networks. ACAP estimates the attainable capacity of a link based on 
the shared nature and busyness of a channel within a link's end-
nodes' collision domain. The shared nature of the channel is affected 
by the quantity of nodes within the collision domain and their 
respective transmission rates. The quality of the links based on 
packet losses has also been incorporated into the ACAP metric
We expect ACAP to perform better than recently proposed 
routing metrics, such as ALARM and ILA, because it can better 
discriminate  congestion  and  accurately  estimate  capacity  by 
incorporating the busyness and shared nature of the channel, and in 
conjunction with the quantity of and respective nominal bit rates 
(minus packet loss) of contending nodes.
Our current work focuses on testing our metric in a simulation 
set-up similar to [19] and [17] then implementing the experiment in 
actual test-bed whose set-up is similar to [28].
In the future, we intend to include a broader framework that 
takes into consideration the effect of overlapping domains. Other 
mechanisms to account  for channel busyness will also be explored .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Engineering Research and 
Development for Technology (ERDT) Consortium, Department of 
Science and Technology – Science Education Institute (DOST-SEI), 
Republic of the Philippines.
REFERENCES
[1]
1TouchMovie.com, “ZigBee, Insteon, Z-Wave, and inifiNET Wireless 
Mesh  Networks  for  Home  Automation,”  Availabe  at: 
http://www.1touchmovie.com/wireless_mesh_networks.html.  Access 
on: March 23. 2010
[2]
Riverfront  Apartments,  “Riverfron  Apartments”,  Available  at: 
http://meraki.com/solutions/cs/riverfront/.” Accessed on, Mar 23, 2010
[3]
V. Naumov and T. Gross, “Connectivity-Aware Routing (CAR) in 
Vehicular  Ad-hoc  Networks,”  in  Proc.  26th  IEEE  International 
Conference on Computer Communications, IEEE, 2007.
[4]
R. Knopp, N. Nikaein, C. Bonnet, H. Aiache, V. Conan, S. Masson, G. 
Guib, and C. Le Martret, “Overview of the Widens Architecture, A 
Wireless Ad Hoc Network for Public Safety,” 2004.
[5]
I.F. Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, “Wireless mesh networks: a 
survey,” Comput. Netw. ISDN Syst.,  vol. 47, 2005, pp. 445-487.
[6]
S.  Srivathsan,  N.  Balakrishnan,  and  S.S.  Iyengar,  “Scalability  in 
Wireless Mesh Networks,”  Guide to Wireless Mesh Networks, 2009, 
pp. 325-347.
[7]
A.S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, Prentice Hall, 2002.
[8]
T. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice (2nd 
Edition), Prentice Hall PTR, 2002.
[9]
David B. Johnson, David A. Maltz, and Yih-Chun Hu, “The Dynamic 
Source  Routing   Protocol  for  Mobile  Ad  Hoc  Networks  (DSR), 
Internet-Draft,” Jul. 2004.
[10]
C.  Perkins,  E.  Belding-Royer,  and  S.  Das,  “Ad  hoc  On-demand 
Distance Vector (AODV) Routing, rfc 4561,” Jul. 2003.
[11]
C.E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, “Highly dynamic Destination-Sequenced 
Distance-Vector routing (DSDV) for mobile computers,” SIGCOMM 
Comput. Commun. Rev.,  vol. 24, 1994, pp. 234-244.
[12]
D.S.J.D.  Couto,  D.  Aguayo,  J.  Bicket,  and  R.  Morris,  “A  high-
throughput path metric for multi-hop wireless routing,” Proceedings of 
the 9th annual international conference on Mobile computing and 
networking,  San Diego, CA, USA: ACM, 2003, pp. 134-146.
[13]
R. Draves, J. Padhye, and B. Zill, “Routing in multi-radio, multi-hop 
wireless mesh networks,” Proceedings of the 10th annual international 
conference on Mobile computing and networking,  Philadelphia, PA, 
USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 114-128.
[14]
D. Choi, J. Jung, K.Y. Kwon, D. Montgomery, and H. Kahng, “Design 
and Simulation Result of a Weighted Load Aware Routing (WLAR) 
Protocol in Mobile Ad Hoc Network,” Information Networking, 2005, 
pp. 178-187.
[15]
S.  Lee  and  M.  Gerla,  “Dynamic  load-aware  routing  in  ad  hoc 
networks,”  Communications,  2001.  ICC  2001.  IEEE  International 
Conference on, 2001, pp. 3206-3210 vol.10.
[16]
A.A.  Pirzada,  R.  Wishart,  M.  Portmann,  and  Jadwiga  Indulska, 
“ALARM:  An  Adaptive  Load-Aware  Routing  Metric  for  Hybrid 
Wireless  Mesh  Networks,”  in  Proc.  32nd  Australasian  Computer 
Science Conference,  Wellington, New Zealand: 2009.
[17]
D.M. Shila and T. Anjali, “Load aware traffic engineering for mesh 
networks,” Comput. Commun.,  vol. 31, 2008, pp. 1460-1469.
[18]
H. Zhai, X. Chen, and Y. Fang, “How Well Can the IEEE 802.11 
Wireless LAN Support Quality of Service,”  IEEE Transactions on 
Wireless Communications,  vol. 4, Nov. 2005, pp. 3084 - 3094.
[19]
L.T.  Nguyen,  R.  Beuran,  and  Y.  Shinoda,  “A load-aware  routing 
metric for wireless mesh networks,” Computers and Communications, 
2008. ISCC 2008. IEEE Symposium on, 2008, pp. 429-435.
[20]
E.  Pelletta  and  H.  Velayos,  “Performance  Measurements  of  the 
Saturation  Throughput  in  IEEE  802.11  Access  Points,”  Third 
International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad 
Hoc, and Wireless Networks (WiOpt'05),  Riva del Garda, Trentino, 
Italy: , pp. 129-138.
[21]
A.  Robson,  Introduction  to  Analytical  Geometry,  Cambridge 
University Press, 2009.
[22]
IEEE, “802.11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and 
Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations- Revision of the 802.11-1999 
standard,” 2007.
[23]
B.O.A. Petrick, The IEEE 802.11 Handbook: A Designer's Companion, 
Institute of Electrical & Electronics Enginee, 2005.
[24]
O.  Ekici and  A.  Yongacoglu,  “A  novel  association  algorithm  for 
congestion relief in IEEE 802.11 WLANs,” Proceedings of the 2006 
international  conference  on  Wireless  communications  and  mobile 
computing,  Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: ACM, 2006, pp. 
725-730.
[25]
V. Mhatre, H. Lundgren, and C. Diot, “MAC-aware routing in wireless 
mesh networks,” In Proc. Fourth Annual Conference on  Wireless on 
Demand Network Systems and Services,  Oberguyrgl: IEEE, 2007.
[26]
Air-Stream Community Wireless Network, "Changing ACK timeout 
on
 
various
 
Oses.”
 
Available
 
at:
 http://www.air-
stream.org.au/Change_ACK, accessed on: April 10, 2010
[27]
M.  Heusse,  F.  Rousseau,  G.  Berger-Sabbatel,  and  A.  Duda, 
“Performance Anomaly of 802.11b,” In Proc Twenty-Second Annual 
Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications, IEEE, 
2003, pp. 836-843.
[28]
D. Johnson and G. Hancke, “Comparison of two routing metrics in 
OLSR on a grid based mesh network,” Ad Hoc Netw.,  vol. 7, 2009, 
pp. 374-387.
13
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

