Improving Robustness to Environmental Fluctuations – Dynamical Hierarchies
Included
Dragana Laketic, Gunnar Tufte
Department of Computer and Information Science
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
(draganal,gunnart)@idi.ntnu.no
Abstract—Dynamic environments present an everlasting
challenge for any system, be it the one emerging in nature
or the one designed by humans. Biological solutions – living
systems, successfully tackle the challenge by adapting to their
varying environment. Human designers, when faced with a
similar challenge, may turn to biology to seek inspiration for
possible solutions. Therefore, our previous work has considered
strategies and mechanisms for achieving adaptation in living
systems. In particular, the focus was on the achievement of
adaptation through preservation of homeostasis and the role
of hormones within such processes. This paper builds upon
those ﬁndings. Further, it investigates one possible way to
increase the robustness of an adaptive process performed by
a man–made system where the system architecture is assumed
to be of a grid–of–cells style. We suggest that some of the
principles underlying dynamical hierarchies be used to enhance
the previously developed model of an adaptive system in order
to improve system robustness. This idea is supported with
simulations which show that such model exhibits an increased
robustness to environmental variations.
Keywords-
adaptation; environment; dynamical hierarchies; home-
ostasis; hormones
I. INTRODUCTION
When man–made systems are exposed to dynamical envi-
ronments, their functionality is endangered. If the system is
to preserve its functionality, it needs to adapt. Often, the
possibility of human intervention is excluded so besides
adaptivity, autonomous fashion of the system operation is
desirable, if not required. Also, the robust operation is of
particular interest because of the often unpredictable and
sometimes harsh nature of environmental variations.
Living systems exhibit these qualities – they preserve
their viability in dynamic environments by adapting to
environmental variations. Therefore, our investigation has
considered adaptive mechanisms and principles in living
systems. Previous simulation results have shown how prin-
ciples of preservation of homeostasis can be used for the
achievement of adaptation in a modular man–made system
whose modules (cells) are placed in a grid formation [1],
[2]. This paper goes a step further and investigates one
particular way in which a system can increase the probability
of successfully reaching adaptation to environmental varia-
tions. It looks into the organisation of living systems and
addresses its hierarchical nature examining the effect which
the inclusion of principles of dynamical hierarchies into the
adaptation process may have on the system robustness to
environmental ﬂuctuations.
Engineering applications of the principles of dynamical
hierarchies have been recognised as one of the challenges
for the topic of dynamical hierarchies within the ﬁeld of
Artiﬁcial Life [3]. It is our belief that this paper represents
a signiﬁcant contribution to further establishment of this
topic by suggesting that the robustness to environmental
ﬂuctuations in a man–made system may be increased if the
adaptation process performed by the system is enhanced with
the principles of dynamical hierarchies.
The paper is organised as follows. Section II gives an
introduction on biological principles which were used in
our investigation providing the reference to the work of
other researchers inspired by similar biological solutions.
In particular, the notion of hierarchies within the context of
organisation of biological systems is introduced in subsec-
tion II-A. Section III brieﬂy presents our previous work.
It is included here because the results presented in this
paper build up on it. Section IV presents the model of
the system under investigation which includes dynamical
hierarchies. Further, Section V explains experimental setup,
while Section VI provides simulation results. Finally, the
conclusion of the presented work as well as some directions
for future work may be found in Section VII.
II. ADAPTIVITY OF LIVING SYSTEMS
Adaptivity of living systems is the result of a number
of processes which may be viewed as long term and short
term processes dependent on the process duration relative
to an individual’s lifetime. The long term processes refer to
the evolution of living systems realised through coevolution
with environment. Their effects can be monitored at the
population level. Such processes have resulted in individuals
possessing inherent adaptive mechanisms. Once the envi-
ronmental variation is detected, these mechanisms are em-
ployed in order to achieve adaptation to new environmental
123
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

conditions. Processes performed by these inherent mecha-
nisms upon sensing environmental ﬂuctuation are short term
processes. In general, these processes may be said to aim
at the preservation of homeostasis i.e., the steady state of
the organism’s internal environment despite environmental
ﬂuctuations, be it of internal or external origin. A plethora
of homeostatic processes is performed by different systems
within the body, mutually intertwined and interdependent in
their operation [4]. The prominent role belongs to endocrine
system which is responsible for control and communication
within homeostatic processes.
In some cases, however, environmental variations are
such that organisms are unable to adapt despite possessing
inherent adaptive mechanisms. Examples may be found at
the population level e.g., the extinction of whole species due
to abrupt, unpredictable or extreme change, or at the level
of one individual when exposed to extreme or harsh senvi-
ronmental conditions e.g., too high temperature. Therefore,
it can be said that living systems exhibit certain norma-
tivity in withstanding environmental variations. The higher
the probability of withstanding environmental variation, the
more robust the living system is to this variation. Further, if
the environmental effect on living systems is described by a
set of parameters e.g., temperature, pressure, salinity, acidity,
then environmental variations are represented by variations
in the values of these parameters.
The preservation of homeostasis for adaptive processes
as well as the tasks performed by hormones have been
addressed by a number of researchers, be it as a general
framework for adaptive processes [5]–[7] or for a speciﬁc
task like control and self–organisation within evolutionary
robotics ﬁeld [8]–[11] or fault tolerance in a multiprocessor
system [12]. Our approach aims at establishing a model of
an adaptive man–made system inspired by these biological
principles which could ﬁnd its application in adaptive hard-
ware and electronics systems.
A. Hierarchies
Ever since its creation, the living matter has been faced
with a difﬁcult task of preserving the viability despite ever–
changing environment. Clever strategies emerged providing
optimal solutions not only for the present environmental
conditions but also for maintaining the possibility of further
evolution. Living systems as we see them today, are the
result of such processes. As can be observed, the design
strategy which has proven most successful through the
evolutionary mechanism of natural selection is a step–wise
creation of more and more complex living systems. Their
complexity refers to both the complexity of organisation and
the complexity of the behaviour they are able to perform,
the latter being the result of the former. Different solutions
would be created competing with each other and the winner
would be a stable solution for the present conditions [13].
Further evolutionary processes would include these stable
units and create future solutions with these units included
as subunits together with some novelty brought about with
the resulting, hierarchically higher organisation, as a rule
more complex in its organisation and behaviour. Organisms
built up of cells, which form tissues, tissues which form
organs, organs entwined into systems which make up an
organism, represent a well–known example of such organi-
sation. Hierarchical organisation can be noticed even further,
towards eco–systems all the way up to the living planet [6].
Such organisation which exhibits hierarchies in structure,
where higher level units contain lower level units, also need
to account for the dynamics between these entities (units),
be it the entities on the same level or entities pertaining
to different levels. For the example given in [14], just a
mere aggregate of amino acids would not make an enzyme.
It takes a certain order of amino acids when forming the
enzymatic protein and in addition a certain folding of the
protein to yield enzymatic properties. Novel properties of
the amino acid sequence which form the enzymatic protein
emerge as a result of interactions between amino acids but
would be impossible to exist if the hierarchically higher level
– the protein, did not possess the novel property i.e., the
ability to fold. Observed from the protein level, properties of
the pertaining amino acids can be described in a novel way.
In general, we speak of levels of description so that a higher
description level requires certain amount of information
from the lower level to be discarded [13] i.e., some of
the dynamics from the lower level need be abstracted –
the higher the level in hierarchical organisation, the lower
the level of detail with which the pertaining dynamics is
described.
Further, organisation into dynamical hierarchies leads to a
’hierarchical control arising from a collection of elements’
[15]. In this way, higher levels impose certain control on
the lower level dynamics. The novelty brough about by
the dynamics at a higher level plays a signiﬁcant role in
generating hierarchical control for the lower level entities.
However, dynamical hierarchies still represent a challenge
to address which is partly due to the lack of the established
theoretical framework for this topic. Although a signiﬁcant
amount of work has been done with the aim of establishing
such framework [16]–[19], a number of issues still remain
open. Primarily, the criteria for the deﬁnition of novelty
generated by the system intra- and inter-level dynamics need
be established. In [20], the necessary condition for the exis-
tence of a new level is given from the information theoretic
approach. There, this condition is based on the relation
between entropies of the higher and lower hierarchical level.
In this paper, we make a contribution to the establishment
of dynamical hierarchies by proposing a design principle
for man–made systems which exhibit robust adaptation to
environmental variation. In our investigation, the distinction
is made between environmental variations whose effects can
124
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

Figure 1: Schematic view of the system architecture
be seen on whole populations and those with effects on
particular individuals. The former we term environmental
changes and they are assumed to be tackled by the long
term, (co)evolutionary processes; the latter we further refer
to as environmental ﬂuctuations and presume them tackled
by the short term adaptive processes. Our work, as further
described, considers the short term adaptive processes which
take place in response to environmental ﬂuctuations.
III. MODELLING ADAPTIVE PROCESSES FOR THE
PRESERVATION OF HOMEOSTASIS
Our approach has a starting point in the framework
presented in [5]. It is explained in greater detail in [1],
[2]. At this place, the main characteristics of the introduced
model are repeated for the ease of understanding the work
presented further in the paper. The system architecture
under investigation is schematically represented in Figure 1.
Such architecture can be related to cellular automata (CA)
formalism [21] where each cell communicates only with the
nearest neighbours in its Von Neumann neighbourhood. Its
behaviour is performed and monitored over the discrete time
steps (ticks). The system is assumed to perform some func-
tionality which is the result of the functionality performed
by each of its cells. Therefore, if the functionality of one of
the system cells deviates from the desired, the functionality
of the system as a whole is also affected.
Further, each cell is assumed to possess a sensor through
which it can sense ﬂuctuations in its local environment.
Two types of identiﬁers are used for the cell identiﬁcation:
one referring to the physical position of the cell within the
system, physical ID, and another to its functional relatedness
to other cells, encoding ID. Functional relatedness deﬁnes
from which cell the functional input is received and to which
cell the functional output is sent. More precisely, the cell
with the encoding ID n is functionally related to the cells
with the encoding IDs n − 1 and n + 1. Finally, the system
conﬁguration is given as a sequence of numbers where
the position within the sequence corresponds to the cell’s
physical ID and the actual value represents its encoding ID.
The cell behaviour is deﬁned by the ﬁnite state machine,
0
(L,Li,Ei)
2
(R,Li,Ei)
3
(P,Li,Ei)
4
(RP,Li,Ei)
1
(S,Li,Ei+/-1)
5
(SP,Li,Ei+/-1)
6
(S,A,Ei+/-1)
7
(SP,A,Ei+/-1)
8
(L,F,Ei+/-1)
9
(P,F,Ei+/-1)
0
(L,Li+/-1,Ei+/-1)
3
(L,Li+/-1,Ei+/-1)
4
(RP,Li+/-1,Ei+/
-1)
2
(R,Li+/-1,Ei+/-
1)
Adapted -
ultrastable
states
Failed to adapt
Adapting
Sending S hormone,
waiting for R
hormone
Figure 2: The ﬁnite state machine diagram describing the
cell behaviour [22]
see Figure 2. The cell state is represented by a 3-tuple
(H,A,E): H referring to hormonal ﬂows; A to the cell
functionality and E to the value of some environmental
parameter which describes the effect of the ﬂuctuation in
the cell’s environment on the system. Possible values for
each member of a 3-tuple are as follows:
• H: L - no hormone present, S - sending S hormone, R
- sending R hormone, P - passing hormone not func-
tionally related to the cell, SP - sending S hormone and
passing functionally unrelated hormone, PR - sending R
hormone and passing functionally unrelated hormone;
• A: L0, L1, L2, L3 or L4 - functionality adapted to E0,
E1, E2, E3 and E4 respectively, A - adapting or F -
failed to adapt;
• E: E0, E1, E2, E3 and E4 - ﬁve different values of
environmental parameter under consideration.
Control variables for the state transitions are as follows: the
change in the environmental parameter (EE), the cell’s S
hormone present (SM), the cell’s R hormone present (RM),
hormones from functionally unrelated cells present (HO),
incoming S hormone recognised (RR), incoming R hormone
recognised (FB), hormone(s) from functionally unrelated
cell(s) present at inputs (HI). They are omitted from Figure 2
for the sake of clarity.
According to the state diagram in Figure 2, the cell
adapted to its environment will be in one of the ultrastable
states (states 0,2,3,4), while upon detecting environmental
ﬂuctuation, it will start sending the message on possible
deviation in its functionality (states 1 and 5) and perform
adaptation process (states 6 and 7) after it receives informa-
tion on its functional deviation. This information is provided
by its functionally related cell, see Figure 1. If it fails to
adapt, it will remain in one of the states 8 and 9. However,
if it successfully achieves adaptation, it will move to one
of the ultrastable states of another set pertaining to the new
125
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

Figure 3: Schematic view of the cell architecture correspond-
ing to the model of chemoton [23]; equivalent subsystems
in chemoton model are given in parentheses
value of the environmental parameter. These states are shown
to the right from the dashed line in Figure 2. Such behaviour
is in accordance with [5].
We have further addressed the organisation of living
systems for its autonomous and self-referring character. The
cell architecture is related to the model of minimal living
system provided by the chemoton theory [23]. Therefore, it
is assumed that the cell consists of three subsystems, see Fig-
ure 3. The subsystem of tuning parameters is sensitive to en-
vironmental variations. It steers the operation and determines
the performance of the cell’s functional subsystem. The third
subsystem - membrane, is rather straightforward to explain
when the cell boundaries are considered. Additionally, the
ﬂow of nutrients and metabolic waste through the chemoton
membrane corresponds to the ﬂow of computational and
control (hormonal) data via local communication lines.
The behaviour of the system can be described by the ﬁnite
state machine diagram shown in Figure 4. The system can
be in one of the three possible states:
• state 0: the system is adapted to its environment - none
of the system cells detects environmental ﬂuctuation,
neither exhibits functional deviation
• state 1: the system performs adaptation process - at
least one of the system cells detects variation in its
environment and undergoes adaptation process
• state 2: the system fails to adapt - either 1/3 of the
system cells failed to achieve adaptation to the detected
environmental ﬂuctuation or 2/3 of the cells detect
environmental ﬂuctuation
Such view of the system states can be related to the levels
of living and life criteria as given in [24]. There, the state
0 would correspond to the state of living, the state 1 to the
state of being capable of living and the state 2 to the state
of being dead. As in Figure 4, once the system reaches this
state, it remains in it i.e., it can not recover its functionality
any more. On the other hand, state 1 still allows the system
to achieve adaptation and eliminate functional deviation.
0
Adapted
(Living)
1
Adapting
(Capable of
living)
2
Failed to Adapt
(Dead)
Figure 4: The ﬁnite state machine diagram describing the
system behaviour
Based on such system behaviour, we deﬁne system robust-
ness to environmental ﬂuctuations as its ability to avoid the
state of failure (the state 2 in Figure 4). Further, we introduce
the degree of robustness as the probability to avoid the state
of failure: the greater the probability the system escapes
from reaching the state 2, the greater the level of robustness
it exhibits towards environmental ﬂuctuations.
A. Adaptation Process and the Role of Hormonal Loops
Adaptation process performed by the cell was described
and demonstrated in simulation in [1]. In [2] it was re-
considered from the perspective of hormonal ﬂows where
hormonal loops were recognised to initiate and sustain
adaptation process until adaptation is achieved. Hormonal
loops are formed between functionally related cells through
the following sequence of events:
1) the cell (S cell) senses environmental ﬂuctuation
2) S cell begins secreting S hormone as a response to the
sensed ﬂuctuation, see Figure 5a
3) S hormone reaches the functionally related cell (R cell)
4) R cell recognises S hormone, see Figure 5b
5) R cell begins secreting R hormone which carries the
information on the functional deviation exhibited by
the related S cell, see Figure 5c
6) R hormone reaches S cell, see Figure 5d
Once the hormonal loop is closed, S cell begins adapta-
tion process. This process can be performed provided two
hormones are present in the cell: its S hormone and the R
hormone from its functionally related cell. If any of these
hormones is cleared from the system before adaptation is
achieved, the cell fails to adapt. However, if both hormones
are present during adaptation process until no functional
deviation is detected by the related R cell, S cell achieves
adaptation to environmental ﬂuctuation which triggered the
whole process.
Figure 6 shows the loops for the conﬁguration used in
simulations in [2]. There, the value of the environmental
parameter was changed for the cells with encoding IDs 52,
23 and 32. The loops which were formed between these
cells and their corresponding functionally related cells can
126
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

(a) S cell senses environmental
ﬂuctuation and begins secreting
S hormone
(b) R cell recognises S hor-
mone as coming from the func-
tionally related cell
(c) R cell begins secreting R
hormone
(d) R hormone reaches func-
tionally related S cell - hor-
monal loop is closed
Figure 5: A loop formation: the ﬂows of hormones which
form the loop
Figure 6: Hormonal loops as observed during one of the
simulation runs for the system conﬁguration to the right
be seen on the plot on the left side in Figure 6. This ﬁgure
represents a plot of the system state pertaining to the ﬂow
of hormones, H, part of the state 3–tuple (H,A,E) during
simulations. The amount of hormones ﬂowing around the
architecture during adaptation process is determined by the
exponential decay rate parameter. This value can be made
adaptive so that the presence of the hormone is ensured until
adaptation is successfully achieved [1].
We denote a hormonal loop as (Si(n), Ri(n + 1)) if it
is formed between S cell with the encoding ID n and R
cell with the encoding ID n + 1. Index i serves for the loop
identiﬁcation and corresponds to the order in which the loop
was formed relative to other loops during simulation.
The progress of the adaptation process performed by
the cell is modelled by a counter which is stochastically
Figure 7: Model of the stochastic decrease in functional
deviation during adaptation process
decremented each time tick during this process. The counter
value reﬂects the functional deviation exhibited by the cell:
upon the change in the environmental parameter value, this
counter is assigned some value which represents maximum
functional deviation exhibited by the cell; decrementing this
value corresponds to the decrease in functional deviation as
a result of the ongoing adaptation process. Figure 7 shows
how this is performed for the case of maximum counter
value 25 which was used in our simulations.
IV. ENHANCING THE SYSTEM MODEL – DYNAMICAL
HIERARCHIES INCLUDED
We pose the question if the adaptation process performed
by the model introduced in Section III can be improved
with respect to the exhibited robustness if the principles of
hierarchical organisation are included. To investigate such
possibility, the existing model need be enhanced so as to
account for hierarchical organisation. However, for such
an endeavour there are no straightforward solutions. In
[25], preliminary considerations were presented concerning
different ways in which hierarchies could be included. There,
a number of arguments is provided in favour of dynamical
against structural hierarchies. Primarily, for the environmen-
tal dynamics (ﬂuctuation) we seek dynamic response of
the system. Therefore, we look into the system dynamics
initiated by environmental dynamics.
Several issues need be addressed. Firstly, higher level
entities need be recognised: what entities arise as a result of
the cell dynamics in response to environmental ﬂuctuation?
Secondly, the behaviour of these entities must be addressed:
how do these entities behave, how do they interact? Does
such behaviour bring in some novelty? If so, how can this
127
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

Figure 8: Schematic view of the hormonal loops observed
as entities at the second hierarchical level
novelty be used for the increase in the robustness of the
performed adaptation process?
Further, when the description of such system is con-
sidered, different levels of description need be provided.
This requires the granularity of each description level be
chosen. A careful choice has to be made on what information
from the lower level is to be discarded when describing the
higher level dynamics. Finally, as our particular interest lies
in adaptive processes, we address the issue of hierarchical
control for such a process: what kind of hierarchical control
could be imposed from a higher hierarchical level on the
adapting cell at the lower level so that it accounts for
the dynamics of higher level entities and improves robust-
ness of the performed adaptation process? Figure 8 shows
schematically relations between the two levels within the
proposed model. Subsections IV-A and IV-B further explain
the abstraction and the hierarchical control denoted by the
upward and downward pointed arrows in this ﬁgure.
A. Describing Behaviour from a Higher Level
The system responses to environmental dynamics through
a sequence of hormonal secretions as described in section
III-A. Therefore, we seek the candidates for the higher level
entities among these hormonal ﬂows. Hormonal ﬂows which
arise in the system upon the cell sensing the ﬂuctuation in its
environment are given in Figure 5 and introduced in section
III-A. At ﬁrst, one cell which secretes S hormone does
not possess enough information to perform any meaningful
action within adaptive process (Figure 5a). The information
on the functional deviation exhibited by the S cell is available
only after its functionally related R cell has recognised
the incoming S hormone and began secreting R hormone
(Figures 5b and 5c). This information can be provided by
the related R cell due to the functional relatedness between
the cells. However, although available within the system, it
has no effect as long as it does not reach the cell affected
by environmental variation. It is only at this point that
Figure 9: Hormonal loops: a) four loops out of which 2
are related i.e., loops (S1, R1/R4) and (S4, R1/R4) where
R1/R4 stands for the cell which recognises incoming S
hormones from both cells S1 and S4; b) three unrelated
loops. The cells encoding IDs are omitted for the sake of
clarity
the cell can begin its adaptive process. Hormonal loop is
closed between the two functionally related cells (Figure
5d) one of which exhibits deviation in its functionality due
to the environmental ﬂuctuation, while the other provides
information on this deviation which is necessary for the
adaptive process to be performed. Hormonal loops can not
be observed at the cell level but it takes a view from a higher
level to observe them.
Next issue to address is the hormonal loop dynamics.
The new level of description is needed which describes
the behaviour related to the level of hormonal loops. This
description level concerns the dynamics of the higher level
entities – hormonal loops. Relevant information for the hor-
monal loop behaviour is contained in hormonal ﬂows which
make this loop as well as the status of the adaptation process.
Hormonal ﬂows deﬁne the loop existence: dependent on the
ﬂows of hormones, the loop will come into existence but
also disappear. Moreover, the achievement of adaptation and
failing to do so will affect the loop existence and behaviour.
When hormonal ﬂows form the loop, the information on
functional deviation is provided and the adaptation process
may be performed. Further question may be posed if it is
possible to enhance this information so that the adaptation
process is improved. The information on the functional
deviation is provided by the functionally related R cell. Can
situations occur when this cell possesses more information
on functional deviation performed by the related S cell
than it otherwise would when based only on the functional
relatedness between these two cells?
In a broader picture, because of the way in which the
system conﬁguration is implemented, one cell is functionally
related to two other cells. Therefore, the R cell within the
loop will be functionally related to one more cell beside
the S cell within the loop. Dependent on the environmental
dynamics, this other functionally related cell may also be
affected by environmental ﬂuctuation causing it to start
128
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

secreting S hormone upon which its related R cell would
secrete hormone with the information on its functional
deviation as well. In that way, one R cell will be part of two
hormonal loops, as schematically shown in ﬁgure 9. Because
the cell functionality is dependent on the functionality of its
predecessors as well as its successors in the conﬁguration
string, the R cell shared between two loops may provide
each of the related S cells with more information on their
functional deviation. Therefore, we introduce interaction
between the loops based on the functional relatedness of
their pertaining cells: two hormonal loops will interact if
their S cells share the information provided by the R cell
which is part of each of the two loops simultaneously. Such
loops are said to be related. Figure 9 schematically shows
the case where related hormonal loops are identiﬁed (a) and
when no related loops exist (b).
The ﬁnite state machine diagram which describes the loop
behaviour is shown in Figure 10. When no environmental
ﬂuctuation is detected, no hormonal ﬂows are present and
the loop is in the state 0. Such case corresponds to the
cases when the cell which may initiate creation of hormonal
loop, i.e., the S cell of the loop, is in the state 0, see
Figure 2. The loop remains in the state 0 also when this cell
is passing a hormone from another functionally unrelated
cell (state 3 in Figure 2), when secreting S hormone without
having recognised R hormone (state 1), when recognising
the incoming S hormone (state 2) or corresponding to both
ﬁrst and either of the two mentioned cases (states 5 and 4
respectively). The loop comes into existence when the cell
which is already secreting S hormone detects and recognises
the incoming R hormone. Then, the loop moves to either
of the states 1 or 2. This transition corresponds to the cell
state transitions to states 6 and 7 in Figure 2, the exact
transition being dependent on the presence of some hormone
from a functionally unrelated cell: when such hormone is
present, it corresponds to the cell state 7 and when not, to
the state 6. As said, the loop also moves to one of the two
states but which one in particular is determined by somewhat
different criteria from the presence of the hormone from a
functionally unrelated cell. If the R cell pertaining to the loop
is already part of another loop, the loop will move to the
state 2. Otherwise, it moves to state 1. In this state, the S cell
is the only cell to which the R cell provides the information
on functional deviation. If any of the hormones forming
the loop is cleared from the system before adaptation is
achieved, the pertaining S cell fails to adapt so the whole
loop fails as well and it moves to the state 3 in Figure 10.
This state corresponds to the cell states 8 and 9 in Figure 2.
Again, which of the two in particular is dependent on the
presence of the hormone from the functionally unrelated cell:
it moves to the state 8 when no such hormone is present and
to the state 9 when it is present. The loop may also move
to the state 3 from the state 0. Such situation corresponds
to the case when the cell begins secreting S hormone upon
0
No loop(s)
1
Non-related
loop
2
Related
loop(s)
3
Failure
Figure 10: The ﬁnite state machine diagram describing the
hormonal loop behaviour
the detection of environmental ﬂuctuation but it does not
begin to adapt because one of the two hormones needed to
sustain adaptation process is cleared from the system before
the loop is closed. It can be noticed that the behaviour
at the loop level can not be fully described without the
knowledge on the existence of the related hormonal loops.
This concerns transitions between states 1 and 2. As the
existence of the related hormonal loops can be observed
only at the hormonal loops level, it may be said that the
hormonal loops relatedness arises at this higher hierarchical
level.
Comparing Figures 2 and 10, it can be noticed that the
description of the behaviour at the higher, hormonal loop
level (Figure 10), contains much less detail than the de-
scription of the behaviour at the lower, cell level (Figure 2).
This is in accordance with [15] where the loss of detail at
different description levels is explained from the physical
point of view and related to the loss of information at
different description levels respectively [20]. Such behaviour
brings in new means of communication within the layer,
realised through the interaction between hormonal loops,
but, as explained further, also between the layers through the
hierarchical control of adaptation process which accounts for
the hormonal loops dynamics.
B. Hierarchical Control of Adaptation Process
In [15], the role of hierarchical control within hierarchi-
cally organised systems is discussed. Here, the possibility of
using the information generated by the higher level dynamics
is examined with the aim of improving the adaptation
process within the system. As mentioned, adaptation process
performed by the cell is dependent on the existence of the
hormonal loop to which the cell belongs as its S cell. More-
over, it was explained how the existence of related loops
can provide more information on the functional deviation
exhibited by the cell. Therefore, in cases when related loops
exist for the loop to which the adapting cell belongs, this
cell stands better chances to adapt due to the availability of
129
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

a larger amount of information on its functional deviation.
So, we suggest the following scheme for performing the
adaptation process which accounts for the hormonal loops
dynamics:
• If adaptation process is performed within the loop
which does not detect related loop, the counter mod-
elling this process is stochastically decremented by 1.
Such scheme is depicted in Figure 7.
• If adaptation process is performed within the loop for
which a related loop exists, the counter is decremented
by 3 thereby modelling the case when more information
is available for the achievement of adaptation.
In short, the more information available from the higher
hierarchical level, the larger the adaptation increments are
i.e., the larger the decrements in functionality deviation.
For the example given in Figure 9 a), this means that the
cells S1 and S4 would have the functional deviation value
decremented by 3 during adaptation process while the cells
S2 and S3 would have this value decremented by 1. This is
because the cells S1 and S4 are part of the loops which share
the R cell R1/R4. The novel feature brought into the system
model would then be the hierarchical control determined by
the second level dynamics which accounts for the interaction
and relatedness between the second level entities – hormonal
loops.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The system is exposed to environmental ﬂuctuations and
its behaviour observed until its failure. To investigate how
useful the information on the higher level dynamics can be
for the hierarchical control of adaptation process as well as
its effect on the system robustness, two types of simulation
runs are performed:
• type 1: hierarchical control of adaptation process does
not account for the interactions between the higher level
entities – hormonal loops
• type 2: hierarchical control takes into account interac-
tions between hormonal loops
The time ticks of the system failure are compared for
the two types of run. If the information on the interactions
between the higher level entities helps the system improve
its robustness towards environmental ﬂuctuations, the system
will fail at a later point in time i.e., a later time tick when
this information is accounted for than when it is not.
Exponential decay rate parameter is kept constant thereby
allowing the cells to fail to adapt in some cases due to the
insufﬁcient amount of hormones. The value of this parameter
was set to 0.9 based on the consideration of optimal values,
see [1].
We deﬁne that the system fails to adapt if either of the
following two conditions is fulﬁlled:
• one third of the system cells fails to adapt; for our
system of 64 cells (a grid of 8X8 cells), this value
equals approximately 21
• two thirds of the system cells are sensing the ﬂuctuation
in the environmental parameter; for the system under
investigation this value equals approximately 43
The numbers of the system cells which failed to adapt
i.e., which are affected by the environmental ﬂuctuation are
chosen arbitrarily.
The effect of environmental ﬂuctuations on the system
is modelled by a change in the value of the parameter E,
see section III. So, the system is being driven to the state
of being dead, see Figure 4, by imposing more and more
changes in the value of this parameter. The rate of change
of the parameter value reﬂects the harshness of the environ-
mental dynamics. It is expressed as a parameter RC which
stands for the percentage of occurrences of environmental
variations and is set to 5% for the pertaining simulations. At
each time tick, according to the RC value, the environmental
parameter E is changed with some probability p(n). This
probability models the stochastic nature of the environment.
In the beginning, it is as low as 0.001. As the time proceeds,
it is increased also with certain probability pst by a small
amount i.e., 0.0005. Therefore, for each cell i, the probability
of having the local environment changed may be expressed
as:
pi(n) = pi(n − 1) + incri(pst), pi(0) = 1e − 3
(1)
where incri represents the increments added to the preced-
ing time tick probability with some probability pst:
incri(pst)
=
5e − 4, pst ≥ th
=
0, pst < th
where th is a threshold value. In this fashion, the total
number of cells affected by the ﬂuctuation in their local
environment increases with time. In a real case, where the
system tissue is rather of a continuous nature, it would be
more realistic to speak of the gradient of environmental pa-
rameter over the system architecture. So, to account for this,
we assign a greater probability of having the environmental
parameter changed to those cells which are in the neighbour-
hood of the cells already affected by some environmental
ﬂuctuation. For these cells we set the threshold value to be
higher than otherwise: 0.8 and 0.5 respectively.
In order to achieve statistically relevant results, this pro-
cedure is repeated for 10000 conﬁgurations. The value of
10000 was chosen based on the ﬁndings for the experiments
with the same architecture within our previous work [1].
VI. RESULTS
The simulation results are summarised in table I. It shows
averaged values of the time ticks when the system failed. The
ﬁrst row refers to the cases when the hierarchical control
did not account for the interactions between second level
entities during adaptation process, while the second row
shows the result for the cases when it did. It can be noticed
130
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

Table I: Numeric data on the system failure for two types of
simulation runs averaged over 10000 conﬁgurations, RC =
5%
Average time
Avrg # of
Avrg # of
Type of
tick when
related loops
related loops
the run
the system
for equal
for different
failed
ticks of fail.
ticks of fail.
No loops interactions
included in control
6.13e2
–
–
Loops interactions
included in control
6.46e2
2.13e-1
1.58
Figure 11: Time ticks of system failures for conﬁgurations
used in simulations
Figure 12: The cummulative time ticks of the system failure
for conﬁgurations used in simulations
that the system fails at a later point in time i.e., a higher
time tick when the hierarchical control is enhanced with
the information generated by the interactions between the
higher level entities. The results show that the time tick of
the system failure is equal or higher when the interactions
between the higher level entities are accounted for than when
they are not. This ﬁnding stands in support to the claim
that hierarchies i.e., dynamical hierarchies can improve
robustness in the assumed man–made system based on a
grid-of-cells architecture.
Figure 11 shows the values of the time ticks of failure
Figure 13: The difference in the cummulative time ticks of
failure for the two types of adaptation processes - detail
for the ﬁrst 100 conﬁgurations examined under simulations.
It can be noticed that the tick of failure is equal or higher
when the interactions between the higher level entities are
accounted for than when not. Only 100 values are shown
for the sake of clarity. However, the same trend holds for all
conﬁgurations used in simulations. To visually support such
observation, we present the accumulated value of the tick
of failure for the two types of runs, see Figure 12. There,
the graph corresponding to the case when the dynamical
hierarchical control accounts for the interactions between
the hormonal loops has a steeper slope throughout. In
more detail, Figure 13 shows the difference between these
cummulative values for the ﬁrst 100 conﬁgurations.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have addressed the challenge of increasing robustness
of a man–made system to environmental ﬂuctuations. The
assumed system was modular, its architecture based on CA.
One possible way in which this could be achieved has
been presented on previous pages. Moreover, the simulation
results have shown that application of the principles of
dynamical hierarchies can improve system robustness to
environmental ﬂuctuations. The improvement is due to the
hierarchical control of adaptation process which accounts
for the higher level dynamics while adaptation process is
performed by entities at the lower level. At the same time,
suggested solution has opened a number of questions which
remain for further work to answer. One of the questions
is related to the dynamics of environmental ﬂuctuations.
The results presented in the paper accounted for only one
value of RC. It would be interesting to look into the system
behaviour under different environmental dynamics modelled
by varying parameter RC. Further challenge would be also to
extend the investigation to even higher levels seeking general
recommendations for building up a higher level dynamics.
On the other hand, this work has addressed the topic of
dynamical hierarchies which has raised a great interest and
inspiring discussions within the ALife research community
131
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

over the recent years. We believe that the model presented
in this paper might be the way towards bringing closer the
theoretical research into dynamical hierarchies and engi-
neering applications for man–made systems when needed to
operate in dynamic environments. In particular, we have in
mind applications where hardware and electronics systems
need to operate not only in dynamic but also extreme, harsh
environments.
Before we engage into addressing open challenges, the
system model needs to be put within a ﬁrmer theoretical
framework with dynamical hierarchies included. However,
debates are still being held on this topic so such an endeav-
our is not a straightforward thing to do. Rather, to begin with,
we have chosen one of the proposed approaches which is
based on information theory [20]. Our deep belief is that in
succeeding to do so, a ﬁrm theoretical basis for our research
would be established opening new possibilities for further
development of ideas.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
D.L. would like to thank Chrisantha Fernando for inspir-
ing talks during ECAL 2009.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Laketic, G. Tufte, and P. Haddow, “Stochastic adaptation
to environmental changes supported by endocrine system
principles,” in NASA/ESA Adaptive Hardware and Systems,
AHS 2009.
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 215–222.
[2] D. Laketic and G. Tufte, “Adaptation in tissue sustained by
hormonal loops,” in 10th European Conference on Artiﬁcial
Life, 2009.
[3] T. Lenaerts, D. Gross, and R. Watson, “Introduction to the
workshop wdh2002,” in Proceedings of the Alife VIII work-
shop On the modeling of dynamical hierarchies, D. Gross and
T. Lenaerts, Eds.
Sydney: University of New South Wales,
2002, pp. 37–44.
[4] A. Guyton and J. Hall, Textbook of Medical Physiology.
Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
[5] W. R. Ashby, Design for a Brain, the origin of adaptive
behaviour.
Chapman & Hall Ltd., 1960.
[6] J. Lovelock, Gaia - A new look at life on Earth.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1979.
[7] M. Neal and J. Timmis, “Timidity: A useful emotional mech-
anism for robot control?” in Informatica – special issue on
perception and emotion based control.
The Slovene Society
Informatika, Ljubljana, Slovenia, June 2003, pp. 197–204.
[8] W. M. Shen, B. Salemi, and P. Will, “Hormone-inspired
adaptive communication and distributed control for conro
self-reconﬁgurable robots,” in IEEE Transactions on Robotics
and Automation, October 2002, pp. 700–712.
[9] R. Moioli, P. Vargas, F. Von Zuben, and P. Husbands, “To-
wards the evolution of an artiﬁcial homeostatic system,” in
IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation 2008, Proceed-
ings, June 2008, pp. 4023–4030.
[10] K. Suzuki and T. Ikegami, “Homeodynamics in the game
of life,” in Artiﬁcial Life XI: Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on the Simulation and Synthesis of
Living Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008, pp. 600–
607.
[11] M. Asada, J. C. T. Hallam, J.-A. Meyer, and J. Tani, Eds.,
Extended Homeostatic Adaptation: Improving the Link be-
tween Internal and Behavioural Stability, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science.
Springer, 2008.
[12] A. J. Greensted and A. M. Tyrrell, “Implementation re-
sults for a fault-tolerant multicellular architecture inspired
by endocrine communication,” in NASA/DoD Conference on
Evolvable Hardware, Proceedings, June-July 2005.
[13] H. A. Simon, “The organisation of complex systems,” in
Hierarchy Theory, H. H. Pattee, Ed.
George Braziller Inc.,
1973, pp. 1–27.
[14] C. Grobstein, “Hierarchical order and neogenesis,” in Hierar-
chy Theory, H. H. Pattee, Ed.
George Braziller Inc., 1973,
pp. 29–47.
[15] H. H. Pattee, “The physical basis and origin of hierarchical
control,” in Hierarchy Theory, H. H. Pattee, Ed.
George
Braziller Inc., 1973, pp. 71–108.
[16] D. Gross and T. Lenaerts, “Towards a deﬁnition of dynamical
hierarchies,” in Artiﬁcial Life VIII Workshop Proceedings,
2002.
[17] S. Rasmussen, N. Baas, B. Mayer, M. Nilsson, and M. Olesen,
“Ansatz for dynamical hierarchies,” in Artiﬁcial Life.
Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, 2001.
[18] D. Gross and B. McMullin, “Is it the right ansatz?” in
Artiﬁcial Life.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2001,
pp. 355–365.
[19] S. Rasmussen and N. Baas, “A defense of the ansatz for
dynamical hierarchies,” in Artiﬁcial Life.
Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2002, pp. 367–373.
[20] S. McGregor and C. Fernando, “Levels of description: A
novel approach to dynamical hierarchies,” in Journal of Ar-
tiﬁcial Life (Species Issue on Dynamical Hierarchies), 2005,
pp. 459–472.
[21] E. F. Codd, Cellular Automata, ser. Association for computing
machinery, Inc. Monograph series.
Academic Press, New
York, 1968.
[22] D. Laketic, “Homeostatic adaptation to environmental ﬂuctu-
ations sustained by hormonal ﬂows,” Norwegian University
of Science and Technology, Tech. Rep., 2010, in print.
[23] T. Ganti, Chemoton Theory Vol.1., Theory of Living Systems.
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003.
[24] ——, Chemoton Theory Vol.2., Theory of Living Systems.
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003.
[25] D. Laketic and G. Tufte, “Achieving robustness in adaptive
systems – can hierarchies help?” in ICAART 2010, 2nd In-
ternational Conference on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Proceedings, 2010, pp. 422–427.
132
ADAPTIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-109-0

