Highly Accurate Map-based Path and Behavior Planning
for Automated Urban Driving
Bj¨orn Reuber, Holger Znamiec, Dr. Roman Henze, Prof. Dr. Ferit K¨uc¸¨ukay
TU Braunschweig - Institute of Automotive Engineering
Email: b.reuber@tu-braunschweig.de
Telephone: (+49) 531 391-66605
Abstract—To overcome challenges of automated driving in inner-
city scenarios, this paper’s approach is to realize a robust behav-
ior and path planning based on highly accurate maps combined
with localization and communication methods. The main idea is
to build up the model based on an existing modular automated
driving architecture which was initially developed for highway use
cases. This should enable a possibility of implementation with an
signiﬁcantly reduced effort.
Keywords–Automated Urban Driving; Behavior Planing; Con-
nected Driving; Highly Accurate Maps; Localization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Automated driving is undoubtedly one of the most impor-
tant technological development components for the automotive
industry. For example, the ﬁrst series applications of individual
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Level 3 systems are
now almost ready for market launch [1]. However, their range
of functions is still rather low and the scope is limited to the
highway.
On the other hand, a number of complex challenges have
to be overcome in order to realize automated driving in the
inner-city area. Therefore, the high complexity of the static
and dynamic environment within cities leads to increased
requirements to the robustness of in-vehicle behavior planning.
This is where the following papers approach is focusing on.
Based on a high-precision digital map, additional information
about the static environment is provided to the vehicle’s
planning modules. This is complemented by additional in-
formation from communication infrastructure to the dynamic
environment.
At ﬁrst, in Section II, an exemplary use case is presented
in which the concept can be applied. Section III is focusing on
the key elements of the concept and their purpose as well as
the connection among them. In Section IV an overview about
the integration in an existing architecture is given. The paper
is concluded by a summary of the current work status and the
outlook for upcoming activities in Section V.
II.
MOTIVATIONAL USE-CASE
The problem given is the approach of an automated driving
vehicle on a road with two lanes to an inner-city intersection
with three lanes branching off into three direction - one lane for
turning right and going straight, one lane for going straight and
one lane for turning left. Regardless of other dynamic object
vehicles, some really big challenges come up to the automated
driving vehicle in such a complex scenario [2].
The correct localization on the approaching road and the
high precise localization within the intersection area is difﬁcult
to handle. Based just on Global Positioning System (GPS), it
is almost impossible to localize within a required tolerance for
automated intersection crossings [3]. At this point, this paper’s
approach to use map and communication data combined with
vehicle sensor data is set up. After the data fusion, it is possible
to locate the ego vehicle with high precision within the right
lane and on the right spot, e.g., the stop line of a trafﬁc light
on the lane for left turning.
The localization is followed by the behavior and path
planning model, which provides the vehicle with the necessary
intelligence to deal with for example complex intersection
scenarios. Therefore, in addition to this, the planning model
needs information about the trafﬁc lights, other crossing object
vehicles, e.g., the opposing trafﬁc on the straight lane or pedes-
trians crossing the target road. This can be solved by different
communication methods, e.g., road-side-units, backend-server
communication and is work in progress.
III.
CONCEPT
The basic idea to overcome the challenges of the inner-
city area is to expand the information sources of the behavior
planning of the automated vehicle to high-precision map data
and communication.
For this purpose, a tool chain is developed, which is
initially dedicated to the processing of map data in the online
vehicle application. In the ﬁrst step of preprocessing, a map is
parsed into the structure of the framework. Thus, in the next
step, an interpretation can be made, which provides the logical
and geometric information of the map.
The proposed architecture offers the possibility to integrate
different map formats and extract speciﬁc information from
them. Thus, on the one hand, behavior planning purposefully
receives information about, e.g., the change in the road cross-
section and the associated logical assignment of tracks, which
then in turn lead to an adequate behavior decision.
On the other hand, geometric information of the lane course
is used to support and optimize path planning. For example,
complex lane courses at inner-city intersections can be taken
into account in a timely and precise manner in the planning.
The extraction of the information can be done in two ways.
On the one hand, a predeﬁned route can be stored on the basis
of which, in combination with the current vehicle position,
speciﬁc information can be forwarded to the planning level.
On the other hand, it is possible to provide information by
means of a virtual horizon during free driving. The former, of
course, offers the higher precision, since the route is known in
advance.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

The localization within this map is realized by a com-
bination of different data. First, a rough assignment within
the map is achieved via the GPS of the vehicle. This was
done by comparing the current vehicle position and the global
reference stored in the map. Next, a track accurate assignment
of the vehicle is supplied. This is calculated by a model which
processes information of the vehicle camera and matches these
with the GPS data.
If a higher accuracy is required in individual situations, this
is also anticipated in the model. A comparison between speciﬁc
landmarks within the map and the scenario perceived by the
vehicle provides additional potential for this. In particular, this
can also be used to support the localization during a lack of
GPS signal quality.
The model is also supplemented by external dynamic
information. On the one hand, there is the possibility to
provide data from a backend server. Here, individual events or
speciﬁc information can be collected centrally and transmitted
to the behavior model. Thus, a timely and targeted response
of the automated vehicle can be realized on, for example,
a construction site with a lane closure without a critical
or uncomfortable situation arises. Situations of these types
classiﬁed by the vehicle itself are correspondingly reported
back via this interface and can in turn be made available to
other vehicles.
IV.
INTEGRATION IN EXISTING AUTOMATED DRIVING
ARCHITECTURE
An important point for the design of the concept is the
practical feasibility. In doing so, particular attention was paid
to the modularity of the individual elements. This is particu-
larly important with regard to the integration of the model in
an existing vehicle architecture.
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the individ-
ual modules, as well as the general structure in the overall
overview.
vehicle sensor 
data
highly 
accurate map 
data
communi-
cation data
environment model
localization
map data 
processing
planning model
behavior 
planning
path planning
vehicle control
sensor data 
fusion
Figure 1. Relationship between the environmental model, the planning
model, the vehicle control as well as the map and the communication data
set on the same level as the vehicle sensor data.
The ﬁrst level shows the provision of the most important
input information for the model chain. Here, the existing
vehicle sensors are extended by the highly accurate map
data and the communication data. The latter are therefore
considered in the overall context as an additional source of
information at the sensor level. These data form the basis for
the extended environment model. At this level, the processing
of map data is integrated. In combination with the localization
module, information is passed on to the planning level from
there. The communication data are also processed and linked
here.
At the planning level, this additional data can now be used
directly to enhance the behavioral planning, as described in
Section II, or as additional support in path planning.
For this purpose, the existing planning module is extended
so that speciﬁc information can now be extracted. This can
be done on the one hand in addition, in which, for example,
information about speed limits can be adapted in advance. On
the other hand, additional information which is not yet detected
by the vehicle sensors, such as the distance to a stop line is
taken into account.
Furthermore, the path planning model is edited, so that, in
addition to the information of the existing vehicle sensors, now
also information from the map are directly considered. These
are for example the exact course of tracks within complex
intersection scenarios.
The ﬁnally planned vehicle movement is then transferred
to the vehicle control level. The advantage at this point is that
the existing control algorithms do not have to be edited but
can persist. This is possible because the existing interface can
be adopted here unchanged.
V.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
The paper proposes a new approach for a highly accurate
map-based path and behavior planning for automated urban
driving. In summary, the presented approach realizes a model
that can contribute to overcoming the speciﬁc challenges of
inner-city automated driving. One of the main advantages of
the model is that the individual components can be integrated
into the existing vehicle architecture due to the modular design.
Consequently, on the one hand, the implementation effort is
signiﬁcantly reduced, and on the other hand, extensions can
be added easily.
The next step is to complete the hole practical imple-
mentation. In particular, the communication data processing
model and its complete integration into the planning level are
currently still under development.
Following this, a comprehensive evaluation of the overall
function is planned. For this purpose, speciﬁc test cases have
to be carried out in simulation based on an existing test
methodology [4]. This is followed by integration into a test
vehicle and the execution of tests on a test site.
REFERENCES
[1]
“AUDI AG,” 2017, URL: http://www.audi.com/en/innovation/
piloteddriving/piloted driving.html, [accessed: 2018-01-13].
[2]
J.
Abhau,
“Challenges
in
Automated
Driving,”
https://www.hightechzentrum.ch/, [accessed: 2018-01-12], 2014.
[3]
H. Lategahn, M. Schreiber, J. Ziegler, and C. Stiller, “Urban Localization
with Camera and Inertial Measurement Unit,” IEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium, 2013, p. 1.
[4]
H. Znamiec, B. Reuber, and R. Henze, “Method for the efﬁcent Testing
of new Automated Driving Functions,” FAST-zero Conference, 2017, pp.
1–2.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

