Low Power Tristate Buffer for Mobile Applications
Karol Niewiadomski and Dietmar Tutsch
Chair of Automation and Computer Science - University of Wuppertal
Wuppertal, Germany
Email: {karol.niewiadomski, tutsch}@uni-wuppertal.de
Abstract—The adaptiveness of integrated electronics is a key
feature in current and future mobile applications. Despite the
continuous improvement of battery capacity, reconﬁguration
capabilities of integrated electronics are an inevitable step to
cover the rising demand for processing power. Without any
further adjustments for efﬁciency, power consumption becomes
a limiting factor for runtime performance. Field Programmable
Gate Arrays (FPGA) provide suitable conﬁguration capabilities,
but lack of efﬁcient power saving design measures. To overcome
this challenge, different approaches were proposed in recent
research activities. A substantial contributor to battery load are
General Purpose Input Output (GPIO) circuits, which serve the
purpose of connectivity. In this paper, we present a modiﬁed
tristate buffer, which is a key component in a typical GPIO design.
Modiﬁcations for active power reduction and standby leakage
current suppression are applied at circuit level to achieve a better
energy efﬁciency. This new tristate buffer design is compared to
already existing designs.
Keywords–Tristate buffer; GPIO; Power reduction; Leakage
suppression; Energy efﬁciency.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mobile computing is the driving factor for innovations on
the ﬁeld of instant availability of information. It is expected
to have the same computing performance in mobile devices
like smartphones, tablets and even sometimes in vehicles, as
known from high performance computers in very demandable
applications. Vehicles approach a rising degree of functions
supporting autonomous driving which require fast evaluation of
different driving situations in real time. This comes along with
a urgent demand for continuously rising computing power,
whilst batteries do not experience comparable proceedings in
terms of higher capacities. Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs) offer vast reconﬁguration capabilities way beyond
their earlier use case as glue logic [3]. Depending on the
size of the FPGA in terms of number of Conﬁgurable Logic
Blocks (CLBs), different designs can be loaded into the FPGA
and therefore synthesized by an intelligent routing of CLBs.
However, in most cases implemented designs do not use all
resources of reconﬁgurability, leading to a waste of energy due
to leakage currents ﬂowing through blocks in standby mode.
Unused blocks inside an integrated circuit, which is intended
to be used in mobile applications, should be switched off and
only turned on again, if more resources are needed. Different
design methodologies can be used on different hierarchical
levels to realize a ﬁne-grain and coarse-grain approach for
reduction of consumed power. This can be achieved by an
efﬁcient combination of design decisions at circuit level, e.g.,
power gating, clock gating, dynamic voltage scaling, etc [4].
A breakdown of a CLB into its single blocks reveals further
possibilities to modify the schematics towards the intended
low power purpose, e.g., optimization of conﬁguration random
access memory (CRAM) [1] and data ﬂip-ﬂops (D-FFs) [2].
In addition to that, investigations have shown that a noticeable
amount of power is dissipated by the General Purpose Input
Outputs (GPIOs), which serve as a generic input / output de-
vice for integrated circuits [5]. As the number of reconﬁgurable
/ adaptive electronics in mobile applications is expected to
grow continuously, we beliebe that special attention in terms of
improvements or redesign should be allocated to these special
circuitry, which can not be neglected for the sake of well
interconnectivity in integrated circuits.
In this paper, we investigate a standard tristate buffer design
on its most signiﬁcant characteristics, which are dynamic
power consumption, standby leakage current and high Z capa-
bilities. In Section II, we give an overview about related work
and key aspects of dependencies between performance and
power consumption. In Section III, we introduce a reference
design of a tristate buffer and discuss typical characteristics
in operation and standy. In Section IV, a newly implemented
tristate buffer is presented and its beneﬁts for energy sensitive
usage are introduced. In Section V, we compare the simulation
results of the different investigated designs. In Section VI, all
previous discussions are summarized and concluded.
II.
RELATED WORK
GPIOs are used in almost every integrated circuit as an
interface to communicate with peripheral circuitry. These ele-
ments are designed for receiving data as inputs and to transmit
data as output to other connected devices. Therefore tristate
buffers are bidirectional circuits with the ability to receive and
to transmit logic signals by the same input/output pin. Due to
this important functions, GPIO play a major role in consumed
area of a chip and power consumption in each complex design
[6]. Figure 1 illustrates a simpliﬁed block diagram of a FPGA
without any additional hard processing cores.
As illustrated in Figure 1, all CLBs of this simpliﬁed
internal hierarchy are surrounded by GPIO blocks. For the
sake of simplicity, all further blocks, e.g., switching matrices,
are not displayed there. In complex systems, several FPGAs
may drive an internal bus for different purposes, e.g., data
exchange, leading to potential conﬂicts when different circuits
try to write different logic values to the same bus line.
Figure 2 highlights the described conﬂict and depicts a
situation, in which two different FPGAs, connected to the same
4 bit data bus, drive the same line with different values: whilst
FPGA1 drives one signal line of the bus with a logic 1 or Vdd,
FPGA2 tries to do same but with a logic 0. The consequence
is a ﬂoating voltage on the interconnection signal line, which
is difﬁcult to predict and an undeﬁned state. For this reason
tristate buffers play an important role inside each GPIO, since
they offer one special output state beside their functionality to
pass a logic value from the input to the output node: highZ,
also called high impedance. By enabling this state, a tristate
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

4LUT
&
4LUT
&
4LUT
&
4LUT
&
D-FF
D-FF
D-FF
D-FF
4LUT
D-FF
CLB
GPIO
FPGA
&
Figure 1. Simpliﬁed FPGA structure
FPGA1
FPGA2
4 bit bus
1
0
Figure 2. Interconnection bus
buffer cuts off the connection between its input and output
node and therefore prevents an undesired throughput from the
inputs of the GPIO inside an FPGA to the interconnection bus.
So in general, we can identify three aspects to be of relevance
for optimization in terms of energy efﬁciency:
•
Subthreshold / standby leakage
•
Active power consumption
•
highZ behavior
Each of these bullet points has to be adressed by a careful
analysis of parameters which are responsible for different
behaviour and therefore also different results or performance
of the circuit in scope. Subthreshold leakeage current can be
characterized by the following equations [7][8]:
JDT ∝A(Vox
Tox
)2
(1)
Ileak∝ W
Leff
e(VGS−Vt0−γVSB+ηVDS)/nVt)(1−e
− VDS
Vt
)
(2)
Equation (1) explains that a higher oxide thickness Tox
will subsequently lead to a lower current density JDT , which
is a favored effect for our purposes as we intent to limit
undesired current ﬂows as good as possible. On the other
hand, (2) highlights the dependency of a subthreshold current
Ileak to different factors, e.g., the transistor length Leff, the
gate-source voltage VGS and the source-body voltage VSB.
On the other hand, active power consumption Pdyn depends
on various factors showed in the following equation:
Pdyn = αCloadV 2
ddfClk
(3)
Equation (3) [9] shows that for signiﬁcant reduction of
consumed battery power several factors, e.g., the switching
activity α, the load capacitance Cload, the supply voltage Vdd
and the operating frequency fClk have to be designed in a way
to keep Pdyn as low as possible. Some factors like Cload can
not be easily controlled, however other factors can be adapted
in a better way directly at circuit level. Last but not least, the
highZ attributes of a tristate buffer play an important role
due to their ability to decouple this buffer from the remaining
signal chain. A careful design of the output transistors inside a
tristate buffer offers heavy impact on this ability. Nevertheless
it should be stated here, that priority was put on low power
characteristics of our newly implemented design. Measurement
of the highZ state with different output voltages was done
after evaluating power consumption of all investigated designs.
Furthermore, all measurements were compared against each
other to ﬁgure out which design performs best in general.
III.
TRISTATE BUFFER CELL DESIGN
The basic purpose of a buffer circuit is to forward the
input value with a certain delay to the output node. Some
applications might require the addition of a delay time for
synchronizing different data paths. The easiest way to under-
stand the basic function of a buffer is to imagine the logic
function of two inverter in series. A tristate buffer adds a third,
important feature to this functionality: the highZ state. For a
better understanding of the circuit’s function, a tristate inverter
is shown in Figure 3.
Gnd
Vdd
En
In
Out
M1
M2
M3
M4
INV
Figure 3. Tristate buffer
As long as En provides a logic LOW at the respective
input node, the transistors M1 and M4 are turned on and
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

subsequently provide a direct path to the voltage source Vdd
and Gnd. As a consequence, the transistors M2 and M3 work
as an inverter and therefore invert all signals applied to In. On
the other hand, if En turns to HIGH, M1 and M4 are turned off
and cut-off the internal transistors M2 and M3 from the supply
voltage and ground path. In this special case, the voltage at the
output node Out is ﬂoating and undeﬁned. This means that in
dependence of this ﬂoating voltage, only a very small current
will ﬂow either as leakage current from the tristate inverter
into the circuitry connected to Out or from the load into the
tristate inverter to Gnd. By adding one additional nMOS and
pMOS transistor, the discussed tristate inverter can be modiﬁed
to a tristate buffer, which is shown in Figure 4.
Gnd
Vdd
En
In
Out
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Figure 4. Standard design of a tristate buffer
Different aspects of this tristate buffer’s behavior have been
investigated during simulations by a 90nm TSMC (Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Company) technology and a
Cadence toolchain (INCISIVE 6.1.5). All simulations, serving
the purpose investigating the circuit’s dynamic performance,
were done at an operating frequency of 200MHz and with
standard settings for all transistors’ dimensions (120nm).
Since all analyzed designs are not dynamic logic inheriting a
dedicated Clk input, the operating frequency was modulated
into the switching events of En. The results of the ﬁrst
simulation run with active inputs are shown in Figure 5 and
also displayed in Table I and Table II . This simulation
was followed by further tests for alternative circuit states
with the intention to build up a baseline database for further
comparisons.
TABLE I. SIMULATION RESULTS (PWR)
Design type
Average Power nW
Max. Power uW
Min. Power pW
Reference
245
56.75
103.8
TABLE II. SIMULATION RESULTS IV dd
Design type
Avg. Current nA
Max. Current uA
Min. Current nA
Reference
215.2
230.5
261.4
The simulation results display the correct function of this
tristate buffer, which directly passes the input value to Out
whenever En is set to LOW. Once En applies a logic HIGH to
the cutoff transistors, the voltage level at Out starts to ﬂoat and
ENB (V)
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
1.25
IN (V)
-.25
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
1.25
OUT (V)
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
1.25
I (uA)
-200.0
-100.0
0.0
100.0
200.0
300.0
PWR (uW)
-10.0
10.0
40.0
60.0
time (ns)
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
Figure 5. Simulation results of dynamic behavior of a standard tristate buffer
swings between voltage levels above Vdd and below 0V (Gnd).
These ﬂoating voltages are not deﬁned and also indicate that
the whole circuit is in highZ mode. Active power dissipation
is of high importance for the estimation of required energy
resources, but regardless of these results it is also obligatory to
have a closer look on the standby power characteristics when
the circuit is lead into an idle phase or put completely into
standby mode. This means that the data input is inactive and
En active. The simulation results are shown in Figure 6.
I_standby
PWR_standby
I_standby (pA)
-136.0
-135.0
-134.0
-133.0
-132.0
132.16
132.14
PWR_standby (pW)
132.09
132.1
132.11
132.12
132.13
132.15
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
time (us)
Figure 6. Simulation results of idle standby results
For this analysis and for a better observation of the standby
current, the simulation runtime was set to 1µs. The simulation
curves of both, standby current and standby power dissipation,
show the discharging process of all internal parasitic capaci-
tances after powering on the circuit at the very beginning of
the simulation process. Both, standby current and the allocated
dissipated power, continuously decrease over time, resulting
in an average leakage current Ileak of 133.6pA and a related
average power dissipation of 132.1pW.
The remaining aspect to be considered at this point is the
behavior of the reference tristate buffer in highZ mode after
setting En to HIGH. First of all, it should be stated here that
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

there is no unambiguous answer on this question, since this
depends on the voltage which will be applied by the load to the
output node Out of the tristate buffer. In addition to that, there
is always a small throughput from the input node on the output
in case that the tristate buffer in highZ is still stimulated with
input date, which might be a realistic situation when the related
control logic fails. Thus, two different situations, active and
inactive inputs, must be considered. Based on the assumption
that the voltage applied to Out may vary from 0V to1V , a dc
sweep simulation was done. The results of both test runs are
displayed in Figure 7.
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
20
80
140
200
260
320
380
440
500
560
620
680
740
800
860
920
980
Output impedance active input (GOhm)
Output impedance inactive input (GOhm)
Output voltage (V)
Active input
Inactive input
Figure 7. Simulation results of output impedance in highZ state
Active input data has a remarkable inﬂuence on the circuit’s
capabilities to decouple its internal switching events to the
output node. In case of setting the input node to a 0V and
therefore making it ’inactive’, Figure 7 reveals a sweetspot
in terms of output impedance and which is closely allocated
to almost Vdd/2. Having this striking high output impedance
(≈ 1.01TΩ) at this voltage range is a desirable situation,
since this implements an almost perfect balance between
current source and current sink. If input data are applied
to In, a drop the output impedance can be observed after
simulation. Even with turned of decoupling transistors M1 and
M4, the throughput originating from the buffer’s input is strong
enough to lower the impedance at Out. Therefore, a stronger
decoupling mechanism would probably lead to better results.
IV.
MODIFICATIONS
A careful analysis of the reference tristate buffer pointed
out that there is still room left for different improvements.
Thus, a noticeable adaption of circuits for sensitive low-power
application can only be achieved by a synergy of different
power savings measures for imaginable operating states.
A. Power Gating
On our way to develop a low-power tristate buffer, the
implementation of a ’hold’-mechanism for standby-phases was
an inevitable step. The difﬁculty here was the fact, that this
design does not imply clocked inputs which could have been
gated. Instead of this, a more stringent design technique was
applied: power-gating. This modiﬁcation can be applied in
different ways, by adding a gating transistor between the
supply voltage and the circuit or by inserting a transistor
between Gnd and all internal nodes. A third alternative comes
along with a combination of both design modiﬁcations and can
be found in Figure 8 (transistors M5 and M10).
Gnd
Vdd
En
In
Out
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Vddlow
M7
M8
M9
M10
INV
Vddlow
Figure 8. Low-power tristate buffer
The addition of two transistors to a design with a total
number of eight transistors before this modiﬁcation means an
increase 20% and a high probability for penalty in terms of
area consumption. Regardless of the chosen technology for
synthesis and allocated continuous proceedings in technology
node shrinking, a higher number of transistors is always
considered as a drawback. On the other hand, this modiﬁcation
is responsible for a noteworthy limitation of leakage current
running through the design under test (DUT), since we achieve
a complete decoupling of the tristate buffer vor Vdd and Gnd
respectively.
B. Leakage Current Reduction
A reasonable extension of power gating is the use of special
transistors with a higher oxide thickness Tox which can be also
seen in (1), where Tox is in the denominator and therefore
has the ability to limit the electrons tunneling through the
transistor’s gate connector. This results in a reduction of the
leakage current in idle / standby state. Despite these beneﬁts
it should be mentioned that high Tox transistors have a slower
switching frequency than standard Tox do. Hence, adding
these transistors should be carefully waived taking a decision
upon it. In our case, M5 and M10 have an increased Tox
than the remaining transistors have for keeping the penalty
in performance degradation as low as possible.
C. Subthreshold Current Reduction
Whilst power gating is an effective method for a total
shutdown of a circuit, there should be an alternative for
measurable reduction of a current ﬂowing through a transistor
with an applied gate-source voltage Vgs below the threshold.
voltage Vth. This led to the decision to apply high Vth tran-
sistors, which have the ability to cut off subthreshold electron
tunneling. This method might have a negative impact on the
maximum operating frequency and should be carefully applied.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Nevertheless, these special transistors can not be neglected
during the design of low power designs. All internal transistors,
except the gating transistors, have been replaced by their hight
Vth counterparts and simulated.
D. Multi Supply Voltage
An operating circuit in low power applications should not
only be optimized for static power reduction but also for energy
efﬁciency in active mode. As shown in equation 3, the supply
voltage has a vast inﬂuence on the overall dissipated power.
It’s obvious that the best approach would be to decrease the
global supply voltage Vdd, but might lead to the necessity
of additional level restorers for a smooth signal transmission
to other circuitry. An alternative is the careful partial supply
voltage reduction within a design after analyzing certain parts
of a design, which could be powered by a lower Vdd. On
the other hand, lowering Vdd comes along with a slower
computation time of the input values, therefore a smaller
supply voltage Vddlow was only applied to the internal inverter
M6 and M7. In principle, there are two different ways how to
generate Vddlow: this can be realized by an external voltage
source (illustraed by the additional voltage source Vddlow in
Figure 8) or by exploiting internal voltage nodes (illustrated
by the dashed line in Figure 8). The second option shows
its beauty by an inherent voltage reduction automatism. Once
En goes HIGH M10 is turned off and therefore cutting off
M7 from Vdd, but keeps the internal inverter still working.
Minor adaptions to the width of M7 have to made due to the
decreased internal supply voltage. Nevertheless, both options
work well with the low power tristate buffer.
1.0
OUT (V)
.25
1.5
-.25
.75
1.0
1.25
0.0
.25
.5
IN (V)
ENB (V)
0.0
.25
.5
.75
1.0
1.25
-5.0
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
PWR (uW)
-500.0
-250.0
0.0
250.0
500.0
750.0
I (uA)
time (ns)
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
Figure 9. Simulation results of dynamic behavior of the low-power tristate
buffer
Figure 9 shows the dynamic behavior of the low power
tristate buffer. Compared to the simulation curves shown in
Figure 5, it can be seen that the low power tristate buffer is
superior in terms of dissipated power during active runtime.
The related simulation results are summarized in Table III and
Table IV.
Furthermore, an analysis of the standby behavior revealed
an improved average leakage current Ileak of 24.1pA and a
related average power dissipation of 22.04pW. As a ﬁnal step,
the highZ characteristic was investigated for having a better
TABLE III. SIMULATION RESULTS (PWR)
Design type
Average Power nW
Max. Power uW
Min. Power pW
LP tristate
191.3
29.72
22.36
TABLE IV. SIMULATION RESULTS IV dd
Design type
Avg. Current nA
Max. Current uA
Min. Current nA
LP tristate
225.8
194.8
206.9
comparison to the reference design. The simulation results are
displayed in Figure 10.
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
320
360
400
440
480
520
560
600
640
680
720
760
800
840
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Output impedance active input (kOhm)
Output voltage (V)
Figure 10. Output impedance in highZ state (low power tristate buffer)
In contrast to the reference tristate buffer, the newly im-
plemented tristate buffer shows a different behavior. First of
all, the output impedance shows a smaller order of magnitude
(GΩ → kΩ) and in addition to this, the output curve strongly
depends on the voltage at the output node and reveals a
proportional dependency. The higher the voltage at Out is,
the higher the output impedance will be. Despite the fact
that the low power tristate buffer’s active highZ curve has
a smaller order of magnitude, the evaluated results are still
acceptable and give an evidence about the appropriateness
for the usage as an connecting element in complex designs.
These results could be improved by modifying the gate lengths
of the output transistors M2 and M3. The downside of this
modiﬁcation would lead to necessary modiﬁcations of the
manufacturing process, but which can be easily handled by
modern technology nodes.
V.
RESULTS COMPARISON
For a better comparison of the investigations which have
been done, all results were summarized in Table V. The low
power tristate buffer outperforms in almost each aspect the ref-
erence design, which highlights its appropriateness for use in
applications with limited energy resources. Results of dynamic
behavior show that power dissipation is reduced signiﬁcantly,
no matter whether the average, maximum or minimum power
consumption is in focus of discussion. The most remarkable
reduction is allocated to static behavior of both circuits. Here,
the standby leakage current and the dissipated power in idle
mode are lowered by over 80%, which emphasizes the effect
of implemented low power measures.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

TABLE V. SIMULATION RESULTS IV dd
Design type
Reference buffer
Low power buffer
∆%
Av. PWR (nW)
245
191.3
22 ↓
Max. PWR (uW)
56.75
29.72
47.63 ↓
Min. PWR (pW)
103.8
22.36
78.46 ↓
Av. Current (nA)
215.2
225.8
5 ↑
Max. Current (uA)
230.5
194.8
15.49 ↓
Av. Leak. Current (pA)
133.6
24.1
82 ↓
Av. Standby PWR (pW)
132.1
22.04
83.32 ↓
highZ max.
12.38 GΩ
81 GΩ
↑↑
highZ min.
6.85 GΩ
18 kΩ
↑↑
The appropriate choice of process technology due to the
multi-oxide requirements as well as careful layout of transistor
parameters requires special attention and allows additional
improvements. However, the low power tristate buffer delivers
remarkable out of the box performance without further de-
tailed optimization. These adaptions are achieved with a small
penalty in terms of transistor count and area. Xilinx provides
372 Maximum User I/O and 165 Maximum Differential I/O
Pairs [6], which could be realized in 537 GPIOs. Implementing
a new FPGA design by usage of the low power tristate buffer
requires 1074 additional transistors. Here it comes to the
point where an efﬁcient layout of the overall chip could be
a measures to catch up this drawback. In addition to that,
the achieved minimum highZ state of the new design of
about 14kΩ does not perform as good as the result of the
reference tristate buffer (6.85GΩ). This could be improved by
a further optimization of the transistor parameters in terms of
length and width. However, this might lead to a higher energy
consumption and should be carefully decided case by case,
depending on which characteristic is of higher importance
for the respective application. Despite the additional parasitic
capacitances which come along by adding transistors, nearly
all measured insights does not weaken the positive overall
print.
VI.
CONCLUSION
We analyzed an existing design of a tristate buffer, which
was baselined as a reference design serving for further com-
parisons. During the analysis we did a deep dive into the
characteristics of this design for the evaluation of its active
and standby performance in terms of dissipated power, average
current consumption and the special ability to enter a highZ
mode. The outcome of these activities was that we wanted to
develop a tristate buffer which is superior in terms of energy
savings during runtime and idle state. Due to the lack of a clock
signal and therefore the impossibility to apply clock gating,
we implemented power gating by choosing special high Tox
transistors. These transistors have the ability to decouple the
tristate buffer from Vdd and Gnd as well as the function of gate
tunneling mitigation. For subthreshold current reduction we
decided to use high Vth transistors, being aware of accepting
a penalty in the maximum operating frequency, which was not
in the focus of our work though. Simulations have shown that
the low power tristate buffer delivers outstanding performance
in terms of, e.g., average power consumption in active mode,
which is decreased by 22% compared to the reference design.
This is a noticeable improvement, since it shrinks the losses
of energy in active mode of almost a quarter compared to the
reference design. In standby mode, our design outperforms
the legacy design by 82% related to average Ileak, which is a
remarkable result. This low power design features the ability to
provide the generation of an internal, smaller supply voltage
without any extra enable signal from external circuitry. The
highZ mode abilities of the legacy design are better by a higher
order of magnitude, nevertheless we consider the achieved
results of the new tristate buffer as acceptable. These results
come at the cost of a higher transistor count and an additional
input for an internal, decreased supply voltage IV ddlow as
an option. Several possibilities exist for future investigations
and improvements. A very simple but effective method for
achieving remarkable power savings would be the choice of a
technology library with shorter channel lengths, e.g., 28nm.
A technology shrink usually leads to a measurable reduction
of consumed power, however, this comes along with some
drawbacks like the short-channel effect. Applying negative
VGS voltages is an effective way to suppress subthreshold
leakage currents after turning a transistor off. Of course, this
requires auxiliary logic for generation of negative VGS gate
voltages, but this should be a small amount of additional
transistors. Further supporting measures can be applied at a
higher hierarchical layer, e.g., at architectural level. Controlled
dynamic voltage scaling offers the potential to drive the whole.
circuit into a deep sleep mode if a standby mode is not crucial
for operation of the whole logic. These suggested measures
will be starting points for further elaboration of enhanced
energy balance with strong focus on a extended battery lifetime
in mobile applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Pierre Mayr, from Ruhr University of
Bochum, for giving advice on the aspects of correct signal
transmission for bus architectures. We are grateful to Andreas
Ullrich, from University of Wuppertal, for his continuous
support in tool maintenance.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Niewiadomski, C. Gremzow, and D. Tutsch, “4t loadless srams for
low power fpga lut optimization,” in Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
(ADAPTIVE 2017), February 2017, pp. 1–7.
[2]
K. Niewiadomski and D. Tutsch, “Low power charge recycling d-ff,” in
The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics
and Micro-electronics (CENICS 2017), September 2017, pp. 1–6.
[3]
C. Maxﬁeld, The Design Warrior’s Guide to FPGAs: Devices, Tools and
Flows, 1st ed.
Newton, MA, USA: Newnes, 2004.
[4]
J. M. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan, and B. Nikolic, Digital integrated
circuits- A design perspective, 2nd ed.
Prentice Hall, 2004.
[5]
T. Tuan, S. Kao, A. Rahman, S. Das, and S. Trimberger, “A 90nm low-
power fpga for battery-powered applications,” in Proceedings of the 2006
ACM/SIGDA 14th international symposium on Field programmable gate
arrays.
ACM, 2006, pp. 3–11.
[6]
XA Spartan-3A Automotive FPGA Family Data Sheet, Xilinx, 04 2011,
rev. 2.0.
[7]
C. Piguet, Low-power processors and systems on chips.
CRC Press,
2005.
[8]
C. Piguet, J.-M. Masgonty, V. von Kaenel, and T. Schneider, “Logic
design for low-voltage/low-power cmos circuits,” in Proceedings of the
1995 International Symposium on Low Power Design, ser. ISLPED ’95.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1995, pp. 117–122. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/224081.224102
[9]
A. Bellaouar and M. I. Elmasry, Low-Power Digital VLSI Design
Circuits and Systems, 1st ed., J. Allen, Ed. Norwell, MA, USA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1995.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-610-1
ADAPTIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

