Robot Cognition in Disassembly 
Advanced Information Processing for an Adaptive Dismantling Ecosystem 
 
Hendrik Poschmann 
Institute of Production Technology 
Ostfalia University of Applied 
Sciences 
Wolfenbuettel, Germany 
email: he.poschmann@ostfalia.de 
Holger Brüggemann 
Institute of Production Technology 
Ostfalia University of Applied 
Sciences 
Wolfenbuettel, Germany 
email: 
holger.brueggemann@ostfalia.de 
Daniel Goldmann 
Institute of Mineral and Waste 
Processing, Waste Disposal and 
Geomechanics 
Clausthal University of Technology 
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
email: daniel.goldmann@tu-
clausthal.de 
Abstract—Disassembly is an elementary process step for 
efficient recycling. In order to improve disassembly operations, 
the implementation of digitalization technologies and advanced 
robotic systems is investigated in this paper. The authors 
propose an agent-based robotic system which is capable of 
classifying components in a hierarchical structure for an 
optimized determination of an ecologically and economically 
feasible level of disassembly. By utilizing a machine-learning 
classifier, an adaptive system is facilitated being able to react to 
the dynamic change of conditions in the reverse supply chain. 
Holistic information management processes are the foundation 
of the advanced disassembly system. It is shown that the 
application of cognitive robotics fosters the progression towards 
an advanced circular economy by being able to reliably classify 
End-of-Life options autonomously. 
Keywords—disassembly; recycling 4.0; robotics; decision 
making; machine-learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Resource scarcity and the necessity of limiting emissions 
in order to tackle the climate change issue are hard constraints 
in 
today’s 
manufacturing 
industries. 
Following 
the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set by the United 
Nations, responsible dealing with rare materials and elaborate 
products becomes a strategically important objective for 
every enterprise [1]. Reuse, remanufacturing and recycling as 
End-of-Life (EoL) options seem to be mandatory 
consequences of this development. 
However, the current situation with EoL products often 
shows the inability to deal with them appropriately in terms 
of economic efficiency and technical dexterity. A key point 
in all possible EoL treatment paths is the process of 
disassembly. Disassembly can be understood as the entirety 
of actions required to separate manufactured products to their 
modules, components or resource constituents [2]. Advanced 
robotic systems can provide an automation solution so that 
high quality component output for reuse, remanufacturing or 
high grade material recycling can be achieved while reducing 
the planning complexity for the companies and saving costs 
due 
to 
decreasing 
process 
time. 
Admittedly, 
the 
implementation of a robotic system often requires a great 
effort in programming for each variant which needs to be 
dismantled. In order to overcome this impetus, advanced 
cognitive robotic systems are capable of perceiving their 
environment through camera and sensor technologies and 
make decisions based on available data autonomously. The 
field of cognitive robotics embodies the study of knowledge 
representation and reasoning problems in dynamic and 
incompletely known environments by a robotic agent [3]. In 
the Recycling 4.0 project, the authors develop an 
informationally integrated disassembly system by employing 
the characteristics of cognitive robotics to fulfil highly 
complex tasks, such as the disassembly of different (and 
partly unknown) products by the example of electric vehicle 
battery systems in varying product conditions.  
This paper proposes an adaptive system-approach for 
robotic disassembly in dynamic environments. Through 
connecting the disassembly system to a superordinate, cloud-
based information system [4], the robot is able to stream real-
time information for each process step, taking different 
requirements of individual supply chain actors into account 
while constantly updating available data. A machine-learning 
empowered decision making process is established and 
presented to assist in making improved decisions for the 
disassembly grade in respect to economic, ecologic and social 
dimensions of the available EoL-options. In contrast to 
existing disassembly systems, such as those of Jungbluth et 
al. [5] and Vongbunyong et al. [6], the system actively 
contributes to the cloud information system and receives live 
data updates from various sources and system participants, 
making it an ecosystem adaptable to changes in the general 
market situation of the targeted product. Furthermore, the 
system is able to generalize knowledge from existing product 
structures so that it is able to work on previously unknown 
products. By scanning the product with its vision system, the 
robot is also able to rate the visual condition of the product as 
first-time hands-on experience in the recycling process-chain. 
The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, the initial 
problem of robotic disassembly automation is described and 
the research question is formulated. Section 3 introduces the 
concept of the agent based system and explains the methods 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

proposed to answer the question based on a standardized 
product structure model and a feature based machine learning 
classifier. An evaluation of this classifier using generic 
product data is described in Section 4. A conclusion on the 
results and its contribution to disassembly as well as an 
outlook to future research within this project is given in 
Section 5. 
II. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Disassembly operations usually include the largest 
number of employees and the highest complexity regarding 
the amount of possible variants in all EoL-treatments, making 
automation approaches difficult to establish in most of the 
contemplable use-cases. Advantages of human workforce, 
such as accurate perception, craftsmanship and intelligent 
behaviour are needed in disassembly scenarios, whereby time 
effort, cost and volatile quality of manual processes have to be 
overcome. In order to keep the required investment for 
disassembly automation feasible in terms of an overall benefit 
in cost compared to the fully-manual process, a hybrid 
disassembly scenario with Human Robot Collaboration 
(HRC) should be realized. Another benefit of HRC is the 
capability of implementing a correction functionality for the 
robotic agent in favour of enabling learning behaviour as a 
fail-safe strategy for the robot cognition processing.  
The general requirements of a cognitive robotic 
disassembly system are [7]: 
• 
Disassembly sequence planning and optimization 
• 
Determination of the level of disassembly (technical 
possibility vs. economic feasibility) 
• 
Capability of dealing with high numbers of product 
and product state variants 
• 
Including market information regarding cores, 
resource data and component reselling 
• 
Including life-cycle information and product data 
The problem of profitability and optimal decisions exists 
mostly due to a lack of information spanning various 
participants in the EoL-value-chain. These optimal decisions 
cannot be made due to missing conspectus of all relevant data. 
In order to locate this work within the canon of disassembly 
planning research, the focus lies more on disassembly 
decision making (in respect to multiple criteria) than the actual 
sequence planning depending on the product model. Feng et 
al. [8] presented a stage-wise decision making process on each 
hierarchy level, determining the EoL-option at the last stage 
of the process, whereas this decision marks the initial input of 
the proposed system in this work. Focusing directly on a 
robotic disassembly, Li et al. [9] presented a multi-criteria 
assessment with a score-system which is difficult to maintain 
in the dynamic environment of a circular economy with many 
different value-streams and stakeholders. The consideration of 
varying component quality and operational cost is introduced 
by Tian et al. [10], taking the randomness and fuzziness of real 
processes into account. However, such a quantified, 
designated assessment is often not possible due to a lack of 
information. Furthermore, quality level ratings would be 
different for various purposes depending on the market rather 
than technical process experience. 
At this point, the Recycling 4.0 model introduces a 
superordinate information marketplace which is connected to 
the disassembly system. All relevant data for optimized 
decision making can then be obtained from the information 
marketplace and from the robotic system’s vision unit. 
However, anticipation from existing rules is not possible, 
because market principles of a full-scale reverse supply chain 
cannot yet be foreseen. Therefore, dynamic models which take 
various types of data from different sources into account need 
to be utilized. These forms of disassembly grade decision 
systems have not been implemented before. To gain a wider 
conspectus of the topic, the authors already conducted an 
analysis of a vast number of robotic disassembly automation 
examples which can be found in [11]. 
The proposed system must be able to constantly respond to 
changes and also show evolutionary behaviour in terms of 
how the adaption is performed (second-order adaption). An 
important foundation for the depicted approach is the 
information exchangeability and cross-system interoperability 
within the Recycling 4.0 ecosystem. Summarized, the 
challenges of automated disassembly can be seen as a problem 
of information management along the EoL process-chain. The 
addressed research question of this paper therefore aims at this 
very point: 
How can the available supply chain information, lifecycle-
knowledge and sensory information be used in the 
disassembly process in order to benefit the overall recycling 
efficiency? 
III. 
CONCEPT AND METHODS 
The developed concept of the robotic disassembly system 
consists of three different agents, each fulfilling specific 
requirements of the proposed tasks (Fig. 1). As an external 
junction, an information marketplace is established, serving as 
a central information node for all participants of the reverse 
supply chain. A presumption of the developed concept of this 
paper is that semantic and structural information required for 
the robot cognition process can be obtained from this 
marketplace [4]. 
The main module of the system is the Robot Cognition 
Processor (RCP), responsible for information synthesis and 
decision making regarding the step-wise decision of 
disassembling the product structure up to the optimized grade 
by economic, ecological and social considerations at the time 
of disassembly. The required sensory information is gathered 
by the System Perception Unit (SPU). The module captures 
the target object with a specially designed 3D-camera in order 
to identify, detect (localize) and rate the part pertained. This 
agent’s contribution to the RCP process is an optical condition 
diagnosis factor which is used in addition to the product’s 
internally assigned health factor. Finally, the Disassembly 
Execution Unit (DEU) is formed by the operative robotic 
system (robot arm and tooling), as well as an affiliated 
execution monitoring system. Based on the disassembly 
command of the RCP, the DEU is responsible for path 
planning, tooling and actual disassembly action execution. An 
HRC pairing of the robot and a human worker enables the 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

DEU to accomplish complex tasks and take instructional input 
of the human worker, in the case of the autonomous path 
planner failing to achieve its objective. 
The core process of the RCP is the handling and 
processing of relevant information in order to make a decision 
compliant to economic, ecological and social objectives. After 
an initial decision about the general feasibility of core 
disassembly, the disassembly request for the target part is 
forwarded to the RCP. Available product data and technical 
documentation as well as a standardized set of relevant 
information are gathered from the superordinate information 
system. Product states from the optical assessment via the 
SPU are merged with the gathered information into a single 
attributed dataframe per object, forming a set of all available 
data for the target product or component. This augmented 
information set is transferred back to the cloud information 
system to make predictions about future batches of related 
products possible. 
The next step in the RCP process is a machine-learning 
sub-process of step-by-step decision making along the 
hierarchical structure of the product. By the time of individual 
disassembly decision for each component, three possible 
classifications are taken into account (Fig. 2). Reuse and 
remanufacturing are clustered in one category, as they both 
strive for functional integrity and component resale. The 
second option is disassembly for improved material recycling. 
The third option is not to disassemble any further, thereby 
determining the final grade of disassembly. If at any point, the 
system is not able to make an acceptable or technically 
feasible decision, human decision making and manual 
teaching in a possible interaction phase may give the missing 
input to the system, which is then learned for future appliance 
and adaption, improving the possible system autonomy with 
an increasing number of iterations and variants. The desired 
disassembly sequence is thereby automatically determined by 
the order of parts and components eligible for profitable 
disassembly. Physical disassembly commands are then 
forwarded to the DEU for path planning and execution. 
     Disassembly Execution Unit (DEU)
      System Perception Unit (SPU)
Information marketplace
                      Robot Cognition Processor (RCP)
Interaction with
physical systems
RCP process
Decision steps
o Control system of the disassembly cell
o Concatenation of marketplace data and ascertained sensory information
o Decision making
o Periodic process for each step in disassembly 
o Initial disassembly decision before the begin of the actual process only on marketplace data
Semantic Information: technical documentation, instructions, disassembly process information, economic and ecologically relevant data
Valid process knowledge, 
information about
disassembled product
Disassembly commands following
the decision based on marketplace
and sensory information 
Top Level
Shopfloor
Level
Sensory information
External information
Main functionalities: SYNTHESIS and DECISION MAKING
Machine 
learning process
New valid knowledge for 
specific variant 
Disassembly sequence step
RCP-knowledge and prior 
sequence data
Interaction with cloud
information system
Alignment with 
RCP knowledge
Periodic 
disassembly 
decision
Human 
interaction
 Identification 
of the part
Processing of 
information 
system input
Information 
synthesis
Rating of part 
conditions
Detection of 
connectors and 
components
Image 
capturing
positive
no
Process data, 
times, 
feasibility
Receive 
available 
information
Return of 
sequence and 
process data
Disassembly 
command
Optimized 
sequence step
yes
Return of 
product state 
data
Execution monitoring data
Disassembly 
request
Forwarding 
type 
information
Results of 
identification 
and rating
Configuration of 
tooling
Receive target 
part and sequence 
information
Path planning
positive
Modified path
Disassembly 
action
Human 
interaction
Results of 
identification and 
detection
no
yes
Figure 2. System concept of the agent-based disassembly system 
Initial Option: Core 
Disassembly
Option 0: 
Disassembly for 
Reuse / Reman
Option 1: 
Disassembly for 
Recycling
Option 2: 
Dispose /
No further 
Disassembly
Synthesis of 
static and 
dynamic 
information
Information 
processing
Disassembly 
decision
Command to 
Execution Unit
RCP workflow:
Iteration for each hierarchy level 
Figure 1. RCP workflow process 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Sequence and process data is transferred back to the 
information marketplace for possible utilization in future 
disassembly targets of the same type or in other locations 
respectively other disassembly facilities connected to the 
Recycling 4.0 framework. 
In order to achieve the functionality as described, there are 
several preliminaries which have to be met: 
• 
Accessible data structure for each hierarchy level of 
the target product 
• 
Standardized data format to ensure cross-system 
interoperability 
• 
Sufficient amount of training data based on real 
decisions of current processes for initial training 
One elementary idea of the system is to use data 
processing capacities most efficiently at the information 
sources and sinks (edge computing principle). Bottlenecks in 
data transfer can be avoided that way and the available 
capacity is solely used for useful and requested information 
transfer. All agents in this configuration are independent parts 
of the system which can act inherently autonomously. 
In order to align the dynamic data of the SPU to the model 
data from the information marketplace, a common framework 
of the digital model is required for interoperability. As a 
solution to this problem, the platform-independent interface 
OPC Unified Architecture (OPC UA) was selected in the 
project Recycling 4.0. The communication between the 
stakeholders can either take place as publisher/subscriber or 
client/server model [12]. The structure of the OPC UA model 
allows the alignment of external and sensory data in a single 
attributed dataframe per object node of each hierarchy level 
(see Fig. 3). Communication and data transfer in the OPC UA 
framework rely on the quality of the digital model deposited. 
In Recycling 4.0, the example of an electric vehicle battery 
was chosen. The structure of the car, the battery system and 
all relevant sub-assemblies, components and connectors are 
therefore modelled on the OPC server. Each object is 
represented by a node in the hierarchy tree. 
The cognition module uses the available data for AI-
enforced decision making. Decisions considering advanced 
circular economy models are too complex and dynamic for 
standard classification algorithms (such as decision trees or 
linear regression models). Up to the present, such connected 
information systems as described above do not exist in 
practice, therefore research cannot deliver the mechanisms 
and rules those systems would follow. However, Neural 
Networks (NN) as universal function approximators [13] 
deliver valuable output in dynamic and highly complex 
systems, being able to deal with manifold relations in wide, 
non-linear feature-maps. The approach presented in this paper 
is based on generic battery data of three different battery types 
(small BEV, mid-range BEV and PHEV). The composition of 
material rates and weight was defined according to [14]. The 
features used for classification in the RCP can be found in 
Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
TABLE OF INPUT FEATURES 
Feature 
Symbol 
Description 
Type 
PrV 
Component type assigned to 
node (0=functional part, 
1=connector, 2=case part, 
3=wire, 4=board) 
Hazmat 
PrHz 
Containing hazardous 
materials, Boolean 
ProductionDate 
TProd 
Date of Production 
BMS
Cables
Connectors
Module 1
...
Case
Cables
Connectors
Cell1
...
Battery
Electronics
Motor
Body
...
BMS
Cables
Connectors
Module 1
...
Case
Cables
Connectors
Cell1
...
Battery
Electronics
Motor
Body
...
Vehicle 1
Battery
Electronics
Motor
Body
...
BMS
Cables
Connectors
Module 1
...
Case
Cables
Connectors
Cell1
...
Vehicle 2
Vehicle n
Product Model Hierarchy in OPC UA Server
Subassembly 
Level 1
Subassembly 
Level 2
Subassembly 
Level 3
Object
Variables
Methods
[… … …
  … … ...
   … … …]
___()
___()
___()
Data Change 
Notifications
Read / Write
Call
Event 
Notifications
References to 
other Objects
OPC UA Object Model Architecture
Figure 3. OPC UA product model hierarchy and object architecture 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

functionalIntegrity 
PrFI 
Potential operability / direct 
reuse possible, Boolean  
PriceCore 
CCore 
Purchasing price of the target 
core 
CondDiagSOH 
PrSOH 
Diagnosed condition by state-
of-health (SoH) 
CondOpt 
PrOpt 
Optical diagnosis value after 
first step of disassembly 
NodeIDASSEMBLY 
PrID 
Individual node ID of the 
digital model 
TDISASSEMBLY 
TDiss 
Time for disassembly to next 
hierarchy level 
PDISASSEMBLY 
CDiss 
Specific cost of disassembly 
(hourly rates plus overhead 
surcharge) 
ExpCompResale 
IComRes 
Expected profit from 
component resale 
Demand 
DCmp 
Market demand indicator 
measured by time between 
last two orders of component 
GradientPrice 
∇Price 
Gradient of core price 
development from historical 
data 
SocialAssessment 
ASoc 
Social assessment factor of 
disassembly operation 
EnvironmentalAssessment 
AEnv 
Environmental assessment 
factor of disassembly 
operation 
WeightTHEORETICAL 
PrWt 
Product weight according to 
technical documentation 
WeightACTUAL 
PrWa 
Actual product weight  
MassConstituent (multiple) 
MConstituent 
Material constituent shares 
PriceConstituent (multiple) 
CConstituent 
Material prices on a daily 
basis (given for each 
constituent) 
In order to process the data for decision making in a NN, 
vectorization of the relevant datasets is required as input 
format. In pursuance of a highly concentrated information-set, 
a multistage pre-processing of the obtained node-data is 
performed in advance. In a first step, the material 
concentration and material price information can be 
condensed into a single value (IMatRec), as both feature sets are 
only of relevance to a decision towards material recycling. 
IMatRec= ∑
nConstituent PrWa*MConstituenti*CConstituenti
i=0
  
(1) 
The expected value of material-focused recycling is higher 
for a more advanced level of disassembly (LDiss), as the 
achievable standard of purity can be increased by the removal 
of less important fractions, such as case components made of 
plastics or aluminium. Therefore, a factor is assigned to the 
expected material value considered to be recoverable, 
dependent on the disassembly grade. 
IMatRec(LDiss)=IMatRec*
e
LDiss
Lmax
e  
 
(2) 
The disassembly grade is determined by the initial node of 
the target object’s structure at the point of disassembly request 
in respect to the maximum achievable level of disassembly 
(Lmax). The factor delivers values between 36.7% and 100% of 
IMatRec as an approximation to a realistic expectable return. 
Technologically achievable recycling rates of downstream 
processes are not taken into account at this point.  
In the case of a decision for option 2, no further 
disassembly, the remaining components can be transferred to 
an established recycling process, such as the JX [15], Umicore 
or LithoRec battery recycling processes [16] for battery 
modules or other established material recovery processes for 
the remaining parts, such as case components, fasteners or 
electronics. 
This first stage of pre-processing has reduced the number 
of input features per battery from 43 to 17. 
The second stage of pre-processing reduces the number of 
input features by all features which are steady for all variants 
of the considered hierarchy level, such as hazmat factor and 
type in the case of the entire battery level. The node ID as 
structural model information is also removed, as it has no 
direct contribution to the disassembly decision. Moreover, 
features containing only redundant information are also 
excluded (e.g., TDiss, as its information is already contained in 
the specific CDiss). This step further simplifies the final 
processing by extracting irrelevant noise from the data 
affected. Finally, 13 features will be the input for the 
classification task. 
A third and last step of pre-processing is the normalization 
of data. 
FeatureNormalized =
Feature-Featuremin
Featuremax-Featuremin  
(3) 
By normalization, the feature data is concentrated in a 
value range between 0 and 1, making the assessment of 
weights to each feature more balanced, as strong differences 
between value domains can be avoided. 
On core disassembly level (entire battery), the decision has 
to be made before the actual disassembly process begins in 
order to avoid economic loss due to counterfactual process 
intake. Two modifications have to be made to apply the 
generalized cognition processor in this first step: 
• 
The optical diagnosis factor cannot be applied as it 
has not yet been assessed for the target core 
concerned. 
• 
The output category options zero and one both 
determine the target to be disassembled. The process 
is therefore pseudo-binary, as there is no difference 
to the first step in the process between the two 
categories. This modification is important for 
assessment of a validation data set as described in the 
final evaluation section. 
For the evaluation of the first decision making approach of 
the RCP in this paper, the entire car is defined as the intake 
core eligible for a feasible disassembly. The decision making 
step in focus of this work is the disassembly decision on the 
level of the integral battery, which is investigated as a 
compliant 
three-class-classification 
problem. 
For 
the 
processing of the classification task, we consider a NN 
composed as a deep multilayer-perceptron. The network 
consists of six hidden layers, including two dropout-layers 
after the first and the second hidden layer (Fig. 4). 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
Figure 4. Schematic architecture of the Neural Network 
The type of layers is “dense”, as the network is fully 
connected. Apart from the output layer, whose activation 
function is “softmax” for classification purposes, the 
activation of the other layers is a rectified linear unit for better 
training behaviour [17]. The dropout rates are 0.2 for the first 
and 0.1 for the second dropout layer. As the Keras-API [18] is 
used for realization, the kernel initializer for initial weights is 
set to a randomized Gaussian with a standard deviation of 1.5. 
The model is compiled with Stochastic Gradient Descent 
(SGD) optimizer and categorical cross entropy as loss-
function. The SGD optimizer is parameterized with a learning 
rate of 0.00015, a momentum of 0.3 and Nesterov accelerated 
in order to prevent early overfitting. All the hyperparameters 
were optimized following the general principles as described 
in [18] and [19] and fine-tuning the values manually in a 
narrow range around the given recommendations. 
The model described is adaptable to new data, as the 
training of the model can be continued with each new sample 
available in the database for each level of disassembly 
hierarchy. Furthermore, each part that passes the process will 
deliver new aspects for improved training results even with 
constant architecture and hyper-parameters. In this way, the 
RCP is able to evolve in dynamic and constantly changing 
conditions of a global advanced circular economy. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
Based on the generic battery data from literature [14], 600 
individual generic battery cores with random values in given 
ranges for each of the relevant features according to Table 1 
were generated for training and validation. The supervised 
training on pre-classified data is performed with weighted 
categories according to the amount and deviation of the 
regarded classes in the available samplings. As displayed in 
Fig. 5, the correlation magnitude between the features apart 
from correlation in price related features is relatively low. The 
strongest impact on the pre-classified training set has the 
battery’s state of health (SoH) and the expected component 
resale value. The fact of a widely minor to none correlation in 
a linear model assures the proposal of a non-linearly activated 
multilayer-perceptron for the classification task. However, the 
analysed pre-classified training set only provides the starting 
input for the NN, as the main adaption phase would begin with 
the implementation in real processes. 
The training process itself is performed as a k-fold cross 
validation (k=9) [20] after an initial holdout of 10% of the 
samples for a final double-check. Each training cycle runs 
over 120 epochs with 490 samples for training and 60 samples 
for validation. To prevent bias, the two datasets were 
separated in advance randomly by the time of loading the 
dataframes. The batch size is 8 and the samples are shuffled 
each time in advance. For each of the k-fold iterations, the 
output for training loss and accuracy as well as for validation 
loss and accuracy are documented (Fig. 6). In most cases, the 
validation accuracy reaches its best value after approximately 
60 epochs, albeit in a few runs, the validation accuracy starts 
converging to its maximum value only at the end of the 
training. Furthermore, considering also the loss functions, it is 
shown that a gradual overfitting only intensifies after a high 
number of epochs, especially if the general level of 
convergence was notably higher than in other runs. As a result, 
an accuracy of 77.96% with a standard deviation of 3.91% 
could be achieved for a correct classification in the validation 
data. A prediction for the isolated holdout dataset could 
confirm this result with an accuracy of 76.67%. The baseline 
of the classifier’s accuracy considered is 33.34% (3 options). 
A closer look at the prediction matrices shows that most 
failures in classification occur due to a wrong decision 
between option 0, disassembly for part recovery, and option 
1, disassembly for improved recycling. Considering that, the 
physical output of the disassembly process regarding the level 
Figure 5. Correlation matrix of input features in training data 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

of disassembly determined by the decision processor would 
clearly have a higher success rate, as this physical process only 
has a binary option (whether to disassemble or not). 
In conclusion, the evaluation of the training and validation 
sets shows that the network considered is capable of 
contributing to the determination of the product’s disassembly 
grade with multiple EoL options by its ability to classify. The 
amount of data provided in this work can only be an initial 
input for the advanced disassembly system. In order to 
improve its decision quality in future operation phases, more 
data from real applications is required for the system to adapt 
to the dynamic and highly complex structure of the 
disassembly task. In operation, human decision should always 
be able to override the output of the system. These particular 
corrections are of great importance as they add valuable 
process knowledge to the future abilities of the RCP. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Disassembly is a key element of every complex products’ 
recycling process. However, market principles of the reverse 
supply chain cannot be estimated holistically in advance, 
therefore a high level of adaptability is needed. Digitalization 
tools and advanced robotic systems can augment these 
processes as long as the necessary amount of information is 
provided. The integration of a cloud information system and a 
robot cognition processor enables the herein presented system 
to adaptively react to dynamic changes of the process 
environment by generalizing knowledge, both regarding the 
product as well as the process itself. Furthermore, the system 
actively contributes to the product knowledge by visual 
assessment and rating of individual parts. 
Interoperability is also a key feature in the depicted 
structure, as the exchange of knowledge and information 
demands specific requirements for systems containing 
several, diverse types of agents. The use of an OPC UA 
framework for semantic interoperability also enables the 
transfer of concrete commands and sequence data of the robot 
in a standardized model back to the OPC server, enabling 
different stakeholders to exercise the acquired process 
knowledge on individual hardware. The authors developed an 
agent-based system, which is capable of integrating the 
disassembly operation into a holistic information flow 
management system. The available information can be 
utilized to predict and decide feasible levels of disassembly 
reliably and thereby increase the overall recycling process’s 
efficiency. In-line, feature-based decision making by a 
machine-learning approach facilitates an adaptive EoL 
ecosystem at a critical point of the entire reverse supply chain. 
The actual disassembly sequence is determined by the 
product’s structure in the OPC model as well as the step-wise 
decision process of the RCP. Moreover, the classification of 
an assembly group or component strongly correlates with its 
position within the OPC structure, therefore these relational 
sequences have to be included in future approaches. 
Integrating sequential forecasting for individual features in 
order to predict future values can be considered by using 
recurrent networks, although the general economic system 
dynamics has to be taken into account. However, sequences 
and possible connections can become extraordinarily wide,  
 
Figure 5. a) loss-function b) validation loss-function c) accuracy  
 
d) validation accuracy, all for k=9 on 120 training epochs 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

depending on the level of detail of the product and relevant 
data per component included. The integration and 
communication between the control architecture and the 
perception agent, especially regarding its rating capabilities as 
a system-immanent source of relevant information for the 
classification process as well as an optimization of the feature 
intake based on the experiences in the full-scale reverse supply 
chain model are subject to future research of this project. 
Moreover, the case of false-positive classification would in 
this concept lead to a disassembly at a potential loss for the 
disassembler. To overcome this, an optimization of the 
classification rate is necessary as a future improvement to the 
proposed architecture. 
The benefits of the presented system for disassembly and 
therefore the circular economy process lie in the faster and 
more exact decisions based on predicted features available 
through the marketplace infrastructure. This enables the 
Recycling 4.0 ecosystem to contribute to EoL processing 
feasibility no matter what the final option, as all system 
participants profit from the available information being 
processed into actual knowledge. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper evolved from the research project Recycling 4.0 
(Digitalization as the Key to the advanced circular economy 
using the Example of Innovative Vehicle Systems) which is 
funded by the European Regional Development Fund (EFRE 
| ZW 6- 85017703) and managed by the Project Management 
Agency NBank, Germany. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 
2015: A/RES/70/1, 2015. Accessed: Apr. 15 2019. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.un.org/ga/search/view 
doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E 
[2] G. Seliger, “Assembly and Disassembly,” in Handbook of 
Mechanical Engineering, H. Dubbel, K.-H. Grote, and J. 
Feldhusen, Eds., 23rd ed., Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 97-103, 2011. 
[3] H. Levesque and G. Lakemeyer, “Chapter 23 Cognitive 
Robotics,” in Foundations of Artificial Intelligence, Handbook 
of knowledge representation, F. van Harmelen, V. Lifschitz, 
and B. Porter, Eds., 1st ed., Amsterdam, Boston: Elsevier, pp. 
869–886, 2008. 
[4] C. Knieke, S. Lawrenz, M. Fröhling, D. Goldmann, and A. 
Rausch, 
“Predictive 
and 
Flexible 
Circular 
Economy 
Approaches for Highly Integrated Products and their Materials 
as Given in E-Mobility and ICT,” MSF, vol. 959, pp. 22–31, 
2019, doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/MSF.959.22. 
[5] J. Jungbluth, W. Gerke, and P. Plapper, “An Intelligent Agent-
Controlled and Robot-Based Disassembly Assistant,” IOP 
Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., vol. 235, no. 1, p. 12005, 2017, 
doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/235/1/012005. 
[6] S. Vongbunyong and W. H. Chen, Disassembly Automation. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015. 
[7] H. Poschmann, H. Brüggemann, and D. Goldmann, “Robotized 
Disassembly as an Essential Driver for Digitalization in Future 
Recycling Processes,” in Recycling und Rohstoffe, vol. 13, E. 
Thomé-Kozmiensky, O. Holm, B. Friedrich, and D. Goldmann, 
Eds., Nietwerder: Thomé-Kozmiensky Verlag GmbH, pp. 
570–587, 2020. 
[8] Y. Feng, Y. Gao, G. Tian, Z. Li, H. Hu, H. Zheng, “Flexible 
Process Planning and End-of-Life Decision-Making for 
Product 
Recovery 
Optimization 
Based 
on 
Hybrid 
Disassembly”, IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1, 
pp. 311-326, 2019, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2018.2840348. 
[9] J. Li, M. Barwood, S. Rahimifard, “A multi-criteria assessment 
of robotic disassembly to support recycling and recovery”, 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling (Elsevier), no. 140, pp. 
158-165, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.09.019. 
[10] G. Tian, M. Zhou, P. Li, “Disassembly Sequence Planning 
Considering 
Fuzzy 
Component 
Quality 
and 
Varying 
Operational Cost”, IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. Eng., vol. 15, 
no. 2, pp. 748-760, 2018, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2017.2690802. 
[11] H. Poschmann, H. Brüggemann, and D. Goldmann, 
“Disassembly 4.0: A Review on Using Robotics in 
Disassembly Tasks as a Way of Automation,” Chemie 
Ingenieur 
Technik, 
vol. 
92, 
no. 
4, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1002/cite.201900107. 
[12] OPC Foundation, “OPC Unified Architecture. Part 1 : 
Overview and Concepts: Release 1.04,” Accessed: Feb. 09 
2020. [Online]. Available from: https://opcfoundation.org/ 
developer-tools/specifications-unified-architecture/part-1-
overview-and-concepts/ 
[13] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, “Multilayer 
feedforward networks are universal approximators,” Neural 
Networks, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 359–366, 1989, doi: 10.1016/0893-
6080(89)90020-8. 
[14] J. Diekmann et al., “Ecological Recycling of Lithium-Ion 
Batteries from Electric Vehicles with Focus on Mechanical 
Processes,” J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 164, no. 1, A6184-
A6191, 2017, doi: 10.1149/2.0271701jes. 
[15] Y. Haga, K. Saito, and K. Hatano, “Waste Lithium-Ion Battery 
Recycling in JX Nippon Mining & Metals Corporation,” in The 
Minerals, Metals & Materials Series, Materials Processing 
Fundamentals 2018, G. Lambotte, J. Lee, A. Allanore, and S. 
Wagstaff, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 
143–147, 2018. 
[16] T. Elwert et al., “Current Developments and Challenges in the 
Recycling of Key Components of (Hybrid) Electric Vehicles,” 
Recycling, 
vol. 
1, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
25–60, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.3390/recycling1010025. 
[17] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio, “Deep Sparse Rectifier 
Neural Networks,” Proceedings of the Fourteenth International 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, no. 15, pp. 
315–323, 2011. Accessed: Apr. 2 2020. [Online]. Available 
from:http://proceedings.mlr.press/v15/glorot11a/glorot11a.pdf 
[18] F. Chollet, Deep learning with Python. Shelter Island, NY: 
Manning Publications Co, 2018. 
[19] A. V. Joshi, Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020. 
[20] R. Kohavi, “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for 
accuracy estimation and model selection,” IJCAI'95: 
Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial intelligence, no. 2, pp. 1137–1143, 1995. Accessed: 
Feb. 
3 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1643031.1643047 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

