Mathematical Model for the Optimal Utilization Percentile in M/M/1 Systems:  
A Contribution about Knees in Performance Curves
Francisco A. González-Horta, Rogerio A. 
Enríquez-Caldera, Juan M. Ramírez-Cortés, Jorge 
Martínez-Carballido 
INAOE, Department of Electronics 
Luis Enrique Erro #1, Tonantzintla, 72840, Puebla, 
México. {fglez, rogerio, jmram, jmc}@inaoep.mx 
Eldamira Buenfil-Alpuche 
Master in Computer Science 
Professional Associated to INAOE 
eldamira@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— Performance curves of queuing systems can be 
analyzed by separating them into three regions: the flat region, 
the knee region, and the exponential region. Practical 
considerations, usually locate the knee region between 70-90% 
of the theoretical maximum utilization. However, there is not a 
clear agreement about where the boundaries between regions 
are, and where exactly the utilization knee is located. An open 
debate about knees in performance curves was undertaken at 
least 20 years ago. This historical debate is mainly divided 
between those who claim that a knee in the curve is not a well-
defined term in mathematics, or it is a subjective and not really 
meaningful 
concept, 
and 
those 
who 
define 
knees 
mathematically and consider their relevance and application. 
In this paper, we present a mathematical model and analysis 
for identifying the three mentioned regions on performance 
curves for M/M/1 systems; specifically, we found the knees, or 
optimal utilization percentiles, at the vertices of the hyperbolas 
that relate response time as a function of utilization. Using 
these results, we argue that an adaptive and optimal queuing 
system could be deployed by keeping load and throughput 
within the knee region. 
Keywords- 
adaptive 
queuing 
system; 
performance 
optimization; knees in performance curves; optimal utilization 
region; optimal throughput region 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to Bose [1] and Kleinrock [2], queuing is a 
basic phenomenon that arises whenever a shared resource 
(server) of finite capacity is accessed for service by a large 
number of jobs or customers. Queues or waiting lines are 
frequent in many systems and daily life situations; e.g., 
when you wait for a free ATM to take money out of your 
bank account, or when a computer inputs data packets into 
the network, and after a time delay, they are delivered to the 
destination computer. 
Nobody likes to wait too long for a service on a shared 
resource, thus, one major goal for the performance of a 
queuing system is to reduce, as much as possible, the system 
response time (R) or delay. However, making a very fast 
service may have a very high cost. The response time may 
be reduced if the system capacity is increased, but, if we 
extend the capacity more than necessary, then the costs for 
system maintenance and construction will rise, and surely, 
many resources will be wasted unnecessarily. Therefore, in 
order to reduce those costs, the system should operate with 
the greater load or throughput as possible, i.e., allowing to 
attend as many jobs or customers as possible per unit of 
time. 
One measure of load is utilization (U), which is the 
resource usage divided by resource capacity for a given time 
interval. Thus, increasing the utilization rate of a queuing 
system is another relevant goal for raising its performance. 
However, as utilization for a resource goes up, so does the 
response time, meanwhile in the opposite way, as the 
response time goes down, so does the utilization rate. This 
means that there is a conflict between reducing the response 
time and increasing the system utilization, both goals cannot 
be optimized simultaneously, unless we find a compromised 
or balanced solution. In optimization theory, a Pareto 
improvement [3] can be made by improving one goal as 
long as the change that made that goal better off does not 
make the other goal worse off. When no further Pareto 
improvements can be made, then the solution is called 
Pareto optimal or non-dominated solutions. The utilization 
percentile at which this optimal balance occurs is called the 
knee. This is the point at which load is maximized with 
minimal negative impact to response times. 
A recent article by Cary Millsap [4], about performance 
for computer software, brought back a discussion on an old 
debate that has been rounding out the queuing literature for 
more than 20 years. In 1988, Stephen Samson [5] argued 
that, at least for M/M/1 queuing systems (i.e., single-server 
queues where both inter-arrival times and service times 
follow the exponential distribution), no “knee” appears in 
their performance curves. Moreover, Samson wrote: “In 
most cases there is not a knee, no matter how much we wish 
to find one.” Since that moment, a historical debate was 
initiated between those who support the Samson’s claim 
about knees, e.g., [6][7], and those who argue the existence 
and relevance of the “knee in the curve” [4]. In this paper, 
we provide a mathematical approach based on differential 
calculus to find a “knee” or optimal balance point between 
conflicting goals involving minimizing response times and 
maximizing utilization rates for M/M/1 systems. In 
difference with Millsap [4], who located the knee utilization 
for a single-server system at U = 50% independently of any 
other performance parameter, we claim that the knee 
location is dependent on the average service time for each 
arrival (S). This knee occurs where the hyperbola, relating U 
85
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

and R, makes its sharpest turn, corresponding to its vertex 
located at the point ,   1  √
, √
. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents an 
overview of proposals arguing in favor or against the 
existence and location of knees in performance curves. 
Section III starts by presenting a synopsis of the M/M/1 
queue model and its nomenclature, then, it shows the 
mathematical model and analysis for the optimal utilization 
and the optimal throughput in M/M/1 performance graphs. 
Thereafter, we propose a region of optimality based on the 
hyperbola latus rectum. Section IV discusses the relevance 
of the knee concept and its application to adaptive and 
optimal communication networks. Finally, Section V 
concludes the paper with a summary of contributions and 
future work. 
II. 
OPEN DEBATE ABOUT KNEES 
A. Proposals Against the Existence of Knees 
Neil Gunther in [6] makes a rigorous but unconventional 
study about knees. He, in fact, analyzed several of the 
concepts we use in this paper. For instance, he described the 
hyperbola vertex as an optimum, and he used the endpoints 
of the latus rectum to find alternative optimum points. 
Surprisingly, he arrived to the following conclusion:  there 
is no “knee” on the response time curve, even in the case of 
M/M/1 systems; the same conclusion that Samson arrived in 
1998. 
A detailed analysis of Gunther’s argumentation revealed 
that he arrived to such conclusion because he analyzed only 
a normalized response time function (R/S). The R/S 
function equals to 1/(1−U) which corresponds to the R(U) 
function with S = 1. As we show in this paper, the curve for 
S = 1 is one of the most inefficient performance curves, 
because such curve is for an unconventional large number of 
service times. This is the reason why Gunther, declined his 
interest in considering the vertex of a hyperbola as the knee 
in the curve. 
Ley [7] reviewed ten different definitions about the knee 
concept, but, he concluded that there is no a clear definition 
of what constitutes the knee in the curve, and that all the 
definitions he collected do not agree with the traditional 
70% utilization level. As we prove in this paper, the 
traditional 70-90% for the optimal utilization range is a 
myth, because it depends on the service capacity, which 
makes such a value not a universal constant. 
B. Proposals in Favor of the Existence of Knees 
Millsap [4] argues in favor of the existence of knees in 
performance curves. His paper in fact is quite motivating 
and provides many useful insights into the fundamentals of 
performance and further details about this historic debate. 
He published, in that paper, a table of knee values expressed 
in utilization percentiles for different number of servers in 
M/M/m systems. Particularly, for M/M/1 systems he 
claimed the knee value is 50%. He mentioned that the knee 
values for an arbitrary number of servers are difficult to 
calculate, but he also said that the only parameter required 
to compute them was the number of service channels or 
servers. However, we disagree on that issue because as we 
show in this paper, the sharpest point in the curve is 
dependent on the capacity of the system. We deduced that 
he obtained such knee values by minimizing the function 
R/U defined for a specific number of servers. Obtaining the 
turning points for such function, i.e., making d(R/U)/dU = 0, 
he calculated the U value of 50% independent of S. The 
problem with dividing the R function by U is that the R/U 
function is undefined at U = 0, which is inconsistent with 
the valid value of R at no load. 
III. 
MATHEMATICAL MODEL AND ANALYSIS 
A. The M/M/1 Queue Model and Parameters 
The simplest queuing system is represented by the 
Kendall notation as M / M / 1 / ∞ / FCFS. This means that 
customers arrive according to a Poisson process (first M), 
they request exponentially distributed service times from the 
server (second M), the system has only one server, an 
infinite waiting queue, and customers are served on a First 
Come First Served (FCFS) basis. For simplicity, this 
queuing system is sometimes named an M/M/1 system. 
As it was neatly described by Chee-Hock in [8], the 
single-server queue is a place where customers arrive 
individually to obtain service from a service facility. The 
service facility contains one server that can serve one 
customer at a time. If the server is idle, the customer is 
served immediately. Otherwise, the arriving customer joins 
a waiting queue. This customer will receive his service later, 
either when he reaches the head of the waiting queue or 
according to some service discipline. When the server has 
completed serving a customer, the customer departs. Along 
this paper, the generic terms ‘customers’ and ‘servers’ are in 
line with queuing literature, but they take various forms in 
different application domains; e.g., in the case of a data 
switching network, ‘customers’ are data packets and 
‘servers’ are the transmission channels. 
The M/M/1 system is depicted in Fig. 1. This figure also 
illustrates some important parameters associated with the 
queuing model. We describe them briefly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The M/M/1 queue model and parameters at steady state. 
• 
λ, is the average arrival rate or the mean number of 
customers arriving at the system per unit of time. In 
 
86
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

steady state, the rate for arrivals and departures is the 
same. Moreover, if the waiting line buffer is infinite, 
then λ also represents the throughput of the system, i.e., 
the mean number of customers that are served in a 
single unit of time. The domain of this variable is λ ≥ 0. 
• 
µ, is the average service rate or the mean number of 
customers that are served by the service facility per unit 
of time. The operating condition λ < µ states the 
theoretical maximum input rate for the queuing system 
at λmax = µ. If this condition is not achieved (i.e., if λ > 
µ), the number of customers in the waiting line will 
grow without limit collapsing the system. 
• 
S, is the average service time per customer, it is defined 
as the reciprocal of µ; i.e., the time interval between the 
dispatching of a customer to the server and the 
departure of that customer from the server. The service 
time cannot be avoided in real scenarios, thus, S > 0. 
• 
U is the utilization rate or the fraction of time in which 
the server is busy. It is obtained as the arrival rate 
divided by the service rate and it can be expressed as U 
= λS. For 0 ≤ λ < µ, the domain for U is 0 ≤ U < 1. 
• 
R is the average time that a customer spends in the 
whole system, waiting and being served; aka, the mean 
residence time, response time, or delay. R = 1/ (µ−λ) or 
R = S/ (1−U), and the domain for R is S ≤ R < ∞. 
• 
r is the expected number of customers resident in the 
whole system, including the customers being served (if 
any) and the customers waiting (if any). This parameter 
is defined by r = λ/ (µ−λ) or r = U/ (1−U) or r = Rλ. 
The domain for r is 0 ≤ r < ∞. 
• 
Q is the queuing delay or the mean time that a customer 
spends in a queue waiting to be serviced. Q = λ/ 
(µ(µ−λ)), Q = R−S, and the range for Q is 0 ≤ Q < ∞. 
• 
q is the average number of customers waiting in the 
queue. q = λQ, q = λ2/ [µ(µ−λ)], q = r−U, with 0 ≤ q < 
∞. 
 
 
In M/M/1 queuing systems, the inter-arrival times and 
the service times follow the exponential distribution, this 
means that the arrival and service processes are Poisson (or 
random). The exponential distribution is the only continuous 
function that has the memoryless (M) property, and thus, it 
is commonly used to model stochastic processes [11]. 
Examples of random variables that are well-modeled by the 
Poisson process are: the number of goals in a soccer match, 
the number of raindrops falling over an area, the time it 
takes before your next telephone call, the arrival of 
customers in a queue, etc. 
B. The Optimal Utilization Percentile (The Knee) 
The performance curves of a queuing system can be 
obtained by plotting different performance parameters; in 
particular, we concentrate on relations between R, U, λ, and 
S or µ. We consider the following relations: 
 
;  
  
 1  
⁄
,  
  0  0    1.         (1) 
λ;    1    λ,
⁄
   0  0  λ  .          (2) 
 
We use (1) for analyzing the relation between response 
time R and utilization or traffic intensity U, and (2) for 
studying the relation between delay R and throughput λ. 
Equations (1) and (2) also show how the response time is a 
function of service capacity, described by the service time S 
in (1) and the service rate µ in (2). We will sketch the 
graphs of these equations for different capacity parameters. 
Fig. 2 shows a plot for R(U; S) illustrating the behavior 
of response time as a function of utilization. Here, each 
curve is plotted for different values of S, S = 2 (black), 1, 
1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16 (blue). Notice the aspect ratio in the plot 
is 1-to-1, to avoid what Gunther [9] calls an “optical 
illusion” produced by using different aspect ratios in the 
utilization and response time axes, which might result in a 
misconception about the utilization knees. Notice also that, 
as Gunther showed in [6], the graph for the response time 
function can be depicted for an extended range of utilization 
values −∞ < U < ∞, even if it does not make physical sense; 
therefore, we demarcate at Fig. 2 the actual service 
utilization range 0 ≤ U < 1 as the region of meaningful 
performance metrics in between bold blue lines. 
Fig. 2 stresses the hyperbolic characteristic of the 
response time function by extending the utilization range. 
The gray dotted line highlights the transversal axis of the 
hyperbolae and pinpoints its sharpest turns or vertices. 
Notice how each curve becomes sharper as S disminishes or 
the system capacity increases; however, when S > 1, the 
vertices jump to the negative utilization region and response 
times within the performance region of interest (blue lines) 
fluctuate rapidly with small changes of load. It is important 
to design queuing systems operating with S values lower 
than 1, whatever the time unit is chosen, e.g., seconds, 
minutes, hours, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Plot of response time vs utilization for distinct service times. 
1) Hyperbola Vertex as an Optimum. Considering the 
optimality condition that indicates a balance between 
changes in U and changes in R, the point where a 
differential increment of U yields the same increment of R, 
or dR = dU, is the point where the rate of change of R with 
respect to U (dR/dU) is equal to 1. This condition is reached 
 
87
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

exactly at the vertex of a hyperbola. In fact, that is the point 
that we use to divide the R(U) function initially in three 
sections: a) the flat section, where the gradient of the curve 
is dR/dU < 1, indicating a small but constant increment in 
response time at low load; b) the knee or optimal utilization 
point, located at the hyperbola vertex, where dR/dU = 1; and 
c) the exponential section, where dR/dU > 1, indicating that 
response time rises exponentially at high load. 
Our performance goals are maximizing load and 
minimizing response time. According to Pareto optimality, 
starting at no load (U = 0), we make improvements or 
increments in load as long as the resulting increments in 
response times do not exceed the increments in load (i.e., dR 
< dU). Thus, the point where optimal balance occurs is the 
vertex of the hyperbola. Differentiating equation (1) and 
making R’(U) = 1, we obtain the coordinates for the vertices 
at ,   1  √
, √
. Notice that the optimal utilization 
percentile is a function of S, and depending on the service 
capacity, this optimum occur at U = 0.5, only if S = 1/4; at 
U > 0.5 (the high-load zone), if S < 1/4; at U < 0.5 (the low-
load zone), if S > 1/4; or even at U = 0 if S = 1. 
2) Latus Rectum as an Optimal Region. Practical 
considerations such as response time requirements or buffer 
sizes, are usually interested in a region of optimal utilization 
rather than a single optimal point (knee) in the curve. This 
optimal region is usually located between 70-90% of the 
theoretical maximum utilization. However, there is no 
agreement on defining this knee region. We argue that the 
latus rectum of the hyperbola can be used to establish this 
region of optimality. 
Consider Fig. 3. The Latus Rectum [10] is the line 
segment passing through a focus of a hyperbola, which is 
perpendicular to the transversal axis and has both endpoints 
(P, Q) on the intersection with the curve (P, Q are indicated 
just for the curve S = 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Plot of R(U) for distinct service times (S) with Latus Rectum. 
The dashed lines with slope 1 in Fig. 3, represent the 
graphs of the latus rectum for each sketched hyperbola with 
S ≤ 1. It can be observed that different scenarios may occur 
in relation to where the endpoints of the latus rectum are 
with respect to the region of interest: a) both endpoints are 
within the bold blue lines, b) one endpoint is in and the 
other is out, and c) both endpoints are out of the blue lines. 
The selection of one of these scenarios is, again, dependent 
on the value of S. 
3) Boundaries of the Knee Region 
The following analysis is intended to obtain the 
coordinates for both endpoints of the latus rectum and its 
length in a general way, such that, it can be obtained for any 
valid value of S. 
We already obtained the coordinates for the vertices, 
now we obtain the coordinates for the foci intersecting the 
latus rectum of each hyperbola. The distance from the center 
O (1,0) to the vertex V 1  √
, √
 of the hyperbola is 
  √2
. Using this value, we calculate the distance from 
center to focus as   2√
. Thus, the coordinates for the 
foci are 1  √2
, √2
. The equation of the straight line 
representing the latus rectum is:     1  2√2
. Now, 
intersecting the latus rectum equation with the response time 
function, we obtain the coordinates for the latus rectum 
endpoints: 1  √2
  √
, √2
  √
 and  1  √2
 
√
, √2
  √
. Thus, the boundaries for the three regions 
that can be used to study the response time versus utilization 
performance curves can be stated as: a) flat region, the locus 
of points before P, b) knee region, the locus of points 
between P and Q, and c) exponential region, the locus of 
points after Q. Using the distance between two points we 
obtain the length of latus rectum as: 2√2
. 
Considering that the region of interest for R(U) is 0 ≤ U 
< 1 and its knee region is !1  √2
  √
"    1 
√2
  √
, we calculate the service capacity condition that 
makes both endpoints of the knee region reside in the 
interest region; this condition is 0  
  3  2√2. 
4) Knees in Delay-Throughput Curves 
Considering (2), we analyze how the response time R 
(delay), arrival rate λ (throughput), service capacity µ 
(bandwidth), and delay knees (hyperbola vertices), are all 
related to system performance. Fig. 4 shows a plot which we 
use to illustrate and explain such relation. Here, each 
hyperbola is plotted for different values of µ, µ = 1 (brown), 
2, 4, 8, 16 (blue). Notice again, how the vertices V of the 
hyperbolas occur precisely when  λ
⁄
 1  and they 
represent the sharpest points in the curve. Using this 
condition we locate the vertices of the upper-half 
hyperbolae at   1,1. The coordinates for the centers 
are , 0. With the coordinates for O and V, obtain the 
distance to the vertices as   √2. Using the distance to 
the vertex and the definition of hyperbola, we obtain the 
distance to the focus as   2. Knowing the distance to 
the focus, we obtain the coordinates of the focus at  
√2, √2. Using the coordinates for F and definition of latus 
rectum, we obtain the equation for latus rectum as:   λ 
  √8 . Intersecting the latus rectum equation with the 
hyperbola, we obtain the coordinates for the endpoints of 
the latus rectum at :   √2  1, √2  1  and  : ! 
√2  1, √2  1". Thus, the length of latus rectum is √8. 
 
 
88
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Plot of R(λ) for distinct service rates (µ) with Latus Rectum. 
The region of interest is 0 ≤ λ < µ. Notice that for low 
capacity systems, the knee region: !  √2  1"  λ 
  √2  1  may have its lower endpoint outside the 
region of interest. In order to have both endpoints of the 
latus rectum within the region of interest, the following 
condition must be satisfied:  & √2  1. 
System performance is measured by delay R (i.e., the 
time a customer stays within the system), and by throughput 
λ (i.e., the number of customers per unit of time that can 
pass through the system). Throughput is a measure of the 
system capacity. Delay and throughput are closely related 
by (2), as throughput approaches 100% of service capacity 
or bandwidth (µ), delay increases rapidly. 
5) Summary of Results 
Table I shows a summary of major results obtained from 
the analysis presented in this paper. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF MAJOR RESULTS 
Useful 
Results 
Response Times for Load and Throughput 
R(U) = S/ (1 −−−− U) 
R(λλλλ) = 1/ (µµµµ −−−− λλλλ) 
Region of 
interest 

  0, 0    1 
  0, 0  λ   
Knee 
values 
  1  √
 
λ    1 
Knee 
coordinates 
!, ": 1  √
, √
 
!λ, λ":  1, 1 
Knee 
regions 
 & 1  √2
  √
  
  1  √2
  √
 
λ &   √2  1 
λ    √2  1 
Latus 
rectum 
endpoints 
: 1  √2
  √
, √2
  √
 
 : 1  √2
  √
, √2
  √
 
:   √2  1, √2  1 
 :   √2  1, √2  1 
Length of 
latus 
rectum 
2√2
 
2√2 
Required 
service 
capacity 
0  
  3  2√2 
 & √2  1 
 
These closed-form results show that there is a knee or 
optimal value for load and throughput in simple M/M/1 
queuing systems. Moreover, based on the latus rectum 
endpoints it is possible to define optimality regions for load 
and throughput. It can also be observed that both, the knee 
values and knee regions are dependent on the service 
capacity of the queuing system. Therefore, it was important 
for us to determine what would be the required service 
capacity that will make the knee regions to operate within 
the regions of interest. The service capacity can be increased 
by reducing the service time S or by increasing the number 
of servers. Although we only analyzed the case of 
increasing the service capacity by reducing S, similar results 
can be obtained if the case of increasing the number of 
servers is considered. 
IV. 
RELEVANCE AND APPLICATION OF THE KNEE 
A. The Relevance of the Knee Region 
Why is the knee value so important? The answer to this 
question is related to the consequences of having a system 
operating outside its optimal region. On one hand, if the 
system operates at the flat region, it is likely that the system 
capacity is oversized, and therefore, many valuable resources 
may be wasted. On the other hand, if the system operates at 
the exponential region, it is likely that the system capacity is 
undersized, and hence, response times will fluctuate severely 
even with microscopic changes in load or throughput. The 
system operation in the exponential region may take the 
system to instability, oscillating congestion, severe delays, or 
the worst scenario, to a collapse. Hence, overall on systems 
with random arrivals, it is vital to manage load and 
throughput so that they do not operate outside the knee 
region. 
At M/M/1 system queues, we do not know exactly when 
the next arrival request or service request is coming; 
therefore, arrivals have a non-deterministic or random 
behavior. The M/M/1 model considers an exponential 
probability distribution for arrivals and service requests. The 
exponential distribution assumes a higher probability for 
small inter arrival times. This implies that arrivals will tend 
to cluster and cause temporary spikes in utilization, as it was 
mentioned by Millsap [4]. Temporary spikes in utilization 
beyond the knee region may cause serious performance 
problems or quality of service (QoS) degradation if they 
exceed a few seconds in duration. This is the reason the knee 
region is so important on a system with random arrivals. 
Once we mentioned the consequences of a system with 
oversized or undersized capacity, the question is how to 
determine the adequate capacity that makes a system to 
operate within its optimal region? Capacity management or 
capacity planning is a task intended to answer that question. 
A first consideration about the service capacity of a queuing 
system is that it should be calculated so that the optimal 
region lay down within the region of interest. The last row in 
Table I shows the conditions for S and µ that make the knee 
regions for R(U) and R(λ) to be within the region of interest. 
A second consideration is to estimate the service capacity 
according to specific service quality requirements; i.e., the 
expected amount of traffic intensity, throughput, and 
response times, particularly at peak times. The knee regions 
 
89
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

can be computed to meet these QoS requirements. If service 
capacity cannot be changed dynamically, then the system 
would operate within its optimal region at peak times, but it 
would operate outside its optimal region at different load 
conditions than the peak times. On the contrary, if capacity 
could be changed dynamically, then the knee regions could 
change accordingly so that the system operates always 
within its optimal region. This implies to change adaptively 
the knee regions according to different load conditions (at 
low load, at peak times, or at excessive high loads). In this 
way, we believe that and adaptive and optimal queuing 
system could be deployed by dynamically managing the 
service capacity in order to keep load and throughput within 
their knee regions. Therefore, the knowledge about knees is 
fundamental for capacity management. 
B. The Knee Concept Applied to Communication Networks 
The M/M/1/∞/FCFS model discussed earlier is simple 
and useful if we just want to have a first estimation of a 
system’s performance. However, as Chee-Hoc indicates in 
[8], it becomes a bit unrealistic when it is applied to real-life 
problems, where they often have a finite waiting queue 
instead of one that can accommodate an infinite number of 
customers. A single isolated M/M/1 model may have certain 
limitations to represent real-life complex queuing systems; 
however, the networks of queues, whereby the departures of 
some queues feed into other queues, are a more realistic 
model for a system with many shared resources interacting 
with each other. In this way, a model for a virtual circuit in 
packet switching networks can be designed in terms of a 
network of tandem M/M/1 queues. Therefore, we can say 
that M/M/1 queues are the building blocks for all the 
queuing theory, as we will show in the next discussion. 
1) Using the M/M/1 model: 
In order to apply the knee concept to a real-life queuing 
system, we now immerse a bit into the field of 
communication networks. Two fundamental performance 
measures of a network are: delay (D) and throughput (T). 
First notice that we changed the symbols for the equivalent 
terms we used before as R for delay and λ for throughput in 
the M/M/1 model. The term delay (or end-to-end delay) 
specifies how long it takes for a single bit of data to travel 
across the network cloud from source to destination, as Fig. 5 
illustrates. Comer in [12] cleverly describes four types of 
delays that may occur within the network: propagation 
delays, switching delays, access delays and queuing delays. 
All these types of delays contribute to the total delay, which 
is measured in seconds or fractions of seconds. The other 
fundamental performance parameter of a network is 
throughput. Throughput is the rate at which bits of data can 
pass through the network, and is usually specified in bits per 
second. The rate at which the hardware can transfer bits is 
called bandwidth (B). It is impossible for a user to send data 
faster than the bandwidth; therefore, bandwidth gives an 
upper bound on throughput or 0 ≤ T < B. Notice that B is 
equivalent to the µ parameter defined earlier. 
In Fig. 5, we also made a distinction between the rate of 
bits entering the network from source (γ) and the rate of bits 
leaving the network at destination (T). Notice that for a 
stable and lossless network, T = γ; however, if T < γ then 
there will be a steady build-up of bits within the network and 
it will eventually become unstable. In case of T > γ, new bits 
might be being created within the network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Store and forward data network. Packets traverse from source to 
destination. Circles are packet switches and red lines are links. 
The capacity of a network refers to the maximum number 
of bits that can simultaneously reside within the network, 
inclusive of those bits waiting for a shared resource and 
those that are actually traversing across a link. If D0 denotes 
the average delay when the network is idle or when the 
current utilization (U) is 0, then the network capacity is 
defined by the Little’s Law as D × T (delay-throughput 
product). According to [8], Little’s Law can be applied to all 
types of queuing systems, including priority queuing and 
multi-server systems, which is the case for packet-switching 
networks. Notice that D0 corresponds to S, U = T/B 
corresponds to U = λ/µ, and D × T corresponds to r = Rλ in 
the M/M/1 model. When it is desired to measure the capacity 
of the underlying hardware, the delay-throughput product 
becomes the delay-bandwidth product. 
Congestion in the network occurs when the offered 
traffic load from the user to the network produces an excess 
of bits residing within the network, which exceed the design 
limit. Data entering a congested network will experience 
longer delays than data entering an idle network. The 
relationship between delay and congestion is estimated from 
the current percentage of the network capacity being used, 
according to the following expression: 
 
'  
'(
1 –  ,  '(  0  0    1.        3 
 
As traffic approaches the network capacity (i.e., as U 
becomes close to 1), the delay approaches infinity. We 
already plotted this expression in Figure 2 and Figure 3 and 
obtained some significant insights summarized in Table I. 
2) Towards an Adaptive-Optimal Congestion Control: 
A simple mechanism for preventing congestion is flow 
control, which involves regulating the input rate of traffic 
into the network so that the receiver controls the rate at 
which it receives data. The main goal of a flow control 
mechanism is to preserve the levels of throughput and delay 
within a range of acceptable values. There are basically two 
types of flow control mechanisms, open-loop and closed-
loop. The open-loop flow control is characterized by having 
 
90
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

no feedback between the source and destination. This 
mechanism allocates networks resources for a specific traffic 
flow with necessary previous reservation. Often this type of 
mechanism is inefficient and results in over-allocation of 
resources, it also lacks of any adaptability. On the contrary, 
the closed-loop flow control is characterized by the ability of 
the network to report pending network congestion back to 
the source node. By using this feedback, the source can adapt 
its transmission rate to a lower rate or a higher rate 
depending on the network conditions. Real protocols that 
implement different mechanisms of closed-loop flow control 
are TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) and ABR 
(Available Bit Rate). On one hand, TCP adaptively 
increments or decrements the size of a window in order to 
speed-up or slow-down the transmission rate. On the other 
hand, ABR uses congestion information generated in the 
destination and updated at each packet switch on the path to 
the source, to reduce or increment the transmission rate 
accordingly. 
Congestion is usually caused by unpredictable events. 
Although the daily peak hour is semi-predictable, congestion 
can also be random due to breakdowns, insertions, or 
changes in the network topology. Therefore, an adaptive 
mechanism to control the traffic flow is imperative to 
alleviate congestion problems and preserve the stability of 
the network. 
To know where exactly the borders of the optimal 
load/throughput region are, as identified in this paper, could 
be used by the end nodes to regulate and control the stability 
of the network. If the network capacity could be dynamically 
managed by the source and destination nodes, then new 
optimal knee regions would be created, giving the possibility 
that end stations transmit data flows optimally, i.e. 
minimizing delays and maximizing throughput [11].  
The relevance of the results obtained in this paper is that 
they can be applied to both, the simplest queuing systems 
(M/M/1) and the most complex communication network. 
This is because the M/M/1 model is the building block of 
any complex queuing system and because Little’s Law can 
be applied neatly to all types of queuing systems. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a mathematical approach to 
determine the optimal utilization region and the optimal 
throughput region for M/M/1 queuing systems. It showed 
that performance curves for such systems can be analyzed 
by separating them into three regions: the flat region, the 
knee region, and the exponential region. The mathematical 
definition of boundaries between these regions is a problem 
that has not been properly addressed in the literature. The 
paper showed that this problem has historical roots and it is 
still an open debate. The major contribution of this paper is 
the calculation of knees values and knees regions in 
performance curves for load R(U) and throughput R(λ). The 
relevance of knees and their applications was discussed 
showing the consequences of operating a system outside of 
its optimality region. 
Although the knee model proposed in this paper seems 
to be mathematically consistent, it is still necessary to create 
tests, in real applications or simulations, which can help us 
to validate or invalidate this model. Therefore, our future 
work will be focused on this task. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
F.A. González-Horta is a Ph.D. candidate at INAOE. He 
thanks the financial support received from the National 
Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT) Mexico, 
through the doctoral scholarship 58024. 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] S. K. Bose, An Introduction to Queueing Systems, Springer, 
ISBN: 0306467348, 2002. 
 
[2] L. Kleinrock, Computer Science Department, UCLA, Home 
Page: http://www.lk.cs.ucla.edu/index.html, Retrieved on May 
14, 2011. 
 
[3] J. Branke, et al. (Eds.), Multi-objective Optimization: Interactive 
and Evolutionary Approaches, Springer, Germany, 2008. 
 
[4] C. Millsap, “Thinking Clearly About Performance, Part 2,” 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 53, No. 10, pp. 39-45, 
October 2010. 
 
[5] S. Samson, “MVS Performance Legends,” Proceedings of 
Computer Measurement Group Conference, pp. 148-159, 1988. 
 
[6] N. J. Gunther, “Mind Your Knees and Queues, Responding to 
Hyperbole with Hyperbolæ,” Computer Measurement Group, 
MeasureIT, 
published 
on 
August 
2009. 
URL: 
http://www.cmg.org/measureit/issues/mit62/m_62_15.html, 
retrieved on May 14, 2011. 
 
[7] M. Ley, “Does the Knee in a Queuing Curve Exist or is it just a 
Myth?” Computer Measurement Group, MeasureIT, published 
on July 2009. URL: 
 
 
http://www.cmg.org/measureit/issues/mit61/m_61_16.html, 
retrieved on May 14, 2011. 
 
[8] N. Chee-Hock, and S. Boon-Hee, Queueing Modelling 
Fundamentals with Applications in Communication Networks, 
2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, England, 2008. 
 
[9] N. J. Gunther, “Taking the Pith Out of Performance: Watch 
Your Knees and Queues, Beware of Optical Illusions.” 
Performance Dynamics Company, Blogspot, Published in March 
8, 2008. URL: 
 
 
http://perfdynamics.blogspot.com/2008/03/watching-your-knees-
and-queues.html , retrieved on May 14, 2011. 
 
[10] Mathwords – Latus Rectum, webmastered by Bruce Simmons; 
http://www.mathwords.com/l/latus_rectum.htm, 
retrieved 
on 
May 14, 2011. 
 
[11] G. Bolch, S. Greiner, H. de Meer, and K. S. Trivedi, Queueing 
Networks and Markov Chains – Modeling and Performance 
Evaluation with Computer Science Applications, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., ISBN: 0-471-20058-1, USA, 1998. 
 
[12] D. E. Comer, Computer Networks and Internets, 1st. Edition, 
Prentice Hall, ISBN: 0-13-239070-1, USA, 1997. 
91
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

