Development of a Digital Ecosystem Using the Example of Amazon  
 
Marit Mathiszig 
Institute for Software and Systems Engineering,  
Clausthal University of Technology  
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
email: marit.elke.anke.mathiszig@tu-clausthal.de 
Anna Unterluggauer 
Institute of Management and Economics 
 Clausthal University of Technology 
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
email: anna.unterluggauer@tu-clausthal.de
 
 
Abstract— Economic changes have been driven in recent years 
due to the digital transformation. Companies like Amazon are 
adapting to this development by using digital ecosystems. It is 
assumed by the authors that changing customer needs lead to 
an adaption at the ecosystem level. Amazon’s digital ecosystem 
expands with the integration of new technologies. These 
technologies are acquired through company acquisitions. This 
paper deals with the questions of how the future development 
of Amazon’s digital ecosystem can be predicted and which 
method could be used to analyse the development of Amazon’s 
digital ecosystem. To answer these questions, the technology-
portfolio of Pfeiffer et al. combined with other criteria and 
modified was applied to the previous and the future 
development of Amazon. A possible future alternative of 
Amazon’s digital ecosystem was developed.  
Keywords: Amazon; expansion strategies; digital ecosystem; 
innovationsmanagement; technology-portfolio. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, society and especially the economy have 
changed dramatically due to digital technologies. This 
process of change, often described in the literature as digital 
transformation, will progress even more rapidly in the 
coming years. Intelligent systems and ever more extensive 
networks will trigger a process that can help those companies 
that react flexibly and do not ignore this development to 
achieve a huge growth [1]. Therefore, digital business 
models, especially digital ecosystems, are becoming more 
important in research and practice. Digital ecosystems are 
changing and developing continuously, forcing companies to 
analyse their digital ecosystem in order to identify 
(environmental) changes early and to be able to act and react 
[1]. There are a large number of studies that discuss (digital) 
ecosystems. The term business ecosystem was first used by 
Moore in 1993. Just like a natural ecosystem, a business 
ecosystem moves progressively from a collection of products 
and services to a more structured community [2]. 
As an extension of business ecosystems, digital 
ecosystems focus on the central importance of the digital 
technologies that make up the ecosystem [3]. There are some 
studies that focus on the development of digital ecosystems 
in general from an economic perspective, e.g., network 
analysis, the formation of digital ecosystems, and co-
evolution, a large part of the studies, however, focuses a 
technical view of digital ecosystems [3].  
Companies like Amazon often acquire new technologies 
and integrate them into their structures and products. The 
integration 
avoids 
competition 
between 
new 
and 
conventional products [4]. Amazon’s business model 
consists of a digital ecosystem that includes the entire value 
chain [5]. In the last few years, there have been some studies 
that have focused on the development of Amazon towards a 
digital ecosystem [6]. So far, there are no scientific studies 
that focus on the future expansion of Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem. For this reason, this paper deals in particular with 
the following question:  
How can the future development of Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem be predicted?  
This also leads to the question: Which method could be 
used to analyse the development of Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem? To answer the research question of how the 
development of Amazon’s digital ecosystem can be 
predicted, the technology-portfolio of Pfeiffer et al. [7] was 
used in a modified form as an analytical method. It is 
assumed by the authors that feedback of the customers and 
changes in customer needs lead to an adaption of Amazon’s 
service system. These changes might also support an 
adaption at the eco-system level. The adjustment rules in this 
context are based on human decisions. 
Section 2 of this paper includes the description of 
Amazon’s digital ecosystem and a specific method, the 
technology-portfolio according to Pfeiffer et al. [7]. Section 
3 is about the previous development of Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem. The results are used to forecast the development 
in the future. Section 4 includes the future development of 
Amazon and Section 5 deals with the influence on Amazon’s 
digital ecosystem. This paper ends with the limitations of the 
analysis and a conclusion. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The following section presents the background of the 
analysis, including a description of Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem and the explanation of the technology-portfolio 
according to Pfeiffer et al. [7]. The technology-portfolio 
analysis is typically used to value new technologies in order 
to identify the most relevant strategic technology areas and 
to make an investment decision based on the results [8]. 
Further criteria used in this analysis, e.g. to determine 
resource strength and technological attractiveness, are 
explained in more detail in this section [14]. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

A. The digital ecosystem of Amazon 
To analyse the development of Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem, Amazon’s digital ecosystem should be described 
previously. There are many definitions of digital ecosystems 
in the literature.  
In general, a digital ecosystem is defined as a network of 
businesses, 
individual 
stakeholders, 
institutions, 
and 
consumers interacting both physically and electronically to 
provide combined services and value to each other [9]. 
From an economic point of view, an ecosystem can be 
perceived as an association of market participants that are in 
a certain relationship. The relationship between the 
participants is basically one of partnership, but competitive 
situations can also exist [10].  
In contrast, digital ecosystems can form limited systems 
in the technical field, combining hardware, software, content, 
and services [11]. In the following sections, the term digital 
ecosystem is based on this description. 
Amazon’s service offer, which includes products and 
services in Amazon’s core business as well as in its 
subsidiaries, has been visualized based on the understanding 
of a digital ecosystem by T. Ammon and A. Brem [11] 
(Figure 1).  
The allocation was made according to the assessment of 
the authors. Amazon’s digital ecosystem consists of 
hardware like the Kindle eReader, software for example 
Kindle Apps, content including eBooks and services [11]. 
The majority of Amazon’s value proposition is bundled on 
the Amazon platform [12]. In addition, there are other, cross-
functional platforms for which it is not obvious at first sight 
that they belong to Amazon. These are mainly platforms, like 
Zappos, or Twitch that have been acquired by Amazon. 
B. Technology-portfolio according to Pfeiffer et al. and 
further criteria 
The focus of this analysis should be based on 
technologies because the related software, hardware, content, 
and services build the digital ecosystem. For this reason, a 
technology-portfolio is used in this paper. In the course of 
the paper, the technology-portfolio according to Pfeiffer et 
al. [7] is discussed further because it is in contrast with 
different technology-portfolio approaches empirically proved 
[13].  
In advance, the technology-portfolio according to Pfeiffer 
et al. [7] is used in a modified state and in combination with 
other criteria as an analytical method regarding the Amazon 
case. The technology portfolio according to Pfeiffer et al. 
originally 
provides 
recommendations 
for 
investment, 
selection, and disinvestment [7]. Modified in this context 
means that the technology portfolio analysis is applied to 
acquisition 
decisions. 
Technology 
attractiveness 
and 
resource strength are determined according to criteria that 
will be explained in detail in the course of this paper [14]. 
This paper covers Amazon’s acquisitions according to the 
corresponding technologies. To analyse the technologies, it 
is important to explain the chosen technology-portfolio [7]. 
The objective of a technology-portfolio-analysis is to 
gain a recommended action based on the position of a 
specific technology [7]. 
During this portfolio-analysis, there is a difference 
between the two dimensions. The first dimension is the 
attractiveness of technology, whereas the second dimension 
is the strength of resources. Depending on the position, the 
technology is located at the investment, the selection, or the 
disinvestment area of the matrix [7].  
 
 
 
Figure 1. The digital ecosystem of Amazon (adapted from [11]) 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

A diagonal between the upper left corner and the lower 
right corner of the matrix symbolizes the selection area. The 
upper right corner is the investment area and the lower-left 
corner is called the disinvestment area [7]. 
In a work of Perspectives4You, criteria were used to 
determine the attractiveness of the technology and the 
strength of resources [14]. To determine the attractiveness of 
the technology and the strength of resources three questions 
are respectively answered. The answers are consisting of 
values between zero to four. The answers are weighted with 
the given percentages [14]. This is the basis to evaluate the 
general values of the attractiveness of the technology and the 
strength of resources. During the evaluation of the 
technology attractiveness, it is determined for example which 
potential the used technology has regarding the performance 
enhancement and/or the minimization of the overall cost. 
The question of how the technology is mastered flows for 
example into the determination of the resource strength [14]. 
The following sections combine the technology-portfolio 
according to Pfeiffer et al. and the specific criteria [7][14]. 
The questions will be answered based on data from the 
literature. It is important to examine if this combination leads 
to useful results in the case of Amazon. 
III. 
METHOD APPLIED TO THE PREVIOUS DEVELOPMENT 
The method applied to the previous development of 
Amazon is used to identify which companies and 
corresponding technologies Amazon could acquire. Because 
of that, the corresponding technologies of Amazon’s 
acquisitions and their competitors are positioned in the 
matrix of the technology-portfolio. The selection of the 
technologies includes successful, unsuccessful technology 
and technologies of companies with different acquisition 
prices, in order to select a meaningful cross-section.  
The input of the analysis is data, which was generated 
during the time of the acquisition. If there is no data about 
this time in the literature, the data of the next possible point 
in time is chosen as input. The positioning regarding the 
technology-portfolio depends on the criteria of technology 
attractiveness and strength of resources. If there is no data 
about the criteria in the literature, data of similar criteria are 
the basis of the analysis.  
The technology of the company Kiva Systems was 
positioned in the matrix. The company has made a major 
contribution to improving the goods-to-person concept in the 
field of warehouse logistics. Robots transport shelves to 
specific stations [15]. Mick Mountz founded the company in 
2003 and Kiva Systems was acquired by Amazon in 2012 
[16]. After the acquisition, the company name was changed 
to Amazon Robotics [17]. 
Kiva Systems technology in this paper is understood to 
be any technology used to create, implement, and develop 
the so-called Kiva Schema. In order to determine the 
positioning, it should be explained what potential the Kiva 
technology has. The more efficient design of the process, the 
use of an improved indoor GPS system, and the use of 
certain 3D sensors could be further developed in the future 
[15]. On the basis of the potentials mentioned, the authors 
assume that the Kiva technology has a very high innovation 
potential. 
In this context, the question of the extent to which Kiva 
technology can open up further areas of application is also 
interesting [14]. Kiva’s customers have similar demands in 
the field of logistics. The company’s customers are for 
example part of the shopping industry or pharmaceutical 
industry [18]. Because companies from different industries 
are potential customers, a wide range of applications is 
assumed by the authors [14]. 
Major customers, such as retailers Toys "R "Us, GAP, 
and Staples use the Kiva technology [19]. For this reason, it 
is assumed that Kiva technology was urgently anticipated as 
a further step towards fully automated warehouses. 
The Kiva concept has been imitated by several 
companies, such as GreyOrange [15]. GreyOrange was 
founded in 2011 [20]. Since Kiva Systems was already 
established in 2003, the company can benefit from a lead in 
the release of the technology of over two years compared to 
the competitor [14]. 
Considering the general potential of the Kiva Systems 
technology it is important to notice the good legal conditions. 
The company has filed more than 20 patents in the USA and 
many have been approved [15]. Despite the success of the 
GreyOrange technology, it is an imitation. For this reason, it 
is assumed by the authors that the Kiva Systems technology 
has a higher speed to market entry [14]. 
Because Kiva Technology and GreyOrange Technology 
are similar technologies, the innovation potential and the 
range of applications of these technologies are considered to 
be equally high. In classifying the technology-portfolio, it is 
assumed that customers may have reservations about 
GreyOrange because it is an imitative technology [14].  
All the information and decisions lead to a positioning. 
The positioning of the Kiva Systems technology and the 
GreyOrange technology is shown in Figure 2. The figure 
includes the two dimensions of the technology-portfolio. It is 
also shown that the Kiva Systems’ technology is clearly in 
the investment area.  
 
Figure 2. Technology-portfolio of the Kiva Systems 
technology (adapted from [7][14]) 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Whereas the GreyOrange technology shown in blue can 
be found in the selection area. A total of six technologies are 
compared with selected competitors. All technologies, which 
have been integrated in the long term in Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem are located at the investment area. 
 
In Figure 3, these technologies are shown in red. One 
technology is shown in green because it is the only one that 
was discontinued a few years after the acquisition of 
Amazon. 
IV. 
METHOD APPLIED TO THE DEVELOPMENT IN THE 
FUTURE 
Using the method applied to the previous development 
leads to reasonable results. That is why the same method 
applied to the development in the future is described in 
Section 4. 
In order to select a technology, a specific market is first 
selected into which Amazon could enter.  
L.E.K. Consulting has published why Amazon could be 
seriously interested in health care. Decreasing health care 
cost would be a financial advantage for Amazon as a 
company. There are also a lot of processes in the health care 
markets that could be improved. The improvement of the 
health care could be one of the huge challenges that Jeff 
Bezos is looking for [21]. There has been already a report, 
that Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway and JPMorgan Chase are 
working together to decrease spending in the health care 
sector. One objective is the decreasing of health care 
expenses of the families of their employees [22]. 
Furthermore, people in the health industry speculate that 
Amazon could expand the offers in this sector [23]. Due to 
these reasons, a company in the healthcare industry is 
selected for this analysis.  
The focus of the analysis lies on a digital physiotherapy 
of 
the 
company 
Sword 
Health, 
which 
enables 
a 
physiotherapy service at the home of the customer [24]. In 
Figure 4, the possible future technology is shown in red and 
a similar technology of a competitor is symbolized by a blue 
circle. 
Both technologies can be found in the investment area, but 
the position of the chosen technology is marginally better. 
Based on these results it is assumed in the following sections 
that the chosen technology might be an alternative in the 
future. Amazon could perhaps acquire the company that 
owns the chosen technology. That is why the acquisition of 
Sword Health might be a possible alternative. 
V. 
INFLUENCE ON THE DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM 
The company Amazon has started as an online bookstore 
[25]. That is the reason, why Amazon’s digital ecosystems, 
in the beginning, consisted probably of content like books, 
services like delivering service, software, and hardware that 
supported the trading. By integrating the technologies 
already considered, Amazon’s digital ecosystem has become 
more complex in hardware, software, content and services. 
The acquisitions of the company, which offers the online 
physiotherapy and afterwards the integration of the 
technology, could extend the digital ecosystem of Amazon. 
In this context, it is important to understand in which way 
the technologies were integrated into Amazon’s digital 
ecosystem. It should also be explained how the digital 
ecosystem could change in the future. 
The Kiva Systems robots for example really have been 
used by Amazon since 2014. This leads to a reduction in 
costs of the warehouse processes of the company [26]. Kiva 
combined hardware and software to improve the warehouse 
processes 
[27]. 
Since 
Amazon 
already 
uses 
Kiva 
technology, it is expected that the hardware and software of 
Kiva extend Amazon’s digital ecosystem. 
Christina Farr describes in an article in which way 
Amazon could offer health care services. It may be possible 
for customers to describe their symptoms to a doctor 
through Alexa. If necessary, the doctor can send tests to the 
 
Figure 3. Technology-portfolio of six technologies (adapted 
from [7][14]) 
 
 
Figure 4. Technology-portfolio of a possible technology 
(adapted from [7][14]) 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

customer [23]. The company Sword Health that is according 
to this analysis a potential candidate for an acquisition could 
be integrated in Amazon’s ecosystem in a similar way.  
Sword Health offers digital physiotherapy. Sensors allow 
physiotherapists to monitor and adjust the therapy [24]. This 
service, the software and the associated hardware could be 
integrated into Amazon’s digital ecosystem, e.g. through 
Alexa. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The results of this analysis are not binding and should be 
viewed as recommendations for actions, suggestions or 
trends, rather than general rules. The inclusion of more 
factors or other methods might generate different results. 
For example, a lot more factors than strength of resources 
and attractiveness of technology influence acquisition 
processes. In this specific context the determination leads to 
comprehensible results.  
The appropriateness of this method should be proved 
with further analysis. Furthermore, the preparation of this 
work is based on a difficult data situation, because 
technologies are classified that can only be viewed from an 
external perspective in this paper. The determination of 
resource strength and technology attractiveness is based on 
the answers to certain questions. The answers are consisting 
of values between zero to four. The determination of the 
values on the basis of the data could be carried out in further 
work by different persons to prove whether similar results 
are obtained. The analysis could also be carried out with 
more technologies, because other results might be 
generated. 
It could be proved in further investigations if the 
technology-portfolio according to Pfeiffer et al. [7] is a 
viable method in this context. It is also important to 
examine if other methods and data lead to different results 
or trends. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The technology-portfolio according to Pfeiffer et al. [7] 
combined with other criteria and modified was used to 
evaluate the development of Amazon. In this paper 
companies with different acquisition prices and state of 
success were examined to create a meaningful cross section. 
Because the long-term successful technologies were 
positioned in the investment area of the technology-
portfolio, the same method is used to forecast the future 
development of Amazon’s expansion. A technology in the 
health industry was found that is also located at the 
investment area of the portfolio. The health industry was 
chosen for several reasons, for example because Amazon 
has already started activities in this area. The company 
Sword Health that offers a digital physiotherapy could 
therefore represent a possible acquisition alternative. For 
this reason, the technology of Sword Health was positioned 
in the matrix. The company is assumed as an acquisition 
alternative, because it is positioned in the investment area of 
the matrix. The integration of new technologies like the 
possible alternative could expand the digital ecosystem of 
Amazon by extending software, hardware, content, and 
services. The integration of the Sword Health Services in 
the digital ecosystem of Amazon through Alexa could be a 
possible alternative in the future. The basis of these results 
is the use of a method from the field of investment decisions 
and further criteria with the aim of developing a future 
prognosis of the digital ecosystem of Amazon. The method 
leads to reasonable results, since the technologies acquired 
by Amazon, which have been integrated into the ecosystem 
in the long term, are positioned in the investment in this 
analysis. Expanding the sources and technologies that are 
used during the positioning process could improve the 
outcome. The number of people carrying out the analysis 
influences 
the results and has also potential for 
improvement. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. T. Kreutzer, “Drivers and backgrounds of digital 
transformation,” “Treiber und Hintergründe der digitalen 
Transformation,” in Digital transformation of business models 
- 
Basics, 
instruments 
and 
best 
practices, 
Digitale 
Transformation 
von 
Geschäftsmodellen, 
Grundlagen, 
Instrumente und Best Practices, D. Schallmo, A. Rusnjak, J. 
Anzengruber, T. Werani and M. Jünger, Wiesbaden: Springer 
Fachmedien , pp. 33–34, 2017. 
[2] J. F. Moore, “Predators and prey: a new ecology of 
competition,” Havard Business Review, 71(3), pp. 75–83, 
1993. 
[3] P. K. Senyo, K. Liu and J. Effah, “Digital business ecosystem: 
literature review and a framework for future,” International 
Journal of Information Management. 47, pp. 52–64, 2019. 
[4] C. Hoffmeister, “How to assess digital business models 
correctly,” “Digitale Geschäftsmodelle richtig einschätzen,”  
München: Carl Hanser Verlag, p.105 & 106, 2013. 
[5] A. Hotz and M. Fost, “The 'amazonisation' of consumption - 
Game-Changer 
Amazon,” 
“Die 
'Amazonisierung' 
des 
Konsums 
– 
Game-Changer 
Amazon,” 
in 
Digital 
transformation of business models - Basics, instruments and 
best 
practices, 
Digitale 
Transformation 
von 
Geschäftsmodellen, Grundlagen, Instrumente und Best 
Practices, D. Schallmo, A. Rusnjak, J. Anzengruber, T. 
Werani 
and 
M. 
Jünger, 
Eds. 
Wiesbaden: 
Springer 
Fachmedien, p.681, 2017. 
[6] I. Thierry and D. Lescop, “Open innovation within business 
ecosystems: a tale from amazon.com,” Communications & 
Strategies No. 74, p. 37, 2nd Quart. 2009, 2009. 
[7] W. Pfeiffer, G. Metze, W. Schneider, and R. Amler, 
“Technology portfolio for managing strategic future business 
areas,” 
“Technologie-Portfolio 
zum 
Management 
strategischer 
Zukunftsgeschäftsfelder,” 
Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1987. 
[8] M. Kayser, L. Wohlfart and F. Wagner, “Dynamic technology 
assessment,” “Dynamische Technologiebewertung,” in The 
digitization hurdle can be mastered - Success factors, tools 
and 
examples 
for 
medium-sized 
businesses, 
Die 
Digitalisierungshürde lässt sich Meister(n) Erfolgsfaktoren, 
Werkzeuge und Beispiele für den Mittelstand, T. Knothe, P. 
Gering, S. O. Rimmelspacher and M. Maier, Eds. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Vieweg, p.99, 2020. 
[9] M. Schaffnit, “Digital ecosystems,” in Digital Business 
Development The effects of digitalisation on business models 
and 
markets, 
Digital 
Business 
Development 
Die 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Auswirkungen der Digitalisierung auf Geschäftsmodelle und 
Märkte, S. Gatziu Grivas, Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer 
Gabler, p.55, 2020. 
[10] S. von Engelhardt and S. Petzolt, “The business model 
toolbook for digital ecosystems,” “Das Geschäftsmodell-
Toolbook für digitale Ökosysteme,” Frankfurt am Main: 
Campus Verlag, p.85, 2019. 
[11] T. Ammon and A. Brem, “Digitalisation and innovation - 
selected industry-related aspects,” “Digitalisierung und 
Innovation – Ausgewählte branchenbezogene Aspekte,” in 
Digitalisation and Innovation, Digitalisierung und Innovation, 
F.Keuper, K.Hamidian, E.Verwaayen, Eric T. Kelinowski, 
and C. Kraijo, Eds. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien, pp. 
101, 102, 104 & 110, 2013. 
[12] Amazon.com, 
inc, 
“amazon” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.amazon.com/ 2020.08.31. 
[13] T. Tiefel and M. Frühbeißer, “Portfolio approaches for 
strategic technology and innovation management - a "state-of-
the-art" analysis,” “Portfolio-Ansätze für das strategische 
Technologie- und Innovationsmanagement - Eine "State-of-
the-Art”-Analyse," 
Köln: 
TÜV 
Media 
GmbH, 
TÜV 
Rheinland Group, p.38, 2012. 
[14] Perspectives4You, Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und 
Energie & Zentrales Innovationsprogramm Mittelstand, 
“Potential 
analysis 
overall 
outcome 
and 
overview,” 
“Potenzialanalyse Gesamtergebnis und Übersicht,” Available 
from: 
https://p4y.informatik.uni-augsburg.de/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Zusammenfassung-P4You-
Präsentation.pdf 2019.10.24. 
[15] C. Wurll, “The mobile storage based on a cyber-physical 
system,” “Das Bewegliche Lager auf Basis eines Cyber-
physischen Systems,” in Handbook industry 4.0, Handbuch 
Industrie 4.0, B. Vogel-Heuser, T. Bauernhansl and M. ten 
Hompel, Berlin Heidelberg: Springer Nachschlage Wissen, 
pp. 1, 5 & 35, 2015. 
[16] E. M. Rusli, “Amazon.com to acquire Manufacturer of 
robotics,” 
Available 
from: 
https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/03/19/amazon-com-buys-
kiva-systems-for-775-million/ 2020.08.31. 
[17] About Amazon Staff, “What robots do (and don’t do) at 
Amazon 
fulfillment 
centers,” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.aboutamazon.com/amazon-fulfillment/our-
innovation/what-robots-do-and-dont-do-at-amazon-
fulfillment-centers/ 2020.08.31. 
[18] C. Kurz, “Robots move forward at Amazon,” “Roboter 
rücken bei Amazon vor,” Frankfurter Allgemeine, Available 
from: 
https://www.faz.net/aktuell/feuilleton/aus-dem-
maschinenraum/aus-dem-maschinenraum-roboter-ruecken-
bei-amazon-vor-12685684.html 2019.11.02. 
[19] F. Patalong, “Robopackers displace humans,” “Robopacker 
verdrängen 
den 
Menschen,” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.spiegel.de/wirtschaft/unternehmen/automatisierte
-systeme-veraendern-lager-wirtschaft-a-847701.html 
2020.08.31. 
[20] Business Wire India, “GreyOrange’s Samay Kohli recognized 
as an honoree of MIT Technology Review’s 2016 innovators 
under 
35 
list,” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.businesswireindia.com/greyoranges-samay-
kohli-recognized-as-an-honoree-of-mit-technology-reviews-
2016-innovators-under-35-list-49848.html 2020.08.31. 
[21] J. Haslehurst, Robert Johnson, “As Amazon turns its gaze to 
healthcare, the industry may be in for a wild ride,” L.E.K. 
Consulting / Executive Insights, Volume XX. Available from: 
https://www.lek.com/sites/default/files/insights/pdf-
attachments/2021-Amazon-Healthcare_R1.pdf, 2020.08.31. 
[22] R. S. Huckman, “What Could Amazon’s approach to health 
care 
look 
like?,” 
Available 
from: 
https://hbr.org/2018/02/what-could-amazons-approach-to-
health-care-look-like 2020.08.31. 
[23] C. Farr, “Amazon’s vision for the future of health care is 
becoming 
clear,” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/12/17/amazon-vision-future-
health-care.html 2020.08.31. 
[24] K. Anderton, “How Sensors are Changing the Way We 
Deliver Physiotherapy,” Available from: https://www.news-
medical.net/news/20180926/How-Sensors-are-Changing-the-
Way-We-Deliver-Physiotherapy.aspx, 2020.08.31. 
[25] B. Stone, “The all-rounder - Jeff Bezos and the empire of 
Amazon,” “Der Allesverkäufer – Jeff Bezos und das 
Imperium von Amazon, ” Frankfurt am Main: Campus 
Verlag, p.47, 2013. 
[26] E. Kim “Amazon’s $775 million deal for robotics company 
Kiva is starting to look really smart,” Available from: 
https://www.businessinsider.com.au/kiva-robots-save-money-
for-amazon-2016-6 2020.08.31. 
[27] B. Einstein, “Meet the drone that already delivers your 
packages, 
Kiva 
robot 
teardown,” 
Available 
from: 
https://robohub.org/meet-the-drone-that-already-delivers-
your-packages-kiva-robot-teardown 2020.08.31. 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

