With Cross-Industry Innovation to a Circular Economy 
Core competence transfer as the basis of sustainable business 
Andrea Lutsch 
Institute of Management and Economics 
Chair of General Management 
TU Clausthal 
E-Mail: andrea.lutsch@tu-clausthal.de 
 
 
Abstract— The cross-industry innovation approach can help 
companies diversify their existing core competencies into new 
sectors or industries with as little risk as possible. In five 
systematic phases, the management level is enabled to identify 
potentials for cross-industry innovations from existing 
innovative problem solutions or core competencies of the 
company. With this approach, existing core competencies of 
the company can be used sustainably and in the long term, 
thus contributing to a circular economy.  Instead of constantly 
building up new skills and resources, the already established 
resources are used sustainably and, if necessary, adapted to 
raise cross-industry innovation potential. The cross-industry 
innovation approach helps companies to transform their 
existing business model and form a sustainable business model. 
Keywords-Cross-Industry 
Innovation; 
Cross-Sector 
Innovation; Circular Economy; Open Innovation; Sustainable 
Business; Sustainable Innovation; Sustainability 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The diversity of global and local industry and customer 
requirements is constantly increasing. Digitalization in 
particular has gained enormous momentum in recent years 
and is now demanding changes in all areas of society and the 
economy. This is also accompanied by increasing demands 
on companies at various levels. The megatrend of 
digitalization is stimulating the pressure for change in 
companies immensely [1]. Increasing complexity in product 
development, accompanied by a high demand for know-how 
and resources, shorter product life cycles and an ever-
decreasing time-to-market can be observed. This puts 
companies under increased time and innovation pressure [2]. 
Which makes it necessary to adapt old business models, but 
also offers the opportunity to develop new business models. 
In the long term, this gap between increased internal 
systemic and external requirements as well as shortened 
development times can only be countered with a change in 
the use of resources, increased efficiency in the innovation 
process or greater flexibility in the strategic orientation of the 
company [3]. This can be achieved by adapting the 
innovation process to a sustainable use of core competencies 
[4]. 
"Growth in stagnating industries can result from three 
starting points: Customer loyalty, propaganda or from 
innovation." [5] For this, a rethinking of companies is 
necessary in order to survive against competitors [6]. Digital 
technologies, such as big data, blockchain and cloud 
computing are the basis for overcoming the challenges of 
digital transformation and developing a digital business 
model and are already being used in a large number of 
industries [7].  
In the following, the cross-industry approach is first 
described as an enabler of the circular economy. Then the 
inside-out approach and the special role of core competences 
will be discussed in detail. Finally, a process model is 
presented based on cross-industry innovation, which 
combines the previous aspects and enables a circular 
economy. 
II. 
CROSS-INDUSTRY INNOVATION, AN ENABLER OF THE 
CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
The development of new ideas and the implementation of 
successful innovations on the market is not only time-
consuming, but the cost factor also plays a major role. 
Conventional development processes require a very high 
capital investment and at the same time the prospects of 
success are not guaranteed [8]. Cross-industry innovations 
help companies to sustainably commercialize existing know-
how and core competencies in other markets [9].  
The cross-industry innovation approach offers the 
possibility of opening up new sectors and business areas 
without the risk of losing competencies and having to 
develop completely new products. Rather, this approach 
enables companies to strengthen their existing competencies 
and capabilities and to identify and leverage cross-industry 
potential [2]. In this way, their own core competences are 
strengthened in the long term and transferred to other sectors.  
Cross-industry innovation thus contributes to cross-industry 
solution development and a circular economy by applying an 
open innovation strategy [10].  
In the cross-industry innovation approach, companies 
from different sectors enter into cooperation. In this way, 
successful mergers can be created without the cooperating 
companies being in direct competition [11]. By using 
heterogeneous sources to generate ideas and a high cognitive 
industry distance, cross-industry innovations have a higher 
potential for radical innovations [1].  
In contrast to intra-industry approaches, cross-industry 
innovation combines problems and existing solutions in a 
new way across existing industry boundaries. This is done by 
using the idea of analogical thinking and development [13]. 
There are hardly any limits to the creative scope; not only the 
know-how of companies from other sectors, but also 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-848-8
ADAPTIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

technologies, patents, business processes or different 
approaches to solutions can produce innovations when 
adapted across sectors [14].  
These approaches can reduce development time, risk and 
effort. The cross-industry innovation approach thus 
contributes to a sustainable economy [15].  
III. 
CORE COMPETENCIES AND THE INSIDE-OUT 
APPROACH 
The concept of core competence, as a sub-area of a 
resource analysis, is to be assigned to the newer strategy 
theory [16]. The concept of core competence is to be 
understood as an outstanding capability that overlaps the 
functions of the value chain, even across different business 
areas, which holds specific corporate knowledge and thus 
simultaneously represents a differentiation from other 
companies [16]. A core competence can only be described as 
a strategically relevant resource if it represents an advantage 
over the competition [16]. Core competences are also 
permanent and transferable causes of a company's 
competitive advantage based on resources and capabilities 
[17].  
Within the framework of the cross-industry innovation 
approach, the potential for new business areas or new sectors 
is examined on the basis of the identified and abstracted core 
competences in order to achieve the creation of a strategic 
competitive advantage. The final assessment of whether the 
identified core competences represent actual strengths can 
only be meaningfully evaluated in relation to possible new 
sectors or current competitors [16]. 
Resources of any kind that are considered valuable are 
referred to as core competencies. These can also be present 
at all levels of the value chain and represent both supporting 
and primary activities [18]. Supporting activities include 
business 
infrastructure, 
human 
resources, 
technology 
development and procurement. Primary activities include 
inbound and outbound logistics, operations (all activities of 
production), marketing and sales, and customer service 
activities [19].  
In order to determine the intrinsic value of a corporate 
resource or core competence, and thus whether the resource 
represents a real competitive advantage, it must be valued 
accordingly. In order to achieve the best possible valuation, a 
competitor analysis would theoretically be possible, in the 
context of which an analogous resource analysis of the 
strongest competitors could be carried out. In practice, this is 
rarely possible in a comprehensive manner and hardly 
practicable. One common method is the VRIO scheme. The 
acronym VRIO stands for the properties to be checked: 
value, rarity, inimitability and organization [16]. The 
attribute "Value" describes the existence of an increase in 
value that is made possible or reinforced by the resource in 
question [16]. The attribute "rarity" in this context expresses 
a competitive advantage that arises from the fact that the 
resource or capability under consideration is so highly 
differentiated that only one or very few companies have it. 
The attribute "inimitability" applies if at least one of the 
following characteristics is fulfilled. The competence is 
based on empirical knowledge or achievements that remain 
causally incomprehensible. This is the case, for example, 
with artistic creation or advisory services, since these are 
based on individual knowledge or skill. In addition, such 
competence may also have arisen historically or from the 
interaction of different social structures [16]. The fourth 
characteristic of the VRIO scheme to strive for is 
"organization". In this context, this means the organizational 
anchoring of the resource to be tested in the company in such 
a way that the company can actually use the resource in a 
way that promotes the company [20]. 
Only if all four criteria of the VRIO scheme are fulfilled 
is a competence also a core competence and thus to be 
located as a long-term competitive advantage. If, on the other 
hand, the competence is not anchored in the organization, i.e. 
if the evaluation of the O-criterion is negative, the 
competence is an unused competitive advantage. If the 
competence can also be easily imitated (negative assessment 
of the I criterion), only a short-term competitive advantage 
can be assumed. If, in addition, the R criterion is also 
negative, the competence is not rare and one speaks of 
competitive equality. If the competence under consideration 
is additionally assessed as not valuable (V criterion), this can 
have an effect on the company as a competitive disadvantage 
[21]. 
The starting point for the inside-out process of the cross-
industry innovation approach are innovative solutions, core 
competencies, knowledge, products or innovations that 
already exist in the company [22]. In this process, new 
product-market combinations are developed [9]. With 
relatively low monetary and time expenditure, increases in 
turnover can be achieved, for example, through licensing. 
The inside-out approach can reduce development time, risk 
and effort. Inside-out approaches often result in radical or 
disruptive innovations [15]. 
IV. 
WITH CROSS-INDUSTRY INNOVATION TO A CIRCULAR 
ECONOMY 
The 
cross-industry 
innovation 
approach 
enables 
companies to transform their existing business model and 
form a sustainable business model. The transformation is 
carried out using the modified cross-industry innovation 
approach.  
In the cross-industry innovation approach presented 
below, five successive phases, which systematically 
interlock, are run through. The output of the upstream phase 
generates the input for the downstream phase. The entire 
five-phase process, which is based on the cross-industry 
innovation approach, can be seen in Fig. 1.   In the first 
phase, the analysis phase, the strategic group in which the 
company under consideration operates in the industry 
context is first analyzed. In addition, the core competencies 
of the company that are most interesting for further analysis 
are evaluated and selected. Subsequently, in the second 
phase, the abstraction phase, the previously selected core 
competence is broken down into its basic core competence 
elements in order to obtain a sector-unspecific description of 
the core competences. With these split core competence 
elements, analogous sectors are searched for in the analogy 
phase. These are industries that have a similar need for the 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-848-8
ADAPTIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

core competence elements as is the case in the domestic 
industry of the company under consideration. The identified 
bundle of foreign industries is evaluated in the downstream 
assessment phase using the two main criteria of "industry 
attractiveness" and "strategic compatibility". The main 
criterion "industry attractiveness" is made up of the sub-
criteria "innovation activity", "industry entry barriers" and 
"position in the industry life cycle"[23]. The sole object of 
evaluation is the individual foreign industry, i.e., it is the 
independent criterion. The dependent main criterion 
"Strategic Compatibility", on the other hand, evaluates the 
gap in the characteristics of the sub-criteria between the 
dominant strategic group of the individual foreign industry 
and the strategic group of the home company. The sub-
criteria of the main criterion "strategic compatibility" are 
"industry distance", "competitive strategy" and the "degree 
of vertical integration". 
The classification of the individual foreign industries on 
the basis of the two main criteria mentioned is carried out in 
the developed "industry attractiveness portfolio" based on 
the portfolio method. The industry attractiveness portfolio is 
shown in Fig. 2. 
Based on this portfolio representation, the classified 
industries can be classified into the three portfolio standard 
strategies "monitoring", "selection" and "investment". Each 
of these three areas in the portfolio reflects specific strategic 
fields of action. In the final phase, the strategic adaptation, 
sector-specific strategies for action and cooperation are 
discussed and developed.  
The research model developed enables companies to 
identify their own core competencies and thus make visible 
those sectors which, from the company's point of view, have 
cross-industry innovation potential. Based on this, sector-
specific, 
strategic 
recommendations 
for 
action 
and 
cooperation strategies can be developed in order to be able to 
raise the cross-industry innovation potential. Due to the 
already existing core competences in the company under 
consideration, a diversification with minimal risk can be 
achieved through the raised innovation potential and 
sustainable economic activity can be achieved. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The 
five-phase 
cross-industry 
innovation 
approach 
presented can help companies to detect their core 
competencies, identify diversification potentials and thus 
create a sustainable business model in the long term, which 
builds on existing competencies and capabilities and 
successively expands them. This sustainable management of 
corporate competencies and resources can have an impact 
on the entire business model and, for example, lead to a 
higher return on investment through the improved 
utilization of corporate competencies. Instead of constantly 
building up new competencies and resources, the already 
established resources are used sustainably and, if necessary, 
adapted to leverage cross-industry innovation potentials. 
The cross-sectoral innovation approach can thus help 
companies to transform their existing business model into a 
circular business model. 
Future research could address the explicit theoretical and 
operational challenges and needs for adaptation to circular 
business models. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Zollenkop, „Changing business models and their impact 
on product development. In: Operations excellence: smart 
solutions for business success,“ Springer Science and 
Business Media, pp. 9-23, 2008. 
[2] O. Gassmann and K. Frankenberger, „Exploring the Field of 
Business Model Innovation. New Theoretical Perspectives, 
Springer International Publishing,“ 2018.  
Figure 1: The new five-phase cross-industry innovation process. 
Figure 2: The industry attractiveness portfolio is developed in the evaluation 
phase and shows the interesting industry options. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-848-8
ADAPTIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

[3] T. 
J. 
Gerpott, 
„Strategisches 
Technologie- 
und 
Innovationsmanagement,“ 
Stuttgart, 
Schäffer-Poeschel 
(Sammlung Poeschel, 162), 2005. 
[4] T. Müller-Prothmann and N. Dörr, „Innovationsmanagement. 
Strategien, Methoden und Werkzeuge für systematische 
Innovationsprozesse,“ Munich, Carl Hanser Verlag, 2014. 
[5] H. H. Hinterhuber and K. Matzler, „Kundenorientierte 
Unternehmensführung. 
Kundenorientierung 
- 
Kundenzufriedenheit – Kundenbindung,“ Wiesbaden, Gabler 
Verlag, 2004. 
[6] T. Sommerlatte, „Challenges of maintaining innovativeness in 
organizations under business model transformation and 
digitalization. In: Tiwari, Buse:  Managing innovation in a 
global and digital world,“ Wiesbaden, Springer Gabler, pp. 
41-48, 2020. 
[7] A. Ross, “The industries of the future,” First Simon & 
Schuster trade paperback edition, New York, London, 
Toronto, Sydney, New Delhi, Simon & Schuster paperbacks, 
2017. 
[8] P. Granig, „Innovationsmanagement. 12 Erfolgsstrategien für 
KMU,“ Munich, Hanser, 2013. 
[9] E. Enkel and C. Dürmüller, „Cross-Industry-Innovation. Der 
Blick 
über 
den 
Gartenzaun,“ 
In: 
Praxiswissen 
Innovationsmanagement : von der Idee zum Markterfolg, 
Munich, Hanser, pp. 215–235, 2011. 
[10] M. Palmié, J. Boehm, C. Lekkas, V. Parida, J. Wincent, and 
O. Gassmann, „Circular business model implementation: 
Design choices, orchestration strategies, and transition 
pathways for resource-sharing solutions,“ In: Journal of 
Cleaner Production 280: 124399, January 2021. 
[11] Z. Yaman and T. Abele, “Cross Industry Business,” In: 
Thomas Barsch, Thomas Heupel und Holger Trautmann 
(Hg.): Die Blue-Ocean-Strategie in Theorie und Praxis. 
Diskurs 
und 
16 
Beispiele 
erfolgreicher 
Anwendung. 
Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden (FOM-Edition, 
FOM Hochschule für Oekonomie & Management), pp. 45–
58, 2019. 
[12] L. 
Koschate, 
„Implementierung 
von 
Cross-Industry-
Innovation. Konzeption und Best Practice“. 1. Auflage. 
München: Studylab, 2019. 
[13] E. Enkel and A. Horváth, „Exercising Opportunities for 
Cross-Industry Innovation: How to Support Absorptive 
Capacity in Distant Knowledge Processing,“ In: International 
Journal of Innovation Management, Vol. 19, No. 05, 
1550048, 2015. 
[14] A. Dingler and E. Enkel, „Cross-Industry Innovation,“ In: 
Thomas 
Abele 
(Hg.): 
Die 
frühe 
Phase 
des 
Innovationsprozesses. Neue, praxiserprobte Methoden und 
Ansätze, Bd.43. Wiesbaden: Springer Gabler (FOM-Edition), 
pp. 109–122, 2016. 
[15] E. Enkel and O. Gassmann, Oliver, “Creative imitation. 
Exploring the case of cross-industry innovation,” In: R & D 
management 40 (3), pp. 256–270, 2010. 
[16] H. Steinmann, G. Schreyögg, J. Koch, „Management. 
Grundlagen 
der 
Unternehmensführung: 
Konzepte 
- 
Funktionen – Fallstudien,“ Wiesbaden, Springer Gabler, 
2013. 
[17] W. Krüger and C. Homp, „Kernkompetenz-Management. 
Steigerung von Flexibilität und Schlagkraft im Wettbewerb,“ 
Wiesbaden, Gabler, 1997. 
[18] M. E. Porter, „Competitive advantage. Creating and 
sustaining superior performance,“ New York; London: Free 
Press, 2004. 
[19] M. K. Welge, A. Al-Laham and M. Eulerich, „Strategisches 
Management. Grundlagen - Prozess – Implementierung,“ 
Wiesbaden, Springer Gabler, 2017. 
[20] J. B. Barney and W. S. Hesterly, “Strategic management and 
competitive advantage. Concepts and cases,” 2005. 
[21] J. 
B. 
Barney, 
“Gaining 
and 
sustaining 
competitive 
advantage,” 2. ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
2002. 
[22] R. Freund, “How to Overcome the Barriers Between 
Economy and Sociology With Open Innovation, Open 
Evaluation and Crowdfunding?” In: International Journal of 
Industrial Engineering and Management Januar (1 (3)), pp. 
105–109, 2010. 
[23] K. Shahidi, „Der Branchen-Lebenszyklus. Eine Untersuchung 
am Beispiel der deutschen Stahlindustrie,“ Hamburg, Univ. 
der Bundeswehr, 1997. 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-848-8
ADAPTIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

