Driving Style Recognition for Co-operative Driving: A Survey 
 
Anastasia Bolovinou, Angelos Amditis 
I-SENSE group 
Institute of Communications and Computer Systems 
Athens, Greece 
abolov@iccs.gr;a.amditis@iccs.gr 
Francesco Bellotti 
Dept.of Naval, Electric, Electronic and Telecommunications 
Engineering, University of Genoa 
Genoa, Italy 
franz@elios.unige.it 
 
Mikko Tarkiainen  
VTT  
Tampere, Finland  
Mikko.Tarkiainen@vtt.fi 
 
 
Abstract—This paper serves as a critical survey for automatic 
driving style recognition approaches and presents “work in 
progress” ideas that can be used for the development of 
intelligent context-adaptive driving assistance applications. 
Furthermore, a preliminary specification of a context-adaptive 
application that can be described by the following three steps is 
provided: at first, driving style is automatically classified into 
one out of a set of predefined classes that are learnt through 
historic driving and trip data; secondly, based on the driving 
style recognition a context-adaptive driving application is 
proposed; thirdly, eco-safe and co-operative driving behaviour 
can be rewarded by the system by introducing a serious game 
theoretic approach. While the focus of this paper lies on 
reviewing the state of the art for implementing the first step, 
providing the high-level specification of the two other steps 
offers valuable insight on the requirements of such 
collaborative driving application. 
Keywords- driving behaviour; vehicle dynamics; time-series 
analysis; supervised learning; classification; co-operative system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Driving is in essence a multi-factor cognition task that 
can only be perceived in the context of underlying road 
layout, traffic, weather and social behaviour conditions in a 
framework where the action of an individual driver is 
affected by the actions of other drivers and travellers that co-
exist temporarily: the driver recognizes the road environment 
including road layout, traffic conditions, and the behaviour 
of nearby vehicles, e.g., distance from the vehicle in front, 
and decides actions to take, such as accelerating, braking, 
and/or steering. With experience gained each driver develops 
an individual behaviour behind the wheel, which could 
impact safety, fuel economy, and road congestion, among 
other things. For example, a driver, usually, maintains a 
comfortable time gap to the leading vehicle by adjusting 
his/her own threshold based on traffic conditions. 
Being able to dynamically recognize the driving style is 
invaluable information for modern Intelligent Transport 
Systems and Road Operators. More specifically, being able 
to collect contextual information about the driving style 
coupled with specific traffic or road characteristics, allows 
the road operator to perform reasoning about safety 
characteristics of road usage and react upon that information: 
for example, Zhang et al. [1] assess vehicle dynamic 
information and perform a categorization of drivers’ 
acceleration patterns in specific road curves. If this 
information is compared with speed limit information and 
accident statistics in the specific road segment under 
investigation, specific adjustments of the road infrastructure 
can be proposed in order to minimize the possibility of bad 
driving behaviour.  
Recognizing the driving style is also important in any 
effective Advanced Driver Assistance System (ADAS) that 
aims to increase its acceptability by being adaptive to the 
driver’s behaviour: One good example is the Adaptive 
Cruise Control (ACC) system presented in [1], which adapts 
its output before entering a curve based on road context data. 
In contrast with a conventional ACC system that simply 
maintains the host vehicle speed at a set value if there is no 
preceding car regardless of the road conditions, the proposed 
system can provide individual drivers with customized 
speeds based on their preferred speeds, deceleration rates, 
and lateral acceleration. Such an adaptive system is expected 
to increase ride comfort and highly decrease the need for 
driver intervention in the ACC functionality. More broadly, 
future ADAS are expected to rely heavily on driving 
intention recognition and driving behaviour prediction, in 
order to choose a suitable control strategy to assist and/or 
warn the driver or even intervene in an automatic manner 
[2].  
Within a collaborative mobility concept, the performance 
of future ADAS applications can be optimized based on 
automatic recognition of driving behaviour: for example, the 
suggested headway, from the vehicle in front, in a co-
operative ACC application, can be adapted to the 
dynamically changing driving style of the driver of the 
vehicle in front. In a broader consideration, categorizing the 
driving style of the driver , e.g. as “safe driver”, “aggressive 
driver” or “good fuel economy driver”, could be used to 
encourage community-friendly driving styles; combined with 
driver records and models of ideal driving style, one’s 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

driving style could be compared and used, as an immediate 
feedback to the driver while driving [3]. In a community 
building serious game approach, driver coaching and 
rewarding good driving habits could help promote ecological 
and safer driving.  
In this work, recent approaches that try to automatically 
identify driving behaviour by recognizing specific car-
following and pedal/steering wheel operation patterns will be 
reviewed in order to identify suitable methods for context-
adaptive and collaborative driving applications as these will 
be investigated within the European TEAM project [4]. Note 
that approaches that deal with vision-based driver state 
monitoring (by tracking the driver’s face or body motions, 
see the review of Kang [5]) are not studied here as we want 
to focus on an inertial base system that enables a discrete, 
unobtrusive, and seamless recognition of the driver’s 
behaviour. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II, a 
state of the art review is provided that concludes with 
observations on the features that appear in the methods under 
review. In Section III, the functional architecture of a future 
co-operative driving application that can adapt to the 
recognized driving style and upon which, a co-operative 
game-theoretic approach can be built, is presented. 
Conclusions and ideas for future work are included in 
Section IV that concludes this work. 
 
II. 
METHODS FOR AUTOMATIC DRIVING STYLE 
RECOGNITION IN THE LITERATURE 
A. Related Work 
Benavente et al. [6] study three different datasets to 
examine the relationship between aggressive driving and 
roadway characteristics, such as type of road, speed limit, 
number of travel lanes and presence of curbs. Aggressive 
driving behaviours include speeding, failure to stop, lane 
violations (such as improper passing), and severe violations 
(such as operating recklessly). Based on an empirical study 
on Automatic Cruise Control use by 118 subjects, Fancher et 
al. [7] classified drivers into five categories: flow conformist, 
extremist, hunter/tailgater, planner, and ultraconservative. 
Depending on their velocity and distance from the vehicle in 
front, a simple empirical model, which divided this two-
dimensional feature space into classes of interest by applying 
rule-based thresholds, was applied. Since such large-scale 
testing with many different drivers are difficult to be 
performed while data annotation is too time-consuming and 
on the other hand  real driving styles can vary a lot 
depending on the country’s driving culture and road/weather 
condition, machine learning methods for discovering patterns 
and classifying driving styles based on them is highly 
preferable. 
Taking advantage of the recent advancement in machine 
learning and data mining algorithms, big multi-dimensional 
time-series data can be explored in order to discover 
repeating patterns and spatio-temporal relationships among 
them [8]. Moreover, based on the software/hardware 
advances in communications and automotive on-board 
diagnostics units, we are able to record the high-frequency 
real-time driving information. In this review we are 
interested in works that discover patterns from rich driving 
data, which include vehicle signals captured in the context of 
a specific trip (terrain, weather, traffic information may be 
included).  
In the work of Mudgal et al. [9], speed profiles of 
different drivers at a roundabout have been modelled, with 
average circulating speed and non-linear parameter such as 
position of maximum acceleration determined using 
Bayesian inference methods. In addition, vehicular emissions 
were estimated using past experimental data. It is found that 
speed profiles differ significantly across drivers, as do the 
mean speeds at the circulating path of the roundabout. The 
model provides a second-by-second speed profile that can be 
used for deriving acceleration profile, which can be used for 
emission 
hotspots 
or 
aggressive 
driving 
behaviour 
recognition. The average circulating speed can also be used 
as a parameter for developing driving cycles for corridors 
that include roundabouts. In the work of Spiegel et al. [10], a 
Singular Value Decomposition bottom-up algorithm that 
identifies, internally homogeneous, time series segments is 
adopted. To recognize recurring patterns, the established 
time series segments were grouped via agglomerative 
hierarchical clustering. Subsequently, recurring sequences of 
grouped segments, which can be considered as classes of 
high-level driving context, can be retrieved. 
Spectral analysis of velocity, following distance (only 
simulation data), gas and brake pedal signals is used for 
signal representation by C. Miyajima et al. Then, multiple 
component Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM), applied on a 
0.32-s frame length, are used for data modelling. The model 
fits a GMM for each driver and performs driver 
identification among a small set of subjects. Targeting at the 
same driver identification objective, Ly et al. [12] apply 
automatic extraction and classifications of three simple 
driving events, defined as brake, acceleration and turn event 
(GPS positioning data are ignored). Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) and K-means clustering are compared for a 2-class 
classification (driver A and driver B), while the classification 
performance does not exceed 65%. 
Johnson and Trivedi [13] detected and classified driving 
manoeuvres using a smartphone’s accelerometer and gyro 
sensors mounted in the car. In a similar approach,  
Sathyanarayana et al. applied SVM classification in order to 
compare the automatic driving maneuver recognition that is 
based on signals from smart phones against using the CAN 
signals from the vehicles and equal performance of the two 
methods is reported.  
Amata et al. [15] introduce two prediction models for 
driving events’ recognition: the first is based on multiple 
linear regression analysis which predicts whether the driver 
will steer or ease up on the accelerator, or brake; the second 
predicts driver decelerating intentions using a Bayesian 
Network. The proposed models predict the three driving 
actions with over 70% accuracy when the use cases are split 
into 9 categories of intersection classes. Kishimoto and 
Oguri [16] also proposed a prediction method that forms an 
Autoregressive switching-Markov Model (AR-HMM) in 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

order to predict stop probability focusing on a certain period 
of past movements. 
Although not related only with driving style, similar 
works appear in energy consumption prediction for electric 
vehicles. In a review of driving behaviour recognition 
methods for fuel efficiency in hybrid vehicles, Wang and 
Lukic [17] divide driving styles into three categories: mild 
drivers (calm driving or economical driving style), normal 
drivers (medium driving style) and aggressive drivers 
(sporting driving style). A spine regression model for 
predicting 
gasoline 
consumption 
rate 
from 
speed, 
acceleration and heading degree information is applied on 
real driving data (a box-cox transformation to the response 
variable gives improved modelling) by Nie et al. [18]. 
Similarly, Quek and Ng [19], train SVM and multinomial 
logistic regression models but the model is evaluated only 
for a small set of categories. A last example from the electric 
vehicles field is the work of Ferreira et al. [20], where a 
Naïve Bayes classifier was used to classify driver behaviour 
in several pre-defined classes with respect to electric energy 
consumption (classes are defined based on percentage of the 
state of charge level decreasing from the ideal driver). As 
input data,  discretized weather information (temperature and 
raining information), average speed, traffic information, road 
type, EV age and type, drive mode (work or leisure) and 
drive period (morning, afternoon, night) were utilized but no 
evaluation of the method is presented.  
Although the majority of the works presented deal with a 
classification problem, i.e. [9-14][16][20], formulating the 
problem as a regression problem i.e. [15][18][19],  is 
considered very useful as it gives valuable insights in the 
recognition problem in hand, by providing estimation of each 
factor contribution to the event that we wish to recognize. 
In all the previous works and independently of the 
underlying data model (GMMs, Bayesian inference such as 
HMM) or its absence (SVMs, SVD), a significant correlation 
of the low-level data being observed and the classes that 
represent the driver behaviour is assumed. This might be true 
for classes that represent low-level information such as 
speed, acceleration or stopping profile, as in  [9][10][16], or 
even some specific manoeuvre detection as in [13 - 15]. 
However, when higher level behaviour recognition is 
required, such as driver intention recognition, the existence 
of contextual information related to the surrounding 
conditions needs to be taken into account despite the absence 
of relevant clues. To overcome this problem, Taniguchi et al. 
[21] assume that contextual information has a double 
articulation statistical structure. The underlying assumption 
is that since a concrete value of driving behaviour cannot be 
easily predicted, an alternative task can be to predict 
contextual information, i.e., hidden states of these 
probabilistic models. Following the above line, Fox et al. 
[22] use an extension of the Hierarchical Dirichlet Process 
Hidden Markov Model (HDP-HMM), appropriate for 
dynamic time series modelling, called sticky HDP-HMM. By 
using this model, the analyser can estimate segments and 
obtain sequences of hidden state labels (letters) without 
fixing the number of hidden states. Similarly, in the work of 
He et al. [23], a double-layer Hidden Markov Model (HMM) 
is developed for driving intention recognition and behaviour 
prediction using manoeuvring signals and vehicle state 
measured by a driving simulator. Each multi-dimensional 
Gaussian HMM bank in the lower layer corresponds to nine 
short- braking/acceleration manoeuvres and three steering 
driving 
behaviour 
HMMs 
while 
upper-layer 
multi-
dimensional discrete HMMs  are built for long-term driving 
intention in a combined working case. Finally, a semi-
supervised time-syntactic pattern recognition approach (by 
discretizing the values of on-board sensors into simple 
brake/steering events) is applied for learning models of the 
driving behaviour of truck drivers by Verwer et al. in [24]. 
B. Notes on Feature Representation  Appopriate  for 
Automatic Driving Style Recognition 
Although it is difficult to directly compare the methods 
presented due to lack of shared common datasets, one 
element that differentiates this set of methods is the feature 
representation used. Since this a factor that may judge the 
power of the overall method, in the followings, we proceed 
with some observations and we draw some directions for 
future work in the field. 
In terms of driving cycles characteristics, the research has 
started since as early as 1978 when Kuhler and Karstens [25] 
introduced 10 aggregate driving behaviour parameters: 
average speed, average speed excluding stop, average 
acceleration, average deceleration, mean length of a driving 
period, average number of acceleration deceleration changes 
within one driving period, proportion of standstill time, 
proportion of acceleration time, proportion of deceleration 
time, and proportion of time at constant speed. More 
recently, Huang [26] study the influence of 11 parameters on 
driving cycle recognition and argue that by using 4 of them 
the prediction result is satisfactory. Higher level features for 
driving style recognition could be provided if a feedback 
loop with an advanced driver assistance application is 
established so that for instance the reaction time from the 
changing of the signal light to the actual movement of the car 
is measured, as proposed in [19] and also envisioned in 
TEAM applications [4]. 
Feature selection and their representation is critical in the 
applicability and the discriminative power that a machine 
learning algorithm can demonstrate for a specific problem in 
hand. Since the extraction of contextual information for 
dynamic events like driving requires high computational 
demanding statistical models (like the ones used in [21-24]) 
which may not be easily adapted for real-time systems, the 
robust representation of low-level data is considered 
necessary since: 
- 
As noted by Liu [27], instantaneous accelerator or brake 
pedal positions are very noisy signals in the sense that 
the moment-to-moment position of the pedals do not 
reveal the actual vehicle speed (due to vehicle dynamics 
history).  
- 
There is noise in vehicle sensors’ measurement and 
dynamics estimation (even if filtering is applied, e.g., 
Kalman filter). 
While most of the works presented in Section II.A, deal 
directly with time-series data, without performing a 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

quantization of the signal, there are also some works that 
choose to work on a histogram-based representation of 
aggregated data. For example in the work of Ly et al. [12], 
“histogramming” of the extracted time series vector into 5 
bins seems to help: “Using 5 bins histogram reduces the 
feature vectors size and helps alleviate over fitting when 
learning with limited data size. Typical signal statistics such 
as the min, max, mean, and variance are included in the 
feature vector. Additionally, the duration of the event is also 
included”. The feature vectors for turning activity 
recognition include the histograms of both the angular 
velocity 
and 
the 
longitudinal 
acceleration. 
An 
acceleration/deceleration histogram by fitting a 3rd order 
polynomial curve to the speed data only at the regions where 
significant acceleration / deceleration was observed is 
obtained by Quek and Ng [19]. 
The advantage of this latter approach is that they can 
proliferate by the big progress in histogram-based feature 
vector processing in the fields of text (initially) and image 
processing where impressive results have been obtained by 
using a dimensionality reduction technique known as bag of 
features [28]. A different interesting approach, that handles 
time-series driving data as a two-dimensional grey-scale 
image data, has been presented by Griesche in [29]. 
Converting time-series data into histograms has also been 
proposed recently by Lin and Li [30] with promising results. 
III. 
A FUTURE APPLICATION: COLLABORATIVE-DRIVING 
APPLICATION THROUGH GAMING 
Gamification can be a solution to the challenge of long 
term involvement of drivers in cooperative driving. In the 
agent-based approach of Rossetti et al. [31], the authors 
focus on driving behaviour elicitation by promoting 
synergies in a simulated artificial society on a participative 
basis. In the recently started TEAM integrated European 
project [32], the goal of the next generation cloud enabled 
co-operative elastic mobility is pursuit through the 
development of adaptive transport and driving applications 
used by a community of users. Part of the preliminary 
specification work on a Serious Gaming and Community 
building application which requires a driving style 
classification component is presented hereafter. 
In TEAM, a cloud-based architecture is assumed where 
intelligent algorithmic components, which are considered as 
enablers for TEAM applications, run on a distributed cloud 
server system that also stores local dynamic map information 
and drivers/travellers history of trips. Moreover, a social 
network management enabler stores information that the 
users are willing to share with their co-commuters through 
smartphones. As a mean of involving the user in a 
collaborative driving task in order to achieve more fluid and 
ecological behaviour the TEAM Serious Game and 
Community Building (SG-CB) application is specified. SG-
CB vision is to implement a travelling game based on 
participation of a community of users where the system 
provide drivers with “virtual community currency” related 
with eco-safe driving behaviour (e.g., driver gets a virtual 
coin if he/she keeps correct headway, he/she can spend the 
virtual coin later).  
The game targets in essence, in coaching the driver 
towards obtaining a better community performance. For this 
reason, the SG-CB application should be able to recognize 
typical driving behaviours such as: headway profile, 
stopping profile in intersections, longitudinal and lateral 
acceleration profile. Therefore, a multi-class classification of 
the driving style that is dynamically updated is proposed as 
an enabler called “Driving Style Classifier”.  
As shown in Figure 1, driving style classification is 
expected to run online and its output will be assessed by the 
SG-CB application in order to present to the driver, through 
HMI, messages relative with the game objectives. The inputs 
of this component are based on vehicle and context data 
available from the cloud (like traffic conditions or terrain 
characteristics based on geo-position). For recognizing 
different driving styles, several driving indicators are 
envisioned to be defined using mass past driving data and the 
classifier will be responsible for assigning a weight 
corresponding to the similarity of the real time driving event 
with each of these available indicators.  
An appropriate dynamic data representation selected 
based on the directions derived in section II.B and a robust 
machine learning algorithm like SVM will be the internal 
components of the classifier component. For training the 
classifier, the project plans to create driving reference 
databases by integrating driving data for safety analysis by 
previous TeleFOT [33], in European level, and national 
Tele-ISA [34] and Trafisafe [35] field trials. Using 
aggregates over these data, driving indicators reference 
database for highway and urban scenarios will be built. 
Examples of such indicators are the percentage of kilometres 
driven at more than 10 km/h over the speed limit, the number 
of hard longitudinal and lateral accelerations/decelerations, 
high yaw rate angles, hard braking events per 100km, high 
acceleration/deceleration combined with rain or darkness 
conditions per 100km. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Requirements and methods for automatic driving style 
recognition from vehicle and trip data have been studied. 
Emphasis has been given in the feature selection strategy and 
a novel promising method for bag of patterns classification, 
based on time series data turned to histogram-based features, 
has been identified by combining clues from the literature 
and the recent advances in the European automotive research 
projects. Future implementation of a driving style 
classification module in the terms of a gaming collaborative 
driving application was drafted based on three categories of 
driving style: safe, eco-friendly and fluid-promoting in the 
ACC context. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was also supported by the European 
Commission under TEAM integrated project (FP7-ICT-
2011-8). The authors would like to thank all partners within 
TEAM for their cooperation and valuable contribution. 
 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] D. Zhang, Q. Xiao, J,Wang and K. Li, “Driver curve speed 
model and its application to ACC,” International Journal of 
Automotive Technology, 2013, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 241−247. 
[2] Mauro Da Lio, Francesco Biral, Marco Galvani and Andrea 
Saroldi, “Will Intelligent Vehicles Evolve into Human-peer 
Robots?,” 2012 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 
Conference proceedings, pp. 304 – 309. 
[3] S. Rass, S. Fuchs, and K. Kyamakya, “A Game-Theoretic 
Approach to Co-operative Context-Aware Driving with 
Partially Random Behavior, Smart Sensing and Context,” 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5279, 2008, pp. 154-
167.  
[4] A. Amditis, P. Lytrivis, I. Karaseitanidis, M. Prandtstädter, 
and I. Radusch, “Tomorrow´s Transport Infrastructure: from 
Static to Elastic Mobility,” Proc. of the 20th ITS World 
Congress 2013, Tokyo, 14-18 October 2013. 
[5] H. Kang, “Various Approaches for Driver and Driving 
Behavior 
Monitoring: 
A 
Review,” 
Computer 
Vision 
Workshops (ICCVW), 2013 IEEE International Conference 
on, pp. 616-623, Dec. 2013, doi: 10.1109/ICCVW.2013.85.   
[6] M. Benavente, M. A. Knodler, and H. Rothenberg, “Analysis 
of the Relationship between Aggressive Driving and 
Roadway Characteristics Using Linked Data,” Institute of 
Transportation Engineers Annual Meeting and Exhibition, 
2007, Pittsburgh, PA. 
[7] P. Fancher et al., “Intelligent Cruise Control Field Operational 
Test,” Technical report, vol. I, U.S. Dept. of Transportation 
NHTSA, 1998.                                             
[8] J. Lin, S. Williamson K. Borne, and D. DeBarr, “Pattern 
Recognition in Time Series,” book chapter in Advances in 
Machine Learning and Data Mining for Astronomy”, Eds. 
Kamal, A., Srivastava, A., Way, M., and Scargle, J. Chapman 
& Hall, Mar 2012. 
[9] A. Mudgal, S. Hallmark, A. Carriquiry, and K. Gkritza, 
“Driving behavior at a roundabout: A hierarchical Bayesian 
regression analysis,” Transportation Research Part D: 
Transport and Environment, vol. 26, January 2014, pp. 20-26, 
ISSN 1361-9209, doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2013.10.003. 
[10] S. Spiegel, J. Gaebler, A. Lommatzsch, E. De Luca, and S. 
Albayrak, 
“Pattern 
recognition 
and 
classification 
for 
multivariate 
time 
series,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Fifth 
International Workshop on Knowledge Discovery from 
Sensor Data (SensorKDD '11). ACM, NY, USA, pp. 34-42.  
[11] C. Miyajima et al., “Driver Modeling Based on Driving 
Behavior and Its Evaluation in Driver Identification,”   
Proceedings of the IEEE , Feb. 2007, vol. 95, no. 2, pp.427-
437, doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2006.888405. 
[12] M. V. Ly, S. Martin, and M. M. Trivedi, “Driver 
Classification and Driving Style Recognition using Inertial 
Sensors,” IEEE IV2013, June 23-26, 2013, pp. 1040-1045, 
Gold Coast, Australia. 
[13] D. A. Johnson and M. M. Trivedi, “Driving Style Recognition 
Using a Smartphone as a Sensor Platform,” 14th International 
IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 
October 5-7, 2011, pp. 1609-1615, Washington, DC, USA. 
[14] A. Sathyanarayana, S. O. Sadjadi, and J. H. Hansen., 
“Leveraging sensor information from portable devices 
towards automatic driving maneuver recognition,” IEEE 15th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent 
Transportation 
Systems (ITSC), 2012, pp. 660–665. 
[15] H. Amata, C. Miyajima, T. Nishino, N. Kitaoka, and K. 
Takeda, “Prediction model of driving behavior based on 
traffic conditions and driver types,” IEEE 12th International 
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 4-7 Oct. 
2009, pp. 1-6. 
[16] Y. Kishimoto and K. Oguri, “A Modeling Method for 
Predicting Driving Behavior Concerning with Driver’s Past 
Movements,” Proc. IEEE International Conference in 
Vehicular Electronics and Safety, Sept. 2008, pp. 132 – 136, 
doi: 10.1109/ICVES.2008.4640888. 
[17] R. Wang and S.M. Lukic, “Review of driving conditions 
prediction and driving style recognition based control 
algorithms for hybrid electric vehicles,” IEEE Vehicle Power 
and Propulsion Conference (VPPC) , 6-9 Sept. 2011, pp. 1-7. 
[18] K. Nie, L. Wu, and J. Yu, “Driving Behavior Improvement 
and Driver Recognition Based on Real-Time Driving 
Information,” technical report in CS229 Project, Stanford 
university, 2013. 
[19] Z. F. Quek and E. Ng, “Driver Identification by Driving 
Style,” technical report in CS 229 Project, Stanford university 
2013. 
[20] J. Ferreira, V. Monteiro, and J. L. Afonso, “Data Mining 
Approach for Range Prediction of Electric Vehicle,”  
Conference on Future Automotive Technology - Focus 
Electromobility, 26-27 March 2012, Munich, Germany, pp. 1-
15. 
[21] T. Taniguchi, S. Nagasaka, K. Hitomi, N. P. Chandrasiri, and 
T. Bando, “Semiotic Prediction of Driving Behavior using 
Unsupervised Double Articulation Analyzer,” 2012 Intelligent 
Vehicles Symposium, Alcalá de Henares, Spain, June 3-7, 
2012, pp. 849 - 854, doi: 10.1109/IVS.2012.6232243. 
[22] E. B. Fox, E. B. Sudderth, M. I. Jordan, and A. S. Willsky, 
“The sticky hdp-hmm: Bayesian nonparametric hidden 
markov models with persistent states,” Tech. Rep. 2777, MIT 
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, 2007. 
[23] L. He, C. Zong, and C. Wang, “Driving intention recognition 
and behaviour prediction based on a double-layer hidden 
Markov model,” Journal of Zhejiang University  Science C, 
Issue 13, 2013, vol 3, pp. 208-217. 
[24] S. Verwer, M. de Weerdt, and C. Witteveen, Learning 
“Driving Behavior by Timed Syntactic Pattern Recognition,” 
In Proc. of the Twenty-Second international joint conference 
on Artificial Intelligence, 2011, vol. 2, pp. 1529-1534, doi: 
10.5591/978-1-57735-516-8/IJCAI11-257. 
[25] M. Kuhler and D. Karstens, “Improved Driving Cycle for 
Testing Automotive Exhaust Emissions,” SAE Technical 
Paper Series 780650, 1978, doi:10.4271/780650. 
[26] X. Huang, Y. Tan, and X. He, “An Intelligent Multifeature 
Statistical Approach for the Discrimination of Driving 
Conditions of a Hybrid Electric Vehicle,” IEEE Transactions 
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Dec. 2010, pp. 1-13. 
[27] A. M. Liu, “Modeling Differences in Behavior Within and 
Between 
Drivers, 
Human 
Modelling 
in 
Assisted 
Transportation (Models, Tools and Risk Methods),” 2011, pp. 
15-22, doi: 10.1007/978-88-470-1821-1_3. 
[28] J. C. van Gemert, C. G. M. Snoek, C. J. Veenman, A. W. M. 
Smeulders, and J. Geusebroek, “Comparing Compact 
Codebooks for Visual Categorization,” Computer Vision and 
Image Understanding, 2010, vol. 14, iss. 4, pp. 450-462.  
[29] S. Griesche, “Images in mind – Design metaphor and method 
to classify driver distraction in critical situations,” DLR 
presentation 
in 
interactIVe 
project 
final 
event, 
http://www.interactive-ip.eu/publications, 
retrieved 
April, 
2014. 
[30] J. Lin and Y. Li, “Finding structurally different medical data,” 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Second IEEE International 
Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems, August 3-
4, 2009, pp.1-8, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA. 
[31] R. Rossetti, J. Almeida, Z. Kokkinogenis, and J. Goncalves, 
“Playing Transportation Seriously: Applications of Serious 
Games to Artificial Transportation Systems,” IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, July-Aug., 2013, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 107-112. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

[32] TEAM IP, Deliverable D1.0, “TEAM users, stakeholders and 
use cases,” www.collaborative-team.eu, retrieved: April, 
2014. 
[33] TeleFOT project, Seventh FP, co-funded by the European 
Commission DG Information Society and Media within the 
strategic objective “ICT for Cooperative Systems”, 2008- 
2012, 
http://www.telefot.eu/pages/index/?id=43, 
retrieved 
May 2014.  
[34] Field experiment on intelligent speed adaptation (Tele-ISA), 
VTT research project, 2009,  
http://www.lintu.info/hanke_TeleISA.htm, retrieved: May 
2014. 
[35] Trafisafe, ITS safety project, 
http://www.trafi.fi/turvallisuus/trafisafe, retrieved May 2014.
Figure 1: Functional concept diagram for a collaborative driving serious gaming application based on driving style classification 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

