Multi-Layered Design and Game-Based Learning as a Pedagogical Concept  
How to develop proper behavior in ARPA simulator training 
 
Johan Hartler 
Department of Shipping and Marine Technology 
Chalmers Technical University 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
e-mail: johan.hartler@chalmers.se 
Linn Gustavsson Christiernin 
Department of Engineering  
University West 
Trollhättan, Sweden 
e-mail: linn.gustavsson@hv.se
 
 
Abstract — To become a professional master mariner one has 
to develop many different skills and have an understanding of 
how to act in different situations on the bridge. Within the 
master 
mariner 
program 
at 
Chalmers 
University 
of 
Technology, Sweden, simulation technologies are used to 
evolve pertinent skills within the educational program. A 
challenge with using a full scale simulator from the outset of 
the program is to get the students to develop both professional 
competencies and internalize tacit knowledge in the navigation 
of a ship when the interface of the simulator itself is quite 
demanding. By using an adaptive Multi-Layered Design 
approach in combination with game based learning, this paper 
proposes how to guide the student through a more summative 
learning process. The main idea is to grant limited access to 
what the students can do with some functions, and gradually 
turn on more functionality in order to develop certain 
experienced behaviors to get them to understand the logical 
approach behind selections and to make them think through 
why and when they should do things.   
Keywords - Simulator training; game-based learning;  Multi-
Layered Design; radar. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There is a trend of high technical fidelity in maritime 
simulators. Simulators provide a rich, realistic interface with 
a large amount of functions and possibilities where the user 
can explore and experience many different scenarios. 
However, high-functionality interfaces are often very 
challenging for a user to learn [1][2]. The high amount of 
functions require not only a skilled interface user, but also 
high skills within the scope of the application if the training 
is to be useful and not only seen as an advanced game. The 
user has to be relatively experienced in the naval context in 
order to draw educated conclusions and solve tasks in a 
realistic way [3]. When a simulator is used in an educational 
setting, the aim is usually to teach less oriented students 
something about a real setting or to practice a complex 
activity before they perform under real conditions. Students, 
beginners and novices are supposed to use the simulator in 
this way to become more experienced [4][5]. However, the 
user has to possess real life experience in order to be able to 
fully understand the simulator and make realistic choices, but 
at the same time the simulator should provide exactly that – a 
virtual surrogate for real live experience. It would be 
preferable if the tacit knowledge the experienced person 
possess within the specific domain, could somehow be 
transferred to the novice.  
Our underlying assumption in this study is that the 
knowledge of an experienced professional can be captured 
and taught to new students through simulator-supported 
learning. The goal is to convey the process of decision 
making and the rules for why a specific decision is made. 
Furthermore, the novice user should understand the 
underlying logic in why certain behaviors are preferable in a 
specific situation. The outcome is to strengthen the ability to 
make educated and constructive decisions and value, order 
and select specific important data in a large dataset. By 
encouraging certain behaviours in the simulator, we believe 
that it could be possible to transfer the knowledge of a 
professional maritme officer to a novice student by 
practicing in a guided environment. If the interface is 
adapted to support guided learning and certain forced 
behaviors, the novice could practice how an experienced 
mariner officer would act and understand why problems 
should be solved in a specific way. To achieve this, the 
underlying learning processes as well as the profession at 
hand must be understood.  
The focus of this study is the interface design and game 
based learning as a support for teaching of professional 
behaviors in a maritime simulator. We suggest an adaptive 
simulator design where a stepwise learning approach is used, 
a so called Multi-Layered Design [1][6]. The functions are 
divided into so-called layers and adapted to the learning 
scenario. The choices are limited at first and then they gets 
less and less restricted over time. The first layer will be 
rather restricted from a domain point of view and train 
certain behaviors that should be included in the novice’s 
basic understanding. The next layer will give slightly more 
freedom and the last layer should have full functionality. The 
complexity of the data and the technical fidelity in the 
simulator is not simplified. The Multi-Layered approach is 
then combined with gaming-based learning strategies to 
encourage and create enthusiasm. By using a gaming 
philosophy, specific behaviors can be positively encouraged 
through rewards. This to encourage and/or force the learner 
to use certain behaviors in the simulator.   
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
sections II and III will introduce the current status of today’s 
maritime education while section IV introduce the theoretical 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

concepts further. A layered concept design is suggested and 
the resulting solution is discussed from a pedagogical 
viewpoint in section V. All design ideas are based on 
observations of students’ behavior in the current maritime 
simulator at the master mariner program at Chalmers 
Technical University. Section VI discusses the results and 
presents our conclusions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
To become a master mariner both theoretical studies and 
extensive practical training are required. The practical 
training is initiated with simple examples on paper where 
different scenarios are walked through. The next step is to 
practice in different high fidelity simulators. When approved 
in the simulator the students are finally accepted to test their 
knowledge and ability on a real ship. To exemplify this 
learning process we use teaching of the Automatic Radar 
Plotting Aid (ARPA) in the following two sub-sections. 
A. STCW MANILA 2010 
STCW or the minimum Standard for Training and 
Certification for Watch-keeping officers describe radar 
navigation on management levels and is the guide for what 
students should know about navigation. With the start of 
STCW 1978, the convention has been amended several 
times; and the latest is STCW 2010 MANILA (used from 1 
April 2012) [7]-[11]. The convention is explained in more 
detail in the STCW CODE, which describe competence and 
minimum standard of knowledge, understanding and 
proficiency for certification: 
Competence, knowledge, understanding and proficiency 
- 
The student should be able to show ability to use 
methods for demonstrating competence 
 
Criteria for evaluating competence  
- 
The student should use radar and ARPA to maintain 
safety of navigation.  
- 
The student should show knowledge of the 
fundamentals of radar and ARPA.  
- 
The student should show ability to handle the radar- 
and ARPA simulator plus in-service experience.  
- 
The student should be able to interpret and analyze 
information obtained from radar and ARPA, taking 
into account the limitations of the equipment and 
prevailing circumstances and conditions.  
 
The International Maritime Organization (IMO) gives out 
model courses with a detailed teaching syllabus to cover 
overall learning objectives within the convention. In this 
paper we focus on model course 1.07 and 1.08, [10][11] with 
the specific learning objectives: 
Course 1.07  
- 
7.1 Set up and maintain an ARPA display 
- 
7.2 Obtain target information 
Course 1.08  
- 
2.2 Carry out radar plotting 
B. Classical approach to learning 
The classical approach to learning Radar and ARPA, 
during the master mariner education is to start with simple 
scenarios and increase theire complexity during the course. 
The students are introduced to a two ship scenario using a 
“relative” motion setup to learn how to determine risk of 
collision. Figure 1 show this simple scenario with only two 
ships on a radar screen.  
 
 
Figure 1. Scenario with only two ships on the radar 
 
In the second scenario, there are three to four ships 
visible on the screen and introduces more ARPA functions 
that show navigational data for all the ships. In the third 
scenario, the complexity increases to more than seven ships 
and potential situations of collisions are introduced. This 
demands a good overall understanding of the traffic 
situation. Between the second and third scenario, students 
often switch setup from relative motion to “true” motion 
which can be easier to understand in more complex 
situations.  
The left part of Figure 2 shows a part of the radar plot 
where six ships has been selected for tracking of position and 
course. More information for each ship is visualized when a 
ship is selected. In the right part of Figure 2 the data for two 
of the selected ships is visualized. Information such as speed, 
course, time to closest point of approach (TCPA) are shown. 
 
 
Figure 2. Radar plot showing current position and surrounding ships. Six 
ships are plotted (numbered and with lines) and details on 015 and 003 (the 
two circled ships) are illustrated to the right.  
With the information visualized in Figure 2 the martime 
officer can keep track of surrounding ships.  
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

III. 
STUDY 
In order to understand the learning process and how the 
students use the current maritime simulator to achieve 
proficiency, a number of activitities have been undertaken. 
Several groups of master mariner students have been 
monitored on how they use the simulator, how they develop 
skills over time and what type of mistakes they make. The 
observations have been made over four years of teaching and 
assessment of the course based an ARPA model course 1.07 
(Operational level) and model course 1.08 (Management 
level) [10][11]. The participants are second year master 
mariner students at Chalmers University of Technology. The 
analysis in this paper is also made from assessment protocols 
from this course between the years 2010 and 2013. In the 
protocols, skills are given a score according to the student’s 
performance on a 0-2 scale. Also interviews with the 
instructor of the course, who have more than 10 years of 
experience from teaching ARPA, was conducted. This was 
to confirm the assessment scores and get more information 
on identified challenges. The assessment protocols and the 
interview, as well as the authors own observations during 
these four years of teaching, lead to the same conclusions. 
One of the more frequent behaviours among students are 
the approach of selecting all targets and using long vectors. It 
can be observed that in the high technical fidelity scenarios 
with seven or more ships the students tend to continue to 
select or mark all ships as the amount of ships increase in the 
scenarios. Figure 3 illustrates a photo taken during an 
assessment showing classical mistakes despite around 22 
hours of practice in the simulator. 
 
 
Figure 3. A photo taken during student assessment. 
 
The students learn in the simple scenarios that all ships 
can be marked, but they do not understand the implications 
upon situation awareness in a more complex view, as a more 
cluttered radar picture is more difficult to understand (see 
Figure 3). It is still possible to follow all ships but that will 
require full attention on the radar screen, which is not a 
positive outcome in a real world case. On a real ship bridge, 
the officer of watch needs to keep control of a number of 
monitors and displays. Hence, the students tend to get 
information overload resulting in a suboptimal, bottlenecked 
behavior in the simulator. Best practice is to plot a maximum 
of 8 to 10 targets that might be of interest from an anti-
collision perspective. From a teaching perspective, this 
creates challenges that relates to required competence in the 
STCW CODE for how to use plotting techniques and relative 
and true motion concepts, as well as setting up and 
maintaining multiple displays. 
The different set-ups for combinations of relative and 
true motion vecrors poses another problem. In one interview 
the instructor states that “Many students have difficulties in 
understanding the difference between relative and true 
motion, relative and true vectors, and relative and true 
trails”. There is up to eight different set-up combinations and 
all of them are appropriate for specific conditions or 
purposes. Relative motion shows if there is a risk of collision 
in an easy and quick way. True motion show real movement 
of vessels and are used to avoid grounding. True vectors give 
a hint of the direction of a vessel, and the direction is 
deciding which is the “stand on” vessel according to 
international regulations for preventing collisions at sea. 
Students normally do one set-up and maintain the same in all 
situations.  
The instructor continues to discuss that “ARPA settings 
and particular plotting of targets are almost impossible to 
teach”. This is due to the characteristics of the embedded 
tacit knowledge as there is never a perfect or expected setting 
for given conditions. The correct behavior is to switch 
between different settings and the officer of the watch needs 
to “know” when and why the specific setting is the right 
choice in that moment. Such knowledge takes time and 
practice to build up and it is seen amongst experienced deck 
officers. With better understanding and knowledge, the 
student would be able to change set-up according to the 
changing scenario. They should also be able to switch 
between which ship to select and track. 
IV. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND TO DESIGN CONSEPT  
Miller [4] was one of the first to start discussing the 
importance of fidelity in simulators and he made a 
distinction between physical fidelity and psychological 
fidelity. Physical fidelity is a technical aspect while 
psychological fidelity is how well the functional skills in the 
simulation relates to practice in the real world. The past 
years of increased computing power have largely increased 
the possibilities of the physical fidelity in simulations [5]. 
However, the ability to transfer skills from the simulator to 
the real world is a key element in the quality of the learning. 
Hence, functional fidelity is more important than technical 
fidelity, but a mix between good physical and psychological 
fidelity is needed. 
The technical fidelity or the graphical user interface of a 
simulator is created to support a large number of complex 
scenarios and different types of users with different types of 
skills. This often powers a so-called all-in-one interface, 
where all various functions are visible at once [12][13][14], 
and so is also the case with the current maritime simulator. In 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

a learning situation, this could lead to confusion but also 
mistakes when solving specific task.  
To try to guide the learning of functions we suggest a 
Multi-Layered Design [1][6] combined with positive 
behavioral encouragement from game-based learning [15] 
[16]. A good behavior is then praised through rewards in the 
simulator leading to a practice of a “correct” behavior in 
different situations. The idea is to transmit knowledge of 
how to behave in certain situations through gaming, 
encouragement and limitations. Creating an, for the student 
adaptive interface, but for the instructor an adaptable 
interface (possible to alter). The following sub-sections will 
present these concepts further. 
A. Game-based learning 
It is possible to use gaming strategies in educational 
settings in several ways, but it is important to differ between 
Game-based 
learning 
and 
gamification 
[15][16]. 
Gamification means the use of game characteristics to 
achieve something else. An example is the usage of 
collecting points in a commercial advertisement campaign. 
Game-based learning means the use of games for educational 
purposes. 
Rules define how a player interacts in a game and is more 
important than the educational theme [16]. One example is 
chess, if one, by mistake, touches a piece and it is moved out 
of position, both players restore the state of the game. If a 
player touches a piece and then regrets the start of the move, 
the player must move that piece. The difference between the 
two situations is explicitly agreed on and understood by 
chess players. The formal rules say that a touched piece must 
be moved and still we see this extra non-written rule.  
Linderoth [15] argues two ways to use rules in games for 
learning. The first way is used for drill training. Instead of 
learning mathematics from a traditional book, an example is 
given as a space ship game (Matteraketen/The Math Rocket) 
[17]. The players need to shoot down meteorites to survive 
but the ammunition is only refilled by solving mathematical 
equations. The rule then states that a player needs to learn 
how to solve mathematical problems to refill ammunition. 
Observations have shown that players might cheat and bring 
a friend who is good at mathematics to solve the questions. 
The second way to use rules is where the rules are repre-
senting the learning itself. An example is given in [16] a 
simple game for understanding environmental sustainability 
(Harvest about sustainability). In the game, fifty fish are in 
the ocean and five teams will fish for ten days. Every day the 
teams write down on a piece of a paper how many fish they 
will land that day. The instructor chooses randomly to hand 
out fishes to each team. If there are not enough fish that day 
in the ocean compared to what a team wished for, no fish are 
handed out. Every day the amount of fish in the ocean is 
doubled with up to maximum 50 fish. Normally all teams 
choose too much on the first and the second day for the 
ocean to be repopulated in a sustainable way. Rules are 
directed towards a discussion on the population level of fish 
for sustainable fishing. The players learn directly from the 
rules of the game. 
A problem with a game-based learning approach is if the 
player end-up in bad state of a so-called gamer mode. A 
gamer mode is a state when a learner uses different options 
from given rules in a game and carry over this behaviour into 
the real world. This can be problematic when the learner tries 
to win instead of adhering to intended learning outcome. 
Frank [18] describes this behavior in a model illustrated in 
Figure 4. The left part of the figure is the scope of the game 
and to the right is reality. The overlapping part between these 
two areas is the intended learning zone that is aimed for 
when using the game as a learning platform in a simulator. 
When in gamer mode, the player tend to focus on things in 
the game that are only beneficial to the game and not to the 
real world scenario.  
 
Figure 4. A model of learning outcome when a player focus on the wrong 
part of the game [18]. 
 
Frank [18] documents two contributing factors leading to 
a gamer mode. The first factor is when the game does not 
fully match the real world functions, corresponding to only 
partial functional fidelity. This invites the learner to leave the 
professional mode and uses the rules from the game to win. 
The second factor is the game-design itself. Playing for 
victory points does something to the learner. In a study, 
Frank [18] showed how the health indicator are lower at the 
end of the game when playing for points compared to when 
not playing for points. The learner enters into a mode where 
fulfilling game goals becomes more important than the 
intended learning outcome of managing military troops. 
Educational simulation consists of three elements according 
to Aldrich [3]; games, pedagogic, and simulation. Simulation 
enable experimentation, practice and transfer of practice to 
real world knowledge. The game element might not by itself 
contribute to intended learning outcomes but can be used to 
enhance learning experience. The game element contributes 
to engagement, enjoyment and can be a way to assess or 
direct the learners focus on a particular thing. The 
pedagogical 
element 
includes 
the 
meta-game 
with 
background, scenario and intended learning outcome for 
specific knowledge. Scaffolding is central in the learning 
process according to Aldrich [3] and Säljö [19]. 
B. Multi-Layerd Design 
Multi-Layered Design as a concept was first introduced 
by Shneiderman et al in 1998 [1] and further investigated in 
a number of studies [6][20]-[24]. In Multi-Layered Design, 
the graphical user interface is divided into layers and has a 
sequence in which the layers are ordered [6]. The sequence 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

should provide a meaning to the interface structure and could 
be based on domain knowledge, frequency of use, or the 
user’s task capability. It should be noted that although an 
application might have layers and a component like 
structure, it does not necessarily have a meaningful order and 
will not provide a proper layered design.  
A layer is a set of specified functions constituting a part 
of an application. The layer could hold one or several 
functions, like program instructions, wizards, forms, data, 
graphical 
decorations 
and 
representations, 
or 
text 
information. Each layer always has a specific purpose, which 
for example could be to train a specific type of tasks (for 
example selecting ships on a radar plot) [1][6]. How the 
layer is composed depends on the intended purpose, the 
number of available functions, intended sequence and the 
level of complexity of the application at hand.  
It is possible to choose if the layered design should affect 
only how the functions are divided or if the graphical 
presentation of the interface objects should change between 
the layers as well. For example, if a function should be 
visible in all layers but not available in lower layers. How to 
present information could also be varied between the layers.  
The concept of layered design is not new, similar ideas 
have been used within games, learning environments, and 
access systems for a long time but then with different names, 
like levels, tiers, parts or paths. There are many types of 
structures and many varieties of applications using a design 
similar to the layered design.  
C. Adaptive and adaptable interface 
When creating layered structures, the design of the 
interface can follow two types of interactive approaches, 
either adaptable or adaptive. In an adaptable interface the 
users have control over the layer contents while the adapting 
interface is intelligent and change the contents based on 
external rules or algorithms [2]. Each of those include 
different techniques for how to actually design the graphical 
interface. The adaptive concept, for example, includes 
techniques like intelligent interfaces, self adapting menus 
and 
task based adaptation. The 
adaptable concept 
encompasses customization and user aware choices. An 
application can be both adaptable and adaptive for different 
types of users, depending on their access rights in the system.  
V. 
RESULTS - WANTED LEARNING APPROACH 
Based on the observations and the experiences from 
assessments and interviews, a concept for simulator learning 
is created. A wanted learning approach for the student is to 
understand the foundation of why decisions are made and 
what might be the consequences of a bad decision. The 
simulator should encourage a correct behavior and train the 
student in behaving like an experienced master mariner. 
However, this requires tacit knowledge to be transferred 
from the experienced mariner to the student via the 
simulator. A correct learning behavior, in the more advanced 
scenario with a large amount of ships, would be to 
understand how to sort the traffic information on the radar 
screen and select a “correct” number of ships to track. The 
decision should be made based on the risk of collision. Ships 
in close proximity to the student’s own ship might require a 
course alteration or other activity to reduce the risk of 
collision. The amount of ships in more complex scenarios 
and reality are typically, somewhere between 15-25 ships (or 
more) in moderately busy European and Asian waters, 
depending on the scale used in the radar system (see real 
world example in Figure 5).  
 
Figure 5. A real world radar plot taken from a ship in the South China sea. 
 
Figure 6. More than 20 ships plotted on a radar screen, all ships are 
selected for detailed information, creating an information bloat. 
 
Figure 7. More than 20 ships plotted on a radar screen, only six targets 
selected for detailed information. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Normally, students should actively switch between a 
radius of 12 miles (up to 25 ships) and 6 miles (10-15 ships) 
on the screen. It is not possible to follow all 25 ships with 
full data coverage turned on, as seen in Figure 3 earlier and 
in Figure 6 below. Such a behavior will result in information 
overload. This indicates that an educated selection of ships 
has to take place. Figure 7 visualizes the same radar plot as 
in Figure 6 but with only six ships selected. It is now 
possible to get a quick overview of the situation and only 
information needed is visualized in detail and highlighted. 
Understanding this type of educated selection is what the 
students should strive for in the scenarios. To try to bridge 
the transfer of knowledge for how to make educated 
selections a concept based on Multi-Layered Design 
combined with game-based learning is suggested. 
A. Learning approach with a layered and guided design  
A simulator with a layered design implemented creates 
possibilities for a new set of training scenarios. The teaching 
can focus on radar plotting and how to safely navigate the 
ship. The training scenario, keeping in mind that training is 
scaffolding the knowledge, has a specific purpose and an 
intended learning outcome. The technical rules built into the 
scenario can be used to limit functions in the simulation to 
only allow usage of best practice combinations.  
From the instructor’s point of view, the layered design is 
adaptable and possible to customize for each intended 
learning scenario, while from the student’s point of view the 
interface is adapting to how they behave in the simulator. 
The focused sequence is based on behavior in different 
situations and each layer targets to train a specific behavior. 
The fidelity will not change - only the rules for how to use 
the functions. As a first suggestion a design with three layers 
is chosen. The number of three layers is based on intended 
behavior tested during assessment.  
Layer 1 - The first layer should hold only the most basic 
functions needed to be able to navigate but with full fidelity. 
The complexity of the radar plot should be realistic and the 
functions guide or force the students behavior. The interface 
should not allow the student to make unprofessional 
selections. If the student tries to make a selection or use a 
function that represents an unprofessional choice the 
simulator should give hints to why this is undisirable. From a 
graphical point of view this means that the functions should 
be grouped and ordered in a meaningful pedagogical manner. 
Functions not available in this layer should not be visible at 
all, since that could cause confusion. The rules for this layer 
should add a limit of ten targets to select. This may force the 
learner to prioritize early and to build experience about what 
type of targets that are of interest. The second learning effect 
should be to cancel the selection of targets that are not of 
interest anymore in order to be able to select and view new 
targets. 
Layer 2 - The second layer should have less constraints 
for how the functions can be used. Game-based learning is 
used to encourage the student to make correct choices. If the 
student shows correct behavior and good strategies when 
solving problems, the simulator should be rewarding. A 
reward could be, for example, hints for the next upcoming 
risk that will help the student to make the next choice by an 
early warning. Another such reward could be to 
acknowledge correct selections and praise the student for 
good behavior as a feedback on earlier choices.  
Like in the game "matteraketen" (math rocket) [17] the 
student has to safely navigate a moving vessel over an ocean, 
the learner needs to solve how other vessels move. This is 
done with the use of relative- and true-motion techniques. 
The second layer should help the student to practice how to 
switch between these modes and understand when and why 
to switch.  
Layer 3 - The third and final layer should be very similar 
to what the simulator looks like today. Full fidelity, full 
functionality and the students have to make decisions based 
on previous training. The student should by now know from 
earlier layers how to behave. The game-based learning could 
still be used to give positive feedback or to improve on 
details and skills that are more advanced.  
An example of how to map training scenarios to the 
layers can be seen in TABLE I. Three different steps for 
training are suggested, matching the layered layout.  
TABLE I. PROPOSED NEW TRAINING 
Scenario # 
ships 
Ship on 
collision 
Layers 
Game 
feature 
1-2 
10-
15 
1 
Relative motion. 
6 ships to plot 
True-motion 
available only for 
1 minute 
Points 
for 
correct 
ships 
plotted 
3-4 
20 
2 
8 ships to plot. 
Relative motion 
gives a hint 
Hidden 
information 
5-6 
20 
4 
Full functionality  
The first two scenarios introduce the simulator and how 
to perform basic plotting. The focus is on which ship to 
select for more information and to follow its course. The idea 
is to identify the ships with potential risk of collision within 
the surrounding noise. Relative motion is available and true 
motion is available for short time spans to train the student in 
switching in-between those two modes. Note that the number 
of visible ships on the screen is rather large. The functional 
fidelity of the simulator has not been simplified, the scenario 
should mimic a real world case. 
In the third and fourth scenario (used in the second 
layer), the number of visible objects on the radar plot is 
higher and more activity is required to avoid collision. Also 
more functions are available and can more decisions can be 
made. When showing correct behavior, the student is 
rewarded with hints that will help solve the task at hand.  
The two last scenarios are played out with full fidelity, 
complexity and functionality. The student should now be 
able to handle the full simulator and based on previous 
training be able to demonstrate correct behaviors. This layer 
can also be used for exams where the student shows their 
skills during assessment. The interface will guide the learner 
through correct behaviors and give information during the 
time to why this was good behavior. In debriefing after the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

simulator session it is possible for the instructor and the 
student to reflect and discuss their experiences and why this 
is or should be the best practice. The suggested design 
should take the student away from gamer mode and with 
help of limitations encourage correct behavior. Our 
suggestion is to use the technical rules as layers to hinder 
behavior not corresponding to actions amongst professionals. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
It can be concluded that maritime simulator training can 
adopt knowledge from other domains and it is argued that 
some challenges in ARPA training can be partly solved with 
elements from Multi-Layered Design and game based 
learning theory. The use of technical rules can steer towards 
intended learning outcomes.  
The first challenge is how to provide knowledge for the 
setup of the ARPA display in a professional manner. As 
shown there is different mental loads when interpreting 
displays with all targets plotted or only a few targets. From a 
professional mariner’s perspective two or three different 
settings might be workable in those scenarios while the rest 
are inadequate.  
The rules of the layered structure are very important 
when creating the layers in the suggested design. In a classic 
Multi-Layered Design the functions are unavailable and the 
division of layers are based on the number of functions per 
layer divided by knowledge level or how often a function is 
used. In the current case all functions are available. Instead 
the layers are based on how a function is allowed to be used. 
The layers are divided based on the rules of the learning 
scenario. Rules in the simulation should steer the learning 
process according to the intended learning outcome so an 
improved overall learning amongst learners can be 
accomplished. By forcing the learner to adapt to the rules of 
how to use different functions in each layer a proper 
professional behavior is practiced. A disadvantage of a game 
based design could be that the learner tries to optimize the 
behavior in the simulator to solve the problem using added 
game features like hidden information just to win without 
actually understanding the learning scenario or the intended 
learning outcome. An active instructor is a way to get 
qualitative learning and avoid this risk for gamer mode 
behavior in the simulation according to Frank [18].   
REFERENCES 
[1] Shneiderman, B. Designing the User Interface-Strategies for 
Effective Human-Computer Interaction. 3rd ed. 1998, 
Longman, Essex, United Kingdom: Addison Wesley. 
[2] Dix, A. Finlay, J. Abowe, G.D. and Beale, R. Human-
Computer Interaction. 3:d ed. 2004, Harlow, United 
Kingdom: Pearson & Prentice Hall. 
[3] Aldrich, C. Learning by Doing, Section The Three Essential 
Elements to Successful Educational Experiences: Simulations, 
Games and Pedagogy.Page 79-96. Publisher Pfeiffer year 
2005 San Francisco 
[4] Miller. R.B.  Psychological considerations in the design of 
training equipment. ; 1953. Report No.: WADC-TR-54-563. 
[5] Glavin R&MNJ. Low- to high-fidelity simulation – a 
continuum of medical education? MEDICAL EDUCATION. 
2003; 37: p. 22-28. 
[6] Christiernin, L.G. “Layered Design Concepts, Case Studies 
and Processes – Theories and Implementations” Doctoral 
thesis, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg University, 
Göteborg, Sweden, 2007. 
[7] International Maritime Organization. IMO. [Online].; 2015. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.imo.org/MediaCentre/Press 
Briefings/Pages/02-WMD-launch.aspx#.VUsfDc4wyfQ  
[cited 2015 05 02]. 
[8] International Maritime Organization. STCW 1978. [Online].. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.imo.org/OurWork/Human 
Element/TrainingCertification/Pages/STCW-Convention.aspx 
[cited 2015 04 25].  
[9] International Maritime Organization. STCW 1978. [Online].. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.imo.org/OurWork/Human 
Element/TrainingCertification/Pages/STCW-Convention.aspx 
[cited 2015 04 25]. 
[10] International Maritime Organisation. Radar navigation, radar 
plotting and use of ARPA. 2010th ed. London: IMO; 1999. 
[11] International Maritime Organization. Radar, ARPA, bridge 
teamwork, search and rescue. 2010th ed. London: IMO; 1999. 
[12] McGrenere, J. Baecker, R.M. and Booth. K.S. An Evaluation 
of a Multiple Interface Design Solution for Bloated Software. 
in The Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI2002). 2002. Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. 
[13] Mozeico, H. A Human/Computer Interface to Accommodate 
User Learning Stages. Communications of the ACM, 
Computing Practice, 1982. 25(2): p. 100-104. 
[14] Kaufman, L. and Weed. B. Too Much of a Good Thing?: 
Identifying and Resolving Bloat in the User Interface. in The 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI'98). 1998. Los Angeles, USA. 
[15] Linderoth J. Why gamers don´t learn more, a ecological 
approach to games as learning environment. Journal of 
gaming & Virtual Worlds. 2012;: p. 45-62. 
[16] Linderoth J. Det regelstyrda lärandet. In R.Säljö ALA&. 
Lärare i den uppkopplade skolan. Malmö: Gleerups; 2014. p. 
173-195. 
[17] Matteraketen. 1994. Levande böcker (1994). Matteraketen 
[PC-spel]. Levande böcker: Stockholm. 
[18] Frank A. Gamer mode. PhD Thesis. Stockholm: KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology, School of computer science and 
communication, Dept. of Media Technology and interaction 
design; 2014. Report No.: ISSN 1653-5723. 
[19] Säljö, R. (2000). Lärande i Praktiken (Learning in Practice), 
Studentlitteratur, Lund, Sverige. 
[20] Shneiderman, B. Promoting Universal Usability with Multi-
Layer Interface Design. in Conference on Universal Usability. 
2003. Vancover, British Columbia, Canada. 
[21] Christiernin, L.G., "Guiding the designer: A Radar Diagram 
Process for Applications with Multiple Layers," Interacting 
with Computers, vol. 22(2), pp: 107-122, March, 2010. 
[22] Christiernin, L.G. and Martin, A “A multi-layered aesthetical 
web-portal interface for governmental integration issues”. In 
Proc. of the International Conference on Advanced Visual 
Interfaces (AVI 2010), pp: 341-344, Rome, Italy, Maj, 2010. 
[23] Christiernin, L.G. Bäckman, R. Gidmark, M. and Persson, A. 
"iLayer: MLD in an Operating System Interface" In 
Proceedings of International Working Conference on 
Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI2006), pp: 87-90, Venezia, 
Italy, May, 2006. 
[24] Andersson, M.  Heldal, R. and Christiernin, L.G. “Applying 
Multi-Layered Design Aspects in a Role-Based Application – 
An Industrial Case Study”, In Proceedings of the International 
Conference in Human Computer Interaction, pp: 87-90, 
Phoenix, USA, November, 2005. 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

