Sensor-Hub: A Real-Time Data Integration  
and Processing Nexus for Adaptive C2 Systems 
 
Jean-François Gagnon, Sébastien Tremblay 
School of Psychology 
Université Laval 
Québec, Canada 
e-mail: jean-francois.gagnon.22@ulaval.ca 
sebastien.tremblay@psy.ulaval.ca 
Daniel Lafond, Martin Rivest, François Couderc 
Thales Research and Technology Canada 
Thales Canada 
Québec, Canada 
e-mail: daniel.lafond@ca.thalesgroup.com 
martin.rivest@ca.thalesgroup.com 
francois.couderc@ca.thalesgroup.com
 
Abstract—The present paper introduces the Sensor-Hub, a 
prototype tool for augmenting the common operating picture 
and adaptability of distributed teams in safety-critical 
environments. 
The 
Sensor-Hub 
aims 
to 
facilitate 
the 
integration and interpretation of data collected directly from 
humans augmented with sensing capability involved in the 
situation to produce timely and relevant information on the 
current functional state of operators, the situation and their 
environment. Herein, we elaborate on the development and 
validation of the sensing and interpretation framework, 
emphasising the key adaptation capabilities that it seeks to 
enable. Lastly, this paper illustrates three sectors of application 
of the Sensor-Hub: training of safety-critical team operations, 
real-time error-prevention and adaptation during operations, 
and 
assessment 
of 
inter-agent 
and 
human-technology 
interactions. 
Keywords-Augmenting humans with technology; sensing; 
modeling; situation awareness; network centric operations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sensing technologies have evolved to the point that 
valuable information on an evolving operation can not only 
be acquired with regards to observable characteristics of the 
environment, but also about the functional state of the team 
during the accomplishment of its mission [1][2][3]. 
Advanced human sensing tools provide the opportunity to 
increase decision making and situational awareness of 
personnel actively engaged in a task and their immediate 
environment. Applications exploiting such data have the 
potential to significantly improve individual and team 
situational awareness, safety, adaptability and performance – 
provided that the data is processed by valid and reliable 
assessment models.  
Situational awareness is defined as the perception of 
information pertaining to a situation, the comprehension of 
its meaning, and the projection of the situation into a near-
future [4][5]. It is widely posited that situational awareness is 
associated with operational success, as it is the basis for a 
Common Operating Picture (COP) within the response team. 
Unfortunately, the characteristics of many situations severely 
hinder the perception of data, its comprehension and 
consequently its projection into the future. This is the case, 
for instance, during emergency response. Emergency 
response is the active phase of emergency management at the 
occurrence of an incident. Team members involved in 
emergency response must coordinate their effort in order to 
perform effectively often in very stressful, life-threatening 
environments, despite the challenges of the geographically 
distributed nature of their work (e.g., the command center is 
frequently delocalized from the incident and first responders 
are often dispersed across the area of operations). The 
uncertainty and time pressure that characterise emergency 
response situations often severely constrains the quality of 
the COP, both at the tactical and operational levels. 
Moreover, the amount of information to consider is often 
considerable, pushing individuals’ cognitive capacities to 
their limit. The state of readiness of different team members 
can be particularly difficult to assess in such contexts. 
Despite these constraints, there is a growing effort to 
augment accessibility and reliability of information in these 
(or similar) environments [6]. The deployment of multiple 
sensors in these environments enables the application of a 
network-centric approach to operations. The concept of 
Network-Centric Operations (NCO) originates from the 
military domain and refers to linking networks of sensors, 
decision makers, and individual agents [7][8] to achieve 
information superiority. This approach strives to increase 
shared awareness, self-synchronization, and performance of 
the network as a whole [9]. Concepts pertaining to network-
centric operations can also be applied to emergency 
response, as many similarities exist between the two domains 
[10]. The objective of this paper is to discuss on how the 
developments in human sensing can take the NCO approach 
to a new level by enabling adaptive solutions to Command 
and Control (C2) in complex, distributed environments. To 
serve this purpose, we use the Sensor-Hub concept as a 
demonstrator of potential increased capabilities in the 
context of C2 and emergency response. 
  
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Emergency response 
personnel
Sensors
Integration + Interpretation
Adaptation
Deployed
In command center
Psychophysiological – EEG, 
ECG, EMG, fNIRS, GSR, etc.
Mobile device sensors – 
Kinetic sensors, GPS location, 
thermal, cameras, etc.
Model of task readiness (for 
error prevention)
Models/rules for generating 
feedback/alerts
Operator functional state 
model
Team management – 
Detection of user distress/
readiness
Alerts – Detection of critical 
events (e.g., fall, collision, 
explosion)
Prevention – Detection of 
error-prone user states
Information sharing – Spatio-
temporal coordination
* Data can either be collected 
passively (e.g. EEG) or actively (e.g. a 
picture taken by the operator)
 
Figure 1. Sensor-Hub Framework. 
 
This paper is divided into six sections. Section I sets the 
general context in which the Sensor-Hub could be deployed 
and implemented. Section II describes the potential sensing 
capabilities of the Sensor-Hub. Section III is concerned with 
the validation and the calibration of the higher-level models 
that will interpret the signals from the sensors. Section IV 
highlights the key features of the Sensor-Hub and discusses 
how these features could facilitate its implementation into 
different security and military contexts. Section V describes 
how the interpretation of sensors in the context of C2 and 
emergency response can trigger adaptive automation such as 
cognitive counter-measures. Finally, Section VI summarizes 
the critical components of the Sensor-Hub with regards to 
the concept of NCO. 
II. 
HUMAN SENSING AND SITUATION MODELING   
The Sensor-Hub aims to integrate and interpret data from 
multiple sensors mounted on emergency response personnel, 
either stationed in command centers or deployed in the field. 
Specifically, it integrates data from multiple sensors to 
derive metrics pertaining to Operators’ Functional State 
(OFS), and passively/actively captures data about the 
environment. The main innovative component of the Sensor-
Hub is its ability to model a series of data inputs (e.g., heart 
rate variability, velocity, blood pressure, positional data, 
temperature, etc.) and output relevant information about the 
functional state of the operator or the state of the operator’s 
immediate environment. The Sensor-Hub is designed with 
built-in models and decision rules (to be calibrated and 
validated using experimental data), and allows for specifying 
relationships/rules as necessary to adjust to new contexts, or 
to different functional state concepts. The Sensor-Hub builds 
upon existing sensing technologies by integrating their signal 
and interpreting the data to derive higher level concepts. 
Below we describe the modeling framework (Fig. 1). 
A. Sensing the Environment 
Safety-critical environments are rapidly changing, 
dynamic and complex, which make them hard to predict. 
Although different situations (e.g., a toxic gas leak and a 
residential fire) may require different types of information, 
the individuals in charge of emergency response will often 
be well situated to provide the required information to higher 
level decision makers or other responders arriving on site. 
Providing sensors to these individuals and allowing the 
information of these sensors to be integrated and distributed 
across the response team is a key factor to augment Situation 
Awareness (SA) in this context and to effectively adapt to 
the situation. The Sensor-Hub seeks to facilitate integration 
and sharing of environmental information by allowing 
tactical operators to capture (either passively or actively) 
geotagged pictures, video, sounds, and measurements such 
as pressure and temperature. This data can be distributed 
across team members, both at the tactical level and command 
levels to support decision making and create a more capable 
emergency 
workforce. 
The 
capacity 
to 
sense 
the 
environment will help provide timely and relevant support 
for coordination and collaboration between tactical 
responders.  
B. Sensing Operator Functional State (OFS) 
Considerable amount of effort is put in the development 
of systems aiming to monitor OFS – a concept that groups 
together the mediators of human performance in a given 
context. OFS is a multidimensional concept that represents 
the current capacity of an individual to carry out his/her task 
without errors. As stated by Hockey and Robert [11], OFS is 
intrinsically defined in relation to the task to be carried out 
and its associated costs in terms of cognitive and physical 
efforts. For instance, in remotely operated vehicle piloting 
tasks, OFS involves the capacity of the pilot to re-allocate 
his attention between tasks, deemed critical for responding 
appropriately to alarms. In this context, OFS may also 
involve fatigue and stress as they are all related to piloting 
performance. Systems aiming to determine OFS are mostly, 
if not all, based on the assessment of the psycho and 
neurophysiologic state of the operator and the interpretation 
of this signal to derive OFS-related concepts such as fatigue, 
mental workload and stress. The major value in OFS 
assessment is the ability to anticipate human error (i.e., 
recognize states with high error probabilities), allowing the 
user or team to take preventive action. Mobile assessments 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

of OFS are becoming increasingly feasible using wearable 
sensors. Furthermore, kinetic data and vital signs of 
deployed personnel can provide valuable information for 
increasing collaboration effectiveness and survivability. 
C. Sensing the Situation 
The OFS cannot be established solely by monitoring the 
operator, but requires information about the interactivity of 
the operator and the tasks; and on how efficient and 
responsive the operator is at performing his/her tasks [11]. 
Since there is most often a variety of tasks and sub-task to 
be carried out by operators in safety-critical environments, 
the accurate assessment of the OFS is directly related to the 
capacity to identify ongoing tasks and monitor modulations 
in performance. Determining the ongoing task remains a 
challenge, however, innovative techniques like dynamic 
cognitive task analysis [12] could be used to detect a pattern 
in the series of actions carried out by the operator and 
consequently infer the actual task being performed. 
Although this is not currently implemented in Sensor-Hub, 
having such a model capable of sensing the situation is key 
to augmenting the COP.  
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL CALIBRATION/VALIDATION 
The work in progress for the development of the 
integration and interpretation model within the Sensor-Hub 
involves several steps. First, an initial OFS model, based on 
existing literature, will be developed. This initial model will 
specify the filters applied to the incoming sensor data, the 
nature of the relationships between the different type of data 
generated by the sensors, and the format of the output 
generated. For the initial demonstration, the number of 
sensors used is restrained and will include heart rate monitor, 
global positioning system, and accelerometer. These sensors 
are chosen because they can provide several different metrics 
that were proven to be good indicators of operators’ state in 
previous studies [11]. Heart rate variability, breathing rate, 
speed and acceleration will most likely be integrated within 
the OFS model. A hybrid architecture for the OFS model is 
adopted to allow for flexibility, meaning that it can easily be 
adapted to fit a wide variety of data with different properties. 
Both logical rules and the general class of regression models 
are implemented within the Sensor-Hub. Regression-based 
models have a demonstrated capacity to fit highly non linear 
data in similar contexts [13], whereas logical rules allow for 
quick implementation of disjunctive or conjunctive rules, for 
instance, which may be harder to model with regressions. 
Disjunctive rules may allow, for instance, one to differentiate 
between mental and physical workload based on heart rate. 
Second, the OFS model will be empirically calibrated 
through the observation of pilot participants completing an 
emergency response scenario. The appropriate calibration of 
the relationship between the data collected by the sensors 
and the various concepts that the Sensor-Hub aims to 
monitor (e.g., OFS and critical events in the environment) 
requires empirical testing in order to ensure good sensitivity 
and specificity. This involves a realistic emergency response 
scenario putting together multiple sub-tasks designed to be as 
close as possible to the real operational context. This 
scenario is divided into multiple phases with varying levels 
of mental demand, team coordination demands, physical 
demands, and environmental states. Given the live nature of 
the scenario (i.e., emphasis on realism rather than 
experimental control in simplified conditions), a good deal of 
noise in the measurement of the aforementioned concepts is 
to be expected. The modeling approach thus focuses on 
simplicity and robustness at the cost of raw accuracy. The 
scenarios are implemented into the SYnRGY simulation 
platform. As illustrated in Fig.2, the Safety-critical scenarios 
involving multidisciplinary teams of emergency responders 
are scripted and recorded (left). The responders’ interface (in 
command centers) is composed of a geographic information 
system and multiple panels used for decision making, 
communications and displaying mission critical information 
(right).  
 
 
Figure 2. SYnRGY Simulation platform. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

The platform allows for human in-the-loop simulations 
of safety-critical situations for both deployed and command 
center personnel [14]. These simulations allow the 
collection of data for model calibration in this context. 
Thirdly, model validity will be tested using different 
participants on a similar, but different emergency response 
scenario. The participants will be emergency management 
experts to improve the validity of the results. The purpose of 
this validation is to evaluate the predictive power of the 
model. Additionally, volunteers participating in the 
validation scenario will be asked (retrospectively) to rate the 
level of each of the output concepts at different moments in 
time. These added constraints will allow further tuning of 
the model. The developed scenario will enable the 
calibration and validation of the OFS model, which are 
human factors related issues, and to test for scalability and 
latency of the system which are technology-related issues.  
IV. 
TOOLSET 
A key feature of the Sensor-Hub is its toolset to facilitate 
(1) the integration and interpretation of new sensors and (2) 
visualisation of its outputs. Since OFS modeling is in its 
infancy, the development of each model is tedious and may 
represent an important obstacle, especially for non-
specialists. 
The 
Sensor-Hub 
aims 
to 
facilitate 
the 
development of the OFS model by providing its users with 
pre implemented models and tuning tools. For instance, users 
can add or remove logical conditions to increase fit between 
inputs (i.e., data from sensor) and outputs (i.e., OFS). 
Calibration of the model is also facilitated by the availability 
of validated scenarios implemented within SYnRGY. These 
scenarios are specifically designed to vary cognitive demand, 
teamwork, and physical demand and consequently constitute 
an efficient calibrating environment. Moreover, data 
collected through the simulation platform constitutes an 
important 
referential 
database 
for 
further 
model 
development. In addition to modeling tools, the Sensor-Hub 
provides a component for visualizing the inputs and outputs 
of the model which may provide additional insight for model 
calibration or for decision makers in operational contexts. 
V. 
ADAPTABILITY 
Within the suggested framework, the Sensor-Hub 
interprets raw data to create mission-relevant information, 
which could serve as critical events for adaptive systems. For 
instance, in a safety-critical task training context, the Sensor-
Hub can provide useful feedback to tactical operators during 
debriefings or even in real-scale exercises. Real-time 
assessment of cognitive load, for instance, has been shown to 
be insightful in the improvement of training [16]. From this 
point of view, what is adaptive in the system is the team of 
responders per se rather than the Sensor-Hub. The latter is 
the enabler, and so provides information required for 
triggering team adaptation. Adaptive systems, in general, 
would benefit from inputs from an assessment of the 
situation, OFS and of the environment that the tactical 
operators are facing [15]. Such adaptive systems can, for 
instance, offer assistance to the operators involved in safety-
critical missions when detecting critical OFS levels that are 
likely to lead to critical failures or when detecting an 
environmental threat. Moreover, because environmental 
information can be assessed by the Sensor-Hub, the adaptive 
system could provide tactical operators with additional 
informational inputs (i.e., the information flow is bi-
directional). Finally, this human-sensing and analysis 
capability may also be useful as an assessment tool for 
comprehensive 
assessments 
of 
human-technology 
interactions or team interactions in a research and 
development context. In the context of NCOs, and 
particularly emergency response, the Sensor-Hub can 
provide critical information on the OFS of first responders 
for real-time adaptation. One of our currently envisioned 
applications would use the high-level assessment of the 
functional state to suggest task re-allocation to commanders 
for timely team management [17]. Task re-allocation is 
deemed critical for highly dynamic C2 situations such as 
emergency response [11]. The adaptive component of the 
system, triggered by the OFS, is not fully automated, leaving 
the final decision and responsibility in the hands of the 
commanders.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The current paper discussed how human sensing can 
support the NCO approach to C2 and emergency response by 
enabling adaptive solutions in dealing with the challenges of 
complex and dynamic distributed environments. We 
illustrate how the data from physiological sensors can be 
interpreted into higher-level concepts and trigger adaptive 
“support” to the commanders. The Sensor-Hub framework 
aims to provide an advanced human sensor integration and 
modeling capability to support a new and unparalleled 
network-centric 
emergency 
response 
capability. 
The 
framework is nonetheless generic and widely applicable to 
other domains. Three potential applications of the Sensor-
Hub would provide adaptive capabilities to teams evolving 
in safety-critical environments: 1) Training of safety-critical 
team 
operations, 
2) 
Real-time 
error-prevention 
and 
adaptation during operations, and 3) Assessment of inter-
agent and human-technology interactions. Others have also 
developed sensor integration tools relevant to OFS 
measurement [1][2][18]. However, the key differentiator in 
the development of the Sensor-Hub is its focus on facilitating 
the assessment and decision making process by giving a 
simple yet flexible toolset for editing and calibrating the 
interpretation model, based on psychophysiological theory 
and on empirical evidence. Such an empirical evidence is 
also greatly facilitated by the scenarios implemented with the 
SYnRGY simulation platform. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by Thales Research and 
Technology Canada and by an internship fund granted to 
Jean-François Gagnon by the MITACS Accelerate program.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Matthews, N. J. McDonald, P. Hervieux, P. J. Turner, and 
M. A. Steindorf, “A wearable physiological sensor suite for 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

unobtrusive monitoring of physiological and cognitive state,” 
29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE, pp. 5276-
5281, August 2007, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4353532 
[2] P. Alexandros and N. G. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable 
sensor-based systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: IEEE Transactions on 
Applications and Reviews, vol. 40, pp. 1-12, January 2010, 
doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2009.2032660. 
[3] K. M. Stanney, et al., “Augmented cognition: An overview,” 
Reviews of human factors and ergonomics, vol. 5, pp. 195-
224, June 2009, doi: 10.1518/155723409X448062. 
[4] M. R. Endsley, “Toward a theory of situation awareness in 
dynamic systems,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 37, pp. 32-64, March 
1995, doi: 10.1518/001872095779049543. 
[5] R. Rousseau, S. Tremblay, and R. Breton, “Defining and 
Modeling Situation Awareness: A Critical Review,” In S. 
Banbury and S. Tremblay (Eds), A Cognitive Approach to 
Situation Awareness: Theory, Measures and Application, 
Aldershot, UK, Ashgate, pp. 3-21, 2004. 
[6] S. Vieweg, A. Hughes, K. Starbird, and L. Palen, 
“Microblogging during two natural hazards events: What 
twitter may contribute to situational awareness,” Proceedings 
of ACM Conference on Computer Human Interaction (CHI), 
pp. 1079-1088, April 2010, doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753486. 
[7] A. K. Cebrowski and J. J. Garstka, “Network-centric warfare: 
Its origin and future,” In US Naval Institute Proceedings, vol. 
124, pp. 28-35, 1998. 
[8] D. Caterinicchia and M. French, “Network-centric warfare: 
Not there yet,” Federal Computing Week, vol. 9, 2003.  
[9] J. Garstka, “Implementation of Network Centric Warfare,” 
Transformation Trends, vol. 28, 2004.  
[10] M. Stanovich, “Network-centric emergency response: The 
challenges of training for a new command and control 
paradigm,” Journal of emergency management, vol. 4, no. 2 
pp. 57-64, 2006.  
[11] G. Hockey and J. Robert, “Operator functional state: the 
assessment and prediction of human performance degradation 
in complex tasks,” Amsterdam, NL: IOS Press, vol. 355, pp. 
1-383, April 2003. 
[12] J-F. Gagnon, P. Jeuniaux, G. Dubé, and S. Tremblay, 
“Dynamic cognitive task modeling of complexity discovery A 
mix of process tracing and task analysis,” Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. vol. 55, pp. 1346-1350 
September 2011, doi: 10.1177/1071181311551280. 
[13] H. Ayaz et al., “Estimation of cognitive workload during 
simulated air traffic control using optical brain imaging 
sensors,” Foundations of Augmented Cognition. Directing the 
Future of Adaptive Systems, pp. 549–558, January 2011, doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.06.023 
[14] J-F. Gagnon, F. Couderc, M. Rivest, S. Banbury, and S. 
Tremblay, “Using SYnRGY to support design and validation 
studies of emergency management solutions,” Proceedings of 
the 10th International ISCRAM Conference, May 2013. 
[15] J. Allanson and S. H. Fairclough, “A research agenda for 
physiological computing,” Interacting with computers, vol. 
16, no. 5, pp. 857-878, October 2004. 
[16] J. T. Coyne, C. Baldwin, A. Cole, C. Sibley, and D. M. 
Roberts, “Applying Real Time Physiological Measures of 
Cognitive Load to Improve Training,” In D. D. Schmorrow, I. 
V. Estabrooke, & M. Grootjen (Eds.), Foundations of 
Augmented Cognition, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 
pp. 469–478, July 2009. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-02812-0. 
[17] D. Lafond, H. Irandoust, S. Tremblay, W. Price, and A. R. 
Benaskeur, “A Context-sensitive functional model of 
teamwork operations,” Proceedings of the 14th International 
Command and Control Technology Symposium. Santa 
Monica, CA, pp. 2-19, June 2009. 
[18] S. Pappada, A. Geyer, K. Durkee, J. Freeman, and J. Cohn, 
“Modeling Operational Workload for Adaptive Aiding In 
Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Operations,” Aviation, 
Space, and Environmental Medicine, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 331-
332, April 2013. 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-341-4
ADAPTIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

