Adaptive Construction Behavior in Robot Swarms
Yara Khaluf
Department of Information Technology
Ghent University
Ghent, Belgium
Email: yara.khaluf@ugent.be
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the collective behavior of
a robot swarm that emerges in constructing walls for isolation
purposes. Collective construction is one of the highly required
behaviors for the future applications at which robotics systems
are planned to be deployed. The construction task is performed
using a swarm of homogenous robots. We, furthermore, present
a probabilistic approach that allows us to design an adaptive
construction behavior. Our results are veriﬁed using physics-
based simulations.
Keywords–Robot swarms; Collective construction; Adaptive be-
havior.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the fascinating self-organized behaviors in nature is
collective construction, that is observed by many social insects
such as ants and bees [1]. Collective construction refers to
the ability of simple individuals to achieve the construction of
complex structures in a self-organized manner by following
a set of simple rules. A prominent example can be found by
termites, which are able to build complex and huge mounds
without any detailed plan. Termites live in societies where the
collective power outstrips that of the individuals. They commu-
nicate between each other directly and indirectly through their
environment (Stigmergy) in order to take decisions related to
depositing their pieces of building material, see [2]. Swarm
robotics is a promising approach in which a large number
of simple robots collaborate to achieve a goal beyond the
capability of an individual robot, see [3]. Swarm robotics was
mainly inspired by natural swarms and has inherited their
advantages including fault-tolerance, scalability, and ﬂexibility.
Those advantages allow swarm robotics to provide an efﬁcient
solution for a wide range of applications, in which constructing
particular structures may be a fundamental task.
In this paper, swarm robotics is used to achieve a collective
behavior that results in constructing a wall to separate a work-
ing arena in two parts. This task can be used in real scenarios
to prevent the access from one part of a particular arena to its
another part or to isolate dangerous parts. Construction tasks
can be an important part of military tasks, agriculture tasks,
civil tasks, and others. We start by designing a self-organized
construction behavior. Afterwards we present a probabilistic
approach in order to turn our behavior into an adaptive one
that can deal with the various dynamics of the environment,
e.g. recognizing the construction progress and thus the end of a
construction task or the need to isolate a new part of the arena
by constructing a new wall. The rest of the paper is organized
as in the following: Section II introduces the wall construction
problem and presents the performance metrics (quality metrics)
used in measuring the quality of the obtained solutions. Section
III is dedicated to discuss the related work that has focused
on constructive behaviors in natural and robot swarms. The
construction behavior of a robot swarm is described in Section
IV, in which both the general and the adaptive construction
behaviors are presented. A set of physics-based simulations
and the discussion of their results are presented in Section V
and the paper is concluded in Section VI.
II.
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
A homogeneous swarm of N robots – all are foot-bots
having the same hardware – is used to build a wall that isolates
an undesired (dangerous) part of the arena from the rest of the
arena. The wall should be constructed in a way that access is
prevented between the two arena parts. The location at which
the wall is required to be constructed is referred to as the
construction area, which can be indicated using speciﬁc envi-
ronmental parameters. In our scenario, the construction area is
indicated by using a black strip on the ﬂoor. Furthermore, we
assume that M building blocks (cylinder shaped) are scattered
initially at the safe side of the arena, where M is equal to or
greater than the amount of blocks required to build the desired
wall. The building blocks are identical and the block can be
transported using a single robot. The required height of the
wall is equal to the height of a building block. Thus, the wall
is built using a single layer of blocks i.e., no vertical building
is needed. Since no exact notions of the building process are
encoded in the robots’ behavior, constructing the required wall
represents a serious challenge.
Our goal, as mentioned above, is to isolate a dangerous
part of the arena from a safe one. Therefore, the constructed
wall should prevent intrusions by being as compact as possible.
Moreover, it should provide the maximum coverage possible
over the boarder between the two sections of the arena, and
ﬁnally, it should consume as less building blocks as possible
to preserve such blocks for potential construction tasks in the
future. We deﬁne three performance metrics to measure the
quality of the wall that needs to be constructed along the y-
axis of the arena, see Figure 1 for illustration:
•
The wall thinness is deﬁned as:
Wthinness =



0
if M = 0,
1 −
σ(X)
xmax − xmin
otherwise
where σ is the standard deviation and X is the set
of the x coordinates of the building blocks within the
construction. xmax and xmin are the maximum of the
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Arena	  Part	  to	  Isolate	  
Arena	  Part	  1	  
Arena	  Part	  2	  
X	  
Y	  
x1	  (xmin)	  
x3	   x4,5	   x6	   x7	  (xmax)	  
y1	  
max{yi	  –	  yi-­‐1}	  
S
y2	  
y3	  
y5	   y4	  
y6	  
x2	  
y7	  
R
c1	  
c2	  
c3	  
c4	  
c5	  
c6	  
c7	  
ConstrucFon	  Area	  
Figure 1. Illustration of the quality measures used in the performance
metrics.
x coordinates and the minimum of the x coordinates,
respectively. The thinness measure takes its values in
the range [0, 1] and an optimal solution is the one
which maximizes this measure and thus leads to build
a thiner wall.
•
The wall compactness is deﬁned as:
Wcompactness =



0
if M < 2,
max{yi − yi−1}
R
otherwise
Where max(yi−yi−1) is, as illustrated in Figure 1, the
maximum distance between two consecutive blocks
on the y-axis. R is the diameter of a construction
block. Compactness is best when it is close to 1. A
value lower than 1 means that the maximum distance
(projected onto the y-axis) between the center of the
blocks is smaller than R. Whereas, a value larger
than 1 means that the maximum distance between the
center of the blocks is smaller than R.
•
The wall coverage is deﬁned as:
Wcoverage =



0
if M = 0,
P#placed blocks
i=1
ci
S
otherwise
Where ci is the diameter projection of the i-th block
in the construction area on the y-axis (in the sum
we remove the overlaps of the projections) as shown
in Figure 1. S is the size of the construction area
along the y-axis. Coverage takes values in [0, 1] and
an optimal solution is the one which maximizes this
measure and thus leads to a larger coverage.
III.
RELATED WORK
Collective construction is a well-known behavior in natural
swarms such as social insects, in which complex structures
are achieved in a self-organized manner. Authors in [4] have
reviewed some of the basic mechanisms used by social insects
to build structures such as mounds by termites, brood structures
in honey bees, and others. Other examples can be found in [5]
and [6]. Furthermore, several authors tried to formalize the
construction behaviors observed in nature in models, such as
in [7] and [8].
In swarm robotics and based on its signiﬁcant importance,
collective construction was tackled in several works. In [9], the
authors proposed a system of 20 small bulldozers employing
simple rules to level the ground at a lunar construction site. In
[10], the authors have introduced a minimalist solution inspired
from the behavior of the Leptothorax tuberointerruptus ants to
build a defensive wall using two templates which were created
once using a white strip and second using halogen lights.
The presented approach is relatively inﬂexible where turning
angles and particular traveling distances are hard coded. The
authors in [11] have tackled the problem of constructing a
wall in which blocks should be of alternated colors and robots
communicate to agree on the next feasible color of the building
block. This work focuses on the role the communication plays
in coordinating the behaviors of the robots. This is illustrated
by showing that exchanging the color of the last block reduces
the attempts to place a block of the same color as next.
Authors in [12] have developed a mathematical model based
on a particular species of ant called blind bulldozing, for the
purpose of clearing an open area out of rocks. In [7], the
authors considered construction problem without addressing
the issue of generating pre-speciﬁed structures. Some works
have presented approaches, in which the building blocks are
the mobile robots themselves as in [13] and [14]. In these
approaches, having a global knowledge about all agents is
likely required, which on the other hand restricts the ability
of building a self-organized and scalable system.
Differently from the works mentioned above, the approach
presented in this paper is a self-organized, scalable and
adaptive approach for robot swarms in which robots work
in a full autonomy. Neither building instructions nor global
knowledge are available and the quality of the constructed
wall is assessed using the above-mentioned set of performance
(quality) metrics.
IV.
THE CONSTRUCTION BEHAVIOR
In this section, we describe the behavior of the individual
robots that emerges in constructing walls to isolate areas
for preventing undesired access. The design starts from the
microscopic level (individual level) at which we deﬁne the
rules applied by the robots and ends up at the macroscopic
level (swarm level) at which we measure the overall perfor-
mance. Characterizing the link between the microscopic and
the macroscopic behaviors is one of the main well-known
challenges in swarm robotics, in general, and particularly
in this task, where the macroscopic behavior is restricted
to speciﬁc criteria. In the following, we are presenting two
behaviors: the general construction behavior and the adaptive
construction behavior.
A. The general construction behavior
In the general construction behavior, we focus on designing
a robot behavior that leads to construct a wall for isolation
in an unknown environment. Robots which are applying the
general construction behavior perform the following tasks:
searching for building blocks; gripping the found blocks;
navigating to the construction area; and ﬁnally unload the
blocks and tune the wall before they start again to search
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

for new building blocks. Figure 2 shows the a ﬁnite state
machine (FSM) that describes the behavior of the individual
robot on the microscopic level. The robot starts initially in the
searching state. In this state, it wanders randomly around the
part of the arena at which the building blocks are scattered
trying to ﬁnd a block. Robots are required to avoid gripping
blocks that are already gripped by other robots (e.g. using
broadcasts). As soon as a block is found, the robot comes
closer to the block attempts to grip it. In case the gripping was
successful, the robot starts moving towards the construction
area to place the building block. While moving, robots avoid
other robots and objects using both their camera and proximity
sensors. As soon as the robot reaches the construction area,
it aims to unload the building block at the best possible
position, taking into consideration other building blocks that
are already unloaded. Achieving an efﬁcient unload that meets
the quality measures deﬁned above is a non-trivial task. In
the implemented construction behavior, we allow the robots
to exploit the moveable gripper for adjusting the unloading
position so that the distance to the nearest block with no
two direct neighbors is minimized. This behavior allows to
increase the compactness of the constructed wall and decrease
its thinness. After ﬁnish unloading the building block, the robot
switches to a special state referred to as the wander state. This
state is identical to the searching state, except that robots at
this state are not allowed to grip building blocks. This state is
activated each time a robot unloads a building block and while
the robot is moving near to the construction area for preventing
the robots to grip blocks that are already placed as a part of
the wall. The robot stays in the wander state for a particular
time before it switches back to the standard searching state
and becomes again able to grip blocks.
Search
Wander
Move to
Construction
Area
Tune and
Unload
Gripping
Lose block
Tune timeout
Reach area
Wander
timeout
Object is
in gripper
Find block
Lose block
Figure 2. The ﬁnite state machine of the robots’ construction behavior.
B. The adaptive construction behavior
General construction behavior allows for the construction
of a structure (here a wall) at a desired location of the
arena. However, it does not include the recognition of the
construction dynamics. Therefore, we extend the general con-
struction behavior to the adaptive construction behavior, in
which robots tune their behaviors in respect to the dynamics
of the construction task. The absence of building instructions
and the dynamics of the construction process belong to the
main challenges of a construction task. The main difﬁculty
for the individual robots would be to recognize the degree of
progress achieved at the macroscopic level. However, recog-
nize this macroscopic feature and adopt the individual behavior
accordingly to it allows the swarm to cope with the dynamics
of the task and thus perform it more efﬁciently. Figure 3 shows
the bi-directional link between the microscopic behavior of the
individuals and the macroscopic performance of the swarm.
Macroscopic	  Construc.on	  Behavior	  
Microscopic	  Construc.on	  Behavior	  
Perceive	  the	  construc.on	  
progress	  
Tune	  the	  individual	  construc.on	  
behavior	  
Figure 3. The micro-macro link in the construction task.
In order to recognize the dynamics of the construction task
at the microscopic (individual) level, robots measure the time
required to unload their building blocks at the construction
area. This time is referred to as the unload-time – it starts
from the moment the robot arrives carrying the building block
to the construction area up to the moment the robot unloads
the block successfully. It includs the time spent by the robot
looking for a suitable location for unloading the block. While
the construction of the wall proceeds, it becomes more difﬁcult
for the robots to ﬁnd a free location to unload their building
blocks and hence longer unload-time is experienced. Longer
the time the robot spends in searching for a suitable location
to unload, higher the probability is of having the progress
of the construction at an advanced stage. Consequently, less
blocks need to be transported to the construction area and less
robots are required for continuing the task. Based on that, in
the adaptive construction behavior robots can be in one of
the following states: the constructing state or the resting state.
At the constructing state the robot participates in the building
activities captured in Figure 2. Whereas, the resting state is
selected when the robot decides to leave the construction
task for the moment. The switch between these two states
is performed probabilistically. The probability to switch from
the constructing state to the resting state is denoted by Probr
and the probability of switching from the resting state to the
constructing state is denoted by Probc.
Probc = 1 − Probr
During the task execution, a robot which is at the constructing
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

state switches to the resting state with the probability Probr
or stays in the constructing state with the probability Probc.
Similarly, a robot at the resting state switches to the construct-
ing state with the probability Probc or stays at the resting state
with the probability Probr. Figure 4 illustrates the two states
and the different switching probabilities.
Construc)ng	  
Probc	  =	  1	  -­‐	  Probr	  
Probr	  
Probr	  
Probc	  =	  1	  -­‐	  Probr	  
Res)ng	  
Figure 4. Robot’s states under the adaptive construction behavior.
Let us observe the particular transport of the i-th building
block by a robot. We use ∆ti to denote the time required
to unload the i-th block. This is the unload-time of the i-th
block and it is measured independently by the robot itself. The
unload-time of the previous block is denoted by ∆ti−1. If the
robot has the following condition true:
∆ti >= ∆ti−1 + α
where α is a design parameter, it means that the latest unload-
time was longer than the previous unload-time with the period
α. Thus, the robot starts to contact its local neighbors in order
to inform them that the unload action is getting more difﬁcult.
This indicates a speciﬁc progress in the construction process.
Therefore, less blocks maybe required and consequently less
robots need to participate on the building task. Each robot that
receives the message increases its resting probability Probr as
follows:
Probr = min{Probr + Θr, 1}
where Θr is the probability increment step and it represents a
design parameter.
However, when the robot perceives a shorter unload-time than
the previous one meeting the following condition:
∆ti < ∆ti−1 + α
It is interpreted at the individual level as having an easier
unload action than the previous one. This can be the result of
having the construction task at an early stage, or having a gap
in the constructed wall that needs to be ﬁlled with blocks. It can
be also an indication of a new section in the arena that needs to
be isolated by constructing a new wall. Whatever the reason
is, the robot starts to broadcast this information to its local
neighbors announcing the increasing need to participate on
the construction activities. This message decreases the resting
probability (Probr) and increases the constructing probability
accordingly, as in the following:
Probr = max{Probr − Θc, 0}
where Θc is the probability increment step and it represents a
design parameter. In this paper, we assume to have Θc = Θr
The adaptive construction behavior can result in the following
improvements:
•
Recognizing the dynamics of the macroscopic con-
struction performance and acting accordingly.
•
Providing a resource-efﬁcient solution: by using the
necessary amount of building blocks and preserve the
rest for other construction tasks.
•
Providing a robot-efﬁcient solution: by using the num-
ber of robots required currently. This leads to preserve
robots for joining new construction tasks.
Robots that apply the adaptive construction behavior exploit
both indirect communication (stigmergy) and local communi-
cations with their direct neighbors. Stigmergy can be observed
in the interpretation of the length of the unload-time by the
individual robots. This time is directly related to actions taken
by other robots, namely, to previous unload actions. Hence, it
represents a piece of information transferred using the physical
environment. Direct communication is used, on the other hand,
to inform the local neighbors about the difﬁculty of the unload
action in order to enable them to take an appropriate decision
concerning their next state.
V.
EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present a set of physics-based simula-
tions in order to verify our approaches performed using the
state-of-the-art simulator ARGoS [15]. ARGoS is an efﬁcient
simulator that allows to simulate large swarms of robots with
taking the desired level of physical details into consideration.
In our swarm, we are using foot-bots – wheeled robots
equipped with proximity sensors, cameras, a gripper, and a
range and bearing system. We consider a 6 × 4 m2 working
arena that is divided in three parts: a 0.8 × 4 m2 undesired
part (a dangerous section) which is depict in orange at the top
of the arena, a 4.5 × 4 m2 safe section that is depicted in
white, and the 0.7 × 4 m2 construction area. The construction
area is indicated by a black strip on the ﬂoor in addition to
a set of lights that helps navigating the robots at the working
arena. The robot navigation is performed as a combination
between random walks and attraction and repulsion to the
lights deployed in the environment. In real-world scenarios, the
construction area could be indicated with other environmental
parameters such as light density, humidity, or others. We are
using cylinder building blocks, each with a diameter of 0.2 m,
thus 20 building blocks are enough to construct the desired
wall. Initially, both robots and building blocks are scattered
uniformly at the safe section of the arena and the positions are
chosen at random for each new experiment. We set the running
time of each experiment to 3000 seconds. Furthermore, two
conﬁgurations of the construction experiments are used, one
with 20 building blocks and the other is with 60 building
blocks.
As mentioned above, 20 building blocks is the amount
sufﬁcient to build the desired wall based on the dimensions
of the constructions area. We ﬁrst allow the robots to use
the general construction behavior and afterwards the adaptive
construction behavior. A set of snapshots at different time steps
during a particular trail of the construction process are depicted
in Figure 5 and in Figure 6. As we can notice, both behaviors
perform well in constructing the wall according to the required
criteria. However, the remarkable difference in the performance
between the general and the adaptive behavior can be seen in
the experiments in which 60 building blocks are used. Figure
7 shows the progress of the construction when robots are using
the general construction behavior. As we can see, robots in this
case are not able to recognize the progress of the construction
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

process over time. Thus, they are not reacting in an adaptive
manner to the dynamics of the construction task. Therefore,
they continue to use building blocks as long as they are
available or up to the end of the experiment (i.e., second 3000).
This leads to the thick structure we can observe in Figure 7c.
On the contrary, when robots use the adaptive construction
behavior, they become able to recognize and adapt to the
dynamics of the construction task. This is what we can observe
clearly in Figure 8, in which robots stop to participate on the
construction task over time affected by the feedback given
by other robots about the increasing difﬁculty of unloading a
building block. The improvement in the quality of the obtained
wall is clear in Figure 8c. Moreover, Figure 8 depicts no
increment in the mass of the wall after the time step 2000. This
means that robots applying the adaptive construction behavior
become much earlier available to join other tasks than robots
applying the general construction behavior, thanks to the ability
of recognizing the end of a construction task.
(a) At t.s. 300
(b) At t.s. 500
(c) At t.s. 1000
Figure 5. Snapshots of the wall construction task using 20 blocks at different
time steps. Robots are applying the general construction behavior.
(a) At t.s. 300
(b) At t.s. 500
(c) At t.s. 1000
Figure 6. Snapshots of the wall construction task using 20 blocks at different
time steps. Robots are applying the adaptive construction behavior.
We have repeated each of the 4 experiments, presented
above, 30 times and the quality measures of the obtained walls
in addition of the number of used blocks were averaged. Figure
9 shows the number of building blocks used in constructing
the desired wall (We depict both the mean and the standard
deviation). In Figure 9a, the available amount of blocks is 20
and we can observe that the amounts used by both the general
and the adaptive behavior are similar. Whereas, the amount
(a) At t.s. 1000
(b) At t.s. 2000
(c) At t.s. 3000
Figure 7. Snapshots of the wall construction task using 60 blocks at different
time steps. Robots are applying the general construction behavior.
(a) At t.s. 1000
(b) At t.s. 2000
(c) At t.s. 3000
Figure 8. Snapshots of the wall construction task using 60 blocks at different
time steps. Robots are applying the adaptive construction behavior.
used by the general behavior diverges signiﬁcantly from the
one used by the adaptive behavior when 60 blocks are used.
This what we can see in Figure 9b, in which the amount of
blocks used by the adaptive behavior stays near the sufﬁcient
amount.
0
1000
2000
3000
Time (in seconds)
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Mean #Blocks used in construction
General construction
Adaptive construction
(a) 20 building blocks.
0
1000
2000
3000
Time (in seconds)
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Mean #Blocks used in construction
General construction
Adaptive construction
(b) 60 building blocks.
Figure 9. The number of building blocks used by both the general and the
adaptive construction behaviors. (a) when 20 blocks are used, (b) when 60
blocks are used.
The quality metrics of the wall were averaged over 30 runs
of the different experiments and as we can see in Figure 10,
Figure 11, and Figure 12 both behaviors: the general and the
adaptive have achieved walls with a high quality and with
near-to-optimal thinness, compactness and coverage.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

0
1000
2000
3000
Time (in seconds)
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Mean of wall thiness
General construction
Adaptive construction
(a) 20 building blocks.
0
1000
2000
3000
Time (in seconds)
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Mean of wall thiness
General construction
Adaptive construction
(b) 60 building blocks.
Figure 10. The wall thinness achieved by both the general and the adaptive
construction behaviors. (a) when 20 blocks are used, (b) when 60 blocks are
used.
Time (in seconds)
0
1000
2000
3000
Mean of of wall compactness
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
General construction
Adaptive construction
(a) 20 building blocks.
0
1000
2000
3000
Time (in seconds)
-2
0
2
4
6
Mean of of wall compactness
General construction
Adaptive construction
(b) 60 building blocks.
Figure 11. The wall compactness achieved by both the general and the
adaptive construction behaviors. (a) when 20 blocks are used, (b) when 60
blocks are used.
0
1000
2000
3000
Time (in seconds)
0
0.5
1
Mean of wall coverage
General construction
Adaptive construction
(a) 20 building blocks.
0
1000
2000
3000
Time (in seconds)
0
0.5
1
Mean of wall coverage
General construction
Adaptive construction
(b) 60 building blocks.
Figure 12. The wall coverage achieved by both the general and the adaptive
construction behaviors. (a) when 20 blocks are used, (b) when 60 blocks are
used.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The self-organized construction behavior is a main part of
a wide range of tasks at which swarm robotics are planned to
be deployed in the future. Therefore, it represents an attractive
research challenge, speciﬁcally when no building instructions
are known a priori or coded in the system. In this paper, we ﬁrst
deﬁne a set of quality criteria of the desired wall. Afterwards,
we propose two construction behaviors that can be applied by
a swarm of simple and homogenous robots. The ﬁrst is the
general construction behavior, which includes a set of simple
rules that allow the robots to wander in an unknown arena,
search for building blocks, grip them and navigate to where
they should be placed. One of the main challenges, here, is
to unload the building block properly such that the emergent
wall respects the given quality metrics. The general behavior
performs optimal, when only the sufﬁcient amount of building
blocks is available or when the time of the construction task is
set to be the required one. The adaptive construction behavior,
on the other hand, is designed using a probabilistic approach
to cope with the dynamics of the construction task. It allows
the robots to recognize the progress of the construction task
over time and to act accordingly. The adaptive construction
behavior achieves high quality walls similar to the general
construction behavior. However, it both avoids the use of
unnecessary building blocks and sets the robots earlier free
for participating on other tasks through realizing the end of
the current construction task.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Franks, A. Wilby, B. Silverman, and C. Tofts, “Self-organizing nest
construction in ants: sophisticated building by blind bulldozing,” Animal
behaviour, vol. 44, 1992, pp. 357–375.
[2]
E. Bonabeau, “Editor’s introduction: stigmergy,” Artiﬁcial Life, vol. 5,
no. 2, 1999, pp. 95–96.
[3]
G. Beni, “From swarm intelligence to swarm robotics,” in Swarm
Robotics.
Springer, 2005, pp. 1–9.
[4]
G. Theraulaz, J. Gautrais, S. Camazine, and J. Deneubourg, “The
formation of spatial patterns in social insects: from simple behaviours
to complex structures,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
vol. 361, no. 1807, 2003, pp. 1263–1282.
[5]
E. Bonabeau, G. Theraulaz, J. Deneubourg, S. Aron, and S. Camazine,
“Self-organization in social insects,” Trends in Ecology & Evolution,
vol. 12, no. 5, 1997, pp. 188–193.
[6]
O. Bruinsma and L. Wageningen, An analysis of building behaviour of
the termite Macrotermes subhyalinus (Rambur). Landbouwhogeschool
te Wageningen Wageningen, 1979.
[7]
E. Bonabeau, G. Theraulaz, J. Deneubourg, N. Franks, O. Rafelsberger,
J. Joly, and S. Blanco, “A model for the emergence of pillars, walls
and royal chambers in termite nests,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 353, no. 1375, 1998, pp.
1561–1576.
[8]
M. Beli´c, V. ˇSkarka, J. Deneubourg, and M. Lax, “Mathematical model
of honeycomb construction,” Journal of mathematical Biology, vol. 24,
no. 4, 1986, pp. 437–449.
[9]
R. Brooks, P. Maes, M. Mataric, and G. More, “Lunar base construction
robots,” in IEEE International Workshop on Intelligent Robots and
Systems ’90. ’Towards a New Frontier of Applications’, Proceedings.
(IROS).
IEEE, 1990, pp. 389–392.
[10]
C. Melhuish, J. Welsby, and C. Edwards, “Using templates for defensive
wall building with autonomous mobile ant-like robots,” in In Proceed-
ings of Towards Intelligent and Autonomous Mobile Robots, 1999.
[11]
J. Wawerla, G. Sukhatme, and M. Mataric, “Collective construction with
multiple robots,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 2696–2701.
[12]
C. Parker, H. Zhang, and C. Kube, “Blind bulldozing: multiple robot
nest construction,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS ), vol. 2.
IEEE, 2003, pp. 2010–2015.
[13]
E. Bahceci, O. Soysal, and E. S¸ahin, “A review: Pattern formation and
adaptation in multi-robot systems,” Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, Tech. Rep. CMU-RI-TR-03-43, 2003.
[14]
J. Fredslund and M. Mataric, “A general algorithm for robot formations
using local sensing and minimal communication,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics and Automation, vol. 18, no. 5, 2002, pp. 837–846.
[15]
C. Pinciroli, V. Trianni, R. O ´Grady, G. Pini, A. Brutschy, M. Brambilla,
N. Mathews, E. Ferrante, G. Di Caro, F. Ducatelle, M. Birattari,
L. Gambardella, and M. Dorigo, “ARGoS: a modular, parallel, multi-
engine simulator for multi-robot systems,” Swarm Intelligence, vol. 6,
no. 4, 2012, pp. 271–295.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-463-3
ADAPTIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

