SensAI+Expanse
Adaptation on Human Behaviour Towards Emotional Valence Prediction
Nuno A. C. Henriques
BioISI
Faculdade de Ciˆencias
Universidade de Lisboa
Portugal
nach@edu.ulisboa.pt
Helder Coelho
BioISI
Faculdade de Ciˆencias
Universidade de Lisboa
Portugal
hcoelho@di.fc.ul.pt
Leonel Garcia-Marques
CICPSI
Faculdade de Psicologia
Universidade de Lisboa
Portugal
garcia_marques@sapo.pt
Abstract—An agent, artiﬁcial or human, must be continu-
ously adjusting its behaviour in order to thrive in a more
or less demanding environment. An artiﬁcial agent with the
ability to predict human emotional valence in a geospatial
and temporal context requires proper adaptation to its mobile
device environment with resource consumption strict restrictions
(e.g., power from battery). The developed distributed system
includes a mobile device embodied agent (SensAI) plus Cloud-
expanded (Expanse) cognition and memory resources. The system
is designed with several adaptive mechanisms in the best effort for
the agent to cope with its interacting humans and to be resilient
on collecting data for machine learning towards prediction. These
mechanisms encompass homeostatic-like adjustments, such as
auto recovering from an unexpected failure in the mobile device,
forgetting repeated data to save local memory, adjusting actions
to a proper moment (e.g., notify only when human is interacting),
and the Expanse complementary learning algorithms’ parameters
with auto adjustments. Regarding emotional valence prediction
performance, results from a comparison study between state-
of-the-art algorithms revealed Extreme Gradient Boosting on
average the best model for prediction with efﬁcient energy use,
and explainable using feature importance inspection. Therefore,
this work contributes with a smartphone sensing-based system,
distributed in the Cloud, robust to unexpected behaviours from
humans and the environment, able to predict emotional valence
states with very good performance.
Keywords—emotional valence prediction; context adaptation;
memory; human-agent interaction.
I. INTRODUCTION
The scientiﬁc evidence of epigenetics reveal on/off mecha-
nisms inside chromosomes of human agents and reinforces
the importance of any entity continuous adaptation to its
environment. Additionally, some natural entities such as hu-
man individuals with self-consciousness and emotion-driven
cognition developed a bond between the evolutionary way of
emotions and their supporting physical structure as proposed
by Dam´asio [1]. In a sense, it is clear that an agent’s behaviour
will not develop independently of the environment and that its
affective states are paramount in the adjustment. Further, a
developed behaviour may be the result of an ongoing, bidi-
rectional interchange between inherited traits (e.g., parameter
initial value) and the environment (e.g., data collected from
an interacting human). Therefore, it may be envisioned an
artiﬁcial agent adjusting empathetically towards the interact-
ing human current behaviour and affective state [2][3]. The
concept of empathy [4] may be used as a starting point for
social glue bringing better interaction, communication and
mutual helping. Human-Agent Interaction (HAI) should be
based on the way each entity perceives contact, together with
the perception of human’s affective states in a multimodal
approach [5][6]. Hence, the affect sensing using wearable or
mobile devices, such as a smartphone seems appropriate. The
American College of Medical Informatics (ACMI) has already
envisaged this path. In the 1998 Scientiﬁc Symposium, one of
the informatics challenges for the next 10 years was “Monitor
the developments in emerging wearable computers and sensors
— possibly even implantable ones — for their potential contri-
bution to a personal health record and status monitoring” [7].
Twenty years have passed since this awakening for the mobile
device as a sensing tool. Smartphone sensing for behavioural
research is thriving with active discussions [8][9] including
exploration on correlates between sensors’ data and depressive
symptom severity [10].
This paper describes the SensAI+Expanse system and its
adaptive mechanisms towards emotional valence prediction
ability on humans. The individuals may be diverse in be-
haviour, age, gender and place of origin. Accordingly, the
developed system encompass a mobile device embodied agent
SensAI and its Cloud-expanded (Expanse) cognition and
memory resources. SensAI collects data from several sources
including (a) device sensors, such as Global Positioning Sys-
tem (GPS) and accelerometer; (b) current timestamp in user
calendar; and (c) available text writings from in-application
diary and social network posts (Twitter status). These written
texts in (c) will be subjected to sentiment analysis [11] in order
to collect emotional valence from this modality source. The
ground truth is obtained from the user when reporting about
current sentiment (positive, neutral, negative). On the other
hand, the artiﬁcial agent will be subjected to a simple adaptive
process by means of interaction with humans. An empathy
score value is presented during this interaction. The score
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

decays over time, it also changes with some factors, such as
the frequency of human reporting. This visual adaptive metric
should be perceived by the human as current human-agent
empathetic score. The Expanse complementary resources com-
prise several heuristics and algorithms, such as unsupervised
location clustering parameters auto discovery and supervised
learning hyperparameters auto tuning. These are continuously
adapting to the data set of each human entity. Further, prelim-
inary results from a running study with the agent in the wild,
publicly available for installation, are presented. This method-
ology contributes to avoid a well-known Western, Educated,
Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) society bias in
research studies involving human subjects exclusively from
academia. Moreover, performance results of a comparison
study between state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms are
presented and a model is elected as the best for future studies.
The ﬁrst section introduced the purpose of this investigation
and the work done so far. Next, Section II will describe
the mechanisms in place for the developed mobile agent
system adaptive capabilities. Section III describes the research
study including the followed method and the achieved results.
Finally, Section IV summarises the outcomes and presents a
future perspective.
II. SENSAI+EXPANSE ADAPTIVE MECHANISMS
This section describes the adaptive mechanisms in place for
the developed SensAI+Expanse as a distributed, fault-tolerant,
mobile, and Cloud-based system from scratch. The platform
is used as a research tool for continuously, online, gather
and process sensory data. Figure 1 depicts the general data
ﬂow between the SensAI agent and its expanded resources.
The collected data from mobile sensors and HAI is processed
and stored locally. Additionally, data is periodically synced in
order to feed the learning process and prediction service.
The general HAI is initially restricted by its parameter
values which drives SensAI. This behaviour may be inﬂuenced
by the agent’s context along the interaction timeline and
changes may emerge as adjustment details. Complementary,
SensAI Expanse contains a myriad of adaptive mechanisms
regarding collected data from human behaviour. These actions
work towards Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) and
efﬁcient prediction. The emotional valence ground truth values
used for prediction performance measurement are reported
by humans. The main interface includes three emoticons as
depicted in Figure 2. Moreover, this mechanism is robust
to interaction bias, such as high-frequency repeated button
(emoticon) clicks. Also, on cases of mistaken valence promptly
corrected by an additional hit on a different emoticon. It
includes a simple yet effective heuristic of accounting only for
the last hit during a deﬁned time interval. All these actions are
contextualised, i.e., the location and timestamp of the event are
collected.
SensAI has two ways of collecting data by doing it (a)
passively using several sensors, such as accelerometer and
GPS; and (b) actively by interacting with the human using
Concept Flow
Figure 1. SensAI+Expanse general data ﬂow.
Figure 2. SensAI main user interface and system notiﬁcation bar.
display notiﬁcations and buttons for emotional valence report-
ing. Moreover, SensAI displays information about the human
physical activity aggregated time by each recognisable type
(e.g., running), current emotional valence status, self-report
statistics, and agent empathy score as depicted in Figure 2.
Additional displays are available with (a) sentiment chart
with the chronology of reporting and messaging emotional
valence values; (b) private diary for writing messages to self
where text is subjected to sentiment analysis [11], including
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

a SensAI report of current averaged emotional valence status
and physical activity every three or so hours; and (c) several
statistics about sensors event count, last Expanse data sync,
and data collecting uptime.
A. SensAI
The mobile device embodied agent has several mechanisms
in place for speciﬁc adjustments. These workings are included
in different modules. Each one of those is autonomously man-
aged although orchestrated by Homeostasis module with
periodic health checks. SenseiStartStop is a fail-safe
last resort to deal with device start/stop and also unexpected
SensAI failures such as asynchronous illegal states causing
the application to crash, i.e., be removed from running state.
Activity, service and special modules are instantiated objects
from code developed classes. Some run on demand, others
periodically, as services and activities on dedicated threads
or the main user interface thread. The relevant activities and
services for SensAI embodiment are described below.
Homeostasis is paramount to guarantee some tolerance
to failures and keep the agent in a good health, it is a
scheduled, service designed to regulate the embodiment. Every
run checks for critical aspects, such as database health and
data feed. It takes proper actions to solve some common
failures, such as sensor data Feed not running. Moreover,
adapt itself to the interaction state, i.e., if at rest then database
optimisations and ﬁx actions may run, conversely, updating
notiﬁcations, such as empathy level only happen when the
human user is paying attention. This mechanism prevents
potentially disturbing events, such as too frequent device’s
screen awaking just for an empathy value adjustment. The
homeostasis-like solution for the SensAI application is com-
plemented with SenseiStartStop required to protect and
guarantee Homeostasis service to run as expected.
SenseiStartStop is a system event receiver to assure
persistence and robustness against the device failures and
reboots. It does a system registration at SensAI ﬁrst start to
be called on device boot and on application upgrade dealing
with those special states. This registration also signals Android
operating system to revive SensAI in case of unexpected crash
and removal from running state.
Feed is a started service running autonomously in the back-
ground. Several other services run on demand in an adaptation
to save mobile device resources consumption, such as battery.
This module encompasses and manages all data collecting
from sensors, such as Android-device hardware types (e.g.,
accelerometer). Moreover, a balanced data acquisition rhythm,
such as active = 2s, inactive = 8s, f = 1/5Hz, and
D = 20% is devised and in place for relevant data to be
acquired without draining too much power. This rhythm as
well as other thresholds may be subjected to automatic adap-
tation in the future. Furthermore, Figure 3 depicts a persistent
notiﬁcation message which includes empathy level adjustment
in a progress bar triggered by emotional valence reports (using
emoticon buttons). Also, a dashboard is available with relevant
information including empathy level. An active SensAI main
user interface dashboard was already depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 3. Empathy notiﬁcation including valence report buttons.
Sentiment analysis utility including integration with lan-
guage detection, translation and more is provided by speciﬁc
libraries and services included in SensAI. All contributing
for the best effort to get the sentiment value along with
the language. A heuristic is in place to adapt the analysis
to human idiosyncratic aspects, such as mixed languages
(English and Portuguese supported) and emoticons amongst
other abbreviations when writing short messages. To deal with
this rich and sometimes creative written content the best effort
approach is depicted in Figure 4.
no
Sentiment heuristic flow
only
emoticon
?
human
written
text
language = English
yes
auto-detect
language
language
identified
?
sentiment 
analysis 
language?
yes
yes
return sentiment 
analysis
translate to
sentiment analysis 
available language
no
extract 
available 
emoticon?
no
yes
no
return unknown
Figure 4. Sentiment analysis heuristic.
Expanse is a periodic and scheduled service for data
syncing with a memory aggregator in the Cloud — SensAI
Expanse. It is robust to failures using a mechanism similar
to a transaction, i.e., only successfully transferred data is
marked as such (able to be deleted after cache persistence
time limit). Moreover, on lack of a suitable data connection
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

available it will adapt by increasing veriﬁcation frequency for
later try to sync. This mechanism of local cache and Cloud
sync is paramount to restrict memory resources consumption
and guarantee proper data collection.
B. SensAI Expanse
The agent Cloud-expanded resources — Expanse — are
the augmentation spread of the SensAI limited smartphone re-
sources (e.g., data persistence, processing and power). Expanse
stores data from all SensAI agents anonymously to guarantee
that the human’s privacy is kept when the data ﬂows to anal-
ysis. It includes a repository with historical data, processing
algorithms, services of machine learning towards prediction of
emotional valence in context, i.e., SensAI augmented memory
and cognition. Moreover, processing all eligible data through
available algorithms towards AutoML requires (a) adaptation
to the diverse human behaviours reﬂected in the data set; and
(b) Bayesian efﬁcient auto discovery on parameters. Software
architecture modules and services are depicted in Figure 5.
Software Architecture Modules
Memory
persistent storage
PostgreSQL (server)
SensAI Expanse (Cloud)
Expanse
Memory + Secure
web_service (WSGI)
Jupyter Notebook (server)
interactive research
sensei-expanse.nunoachenriques.net
Apache HTTP (server)
analysis
demographics, 
reports, 
counts, ...
prediction
probabilistic in context
pipeline
analysis, adaptation, learning
transform
Reconstruct 
and Ready
learn
valence
metric
expanse
PostgreSQL
Cognition
Notebooks
analysis, pipeline, prediction
Figure 5. Expanse software architecture modules and services.
Adaptive
actions
start,
amongst
other
things,
with
analysis on gathering data aggregations and ﬁltering el-
igible human entities. This eligibility selection has more
steps through the pipeline process until reaching the
ﬁnal data samples for machine learning. Before the ﬁnal
step, transform acts on cleaning, reconstructing and ﬁx-
ing collected data such as upsampling data within proper
boundaries related to collecting parameters previously used
to save resources in SensAI. The Expanse developed custom
pipeline for SensAI learning uses a myriad of heuristics
and other algorithms. These include a data class (negative,
neutral, positive) imbalance (reports count) degree from [12].
Also, a custom valence class count check and restrict in
order to adapt the learning process in cases such as emotional
valence reported for only two (or even one) classes. The ﬁnal
eligible entities are achieved after these valence class count
and imbalance degree processing.
The learn module integrates several state-of-the-art algo-
rithms from two main categories of (a) unsupervised ones,
such as HDBSCAN for clustering location coordinates and
accurately drop outliers; and (b) supervised for multi-class
classiﬁcation, such as Extreme Gradient Boosting by XGBoost
and a custom multilayer Perceptron using Keras in Tensor-
Flow.
Additional steps are in place towards AutoML by mak-
ing use of (a) the learn process calling a function for
running HDBSCAN clustering algorithm on the differ-
ent min_samples provided in order to ﬁnd the best
min_cluster_size parameter; and before each call to one
of the classiﬁcation algorithms learning process (b) an auto
search is in place for the best cross validation N splits regard-
ing the algorithm minimum number of accepted classes. Next,
a hyperparameter auto tuning with cross validation for each
speciﬁc model uses Bayesian optimisation. Finally, the model
with parameters ﬁt for each human current data is achieved
and performance metrics such as F1 score are computed.
The current knowledge from the learning process is stored
using the expanse module and the Memory component. The
prediction module is serving answers from Web service
requests in the Cloud. These responses are for contextualised
(location and moment) emotional valence prediction requests
for the requiring human, as depicted in Figure 6.
Secure Flow
SensAI 
mobile app
SensAI 
Expanse 
(store data 
authenticated 
and anonymised)
Google
identity 
service
Sign in
Get user data
and ID token
Sync data with ID token
Verify ID 
token
Secure Web 
calls  using 
HTTP over TLS
Figure 6. End-to-end secure communication.
All communications are end-to-end secured and digitally
signed, restricted to the owner available data, i.e., a human A
cannot obtain the prediction for a human B.
III. STUDY
In this section, it will be described the applied method and
the outcomes of a research study comprising a population of
human individuals interacting with SensAI in the wild.
A. Method
The participants are gathered from all kinds and creeds, i.e.,
avoiding the laboratory usual limitations, such as sampling
only from WEIRD societies known as a frequent bias [13].
This goal is accomplished by choosing to collect data using
smartphone sensing [14] by means of an Android applica-
tion. SensAI has already been installed by users from ten
different countries and four continents (Africa, America, Asia,
Europe). A total of 57 participants installed SensAI, eight
were discarded for not sharing demographic data thus 49
(18 female, 31 male) remained eligible. The pipeline process
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

further reduces the population to 31 eligible individuals after
valence class imbalance restrictions are applied. Moreover,
demographic data comprises birthdate and gender at this stage,
extending the collection to other aspects such as income and
education level is foreseen as of interest for future studies.
Regarding the system prediction performance, a com-
parison study assessing a few state-of-the-art algorithms
and two metrics was in place. The set of estimators
comprises
linear
(Logistic
Regression),
non-linear
(Ex-
treme Gradient Boosting), and connectionist (TensorFlow
Keras MLP) distinct approaches. Also, one more estima-
tor is used as baseline (Dummy) generating predictions
by respecting the training set’s class distribution (option
strategy=stratified). The two metrics studied were
F1 score (option average=weighted) and Matthews Cor-
relation Coefﬁcient (MCC) prepared for multi-class (n = 3)
case from scikit-learn package. Both metrics are very
popular and with good software support for machine learning.
B. Results
The preliminary results were achieved by ﬁrst using the
MCC metric on four estimators. The performance statistics
depicted in Figure 7 revealed unexpected overly high values
(e.g., baseline median near 0.8) raising red ﬂags about possible
issues, such as estimators overﬁtting.
Dummy
Logistic Regression
Extreme Gradient Boosting TensorFlow Keras MLP
Model
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Score
Model prediction performance on entities
Matthews correlation coeﬃcient (normalised: [0.0, 1.0])
Dummy (strategy=stratiﬁed) as baseline
Figure 7. Model prediction performance statistics using MCC.
In order to verify the overﬁtting issue possibility on the
ﬁrst results (after several runs to sustain the achieved values)
a different score metric is used. F1 score is selected for per-
formance evaluation within the same experimental conditions.
The results are depicted in Figure 8.
There is evidence of measurement discrepancies between
F1 versus MCC over the population datasets, as depicted
in Figure 9. In order to assess the signiﬁcance of these
differences, a Mann-Whitney U test is applied on F1 versus
MCC and the results presented in Table I show that the null
hypothesis (H0: two sets of measurements are drawn from the
same distribution) can be rejected, i.e., evidence of signiﬁcant
differences on F1 versus MCC results.
As a result, F1 measurements seem reasonably nearer to
the expected baseline statistics than MCC. Further inspection
Dummy
Logistic Regression
Extreme Gradient Boosting TensorFlow Keras MLP
Model
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Score
Model prediction performance on entities
F1 score
Dummy (strategy=stratiﬁed) as baseline
Figure 8. Model prediction performance statistics using F1 score.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Entity (eligible population=31)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Score
Model prediction performance on entities
F1 vs. MCC (normalised: [0.0, 1.0])
Dummy (strategy=stratiﬁed)
F1
MCC
Figure 9. Model prediction performance on entities: F1 vs. MCC.
using the confusion matrix for some cases from the 26/31
(83%) with more than 10 percentage points difference uphold
F1 score as more accurate than MCC. Moreover, making use of
the classiﬁcation report no pattern was identiﬁed correlating
the inspected cases, i.e., all distributions have distinct data
shapes. Although the MCC is considered to have advantages
over the F1 score, speciﬁcally in the binary classiﬁcation
case, such claim [15] was not evidenced in this research with
the current eligible population and datasets. The results of
this study using F1 score for each model are summarised in
Table II and depicted in Figure 8.
The Extreme Gradient Boosting model is elected as best
TABLE I. F1 VS. MCC (FIGURE 9): MANN-WHITNEY U TEST RESULTS
Metrics
p value
Meaning (α = 0.05)
F1 vs. MCC
2.237 × 10−2
H0 can be rejected (p < α)
TABLE II. ALL FOUR ESTIMATORS AVERAGE F1 SCORE AND TOTAL
DURATION
Model
F1 average
Duration
Dummy
0.600
00:00:46
Logistic Regression
0.795
01:46:22
Extreme Gradient Boosting
0.910
01:54:34
TensorFlow Keras MLP
0.907
24:35:11
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

option amongst the other two additional models plus baseline
also available. The choice for this model is further supported
by an interest towards (a) Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(XAI) predictions; and (b) efﬁcient energy use besides overall
score achievement. Regarding (a) the Extreme Gradient Boost-
ing includes feature importance scores for each entity model
thus proper explainable context (e.g., the speciﬁc location
feature with the highest score). As for (b) evidence already
presented in Table II show Extreme Gradient Boosting as
the best performer although marginally to the second yet
for less than a tenth of the processing duration. Therefore,
Extreme Gradient Boosting is simultaneously on average the
best model for prediction with efﬁcient energy use and also
easy explainable by feature importance inspection.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has described the SensAI+Expanse smartphone
sensing-based system, distributed in the Cloud, robust to un-
expected behaviours from humans and the mobile demanding
environment, able to predict emotional valence states with
very good performance. The SensAI agent adapts to the
restricted resources and volatile environment of a mobile
device where an operating system dictates behaviour rules.
Any ill-behaved application is automatically stopped by the
system and may even be excluded from restarting. These
cases where processing takes too long usually result in the
application being stopped and declared Application Not Re-
sponding (ANR). There is no evidence of any ANR in the
Google Play Console used to monitor all events from SensAI.
Conversely, there is evidence of a few “Illegal State” crashes
from which the agent recovered and continued to interact
after a maximum of ﬁfteen-minute delay (interval for periodic
scheduled checks). Furthermore, battery consumption is kept
at one digit percentage (e.g., 1%) for a day-long use in
several devices laboratory and regular testing. The outcomes
presented show evidence, restricted to population and data
samples in this research, of SensAI+Expanse ability to adapt
and learn to predict emotional valence states with a high
score of F1 = 0.910 on average (Table II and Figure 8).
Therefore, SensAI+Expanse contributes as a novel platform
for studies about human emotional valence changes in context
of location and moment. Moreover, it reinforces smartphone
sensing contribution as a tool for continuous, passive, and
personalised health check, such as emotional disturbances,
in spatial and temporal context. Furthermore, all the source
code is published as free software under the Apache License
2.0. Future work should investigate emotional valence report
discrepancies amongst population demographics, such as age
and gender. Furthermore, an assessment over the agent robust-
ness to those differences would be of interest. Thus, studies
about the agent’s neutrality to distinct age ranges and gender
combinations should be in place by means of the elected
Extreme Gradient Boosting model with F1 score.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
N.A.C.H. thanks Jorge M. C. Gomes for the precious
contributions. This work is partially supported by Universi-
dade de Lisboa [PhD support grant May 2016–April 2019].
Partially supported by Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e Tecnolo-
gia [UID/MULTI/04046/2019 Research Unit grant from FCT,
Portugal (to BioISI)]. This work used the European Grid
Infrastructure (EGI) with the support of NCG-INGRID-PT.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Dam´asio, Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain,
1st ed.
[“O Livro da Consciˆencia: A Construc¸˜ao do C´erebro Con-
sciente”, C´ırculo de Leitores, ISBN:9789896441203], 2010.
[2] R. W. Picard, Affective Computing.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press,
1997. ISBN:0-262-16170-2
[3] G. Castellano, I. Leite, A. Pereira, C. Martinho, A. Paiva, and P. W.
McOwan, “Affect recognition for interactive companions: Challenges
and design in real world scenarios,” Journal on Multimodal User
Interfaces, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 89–98, 2010. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12193-009-0033-5
[4] K. Stueber, Empathy, winter2014 ed., E. N. Zalta, Ed.
Metaphysics
Research Lab, Stanford University, 2014. URL:http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2014/entries/empathy
[5] L. Tavabi, “Multimodal Machine Learning for Interactive Mental Health
Therapy,” in 2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction
on - ICMI ’19.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2019.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3340555.3356095 pp. 453–456.
[6] C. Tsiourti, “Artiﬁcial agents as social companions: design guidelines
for emotional interactions,” phdthesis, Universit´e de Gen`eve, 2018.
[7] R. A. Greenes and N. M. Lorenzi, “Audacious Goals for Health
and Biomedical Informatics in the New Millennium,” Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 395–400,
1998. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1136/jamia.1998.0050395
[8] K. Denecke, E. Gabarron, R. Grainger, S. T. Konstantinidis, A. Lau,
O. Rivera-Romero, T. Miron-Shatz, and M. Merolli, “Artiﬁcial In-
telligence for Participatory Health: Applications, Impact, and Future
Implications,” Yearbook of Medical Informatics, 2019. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1055/s-0039-1677902
[9] I. R. Felix, L. A. Castro, L.-f. Rodriguez, and O. Banos, “Mobile
sensing for behavioral research: A component-based approach for rapid
deployment of sensing campaigns,” International Journal of Distributed
Sensor Networks, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1–17, 2019. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1177/1550147719874186
[10] S. Saeb, M. Zhang, C. J. Karr, S. M. Schueller, M. E. Corden,
K. P. Kording, and D. C. Mohr, “Mobile Phone Sensor Correlates of
Depressive Symptom Severity in Daily-Life Behavior: An Exploratory
Study.” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 17, no. 7, p. e175,
2015. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.4273
[11] C. J. Hutto and E. Gilbert, “VADER: A Parsimonious Rule-based Model
for Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text,” in Proceedings of the
Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, 2014, pp. 216–225.
[12] R. Zhu, Z. Wang, Z. Ma, G. Wang, and J. H. Xue, “LRID: A new metric
of multi-class imbalance degree based on likelihood-ratio test,” Pattern
Recognition Letters, vol. 116, pp. 36–42, 2018. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.patrec.2018.09.012
[13] J. Henrich, S. J. Heine, and A. Norenzayan, “The weirdest people in
the world?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 33, no. 2-3, pp. 61–83,
2010. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0999152X
[14] V. P. Cornet and R. J. Holden, “Systematic review of smartphone-
based passive sensing for health and wellbeing,” Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, vol. 77, pp. 120–132, 2018. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbi.2017.12.008
[15] D. Chicco, “Ten quick tips for machine learning in computational
biology,” BioData Mining, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2017. DOI:https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s13040-017-0155-3
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

