An Adaptive Multi-agent System for Ambient Assisted Living
Antonio Andriatrimoson, Nadia Abchiche-Mimouni, Etienne Colle and Simon Galerne
IBISC laboratory, Evry Val d’Essonne University
Evry, France
{tsiory.andriatrimoson, nadia.abchiche, etienne.colle, simon.galerne}@ibisc.univ-evry.fr
Abstract—The work presented in this paper is focused on the
design and the implementation of an adaptive framework for
ambient assisted living applications. The challenge is to provide
an approach able to deal with a dynamic environment in order
to provide an adequate service to the person. The evolution
of the intrusion level of the system based on the degree of
urgency and the availability of different communication devices
that constitute the environment are particularly targeted. The
results obtained with the coalition-based multi-agents system
are promising and reﬂects these constraints.
Keywords-adaptiveness; multi-agent systems; cooperation;
coalition formation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Software increasingly has to deal with ubiquity, so that it
can apply a certain degree of intelligence. Ambient assistive
robotics can be deﬁned as an extension of ambient intelli-
gence which integrates a robot and its embedded sensors.
The interaction among the components in such systems is
fundamental.
The addressed problem here concerns the design of an
ambient assistive living framework that takes advantage of
an ambient environment: a robot cooperating with a network
of communicating objects present in the person’s home. The
aim is to provide a service to an elderly or a sick person.
A multi-agent system (MAS) reiﬁes the sensors and the
mobile and autonomous robot, allowing the cooperation
among the agents by means of adaptation features. Coali-
tions are formed in adaptive way as it will be described in
Section IV.
The next section details the context application and de-
scribes a particular usage scenario. Section III includes a
brief overview of existing ambient assistive living systems
and argues for a new one based on adaptive coalition-based
MAS. The designed system Coalaa is described in details
in Section IV. First evaluations and analysis of Coalaa are
presented in Section V. Finally, in Section VI we draw some
conclusions and introduce future works.
II. THE PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) constitutes a fundamental
research domain. It refers to intelligent systems of assistance
for a better, healthier and safer life in the preferred living
environment and covers concepts, products and services
that interlink and improve new technologies and the social
environment, with a focus on older people. A panorama of
European projects can be found in ([1]). Our speciﬁc context
is to assist a person in loss of autonomy at home. It con-
cerns either the elderly or people with speciﬁc disabilities.
Maintaining such people at home is not only beneﬁcial to
their psychological condition, but helps reduce the costs of
hospitalizations.
House is equipped with a network of communicating ob-
jects (CO) such as sensors or actuators for home automation.
A complete telecare application for remote monitoring of
patients at home, including a wireless monitoring portable
device held by the patient, is added for detecting alarming
situations
The context application is essential in this work. So, a
usage scenario is described in details so as to illustrate
the different application challenges and the scientiﬁc issue
addressed in this paper which is implementing adaptiveness.
A. A scenario description
The scenario consists in a variety of situations where an
alarm has occurred (The scenario has been determined in
cooperation with the remote monitoring center SAMU-92,
which depends on Public Paris Hospital).
An alarm can be triggered by a device worn by the person
or the sensor network of the ambient environment. The
robot, thanks to its ability to move, helps to conﬁrm and
evaluate the severity of the alarm by cooperating with the
CO.
The robot begins by searching the person and then pro-
vides an audiovisual contact with a distant caregiver. That
way, the distant caregiver is able to remove the doubt of
a false alarm, to make clear the diagnosis and to choose
the best answer to the alarming situation. It is important to
note that the embedded device monitors the physiological
parameters and the activity of the person. The originality
of the proposed approach is that the robot tries to take
advantage of ubiquity. The robot autonomy is obtained
by a close interaction between the robot and the ambient
environment (AE). So, the services the robot can bring to
the user are directly related to the effectiveness of the robot
mobility in the environment. Before providing a service to
the person, the robot has to locate itself by interacting with
the AE. In these scenarios an ethical dimension, named level
intrusion of the system, has been introduced to preserve the
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

privacy of the person. The level of intrusion of the system
is deﬁned according to the degree of freedom of the system
regarding to its actions. For instance: maximal distance
allowed between the robot and the person, activating a
camera, switch on a light and so on. The level of intrusion
of the system is supposed to be minimal except in a case of
an emergency.
B. Robot localization task
Using a robotic assistant for the task rather than a simple
set of ﬁx cameras in all rooms is an advantage in two cases:
i) the assistance is only needed for a limited period such as
convalescence period or ii) the residence is composed of too
many rooms for example nursing home. Another advantage
is that the quality of the image and the sound is better. The
part of the robot is to autonomously move to the person in
case of an alarm and then provide an audiovisual contact
with a distant surveillance center.
Figure 1 shows a robot in the person’s home; the patient
has fallen. To move towards her/him and to guide its camera
to the remote caregiver, the robot has to be located ﬁrst. A
visual contact will help the remote caregiver to perform a
correct diagnosis of the situation.
Figure 1.
A person falls scenario
If the robot is located at P1 position, then its mobile
camera can identify the visual marker Y. With further infor-
mation from a ﬁxed camera environment, the robot manages
to locate itself by a mean of an adequate localization
algorithm. The direction taken by its mobile camera that
detected a visual marker also allows the robot to know its
orientation relative to a ﬁxed reference in the environment.
This information can also be inferred from previous values
using odometry on the one hand and its linear and angular
speeds on the other hand. It is thus easy and straightforward
to identify and understand that the more information you
have the better the accuracy of the location of the robot is.
If the robot is in P2 position, it has no marker on its visual
ﬁeld and has no element enabling it to locate itself. It then
uses two different strategies to ﬁnd a visual marker. Either
its moves randomly or turns its pan-tilt camera. In two cases,
it is necessary that the intrusion level of the system permits
it. It can also query the detectors of presence to learn about
the place in which it has been seen lately. In the case of
several conﬂicting reports, it will be decided according to
the data freshness criteria, or according to the consistency
with the data criteria already available thanks to the sensors
of the robot.
This simple scenario shows that robot localization is a
complex task and there is no evidence for an approach that
could be able to choose the relevant interactions between
the robot and the A.E. The difﬁculty lies in choosing the
most relevant criterion to be considered ﬁrst: is it the closest
CO, the most accurate and or least intrusive? The problem
analysis suggests that depending on the context, the criterion
to consider is different. As the context itself is dynamic and
difﬁcult to predict, a centralized algorithmic solution is to
be excluded. What is required is an approach that can adapt
the selection and the use of criteria based on the context
and the choice of a level of intrusion aligned with the level
of urgency. Adaptive systems ([2]) are known to meet this
requirement. More precisely, adaptation features are inherent
to MAS. So, our approach exploits the MAS adaptiveness
potential to design a distributed system to deal, in a dynamic
way, with scenarios such as the one described above. The
adaptiveness is also needed to deal with dynamic addition
and suppression of sensors. While the purpose of the paper
is not to describe the localization algorithm but a selection
mechanism of the agents participating to this task, it is not
necessary to explain the robot localization.
III. STATE OF THE ART
Before addressing a state of the art in the MAS domain,
a brief overview of existing ambient assistive living ap-
proaches is given.
A. Ambient assistive living existing approaches
In the context of ambient intelligence, the communicating
objects of the AE play a ”facilitator” role in helping the robot
in the Ambient assistive living.
Conversely, sensors and robots can be seen as communi-
cating objects which are used by services to the person in
loss of autonomy. Several projects have been interested in
combining home automation, pervasive sensors and robotics,
for the safety of the patient at home.
The IDorm project ([3]) is designed to assess an ambient
environment composed of three categories of communicating
objects: static objects associated with the building, a robot
and mobile devices. IDorm architecture consists of a MAS
that manages the operations of all the environment sensors
and the robot. The sensors are controlled by an agent and the
robot by another one. The sensor agent receives the different
measures from sensors and controls actuators which are
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

linked to sensors like a pan-tilt camera. The robot agent acts
as a data server and coordinates exchanges of information
between the user and the robot. It controls the navigation
of the robot by combining different functions such as the
obstacle avoidance or the search for targets.
The CARE ([4]) project is a Research and Development
activity running under the Ambient Assisted Living Joint
Program, which is co-funded by several European countries.
Its main objective is fall detection and person monitoring at
home by Smart camera. As part of this project, algorithms
essentially based on a biologically-inspired neuromorphic
vision sensor for fall detection have been developed. The
system aims to deﬁne a level of reliable supervision by
avoiding as much as possible interactions with the person
in her/his own home.
ProAssist4Life ([5]) is a German project of situation-
of-helplessness detection System for elderly. This project
consists in developing an unobtrusive system that provides
permanent companionship to elderly people living in single
households or in retirement facilities. Multisensory nodes
mounted on the ceiling of a room register an individual’s
movements. One multisensory node contains six motion
sensors, one brightness sensor, and one oxygen sensor.
According to data provided by various physiological sensors,
the system is based on a predictive approache based on ﬁnite
state automata modeling the previous activities of the patient.
Another project developed at the University of Camerino
is named ACTIVAge ([6]). In order to keep people at home
also, this project aims to provide services and teleservices
based on the context. The system consists of an adaptive
planning solver based webservices orchestation and chore-
ography with decision making algorithms. A knowledge base
is used to model persistent data of the ambient environment.
In each of these projects, the authors seek to design a
system to avoid interfering with the patient at home. Ethical
dimension is still much debated in the ﬁeld of ambient
assisted living, this constraint is managed by the projects
mentioned above by discrete sensor systems. Although the
last described project pretends dealing with adaptiveness,
this concept remains a major challenge in ambient assistive
applications.
The work presented in this paper is focused on implement-
ing adaptiveness while designing several application aspects.
The evolution of the inconvenience (intrusion level of the
system) based on the degree of urgency and the availability
of different communication devices that constitute the envi-
ronment are particularly targeted. The coalition-based MAS
presented in this paper reﬂects this constraint.
The purpose of the paper is to describe a selection
mechanism of the agents participating to the localization
task, so localization algorithm is not presented in details.
B. Coalition-based protocols
The principle of coalition aims at temporarily putting
together several agents for reaching a common goal. Sev-
eral woks have illustrated the relevance of coalition-based
approaches for adaptiveness ([7][8][9]). The methods are
various: either incremental or random or centralized. But,
all of them proceed in two stages: (1) the formation of
agent coalitions according to their ability to be involved in
achieving a goal and (2) the negotiation stage between the
coalitions in order to choose the one that provides the closest
solution to the goal. The interests of the coalition-based
formation protocols are the ﬂexibility with which coalitions
are formed and straightforwardness of the coalition forma-
tion process itself. The coalitions can get rid of dynamically
reorganize with local and simple rules deﬁned in the agents.
IV. COALITIONS FOR AMBIENT ASSISTED LIVING
Coalaa (Coalitions for Ambient Assisted living applica-
tions) is a MAS ([10][11][12]) based on coalitions formation
protocol. Each agent encapsulates a CO. It decides in a local
and proactive way how to contribute to the required service
to the person. In fact, we have introduced a more general
notion than a service, that we have called an effect. An
effect can be a particular lighting at a precise place of the
residence or the localization of a robot. The MAS conﬁgures
itself for providing a solution according to the availability
of the CO and the respect of criteria. The adaptation to the
context is inherent to the multi-agent modeling, strengthened
by coalitions and negotiation mechanisms. Note that the goal
is not to ﬁnd the optimal solution but a solution close enough
to the required effect.
In our coalition formation protocol, the obligation to
respect the result and an intrusion level depending on the
urgency of the situation, are the most important considered
criteria. They are also used during the reorganization of
the agents for searching for a desired effect. The obligation
result criteria is used in priority while the level of intrusion
is modiﬁed only if needed, i.e., to acquire new data and
thus to activate the sensors (ex. tilt-camera) likely to cause
discomfort to the person.
A. Knowledge modeling
An effect is modeled in the form of a triple σ = <t, c,
f>.
• t ∈ T, T is a set of tasks: localization of a robot or a
person, lighting, cognitive stimulation.
• c ⊂ C, C is a set of criteria: precision, efﬁciency, time
constraint, neighborhood.
• f ⊂ F, F is a set of inﬂuencing factors: intrusion level,
urgency degree.
The criteria are assigned by the designer (programer) of
the system in a static way, while the inﬂuencing factors are
dynamically ﬁne-tuned by the end-user.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

B. Agents environment
The ambient agents operate in an ambient environment
consisting of habitat model within which the patient and
the robot are together. They argue according to the different
measures and relevant information that smart objects pro-
vide.
1) Ontology: Information handled by the system is clas-
siﬁed into two types. This so-called persistent information,
related to the application domain, puts together data about
the structure of the residence and the features of the CO.
The second type concerns volatile data mainly the measures
provided by the sensors and the orders sent to actuators. The
information types are handled differently. The volatile data
are distributed in each agent, while persistent data are stored
in an ontology named AA (Ambient Assistance) ([13][14]).
The AA ontology contains four categories of information
related to the application domain: The Home category for
deﬁning the structure of the environment, the CO category
for knowing their characteristics and their operating mode,
the User category for deﬁning the user proﬁle and the Task
category that puts together the tasks and services that the
system is able to achieve. These categories deﬁne the four
concepts of the ontology. Our system needs to set up links
between members of the same concept such as a topological
relationship between two parts of the residence. Links are
also needed between members of different concepts. For
example, to process a measure provided by a sensor, the
system has to locate the sensor in the residence. These links
are referred to as ontological properties. We have deﬁned
three types of properties: relationship, use and attribute. The
ontological property relationship deﬁnes a logical relation-
ship, generally of ownership, which links concept members
between each other. The ontological property use deﬁnes
the function of an object. The ontological property attribute
refers to the features of a concept or a concept of an
individual member of the ontology. It speciﬁes the operating
mode of the object, for example, a camera can be used to
perform the localization task.
In this ontology, a property named topological distance
is deﬁned as the number of hops between two instances.
The hops are relations as deﬁned above in the ontology.
If the structure of the ontology is deﬁned by a graph, the
topological distance is the number of nodes which separate
two individuals minus one. This topological distance is used
by agents of the MAS to determine their neighborhood
during the coalition formation.
This knowledge base is complemented by the dynamic
information from the ambient environment through the gate-
way.
2) Gateway: It is a module for the standardization of
information exchanged between the ambient environment
the MAS. Its role is to make the agents manipulating the
common information format.This standardization is neces-
sary because of the heterogeneity of protocols from different
manufacturers. Thus, the MAS receives and acts on the
ambient environment through the gateway without worrying
about the format of the collected data.
C. Agent internal architecture
Figure 2 represents the internal architecture of an ambient
agent. The decision making module takes in charge the agent
adaption and reactivity by using three main parameters that
are neighborhood, history, and ability. The neighborhood
sets the list of agents that are close to this agent at a given
time, according to the topological distance.
The history stores previous perceived information which
come from the sensors. This is a simple succession of
perceived data which helps to consider the timescale during
the process of coalitions formation.
At last, the ability identiﬁes the skills of the agent which
are directly related to the encapsulated CO.
Figure 2.
Agent internal architecture
D. Agent behaviors
In the process of the coalition formation, an agent may
be either initiator or candidate. Any agent whose ability
can partially meet the desired effect can be a coalition
initiator. The initiator exchanges messages with other agents,
potential members of the coalition, called candidate agents.
The Protocol is based on exchanges of messages between the
initiator agent and candidate agents. As soon as the overall
ability of the coalition is close to the desired effect, the
initiator agent is pending the negotiation phase. At the end
of the coalition formations, each initiator agent that is the
referent of the coalition is negotiating with other initiators
agents to choose the winning coalition. The coalition whose
ability is the closest to the desired effect is the winning
coalition.
The concept of ability is general. In the localization appli-
cation example, it is instantiated by the measures precision.
The principle is simple. Each initiator agent sends a
message that contains the ability obtained by its coalition.
On receipt of this message, each initiator agent compares
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

the ability of the coalition it received to its own one. If
its ability is lower than that received, the coalition will be
no more considered, otherwise, it is a winning coalition up
to receiving a new message. Apart from the desired effect,
the formation of coalitions uses other criteria such as the
topological neighborhood to reduce the response time or the
obsolescence of a measure when the desired effect depends
on sensor data. Thus, the ﬁrst step is the identiﬁcation of
candidate neighboors according to its own location in the
environment (deﬁned by the topological distance) and the
desired effect. The aim of this strategy is to respond in
the shortest time to the desired effect by forming coalitions.
For that purpose, the ﬁrst selection criteria considered is the
topological distance. Once all candidate agents are known,
each initiating agent continues the selection of candidates
based on the recent measures criteria. When no coalition is
able to meet the desired effect, a new search for a successful
coalition is restarted after having relaxed the constraints on
certain criteria. Indeed, it is possible to increase the level
of intrusion of the system despite of the tranquility of the
person at home. This authorization to increase the level of
intrusion allows, for example, to operate a pan-tilt camera
of the robot to acquire new measures and restart the process
by ﬁnding a winning coalition.
The MAS protocol is deﬁned as a set of rules that ambient
agents follow to ﬁnd out a solution. The protocol of coalition
formation is composed of two distinct steps. The ﬁrst step
consists in forming coalitions of agents according to their
ability. The second step is a negotiation and reﬁning phase so
that the best one, in satisfying the desired effect, is chosen.
In summary, after initialization, these exchanges follow
three main actions:
1) Formation of all possible coalitions for each referent.
2) Selection of the best coalition according to the coali-
tion precision.
3) Deployment of the winning coalition.
To make decisions and follow the protocol, each agent
executes the appropriate behavior and starts in a state
corresponding to the behavior adopted.
Figure 3 shows the state transition diagram of the behavior
of an ambient agent. Each ambient agent includes six parallel
and cyclic behaviors. The Baseline behavior represents the
minimum treatment of an agent. Upon receipt of a frame
from the environment (by the mean of the gateway), the
agent must recover the sensor ID associated with it, therefore
it can access the ontology and update ability. InitCoal
Behavior, AcceptCoal Behavior, ACKCoal Behavior and
InitNegociation Behavior include the process of coalition
formation and negotiation. For the formation of coalitions,
the ﬁrst behavior to be executed is sending InitCoal fol-
lowing receipt of a InitEffect. Running an InitCoal behavior
consists in sending a message, containing the ability of the
agent, to the neighborhood agent. All agents which receive
this message accept or refuse to be part of the coalition.
Agents which accept must then execute the AcceptCoal
Behavior and then send an acceptance message or refusal
message. Initiators which receive an acceptance reply with
a conﬁrmation. Finally, the EndNegociation Behavior runs
when a winning coalition has emerged. This is a behavior
that allows the deployment of the coalition.
Baseline
Behaviour
InitCoal
Behaviour
AcceptCoal
Behaviour
ACKCoal
Behaviour
InitNegociation
EndNegociation
Frame ambient environnement
Message initEffect
Message initCoal
Coalitions formed
Message AcceptCoal
Figure 3.
Behaviors of an agent
E. Agents interactions
For the formation of the coalitions, two main types
of messages are deﬁned: Request message and Response
messages. The exchanged messages semantic is based on
speech act theory, introduced by John Searle ([15]), allowing
the agents to assign the messages a semantic by deﬁning a
message a subtype.
1) Initialization: Initialization messages subtype is used
in two situations: by the Interface Agent (AI) to send an
effect to achieve (InitEffect) to the agents of the system and,
the initiator agents after all coalitions have been formed so
that it is possible to initiate the negotiation (InitNegociation).
2) Coalition: A Coalition message type is sent in re-
sponse to the reception of a desired effect.
3) Acknowledgement: A conﬁrmation message (ACK-
Coal) or a refuse message (RefuseCoal) is an Acknowledge-
ment message subtype.
4) Reaction: This subtype includes two main messages
that are AcceptCoal and ArgNeg. AcceptCoal is a message
Reaction subtype that is sent by an agent when accepting an
InitCoal proposal. The second message Reaction subtype is
ArgNeg that is sent by an agent to respond to a request for
negotiation.
Each message type contains the ability of the sending
agent while forming the coalitions, and the ability of the
coalition during the negotiation step.
F. Agent genesis
The initialization step of the MAS is performed by a
particular initialization module. It is to trigger a behavior
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

that scans the environment of each agent and creates the
agents. Each created agent is initialized by loading locally, a
data set from the ontology and information from the physical
environment (the gate).
G. Robot localization scenario
In this scenario, three sensors of the environment are
used: a robot pan-tilt camera, a ﬁxed camera and a presence
detection sensor. These three communicating objects are
encapsulated by three respective ambient agents: a Presence
Detector Agent (APD), a Fixed Camera Agent (AFC) and
a Pan-Tilt Camera Agent (APTC). Visual markers like
Datamatrix are associated with each camera.
Figure 4 shows a sequence diagram of the different agents
that are involved in the scenario already described in Section
II.A.
Following the fall of the patient, a request for a localiza-
tion effect is generated in the form of a triple σ = <t, c, f>
(cf. Section IV.A). t is the localization task which matches
with the localization effect, c matches with a singleton
containing the precision criterion needed for the localization
task and f matches with a set containing two inﬂuencing
factors that are: the intrusion level and level of urgency.
In the considered scenario, we have considered a precision
equal to 0.1, a level of urgency equals to 3(three levels of
urgency are considered: low=1, medium=2, high=3) and an
intrusion level initialized to 0 (the less intrusion level). So,
the tripe becomes: < Locate, {0.1}, {3, 0} >.
The
Interface
agent
(AI)
has
received
the
desired
effect
and
then
broadcasts
the
request
InitCoal
(<
Locate, {0.1}, {3, 0} >) to all the agents of the MAS. Each
agent which received the desired effect checks its ability.
As all sensors in the environment have a precision that
is not better than the desired effect, each agent initiates a
coalition with immediate neighborhood. In this ﬁgure, only
interactions with APD agent are shown. Assuming that all
agents are topologically close, APD broadcast a coalition
formation request by sending an InitCoal message. Each
agent receiving the initialization message checks if its ability
is adequate with the request of coalition formation.
If yes, it sends an acceptance message labelled Ac-
ceptCoal to be a candidate. Such a message contains the
precision of the agent.
APD adds progressively answer acceptance, and accumu-
lates the abilities which are the precision in the considered
localization task.
By this way, it calculates the overall ability of the coalition
until it reaches that of the desired effect.
Then, it sends ACKCoal acceptance to conﬁrm the mem-
bership of the candidate to the formed coalition.
V. CONTRIBUTIONS AND RESULTS/OUTCOMES
The results are obtained in a real environment composed
of heterogeneous sensors and markers. The platform in-
cludes several sensors obtained on the market and dedicated
AI
APD
AFC
APTC
initEffect
initEffect
initCoal
initEffect
initCoal
initCoal
initCoal
initCoal
initCoal
acceptCoal
acceptCoal
ACKCoal
ACKCoal
Figure 4.
Sequence diagram
sensors developed in the laboratory. The environment is
composed of a room equipped with a set of sensors and the
robot with its own sensors. The simple localization presented
scenario has been chosen because the principle is to use
the orientation measurement of various sensors or markers.
These can provide localization information to obtain the
localization of the robot in its environment using real-time
data either from the robot on-board sensors or from the
sensors in the environment.
Coalaa has been implemented using a multi-agents sys-
tem plateform: Jade ([16]). Jade provides generic behaviors
which facilitates controlling the execution of the agents.
Adaptation in our system is observed at three levels; (1)
computational level: during the coalition formation process,
(2) functional and methodological level: while service mod-
eling, and (3) ethical level: intrusion level of the system
which is integrated in the behavior of the system.
A. Computational adaptiveness
To validate the protocol used in Coalaa, a comparison to
a well known protocol which is the Contract Net Protocol
(CNP) has been performed. The CNP was the ﬁrst approach
used in MAS to solve the problem of tasks allocation.
Proposed by Smith in 1980 ([17]), it is based on an
organizational metaphor. The agents coordinate their work
based on building contracts. There are two types of agents,
a manager agent and contracting agents. The contractor
agent must complete a task proposed by the manager. The
manager breaks down each task into several subtasks, and
then announces each subtask to a network of agents by
sending a proposal. Agents contractors which have adequate
resources respond by sending their submission. The manager
agent analyses all received bids and based on the result
of this analysis assigns the task to the best contractors.
The contractors commit with the manager to perform the
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

assigned subtask.
The CNP and the Coalaa protocols have been tested with
a dozen scenari using in each scenario, different values for
the criteria. Each scenario has been executed with both
protocols. The showed results represent an average of the
results of the scenari.
Evaluations have been performed on a MAS whose
cardinality varies. The results are broken down into three
categories:
1) The number of formed coalitions (see Figure 5),
2) The comparison of the response time (see Figure 6),
3) The number of exchanged messages (see Figure 7).
Figure 5.
Formed coaltions
Figure 5 shows the number of formed coalitions depend-
ing on the number of agents present in the MAS. The
preferred strategy in our approach is to obtain a maximum
number of coalitions that meet the selection criteria. The
goal is to maximize the number of solutions to meet the
request to increase the chances of securing a result. The
number of coalitions is always equal to the number of
initiators. In terms of the number of formed coalitions, the
Contract Net protocol is less efﬁcient than Coalaa protocol.
The response times is compared (see Figure 6). This time
corresponds to the time spent in calculating the coalitions,
including the message exchanges.
The fact that the number of coalitions that the CNP can
form is lower than the number of initiators has a direct
effect on the response time. It also impacts the number of
exchanged messages represented by Figure 7.
The curve representing the number of exchanged mes-
sages follows the same rate for the two protocols. However,
Coalaa shows a higher number of exchanged messages. Un-
like the CNP, Coalaa avoids system crashes, by a progressive
coalition formation which in contrast increases the number
of exchanged messages. In terms of performances (time
response and number of exchanged messages) measures
Coalaa and CNP are almost similar; CNP is slightly better
in terms of response time. But in terms of obtained results
Coalaa is better. Indeed, a failure can be catastrophic and
Figure 6.
Response time
Figure 7.
Exchanged messages
thus the few milliseconds delay in the response time may
be insigniﬁcant, if success to complete the task is assured.
This is explained by the fact that Coalaa continues to reor-
ganize itself until ﬁnding a solution (even with deteriorated
criteria), while with CNP, the system can fail and do not
offer a solution.
B. Methodological and functional adaptiveness
The genesis of the MAS is done automatically. In spite
of the fact that this has not been detailed in this paper, this
is very important feature of the system. In fact, modifying
the ambient environment, by adding or suppressing CO,
automatically updates the ontology Habitat and triggers au-
tomatic MAS reconﬁguration. In case of such modiﬁcations,
the user does not need to do any speciﬁcation to make the
system adapting its architecture to AE dynamic updating.
This ability of the system is qualiﬁed by methodological
adaptiveness. We refer to functional adaptiveness when
dealing with services that the system can offer to the user.
The description of the ability of the CO used by the agents
to construct services according to the ”effect description” is
included in the ”task” ontology part. This allows the agents
to perform an automatic detection of their ability to perform
an effect.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

C. Ethical adaptiveness
An original speciﬁcity of our system is its dealing with an
ethical dimension, that is the level of intrusion of the system.
In fact, the system is able to adapt the intrusion of the robot,
the CO and the embedded software according to the urgency
of the situation and be allowed to cause discomfort for the
person or its entourage only if needed.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
An adaptive approach has been presented for an assistive
ambient alarm detection by implementing the Coalaa system.
Coalaa is a coalition-based multi-agent system in which
the adaptiveness is considered from the computational, the
methodological and the ethical points of view. The feasibility
of this approach has been demonstrated on a usage scenario
to remove the doubt of a false alarm. The ﬁrst results
illustrated with robot localization are promising. Moreover,
comparing our protocol to the contract-net protocol has
shown that even more time is spent with Coalaa, the number
of the solutions is greater. We think that the speed of
Coalaa can be improved by revising the way of choosing
the criteria priority. Indeed, in spite of conclusive results,
several improvements of Coalaa are under consideration.
Current work concern the validation of the system with a
great data size. The generation of statistical distributions of
data will provide more more meaningful results. Another
a work in progress is to implement more ﬂexible way to
calculate the cardinality of the coalitions. This could be done
by the agents by evaluating their behavior and self-adapt for
improving the overall model of criteria evaluation ([18]). At
a short-term perspective, we plan to apply our approach to
other services such as cognitive stimulation and detecting
of the person activity. At a long-term perspective, we will
propose to wrap an agent in each communicating object, so
that no time is spent to acquire information from a gate and
apply Coalaa as a solution to optimally deploy the sensors
in the houses.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Chailloux, “Special theme: Ambient assisted living,” Octo-
ber 2011.
[2] A. Eduardo, D. Kudenko, and D. Kazakov, Adaptation and
Multi-Agent Learning.
Springer-Verlag Heidelberg, 2003.
[3] P. Remahnino, H. Hagras, N. Monekoss, and S. Velastin,
“Ambient intelligence a gentle introduction,” Ambient Intelli-
gence A Novel Paradigm, 2006.
[4] A. N. Belbachir, F. Vajda, T. Lundn, and E. Schoitch, “Smart
caring cameras for safe and independent living of the elderly:
A non-wearable technology and service for fall detection,”
ERCIM NEWS 87, october 2011.
[5] D. Rombach, H. Storf, and T. Kleinberger, “Situation-of-
helplessness detection system for senior citizens,” October
2011, pp. 32–33.
[6] F. Corradini, E. Merelli, D.-R. Cacciagrano, R. Culmone,
L. Tesei, and al., “Activage: proactive and self-adaptive social
sensor network for ageing people,” ERCIM NEWS 87, pp. 36–
37, October 2011.
[7] M. Sims, C. Goldman, and V. Lesser, “Selforganization
through bottom-up coalition formation,” in the 2nd AAMAS,
2003.
[8] T. Scully, M. Madden, and G. Lyons, “Coalition calculation
in a dynamic agent environment,” in the 21st ICML, 2004.
[9] L.-K. Soh and C. Tsatsoulis, “Reﬂective negotiating agents
for real-time multisensor target tracking,” in IJCAI’01, 2001.
[10] M. N. Huhns, Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Pitman,
1987.
[11] M. N. Huhns and M. P. Singh, Readings in Agents.
Morgan
Kaufmann, 1997.
[12] M. Wooldridge and N. R. Jennings, “Agent theories, ar-
chitectures, and languages: a survey,” in Intelligent Agents,
Wooldridge and J. Eds, Eds., Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2009,
pp. 1–22.
[13] A. Kivela and E. Hyvonen, “Ontological theories for the
semantic web,” in Semantic Web Kick-Off in Finland, May
2002, pp. 111–136.
[14] R. Arnand, E. M. Robert, H. C. Roy, and M. M. Dennis,
“Use of ontologies in a pervasive computing environment,”
Knowledge Engineering Review 18-3, p. 209220, 2003.
[15] J. Searle, “Speech acts. an essay in the philosophy of lan-
guage,” Cambridge University Press, 1969.
[16] F. Bellifemine, G. Caire, and D. Greenwood, Developing
Multi-Agent Systems with JADE.
Wiley, February 2007.
[17] R. Smith, “The contract net protocol: high-level communi-
cation and control in a distributed problem solver,” in IEEE
Transactions on computers, 1980, pp. 1104–1113.
[18] F. Klugl and C. Bernon, “Self-adaptive agents for debugging
multi-agent simulations,” in ADAPTIVE 2011, 2011, pp. 79–
84.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

