Towards A Data Marketplace Ecosystem 
Blueprint For A Community-Driven Data Marketplace 
Sebastian Lawrenz, Priyanka Sharma, Andreas Rausch 
Clausthal University of Technology, Center for Digital Technologies  
Wallstraße 06 
Goslar, Germany 
email: {sebastian.lawrenz | priyanka.sharma | andreas.rausch}@tu-clausthal.de 
 
Abstract— The amount of data generation has been increasing 
exponentially over the last decades. The reasons for this 
amount of data are pretty similar: The evolution of technology, 
as well as new technologies, such as the Internet of things or 
artificial intelligence, as well as data-driven business models. 
However, the profiteers of the data boom are few players, like 
big tech companies. Small- and medium-size companies do not 
have access to the same amount of data and thus cannot benefit 
from the data boom and adapt their business models. This 
paper presents the concept of a data marketplace ecosystem to 
overcome the inbalance between big tech companies and these 
smaller companies. In comparison to other data marketplaces, 
our proposal is entirely community-driven. Instead of a single 
authority or player, it is developed and controlled by a 
community. The concept is closely related to software 
ecosystems and adaptive and open systems. The paper presents 
a blueprint of such an ecosystem based on blockchain 
technology and smart contracts, discusses the related state of 
the art, and reflects critically on the results.  
Keywords- Blockchain; Data; Data marketplaces; Community; 
Data ecosystem; Open platforms, Data Trading. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Over the last decades, the amount of data generation has 
been exponentially increasing, driven by new technologies 
like the Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) [1]. In 2020, people created 1.7 MB of data every 
second, and by the end of 2020, 44 zettabytes made up the 
entire digital universe. This amount of data means there are 
40 times more bytes than stars in the observable universe!  
Data is generated and collected in such a massive amount 
is pretty simple: Data has become the oil of the 21st Century 
[3]. Data is the fuel for new business models that are 
common for the most valuable companies in 2021, like 
Amazon, Apple, Meta Inc., and Google [4].  
However, most of the available data is related to a very 
limited number of companies and organizations that form 
almost an oligopoly – the so-called Big tech companies: 
Alphabet, Meta, Apple, Amazon, Microsoft, and Tesla [5], 
[6], [7]. For Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), it is 
much harder to extract the same value from their data 
compared to these large enterprises due to three main 
challenges: (a) they have no access to such an amount of 
data, (b) they have not access to the technology to process 
the data, and (c) they have not the knowledge to transform 
their traditional business towards data-driven business 
models [8]. To cope with these challenges, we introduce the 
concept of data marketplace ecosystems in this paper. 
A data marketplace ecosystem is a specific concept 
marketplace. Various data marketplaces already exist in 
different shapes and can be categorized along multiple 
dimensions, making a general classification of the multiple 
forms of business models difficult. In [9], a comprehensive 
model incorporating various dimensions for categorizing 
electronic marketplaces is proposed. For the categorization 
of electronic marketplaces in our work, we consider this 
model (see Figure 1).  
In this model, first, providers are placed on a scale of 
orientation between hierarchy and market, as shown in figure 
1. Economies have two basic mechanisms for coordinating 
the flow of material or services through adjacent steps in the 
chain: markets and hierarchies. Markets coordinate the flow 
through supply and demand forces and external transactions 
between individuals and companies. Market forces determine 
the design, price, quantity, and target delivery schedule for a 
given product that will serve as an input into another process. 
On the other hand, hierarchy coordinates the flow of 
materials through adjacent steps by controlling and directing 
it at a higher level in the executive order rather than letting 
market transactions conform to it. Managerial decisions 
determine the design, price, quantity, and delivery schedules 
at which products from one step on the chain. Thus, all 
transactions between suppliers and buyers can be classified 
as either hierarchical or market-based. 
Furthermore, data marketplaces are categorized based on 
their ownership (see figure1), which can be (a) private, i.e., 
owned by a single company (seller or buyer); (b) consortia-
based, i.e., owned by a small number of companies (seller or 
Figure 1: A taxonomy for data marketplaces from [9] 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

buyer); and (c) independent, i.e., the marketplace is run as a 
platform without any connection to sellers or buyers. 
The last dimension in the model of [9] differentiates 
between six business models. As shown in figure 1. at the 
hierarchy level are the privately-owned platforms. These 
types of business models typically facilitate the selling and 
buying of its owner, i.e., a company, and only allow one-to-
many and many-to-one relations. The consortia-based 
platforms are between; these models typically collaborate 
with various companies and facilitate their buying and 
selling methods. Many-to-many marketplaces are usually 
operated by independent parties and have minimal entry 
restrictions at the market level. 
According to [9], most of the currently existing data 
marketplaces, like knoema.com or mdm-portal.de, have a 
hierarchy private or hierarchy consortium-based business 
model, see figure 1. Consequently, a single company, 
organization, or a small consortium of companies and 
organizations have control over the data marketplace – that is 
what we define as an ownership data marketplace.  
As a result, the buyer and the seller have to trust the 
owner of the marketplace, which is a major problem, as it 
cannot be ensured that the data will not be misused. One 
example of this is the Facebook-Cambridge Analytica data 
scandal in early 2018, where they used personal data for 
political advertising without the consent of the users [10].  
To avoid this, in contrast to an ownership-controlled data 
marketplace, we propose our concept of a Community-driven 
data marketplace, i.e., a data marketplace ecosystem. A data 
marketplace ecosystem does not belong to a single authority 
and is instead owned and controlled by a community system, 
part of the marketplace. The community system itself is open 
such as new participants may join the different communities 
and thereby contribute to and supervise the data marketplace 
and its evolution. Therefore, the data marketplace ecosystem 
comes with an open business architecture platform that 
provides the technical foundation for transparency and trust 
by enabling peer-to-peer transactions for the whole data 
marketplace ecosystem. The community system has various 
responsibilities that help define, develop, and evolve the 
open business architecture platform. These responsibilities 
are the relationship between the community system and the 
open business architecture platform.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II 
gives a brief overview of the state of the art of data 
marketplaces, software ecosystems, and technologies for 
transparent and trustable peer-to-peer business transactions. 
Section III presents our concept for a data marketplace 
ecosystem that is driven by a community. Section IV 
summarizes and gives insights into future work. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART  
     This Section aims to present an overview of the current 
state of the art in data marketplaces on the one hand and 
software ecosystems on the other hand. Finally, blockchain 
technology and smart contracts are introduced since our 
blueprint is based on these technologies.  
A. Data marketplaces 
A data marketplace ecosystem is a specific concept for a 
data marketplace. Like any data marketplace, a data 
marketplace ecosystem is an electronic marketplace to trade 
data. An electronic marketplace is commonplace for 
interaction between sellers and buyers, where interactions 
determine the price and quantity of goods. Moreover, the 
marketplace 
provides 
infrastructure 
for 
trading. 
Marketplaces are concrete locations that facilitate the 
market. A marketplace is an infrastructure that enables the 
abstract concept of a market. A market serves three primary 
functions: First, it serves as an institution, i.e., it assigns 
roles such as buyers and sellers. Provides trading protocols 
and governs the behavior of the participants. And finally, a 
market defines the process of transactions [1]. Thus, an 
electronic marketplace, also known as e-commerce, is an 
infrastructure or concrete agency that allows participants to 
carry market transactions via an electronic medium. As in a 
data marketplace, transactions and other market processes 
such as buying and selling data are carried out through an 
electronic medium. In general, a data marketplace is a 
platform for trading data [11]: 
• 
It provides an infrastructure for trading.  
• 
It allows sellers to sell data. 
• 
It allows buyers to buy data in exchange for money. 
• 
It defines the trading protocols and the transaction 
process. 
Moreover, the existing data marketplaces can be 
classified into two categories [12]: 
 
1. Marketplaces are more motivated by the Internet of 
things devices, which allow subscribing data, such as 
data.iota.org or streamr.com. Here the Stakeholders 
deal with Real-Time Data (RTD), where the buyers need 
real-time data or a subscription to real-time data, e.g., 
traffic data for a navigation application. 
2. There are platforms and marketplaces like kaggle.com, 
knoema.com, redliondata.com, or dataandsons.com, and 
even more, where users can find Non-real Time Data 
(NRT) which we define as datasets. For example, this 
data can be used to train an Artificial intelligence model 
or make a forecast based on historical data.  
 
Real-time data will increasingly turn into a commodity in 
the coming years. Intending to provide real-time data, 
Streamr is an RTD marketplace. Anyone can publish events 
to data streams, subscribe to streams, and use the data in 
decentralized apps. Much of the data is free, but the terms of 
use are stored in Ethereum smart contracts [13].  
The IOTA Marketplace is a decentralized data 
marketplace that aims to make IoT data available to any 
compensating party. The main goal is to solve the following 
3 challenges [14]: 
1. Producing an initial, open-source Proof of Concept 
2. Exploring new IoT/M2M solutions and business models 
for the "Economy of Things" 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

3. Growing 
a 
co-creation 
ecosystem 
to 
foster 
permissionless innovation 
The Mobility Data Marketplace (MDM) enables different 
parties to offer mobility data, such as petrol prices or 
motorway construction sites [15]. Compared to Streamr, 
Datum and the IOTA Marketplace, MDM is not based on 
any cryptocurrency or blockchain technology behind and is a 
closed system. 
In recent years, many ideas have been proposed to give 
back the power to the consumers to decide whether they 
want to share their data. One such project is Datum; the 
Datum Client empowers users to take control of all their data 
and optionally share or sell their data through the Datum 
network [16].  
Another NRT Data Marketplace is Synapse AI, which 
comes up with the idea that users can sell their personal data 
to train AI Applications. It is built like many other solutions 
on blockchain technology [17], [18]. 
Current research focuses on NRT data marketplaces, 
designed decentral and usually based on blockchain 
technology. The main field of application is the exchange of 
IoT data, and the research objectives are generally ruled by 
reference architectures [19], [20], [21].  
Most of the actual NRTD Data marketplaces are quite 
closed systems, where the sellers especially have to trust the 
organization behind it because they have to upload their 
datasets there. In addition, as already mentioned, this trust 
has been tarnished, at least since the Facebook-Cambridge 
Analytica data scandal.  
The RTD marketplaces are mostly still a work in 
progress and used mainly for pushing some cryptocurrencies 
behind them, even though there is now no data marketplace 
known where a Buyer can find RTD and NRT in one 
marketplace. Another disadvantage of the work in progress 
RTD 
marketplaces 
is 
that 
they 
are 
designed 
for 
cryptocurrencies, and Users can only pay with these 
currencies. Still, most actual cryptocurrencies are volatile, 
which has a powerful impact on the market. Moreover, the 
introduced data marketplaces are private or consortium-
owned. The RTD marketplaces, based on blockchain 
technology, are also owned by the consortium behind their 
cryptocurrency. The blue area shows where most of the, I.e., 
ownership data marketplace exists, and the red site offers our 
approach towards a community-driven, I.e., a data 
marketplace ecosystem.  
B. Software Ecosystems 
An ecosystem in nature is the relation and the balance 
between organisms and their environment, and the 
environment directly influences the life and the development 
of the organisms [22]. This concept can easily be transferred 
to software systems that consist of several independent 
components, so-called software ecosystems.  
The interest in software ecosystems in research increased 
rapidly from 2010 until today, as shown in a literature Study 
by Konstantinos Manikos 2015, who has analyzed 231 
papers about software ecosystems. The research papers 
mainly focus on "architecture" (which means software 
architecture), and another focus was variability, integration, 
quality, and requirement engineering [23].  
 One of the main reasons for a software ecosystem is the 
large variety of configuration options, which give the user a 
high degree of freedom. Some examples for software 
ecosystems are the Linux kernel, Debian, Eclipse and 
Android [24]. 
Even though most ecosystems have the same goal of 
being as open as possible, they differ greatly in the 
organizational structure behind them. To tackle the question 
of how to provide an open and independent system on the 
one side, but also provide a fixed and secure framework as 
well as rules on the other side, there different kinds of 
organizational structures [23], [24]:  
• 
Monarchy: The ecosystem is orchestrated by one actor. 
• 
Federal: The ecosystem is orchestrated by a set of 
representative actors. 
• 
Collective: The ecosystem is orchestrated through 
processes involving all the actors, e.g. voting Anarchy: 
the ecosystem is characterized by the lack of a general 
orchestration and each actor acts on their own, based on 
local needs. 
Other research work speaks not only of the software 
ecosystems but also of IT ecosystems in which machines, 
IoT devices and humans are considered more part of the 
overall system. So, IT ecosystems are complex adaptive 
Systems of Autonomous Systems [25]. I(o)T ecosystems 
extend software ecosystems' challenges with hardware 
interoperability and more robust semantical gaps [26].  
The term Software ecosystem was first described by David 
G. Messerschmitt and Clemens Szyperski in the book of the  
same name and defines software ecosystems as a set of 
businesses functioning as a unit and interacting with a shared 
market for software and services, together with relationships 
among them [27]. In this, the challenge is to bring 
ecosystems together with business models.   
Figure 2: Overview of a data marketplace ecosystem 
 
The actual research and the challenges in the software 
ecosystem are like our problem. Moreover, delegating 
control to a community follows the same approach as our 
concept. Therefore, we introduce a data marketplace 
ecosystem, as shown in figure 2. based on the already done 
and ongoing research in the field of the software ecosystem. 
The data marketplace ecosystem has a community system 
and 
an 
open 
business 
architecture 
platform. 
The 
responsibility of the community system with regards to the 
open business architecture platform is the relationship 
between them.  
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

C. Technologies for transparent and trustable peer-to-peer 
business transactions 
1) Blockchain: In recent years, a new technology called 
blockchain evolved, which has the potential to provide a 
trustworthy, secure platform for peer-to-peer transactions. 
Blockchain 
enables 
distributed, 
transparent 
way 
of 
communication. On an abstract level, a blockchain is a 
distributed ledger that allows users to send data and verify it 
without a central entity [28]. Blockchain, at its core, is a 
distributed 
and 
decentralized 
open 
ledger 
that 
is 
cryptographically managed and updated by various 
consensus protocols and agreements among its peers [29]. 
2) Smart Contracts: Researcher Nick Szabo was the mid-
1990s, first conceived the concept of smart contracts. Nick 
Szabo describes smart contracts as a set of promises 
specified in a digital form, including protocols within which 
parties will perform what promises. Thus, the essential 
components of a smart contract are [30]:  
• 
A set of rules or promises  
• 
It is in a digital form  
• 
The Protocols for communication and performance are 
defined  
• 
Performance of actions is triggered automatically.  
Blockchain provides a platform to run smart contracts. 
Thus, enabling automatic execution of contracts on behalf of 
the users. But it is important to note that smart contracts and 
blockchain are different ideas. A blockchain can exist 
without smart contracts, too e.g. bitcoin is a blockchain 
application that exits without smart contracts. However, 
smart contracts and blockchain enable many new 
possibilities, which were not achieved until now. 
Blockchain provides two out of the four important 
components for smart contracts i.e. a protocol for 
communication and performance of actions between various 
parties and a digital form. Further, the first concept of smart 
contracts related to blockchain technology is exposed on the 
blockchain, which is quite a problem regarding privacy. But 
now, there are also ways for smart private contracts, as an 
example, hawk a decentralized smart contract system that 
does not store financial transactions in the clear on the 
blockchain [31].  
III. 
DATA MARKETPLACE ECOSYSTEM 
      In this Section, we present our overall concept of the 
data marketplace ecosystem, see figure 3. The main 
components of the ecosystem are on the community system, 
the open business architecture platform, and the relation 
between them which builds together the data marketplace 
ecosystem.  
 
A data marketplace ecosystem is a decentralized, 
open and large software system owned, controlled, and used 
by a community system. It consists of the following 
components: 
 
1. A community system is a group of people who share a 
common interest but still form a heterogeneous system. 
The community system can be subdivided into different 
homogeneous subgroups. 
2.  The open business architecture platform is the 
platform i.e., the data marketplace itself, which the 
community systems develop, operate, and use. IT 
describes the technical realization of a whole system for 
a data marketplace ecosystem. A blueprint for this will 
be presented in Section 3.3, but first, we introduce the 
community system.  
3. The responsibility of the community system for the 
open business architecture platform is the relation 
between the community system and the open business 
architecture platform.  
Along with having an open architecture and community-
driven, the data marketplace ecosystem is also open for 
integration. It provides not just the buyers and sellers a 
platform to exchange data but also an open architecture for 
developers to integrate various services according to user 
requirements. Because of these various services, the 
marketplace users are not restricted to using just one 
predefined service but can rather use a variety of options. 
E.g., to sell the data is not to be converted in a format that 
the platform supports. Still, the developers can offer various 
services for selling and storing data in many different 
formats and types. The same applies to payment, and the 
developers have the opportunity to integrate various 
payment options and offer them as services. 
 
Figure 3: Overview of a data marketplace ecosystem 
A. Community system 
To avoid an ownership data marketplace, controlled by a 
single authority or small consortium, our concept of a data 
marketplace ecosystem is Community-driven. In order to 
achieve this objective, it is also necessary to ensure that the 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

organizational structure behind the ecosystem is not 
monarchial. For this, we propose a community system.  
As mentioned earlier, the community system consists of 
various communities performing different tasks and having 
various responsibilities. All these communities together build 
the data marketplace ecosystem. We define the community 
system of a data marketplace ecosystem into the following 
four communities:  
1. Provider community: A not anarchical ecosystem 
requires some authority of control. As it is a goal of this 
system is to be as open as possible. We propose the 
provider community, which gives them control of the 
system to the users and benefits many other services or 
developers who want to integrate the services in the data 
marketplace. However, not everything can be combined. 
The services various services one hand, do not restrict 
the buyers and sellers, but not every service cannot be 
integrated because it might imbalance the ecosystem or 
introduce a threat to the ecosystem. Thus, the data 
marketplace needs some rules and standards. The 
provider community defines rules for the data 
marketplace ecosystem, e.g., a service to be offered on 
the marketplace should meet some standards. The 
provider community defines these standards and 
validates if the services meet them whenever it wants to 
be integrated into the platform. 
2. Developer community: The developers create different 
services that can be integrated into the data marketplace 
to fulfill user requirements. Their task is to build new 
services that are in line with the data marketplace 
ecosystem.  
3. User community: The users of the data marketplace use 
the platform for buying and selling data. They also 
define new requirements for the marketplace. 
4. Operator community: The operator community operates 
the data marketplace ecosystem. The operating 
Community provides the computation for the data 
marketplace to function. This is motivated to avoid 
single ownerships, even if they just provide the technical 
infrastructure (e.g., a server).  
 
B. Open business architecture platform 
Besides the community system, the second part of the 
data marketplace ecosystem is the open business architecture 
platform, which is the core concept for technical realization. 
An architectural blueprint for this is shown in figure 4. The 
individual aspects are explained more in detail below.  
The central concept of this blueprint is to provide a 
completely decentralized data marketplace ecosystem, which 
is open and flexible as far as possible. Still, it provides 
nonfunctional requirements like safety, security, privacy, and 
dependability. In order to avoid single ownership to give 
control of the marketplace to the users, the system 
architecture is decentralized using blockchain technology at 
its core. This means not even one single service runs on a 
central server. Everything is provided by the distributed 
nodes and running inside them (as shown in the background 
of figure 4). The operator community provides the 
computing power and the verification from these nodes.  
These concepts ensure that the whole system is entirely 
distributed and decentralized. Every open system needs 
ways to communicate with the outside and interact with its 
users. For this, the communication from the open business 
architecture platform to the outside is provided via 
interfaces, and we propose different interfaces.. 
The data interface enables the possibility to connect 
external data sources to the marketplace. It is motivated by 
two facts. First, many companies already have their own data 
storage system or use one from a provider they trust, and 
second, it increases the degree of openness. For example, this 
can be a simple database hosted on any random server, a 
cloud provider, IPFS, etc., for NRTD, and services to 
exchange RTD from IoT Devices or different kinds of data 
sources. Furthermore, an interface to other already existing 
marketplaces is not excluded. In addition, services can be 
located here. For example, check the quality of a data set or 
convert it to another format. 
The money interface is based on the same idea and aims 
to integrate as many payment options as possible. These 
could be traditional payment services, like interfaces to 
different bank systems and online payment systems like 
PayPal, Alipay, or cryptocurrencies.  
Both interfaces are divided into two kinds of different 
ports for the services. One-half of the services can access 
external services, and the other half not what increases the 
security of the overall system.  
The core foundation interface contains services only 
executed within the nodes in Smart contracts. They are 
strictly not allowed to communicate with external services, 
which increases security and privacy. The developer 
community inside can also develop smart contracts. The 
basic smart contracts provide at least a minimum of 
functions that are required for a platform to build a useable 
system. The developer community can develop advanced 
smart contracts and become part of the ecosystem after 
approval by the provider community.  
The mentioned services and smart contracts are divided 
into two different types: The essential services (shown in red 
in figure 4)-developed by the developer community- provide 
the minimum of functions and build the backbone of the 
platform and the advanced services (shown purple in figure 
4). The idea behind this essential service is that the 
marketplace always has some basic minimum services which 
are required for it to always at least function. The advanced 
services in addition-developed by the developer community 
must meet the ecosystem standards and must be accepted by 
the provider community. This ensures the flexibility and 
expandability of the platform. The aim of the detour via the 
provider community is to avoid jeopardizing the overall 
system's stability and security and avoid illegal activities. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

The actual users/the user community (buyers and sellers) 
of the marketplace access the marketplace via the buyer and 
seller interface, which is not a technical interface, but a user 
interface to get an overview of the offers, buy, or sell data. It 
supports the users in something of sale via the platform and 
configures the services according to their requirements.  
C. Relation between the community system and the open 
business architecture platform. 
As outlined above, the community system and the open 
business architecture platform build the whole data 
marketplace ecosystem.   
This interaction and the different community system 
roles are essential building blocks for the platform 
architecture design. In fact, the developer community, for 
example, can implement new services, and the provider 
community checks them if they meet the ecosystem 
standards. Thus, they have different access levels to the open 
business architecture platform. 
Figure 5 shows an overview of the relation between the 
community system and the open business architecture 
platform. As mentioned in Section 3.1 the community 
system has various roles and responsibilities. The user 
community uses the platform and creates new requirements. 
The developer community gets these requirements, and they 
develop new services based on these requirements. The 
services are then sent to the provider community, who can 
check whether these services meet the ecosystem standards. 
The provider community adds the services in the open 
business architecture platform if the services fulfill these 
standards. Figure 6 shows how a new service is added to the 
open business architecture platform and the roles the 
community system plays in adding them.  
 The provider community introduced as the overall 
control instance (comparable with the judiciary in a 
constitutional state) has the highest access permissions. They 
are also the only Community that can change the basic 
services, new services, and smart contracts  
The developer's Community is comparable with the 
government in a constitutional state. They need permissions 
to build services that must interact with the interfaces and 
communicate with external or internal services. But to ensure 
the overall system's security, they do not have access to the 
platform core.  
The user community (comparable with the nation in a 
constitutional state) cannot directly interact with the platform 
core and cannot implement or change services inside. They 
only use the application layer to interact with the open 
business architecture platform.  
Figure 4: Blueprint for a data marketplace ecosystem 
 
Figure 5: Overview about the relation between the community 
system and the open business architecture plattform 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

For all the introduced roles, the different community 
members need access permissions, which means that they 
must register, and a user administration service is required in 
the core foundation interface implementation. The only 
exception here is the operating Community. They do not 
have to register since they will not interact with the platform 
but only provide the computing power. Since it is an open 
system, anyone can simply participate.  
IV. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
This non-trivial concept for an ecosystem data 
marketplace is based on the following basic principles in 
summary: 
1. There is no central entity which controls the 
marketplace. Instead, it is governed by the 
community system, and the whole ecosystem is 
Community-driven.  
2. The 
complete 
system 
is 
decentralized 
and 
distributed, 
based 
on 
underlying 
blockchain 
technology. The main reason for this is to avoid, that 
the services, or data inside the marketplaces are 
owned or hosted by a single entity. Nevertheless, 
other technologies can also provide these functions 
besides blockchain.  
3. The architecture is designed to be as open as 
possible but ensures security and privacy. New 
services can be added via the developer community 
and will be controlled by the provider community. 
4. The main goal of the different communities inside 
the community system is to avoid anarchy on the one 
side and monarchy on the other side. The 
subcommunities have the task of controlling and 
balancing each other.  
This paper presented a blueprint for a data marketplace 
ecosystem based on underlying blockchain technology. The 
paper aimed to present a concept for a data marketplace that 
does not belong to a single authority. 
Our concept is Community driven and proposes on the 
one side an initial concept for the community structure and, 
on the other side, an architecture that is aligned to this 
Community. In order to keep the marketplace as open and 
flexible as possible but to guarantee a solid security standard, 
clear interfaces are defined.  
Nevertheless, this project is still a work in progress and 
will be continuously expanded in the near future. Our future 
work will include proposals about how our proposed 
ecosystem can be implemented and its challenges. There are 
already some open challenges that we identified in our 
earlier work. These are, for example, the final concrete 
organization form between the communities in the 
community system, the selection of the basic services, and a 
lot of open questions about how to increase the stability and 
the security of the whole system. Further, we identified in 
our previous work some main challenges related to data 
marketplaces, which we still want to provide solutions for in 
the data marketplace ecosystem. Some of these challenges 
are, e.g., how to check and guarantee data quality or 
automatically generate metadata for the product offer [32]. 
Especially for dealing with data quality, we proposed a core 
concept where buyers can define requirements and an 
intelligent contract, which holds this requirement and the 
dataset and verifies the compliance.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was funded by the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), grant number 
033R240C 
(project 
title 
“EffizientNutzen—data-based 
business models for the cascade usage and extended product 
usage of electr(on)ic products”). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, "The Internet of Things: 
A survey," Comput. Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–
2805, 2010. 
[2] Jeff Desjardins, "How much data is generated each day? | 
World Economic Forum," 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/04/how-much-data-is-
generated-each-day-cf4bddf29f. [Accessed: 20-Jun-2021]. 
[3] A. Hasty, "Treating Consumer Data Like Oil: How Re-
framing Digital Interactions Might Bolster the Federal Trade 
Commission's New Privacy Framework," Fed. Commun. Law 
J., no. April, pp. 293–324, 2015. 
[4] Lucy Handley, "Amazon beats Apple and Google to become 
the world's most valuable brand," 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/06/11/amazon-beats-apple-and-
google-to-become-the-worlds-most-valuable-brand.html. 
[Accessed: 18-Jun-2021]. 
[5] Z. Abrahamson, "Essential Data," 2014. 
[6] Jennifer Fraczek, “Facebook, a ′data monopolist′? | Business| 
Economy and finance news from a German perspective | DW 
| 
15.07.2014," 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.dw.com/en/facebook-a-data-monopolist/a-
17788350. [Accessed: 18-Jun-2021]. 
[7] Vince Cable, "The tech titans must have their monopoly 
broken – and this is how we do it | Vince Cable | Opinion | 
The 
Guardian," 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/apr/20/tec
h-monopoly-apple-facebook-data-extreme-content. 
[Accessed: 18-Jun-2021. 
[8] M. Saam, S. Viete, and S. Schiel, “Digitalisierung im 
Mittelstand: Status Quo, aktuelle Entwicklungen und 
Herausforderungen,” 
Zentrum 
für 
Europäische 
Wirtschaftsforschung (ZEW), Mannheim, 2016. 
[9] F. Stahl, F. Schomm, G. Vossen, and L. Vomfell, "A 
classification framework for data marketplaces," Vietnam J. 
Comput. Sci., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 137–143, 2016. 
[10] Carole Cadwalladr and Emma Graham-Harrison, "Revealed: 
50 million Facebook profiles harvested for Cambridge 
Analytica in major data breach | News | The Guardian," 17-
Mar-2018. 
[11] M. Travizano, C. Sarraute, G. Ajzenman, and M. Minnoni, 
"Wibson: A Decentralized Data Marketplace," pp. 1–6, 2018. 
[12] P. R. A. Lawrenz, Sebastian; Sharma, "The Significant Role 
of Metadata for Data Marketplaces." 2019. 
[13] "Streamr vision," 2017. 
[14] Cara Harbor, “Part 1: IOTA Data Marketplace — Update – 
IOTA.” [Online]. Available: https://blog.iota.org/part-1-iota-
data-marketplace-update-5f6a8ce96d05. [Accessed: 13-Jun-
2019]. 
[15] P. 
Stieler, 
V. 
Kanngiesser, 
and 
F. 
Hilti, 
“MobilitätsDatenMarktplatz-welche Chancen ergeben sich für 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Städte und Gemeinden?,” Agit - J. für Angew. Geoinformatik, 
1-2015, pp. 204–210, 2015. 
[16] R. Haenni, "Datum Network The decentralized data 
marketplace," 2017. 
[17] D. P. Gailey, "Synapse : Decentralized Intelligence List of 
Figures." 
[18] "Synapse AI: Al economies on the blockchain Whitepaper 
v1.0," 2018. 
[19] C. Perera, C. H. Liu, and S. Jayawardena, "The Emerging 
Internet 
of 
Things Marketplace 
From 
an 
Industrial 
Perspective: A Survey," IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput., 
vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 585–598, 2015. 
[20] L. M. De Rossi, N. Abbatemarco, and G. Salviotti, "Towards 
a Comprehensive Blockchain Architecture Continuum.," 
Proc. 52nd Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., vol. 6, pp. 4605–
4614, 2019. 
[21] K. R. Ozyilmaz, M. Dogan, and A. Yurdakul, "IDMoB: IoT 
data marketplace on blockchain," Proc. - 2018 Crypto Val. 
Conf. Blockchain Technol. CVCBT 2018, no. June, pp. 11–19, 
2018. 
[22] P. Monga, Radhika, and D. Sharma, "Structural and 
Functional Unit of Environment: Ecosystem," in International 
Conference on Recent Innovations in Engineering, Science, 
Humanities and Management (ICRIESHM, 2017, pp. 275–
280. 
[23] K. Manikas, "Revisiting software ecosystems Research: A 
longitudinal literature study," J. Syst. Softw., vol. 117, pp. 84–
103, 2016. 
[24] T. Berger et al., "Variability mechanisms in software  
ecosystems," Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 1520–
1535,2014. 
[25] A. Rausch, J. P. Müller, D. Niebuhr, S. Herold, and U. Goltz, 
“IT ecosystems: A new paradigm for engineering complex 
adaptive software systems,” 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Digit. 
Ecosyst., pp. 1–6, Jun. 2012. 
[26] 
A. Bröring et al., "Enabling IoT Ecosystems through 
Platform Interoperability," IEEE Softw., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 
54–61, Jan. 2017. 
[27] 
D. G. Messerschmitt and C. Szyperski, Software 
Ecosystem: Understanding an Indispensable Technology 
and Industry, 1st ed., vol. 1. The MIT Press, 2005. 
[28] 
A. M. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking 
Digital Crypto-Currencies, 1st ed. O'Reilly Media, Inc., 
2014. 
[29] 
Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, "An 
Overview of Blockchain Technology: Architecture, 
Consensus, and Future Trends," Proc. - 2017 IEEE 6th 
Int. Congr. Big Data, BigData Congr. 2017, no. October, 
pp. 557–564, 2017. 
[30] 
N. Szabo, "Smart contracts: building blocks for digital 
markets," EXTROPY J. Transhumanist Thought,(16), vol. 
18, 1996. 
[31] 
A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, and C. 
Papamanthou, "Hawk: The Blockchain Model of 
Cryptography and Privacy-Preserving Smart Contracts," 
in Proceedings - 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and 
Privacy, SP 2016, 2016, pp. 839–858. 
[32] 
S. Lawrenz, P. Sharma, and A. Rausch, "Blockchain 
Technology As an Approach for Data Marketplaces," in 
Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on 
Blockchain Technology, 2019, pp. 55–59.  
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-951-5
ADAPTIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

