Data-driven Component Conﬁguration in Production Systems
Daning Wang, Christoph Knieke, Andreas Rausch
Technische Universit¨at Clausthal, Institute for Software and Systems Engineering
Arnold-Sommerfeld-Straße 1, 38678 Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany
Email: {daning.wang|christoph.knieke|andreas.rausch}@tu-clausthal.de
Abstract—In many factories, trying to model and develop a
complex production system is considered a hard task, requiring
efforts and time to the process engineers and system engineers.
The production system is treated as a closed data driven system
where the system development is motivated by the production
time and the quality of products. The corresponding technical
solutions for the evaluated result (e.g., for production time) are
considered as the driving data of the production system, which
can be developed to improve the productivity of the production
system. On the other side, the production system is a cyber-
physical system, which presents a uniﬁed view of computing
systems that interact strongly with their physical environment.
In order to raise the productivity, the production time and the
quality of products must be evaluated regularly. The components
in production systems must follow these results of evaluation
and be conﬁgured with a new architecture to achieve the new
requirements. Thus, the challenge is how to follow the driving
data to get the new component conﬁguration in production
system, particularly cyber-physical system. This paper will give an
approach for modeling of the production system and generating
of a candidate of component conﬁguration in consideration of the
driving data.
Keywords–Architecture Evolution; Semantical Matching; Con-
ﬁguration of Components; Cyber-physical System.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) play important roles in
many areas, e.g., smart factory, digital manufacturing, smart
logistics, and energy efﬁciency. The modern mechanical en-
gineering products are increasingly being supplemented by
programmable controllers. Production system is a classical
Cyber-Physical System. It is in constant evolution and should
permanently be operated in order to raise the productivity
or meet the continuously and fast changing requirements
[1]. However, in general a production system is not deﬁned
perfectly at the beginning. And sometimes, it has to monitor
itself for its productivity. Besides, driven by availability of new
technology the production systems are repeatedly enhanced
and extended in their prolonged life time.
An existing production system (see Figure 1) can be
modeled with a component oriented modeling language. By
using of an equivalent representation, the component oriented
model for the existing production system is transformed to a
graph structure, which keeps the system structure and prop-
erties from the original component oriented model [2]. This
graph structure evolves into more different graphs by using
of graph-based algorithms. Each new graph represents a new
components conﬁguration. By using combination rules, which
are deﬁned by system engineers, a part of the new component
conﬁgurations, which meet the requirements of the driving
data, can be found out. One of these conﬁgurations will be
simulated and as a new production system implemented. This
new one is named target 1 and will be continually evaluated
into the second iteration.
In this paper, an approach is introduced to model and
generate a candidate of component conﬁgurations for a plan of
new production system according to the driving data. Firstly,
the related work about the solutions of this problem will be
introduced in Section II. Then, an example is presented in
Section III reﬂecting the data driven evolution of produc-
tion system. The necessary basics and fundamentals of this
approach will be introduced closely related to the example
system in Section IV. The approach is described in two parts
in Sectionn V : the system architecture and algorithms. Finally,
Section VI concludes and gives an outlook on further work.
Industry 4.0
Solution 
Production System
Evaluation
Existing
Target 1
Target 2
Driving data
Evaluating factor
Analysis
(Expert)
Figure 1. Data driven development of a production system
II.
RELATED WORK
The “Industry 4.0” (I4.0) – also called “smart manufac-
turing” or “industrial internet of things” – in production is
synonymous with highly ﬂexible production, which enables
companies to offer highly individualized products by linking
the internet to conventional processes and services, and to
actively involve their customers very early in the development
process [3]. Currently, there are very less opportunities for
the small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) to gather the
information which they need to adopt I4.0 solutions. In [4], an
information portal is presented providing access to the results
of a study commissioned by Stechert and Franke [5]. It reveals
basic approaches to digitization and helps to identify business
areas, such as product development that can be inﬂuenced by
speciﬁc I4.0 functional areas. But the link to concrete I4.0
technologies does not take place here.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

As part of the project “Intro 4.0” [6], the implementation
strategies of I4.0 solutions are developed based on four appli-
cations for participating industrial partners. Here, the speciﬁc
I4.0 solutions are developed and introduced to industrial part-
ners. The ﬁndings on the development and implementation of
I4.0 solutions will then be used to derive recommendations for
action on risk and potential estimation when implementing the
I4.0 solutions [6]. However, the development of a simulation
environment or the evaluation methodology for the comparison
of alternative solutions is not planned.
The modeling of processes and information ﬂows offers the
sufﬁcient resource for networking of the production planning
systems, the control systems of machines, building systems and
logistics systems [7]. The projects ENOPA [8] and EnHiPro [9]
mainly committed to modeling between production planning
systems and control systems of machines and logistics systems.
The project PROFILE mainly devoted to description models
for companies and the innovation and knowledge management
in production networks. That is also the main work in the
projects SynProd [10] and GINA [11].
The Functional Mock-up Interface (FMI) deﬁnes a stan-
dardized interface and is developed by Daimler within the
framework of the MODELISAR project for the coupling of
various simulation modules [12]. This approach is used to
integrate simulation modules into other simulation modules
with a common interface. A master simulation is deﬁned, in
that the appropriate different modules can be coupled. The data
exchange between the modules must also be modeled in the
master.
All these previous solutions have in common that although
they allow a technical integration of different models they do
not give a set of suitable concepts for structuring and integra-
tion of the concrete I4.0 solutions in the existing production
system. So, the I4.0 solutions must be integrated in the existing
production system before the evaluation of the I4.0 solutions.
III.
EXAMPLE SYSTEM
Figure 2 shows a battery manufacturing system as an
example. It consists of a 3D-print station, a quality assurance
station, a battery module assembly, an electronics assembly, a
ﬁnal assembly, a storage for assembly (such as caps, batteries
and electronics), a logistic system, a central controller and two
robot grippers as transportations. The manufactured batteries
will be transported into a warehouse and stored there.
A battery production system
3D-print
station
Robot 
gripper
Robot 
gripper
logistic
system
Battery
module
assembly
Electronics 
assembly
Final 
assembly
Central 
controller
Storage for
assembly
Quality 
assurance station
Figure 2. Battery production system as example
This battery manufacturing system is a classical CPS. The
manufacturing parameters and the description of production
processes are provided from another system as the input data to
the central controller. The central controller networks the work
stations, assemblies and other subsystems together to execute
the production plan. The material and resources are transported
into the storage for assembly and after the production the
batteries are transported out from this system.
In this case, the production time is an important evaluating
to reﬂect the productivity. Therefore, an evaluation system is
monitoring this evaluating factor and in this way makes the
evaluation of productivity. The evaluation results are analyzed
to obtain one industry 4.0 solution. In this case, ”Track and
Tracing with RFID” technology is selected using to optimize
the production time (see Figure 3): One or more new RFID-
reader sensors will be integrated into the existing production
system and the RFID-chips must be integrated into the trans-
port trays.
But there are many possible implementations to integrate
the RFID-reader sensors into the existing production system.
Thus, before the implementation or simulation of one integra-
tion concept, a decision support is necessary.
Industry 4.0 Solutions
A battery production system
3D-print
station
Robot gripper
Robot gripper
logistic system
Battery
module
assembly
Electronics 
assembly
Final 
assembly
Central 
controller
Storage for assembly
Quality assurance
station
Track and
Tracing with
RFID
Figure 3. The technical solutions of the evaluated result for this battery
production system as example
IV.
BASICS AND FUNDAMENTALS
A. Component-based modeling
Internal Block Diagram (IBD) is a UML 2 based standard
component oriented modeling language and used in Systems
Modeling Language (SysML) for systems engineering [13].
The IBD consists of system components, interfaces in the form
of ports and connections. Their symbols and interpretations are
described in Figure 4.
Figure 4. The interpretations of the symbols in IBD
The above mentioned existing state of the battery manu-
facturing system is modeled model with IBD in Figure 5.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

3D-print
station
Robot 
gripper 1
Robot 
gripper 2
logistic
system
Battery
module
assembly
Electronics 
assembly
Final 
assembly
Storage for
assembly
Quality 
assurance
station
Central 
controller
Figure 5. The existing production system modeled with IBD
B. Graph structure
In order to describe the system evolution from exsiting
state to a target state, a directed graph structure is introduced
in deﬁnition (1). The elements in the set V represent the
nodes of the graph structure G. Any element in the set E
represents a directed edge (arrow) in G. The edges can be also
described with E := V × V . The functions src and tgt are
two connection relationship functions for every edge, which
connects to its source node with function src, as well as its
target node with tgt. Every node and edge has attributes to
store the semantic information (description information). Every
attribute has a key-value structure, where P represents the
power set of key-value pairs. The keys are identiﬁcation keys
and help identify the various kinds of description information,
which are stored in values.
G := (V, E, src, tgt)
src := src|E→V
tgt := tgt|E→V
(1)
attributes := V ∪ E → P(Key × V alue)
Key := a set of values
V alue := a set of values
(2)
C. Transformation between models and graph structure
A transform function bi represents the transformation be-
tween IBD models and graphs. This transformation is deﬁned
as an equivalent and reversible transformation.
bi(mIBD) ↔ gIBD
(3)
Following the example of battery manufactoring system, a
representative part in the full system is selected to clearly and
detailedly introduce the transformation for every elements. In
that, the system components and ports are transformed into
nodes, and all connections to edges. (see Figure 6)
The system components like central controller, robot grip-
per 2, electronics assembly and ﬁnal assembly are transformed
to nodes 1, 2, 3, and 4 (see Figure 7). The belonging de-
scriptions, like the manufactory parameters, descriptions of
functions and protocol, are transformed into the attributes of
2
1
3
4
Production model (IBD)
Graph strukture
Robot gripper 2
Electronics 
assembly
Final 
assembly
Attribute
Attribute
Attribute
Attribute
Attribute
Attribute
Central 
controller
(Art, 
Protocols)
(Manufactory parameters, 
Descriptions of functions,
Protocols)
41
42
11
12
13
21
22
23
31
32
bi
Figure 6. The graph representation of the existing production system
the corresponding node. All of the interfaces are transformed
to nodes in the graph. In this example, the digital (second) in-
terface of the ﬁnal assembly system component is transformed
to node 32 in the graph, and its descriptions, like art and
protocols, are saved in the attributes of node 32. All of the
material ﬂows and information ﬂows are transformed to edges
in the graph, at the same time the connection relationships are
kept through this transformation.
Electronics assembly
4
bi
Attributes in node 4
in Electronics assembly
The second interface
of final assembly
Robot gripper 2
Final assembly
2
3
1
Attributes in node 32
(Art, Protocols)
Central 
controller
(Manufactory parameters, 
Descriptions of functions,
Protocols)
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
32
bi
A belonging relationship
In the second interface
of final assembly
Figure 7. The interpretations of transformation between the IBD elements
and graph elements for the existing production system
V.
APPROACH
A. System architecture
Our approach is based on a subsystem named candidates
generator. Figure 8 shows a new system architecture of data
driven development of production system with this approach.
The inputs of candidates generator consist of one produc-
tion model, which describes the existing state of the production
system with IBD (1) and one Industry 4.0 solution (2). The
outputs of candidates generator is a set of models for a target
production system (3), which is integrated with the given
industry 4.0 solution. At the same time, this set of models
must be implementable. In the case of battery manufacturing
system, the candidates for a new production system should
consider with the integration of RFID-reader sensors into the
existing production system. In the circumstances, any model
in the candidates who cannot satisfy this condition will be
removed from the candidates.
The ﬁltered models will be continually evaluated with
evaluating factors (4), such as production time and so on. After
the evaluation, one production model is selected as a target
model (5) and analyzed by experts (6) again. These processes
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Industry 4.0
Solution 
solution
Candidates 
generator
Production system
Production 
model
Candidates of the 
implementable 
production models  
Production 
models
Evaluation
The target production 
model
Selection of the target 
production model
Existing
Target
(Expert)
Implementation
Analysis
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Evaluating
facrors
Figure 8. A new system architecture of data driven development of
production system with our approach
make the generating an iterative loop possible, in order to apply
more than one Industry 4.0 solution on a production system.
After the integrations for all of Industry 4.0 solutions, the
ﬁnally selected target production model will be implemented
(7) to a new (target) production system. The new production
system can be continually developed in the second iterative
process into candidate generator.
B. Algorithms
The production model for the existing state is transformed
into graph structure without information loss and structural
changes by using the transformation function bi (see deﬁnition
3). On the graph structure, the algorithms in graph theory, e.g.
depth-ﬁrst search, breadth-ﬁrst search, path/walk morphism
and shortest path problem, can easily be used to generate new
graphs. The transformation function bi makes the reversible
from graph structure to production model possible and without
information loss and structural changes.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
We proposed an approach which supports the further devel-
opment of complex cyber-physical systems. In the application
example, the algorithm used in our approach had to give
recommendations for integrating RFID-reader sensors in the
existing production system. The existing models were ﬁrst
abstracted to a common graph-based description. The candi-
dates generator was then used to determine candidates with a
possible integration of the new components. Based on this set
of candidates, an optimal integration of the new components
can be identiﬁed.
The underlying concept is currently being continuously
further developed and applied in the research project “Synus”
to optimally integrate Industry 4.0 solutions into existing
systems. This is intended to provide SMEs in particular with a
decision-making aid for the introduction of new technologies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper evolved of the research project “Synus” (Meth-
ods and tools for the synergetic conception and evaluation
of Industry 4.0 solutions) which is funded by the European
Regional Development Fund (EFRE — ZW 6-85012454) and
managed by the Project Management Agency NBank.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Giese, B. Rumpe, B. Sch¨atz, and J. Sztipanovits, “Science and engi-
neering of cyber-physical systems (dagstuhl seminar 11441),” Dagstuhl
Reports, vol. 1, no. 11, 2012.
[2]
H. Gr¨onniger, J. O. Ringert, and B. Rumpe, “System Model-Based
Deﬁnition of Modeling Language Semantics,” Formal techniques for
distributed systems, 2009, pp. 152–166.
[3]
MCKINSEY
DIGITAL,
“Industry
4.0:
How
to
navigate
digitization
of
the
manufacturing
sector.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.mckinsey.de/ﬁles/mck industry 40 report.pdf
[4]
VDMA
-
FORUM
INDUSTRIE
4.0,
“Industrie
4.0
konkret
-
L¨osungen
f¨ur
die
industrielle
Praxis.”
[Online].
Available:
http://industrie40.vdma.org/documents/
[5]
C. Stechert and H.-J. Franke, “Requirements models for modular
products,” ICORD 09: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Research into Design, Bangalore, India, 07.-09.01.2009.
[6]
J. Schmitt, D. Inkermann, C. Stechert, A. Raatz, and T. Vietor, “Re-
quirement oriented reconﬁguration of parallel robotic systems,” Robotic
Systems-Applications, Control and Programming, 2012.
[7]
S. Thiede, Energy efﬁciency in manufacturing systems.
Springer
Science & Business Media, 2012, ISBN: 978-3-642-25914-2.
[8]
M. Sch¨onemann, C. Schmidt, C. Herrmann, and S. Thiede, “Multi-
level modeling and simulation of manufacturing systems for lightweight
automotive components,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 41, 2016, pp. 1049–1054.
[9]
M. Sch¨onemann, C. Herrmann, P. Greschke, and S. Thiede, “Simulation
of matrix-structured manufacturing systems,” Journal of Manufacturing
Systems, vol. 37, 2015, pp. 104–112.
[10]
C. M¨uller, M. Grunewald, and T. S. Spengler, “Redundant conﬁguration
of automated ﬂow lines based on “industry 4.0”-technologies,” Journal
of Business Economics, vol. 87, no. 7, 2017, pp. 877–898.
[11]
T. Vietor, C. Herrmann, and T. S. Spengler, Synergetische Produkt-
entwicklung: unternehmens¨ubergreifend erfolgreich zusammenarbeiten;
Ergebnisse des Verbundprojekts SynProd.
Shaker, 2015, ISBN-10:
3844034374.
[12]
T. Blochwitz, M. Otter, J. Akesson, M. Arnold, C. Clauss, H. Elmqvist,
M. Friedrich, A. Junghanns, J. Mauss, D. Neumerkel et al., “Functional
mockup interface 2.0: The standard for tool independent exchange of
simulation models,” in Proceedings of the 9th International MODEL-
ICA Conference; September 3-5; 2012; Munich; Germany, no. 076.
Link¨oping University Electronic Press, 2012, pp. 173–184.
[13]
E. Huang, R. Ramamurthy, and L. Mcginnis, “System and simulation
modeling using SysML,” Proceedings - Winter Simulation Conference,
Jan 2008, pp. 796–803.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

