 LTE Uplink Power Control and its Impact on System Performance 
 
Elena-Roxana Cîrstea, Silviu Ciochină 
 Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications 
‘Politehnica’ University of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
rcirstea@elcom.pub.ro, silviu@comm.pub.ro  
 
Abstract—Long Term Evolution (LTE) is the new standard of 
the 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project) and it was 
designed 
to 
increase 
capacity 
and 
improve 
service 
performance. Since SC-FDMA (Single Carrier-Frequency 
Division Multiple Access) is the multiple access scheme being 
used, compared with WCDMA (Wideband Code Division 
Multiple Access) multiple access scheme implemented in 
UMTS or HSPA, there are no intra-cell interferences. The 
problem of inter-cell interference is still present. One of the 
fundamental algorithms that was developed to control inter-
cell interferences is the uplink fractional power control 
mechanism. This paper evaluates possible ways to tune this 
adaptive algorithm in order to maximize system performance. 
Simulation results are presented in order to identify the best 
option for algorithm parameter setting.    
Keywords - power control; adaptive algorithm; throughput; 
load; SINR (Signal to Interference Plus Noise Ratio)  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the last few years, the requirements concerning 
service performance have become very tight. To be able to 
deliver the strict performance requirements requested by 
applications and services, new standards for innovative 
technologies are under development. For many operators in 
many countries, this year  is going to be the starting point for 
launching LTE (Long Term Evolution) networks. The main 
objectives for this new system are: improvement of spectral 
efficiency, increase of uplink and downlink transfer rates,  
support for scalable bandwidth and all IP network, reduced 
delay. 
The uplink multi access scheme is SC-FDMA (Single 
Carrier FDMA). By using this access scheme, a unique 
frequency can be allocated to users at the same time. This 
way, intra-cell interference is eliminated. Also, carriers are 
not combined in random phases so there is no large variation 
of the instantaneous power for the modulated signal. This 
translates into a lower PAPR (Peak to Average Power Ratio). 
The power amplifier in the terminal has an increased 
efficiency and power consumption is reduced.  
One of the key elements that is in charge to improve 
service performance is the Uplink Fractional Power Control 
(FPC) [1]. As it is known, interference, even if it is intra-cell 
or inter-cell, it is an important factor that introduces severe 
service performance degradation and users dissatisfaction. 
The FPC algorithm was designed to improve cell throughput 
or cell edge throughput and to improve battery life time 
[2],[3]. 
This paper investigates the way FPC mechanism works 
and evaluates possible tuning of this algorithm and its impact 
on service performance both on user experience and on 
system functionality. 
The paper is structured in four parts. The first part is 
dedicated to a short introduction and the second part 
describes the fractional power control algorithm as it is 
specified in the standard. The last two parts are the main 
parts of the paper that contain simulated scenarios and 
relevant results. Finally, after analyzing simulation results, 
recommendations concerning parameter setting are provided. 
II. 
FRACTIONAL POWER CONTROL ALGORITHM 
In LTE system, the power control algorithm for uplink is 
different, compared to that used for UMTS and HSPA. The 
differences come from specific characteristics of the LTE 
system like: 
- The multiple access scheme for LTE uplink is SC-
FDMA (WCDMA for UMTS) so there are no intra-cell 
interferences thanks to user orthogonality assured by the 
multiplexing scheme; 
- The LTE flat architecture where base stations 
communicate 
one 
to 
another 
to 
control 
inter-cell  
interferences (RNC –Radio Network Controler- the superior 
entity in UMTS and HSPA that controls interactions between 
base stations is eliminated in LTE and eNodeB (enhanced 
NodeB) takes part of its responsibilities);  
- The uplink scheduler is located at basestation level and 
power control should synchronize with link adaptation to be 
able to adapt to multiple QoS requirements of applications. 
Uplink power control mechanism is part of link 
adaptation mechanisms [5]. Its purpose is to compensate 
channel variations. Based on different channel variations, 
two power control categories have been defined: 
a) Slow Power Control: compensates for slow channel 
variations (pathloss, shadow fading) ; 
b) Fast power control: compensates for fast channel 
variations, like fast fading; 
Another classification for power control algorithms is 
based on the characteristics of the information sent by the 
mobile terminal to establish its level of transmit power: 
a) Open Loop Power Control: power level is 
determined by the terminal using parameters and 
mesurements obtained from the signals sent by eNodeB; no 
feedback related to the power being used by the user 
equipment is sent to the eNodeB; 
57
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

b) Closed Loop Power Control: the mobile terminal 
sends its feedback to the eNodeB which is used afterwards 
for power corrections. 
A Closed Loop Power Control scheme is going to 
introduce important overhead but at the same time, it will be 
able to do a better compensation for channel variations. Open 
Loop Power Control schemes are easy to implement and 
signalization overhead is much lower compared to the 
anterior scheme. The limitation is that power compensation 
for channel variations cannot be done at terminal level. 
Full compensation power control schemes implemented 
for UMTS and HSPA uplink assume that all users are 
received with the same SINR. In a real network, users have 
different SINR requirements. For example, users located at 
cell edge have a higher path loss and instead of using full 
compensation 
which 
increases 
interference 
of 
the 
neighboring cells, fractional power control scheme is being 
used. This way, cell edge users could operate at lower SINR 
and interferences at neighboring cells are diminished. 
The standardized formula for uplink fractional power 
control [1] is described in the next equation: 
 
     {                                }                                                                          
 
PMAX is the maximum transmit power of the terminal and it 
depends on terminal power class, M is the number of PRBs 
(Physical Resources Blocks) being allocated by the uplink 
scheduler on PUSCH (Physical Uplink Shared Channel), P0 
is a specific cell parameter that represents the power 
allocated to one PRB, α is also a cell parameter, PL is the 
downlink pathloss measured by the mobile terminal, δMCS is 
an offset specific to an user equipment and it is in a strict 
connection with the modulation and coding scheme and the 
last parameter, f(Δi) is a function that allows relative, 
cumulative and absolute corrections and it is also user 
specific. 
The eNodeB broadcasts parameters P0 and α. The 
destination of this broadcast is represented by the user 
equipment. Using these two parameters plus the measured 
pathloss, a mobile terminal is able to establish the power 
level used during the first phase. This is the Open Loop 
Power Control. After this stage, mobile terminals send 
feedback to the eNodeB. δMCS and Δi  are being sent by the 
eNodeB. These last two terms represent the Closed Loop 
Power Control. 
When α=0, no power control mechanism is implemented  
and all mobile terminals use the same transmit power. The 
case when α=1, corresponds to full power compensation. For 
α in the interval 0 and 1, a compromise is being done in 
between 
full 
compensation 
and 
no 
power 
control 
mechanism. In this case, a fractional compensation of 
pathloss is used. 
As it was specified, parameter α can take values in the set 
{0, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1} although values in between 
0 and 0.4 have no practical use.  
While the value for parameter α determines a 
compromise between cell edge users and cell center users, P0 
equally impacts all the users in the cell. As α decreases, cell 
edge throughput decreases and cell average throughput 
increases [2], [3], [4]. Each possible combination of  the 
parameters α and P0 defines an operation point for the 
Fractional Power Control algorithm and also a certain 
performance. 
For this study, Closed Loop Power Control is not taken 
into account and only Open Loop Power Control is analyzed. 
This mechanism is based on the principle that target SINR is 
calculated using pathloss. Actually, SINR is a linear function 
of pathloss. Therefore, it is possible to have a higher SINR 
target at cell center in order to increase throughput while 
having a lower SINR target at cell edge. The low SINR 
target at cell edge it is an important factor destined to 
decrease the level of  inter-cell interference. 
The Fractional Power Control algorithm allows a tradeoff 
between cell center users and cell edge users. When α is less 
than 1, the SINR target decreases with pathloss. As pathloss 
decreases, a smooth increase in SINR target was observed. 
The combination of Open Loop and Closed Loop Power 
control is in charge to correct the open loop errors. 
III. 
SIMULATED SCENARIOS 
To be able to evaluate and provide recommendation in 
such a way that system performance is maximized, several 
scenarios have been run.  
For each run, the mobiles are placed on the geographical 
area and rejected or admitted according to specified radio 
conditions. After this stage, the performance per mobile 
station is calculated.  At the beginning of a new simulation, 
there are mobiles present in the system and also new mobiles 
arrive in the network. After identifying the best server for 
each mobile terminal, the admission control is performed.   
Here are the inputs for the system-level simulator: 
 
Frequency band: 2.6GHz 
 
Bandwidth: 10MHz 
 
Environment: Suburban 
 
Traffic: FTP (File Transfer Protocol) 
 
Slow power control: compensate for slow channel 
variations (pathloss, shadow fading)  
 
Path Loss model: Hata suburban, eNodeB antenna 
height 30m, mobile terminal height 1.5m 
 
Shadow fading: σ=6dB, δ=0.95 
 
Maximum transmit power for the terminal: 23dBm 
 
Fading channel profile: 3km/h, Extended Pedestrian 
 
The nominal pathloss related to the reference target 
SINR: 60dB 
 
No mobility 
  
The number of Physical Resource Blocks (PRB) 
allocated to a user depends on the service type. For FTP 
traffic the user requests a minimum guaranteed rate and it 
has no delay constraints. The number of PRBs allocated is 
determined by the value of the minimum guaranteed rate.  
The uplink power control mechanism is adjusted for each 
modulation scheme and coding rate. Power adjustment is 
done while maintaining a target BLER. The first step is to 
calculate the SINR achieved with maximum transmit power, 
then 
the 
modulation 
scheme 
corresponding to 
the 
predetermined SINR is decided.  The last step is to calculate 
58
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

the lowest power that can be used to obtained the modulation 
and the coding scheme previously determined. 
Admission control is based on radio conditions and the 
number of available PRBs. A mobile could be rejected based 
on uplink or downlink coverage or the unavailability of free 
PRBs. For uplink admission, each mobile has to reach a C/I 
threshold to meet the QoS requirements. When the required 
power to meet this threshold is higher than the maximum 
transmit power of the terminal, the user is rejected due to bad 
uplink coverage. Then, the number of PRBs is verified. If  
the number of unallocated PRBs is lower that the required 
number to offer the required QoS, the user is blocked and it 
is taken into account for blocking statistics. 
For each simulation, the parameters related to the 
Fractional Power Control algorithm that can be modified are: 
 
Parameter  α 
 
Target SINR value at cell edge, Min_SINR 
 
Target SINR value at cell center, Max_SINR 
 
Arrival rate of users in the system 
In order to evaluate the impact of the Fractional power 
control parameter setting on system performance, the 
following scenarios have been considered for the suburban 
case. The table below contains the proposed scenarios: 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATED SCENARIOS 
Scenario 
number 
α 
Min_SINR 
Max_SINR 
Arrival 
rate 
Traffic 
1 
0.8 
-1dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
2 
0.5 
-1dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
3 
0.8 
2dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
4 
0 
-1dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
5 
0.8 
2dB 
12dB 
200 
UL+DL 
6 
0 
-1dB 
12dB 
200 
UL+DL 
7 
0.8 
5dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
8 
0.7 
-1dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
9 
0.8 
-5dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
10 
0 
-1dB 
12dB 
120 
UL+DL 
11 
0.7 
0dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
12 
0.8 
2dB 
12dB 
120 
UL+DL 
13 
0.7 
-1dB 
12dB 
120 
UL+DL 
14 
0.8 
5dB 
12dB 
120 
UL+DL 
15 
0.7 
-5dB 
12dB 
80 
UL+DL 
16 
0 
8dB 
8dB 
80 
UL 
17 
0 
-1dB 
12dB 
120 
UL 
18 
0.8 
2dB 
12dB 
80 
UL 
19 
0.7 
0dB 
12dB 
80 
UL 
 
The case when α is 0 means that the Fractional Power 
Control mechanism is deactivated. Because of the low 
admission probability due to downlink limitations (not 
enough resources to accommodate all downlink users), 
downlink traffic is set to 0 for the last four scenarios. 
To study the functionality of the Fractional Power 
Control algorithm, a number of four parameters in the 
simulation output will be analyzed and compared between all 
defined scenarios: 
a) Admission probability: The probability for a user to 
be admitted in the network. It is defined as the percentage of 
admitted users from the total number of generated users.  
b) Average uplink load: The ratio between the average 
number of PRBs allocated for uplink traffic and the number 
of  total available PRBs at eNodeB level. 
c) Average uplink throughput at cell level, R:   
 
  
    
                   
                        
 
where NPRB  is the total  number of available PRBs on 
uplink, at eNodeB level,     
         
i is the number of PRBs 
allocated to user i during one simulation run and BLER is 
the Block Error rate, also an input for the simulation. 
d)  Average number of users in the cell: Average 
number of FTP users during a simulation run. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
The next stage after deciding the scenarios to be run, is to 
collect and interpret the obtained results. Figure 1, illustrated 
on the next page, contains the four parameters after running 
the proposed scenarios. Comparing different scenarios, the 
functionality of the fractional power control is analyzed.  
Because mobility is not considered, pathloss is constant 
for each user during one run. 
Varying only Min_SINR (scenarios 1, 3, 7, 9, 18) and for 
α=0.8, when Min_SINR increases, both, the admission 
probability and the number of user in the cell also increases, 
uplink load decreases (higher modulation and coding 
scheme, better spectral efficiency) and the throughput is 
higher. Comparing scenario 3 and scenario 18 with uplink 
traffic only (avoid being limited by downlink), the output 
parameters maintain the same tendency. 
For a decreasing α (scenario 1, scenario 8, scenario 2, 
scenario 4), pathloss compensation is lower so the mobile 
transmits with less power and SINR decreases. In this case, 
cell edge throughput decreases and average throughput 
increases.  Also admission probability is lower. To make a 
compromise between cell edge throughput and average cell 
throughput, the possible values for α are 0.7 and 0.8, 
depending on operator deployment strategy. 
By analyzing simulation number 16 and comparing it 
with scenario 4, users are closer to cell center and 
throughput, admission probability, average number of users 
are all higher. 
Increasing arrival rate while maintaining other parameters 
at constant values (scenarios 3, 5, 12), admission probability 
decreases and uplink load increases. This is the case when 
the Fractional Power Control algorithm is activated. For the 
case when this algorithm is turned off  (scenarios 4, 6, 10), 
although admission probability and average number of users 
in the cell is comparable with the case when power control is 
turned on (simulation output in figure 1 for scenarios 3 and 
4, 5 and 6, 10 and 12 ), uplink load is lower in this case.  
When increasing arrival rate, the admission probability 
has a very small increase for FPC activated  (the difference 
between admission probabilities is increasing by 0.2 for  
scenario 3 compared to scenario 4, 0.4 for scenario 10 and 
S12, 0.5 for  scenario 5 compared to scenario 6). 
59
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Simulation results: Admission probability, Average uplink 
load, Average uplink throughput at cell level; Average number of users  
in the cell 
Comparing scenario 3 and scenario 8 (α is 0.8 and 0.7) 
and arrival rate 80 and scenario12 and scenario 13 (same 
settings for α) with arrival rate 120, the average throughput 
per Cell, uplink load and admission probability are higher for 
the case when alpha is 0.8 and arrival rate is 80. Increasing 
arrival rate, almost the same results are obtained for both 
alpha 0.7 and 0.8, the difference in between the two α values 
translates into a higher cell average throughput. 
Another interesting comparison to be done is scenario 9 
(α=0.8) and scenario 15 (α=0.7). Both scenarios have the 
same Min_SINR, -5dB. Although three of the output 
parameters are comparable (load is only 4% higher for 
scenario 9), the average throughput for scenario 9 is 
1489kbps while for scenario 15 it is only 1196kbps. 
Analogous, an analysis for scenario 1 (α=0.8) and scenario 8 
(α=0.7) but this time Min_SINR is -1dB. The average 
throughput for simulation 1 is 1493kbps and 1635kbps for 
simulation 8. Average throughput for the first comparison is 
approximately 300kbps higher for α=0.7 and only 142kbps 
higher also for α=0.7 but for higher Min_SINR. 
 A parallel between scenario 4 (no FPC) and scenario 8 
(α=0.7) both with Min_SINR=-1dB shows that throughput is 
comparable. Because users start to be limited by power, the 
effect of the Fractional Power Control mechanism is less 
evident. Conversely, evaluating output from scenario 14 
(FPC on, arrival rate 120 and Min_SINR 5dB) and scenario 
16 (FPC off, arrival rate 80 and Min_SINR 8dB) throughput 
is higher when FPC is active. This is the case when user 
located close to cell center can benefit more from a power 
increase compared with cell edge users. 
Taking into consideration the implemented simulations, 
the recommendation for parameter α is 0.7. Using this value, 
it gives an opportunity for the network operator to make a 
compromise between full pathloss compensation where 
fairness is taken into account and fractional pathloss 
compensation where users close to cell center can better 
benefit from good radio conditions. At the same time, an 
equilibrium between cell edge and cell center average 
throughput is maintained. 
To better highlight the advantages of the Fractional 
Power Control, a future study for dense urban should be 
done.  
 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has assessed the functionality of the adaptive 
fractional power control algorithm for uplink LTE. First, 
some relevant scenarios have been run and the output 
parameters have been  analyzed.  
It can be stated that the uplink power control mechanism 
has a key role in optimizing uplink system capacity. Uplink 
power control together with uplink scheduling strategies can 
enhance cell edge performance by realizing interference 
coordination. Another way to increase uplink system 
performance is to implement the Closed Loop Power Control 
adaptive mechanism to correct errors generated by the Open 
Loop Power Control algorithm. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Roxana Cirstea is a POSDRU grant beneficiary offered 
through POSDRU/6/1.5/S19 contract. 
60
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

REFERENCES 
 
[1] 3GPP TS 36.213 v10.1.0, E-UTRA Physical layer procedures, 
pp. 9–18, March 2011 
[2] C. U. Castellanos, D. L. Villa, C. Rosa, K. Pedersen, F. D. 
Calabrese, P. Michaelsen and J. Michel, Nokia Simens, 
Performance of Uplink Fractional Power control, in press, 
May 2011 
[3] N. J. Quintero, Aalborg University, Advanced Power Control 
for UTRAN LTE Uplink, June, 2008 
[4] H. Holma and A. Toskala, LTE for UMTS - OFDMA and SC-
FDMA Based Radio Access, John Wiley & Sons, 2009, pp. 
202-232 
[5] S.Sesia, I. Toufik and M. Baker, LTE – The UMTS Long 
Term Evolution, From Theory to Practice, John Wiley and 
Sons, pp. 484-492, 2009 
[6] K. 
Parsa, 
Survey 
of 
power 
control 
in 
LTE, 
http://www.parsawireless.com/casestudies/lte_pc_report_1q_
2008.pdf, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61
ADAPTIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-156-4

