Creating a Connectivity Decision Support System for Long-Term Evolution Direct 
(LTE Direct)  
 
 
Michael R. Bartolacci 
Information Sciences and Technology 
Penn State University - Berks 
Reading, USA 
email: mrb24@psu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—With the advent of hybrid mobile phone network 
architectures where handsets can act as an intermediate point 
as well as a source and destination for traffic, a system is 
needed to allow mobile users to find "connectivity". This 
connectivity can be in the form of a mobile network tower, or it 
may be another mobile user if communicating in ad hoc mode. 
This work builds upon the notion of a Connectivity Decision 
Support System (CDSS), first proposed by the author in the 
context of a 1G mobile network architecture. This work in 
progress explores Long-Term Evolution Direct (LTE Direct) 
and the factors related to implementing a CDSS. 
Keywords-Connectivity Decision Support System, Long-Term 
Evolution Direct 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ability to "stay connected" with a wireless device is 
an important factor for mobile users both in terms of their 
choice of networks and also in terms of their degree of 
utilization of mobile devices in the first place. Areas with 
poor mobile network coverage are not crowded with wireless 
device users fighting for limited data speeds or poor call 
quality. This work-in-progress proposes the application of a 
Connectivity Decision Support System (CDSS) to Long-
Term Evolution Direct (LTE Direct), an emerging standard 
for hybrid mobile networks. The contribution of this work is 
that it examines the application of a novel system for dealing 
with connectivity in a wireless environment, a CDSS, as a 
solution for providing wireless users with useful connectivity 
information in the context of a hybrid network architecture 
(LTE Direct) where mobiles nodes can act as both sources 
and intermediate nodes for network traffic. In section 2, 
previous related work is detailed including the motivation for 
such a system.  Section 3 examines potential design aspects 
for a CDSS in the context of today's mobile network 
architectures. In section 4, LTE Direct is described in the 
context of the proposed system. Section 5 examines factors 
that must be taken into account for the development of a 
CDSS for LTE Direct. The final section examines the 
contribution and ongoing work. 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND PREVIOUS WORK 
As more and more users rely solely on their smart phones 
and similar wireless devices for navigation, business, and 
social uses, having a fast and reliable data connection (or in 
the case of emergencies, voice connection) are of the utmost 
importance. 
Wireless 
network 
operators 
do 
offer 
connectivity maps that supposedly show areas of high and 
low connectivity (and ranges of service), but anyone who has 
viewed these maps can attest to the fact that their granularity 
is too large for practical purposes in the context of changing 
positions to gain better connectivity. They only provide 
rough outlines of network base station coverage. Mobile 
network operators therefore tend to overstate their coverage 
in marketing their service through these graphical depictions 
since smaller localized factors, especially involving 
manmade obstacles to theoretic signal propagation, are not 
truly taken into account in the maps. A CDSS, therefore, 
would be far more useful to wireless users seeking to 
improve their connectivity. In the context of battlefield 
networks, emergency networks, and similar wireless network 
implementations where maintaining connectivity is critical, a 
CDSS becomes almost a necessity. 
 
The author first proposed the idea of a mechanism for 
guiding wireless network users to areas of greater 
"connectivity" in 2000, prior to the advent of "smart phones" 
with advanced processing and memory capabilities capable 
of utilizing location-based information. This system, labeled 
a "connectivity decision support system" at the time, would 
vary in exact design between various types of wireless 
networks, but would have the main functionality of 
providing mobile users with connectivity measures and 
information about their immediate surrounding allowing 
them to make informed decisions regarding their location 
and their connectivity with respect to mobile network 
connection points. The general idea of such a system was 
further defined in a conference paper and presentation in 
2003 [1] and subsequent published work in 2004 [2]. The 
ability to pinpoint a mobile user's location is taken for 
granted today; but in the year 2000, this was a novel idea that 
allowed for the development of many possible network 
services and improvements such as a CDSS. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-391-9
ADAPTIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
The author, along with his collaborators, were able to 
establish a mechanism for reliably predicting connectivity 
for 1G Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS) type 
networks where connectivity was defined as the received 
signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for the mobile network handsets 
of the time period using neural networks [3]. The proposed 
crude form of a CDSS at that time relied upon S/N 
information collected from handsets to train a neural network 
to predict S/N ratios for all points on a given grid or region. 
Thus the collection of "connectivity" information from a 
select group of mobile users was used to create the 
knowledge base for advising all mobile users in a given 
region. At the time of this work, more sophisticated handsets 
with graphical user interfaces and advanced data networking 
capabilities were in their infancy. 
 
This discussion of previous work related to the general 
idea of a CDSS has two goals: to introduce the reader to the 
concept and functionality of such a system, and to show that 
it was an idea ahead of its time. The 1G AMPS mobile 
network modeled in 2005 was at that time evolving into a 2G  
network 
architecture 
in most 
countries 
with 
more 
sophisticated 
data 
capabilities. 
The 
widespread 
implementation of more sophisticated technologies such as 
Digital AMPS and General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) 
ushered in the age of mobile applications and located-based 
services that are ubiquitous today.  The concept of a CDSS 
that could be utilized for providing connectivity information 
to users for voice calls can have a more profound effect with 
respect to critical data-based  applications and traffic.  
III. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR A CDSS DESIGN TODAY 
 
The author originally envisioned that a CDSS would 
have uses throughout a range of mobile network types and 
could be implemented in a variety of fashions. Ideally, a 
CDSS provides connectivity information to a wireless device 
user. Although the type of wireless device (and network 
therefore) determine the specific wireless standards utilized 
to create and operate the CDSS, the concept has applicability 
across a wide spectrum of wireless network types from 
802.11x, to mobile phone networks, to ad hoc and hybrid 
ones. The two key operations for the creation and 
implementation of a CDSS are the measurement or 
prediction of  connectivity surrounding a given wireless 
device user and the display of this connectivity information 
in a format that can be understood and quickly utilized by the 
user. Measuring or predicting connectivity around a given 
user is useless if such information cannot be readily used to 
decide if the user can achieve greater connectivity by 
changing positions or if there is a delay in the presentation of 
this information. By definition, the term "decision support 
system" represents an information system that advises, but 
does not make automated decisions, for a given user of the 
system. 
 
It should be obvious that the implementation of a CDSS 
for a given network type, besides being tied to the 
technology involved for that network type, can vary as to its 
general operations with respect to the creation, storage and 
display of connectivity information to the user. A true 
handset-based CDSS would require processing and storage at 
the device level in order to determine connectivity, store 
such information, and then display it to a user. A provider-
based CDSS would require that such information be 
determined and stored by a given network operator/provider 
and sent to a wireless user when requested. Also, a hybrid 
architecture using processing and storage capabilities both by 
the provider and the handset could also be used. The 
integration of advanced data networking capabilities in 
mobile phone networks has allowed for another possible 
hybrid 
architecture 
where 
a 
third 
party 
collects 
"connectivity" information from handsets (via a smart phone 
application) to create a connectivity database that is then 
accessed as requested by wireless users.  
 
The premise of this "crowd sourced" CDSS was created 
by the author and a student in 2004 in a prototype website 
utilizing a database backend that stored S/N information (as 
a proxy for "connectivity") that was manually collected from 
a mobile handset for a grid of points around several local 
cellular network towers. Unlike the current smart phone 
applications such as OpenSignal [4] or Sensorly [5], which 
display connectivity measures only in areas on a map where 
actual information has been collected from users, the system 
developed by the author and his student used additional 
information and a algorithm to predict connectivity for all 
other points on the grid thus creating a complete map of 
anticipated connectivity for the physical region. The 
discussion of this previous work is to highlight one potential 
general design attribute for a CDSS today. Since today's 
cellular networks differ greatly from the analog AMPS-style 
networks in that several users simultaneously share a given 
bandwidth instead of having dedicated frequency channels, 
there is a need to take the "connectivity" of nearby users into 
account. A system that can utilize connectivity information 
from surrounding users and also predict such for a user as 
they move is a necessity in today's cellular networks. The 
same can be said for many other types of wireless 
architectures including the emerging hybrid LTE Direct 
standard. respect to critical data-based  applications and 
traffic.  
IV. 
LTE DIRECT AND CDSS IMPLICATIONS  
At the time of the initial CDSS exploration, hybrid 
mobile networks were in use in only very specialized 
applications such as for battlefield networks. . A hybrid 
cellular network architecture would involve handsets 
operating both in a traditional manner where they 
communicate with a base station, and also in an ad hoc mode 
where transmissions between handsets can occur as well. A 
hybrid architecture would have the advantage of extending 
the communication range of the overall cellular network 
through the linking of "out-of- range" network devices with 
"in-range" ones to serve as intermediate relay points for 
transmissions. Several researchers have examined these 
types of networks, including Mane and Mohite [6] and Do, 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-391-9
ADAPTIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Hsu and Venkatasubramanian [7]. Their work is related to 
various topological designs, services available and operating 
factors for hybrid architectures. Unfortunately, such research 
does not address a network from a user's point of view in 
terms of connecting and remaining connected to such a 
hybrid topology. Existing work assumes users connect and 
disconnect from the network much the same way they do 
from a traditional cellular phone network base station or a 
Wi-Fi hotspot. This assumption can have significant 
implications when such hybrid networks are employed for 
emergency and disaster  management.  
 
The author, with his collaborators, explored the use of 
various types of wireless networks for disaster planning and 
management including such hybrid networks [8][9][10][11]. 
The lack of standards in the past for true hybrid cellular 
architectures created a costly mix of proprietary systems and 
less than ideal implementations of existing wireless network 
infrastructure for disaster scenarios.  Many patents already 
exist that deal with some facet of hybrid cellular networks 
and their operation; but the creation of a true hybrid network 
with handsets that can forward the traffic of other handsets to 
existing base stations is still in its infancy. The development 
of the LTE Direct standards and its technologies has direct 
impact on the application of wireless networks for critical 
emergency services and serving an affected populace after a 
disaster. 
 
LTE Direct promises to deliver what are known as 
"Proximity Services" (ProSe) in an efficient fashion much 
the same way as the Bluetooth standard and its associated 
technologies have for many years with device to device 
connections. Unlike Bluetooth though, LTE direct would not 
have the practical 10 meter limitation on transmission 
distance. Emerging standards for LTE Direct in 3GPP R-12 
allow for ad hoc communication between mobile network 
handsets and devices up to several hundred meters without a 
severe degradation in battery life. Also included in LTE 
Direct's emerging standards is Device-to-Device (D2D) ad 
hoc communication capabilities. This functionality directly 
points to a need for a wireless handset user to know the 
"connectivity" of his or her surroundings in terms of other 
users within range of transmission and potential paths to the 
fixed network infrastructure. Some of the aspects of LTE 
Direct favor the use of a CDSS to maintain connections in an 
ad hoc fashion. 
A. LTE Direct is "Always On" 
Unlike Bluetooth which is a service that can be turned on 
and off for a given mobile handset, the emerging LTE Direct 
standard is "always on". From a practical point of view, this  
means that the handset running this service is always in 
discovery 
mode 
receiving 
transmissions 
from 
its 
environment. "LTE Direct is a new and innovative device-to-
device technology that enables discovering thousands of 
devices and their services in the proximity of ~500 m, in a 
privacy sensitive and battery efficient way. This allows the 
discovery to be 'Always ON' and autonomous, without 
drastically affecting the device battery life unlike other 
proximity solutions such as OTT based that use GPS, or BT-
LE and WiFi Direct" [12]. This aspect of LTE Direct would 
favor the use of a CDSS since it would always have access to 
signals of all similarly enabled nodes around it. In other 
words, the more devices a CDSS can see, the more 
possibilities for increasing a given measure of "connectivity" 
within the network. 
B. LTE Direct would allow D2D communication 
Beyond 
ProSe, 
LTE 
Direct 
promises 
ad 
hoc 
communications for more than location-based information 
and 
services. 
It 
promises 
true 
device 
to 
device 
communication that would be invaluable for disaster and 
emergency management. In a disaster scenario where 
damage to base stations (or power failures) can render 
cellular network connectivity nonexistent or sporadic in hard 
hit areas, the ability to connect directly with other LTE 
Direct users would provide needed support for emergency 
responders and the affected populace. Current 4G LTE 
service relies on User Equipment (UE) communicating with 
evolved  Node B's (eNB) (4G base stations or towers) where 
radio resources are locally managed (as opposed to 3G  
services where they were more centrally controlled). LTE 
Direct allows for communications between both a 
functioning eNB or another UE or both. This scenario 
radically changes the nature of cellular communications in 
that one does not have to be within range of a functioning 
eNB to be able to communicate with and through the 
network. 
D2D communication within LTE Direct would utilize the 
Uplink (UL) resource and also allow for channel 
measurements that are reported to other UE's or to the eNB 
[13]. This is significant with respect to a CDSS in that it 
provides a possible mechanism for defining "connectivity" 
and creating the CDSS. 
V. 
FACTORS FOR IMPLEMENTING A CDSS FOR LTE DIRECT 
 
This leads to the crux of the ongoing work: the 
examination of the factors that must be taken into account for 
a CDSS that would be utilized in conjunction with LTE 
Direct. The first of these is the tracking of locations of 
mobile nodes and their relationship to base stations. Much 
the same way the locations of current mobile devices 
operating on cellular networks are stored for routing 
purposes, an exact geographic location for each node must 
be maintained by the fixed architecture network. This 
implies that nodes not directly in contact with the fixed 
infrastructure base stations must report their locations on an 
ongoing basis through intermediate mobile nodes in an ad 
hoc fashion. One can see that constant location reporting will 
create overhead traffic for both the ad hoc and fixed parts of 
the network architecture. 
 
The second major factor that must be dealt with in 
applying a CDSS to LTE Direct is redundancy.  The 
reporting of location information through intermediate 
nodes, although being done on a periodic basis, suffers from 
the potential for gaps in reporting due to node mobility and 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-391-9
ADAPTIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

reliability (nodes coming on and offline). If a CDSS is truly 
to provide reliable and usable information for a wireless user, 
it must be able to have correct information from a temporal 
point of view for mobile node locations. This requires 
redundancy in the reporting and a mechanism for ensuring 
that incorrect or outdated location information does not 
mislead the CDSS. 
 
The third factor for a CDSS is the nature of the mobility 
of nodes. Within LTE Direct, D2D capabilities rely on nodes 
to be not only within transmission range of each other, but to 
have sufficient capacity and quality of signal to maintain a 
useful connection. The nature of mobility for each node 
plays a key role in this process. Transmission obstacles 
created by natural and manmade objects/geographic features, 
Rayleigh fading, and other phenomena create propagation 
anomalies that limit the connection between two mobile 
nodes. Mere physical proximity from a Euclidean distance 
point of view does not guarantee a useful connection for 
traffic. Direction and speed of a nearby node should be taken 
into account as well This necessitates an integration of 
geographic information, node mobility information and 
larger scale network-related information within a CDSS to 
provide the wireless user a true "picture" of the connectivity 
around him or her. 
 
This leads to final major factor that must be dealt with, 
the actual measure of connectivity and how it is displayed to 
the user. Due to the fact that LTE Direct is a hybrid 
architecture, some nodes may only be operating only in D2D 
mode while others may also be in contact with fixed base 
stations. Clearly the nature of "connectivity" differs between 
the two modes of operation and this information must be 
clearly conveyed to users. One can envision a scenario where 
a user moves closer to a nearby mobile node under the 
mistaken impression that they are increasing their 
"connectivity" when they are actually moving away from a 
nearby fixed base station that would provide a more reliable 
connection.  
VI. 
CONTRIBUTION AND ONGOING WORK 
 
As mentioned previously, this is a work-in-progress 
paper highlighting research by the author into applying an 
idea borne out of an advance in wireless handset technology 
(GPS chipsets in mobile devices) that originated over ten 
years. This paper examined key factors currently being 
explored in order to apply a CDSS to a hybrid mobile 
network architecture such as LTE Direct. Whether provided 
as a native feature to wireless devices enabled for LTE 
Direct use, or as an add-on application, the time has arrived 
for the functionality of a CDSS across the spectrum of 
wireless networks. Current work is focusing on developing 
the algorithmic interpretation of "connectivity" for LTE 
Direct and the necessary protocols for a CDSS to be utilized 
under this standard. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Bartolacci, R. Whitaker, and S. Allen, "A connectivity 
decision support system (CDSS) model framework for 
wireless networks," Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference on Telecommunication Systems Modelling and 
Analysis, October 2003, electronic proceedings.  
[2] M Bartolacci, A. Konak, and R. Whitaker, "A connectivity 
decision support system (CDSS) for wireless networks," 
Asian Journal of Information Technology, vol. 3, pp. 807-
814, 2004. 
[3] M. Nasereddin, A. Konak, and M. R. Bartolacci, “A neural 
network-based approach for predicting connectivity in 
wireless networks,” International Journal of Mobile Network 
Design and Innovation, vol. 1, pp. 18–23, 2005. 
[4] OpenSignal. Available from: http://www.opensignal.com.  
[5] Sensorly. Available from: http://sensorly.com. 
[6] P. Mane and V. Homite, “Analysis of handoff techniques used 
for hybrid networks: cellular/wlan," International Journal of 
Research in Computer Science, vol. 2, pp. 45-50, 2012. 
[7] N. Do, C. Hsu, and N. Venkatasubramanian, "Video 
dissemination over hybrid cellular and ad hoc networks," 
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 13, February 
2014.  
[8] M. Bartolacci and E. Gomez, A 'virtual SONET' routing 
architecture for ad hoc networks in environmental monitoring 
and emergency management," Proceedings of the 2011 
Wireless Telecommunications Symposium (WTS), April 
2011, electronic proceedings. 
[9] E. Gomez and M. Bartolacci, “Crisis management and mobile 
devices: extending the usage of sensor networks within an 
integrated system framework," Proceedings of the 8th 
International ISCRAM Conference, May 2011, Available 
from  
http:///www.iscramlive.org/ISCRAM2011/proceedings/papers
/193. 
[10] M. Bartolacci, A. Mihovska, and D. Ozceylan, "Optimization 
modeling and decision support for wireless infrastructure 
deployment 
in 
disaster 
planning 
and 
management," 
Proceedings of the 10th International ISCRAM Conference, 
May 2013, Available from: 
http://iscramlive.org/ISCRAM2013/files/216.pdf. 
[11] M. Bartolacci, C. Aubrecht, and D. Aubrecht, "A portable 
base station optimization model for wireless infrastructure 
deployment 
in 
disaster 
planning 
and 
management," 
Proceedings of the 11th ISCRAM Conference, May 2014, 
Available from: 
http://iscram2014.ist.psu.edu/sites/default/files/misc/proceedi
ngs/p102.pdf. 
[12] Qualcomm Presentation, Slide 5, Available from: 
https://www.qualcomm.com/invention/research/projects/lte--
proximity-services.pdf. 
[13] Z. Ghadialy, "Direct Communication in 3GPP", Slide 14, 
Available 
from: 
http://www.slideshare.net/zahidtg/direct-
communication-in-3ggp5. 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-391-9
ADAPTIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

