Personalized Multimedia Content Generation Using the QoE Metrics in Distance 
Learning Systems 
 
Aleksandar Karadimce 
   University for information science and technology 
“St. Paul the Apostle” 
Ohrid, R. Macedonia 
aleksandar.karadimce@uist.edu.mk 
Danco Davcev 
   University for information science and technology 
“St. Paul the Apostle” 
Ohrid, R. Macedonia 
dancho.davchev@uist.edu.mk
 
 
Abstract—Personalization of multimedia learning content 
means to classify the multimedia content to meet a specific 
user’s individual interest, preference, background and 
situational context – captured by a user profile. Appropriate 
choice of multimedia learning content has become as one of the 
most important challenges in order to provide user with 
personalized distance learning material. The main contribution 
of this paper is the creation of new model for adaptive 
multimedia learning that dynamically changes the content 
depending of the mapping relations between the QoS and QoE 
metrics. The proposed model delivers personalized multimedia 
content tailored to user cognitive style and adapting the 
content according the context – aware network conditions. 
Main focus is given to tracking the context-aware user 
behavior in order to generate an appropriate and fine-grained 
user profile with personalized learning content. The simulation 
of different models of individual user profiles were developed 
using the OPNET network simulation software. The presented 
simulation results confirmed the correctness of the developed 
model. 
Keywords-personalized multimedia content; adaptive distance 
learning system; context-aware; OPNET; user profile. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Current distance learning systems provide learning 
content that can be reused and easily shared regardless of the 
location of the student, anywhere and anytime. In this way, 
more emphasis is given to the process of indexing and 
manipulating of learning content in order to create multiple 
smaller packages called learning assets [1]. These assets are 
collected in a SCORM (Shareable Content Object Reference 
Model) compliant repository in order to create and deliver 
the learning materials [2]. Using the modern Web 2.0 
technologies, as in [3], easy delivery of learning materials 
and increased interoperability among various e-learning 
platforms has been provided. In this way, reusable SCORM 
learning objects can be very easy imported and exchanged 
between various e-learning platforms if they are SCORM-
compliant [9]. 
In the existing learning process, teachers handover their 
knowledge according to predefined learning schedule and do 
evaluation of student knowledge using different kinds of 
tests, quizzes and questionnaires. Therefore, it is imperative 
to create customized interactive process of knowledge 
transfer in such a way that students receive tailored course 
according to their reasoning preferences. In this process, it is 
important that learning material does not force them to split 
their attention between multiple sources of information. This 
way, combination of different media type can provide 
appropriate personalized learning environment. This can be 
considered as necessity to implement the multimedia 
learning, in particular that a mix of different media enhances 
learning experience [14]. 
Separation of cognitive learning styles using the visual 
and verbal perception has proven to be successful for 
different learner groups: undergraduate, postgraduate and as 
well educators in higher education. These groups prefer more 
visual perception than the typically available existing e-
learning environments. The visual material includes images, 
graphics, simulations and videos in order to increase overall 
quality of experience for the learner. On the other hand, this 
does not imply however to neglect the verbal perception that 
consist of audio and text-based learning [14].  
Developing a model for adaptive multimedia learning 
that will provide dynamic adaptation of a network’s 
operation and performance (for example bandwidth) should 
be in line with user’s profile dynamic requests. In this way, 
the multimedia content will be adapted according to 
available network resources and the user learning profile. 
Usually, environment is greatly influenced by user 
perception of quality that is measured by the QoE (Quality of 
Experience) metrics as a multi-dimensional construct of user 
perceptions and behaviors. In our proposed model, the QoE 
metrics is used for estimating cognitive learning styles of the 
end user, as visualizer, verbalizer or bimodal perception of 
information. If we consider the technological systems as 
“environments”, their influence is quantified by QoS 
(Quality of Service) metrics. They lead to subjective and 
objective responses of users, both of which are considered as 
part of the “user experience” [5]. 
This paper is structured as follows. Section II describes 
the proposed context-aware multimedia learning model and 
discusses how QoE is perceived in current research. Section 
III presents our proposed scheme of mapping between QoS 
and QoE in order to deliver personalized learning content. In 
section IV, we will present our simulation results. Section V 
gives the conclusion and future work. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
Figure 1.  Model of adaptable dynamic multimedia context- aware (ADMCA) distance learning system 
 
II. 
CONTEXT-AWARE MULTIMEDIA LEARNING MODEL 
In order to create a personalized multimedia learning 
content, we need to shift towards estimating the QoE. That is 
more associated to a specific user profile and the degree of 
user satisfaction from a given multimedia service or product.  
The International Telecommunication Union defines QoE as: 
“The overall acceptability of an application or service, as 
perceived subjectively by the end-user” [6]. Because QoE is 
something that is created by user’s observance, it is more a 
qualitative measure than a quantitative one. Then, it needs 
comprehensive subjective quality assessment methodologies 
and objective quality assessment metrics that will model the 
human perception as closely as possible. 
On the other hand, QoE offers a different way of 
measuring how users observe the existing applications. This 
measurement provides means how to measure overall user 
satisfaction of a service and hence, to enhance and adjust the 
existing multimedia delivery content when needed. In this 
way, in order to maintain a satisfactory QoE, certain 
threshold for QoS metrics during a communication session is 
needed. The adaptive mechanism has to provide personalized 
learning materials in real-time according to the context 
(user’s knowledge and environment) and users previous 
feedback records. Therefore, we are encouraged to develop a 
QoE description method based on existing network 
parameters that are measured by QoS metrics in order to 
estimate user’s profile. This way user profile stores learner’s 
personal level of knowledge, cognitive style and current 
network conditions.  
The area of distance IP-oriented learning, known also as 
e-learning, is growing very fast and rapidly. There has been 
different adaptive e-Learning Systems developed in order to 
support learning style based to user’s level of knowledge, 
using the AHA (The Adaptive Hypermedia Architecture) [7] 
and Adaptive educational hypermedia systems [8]. The 
approach for adaptation in technology driven learning has 
significantly improved learning process by adapting course 
content presentation to user learning styles and has been 
implemented in the AEHS-LS system (Adaptive E-Learning 
Hypermedia System based on Learning Styles) [12]. 
In the research area for creating personalized multimedia 
content one of the existing solutions propose MM4U 
(“multimedia for you”) software framework to support the 
dynamic creation of personalized multimedia content [16]. In 
the proposed generic and modular framework the authors 
need to choose, using authoring tool, the media elements that 
are suitable for the intended user. We have advanced this 
procedure of authoring in the new model for adaptive 
multimedia learning with the introduction of user profiling. 
This was a motive to focus our research in direction to 
improve the process of learning by analyzing the impact of 
user cognitive style for the provided multimedia content 
type. Human perception in the learning process is enhanced 
by delivery of diversity of reach multimedia content. Many 
dimensions of cognitive learning styles are offered to the 
users, among which focus is given to Visualizer/Verbalizer 
presentation of information. The differences between 
Visualizers and Verbalizers are frequently not as great as 
some other cognitive styles. Indeed many bimodal users are 
equally comfortable using either modality [4]. Visualizers 
prefer to receive multimedia information via graphics, 
animation, video and images, whereas, mainly because their 
visual memory is much stronger than their verbal. On the 
other hand, verbalizers would prefer to process information 
in the form of words, expressed by audio or text based form. 
Creating personalized multimedia content with the new 
model for adaptive multimedia learning and the context in 
which this content is delivered was taken into consideration. 
Besides it has also influenced by the network conditions. 
Therefore, the multimedia content has to be dynamically 
changed with the network conditions, in order to guarantee 
the quality of service parameters. On the other hand, we have 
the user cognitive perception of multimedia content that 
offers diversity in selection of the type of multimedia 
content. In addition, the context-aware transfer needs to be 
taken into consideration. Creating multimedia content that is 
personalized for a certain user profile will need appropriate 
weighted factors for each of the cognitive learning styles and 
appropriate context- aware factors. In order to ensure a better 
user experience for the delivered multimedia content, we 
propose the content to be network-aware and the network to 
be context- aware. 
Process of creating personalized user profile includes 
gathering cognitive learning styles of the user that are later 
used to create dynamic content multimedia delivery. 
Modeling adaptive learning content that is dynamically 
generated from the available content is done according to the 
user profile. The estimation and preferences of users profile 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

are modeled by assessment of its level of knowledge and 
learning style. In this way, we are able to personalize the 
multimedia learning course and provide content that is close 
to its cognitive reasoning preferences. QoE metrics is used 
for estimating cognitive learning style as visualizer, 
verbalizer or bimodal perception of information. This 
dimension is mapped with the context aware network 
delivery condition, measured by QoS in order to deliver 
adaptable multimedia content to the users. 
In Figure 1, we present our Adaptable Dynamic 
Multimedia Context- Aware (ADMCA) distance learning 
model. Our model provides optimization of users profile by 
dynamically adapting the content, based on both user 
cognitive styles and current network delivery conditions. The 
Domain knowledge model is designed to store the level of 
educational content, being organized in a hierarchical 
structure of concepts, amongst which logical relationships 
exist. The model provides improved user multimedia 
interaction that is expressed by the Collaboration model. 
Role of the Adaptation model is to decide on personalization 
and adaptations of the multimedia content, based on the 
information feedback by the Domain knowledge model and 
Collaboration model. This architecture ensures an adaptive 
model for dynamically changing the appearance of media 
content that has been delivered to user. This will allow them 
to interact and automatically derive user profile from those 
interactions in order to dynamically update the resulting 
presentation according to these preferences.  
The delivery of high quality personalized leaning content 
that is SCORM compliant is consisted from more small and 
reusable modules that can be combined with each other in 
order to create personalized multimedia content. This model 
is SCORM compliant, which is fundamental reference model 
for developing models of learning content and delivery [9]. 
The proposed ADMCA model for distance learning system 
extends the current SCORM framework and generates 
dynamic reusable multimedia learning content based on 
different cognitive preferences of the users, domain 
knowledge and collaboration model. This model provides 
real-time dynamic change of the multimedia content 
according to the user cognitive model and the current 
network conditions. Appropriate use of the bandwidth 
requirements proficiently is needed to make assessment of 
the current network delivery conditions. This assumes to 
provide adaptive intelligent user interfaces addressing 
diverse capabilities of device classes and an automatic 
adjustment of content regarding the measured QoS 
parameters. 
The results produced by the simulations in this paper 
provide justification of the model that can be implemented in 
diversity of education areas. Demand starts from education 
in primary schools, through the special medical schools 
(such as autistic, Deaf & Hard of Hearing, etc.) to 
universities. The proposed model for adaptive multimedia 
learning that dynamically changes the content, is innovative 
because analyses the dependences of the mapping relations 
between the QoS and QoE metrics.   
III. 
MAPPING THE RELATIONS BETWEEN QOS AND QOE 
In the newly proposed model for adaptive multimedia 
learning that creates user personalized multimedia content, 
we explore the methodology of QoS to QoE metrics mapping 
and their correlation. The quality estimation part of the 
model is implemented with a mapping table between QoS 
and QoE metrics. Table 1 shows the mapping of the context-
aware network QoS bandwidth to QoE - Cognitive learning 
styles in process of generating dynamic multimedia content 
in learning lesson. Focusing to the main research problem, 
profiling of system users is done by tracking the context – 
aware user behavior.    
In order to adapt the multimedia content, firstly the 
context-aware bandwidth needs to be considered in the 
appropriate user profile. The increased network usage will 
result in poor available bandwidth and vice versa. We have 
assumed that the adaptation only considers available 
bandwidth as it is the parameter affecting most other network 
parameters as well.  
In this context, other aspects need to be considered for 
improving the learners experience except the need of 
adaptation to available bandwidth. We go further and take 
into consideration the user cognitive perception. In this way, 
in order to generate dynamic multimedia content that will 
increase the experience that is not only depended from the 
QoS, we need to express the user perception of quality 
measured by QoE. 
Users 
should 
prefer 
verbal 
information 
to 
be 
accompanied by visual information and it is more effective 
to present the verbal information as audio content rather than 
give an on-screen text. Learning is also improved if 
animation and audio content are combined in one source and 
therefore presented simultaneously [14]. 
 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING BETWEEN QOS AND QOE 
 QoS - 
Bandwid
th 
QoE - Cognitive learning styles 
Verbalizer 
Bimodal 
Visualizer 
good 
HQ1 dynamic 
Animation, 
Text with audio 
HD2 video with 
audio, 
Simulation, 
Text with audio 
HD2 video, 
3D graphics, 
HQ images, 
Dynamic 
animations 
medium 
Images, 
Video with 
audio, 
more text 
description 
Video with audio, 
Images/  
2D graphics, 
text 
Animations, 
Images / 
2D graphics, 
text 
low 
audio, 
more text 
description 
Images, 
text 
Images, icons, 
text 
1. HQ - High Quality 
2. HD - High-Definition 
 
Classification of the multimedia type is done into 2 
groups, static media, such as texts, images, graphics, and 
dynamic media, including audio and video data. In this way, 
according to the context preferences, the system is doing 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
 
Figure 3.  
Verbalizer, Visualizer and Bimodal user profiles in different load scenario 
adaptive change of the multimedia type. The assessment of 
the network conditions, expressed by the bandwidth is 
classified as low, medium or good. This classification is 
needed in order to adjust specific types of multimedia 
content, such as audio and video files, that require more 
bandwidth [13], that vary considerably in the context of the 
available bandwidth.  
 
In an environment that has poor bandwidth the 
multimedia content that can be streamed is limited to a static 
media (text- based, images, icons) and audio samples. Other 
aspects should be also taken into account such as the user 
cognitive learning styles that limit the verbalizer users to 
have only text- based and audio learning assets. For 
visualizers, the enrichment is done in the multimedia lessons 
with simple images and icons to the text - based learning. 
The network that has medium bandwidth quality will only 
offer graphics and sample animations in the process of 
dynamic multimedia content creation. In this environment, 
verbalizers are introduced with video and audio media that 
is more important for them, than the images and animation 
learning content. On the other hand, the visualizers are 
provided with animations and graphics in the existing 
multimedia content. Bimodal users have access to this 
multimedia content: video with audio, images/graphics and 
text. Network with good bandwidth has opportunity to use: 
HQ – dynamic Animations, HD video with audio, 3D 
graphics and HQ images in order to adopt the multimedia 
content with high quality. To verify the correctness of the 
developed model we have compared the simulation results 
from three different scenarios that demonstrate low, medium 
and high load bandwidth environments. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
Multimedia content in particular, including audio and 
video files, consume a lot of network resources such as 
bandwidth and this pose stringent requirements on 
performance parameter levels such as e.g., load and delay 
[11]. We have used the clustering process of classifying the 
learning assets into user profiles that are significant in the 
context of network conditions. The classification has been 
done into 3 groups of user profiles: Verbalizer, Visualizer 
and Bimodal user profiles.  
The simulation models of individual user profiles were 
developed using the OPNET network simulation software 
that provides virtual network communication environment. 
OPNET 
provides 
a 
comprehensive 
development 
environment with a full set of tools including model design, 
simulation, data collection, data analysis and supporting the 
modeling of communication networks [10]. Hardware and 
software resources used for running the OPNET simulations 
are as follows: 
- 
Workstation ASUS, with CPU Intel Core i5-480M, 
2.66 GHz that has Memory of 2 GB RAM  
- 
Microsoft Windows XP® Service Pack 2 (SP2) and 
Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 
This environment provides a way to model the network 
behaviors by calculating the interactions between modeling 
devices. We have used the Discrete Event Simulation (DES) 
because enables modeling in a more accurate and realistic 
way. It creates an extremely detailed, packet-by-packet 
model for the activities of network to be predicted [15]. The 
network simulator was configured to run 1 hour distance 
learning course. 
To model an application in OPNET, the application 
definition is used to specify/choose the required multimedia 
types among the various available applications such as text, 
video conferencing, voice, images and animations. Profile 
definition was used to create custom user profiles, classified 
as Verbalizer, Visualizer and Bimodal profiles. These 
profiles where specified on three different client nodes: 
Student1, Student2 and Student3 in three different network 
simulation scenarios (see Figure 2). The Application server 
(APP_Server) was configured to be able to support all of the 
applications based on the predefined user profiles. 
 
Figure 2.  
Profile definition model 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
 
Statistics that were collected from the whole network 
model during a discrete event simulation and the object 
statistics were collected from the nodes. For our analysis we 
have chosen object statistics of Ethernet that include delay, 
throughput and load in analyzing the performance of the 
proposed scenarios. 
After running the simulation for the three different 
scenarios, with low, medium and high load bandwidth in 
OPNET simulator, we have done comparison of the traffic 
load. Represented by the blue line is the High Load scenario, 
green line shows the results from the Medium load scenario 
and red line is scenario with Low load.  
From the results in Figure 3, we can conclude that in all 
defined Verbalizer, Visualizer and Bimodal user profiles, the 
high load consumes the biggest part of the bandwidth that is 
available. Also, the same results confirm that the three user 
profiles took the lowest part of the bandwidth during the 
Low load scenarios which confirms the established mapping 
between QoS and QoE. The Medium load scenario has a 
balanced distribution part of the bandwidth in all three user 
profiles. 
Comparison of the throughput between user profiles in 
three different network simulation scenarios is given in 
Figure 4. Results confirmed that the network simulation 
scenario with high load carries the biggest throughput for all 
three user profiles. 
 
 
Figure 4.  
Comparison of the throughput between the user 
profiles 
Results from average network delay comparison for three 
different network simulation scenarios are given in Figure 5. 
They confirmed that in Low load scenario we have biggest 
delay during the transfer of multimedia content that is within 
the expected conditions. However it is highly important in 
the high load scenario that the average network delay 
remains at low level in spite of the increase of number of 
simultaneous multimedia users. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have developed new model for adaptive multimedia 
learning that has customized interactive process of 
multimedia transfer in a context- aware adaptation model 
that creates dynamic multimedia content. The proposed 
model is based on the QoE metrics, defined as user cognitive 
styles. Context-aware adaptation of network conditions 
should be in line with user cognitive styles in order to offer 
dynamic adaptation of the multimedia type. These conditions 
in the newly proposed model have been confirmed by 
mapping of the context-aware network QoS (in our case the 
bandwidth) to QoE - cognitive learning style as verbalizer, 
visualizer or bimodal conditions. This domain independent 
model supports the creation of personalized multimedia 
content by exploiting context-aware approaches for 
multimedia content adaptation. The dynamic model 
demonstrates the strong impact of the multimedia adaptation 
based on the user cognitive styles to available bandwidth 
condition. 
 
Figure 5.  
Average network delay analysis for three different 
network simulation scenarios 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

Results received from the simulation have confirmed the 
correctness of the newly proposed model for adaptive 
multimedia learning, and user experience is increased by 
using interactive learning process. In that way constant 
assessment is important to make appropriate adaptation of 
the learning content. Dynamic creation provides more 
personalized, context aware delivery and organization of the 
multimedia content types according to users learning style, 
knowledge progress and network conditions.  
Challenging task is to analyze the influence of the 
context-aware 
conditions 
in 
the 
cloud 
computing 
environment and its influence in the process of personalized 
multimedia content generation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Pankaj, V. Balkrishnan, and R. Camanathan, “SCORM for e-
Learning: 
Towards 
implementation 
a 
collaborative 
learning 
platform.” IEEE International Conference on Technology for 
Education. T4E 2010. Mumbai, India. pp. 236-238, 2010. 
[2] H. Srimathi and S. K. Srivatsa, “SCORM-compliant personalized 
eLearning using Instructional Design principle.” IEEE Computer 
Society. International Conference on Signal Processing Systems, 
Singapore, pp. 738-742, 2009. 
[3] T.H. Wang, N. Y. Yen, Y.L. Du, and T. K. Shih, “Courseware 
Authoring Tool for Achieving Interoperability among Various E-
Learning Specifications Based on Web 2.0 Technologies.” ICPPW 
'07 Proceedings of the 2007 International Conference on Parallel 
Processing Workshops, Washington, DC, USA, IEEE Computer 
Society, doi:10.1109/ICPPW.2007.32. pp. 25, 2007. 
[4] S. Y. Chen, G. Ghinea, and R. D. Macredie. “A cognitive approach to 
user perception of multimedia quality: An empirical investigation.” 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies. Volume 64 Issue 
12, doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.08.010. pp. 1200–1213, December 2006. 
[5] W. Wu, A. Arefin, R. Rivas, K. Nahrstedt, R. M. Sheppard, and Z. 
Yang. “Quality of Experience in Distributed Interactive Multimedia 
Environments: Toward a Theoretical Framework.” MM '09 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM international conference on 
Multimedia,  Beijing, China, doi: 10.1145/1631272.1631338, pp. 
481-490, 2009. 
[6] ITU-T Report 2007. “Definition of Quality of Experience (QoE)”, 
International Telecommunication Union, Liaison Statement, Ref.: TD 
109rev2 (PLEN/12), January 2007. 
[7] N . Stash and P.De Bra. “Incorporating cognitive styles in AHA! (The 
Adaptive 
Hypermedia 
Architecture).” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
International 
Conference 
Web-Based 
Education 
(IASTED). 
Electronic Publication, pp. 378-383, 2004. 
[8] E. Popescu, P. Trigano and C. Badica. “Adaptive educational 
hypermedia systems: A focus on learning styles.” In Procedings of the 
International Conference on Computer as a Tool (EUROCON), 
Warsaw, Poland, IEEE Computer Society, 2007. 
[9] SCORM- 
Shareable 
Content 
Object 
Reference 
Model.  
http://adlnet.org <accessed on 05/02/2012> 
[10] OPNET Technologies, Inc. http://www.opnet.com/ <accessed on 
08/02/2012> 
[11] G. M. Muntean. “Efficient Delivery of Multimedia Streams Over 
Broadband Networks Using QOAS.” IEEE Transactions on 
Broadcasting, Vol. 52, Issue. 2, pp. 230 – 235, June 2006. 
[12] Y. Eltigani, A. Mustafa and S. M. Sharif. “An approach to Adaptive 
E-Learning Hypermedia System based on Learning Styles (AEHS-
LS): Implementation and evaluation.” International Journal of Library 
and Information Science Vol. 3, pp. 15-28, January 2011. 
[13] K. R. Laghari, N. Crespi, B. Molina and C.E. Palau. “QoE aware 
Service Delivery in Distributed Environment.” Workshops of 
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and 
Applications, 
Biopolis, 
Singapore, 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society, 
doi:10.1109/WAINA.2011.58, pp. 837-842, 2011. 
[14] R. E. Mayer. “The promise of multimedia learning: using the same 
instructional design methods across different media.“ Elsevier 
Science. 
Learning 
and 
Instruction, 
Volume: 13, Issue: 2, 
doi: 10.1016/S0959-4752(02)00016-6, pp. 125–139, 2003. 
[15] Z. Lu and H. Yang. Unlocking the Power of OPNET Modeler. 
Cambridge University Press, January 2012. 
[16] A. Scherp and S. Boll. “MM4U- A framework for creating 
personalized multimedia content.” In: Srinivasan, Uma, Nepal, Surya 
(Hrsg.), 
Managing 
Multimedia 
Semantics, 
IRM 
Press, 
doi:10.1.1.59.6880, pp. 246-287, 2005. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-219-6
ADAPTIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

