 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Data Driven Approach for Efficient Re-utilization of Traction Batteries 
Christian Kreutzmann, Priyanka Sharma, Sebastian Lawrenz 
Clausthal University of Technology, Institute for Software and Systems Engineering 
Arnold-Sommerfeldstraße 1 
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
email: { christian.kreutzmann|priyanka.sharma|sebastian.lawrenz}@tu-clausthal.de 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— As electric cars become more and more 
affordable to broader parts of our society the number of new 
registrations start to increase. Inevitably, an increased number 
of resources consuming cars bring new challenges to raw 
material supply and electrical power networks based renewable 
sources. Traction batteries are used in electric cars for power. 
An approach to solve both issues is second -life applications for 
used traction batteries. Second-life applications are a way of 
reusing traction batteries, which cannot be used in electric cars 
anymore due to challenging requirements. One way of using the 
traction batteries in their second-life is to use them for 
maintaining a fixed frequency on electrical networks even if 
peaking demand cannot be matched by a sufficient supply. As 
high availability in these power networks requires suitable 
storage. It lowers material consumption for otherwise newly 
produced battery systems and reduces costs for the second-life 
applications users. Nevertheless, the current state of recycling 
and identification of potential second-life batteries are highly 
cost intensive but can be improved by usage and combination of 
data. In this paper, we explore an approach for using data to 
increase efficiency and reduce the cost of second-life 
applications of traction batteries in electric cars. But in order to 
move to a data driven approach for re-utilization of traction 
batteries, there are various challenges in the existing system. We 
identify these challenges and propose solutions.  
Keywords-recycling; electric-vehicles; traction batteries; data 
driven; blockchain 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The current change of mobility concepts from 
conventional to electric-cars leads to several upcoming 
challenges. First of all, the composition of the entire vehicle 
itself differs vastly from current vehicles as electric 
powertrains depend on rare and expensive raw materials. Just 
to name tantalum, nickel and lithium [1]. Furthermore, 
societies endeavor to alter their power supplies away from 
centralized and ecologically damaging power plants to 
smaller, decentralized and emission friendly technologies [2]. 
In order to maintain safe and reliable power supply, vast 
amounts of storage capacity have to be available. This is due 
to the nature of most renewable energy sources as they highly 
depend on wind or sun exposure. An approach to solve the 
lack of high available storage power is to use batteries in 
special facilities or even on a consumer level. The high cost 
for the batteries itself plays a big role in the economic 
feasibility and slower the spread of this approach. 
One way to reduce costs and improve ecological impact 
is to reuse traction batteries after the vehicle or the battery 
exceeded an end of life criteria. Traction batteries are 
responsible to supply the electric powertrain with energy. 
They operate in high voltage spectrum. Since material 
consumption for producing new batteries can be avoided. 
This so called second-life approach which lowers the initial 
investment costs for battery-based power storage solutions 
and improves a net present value up to 33% after 20 years 
following for business orientated use [2]. Core process for a 
sufficient implementation of a second-life concept is the 
identification of traction batteries and their current state of 
health in order to be able to determine their potential for 
another use case or a safe recycling route. The current state 
of battery health can be determined by the battery impedance 
and the battery capacity [3]. Both information is saved in the 
battery management system of each battery but can so far 
only be accessed by the original equipment manufacturer. 
Third parties must rely on own measurements which involves 
a big workload and therefore costs for a save and reliable 
categorization. Just to name the process of capacity 
determination, it involves tempering each battery on a set 
temperature and load the battery till no more loading is 
possible. In a next step, the battery must be discharged, and 
the current has to be measured which results in a value for the 
available capacity. While present amounts of returning 
electric vehicles remain relatively low, compared to 
conventional vehicles, current dismantling processes and 
categorizing of each traction battery strongly relies on OEMs 
[4]. But with, further increasing flows third parties can be 
expected to play a big role in the whole dismantling industry. 
During the life of an electric vehicle, a lot of data is 
generated by several participants, which, after being used for 
its initial purpose, is not being collected and put into relation 
to each other. An approach to increase the efficiency of the 
recycling industry is to improve the information exchange 
between all the stakeholders, which are part of the circular 
economy [5]. Especially second-life applications are using 
the data of the traction batteries throughout its lifecycle in 
order to define their further areas of application. If the battery 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be tracked in its entire lifecycle the relevant data from 
it can be used to optimize the dismantling process and to 
determine the second-life applications of traction batteries. 
However, there are some challenges in the existing systems. 
We identify these challenges, such as access to the battery 
data, difficulties in estimating the batteries health easily and 
providing a secure and trusted platform for storing and 
accessing data.   
The rest of the paper is structured as following. Section 
II. gives a brief overview of related work.  The lifecycle of 
traction battery and the stakeholders are shown in Section III. 
Section IV. presents the identified challenges. An approach 
to solve the identified problems is described in Section V. In 
Section VI. an example of application scenario is presented. 
Section VII. shows the evaluation plan. Finally, Section VIII. 
concludes and gives insights of the future work.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
As mentioned in the motivation of this paper the current 
number of new electric car registrations is strongly increasing 
in countries such as Germany. Nevertheless, remains 
relatively low compared to the number of conventional car 
registration [6]. Nevertheless, the prospects are seemingly 
good for battery-based mobility concepts and therefore a 
sufficient process for occurring waste streams should be 
conducted. An approach for a possible solution can be seen in 
China. Due to high amounts of emissions in local cities, 
policies were focusing and emphasizing electric vehicles over 
the last years. In order to obtain an efficient recycling route 
for upcoming amounts of waste streams, China introduced a 
first traceability management platform for traction batteries 
[7]. It aims to trace the whole lifecycle of a battery and use the 
data for a better recycling track. Not only original equipment 
manufacturers but also battery producers and recycling 
companies need to register themselves on the platform and 
each battery is tracked using a unique identification number. 
Another corresponding approach in keeping track of used 
materials in the car industry is the International Material Data 
System [8] (IMDS). Currently 35 OEMs and around 120.000 
suppliers provide data of used materials in their products. The 
IMDS is than for example the basis for an EU type approval. 
Furthermore, there are already existing solutions for 
circular economy concepts. For end-of-life vehicles are 
existing already strategic planning and optimization 
approaches to find optimal network configurations [9]-[10].   
In other industries, an increase in efficiency through the 
targeted use of data has long been established. A good 
example for this is logistic. Since the introduction of 
Enterprise Resource Management System, the efficiency was 
increased highly [11]. 
III. 
TRACTION BATTERY LIFECYCLE 
Defining a relevant lifecycle for traction batteries used in 
electric cars is challenging. In order to keep a simple 
overview of the lifecycle, in this paper we present only the 
core relevant stakeholders. Figure 1 illustrates the adopted 
lifecycle of a traction batteries with previously mentioned 
stakeholders in focus.  
 
 
 
Figure 1: Lifecycle of traction battery. 
The Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) can be 
seen as the starting point of the life of a traction battery and 
electric vehicle. First market design, production and sales are 
executed by the OEM. In this process a set of data such as 
installed battery technology, set up of battery management 
system and unique vehicle identification number is being 
generated but not accessible without the OEM’s interfaces. 
The next step of the examined lifecycle are the vehicle 
customers. Depending on the individual use case a vehicle 
can be transferred to numerous owners. Currently the only 
safe way to keep track of ownership are the corresponding 
vehicle registration documents. This data is sometimes not 
digital and therefore lost for other use cases. Furthermore, 
while being used the vehicle generates vast amounts of data. 
This includes data concerning the current state of health of a 
battery or general usage profiles. This data can if only be 
accessed by the OEM or associated partners and not by other 
participants. 
After being used to a certain degree an electric vehicle 
will be brought back to a suitable dismantling process. 
Currently only the OEM’s are qualified to dismantle high 
voltage systems from their own electric cars in a greater scale. 
It is to be assumed that with greater amounts of returning 
vehicles this process will be executed by third parties such as 
qualified dismantlers. Comparable solutions are already in 
place for conventional vehicles since many years. The 
dismantler needs to identify certain groups of batteries in 
order to decide for a different track. Either the batteries 
qualify for a second-life application or merely a recycling 
process. As explained in the motivation the data for a fast and 
reliable decision is only to be accessed by solutions provided 
by an OEM or must be conducted through a time and cost 
consuming process of measuring and evaluation each battery 
manually.  
Following the end of first lifecycle, after being dismantled 
and potentially grouped in a qualified track, the batteries are 
being used by second-life manufacturers to build new 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
products. In this process data of the state of health and 
potential use scenarios of each battery is needed and is, in an 
ideal case, provided by the dismantling shareholder.  
The final second life product is than being used by a 
second life customer in a suitable use case. Vastly in a fixed 
location and till a second end of life criteria will be matched. 
 
 
IV. 
IDENTIFIED CHALLENGES 
Second-life applications of traction batteries have many 
advantages. Once the battery is no longer usable in the 
vehicle, they can be implemented in other systems such as 
maintaining electric networks. We identify that using the data 
of the battery lifecycles can help all the stakeholders in the 
chain. Mainly the second life manufacturer as they can easily 
determine the battery's health by seeing the data of its 
lifecycle. This on one hand reduces the cost of manufacturing 
second life applications and on other hand increases the 
efficiency of second life application as the health of the 
battery is well recognized.  But there are various problems in 
the existing systems for the required data flow. We identify 
the following challenges as the main challenges for this 
paper. 
1. 
Tracing of the batteries - In order to determine 
a precise battery health, it is very important to 
collect data about it through its entire lifecycle. 
The batteries cannot be easily traced currently 
throughout its lifecycle, thus it’s very expensive 
to retrieve the battery health data when 
required. 
2. 
Access to the data- Currently, it's not easy to 
access the battery data. The data is produced or 
collected by all the stakeholders but it's difficult 
for the other stakeholders to access it. Also, in 
most cases the batteries must be manually 
checked in order to access the health data from 
the battery management systems.   
3. 
Secure platform to store and access data- The 
system should be able to store and give access 
to the data securely. The system should 
guarantee data security, i.e., the data is always 
secure from unwanted authorized users.   
4. 
Trusted Platform- In the lifecycle of a traction 
battery, data is generated by various sources 
and stakeholders. In order to use data for 
efficient re-utilization of traction batteries the 
accuracy of the data is very important.  If the 
data is not accurate or is tampered at any point 
the results of actual battery health state changes. 
Thus, the platform should be able to guarantee 
data integrity and trust, i.e., the data is 
consistent, accurate and not changed at any 
point in time. 
 
Current technologies, such as RFID, do not fulfill all aspects 
in order to match the identified challenges. First of all, the 
maximum storage capacity of an RFID-Chip is limited and 
depending on the amount of data stored not sufficient enough. 
Furthermore, RFID does not offer a complete solution for 
sharing data while maintaining security and data integrity. 
Lastly in case of a damaged RFID-Chip all data would be 
gone and can’t be retrieved. 
V. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
In order to reduce the costs and make the second-life 
applications of traction batteries more efficiently, we realized 
the health of the battery should be tracked through its entire 
lifecycle. The data about the battery's health can be used to 
optimize the dismantling process and to determine the 
second-life application of the battery based on its health. 
Thus, tracking the batteries through its lifecycle reduces the 
cost and error rather than checking it manually.  
The first requirement for tracking a traction battery is that 
it should be unique. As a result, we propose that during the 
production, batteries should get a “unique address”. Once the 
battery has a physical unique address this address must be 
stored somewhere as digital copy so that more data about it 
can be added as the batteries moves through various steps in 
its lifecycle. One way for keeping this digital data of the 
batteries is adding this to a database. Nevertheless, in order 
to provide more security and trust to the digital data we 
propose tracking the batteries lifecycle using blockchain 
technology (see Figure 2). This enables the creation of a 
decentralized environment, where the cryptographically 
validated transactions and data are not under the control of 
any third-party. Any transaction ever completed is recorded 
in an immutable ledger in a verifiable, secure, transparent and 
permanent way, with a timestamp and other details [12]. 
A blockchain is a decentralized, distributed database that 
is used to maintain a continuously growing list of records, 
called blocks. Each block contains a timestamp and a link to 
a previous block. By design and by purpose blockchains are 
inherently resistant to modification of the data. Functionally, 
a blockchain can serve as an open, distributed ledger that can 
record transactions [13]-[14]. 
In summary the blockchain is a distributed database 
existing on multiple computers at the same time. It is 
constantly growing as new sets of recordings, or ‘blocks’, are 
added to it. Each block contains a timestamp and a link to the 
previous block, so they form a chain. The database is not 
managed by anybody; instead, everyone in the network gets 
a copy of the whole database. Old blocks are preserved 
forever, and new blocks are added to the ledger irreversibly, 
making it impossible to manipulate by faking documents, 
transactions and other information. Blockchain is a 
transforming technology and can help the stakeholders on in 
the chain to securely trace the battery’s data and access data. 
Further some blockchain technologies (for example 
Ethereum [15]) are providing smart contracts.  A smart 
contract is a self-executing script that reside on the 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blockchain. This contract could be used to manage the data 
exchange between the different parties in a blockchain to 
involve them in a contractual agreement [14] [16] . Figure 2 
illustrates an outline of the overall approach to enable the data 
exchange. 
 
 
Figure 2: Overall approach. 
 
As shown in Section IV. The proposed platform to store 
and access data should be secure and trustful. Data Integrity, 
i.e., guarantee that the data is consistent and accurate at every 
point is very important for using data driven approach for 
efficient re-utilization of traction batteries. The data could be 
changed by the stakeholders for benefits or can be accessed 
by unauthorized users and altered. Thus, the features of 
blockchain providing higher security, data integrity and 
immutability motivates us to use it as a database for tracking 
the lifecycle of traction batteries.  Once the data is stored on 
blockchain it cannot be altered hence always providing 
accurate battery health.  
In the moment the data is stored on blockchain it can be 
accessed from there whenever required. And as the data is 
stored on blockchain it becomes almost impossible to 
manipulate the data providing higher data integrity, i.e., it can 
be ensured that the data is accurate and consistent over its 
entire lifecycle. 
Blockchains are mainly associated with cryptocurrencies 
but the its scope is far beyond just cryptocurrencies.  There 
are various types of blockchains and a wide array of 
implementation approaches. It can be categorized in three 
types: Public, consortium and private.  
A public blockchain is where anyone in the world can 
become a node in the transaction process. It is a completely 
open public ledger system. It is also be called permission less 
ledgers [17]. 
In private blockchains, the write permissions are with one 
organization or with a certain group of individuals. Read 
permissions are public or restricted to a large set of users [17]. 
Consortium blockchains let a group of people establish a 
distributed ledger. It can also be known as a permission 
private blockchain [17]. Thus, we propose using consortium 
blockchains for the tracking and data access of traction 
batteries as a distributed ledger between all the stakeholders 
is required. 
Blockchain allows multiple competing parties to securely 
interact with the each other. It has shared immutable ledgers 
for recording transaction history and thus it can be used for 
tracking the batteries securely and lets the stakeholders 
access the data easily [18]. Thus, blockchain can be used as a 
standard interface to store and access data securely.  
A uniform format should be sought for the data structure. 
An example of this would be the eCl@ss standard, which is 
the only worldwide ISO/IEC-compliant data standard for 
goods and services [19]. The advantage of one standard is that 
every stakeholder than finally has the same understand of the 
data and can use it easily.  
 
VI. 
SCENARIO BASED ON PROPOSED SOLUTION 
In this Section, we show a scenario of how data can be 
tracked with our proposed solution and be used for the re-
utilization of traction batteries. Figure 3 shows the three 
layers- data collection, data storage and data access. 
Figure 3: Example of an Application Scenario. 
 
The data collection starts once the battery is produced. A 
timestamp of its production date is stored in the blockchain. 
The blockchain here is the data storage mechanism. While the 
battery is produced, we propose that the battery is given a 
unique id which can be used to track the battery. Thus, while 
production the battery's unique id and production timestamp 
is stored. After the production, the battery is added to the 
vehicle. The timestamp when the vehicle is sold can be 
added. During the battery's first life in the car, the health of 
the battery can be tracked through its charging cycles from 
various sources. One source to track the charging cycles is 
using the charging stations for it. This approach is benefiting 
from growing charging infrastructure provided by the OEMs 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves. All the data about the battery's health through 
charging cycles can be stored.  After the battery is used in its 
first life it goes to the dismantling process where the decision 
whether it can be used for second life application or should 
be recycled is to be made. This decision can be easily made 
by analyzing the data of the battery's lifecycle, with our 
proposed solution as all the data is already stored and 
available rather than manually checking it. This reduces the 
cost of the process and helps in taking a precise dismantling 
decision. When the battery is still usable for a Second-Life 
application, data about its health can also be used to 
determine for which application, it can be used in. After the 
battery serves its second-life usage it returns to the 
dismantling process where a further use or recycling decision 
can be easily made by looking at the health data. 
VII. 
EVALUATION PLAN 
In order to implement the proposed solution suitable 
technologies and type of blockchain has to be selected. Public 
blockchains such as bitcoin and Ethereum are not suitable for 
this scenario. Thus, firstly we will evaluate the blockchains 
and related technologies.  However, despite all the 
advantages of the Blockchain it does not make sense to store 
all the data in the Blockchain. Thus, depending on the size of 
data more advanced data storage mechanisms has to be 
selected. Possibilities are on-chain and off-chain data storage. 
In such as a mechanism only critical data such as timestamps 
and charging cycles data is only stored for access to everyone. 
Other data is stored in an off-chain system.  
But further research in this is required. Also, a uniform 
format should be made for the data structure. An example of 
this would be the eCl@ss standard, which is the only 
worldwide ISO/IEC-compliant data standard for goods and 
services [19]. Currently, we are evaluating suitable 
blockchains, technologies and data structure for the proposed 
solution. The standard should be oriented on eCl@ss, which 
is the only worldwide ISO/IEC-compliant data standard for 
goods and services [19]. 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper we present a data driven approach for 
increasing efficiency of traction battery re-utilization by 
reducing related costs. In order to use data for this purpose 
we identified two major problems in the existing system. 
Primarily, there is no existing mechanism to track the 
battery's lifecycle and secondly the stakeholders who are a 
part of the chain do not have access to the data of the batteries. 
For this we propose a mechanism, using blockchain, through 
which the data throughout the battery's lifecycle can be 
tracked and accessed.  Blockchain provides higher security, 
data integrity, transparency, immutability and trust. Once the 
record is saved on a blockchain it cannot be changed thus it 
can be ensured that the data is real and was not manipulated 
at any point. There are various ways to implement it, but in 
this scenario a public blockchain is not feasible. A shared 
database with authorized access is required. Consortium 
blockchains let a group of people establish a distributed 
ledger. Thus, we propose using a consortium blockchain for 
the stakeholders or partners who are a part of the battery’s 
lifecycle. Currently we are evaluating the technologies and 
platforms to establish a permissioned blockchain for the 
scenario shown in this paper. Our next steps will be the 
implementation of the proposed solution for traction 
batteries.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper evolved from the research project “Recycling 
4.0” (digitalization as the key to the Advanced Circular 
Economy using the example of innovative vehicle systems) 
which is funded by the European Regional Development 
Fund (EFRE | ZW 6-85017297) and managed by the Project 
Management Agency NBank. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Zhao, Reuse and Recycling of Lithium-Ion Power 
Batteries. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons Singapore 
Pte. Ltd, 2017. 
[2] 
S. Fischhaber, A. Regett, S. Schuster, and H. Hesse, 
“Studie: Second-Life-Konzepte für Lithium-Ionen-
Batterien aus Elektrofahrzeugen. Analyse von 
Nachnutzungsanwendungen, 
ökonomischen 
und 
ökologischen 
Potenzialen.,” 
Begleit. 
und 
Wirkungsforsch. 
Schaufenster 
Elektromobilität, 
2016. 
[3] 
K.-B. Holve, “Auslegungsaspekte von Batteriepacks 
und Batteriemanagement-Systemen,” Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, 2018. 
[4] 
J. Neubauer, K. Smith, E. Wood, and A. Pesaran 
“Identifying and Overcoming Critical Barriers to 
Widespread Second Use of PEV Batteries,” Nrel, no. 
February, pp. 23–62, 2015. 
[5] 
C. Knieke, S. Lawrenz, M. Fröhling, D. Goldmann, 
and A. Rausch, “Predictive and flexible Circular 
Economy approaches for highly integrated products 
and their materials as given in E-Mobility and ICT,” 
Circ. Econ. Mater. Components E-mobility – CEM2, 
2018. 
[6] 
“Neuzulassungen von Pkw in den Jahren 2008 bis 
2017 nach ausgewählten Kraftstoffarten.” [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.kba.de/DE/Statistik/Fahrzeuge/Neuzula
ssungen/Umwelt/n_umwelt_z.html?nn=652326. 
[Accessed: 12-Apr-2019]. 
[7] 
“National NEV Monitoring And Mangement-
Traction Battery Recycling And Traceability 
Platform.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.tbrat.org/. [Accessed: 12-Apr-2019]. 
[8] 
“IMDS | Internationales Material Daten System.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.mdsystem.com/imdsnt/startpage/index.
jsp. [Accessed: 12-Apr-2019]. 
[9] 
O. Püchert, H.; Spengler, T. S.; Rentz, “Strategische 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planung 
von 
Kreislaufwirtschafts- 
und 
Redistributionssystemen - Am Fallbeispiel des 
Altautorecyclings,” Zeitschrift für Planung, 7 (1), pp. 
27–44., 1996. 
[10] 
F. Schultmann, B. Engels, and O. Rentz, “Closed-
Loop Supply Chains for Spent Batteries,” Interfaces, 
vol. 33. INFORMS, pp. 57–71. 
[11] 
A. Rizzi and R. Zamboni, “Efficiency improvement 
in manual warehouses through ERP systems 
implementation and redesign of the logistics 
processes,” Logist. Inf. Manag., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 
367–377, 1999. 
[12] 
M. C. Bacescu, “The 13 th International Scientific 
Conference eLearning and Software for Education 
Bucharest , April 27-28 , 2017,” 13th Int. Sci. Conf. 
eLearning Softw. Educ., no. April, pp. 369–376, 
2017. 
[13] 
A. S. Bruyn, “Blockchain an introduction Research 
paper,” 2017. University Amsterdam [Online]. 
Avaible: 
https://beta.vu.nl/nl/Images/werkstuk-
bruyn_tcm235-862258.pdf [Accessed: 12-Apr-2019] 
[14] 
M. Finck, “Blockchain Technology,” in Blockchain 
Regulation and Governance in Europe, 2018, pp. 1–
33. 
[15] 
“Ethereum 
Project.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ethereum.org/. 
[Accessed: 
12-Apr-
2019]. 
[16] 
A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, and C. 
Papamanthou, “Hawk: The Blockchain Model of 
Cryptography 
and 
Privacy-Preserving 
Smart 
Contracts,” in Proceedings - 2016 IEEE Symposium 
on Security and Privacy, SP 2016, 2016, pp. 839–
858. 
[17] 
“Paul Valencourt & Samanyu Chopra & Brenn Hill 
[Paul Valencourt] - Blockchain Quick Reference 
(2018, Packt Publishing).” . 
[18] 
M. Santos and E. Moura, Hands-On IoT Solutions 
with Blockchain. 2019. 
[19] 
“home: 
ecl@ss.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.eclass.eu/en.html. [Accessed: 12-Apr-
2019]. 
 
 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-706-1
ADAPTIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

