Analysing the Impact of the Implementation of a Blockchain in an Existing Business 
Model  
Lars Heim 
Department of General Management 
Clausthal University of Technology 
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
email: lars.heim@tu-clausthal.de 
 
 
Abstract— Blockchain technology offers great potential for 
companies and the number of start-ups whose business models 
are based on this technology is growing rapidly. However, for 
many companies already active in their respective markets, the 
question arises as to whether and how this technology is 
relevant to their individual business model and what effects an 
implementation in the company or in the corporate 
environment would have. These questions can be answered 
with the help and modification of existing methods and tools. 
In this paper, we present the method of business model 
stresstesting, which, with certain adjustments, can help to 
answer the question of the impact of Blockchain technology on 
an existing business model. This will help to actively shape and 
evolve the ecosystem emerging in the area of Blockchain 
technology. The implementation and further development of 
the technology based on specific requirements from the 
business environment is thus facilitated and accelerated. 
Keywords: 
Blockchain; 
business 
model; 
stresstesting; 
stressfactor. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Companies are typically faced with uncertainties 
regarding their future environment and their development 
[1]. In this context, the further development of business 
models is considered to be of great importance for 
maintaining competitiveness and economic growth [2]. The 
redesign of business models with the inclusion of 
innovations should lead to an increase in the robustness of a 
business model with respect to uncertainties in the 
company's 
environment 
[1]. 
Such 
business 
model 
innovations can be defined as systemic changes in the 
economic and entrepreneurial logic of companies in creating 
and maintaining value for both customers and companies 
[3]. Such changes also include modifications of value 
creation stages and the integration or elimination of partners 
in the value chain [4]. New technologies are among the 
external drivers of business model innovation [5]. For 
example, by creating new technologies or using existing 
ones, a company's existing resources can be better utilized, 
and a competitive advantage can be generated [3][5]. One 
technology in this context is the Blockchain technology [5]. 
The future effects of implementing this technology are not 
yet fully foreseeable for companies [6]. 
Analytical approaches to researching business model 
innovations deal with how business model components are 
influenced by the introduction of new technologies [6]. 
According to Nowiński and Kozma, examples of such 
analyses can already be found, for 3D printing, life science 
innovations and cloud technology [6]-[9]. Nowiński and 
Kozma have already been striving to develop methods to 
assess the impact of the implementation of Blockchain 
technology in existing business models [6]. The goal of this 
paper, as part of a project on evolving ecosystems and 
services,  is to complement this approach with a concrete 
method to create opportunities for actively building the 
ecosystem around the Blockchain technology and to support 
the further evolution of the technology against the 
background of existing business models. This enables future 
integration of the Blockchain technology into existing 
business models, making business processes smoother and 
more secure. 
The second section of this paper first introduces the 
method of stresstesting for business models in general. In 
the following third section, the procedure of this method is 
presented and modified for the concrete application to 
evaluate business models against the background of the 
Blockchain technology. In the fourth section a summary and 
an outlook are given. 
II. 
STRESSTESTS FOR FUTURE BUSINESS MODELS  
Technology forecasting provides an overview of existing 
and emerging technologies and how they influence and 
replace each other [10][11]. Technology forecasting thus 
shows developments that begin in the past. As shown in 
Figure 1, scenario planning begins where technology 
forecasting stops. To a certain extent, the early detection of 
scenario planning can provide a range of possible 
developments [10]. Scenarios represent outlooks on the 
future, describing how it could develop based on clearly 
defined assumptions [10]. By presenting possible technical 
implementations in scenarios, technologies can be brought 
closer to future users and thus appear more real. Scenarios 
thus make it easier for decision makers to include future 
technologies in the decision-making process [10]. They 
make it possible to better assess the risks of decisions under 
high uncertainty. Scenario planning recognizes that the 
future environment of a company is uncertain. This 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

approach helps to assess the robustness of a company 
against the background of possible scenarios [1]. Scenario 
planning thus creates a basis for decision-making and, 
similar to the explicit presentation of a business model, 
helps to pick up all those involved in the planning process 
[12]-[14]. The fact that scenario planning can help to tailor 
business models to specific future scenarios has already 
been demonstrated [1]. Examples can be found for 
telecommunications and the Internet of Things [15][16]. 
 
Figure 1. Combination of technology forecasting and scenario planning 
[10] 
The authors Bouwman and van der Duin combine 
technology forecasting with scenario planning [10]. 
Consequently, 
they 
developed 
the 
business 
model 
stresstesting method as an approach to operationalize the 
approaches of business model innovation in connection with 
scenario planning [1][3][17][18]. They thus create an 
opportunity to develop scenarios and use them as input for 
the analysis of business models [18]. This method can be 
used to demonstrate the robustness of business model 
components against one or more future scenarios [1]. 
Business model stresstesting is therefore defined as follows 
[3]:  
 
“[…] a systematic analysis of the robustness (i.e., 
long- term viability as well as feasibility) of BM 
components - such as a value proposition, revenues 
or cost structure – based on different future 
conditions (or uncertainties).” 
 
This means business model stresstesting combines future 
uncertainties by using scenarios with business model 
ontologies [3]. The resulting analyses and estimates of the 
effects of scenarios on business model components can be 
used to identify the components that are particularly 
affected under the given circumstances and therefore require 
increased attention in planning. The results enable users to 
assess whether an existing business model can meet 
technical, regulatory, or other changed conditions and which 
business model components may need to be modified. In a 
three-part case study, Bouwman et al. [3] were able to 
successfully test the functionality of this still relatively new 
method. Real business models from the health care and 
transport sectors, as well as that of a charity organisation 
were used for this [3]. The applicability of the method for 
technologies that are still in an early stage of development 
and for which there are no or only little tested 
implementations in business models could also be proven 
[19]. 
 
III. 
STRESSTESTING PROCEDURE FOR BUSINESS MODELS 
IN ORDER TO IMPLEMENT  BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY 
Bouwman et al. developed the business model 
stresstesting method in the form of a six-step process as a 
structured approach to identifying robust or non-robust 
business model components [1][18]. These original steps are 
(1) the selection and description of a business model, (2) the 
identification and selection of stressfactors, (3) the 
comparison of the business model components with the 
selected stressfactors, (4) the presentation of the influences 
of the stressfactors on business model components with a 
heat map, (5) the analysis of the heat map and (6) the 
drawing of conclusions about weaknesses of the business 
model. 
For the application of the stresstesting method to assess 
the 
consequences 
of 
implementing 
the 
Blockchain 
technology in an existing business model, adjustments to the 
known procedure are required. In the following, the process 
including the changes will be described. 
 
Step 1: Selection and description of a business model 
According to Bouwman et al., the first step in the 
stresstesting procedure consists of describing the business 
model in an explicit form [3]. If a company operates several 
business models, one must be selected for the analysis. A 
possible tool for adequately describing the business model is 
the Business Model Canvas following Osterwalder and 
Pigneur [1][22]. De Vrij notes that the Business Model 
Canvas in combination with the Value Proposition Canvas 
contributes in particular to the functioning of the 
stresstesting [21].  
 
Step 2: Identification and selection of stressfactors 
In the second step, it is necessary to select those factors 
that are to be tested for their impact on the business model 
components. These in general include trends and 
uncertainties [3]. For each factor, two opposing, extreme 
characteristics should be defined [1]. In the application 
considered here, the existence of a Blockchain is predefined 
as the relevant stressfactor for the procedure. The respective 
concrete characteristics of this Blockchain variant with 
regard to user rights and access to the consensus mechanism 
should fit the underlying business model. Such a Blockchain 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

variant could be, for example, a private-permissioned or a 
public-permissioned Blockchain. 
The two opposing characteristics of this stressfactor are 
also predefined. The first variant is the implementation of 
the Blockchain in the existing business model. The second, 
opposite variant is the decision against an implementation, 
under the assumption that such a Blockchain nevertheless 
exists in the environment of the company. The analysis thus 
shows the effects of the implementation on the one hand and 
the consequences for the existing company on the other if 
competitors implement such a model. 
The plausible description of this stressfactor plays a 
decisive role in the procedure and validity of the 
stresstesting [10]. A further substep for the design and 
description of this stressfactor therefore appears necessary. 
For this purpose, the business model ontology is again 
applied to simulate a hypothetical business model which can 
be used as a reference for the changes in the original 
business model components. In this way, the abstraction 
level of the stressfactor and that of the business model can 
be raised to the same level [10].  
The Business Model Canvas following Osterwalder and 
Pigneur has already formed the basis for specific 
applications several times since its initial presentation [9]. 
There are already several approaches for adapting the 
Business Model Canvas for the Blockchain technology.  
Burgwinkel retains the nine business model components, 
but develops new guiding questions for each component, 
which facilitate the application to the Blockchain 
technology. In order to facilitate the description of a 
hypothetical, Blockchain-based business model in the 
stresstesting process, the guiding questions as implemented 
by Burgwinkel can be applied [23]. The structure of the nine 
business model components is retained in order to enable a 
comparison with the business model defined in the first step 
of stresstesting [3]. These guiding questions are presented in 
Table 1.  
TABLE 1 GUIDING QUESTIONS FOR THE BUSINESS MODEL CANVAS 
ACCORDING TO BURGWINKEL 
Business 
Model 
Component 
Guiding Questions 
Key Partners 
• 
Who are the partners or industry consortium for 
the development of the  Blockchain application? 
• 
Is the new  Blockchain application in competition 
with other traditional partners (such as banks)? 
• 
Why do the partners get involved (do they not 
want to miss a trend or do they see it as an 
innovative opportunity)? 
• 
Are there cross-industry partnerships that 
generate new benefits? 
• 
How are national and international supervisory 
authorities and industry committees involved? 
• 
Will the Use Case become an alternative to 
traditional approaches or does it offer a 
completely new benefit? 
Key 
Ressources 
• 
Which services does the  Blockchain platform 
serve as a foundation? 
• 
Which special resources or functions/capabilities 
are realized by the use case? 
Key 
Activities 
• 
Does the application use an existing  Blockchain 
platform (such as Ethereum) or is a standalone 
application built? 
• 
How are customers/users motivated to use the 
application and possibly pay for it? 
Value 
Proposition 
• 
Which customer problems are solved with the  
Blockchain application? 
• 
What value is created for the customer, e.g. 
increased trust or the advantage of not being 
dependent on a central provider? 
• 
Why do the participants want to use Blockchain 
and not a traditional technology? 
• 
Why will the Blockchain application establish 
itself in the market and replace traditional 
offerings? 
Customer 
Relationships 
• 
Which new relationships does the Blockchain 
application enable, e.g. direct contact between 
customer and producer without the involvement 
of middlemen? 
• 
For business-to-business applications: which 
participants (suppliers, inspection bodies, 
producers etc.) use the Blockchain for their 
coordination? 
Channels 
• 
Through which channels do customers use the 
Blockchain application? 
• 
Are these channels completely new or is the 
Blockchain application integrated into existing e-
commerce processes? 
• 
What is the advantage of omitting the previous 
central instance which coordinated the market 
participants and guaranteed trust? 
Customer 
Segments 
• 
For which customers/users does the Blockchain 
application create value? 
Cost 
Structure 
• 
Why does a Blockchain offer technical 
advantages in the application scenario or why can 
costs be saved compared to traditional 
technologies? 
Revenue 
Streams 
• 
Which business concept/sources of income do the 
founders of the Blockchain application pursue? 
• 
Which business concept does the operator of the 
Blockchain platform (e.g. Ethereum) pursue? 
 
Step 3: Mapping of the business model components with 
the stressfactors 
The third step is the actual stresstest and consists of a 
description of how the business model components behave 
against the background of the stressfactor and its 
characteristics. This is done by describing in detail the 
relationship between the stressfactor and the individual 
business model components [1][3].  
 
Step 4: Presentation of the influence on the business 
model using a heat map 
In the fourth step of stresstesting, the potential impact of 
the Blockchain stressfactor on the respective business model 
components must be assessed. Based on this qualitative 
assessment, a heat map is drawn up using a colour scheme. 
The colour scheme illustrates the extent of the impact on the 
component [10]. Bouwman et al. and Haaker et al. define 
four colour levels for this purpose [1][3]:  
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

• 
Red: The effect of the stressfactor on the business 
model component makes this component appear as no 
longer feasible. The effect of the stressfactor can 
potentially render the business model as a whole 
unsustainable.  
• 
Orange: The effect of the stressfactor on the business 
model component makes this component appear to be 
no longer feasible. The business model component must 
therefore be considered separately and adjusted if 
necessary. 
• 
Green: The stressfactor has an influence on the business 
model component but does not negatively affect the 
feasibility and usefulness of the component. If 
circumstances permit, a positive influence of the 
stressfactor on the component can be realized.  
• 
Gray: The stressfactor has no relevant influence on the 
business model component. 
The respective classification of the stressfactor in the colour 
categories must be documented and justified [1]. 
  
Step 5: Analysis of the heat map  
After the heat map already shows which components are 
not robust, the fifth step is to analyse the heat map in order 
to uncover possible overarching weaknesses of the business 
model. The analysis can be divided into two partial analyses 
[20]:  
 
Sub-View Analyses  
In a Sub-View analysis, individual areas of the 
heat map are considered separately [1]. Problem 
areas can thus be identified by a horizontal or 
vertical view of the heat map [20]. Accordingly, a 
horizontal view of the columns provides an 
overview of the effects of all the characteristics of 
all stressfactors on a business model component. 
The vertical view of the columns provides a 
focused view of the effects of one stressfactor on 
all business model components [1][20].  
 
Pattern Analysis 
By taking a holistic view of the heat map, 
patterns can emerge, e.g., what characteristic of a 
stressfactor would be the ideal state for the 
business model. Furthermore, it is possible, for 
example, to identify whether business model 
components lose their usefulness under any given 
scenario [20].  
 
Step 6: Conclusion on weaknesses of the business model 
Once the analysis of the robustness and vulnerability of 
a business model has been completed, the next step is to 
formulate measures based on the insights gained [1]. This 
step 
is 
broad 
in 
scope, 
but 
usually 
includes 
recommendations for improving weak business model 
components or improving consistency within the business 
model [20].  
This modified procedure of stress testing for business 
models provides a concrete tool for analysing existing 
business models against the background of implementing 
the block chain technology. It not only evaluates the effects 
of the implementation in an existing business model, but 
also the consequences of an implementation in the 
company's environment. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The Blockchain technology still appears to be relatively 
new when seen from an economical perspective. To enable 
a wider range of applications for this technology, tools have 
to be created that make the technology accessible to 
economists. Using the existing research on the business 
model ontology offers the possibility to adapt tools for this 
new application. The combination of the technology 
forecast with the scenario planning within the business 
model Stresstesting is such a tool. By extending this 
approach by a Blockchain use case, economists can analyse 
their own or hypothetical business models against this 
emerging technology. The approach presented here provides 
a first structured roadmap for this purpose. Existing 
business models can be analysed, and new business models 
can be planned. Future research could further extend this 
approach especially with respect to quantifying the analyses. 
Furthermore, the procedure presented is based on subjective 
assessments of the impact of the technology on the business 
model components. Future research work could attempt to 
make this process more objective by means of further sub-
analyses. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Haaker, H. Bouwman, W. Janssen, and M. de Reuver, 
„Business model stresstesting: A practical approach to test the 
robustness of a business model.” Futures, vol. 89, pp. 14-25, 
2017. 
[2] M. Heikkilä, et al., “Business Model Innovation Paths and 
Tools.” In Bled eConference, p. 6, 2016. 
[3] H. Bouwman, J. Heikkilä, M. Heikkilä, C. Leopold, T. 
Haaker, “Achieving agility using business model stress 
testing.” Electronic Markets, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 149-162, 
2018. 
[4] B. W. Wirtz and M. J. Thomas, „Design und Entwicklung der 
business 
model-innovation.” 
In 
Kompendium 
Geschäftsmodell-Innovation, pp. 31-49, 2014, Springer 
Gabler, Wiesbaden. 
[5] W. Nowiński and M. Kozma, „How can Blockchain 
technology 
disrupt 
the 
existing 
business 
models?” 
Entrepreneurial Business and Economics Review, vol. 5, no. 
3, pp. 173-188, 2017. 
[6] A. Agrawal, S. Laddha, and M. S. Devi, “Impact and 
Uncertainty of Blockchain Usage on Supply Chain.” Studies 
in Indian Place Names, vol. 40, no. 68, pp. 438-446, 2020. 
[7] J. Brink and M. Holmén, “Capabilities and radical changes of 
the business models of new bioscience firms.” Creativity and 
Innovation Management, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 109-120, 2009. 
[8] T. Rayna and L. Striukova, “From rapid prototyping to home 
fabrication: How 3D printing is changing business model 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

innovation.” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 
vol. 102, pp. 214-224, 2016. 
[9] C. M. DaSilva, P. Trkman, K. Desouza, and J. Lindič, 
„Disruptive technologies: a business model perspective on 
cloud computing.” Technology Analysis & Strategic 
Management, vol. 25 no. 10, pp. 1161-1173, 2013. 
[10] H. Bouwman and P. van der Duin, P. “Technological 
forecasting and scenarios matter: research into the use of 
information and communication technology in the home 
environment in 2010.” Foresight, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 8-20, 2003. 
[11] A. L. Porter, A. T. Roper, T. W. Mason, F. A. Rossini, and J. 
Banks, “Forecasting and management of technology”, vol. 18, 
1991, John Wiley & Sons. 
[12] M. Godet, “The art of scenarios and strategic planning: tools 
and pitfalls.” Technological forecasting and social change, 
vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 3-22, 2000 
[13] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, “Business Model Generation: 
A Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and 
Challengers.”, 2010, Hoboken: Wiley. 
[14] C. Leopold, "How do SME’s use Business Model Stress 
Testing?”, 2015, TU Delft 
[15] U. Killström, et al., “Business models for new mobile 
applications and services.”, MobiLife, 2006. 
[16] J. F. Tesch, “Discovering the role of scenario planning as an 
evaluation methodology for business models in the era of the 
internet of things (IoT)” In Twenty-Fourth European 
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS)–AIS, 2016. 
[17] M. Niemimaa, J. Järveläinen, M. Heikkilä, and J. Heikkilä, 
“Business continuity of business models: Evaluating the 
resilience of business models for contingencies.” International 
Journal of Information Management, vol. 49, pp. 208-216, 
2019. 
[18] H. Bouwman, et al., „Business models tooling and a research 
agenda.” The first, vol. 25, pp. 1-28, 2012. 
[19] L. Klomp, “The impact of Blockchain technology on 
insurance business models: Stress testing the insurers' 
business models using the STOF Model”, 2018, TU Delft 
[20] T. van Beusekom, “Testing Business Model Innovation 
Tooling for Small and Medium Sized Enterprises: A Multiple 
Case Study on the Business Model Stress Test.”, 2017, TU 
Delf. 
[21] X. de Vrij, “Decentralised Local Energy Markets: Evaluating 
the Impact of Blockchain Technology on Local Energy 
Markets.”, 2018, TU Delft. 
[22] A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C. L. Tucci, “Clarifying 
Business Models: Origins, Present, and Future of the 
Concept.” 
Communications 
of 
the 
Association 
for 
Information Systems, vol. 16, pp. 1–25, 2005. 
[23] D. 
Burgwinkel, 
„Blockchaintechnologie 
und 
deren 
Funktionsweise verstehen.“ In D. Burgwinkel, Blockchain 
Technology: Einführung für Business- und IT Manager. 2016, 
Basel: De Gruyter Oldenbourg. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

