Towards an Evolving Software Ecosystem in the Mining Industry 
Mirco Schindler 
Institute for Software and System Engineering  
Technische Universität Clausthal 
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
e-mail: mirco.schindler@tu-clausthal.de 
Sunny Schoone, Elisabeth Clausen 
Institute for Advanced Mining Technologies  
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
e-mail: sschoone@amt.rwth-aachen.de,  
e-mail: eclausen@amt.rwth-aachen.de
 
Abstract— How will the data provider and consumer come 
together? Towards a mining 4.0, research is being conducted 
on innovative technologies for digitalization and automation. 
In addition to data transport on the technical infrastructure 
level, there are many challenges in the area of integration of 
different sensor and actuator data sets, as well as already exist-
ing isolated applications from different stakeholders. The de-
fined goal is to reduce the gap between the existing system 
boundaries, on a technical level as well as among the involved 
persons. 
Keywords Digital-Ecosystems; cloud-based Systems; Data-
driven architectures; Software Engineering approaches for 
ecosystems and Services; Ecosystem Architecture 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The sector of the primary resources industry and espe-
cially the sub-sector of raw material extraction is subject to a 
technological change in a facsimile to Industry 4.0 - Mining 
4.0. This also includes, with regard to mining, new social 
demands on this sector of industry [16] and [18]. Thus, tech-
nology transfer and implementation not only lead to prob-
lems in dealing with existing interfaces aimed at process 
optimization and thus increasing economic efficiency, but 
also to the desire for more transparency, sustainability and 
security [16] and [18]. These two trends must progress har-
moniously, and can be supported by flexible, innovative and 
modern technologies and IT solutions. High-level architec-
tures enable a new type of software design, which is de-
scribed by the approach of development and IT operations 
(DevOps), and enable the use of new tools for the optimiza-
tion of software solutions [14] and [19]. 
In order to implement these trends, a new role model for 
the use of platform-based cloud solutions was developed. For 
this purpose, in Section II an underground mining system is 
roughly transferred into an ecosystem. In doing so, rudimen-
tary aspects of underground mining and the special features 
of this use case and its rough structures are also described. In 
particular, in Section III, the belt conveyor is explained and 
presented as a subsystem of an entire mining ecosystem. In 
Section IV is exemplarily described what challenges can 
influence the implementation of new models in the mining 
industry, in order to go into the utilization structures of the 
data generated in the subsystem in Section V. These data 
utilization structures are extended by the introduction of 
cloud-based platforms. Based on this, Section VI presents the 
role and process model developed to reduce or overcome 
dynamically existing system boundaries. Section VII sum-
marizes the findings and gives an outlook on future next 
steps and work 
II. 
THE MINE AS IT ECOSYSTEM 
The increasing complexity of software-intensive systems 
has led to the fact that the classical approaches of software 
engineering have shown difficulties with scalability. Soft-
ware-intensive systems are systems, in which software de-
velopment and/or integration are dominant considerations, 
which includes computer-based systems ranging from indi-
vidual software applications, information systems, embedded 
systems, software product lines and product families and 
systems-of-systems. Consequently, software systems should 
no longer be considered in isolation due to their high degree 
of interconnectedness, as otherwise the exchange of infor-
mation and thus the synchronization, actuality and consisten-
cy between the systems is inhibited. Instead, they should be 
designed as part of a larger IT ecosystem [13].  
In analogy to biological ecosystems, IT ecosystems are 
based on the balance between individuals (autonomy) and 
rules (control) that define equilibria within an IT ecosystem. 
The maintenance and continuous development of IT ecosys-
tems requires a deep understanding of this balance [8] and 
[26]. In addition to these aspects, the mixture of interdisci-
plinarity and technology and non-technology-driven perspec-
tives plays an important role [7]. The aim of an IT ecosystem 
is therefore to establish and ensure a balance between auton-
omous subprocesses and systems for greater controllability 
and optimization of the overall system by gaining a better 
understanding of the influencing components and actors [10] 
and [11]. 
 
Figure1. 
Exemplary elements, based on an underground mining 
ecosystem. 
Analogous to the term IT ecosystem, economic industrial 
companies/mines can also be described as ecosystems [7]. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

A. Short introduction to underground mining 
The term mining infers development and extraction of 
valuable primary mineral resources from natural deposits. In 
particular, the underground mine, shown here in Figure 1, 
describes the development and extraction via shafts and ex-
tensive drift systems. Based on the geological conditions, 
there may be a difference in the implementation of the re-
spective mining method. Due to the different possibilities of 
the mining method, different technologies and machines can 
be used. Nevertheless, underground mines are subject to dif-
ficult conditions, a constant change of position of machines 
due to the progress of the mining site, the influence of dust, 
temperature, limited access to the machines in use and often 
long distances, to name but a small number of influencing 
factors. Due to the constant increase in size and a frequently 
very long working time, different machines from different 
manufacturers with different state of the art technology are 
often used, which makes it difficult to overcome the interfac-
es between the machines. 
In principle, underground mining can be divided into 
several processes for simplified presentation. The Extraction 
of Raw Materials refers to the extraction of valuable mineral 
resources and waste rocks from the natural deposit. Follow-
ing this, the Haulage and Transportation of the dissolved 
materials takes place. This is done by underground logistics 
and the various machines required for this. The aim of load-
ing and transport logistics is to transfer the extracted rocks to 
the Mineral Processing. In mineral processing the concentra-
tion of the targeted valuable minerals should be enriched by 
separating from the waste rocks. The supply of sufficient 
fresh air must be ensured in order to guarantee the work in 
underground mining. This section is grouped together in the 
Ventilation work area. These fields of work are supported by 
other fields of work, such as Safety, Maintenance and Logis-
tics and several others, which will not be discussed further 
here [22]. 
When transferring the ecosystem understanding to a min-
ing company, the individual supply and process chains play 
an important and specific role in order to ensure optimized 
mining operations. The independently acting subsystems 
extend along these chains and thus define very clear system 
boundaries with a defined goal and set of rules. As shown 
schematically in Figure 1, a section can consist of participat-
ing subsystems, actors and mutually influencing dependen-
cies. The real representation of a mining ecosystem depends 
on the underlying implementation of an operation and is not 
subject to a superordinate definition or delimitation.  
An entire operational ecosystem is made up of many in-
teractive or parallel systems, which system boundaries are 
characterized by great dynamics. Nevertheless, an attempt 
can be made to idealize these individual systems and to de-
limit them by "virtual" system boundaries into their areas of 
activity, such as extraction, haulage and transportation, pro-
cessing and ventilation.  
These systems are further subdivided into subsystems, 
which can be defined within system boundaries in analogy to 
the previous description. In transport logistics, for example, 
these are subsystems, such as Load Haul Dump Vehi-
cles (LHD) and conveyor belts. These subsystems provide 
data obtained by sensor technologies in different ways, 
which can be used in the higher-level systems to gain new 
information about the underlying processes by recombining 
these collected data with the aim of building virtual sensors. 
The entire system structure and hierarchy is shown as an 
example in Figure 2. The macrosystems in the third level of 
the system structure cluster the sensor technologies used on 
the acting machines according to their data technological 
end-use. Depending on the configuration, these respective 
macrosystems are composed of many microsystems. Repre-
sentatives for these microsystems are the individual sensor 
technologies. 
Mine-Ecosystem
Subsystem
System
Macrosystem
Microsystem
Mine
Underground
Mining
Safety
Extraction
Ventilation
Transport
LHD
Mine Truck
Conveyer Belt
Cameras
Machine 
Date
Ventilation 
Data
Safety 
Date
Material 
Data
Temp.
Body 
Sound
Acoustics
Speed
...
...
...
...
Figure 2. Exemplary representation of a mining system structure. 
 
III. 
SUBSYSTEM BELT CONVEYER 
As described in the previous Sections, the overall ecosys-
tem of a mine is made up of subordinate systems and these in 
turn are made up of many subsystems. From the system of 
haulage and transport, the belt conveyor (Figure 3) was cho-
sen as a consistent example to illustrate the system structural 
complexity [5]. 
 
Figure 3. Exemplary sketch of a belt conveyor. 
The conveyor belt is a central component of underground 
mining and combines extraction with further processing 
steps like hoisting or mineral processing. It supports the 
haulage and transport of the rock extracted during the mining 
process. The distances to be conveyed from extraction to 
mineral processing can range from a few hundred meters to 
several kilometers. Due to this central location in a mine, 
uninterrupted operation of this subsystem is essential [1]. 
The subsystem conveyor belt can be seen as a Cyber-
Physical System [26]. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

IV. 
PARTICULAR CHALLENGES EXEMPLIFIED BY DATA 
QUALITY AND MODEL VALIDATION  
In an extensive industrial ecosystem, a large number of 
systems act and react in a network to guarantee cross-process 
and process-specific functionality. In the Section described 
above, an infinitesimal part of a hierarchy in a mine is shown 
and divided into several levels according to the data and 
communication hierarchy. This Section briefly outlines the 
increased requirements and demands placed on a subsystem 
(see Figure 2) if the operated machines are compared to the 
target concept of the digital mine. 
A basic prerequisite for the vertical integration of pro-
cesses into a higher architecture is the digitalization and au-
tomation of the machines used within the specific processes 
[16]. The operational requirements of the target system, i.e., 
stable system states to ensure a link to the equilibrium of an 
ecosystem, must never be ignored [16]. For process-central 
systems, such as a logistics system (belt conveyor) within a 
mine, permanent availability, efficiency and no loss of work 
quality must be guaranteed [16]. When a belt conveyor sys-
tem stops, the upstream processes are also interrupted [17]. 
This has a corresponding effect on the downstream process 
steps in the mine like for example, that without a mineral 
processing no further processing steps of the targeted value 
mineral to a product are possible. This strategically im-
portant role of a belt conveyor can only be maintained by 
applying robust machines that can operate in a constantly 
changing environment. In addition, due to the frequent local 
changes in the mining industry, digitalization measures spe-
cializing in a particular application must be recalibrated 
again and again in order to ensure that the quality of the new 
application does not deteriorate [16]. The resulting constant-
ly changing environmental conditions mean that systems can 
rarely be mirrored or flexibly transferred to “similar” appli-
cations. This is made even more difficult by the fact that the 
systems are not always up to date and combined with the fact 
that with an increasing number of different suppliers, the 
number of different systems also increases. The evolution of 
such long-living cyber-physical systems should be per-
formed in a managed way. A formal description technique 
for modelling long-living cyber-physical systems is de-
scribed in [24] and [25], which guarantees the consistency 
between the system evolution requirements and system im-
plementation. 
This general importance of logistic systems in mining al-
so led to the specific content of the Use Case design in the 
EIT Raw Materials funded project Maintained Mine and 
Machine (MaMMa)[21]. Here, an interface-neutral, cloud-
based MaMMa platform for the optimization of maintenance 
cycles is to be developed using a belt conveyor in an under-
ground mine as a use case. In order to optimize individual 
sub-areas, such as a belt conveyor, of a superordinate opera-
tional system, such as an underground mine. For this pur-
pose, the data producer and usage structure of such a de-
scribed subsystem had to be analyzed [21]. 
V. 
DATA USE AND ROLE STRUCTURE OF A SUBYSYTEM 
IN MINING 
The current state of data usage and the role structure are 
presented in the following. For this purpose, a subsystem is 
divided into the respective macro and micro systems. 
A. Collected Sensor Data of a Subsystem (Belt Conveyer) 
Divided into Macrosystems 
As previously described mining operations are character-
ized by versatility and variability. Therefore, a lot of data can 
be generated to describe processes and their environment [2] 
and [6]. These possibilities include not only extensive ma-
chine data sets, which can be derived from the belt conveyer 
usage alone, but also a large number of other microsystems, 
which are conducive to transparency of the subsystem. This 
leads to the fact that a target horizon of data collection and 
thus the data consumer of the different sensor data has been 
divided into different macrosystems. 
When considering the data technology environment of a 
machine-related subsystem, the available sensors and data 
sets can be divided into two categories. On the one hand, the 
existing machine data and those included in the machines are 
to be used. The advantage of these data is that they can be 
acquired in real time without any sensor-technical extension. 
On the other hand, the sensor-technical acquisition of ma-
chine data, as described in the previous Section, is possible 
by means of additional sensors that are specifically applied 
to the machine environment. In addition, there are further 
sensor-technical investigations that are active in the periph-
ery of the subsystem under consideration and address differ-
ent data sets and data consumers as their main goal. These 
data can be used, for example, for quality control, control 
engineering, safety engineering, ventilation engineering and 
process optimization. This multitude of generated data sets is 
supplemented by the number of data sets of the upstream and 
downstream machines and systems for the respective subsys-
tem. The belt conveyor, as a single system is separated from 
the overall process by system boundaries, is shown in Figure 
3. In their technical use the described possibilities of sensor-
technical data collection, which are grouped into individual 
macrosystems in different cases of data collection, are very 
dependent on the respective degree of technology, the con-
veyor system, the machine manufacturer and the mine opera-
tor. Even within one company there can be different degrees 
of technology or fixed physical system boundaries. Irrespec-
tive of this, the data collected in the subsystem belt conveyor 
should be made available for process analysis. The com-
plexity of the process analysis can be shown more complete-
ly by an increased information density. 
Figure 4 refers to the singular data usage according to the 
respective thematic macrosystem. The different sensor data 
collected are used by the respective data specialist for pro-
cess optimization or maintenance. Often, coordinated sys-
tems and structures are used for this purpose. An exchange 
of information within the system structure between the data 
usage paths is neither planned nor made possible. Thus, a 
change in the system structure of data use aims at enabling 
flexible data and information exchange [3].  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
Figure 4. Example of a reduced data hierarchy of a subsystem. 
B. Introduction of a Cloud and Service Based Platform – 
MaMMa 
Figure 5 picks up the data usage structure defined in Sec-
tion V-A. Based on this, a comprehensive data usage string is 
derived. As an example, for the presentation of the structural 
change and problem definition, the data input is shown sin-
gularly for one sensor from the structural points - machine 
data / material data / system data. Here, the data usage is 
extended by the individual acting roles in the development of 
IT solutions for sensor technical data collection.  
The Sensor Specialist is responsible for the configura-
tion and design of the sensor technologies used. He has a 
deep understanding of the domain and detailed knowledge of 
the microsystem. 
The Data Analyst is a specialist for processing and eval-
uating data. He has a high level of domain knowledge. He 
interacts with the sensor specialist, to increase or optimize 
data quality. The data analyst does not work directly with 
sensor data, but with the data provided by any kind of infra-
structure. If the data analysis has reached a stage where these 
findings should be made available to the user or third parties, 
the data analyst passes these findings on to the Software De-
veloper. 
The Software (SW) Developer is an IT specialist and 
developer, who implements new Services or Applications to 
make data or processed data available. For this he only needs 
a rudimentary domain understanding, but a very high IT un-
derstanding. 
The User is the person who uses the product, which was 
created during the development. 
Over the entire data value chain, which was described by 
means of the acting roles, a data point reduction is carried 
out with each processing step. In each step, information is 
lost, perhaps unimportant for the end-user in this context, but 
presumably important in another context. The introduction of 
platform-based cloud solutions and the resulting expansion 
of system boundaries means that extended, flexible and ex-
tensive data use can be enabled. The system boundaries be-
tween developer and user (or between data supplier and con-
sumer) are softened and/or dissolved. By feeding existing 
and newly developed products into a platform-based system, 
new possibilities for their use arise. This enables the devel-
opment of virtual sensors by deriving the final products and 
the information included for new applications and infor-
mation bases [3]. 
The presented open system is a tool for a comprehensive 
high-level architecture. Not only the linear feeding and pro-
vision of pre-processed data or the combined provision of 
different end products, related to the macrosystems, shall be 
enabled in this way. Interaction of the user with the platform 
for flexible retrieval of the different analyzed data sets and 
end products via flexible/interactive dashboards is used to 
create an increased value of the existing data. This should 
lead to a more comprehensive process analysis to improve 
process optimization and also maintenance [4]. 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
Figure 5. MaMMa-Solution and data reduction. 
VI. 
STRUCTURAL DEVELOPMENT OF SOFTWARE FOR IT 
ECOSYSTEMS 
Based on the stringent and linear data usage and the asso-
ciated role structure derived from the current state of prac-
tice, the benefits of platform-based systems to bridge the 
technical gapwas demonstrated. In the following, a new 
concept for a role structure enabled in this way is presented. 
A. Overall Approach  
The innovation of a cloud-based platform in contrast to 
the classical monolithic IT concepts is the shift of the system 
boundaries from a closed to an open one, as shown in Figure 
5. The solution presented here not only allows to combine 
already existing products, but also to break the described 
linear paths of usage. However, this can only be done in a 
managed way and process. An IT ecosystem in the mining 
industry is subject to clearly structured processes and opera-
tional limitations on the one hand, but must also ensure crea-
tive, flexible and fast changes in the process structure on the 
other hand. The visualization of the described transformation 
process is shown in Figure 6. Here, a clear role model is used 
to define responsibilities in relation to processes, data, appli-
cations and the goals pursued. To achieve this, clear commu-
nication channels must be created across the existing system 
boundaries and limiting interfaces. 
This model can be used as a blueprint for all software-
intensive processes regardless of their complexity and level 
of abstraction (see Figure 2). Scalability and implementation 
are discussed in detail in the following Section VI-B. In con-
trast to common process models, the one presented does not 
have a defined sequence of execution. The interaction is ra-
ther to be interpreted as synchronization points, where the 
arrow direction describes the initiation of synchronization. 
For this purpose, the roles already introduced in previous 
Sections are extended by the roles Operator and Integrator.  
The Operator has a very high understanding of the IT 
infrastructure, its use and design. He interacts indirectly with 
every other role through the data and services he manages. 
During the interaction / communication between the other 
roles involved, the operator has a special position. If the role 
of the operator does not coincide with another role, the inter-
action takes place only via the integrator. From the com-
plexity level onwards, where this role is occupied as an inde-
pendent role, the topic of infrastructure will also be cross-
sectional and concern more than one usage path.  
The Integrator has a superordinate understanding of all 
areas and controls the cooperation of all roles. Furthermore, 
he is responsible for integration beyond the system bounda-
ries, i.e., both on the same hierarchical level and between 
different usage threads. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

 
Figure 6. Role- and process model. 
His role is not only to be regarded as a technical integra-
tor, but also as a mediator, since he is the one who brings 
together the triad of data, service and process. 
Basically, there are three types of interaction,  
i.) the mediation and integration within the system, be-
tween systems and between hierarchy and abstrac-
tion level is responsible through the role of the inte-
grator. 
ii.) usage relationships with the infrastructure as a cen-
tral element. 
iii.) feedback channels that allow iterative and incre-
mental development. The interaction / communica-
tion is either directly through the cycles implied by 
the feedback channels or through the integrator. 
The following Section will deal with this role and process 
model can be adapted to the different needs in a mining eco-
system. 
B. Scalability and Mapping to Software Engineering 
Processes 
Considering a macrosystem and its usage paths as shown 
in Figure 2, such software-intensive systems can be modelled 
very well to proven and classical waterfall models [9] and 
classical concepts of software engineering. The disadvantage 
resulting from these process models are the long project du-
rations, which are predominant due to the placing of orders. 
By developing cloud and service-based technologies a tech-
nical infrastructure is created, which allows integrating sys-
tems or components in different ways. However, this results 
in new challenges in the context of an ecosystem that re-
quires new methodologies, concepts and mechanisms on 
higher levels of abstraction [9] [15]. 
These challenges not only result in a change regarding 
the role of the data specialist, the analyst and also the devel-
oper in the context of a mining operation but also, to a great-
er emphasis on agile development methodologies [12], so 
that shorter release cycles can be achieved and smaller pro-
jects can be established in a quick and dynamic way. Fur-
thermore, the user comes as an essential part of an IT ecosys-
tem comes to the fore. The IT ecosystem must represent a 
benefit for the user. Otherwise, the role of the user or the 
development must be questioned at this point. The proposed 
approach also allows flexibility regarding fusion roles to be 
combined in one person. This can be done depending on the 
complexity or the involved usage paths. This can range from 
the extreme case that all roles are combined in one person, 
which can be the example in the case of experimental proto-
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

type development and testing, to a distribution of all roles 
even beyond the company borders. Figure 5 shows how such 
a dynamic adaptation of roles and thus a scaling of the ap-
proach across several abstraction levels and system bounda-
ries can be designed. 
Looking at the utilization path in Figure 2, the scenario 
shown in Figure 7 case i. could represent the development 
and installation of the speed sensor in the belt conveyor en-
gine. This can also be done by or at the manufacturer. In this 
case the sensor is only used to control the drive of the ma-
chine. Therefore, the roles of developer and operator coin-
cide, since the deployment is carried out on the control sys-
tem of the machine itself. The roles of sensor specialist and 
analyst also coincide here, since the generated data output is 
designed for this special application and is therefore used for 
automated control. In this case, the user would be synony-
mous with the client, or the designer of the machine, and 
would thus implicitly represent the role of the integrator. 
However, the role of the integrator can also be fulfilled by 
the other two people/roles depending on the focus of the use 
case. 
Case ii. of Figure 7 represents the scenario of making da-
ta available via a cloud infrastructure. Previously this data 
was only used for controlling the machine. This means that 
the role of the operator is occupied independently, since a 
central infrastructure is now accessed. In addition, the role of 
the developer will be newly occupied in person, because now 
it is no longer a question of developing a piece of software in 
an embedded system, but of writing a new service for the 
infrastructure. This leads to a new profile of the role of the 
developer. Also, in case ii), depending on the interpretation, 
the role of the integrator can be performed by one of the oth-
er roles. The integrator now has a special responsibility, as 
he is responsible for ensuring that added value is created 
through cloud integration. This does not have to be done in 
person by the integrator of the cloud integration project but 
can also be done by an integrator from the material analysis 
path of use, who could initiate case iii). Based on his/her 
domain expertise and the active exchange with the integra-
tors of other utilization paths, it can be determined, that a 
virtual scale can be realized through the now available speed 
values, so that the original sensor data of the machine can 
now also be used for the utilization path of the material anal-
ysis. As shown in Figure 7 iii), each role is now the respon-
sibility of a separate person, with the role of the analyst be-
ing more dominant over the sensor specialist, in contrast to 
cases i) and ii). 
In summary, there is no single profile for the roles, nor 
for the combination of individual roles. This depends rather 
on the level of abstraction, the required domain and expertise 
and the context in the ecosystem. It is crucial that in every 
project the role affiliation and thus the responsibility is made 
explicit, and that the integrator can spread impulses and best 
practices through an active exchange across usage paths. 
 
Figure 7. Dynamic role decomposition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

VII. CONCLUSION, FUTURE CHALLENGES AND FURTHER 
WORK 
In this article a case study was considered, which gives an 
impression of the existing complexity and at the same time 
that this complexity is still detectable and hand-able. Exem-
plary the data collection possibilities and usage structures 
were worked out. Therefore, the cyber-physical subsystem 
conveyer belt was used as a case study. By introducing a 
cloud-based platform, data usage could be made more flexi-
ble and extensive for the whole IT ecosystems. The de-
scribed approach offers an important technical basis and re-
duces the hurdle to carry out small, agile and user-oriented 
software development projects. 
In a first step, the approach presented here has focused on 
modelling the actual state and the necessary changes in rela-
tion to the process and role model in to reduce existing barri-
ers. The differentiation from existing technology solutions / 
technology stack was not considered in depth, as this is high-
ly influenced by the existing solutions and could only be 
answered with the help of a comprehensive study. 
 
 
Figure 8. Classification of IT ecosystem.
Future research, necessary for integration into active min-
ing operations may include following questions: 
1) What role will employees play in future mining eco-
systems? 
2) What methodology and mechanisms can be used to 
create a balance for the social and business aspects, so that 
obstacles can be removed in this area as well? 
In order to classify this challenge, systems can not only 
be classified into macro- or microsystems due to their com-
plexity but can also be evaluated with regard to their techno-
logical, social and business aspects. Figure 8 describes six 
dimensions that can be used for this purpose. Also, from 
practical experience (reference to project MaMMa) it is 
known that the hurdles are not purely technical in nature. In 
order to create emergent system behavior, a high level of 
transparency and data availability beyond the system's own 
boundaries is necessary. The resulting areas of conflict can-
not, however, be decided at a purely technical level, but the 
approach described here attempts to ensure a controlled pro-
cess by introducing a specific role model and, in particular, 
the cross-cutting role of the integrator. The aim is to build 
and refine the necessary understanding between the individ-
ual actors and to contribute to the stability of the ecosystem. 
Another future challenge is the implementation of the model 
described to an active mining operation, since technological 
transformation must be accompanied by a cultural change in 
the company. 
Furthermore, the specification of the individual activities, 
their initiation and their lifecycle will be part of further re-
search. As shown in Figure 7, a comparison with the general 
definition of a DIN 69901 concept is obvious. The dynamic 
formation of teams pursuing a common goal fulfils the pro-
ject character. But our approach goes one step further as we 
explicitly do not speak of a development project anymore. 
Hereby the evolution of the system and the shutdown or re-
placement of a system within the IT ecosystem is an integral 
part of this approach and had to be part of further research 
[20]. 
 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially funded under the auspices of the 
EIT - KIC Raw materials program within the project “Main-
tained Mining Machine” (MaMMa) with the grant agreement 
number: [EIT/RAW MATERIALS/SGA2018/1, 17031] 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Wotruba, H. Knapp, K. Neubert and C. Schropp, 
“Application of sensor-based sorting for the processing of 
mineral resources,” Chemie Ingenieur Technik 86, Nr. 6, pp. 
773-783, ISSN 0009286X, 2014 
[2] T. Vraetz, „Development and application of an innovative 
concept for inline characterisation of mixtures of substances 
in continuous mass flows using Acoustic Emission 
Technology,” RWTH Aachen, Diss., 1. Auflage Aachen: 
Verlag R. Zillekens, Aachener Schriften zur Rohstoff- und 
Entsorgungstechnik, Band 96 ISBN: 978-3-941277-36-6, 
2018 
[3] M. Jaekel, „The power of digital platforms,“ Springer Verlag 
Wiesbaden GmbH, ISBN: 978-3-658-19178-8, 2017 
[4] B. Vogel-Heuser and T. Bauernhansl, „Manuel Industry 4.0,“ 
Bd.4; Springer Verlag Deutschland, ISBN: 978-3-662-53254-
6, 2017 
[5] I. Schindler, „Belt conveyor technology - state of the art and 
current development,“ Studienarbeit, Institut für Bergwerks- 
und 
Hüttenmaschinenkunde, 
Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule Aachen, 1998 
[6] K. Nienhaus, T. Pretz and H. Wotruba, „Sensor Technologies: 
Impulses for the Raw Materials Industry,“ Schriftenreihe zur 
Aufbereitung und Veredlung 50, RWTH Aachen, Shaker 
Verlag, 2014 
[7] D. G. Messerschmitt and C. Szyperski, „Software ecosystem. 
Understanding an indispensable technology and industry,“ 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press., 2003 
[8] A. Rausch and D. Niebuhr: “DemSy - A Scenario for an 
Integrated Demonstrator in a Smart City.”NTH Focused 
Research School for IT Ecosystems, Science Report, TU 
Clausthal, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, 2010 
[9] H. D. Benington, "Production of Large Computer Programs," 
in Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 350-
361, Oct.-Dec. 1983. 
[10] H. Balzert, „Textbook of software technology: Basic concepts 
and requirements engineering,“ Springer-Verlag, 2010. 
[11] F. Wortmann and K. Flüchter, "Internet of things." Business 
& Information Systems Engineering 57.3,2015, p. 221-224 
[12] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. Bennekum, A. Cockburn, M. Fowler, 
J. Grenning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. Jeffries, J. Kern, B. 
Marick, R. C. Martin, S. Mellor, K. Schwaber, J. Sutherland, 
D. Thomas, "Manifesto for agile software development.", 
[Online] Available from www.agilemanifesto.org, 2006, 
retrieved: March, 2020. 
[13] R. Bachmann, G. Kemper and T. Gerzer, „Big Data - Curse or 
blessing?“, mitp/bhv, Verlag C. H. Beck, 2014, ISBN: 978-3-
8266-9690-9 
[14] R. Jabbari, N. Ali, K. Petersen and B. Tanveer, "What is 
devops? A systematic mapping study on definitions and 
practices." 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Scientific 
Workshop 
Proceedings of XP2016. ACM, 2016 
[15] M. Gharbi, A. Koschel, A. Rausch and G. Starke, „Basic 
knowledge for software architects. Training and further 
education according to iSAQB standard to become a Certified 
Professional for Software Architecture - Foundation Level. 
3.”, revised and updated edition. Heidelberg: dpunkt.verlag, 
2018 
[16] O. O´Neill, “Digitisation in mining – Industry 4.0,” Mining 
Report 153, ISSN. 2195-6529.101.106, 2017 
[17] B. Eichentopf, T. Wendel R. Baltes and K. Nienhaus, 
„Application examples of LWIR cameras for process 
monitoring and automation,” AKIDA, Aachener Kolloquium 
für Instandhaltung, Diagnose und Anlagenüberwachung, 1. 
Aufl. Stolberg Zillekens, 19./20. November 2014, pp. 27-36 
ISBN: 978-3-941277-21-2 
[18] P. Hopwood “Tracking the trends 2018,” Deloitte Design 
Studio, Canada 17, 2018,  
[19] M. Hüttermann, “DevOps for Developer,” Springer Science 
and Business Media New York, 2012, ISBN 978-1-4302-
4569-8,  
[20] Deutsches 
Institut 
für 
Normung, 
„DIN 
69901-5, 
Projektmanagement –Teil 5: Begriffe,“ Deutsche Norm, 2009 
[21] EIT Raw Materials, “Maintained Mine & Machine,” [Online] 
available 
from 
www.mamma-project.eu, 
retrieved: 
01.06.2020 
[22] K. Nienhaus, T. Pretz and H. Wotruba, „Sensor Technologies: 
Impulses for the Raw Materials Industry,“ Schriftenreihe zur 
Aufbereitung und Veredlung, Shaker Verlag, Aachen, 2014 
[23] D. Wang, C. Knieke, H. Fischer and A. Rausch, ”An 
Approach for Configuration of the Industry 4.0 Technologies 
on Production Systems,” ICONS 2020: The Fifteenth 
International Conference on Systems, Copyright (c) IARIA, 
2020, February 23-27, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, Page(s): 84-87, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-771-9 
[24] D. Wang, C. Knieke, and A. Rausch, “Data-driven 
Component Configuration in Production Systems,” Adapt. 
2019 Elev. Int. Conf. Adapt. Self-Adaptive Syst. Appl., no. c, 
pp. 44–47, 2019. 
[25] J. Fitzgerald, C. Gamble, P. G. Larsen, K. Pierce, and J. 
Woodcock, 
“Cyber-Physical 
Systems 
Design: 
Formal 
Foundations, Methods and Integrated Tool Chains,” in 
Proceedings - 3rd FME Workshop on Formal Methods in 
Software Engineering, 2015, pp. 40–46. 
[26] A. Rausch, J. P. Müller, D. Niebuhr, S. Herold and U. Goltz, 
"IT ecosystems: A new paradigm for engineering complex 
adaptive software systems," 2012 6th IEEE International 
Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (DEST), 
Campione 
d'Italia, 
2012, 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi: 
10.1109/DEST.2012.6227908. 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-781-8
ADAPTIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Adaptive and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications

