Geometric Error Estimation
Houman Borouchaki
Project-team GAMMA 3
UTT
Troyes, France
Email: houman.borouchaki@utt.fr
Patrick Laug
Project-team GAMMA 3
INRIA
Paris - Rocquencourt, France
Email: patrick.laug@inria.fr
Abstract—An essential prerequisite for the numerical ﬁnite
element simulation of physical problems expressed in terms of
PDEs is the construction of an adequate mesh of the domain.
This ﬁrst stage, which usually involves a fully automatic
mesh generation method, is then followed by a computational
step. One can show that the quality of the solution strongly
depends on the shape quality of the mesh of the domain.
At the second stage, the numerical solution obtained with
the initial mesh is generally analyzed using an appropriate
a posteriori error estimator which, based on the quality of the
solution, indicates whether or not the solution is accurate. The
quality of the solution is closely related to how well the mesh
corresponds to the underlying physical phenomenon, which
can be quantiﬁed by the element sizes of the mesh. An a
posteriori error estimation based on the interpolation error
depending on the Hessian of the solution seems to be well
adapted to the purpose of adaptive meshing. In this paper, we
propose a new interpolation error estimation based on the local
deformation of the Cartesian surface representing the solution.
This methodology is generally used in the context of surface
meshing. In our example, the proposed methodology is applied
to minimize the interpolation error on an image whose grey
level is considered as being the solution.
Keywords-a posteriori error estimation; interpolation error;
mesh adaptation; surface curvature.
I. INTRODUCTION
Different kinds of estimators are available to a posteriori
control the error made on a ﬁnite element solution [1]. Using
such an estimator, it is possible to control the mesh by h-
adaptation so that the corresponding solution of the PDE
problem has a given accuracy. Some of these estimators are
based on the interpolation error (and, in this sense, are purely
geometric since they ignore the nature of the operator con-
sidered). This kind of estimators has been studied by many
authors [2]–[5]. However, most of these studies lie on the
fact that a parameter h, representing the size of the elements,
is small or tends to zero, and thereby they are asymptotic
studies. The estimator is thus based on appropriate Taylor
expansions, and gives in this manner some indications on the
admissible size h. Nevertheless, as this size is not necessarily
small, we propose a novel approach which, although closely
related to the previous ones, does not assume any particular
hypothesis on this parameter, and therefore is probably more
justiﬁed. Our approach is besides rather similar, in its spirit,
to certain solutions used in a different domain, namely the
mesh generation of parametric patches [6]–[8].
Section 2 gives the mathematical formulation of the
problem and reviews the related works. Section 3 introduces
a new class of measures to quantify the interpolation error
depending on the local deformation or curvature of the
Cartesian surface corresponding to the solution. A numerical
example is illustrated in Section 4 and ﬁnally, the last section
provides a brief conclusion.
II. DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM AND STATE OF THE
ART
Let Ω be a domain of Rd (with d = 1, 2 or 3) and let
T be a simplicial mesh of Ω composed of linear simplices
P 1 or quadratic simplices P 2. We suppose that, in order
to solve a problem given in terms of PDEs on Ω, we have
made a ﬁnite element computation on Ω using T , and we
have obtained the scalar solution uT . Denoting by u the
exact solution, the problem ﬁrstly consists in evaluating the
gap eT
= u − uT between u and uT representing the
error involved by the ﬁnite element solution, and secondly
deducing (in general by bounding this gap) another mesh
T ′ such that the estimated gap between u and the solution
uT ′ using mesh T ′ is bounded by a given threshold. Several
points must be more precisely explained:
• how to quantify the gap eT between u and uT ?
• how to use the latter information for building a new
mesh on which the gap between the corresponding
ﬁnite element solution and the exact solution is bounded
by a given threshold?
The solution uT obtained by the ﬁnite element method
is not interpolating (i.e. the solution obtained at the nodes
of T does not coincide with the exact value of u at these
nodes). Moreover, for each element of the mesh, it cannot
be guaranteed that the solution uT coincide with the exact
value of u at one point (at least) of the element. Then, it
seems difﬁcult to explicitly quantify the gap eT . However,
the direct study of this gap has been dealt in several works
[9]. But, in the general case, its quantiﬁcation remains an
open problem. Consequently, other indirect approaches have
been proposed to quantify or rather bound this gap. Let us
denote by euT the function interpolating u on the mesh T
81
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

(which is a piecewise linear or quadratic function, depending
on the degree of the elements of T ) and by eeT the gap u−euT
between u and euT , called the interpolation error on u along
mesh T . To be able to quantify the gap eT , we suppose the
following relation holds (C´ea’s lemma):
||eT || ≤ C ||eeT ||
where ||.|| denotes a norm and C is a constant not depending
on T . In other words, we suppose that the ﬁnite element
error is bounded by the interpolation error. The original
problem is then simpliﬁed by considering the following
problem: given an interpolation euT of u along a mesh T ,
how to build another mesh T ′ for which the interpolation
error is bounded by a given threshold? As euT can be seen as
a discrete representation of u, the problem now reduces to a
characterization of meshes for which the interpolation error
is bounded by this threshold. This problem has been the
subject of several studies (see for instance [5]) and, in most
of them, the examination of a “measure” of the interpolation
error provides some constraints associated with the mesh
elements. In the context of mesh adaptation methods, h-
methods or size adaptation are particularly relevant, and the
constraints are speciﬁed in terms of element sizes. In the
following, some classical measures of this error are recalled,
as well as resulting constraints on the mesh elements.
To quantify the interpolation error, two kinds of measures
can be considered: continuous or discrete. A classical con-
tinuous measure of this error is the square of the L2 norm
of eeT :
||eeT ||2
L2 =
Z
T
ee2
T dω =
X
K∈T
||eeK||2
L2
with
||eeK||2
L2 =
Z
K
ee2
K dω ,
where eeK is the interpolation error on each element K
of T , and dω is an elementary volume of Rd. In two
dimensions, considering linear elements and assuming that
the Hessian Hu of u restricted to the elements is constant,
Nadler [10] gives an analytical expression of the measure
of the interpolation error ||eeK||2
L2 on K as a function of
the area A of K and the quantities di = 1
2 aT
i Hu ai (second
directional derivatives along the edges) where ai is the vector
joining vertices i and i + 1 of K:
Z
K
ee2
K dx dy = A
180


 X
i
di
!2
+
X
i
d2
i

 .
Berzins [11] extends this result in three dimensions (for
linear elements) and shows (still assuming that the Hessian
Hu of u is constant in element K) that:
Z
K
e2
T dx dy dz = V
420


 X
i
di
!2
+
X
i
d2
i
− d1 d4 − d2 d5 − d3 d6
!
,
where V is the volume of K and quantities di are similar to
the 2D case. Berzins deduces from this expression a measure
of the quality of the elements, and thus characterizes the
mesh. However, it is unclear to interpret this information in
terms of element size. The extension of these results to the
case of an arbitrary Hessian Hu remains open. An alternative
measure, well suited to problem solving by the ﬁnite element
method, consists in considering Sobolev norms of eeK, in
particular the H1 norm whose square is deﬁned by:
||eeK||2
H1 =
Z
K

where point x sweeps element K. Similarly, assuming that
Hessian Hu is constant on each element, Manzi et al. [15]
propose an approximation of the measure ||eeK||L∞ from an
expression of error eK given by D’Azevedo and Simpson
[3] for linear elements in two dimensions:
||eeK||L∞ ≈
Q
i
δi
16 det(Hu) A2 ,
where δi = aT
i |Hu| ai, |Hu| being the absolute value of the
Hessian of u. Using this approximation, they show that if
the size h of K along all directions veriﬁes hT |Hu| h ≤ 3 ε
then ||eeK||L∞ ≤ ε. This size constraint proves well-suited
to h-methods and the results obtained by the authors show
the simplicity and the efﬁciency of this method. In the
context of surface triangulation by linear elements, Anglada
et al. [7] propose, in the general case where the Hessian of
u is arbitrary, an upper bound of ||eeK||L∞ given by:
||eeK||L∞ ≤ 2
9 sup
x∈K
||−→
pqT Hu(x) −→
pq|| ,
where point x sweeps element K, p is the vertex of K such
that the barycentric coordinate of x in K with respect to p
is maximal, and q the intersection point of the straight line
(p x) with the edge of K opposite to p. They infer that the
interpolation error is bounded by a threshold if element K
lies in regions deﬁned and centered at the vertices of K.
Therefore, these regions can be deﬁned at every points of
the domain and then constitute constraints for the element
sizes.
According to the above description of different works on
the subject (although this list is far from being exhaustive),
a discrete measure (linking error bound and mesh element
size) seems more appropriate in the scope of error estimation
for mesh adaptation. The following section details this issue.
III. A NOVEL APPROACH BASED ON SURFACE GEOMETRY
In this section, we recall the approach proposed by [16]
which considers solution u as a Cartesian surface, and
we give a new error estimation in the case of anisotropic
geometric surface meshing. Let Ω be the computational
domain, T (Ω) a mesh of Ω, and u(Ω) the physical so-
lution obtained on Ω using the mesh T (Ω). The couple
(T (Ω), u(Ω)) deﬁnes a Cartesian surface Σu(T ). Given
Σu(T ), the problem of minimizing the interpolation error
consists in deﬁning an optimal mesh Topt(Ω) of Ω for which
surface Σu(Topt) would be as smooth as possible. For this
purpose, we propose to locally characterize the surface in
the neighborhood of a vertex. Two methods are introduced:
the ﬁrst one, based on local deformation, can be applied for
an isotropic adaptation while the second one, based on local
curvature, is suitable to an anisotropic adaptation.
A. Local deformation of a surface
The main idea consists in locally characterizing the
deviation (of order 0) of a surface mesh Σu(T ) in the
neighborhood of a vertex with respect to a reference plane,
in particular the tangent plane to the surface at this vertex.
This deviation can be quantiﬁed by considering the Hessian
along the normal to the surface (i.e. the second fundamental
form of the surface).
Let P be a vertex of the solution surface Σu(T ). Locally,
in the neighborhood of P, this surface admits a parametric
representation σ(u, v), (u, v) being the parameters, with
P = σ(0, 0). The Taylor expansion at order 2 to σ in the
neighborhood of P gives:
σ(u, v) = σ(0, 0) + σ′
u u + σ′
v v
+ 1
2 (σ′′
uu u2 + 2 σ′′
uv u v + σ′′
vv v2) + o(u2 + v2) e ,
where e = (1, 1, 1). If ν(P) denotes the normal to the
surface at P, then the quantity ⟨ν(P), (σ(u, v) − σ(0, 0))⟩
(⟨., .⟩ denoting the dot product) representing the gap between
point σ(u, v) and the tangent plane at P, expressed by:
1
2 (⟨ν(P), σ′′
uu⟩ u2 + 2 ⟨ν(P), σ′′
uv⟩ u v + ⟨ν(P), σ′′
vv⟩ v2)
+ o(u2 + v2) ,
is therefore proportional to the second fundamental form of
the surface for u2 + v2 small enough.
The local deformation of the surface at P is deﬁned as
the maximum gap between vertices adjacent to P and the
tangent plane to the surface at P. If (Pi) denotes these
vertices, then the local deformation ε(P) of the surface at
P is given by:
ε(P) = max
i
⟨ν(P), −−→
PPi⟩ .
Consequently, the optimal mesh of Ω for Σu(T ) is a
mesh whose size at each node p is inversely proportional
to ε(P) where P = (p, u(p)). More formally, the optimal
size hopt(p) associated with a node p reads:
hopt = h(p)
ε
ε(P) ,
where ε denotes the imposed deviation threshold and h(p)
the element size in the neighborhood of p in mesh T (Ω).
It can be noticed that the local deformation is a very
simple characterization of the local deviation of the surface,
which does not require the explicit computation of the Hes-
sian of the solution. The only disadvantage of this measure
is that the resulting adaptive meshes can only be isotropic. In
the same context (local deviation minimization), the notion
of curvature provides a more precise and anisotropic analysis
of this deviation.
83
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

B. Local curvature of a surface
The analysis of the local geometric curvature of the
surface representing the solution can be used to minimize
also the deviation (of order 1) between the tangent planes
of the interpolating solution and those of the exact solution.
Indeed, in the context of isotropic surface mesh generation,
we show [8] that the two deviations of order 0 and 1
of the surface are bounded by a given threshold if, at
any point of the surface, the size of the surface elements
is proportional to the minimal radius of curvature. Let
P = (p, u(p)) be a vertex of Σu(T ), let ρ1(P) and ρ2(P)
with ρ1(P) ≤ ρ2(P) be the two principal radii of curvature
at P, and let (−→
e1(P), −→
e2(P)) be the two unit vectors in
the corresponding principal directions. The ideal size for a
surface mesh element at P is [8]:
hΣ
opt(P) = γ ρ1(P) ,
where γ is a coefﬁcient depending on the imposed deviation
threshold. This size is deﬁned in the tangent plane to the
surface at P. In the reference system (P, −→
e1(P), −→
e2(P)) of
this plane, the ideal size in a given direction is a vector
−→v (P) = hΣ
1 −→
e1(P) + hΣ
2 −→
e2(P) whose components hΣ
1 and
hΣ
2 satisfy the following relation:

hΣ
1
hΣ
2

I2
γ2 ρ2
1(P)
 
hΣ
1
hΣ
2
!
= 1 .
This expression, where I2 denotes the 2×2 identity matrix,
represents the equation of a circle with center P and radius
γ ρ1(P) in the tangent plane to the surface at P. By an
orthogonal projection of this circle in the plane of Ω, the
size constraint at p is obtained. If −→
v1(p) and −→
v2(p) are the
respective orthogonal projections of −→
e1(P) and −→
e2(P) in the
plane of Ω, then this size constraint in the reference system
(p, −→i , −→j ) (−→i = (1, 0) and −→j = (0, 1)) is given by:

h1
h2

PT
I2
γ2 ρ2
1(P)
P
 
h1
h2
!
= 1 ,
where P =

−→
v1(p)
−→
v2(p)
−1
and (h1, h2) are the coor-
dinates in the reference system (p, −→i , −→j ) of the projection
of the ideal size vector −→v (P) in the plane of Ω. This relation
deﬁnes, among others, a metric (generally anisotropic) at p.
This metric may produce an important number of ele-
ments owing to the isotropic feature of surface elements.
To minimize this number of elements, and in the context of
anisotropic geometric surface meshing, we have established
[17] a relation which is similar to the isotropic case and
depends on both principal radii of curvature. Now, the ideal
size of the surface elements is given by a metric, called
geometric, which can be expressed at a vertex P of Σu(T ):

hΣ
1
hΣ
2




1
γ2 ρ2
1(P)
0
0
1
η2 ρ2
2(P)



 
hΣ
1
hΣ
2
!
= 1 ,
where γ = 2
p
ε (2 − ε), η = 2
s
ε ρ1(P)
ρ2(P) (2 − ε ρ1(P)
ρ2(P)),
in which ε is the prescribed gap in direction −→
e1(P). This
relation generally represents an ellipse in the tangent plane
to the surface at P which contained a circle in the isotropic
case. Again, by projecting this ellipse in the plane of Ω,
the corresponding metric at p in this plane is obtained. This
measures also provide a means to control the interpolation
error in H1 norm (bounding the error on the solution but
also on its derivatives), and thereby seams more adequate
compared to an isotropic measure.
In practice, to compute the local curvature, several steps
are necessary. First, at each vertex of the surface mesh, the
normal (hence the gradient) is determined by a weighted av-
erage of unit normals to the adjacent elements. Then, in the
local reference system (composed of the tangent plane and
the normal) associated with each vertex, a quadric centered
at this vertex and approaching at best the adjacent vertices
is built. Afterwards, the Hessian is locally approximated by
the Hessian to this quadric. Knowing the gradient and the
Hessian of the solution at the nodes of T (Ω), the curvatures
and principal directions at each vertex of surface Σu(T ) are
obtained.
IV. NUMERICAL EXAMPLE
To illustrate the proposed method, we consider an image
of 700 × 536 pixels and the ﬁeld of its grey levels.
Figure 1 shows the original color image, a reproduction of
The Adoration of the Magi (circa 1500). Its author was
the North Italian Renaissance painter Andrea Mantegna,
whose early career was shaped by impressions of Florentine
works. The image is ﬁrstly represented by a regular grid
of 699 × 535 quadrilaterals, deﬁning its initial mesh. The
analysis of the local geometric curvature of the Cartesian
surface representing the ﬁeld leads to the determination
of an anisotropic geometric size map associated with the
initial mesh, in order to bound the interpolation error (here
ε = 0.1). Figure 2 (general view) and 3 (close-up) show
the adapted anisotropic mesh. This mesh contains 227,557
vertices and 453,265 triangles. It has been realized using
the anisotropic adaptive mesh generator BL2D [18]. The
resulting interpolation error is 0.085 in average.
V. CONCLUSION
A novel approach connecting the problem of a posteriori
error estimation and some techniques of surface meshing
has been introduced. It constitutes an alternative method
to classical approaches using the Hessian of the solution.
84
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

Figure 1.
Original color image (painting by Andrea Mantegna, circa 1500).
To illustrate our methodology, a numerical example has
been presented. The proposed a posteriori error estimation
can be used in any computational problem where a static
ﬁeld must be calculated. In the case of dynamic ﬁelds, the
adaptive computation is constituted by a calculation loop:
at each iteration, beginning at the same global initial time
and ending at a different time, a combination of the current
metric and the previous metrics is applied.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Fortin, “Estimation a posteriori et adaptation de maillages”, Rev.
Europ. des ´El´ements Finis, vol. 9, no 4, 2000.
[2] I. Babuska and K. Aziz, “On the angle condition in the ﬁnite element
method”, Siam J. Numer. Anal., vol. 13, no 2, 1976, pp. 214–226.
[3] E.F. D’Azevedo and B. Simpson, “On optimal triangular meshes for
minimizing the gradient error”, Numer. Math., vol. 59, 1991, pp. 321–
348.
[4] S. Rippa, “Long and thin triangles can be good for linear interpola-
tion”, Siam J. Numer. Anal., vol. 29, no 1, 1992, pp. 257–270.
[5] M. Berzins, “Mesh Quality : a Function of Geometry, Error Estimates
or Both ?”, Eng. with Comp., vol. 15, 1999, pp. 236–247.
[6] X. Sheng and B.E. Hirsch, “Triangulation of trimmed surfaces in
parametric space”, Comp. Aid. Des., vol. 24, no 8, 1992, pp. 437–
444.
[7] M.V. Anglada, N.P. Garcia, and P.B. Crosa, “Directional adaptive
surface triangulation”, Comp. Aid. Des., vol. 16, 1999, pp. 107–126.
[8] H. Borouchaki, P. Laug, and P.L. George, “Parametric Surface
Meshing Using a Combined Advancing-Front Generalized-Delaunay
Approach”, Int. Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
vol. 49, 2000, pp. 233–259.
[9] R. Verf¨urth, A Review of A Posteriori Error Estimation and Adaptive
Mesh-Reﬁnement Techniques, Wiley & Teubner, 1996.
[10] E.J. Nadler, “Piecewise linear best l2 approximation on triangles,
Approximation Theory V :” Proc. Fifth Inter. Symposium on Approx.
Theory, Academic Press, New York, 1986, pp. 499–502.
[11] M. Berzins, “Solution-based Mesh Quality for Triangular and Tetra-
hedral Meshes”, Proc. 6th International Meshing Roundtable, Sandia
Lab., 1997, pp. 427–436.
[12] M. Zlamal, “On the ﬁnite element method”, Numer. Math., vol. 12,
pp. 394–409, 1968.
[13] M. Krizek, “On the maximum angle condition for linear tetrahedral
elements”, Siam J. Numer. Anal., vol. 29, no 2, 1992, pp. 513–520.
[14] R.E. Bank and R.K. Smith, “Mesh smoothing using a posteriori error
estimates”, Siam J. Numer. Anal., vol. 34, no 3, 1997, pp. 979–997.
[15] C. Manzi, F. Rapetti, and L. Formaggia, “Function approximation on
triangular grids : some numerical results using adaptive techniques”,
Appl. Numer. Math., vol. 32, no 4, 2000, pp. 389–399.
[16] P.J. Frey and H. Borouchaki, “Surface meshing using a geometric
error estimate”, Int. Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
vol. 58, 2003, pp. 227–245.
[17] P. Laug and H. Borouchaki, “Interpolating and Meshing 3-D Surface
Grids”, Int. Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, vol. 58,
2003, pp. 209–225.
[18] P. Laug and H. Borouchaki, The BL2D Mesh Generator – Beginner’s
Guide, User’s and Programmer’s Manual, INRIA Technical Report
RT-0194, July 1996.
85
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

Figure 2.
Adapted mesh corresponding to the interpolation error ε = 0.1.
Figure 3.
Enlargement of a selected region.
86
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

