(Un)Like Schumann: Applying Cope’s Music Signature Pattern Matching Algorithms
to Tchaikovsky’s Children’s Album
Evgeny Pyshkin
The University of Aizu
Aizu-Wakamatsu, 965-8580
Japan
email: pyshe@u-aizu.ac.jp
Andrei Kuznetsov
JetBrains
1017 ZM Amsterdam
Netherlands
email: andrei.kuznetsov@jetbrains.com
Andrey Matveets
Peter the Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University
St. Petersburg, 195251
Russia
email: matveets.av@gmail.com
Abstract—This paper describes a preliminary study looking
into applying pattern matching algorithms working with music
signatures to the “Children’s Album” by Pyotr Tchaikovsky.
Though music signatures introduced by Cope are usually used for
author identification and computer music generation, we make an
effort to use them for analysis of origins and links of the existing
compositions. We take Tchaikovsky’s “Children’s Album” as an
interesting case, where we can try to apply the computational
models to resolving the questions, which are usually mostly
in scope of musicology studies. Specifically, our experiments
demonstrate that one can find only a few Schumann signatures in
the pieces from the “Children’s Album”, in contradiction to the
Tchaikovsky’s note in the published version claiming the imitation
of Schumann’s approach. Thus, our experimental results can
provide additional important insights for musicologists searching
to unravel the possible reasons of significant transformations that
occurred on the way from the accurately organized manuscript
to the first published edition. The previous studies addressing
this issue are mostly in the scope of music theory, with almost
no involvement of computational approaches to music analysis.
Techniques based on formal mathematical methods and computer
technology, though being unable to completely resolve these
issues, bring new data to the discourse of musicology and art.
Keywords–Musicology; music information retrieval; human-
centric computing; music similarity; pattern matching; music
signature; music modeling.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In [1], in the scope of a conceptualization of the analysis
of Pyotr Tchaikovsky’s “Children’s Album” (Op. 39) with the
use of computational models, an approach based on David
Cope’s signatures [2][3] is sketched as a promising way to
help musicologists in resolving a number of riddles posed by
Tchaikovsky in his famous cycle of 24 piano pieces thought to
be for children. The analysis of possible sources, metaphors,
and renditions of this masterpiece originally published as far
as in 1878 by Yurgenson [4] still remains a constant topic
of interest for researchers [5][6]. While admitting Schumann’s
influence on Tchaikovsky (along with other precursors, such as
Bach, Mozart, Beethoven, Chopin, or Berlioz), there is still a
challenging question on whether we have to completely accept
the author’s claim that the compositions from the “Children’s
Album” are a form of imitation of Schumann’s pieces for
the young [7], even with respect to the subtitle appeared in
the first published edition by Yurgenson: “Simple pieces for
children (imitating Schumann)” (Figure 1(a)). Interestingly,
such a subtitle is missing in the manuscript [8], though the
latter is a fascinating example of the accurately presented and
organized hand-written work (Figure 1(b)).
Unlike Tchaikovsky, from the outset Schumann had not
intended for his collection of compositions for children to be
a seamless large work, finally organized as Op. 68. Indeed, he
initially composed 10 pieces considered as nice exercises for
his own children, and even though he announced its comple-
tion, more pieces appeared later, in 1848. By composing the
exercises which would be nicer than most things that children
normally needed to play during their piano studies, Schumann
“not only revolutionized attitudes concerning music education,
but also inaugurated an entirely new genre of piano literature
– programmatic music written explicitly for children” [9]. The
latter facts do not contradict the idea that Tchaikovsky could
still have wished to imitate Schumann’s approach, though
musicological analysis of his Op. 39 usually debates this
hypothesis much.
Figure 1. Cover of the Yurgenson’s edition and a fragment from
Tchaikovsky’s manuscript.
The remaining text is organized as follows. Section II
provides an introduction to the concept of signatures according
to Cope. In Section III, we describe a case study on signature
elicitation for Tchaikovsky’s “Children’s Album”. To conclude,
we summarize the most important insights on how the formal
approach we used can be beneficial for musicology experts. We
also sketch necessary extensions that can improve the accuracy
and veracity of the applied computational models.
II.
MUSIC SIGNATURES BY COPE
Signatures form one of the core elements of music rep-
resentation and automatic generation system developed by
Cope [2][3], which uses an implementation of augmented
transition network, a finite-state automaton with recursive suc-
cession rules between music sub-phrases allowing for logical
syntax substitutions [10].
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Cope defined a signature as a set of contiguous intervals
found in more than one work by the same composer [11].
Typically, a signature is composed of two to nine notes (or
more, if combined with harmonies). The idea of signature is
to represent a composition-independent pattern, which does
not sound as an excerpt from a particular work, but rather
represents a characteristic description of one of composer’s
style elements.
Figure 2. Possible signature candidates from Chopin’s compositions.
Signatures portray patterns combining melody, harmony
and rhythm information, with possible transformations of
interval, pitch, rhythm and voice exchange. Even transformed,
the patterns can still be recognised by ear. Figure 2 shows two
examples of possible pattern candidates coloured red and blue
along with their transformations in the works of Chopin.
As we can see from the examples in Figure 2, many signif-
icant patterns need to be detected approximately, not exactly.
Cope compares the pattern matching fine-tuning process to the
sieving the candidates through a mesh. The sieving process
controls the granularity of allowed pattern transformations
enabling inexact pattern matching. Cope introduced a number
of parameters – controllers. The controllers help to establish
pattern matching thresholds to work with variances and be able
to find signatures, which are not identical, but are musically
comparable. For example, if we set the maximum number of
notes in the target pattern too small, the discovered patterns
might be too short to be sufficiently reflective (though, some
harmonic cadence signatures can be short enough). If we set
the value of the same parameter too high, the resultant output
can be too specific to a particular composition, and again,
unreflective of a composer’s style in general. To illustrate the
concept, there is a list of some examples of controllers as
defined by Cope [12]:
•
allowance – defines the possible deviation of the
melody in half steps (see example with the red patterns
in Figure 3).
•
contour – defines how much the general contour of
two fragments conforms to each other (see the cases
(b),(c) in Figure 4).
•
inversion – looks for patterns with inverted se-
quences of notes (or intervals).
•
interpolation – allows for intervening notes (see
the cases (a),(b) in Figure 2).
•
pattern-size – defines the size of pattern selected
for comparison.
•
rhythm – determines whether the patterns match
because of rhythmic match only (like in many genre
pieces, such as dances, where the rhythm is a signifi-
cant component of the style).
Reusing a signature of one composer in the work of another
author (often with recombination and variations) could create
allusions to appear as a more sophisticated construction rather
than straightforward borrowing of melodies or motifs.
In Figure 3, we can see the analysis demonstrating an
exact pattern reuse (shown in blue), as well as possible inexact
variation (shown in red). In the latter case, typical pattern
with a sub-melody often appearing in the second voice of
Chopin’s piano composition, also used by Adam with a slightly
transformed sub-melody (shown using a dashed line).
Figure 3. Similar patterns in the works of Chopin and Adam.
Figure 4 illustrates pattern elicitation in Chopin’s Waltz
in C Sharp Minor (b), which can be inexactly matched to
the pattern found in Griboyedov’s Waltz in E Minor (a).
The latter work contains the pattern (d) matching (with slight
transformations) the fragment from the part 2 of Mozart’s
piano concerto No. 23.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Figure 4. Examples of inexact pattern matching in the works of Mozart,
Griboyedov, and Chopin.
Pattern matching methods based on signature elicitation
can be applied to authorship identification, along with other
known approaches, such as analysis and modeling of mu-
sic structure using N-grams [13][14], Markov chain mod-
els [15][16], deep neural networks [17][18], analysis of high-
level music features like counterpoint structures [19], gram-
matical inference [20], and cortical algorithms [21]. However,
signatures are not only helpful for authorship attribution, but
also for in-depth analysis of music compositions to discover
the characteristics of style, their genesis, and their develop-
ment. The links between the authors and the periods may also
be identified, which will be of great interest for musicologists.
III.
“CHILDREN’S ALBUM” AS A TEST BED FOR
SIGNATURE ELICITATION ALGORITHM
In this section, we describe a case study on applying the
signature elicitation software to obtain new data showing the
links between the compositions from “Children’s Album” and
the works of other composers that influenced the style of
Tchaikovsky.
A. Software
The signature discovery process was organized using the
software we developed [22] based on Cope’s algorithms
adapted to the present-day standard music analysis tools avail-
able in numerous Python libraries. Notably, in order to parse
and analyze input files in different formats (like MIDI and
KERN) we are using Music21 [23] – an open source library
for computer-aided musicology created and supported by the
the Music and Theater Arts Section, MIT.
The software we developed accepts pairs of (file,author),
where the file contains notated music in symbolic formats like
MIDI [24] or KERN [25]. Since the source file usually contains
polyphonic music, the preparation step is to extract the melody
(we use Skyline[26]-like algorithm).
The next stages of the workflow are as follows:
1)
In each single composition, find the patterns appear-
ing 5 to 12 times. These patterns are considered as
signature candidates.
2)
Collect the candidates across the different available
works of the given composer.
3)
From the complete list of collected patterns, eliminate
the patterns that do not appear often enough (i. e., in
less than 10% of all the analyzed works of the same
composer).
4)
Compare the found patterns against the patterns of
different composers and eliminate the patterns, which
are frequently used by other composers, as such
patterns that appear to characterize the epoch rather
than a particular composer’s style.
As a result of the above-described procedure, there is a
database of signatures considered to uniquely characterize each
single composer (at least, within the context of the given
dataset), along with additional metadata, such as the location
of signatures in the original works.
We used our software in the experiments with the composer
identification task (to be discussed in the separate publica-
tion), and found that the signatures can be used to reliably
identify composers in many cases. In terms of success rate,
the achieved results are comparable to some well-known ap-
proaches such as Markov chains (giving a rate of 75%), but not
so fine-grained compared to the best approaches demonstrating
up to 90% success rate.
As a side result of these experiments, we built a database
containing the characteristic signatures of Bach, Beethoven,
Haydn, Mozart, Vivaldi, and others, extracted from a dataset
containing over 100 works of each author.
B. Data
With respect to the goals of this case study, our training
set was constructed using 90 compositions by Tchaikovsky,
and 61 works by Schumann (including those from the Album
for the Youth, Op. 68). Thus, we used an input dataset of 151
works in total, to extract signatures of both composers, and
extend the collection of found signatures with the signatures
of other composers, which became available due to the pro-
cess of evaluating our software for signature based composer
identification. Adding the signatures of other composers can
be helpful in filtering the output so as to discard patterns that
may be attributes of period or genre rather than of particular
composers.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Our target testing set included all the 24 piano pieces from
Tchaikovsky’s “Children’s Album”.
C. Experiment at a Glance
For this experiment, we used a database of more than
26485 signatures in total (including variations). The database
was filtered by eliminating 11745 duplicates that can be
found in the works of different composers. The resulting log
is available at https://github.com/andrei-kuznetsov/signatures/
files/9377147/signatures-wo-dupplicates.txt.
TABLE I. SIGNATURES FOUND IN TCHAIKOVSKY’S “CHILDREN’S
ALBUM”
Composer
Acronym
Signatures (including variations)
Compositions
Tchaikovsky
TCH
19
13
Haydn
HAY
20
8
Beethoven
BEE
9
8
Mozart
MOZ
8
7
Vivaldi
VIV
13
5
Bach
BAC
1
1
Schumann
SCH
5
3
TABLE II. SIGNATURE DISTRIBUTION
No.
TCH
HAY
BEE
MOZ
VIV
BAC
SCH
Total
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
3
3
1
2
3
4
1
1
2
5
0
6
1
1
1
3
7
1
1
8
1
1
9
1
3
1
2
2
9
10
1
1
11
1
1
1
3
12
1
1
2
13
1
1
14
4
1
5
15
1
1
2
16
1
1
17
3
2
5
18
9
1
1
3
14
19
3
3
20
0
21
2
2
22
1
6
2
9
23
1
1
24
3
3
All
19
20
9
8
13
1
5
75
All∗
18
11
8
7
4
1
3
52
∗ excluding No. 18 and No. 22, where disproportionately big number of
signatures of one composer is found compared to others
Table I lists the cumulative results of signature elicitation
process. For each composer, we show the total number of
signatures found and the number of compositions in which the
signatures were discovered. Here and after we use the compo-
sition numbering according to Tchaikovsky’s manuscript [8].
Table II shows the distribution of signatures among all the
compositions.
Based on the analysis of All row from Table II, we
could suggest that the results of automatic signature elicitation
process need to be corrected with further elimination of some
repeated signatures based on manual expertise of music files
with marked up signatures (e.g., using MuseScore software).
For example, in the compositions No. 18 “Neapolitan Song”
and No. 22 “Lark’s Song”, there is a definitive disproportion
between the signatures of one composer against the signatures
of others. It can be explained by the fact that in these
compositions notably we can find a lot of small repetitive (but
not always completely equal) patterns (as shown in Figure 5)
that could lead to signature over-count.
Figure 5. Repeating patterns in No. 22 “Lark’s Song”.
D. Preliminary Analysis
Schumann signature variations are only found in 3 com-
positions: No. 3 “Mama” (2 cases), No. 12 “Russian song”
(quite surprisingly perhaps), and No. 22 “Lark’s Song” (2
cases). We can also see that in all these cases the characteristic
signatures of Schumann appear along with other signatures,
particularly, in No.22, when, in addition to those of Schumann,
we discovered 7 signatures of other composers.
From the experiments with the signature database, we
learned that the recognition rate for particular composers is
unstable and ranges between around 50% to 80% . Even
if we acknowledge that some unique Schumann signatures
were missed due to the imperfectness of automatic signature
elicitation process, we can still argue that compared to other
discovered signatures, there is a very low number of Schu-
mann’s cases. Though, in concordance with Cope’s definition,
an imitation of style does not assume appearance of signatures
of the imitated composers, their very rare occurrences provide
a rationale for disputing the possibility for deliberate imitation
of Schumann’s style by Tchaikovsky.
IV.
DISCUSSION
The question of attributing Tchaikovsky’s masterpiece as
an imitation of Schumann is important as a part of the broader
challenge: to approach possible explanations on why we find
so many disruptive transformations in the first published
edition compared to the so accurately prepared manuscript.
Figure 6 illustrates the transformations related to the order of
compositions. Since if we can provide a good rationale for
understating the author’s claim on imitation, we can also call
into question the meaningfulness (or rather meaninglessness)
of those transformations destroying the structure of the album
as an indissociable whole, and deforming the micro-cycles and
internal links existing in the manuscripts [27][28].
So far, the studies of the above-mentioned questions mostly
remained in scope of music and art theory, with almost no
involvement of computational approaches to music analysis.
Techniques incorporating the formal mathematical methods
and computational approaches could not (fortunately) com-
pletely resolve these questions ex cathedra; however, they
could produce a number of important additional insights to the
problems usually addressed exclusively from the musicology
and human science positions.
As mentioned earlier [1], one could hardly accept an
idea that the alteration of numbers, which led to destruction
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Figure 6. Order of compositions and micro-cycles in “Children’s Album”.
of junctions between the pieces existing in the manuscript,
was a publisher’s mistake. Indeed, Tchaikovsky approved and
signed that version. Nekhaeva suggested that these serious
transformations (partially shown in Figure 6) can be interpreted
as a “gesture of the composer, a natural desire to overcome the
temporary barrier and directly appeal to future generations of
musicians” [6]. This opinion supports a hypothesis claiming
that Tchaikovsky probably preferred to simplify the language
and to decrease the emotional tension of the original version,
and, in so doing, to hide some metaphors, to make them
less explicitly exposed. The author’s explicit claim on imi-
tating Schumann’s approach could be understood being in line
with the above mentioned simplifications and transformations.
Therefore, by raising the arguable doubts on this declared
imitation, we can support the analysis of appropriateness of
the discussed transformations as well, and, actually, vice versa.
V.
CONCLUSION
The novel results we obtained from our preliminary exper-
iments are very interesting, though not sufficient, and need to
be reexamined after extending the dataset with respect to the
following important types of input:
•
Compositions with expected high degree of style
similarity, which were attributed by their authors as
imitations; and
•
Characteristic compositions (e.g., by Tchaikovsky),
where style similarity was reported by musicology
experts.
The studies [29][30] can provide information for selection
of relevant referential datasets necessary to improve the accu-
racy of the signature based music pattern recognition process.
Figure 7. Sample spectrogram of “A New Doll” on a logarithmic scale (Op.
39, orig. No. 6) created using Spectrum Analyzer [31].
It is worth noting that the discussed signature elicita-
tion models do not oppose an idea to use machine learning
approaches to music style identification. On the one hand,
we already mentioned a number of deep learning methods
suggested by different researchers for author identification and
style recognition. These models often work with the input
represented in the form of spectrograms (similar to one shown
in Figure 7).
Though there are many challenges in constructing an ex-
plainable machine learning algorithm producing the results and
making conclusions that can be understood by musicologists,
the possibility to apply such approaches to our problem need to
be investigated in more depth. On the other hand, the process of
signature discovery itself can be implemented using machine
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

learning (e.g., CNN as the most common possible solution).
Such an implementation surely would be an interesting option
for further explorations. However, though not novel, the semi-
automated approach based on Cope models, can still be
relevant to our study for a number of important reasons:
1)
Rather then asking a question of author or style attri-
bution, we are searching for the structural elements
that can be understood by music experts and enhance
their knowledge on the genesis and development of
music style in the work of a particular composer (e.g.,
Tchaikovsky).
2)
With respect to the possibility to develop or use
machine learning algorithms (including those applied
to the process of signature elicitation), one needs to
have ground truth information that, as we believe, can
be delivered based on “adjustable machine-oriented
models”, such as those described by Cope.
3)
In contrast to signatures defined using music nota-
tions (e.g., music scores) and representations (e.g.,
MIDI), and, therefore, can be directly analyzed and
perceived by music experts, machine learning fea-
tures, coefficients, and probability distributions are
definitely less favorable to humans.
We admit that playing with pattern matching settings
and further adjustments of the signature elicitation algorithms
might affect the specific signature scores we obtain from these
algorithms. However, our preliminary experiments demonstrate
that the relative distribution of signatures between different
composers does not fluctuate too heavily upon the changes
in pattern matching controlling parameters; thus, making our
qualitative judgements well-reasoned, though not conclusive.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Many thanks to Natalia Bogach and John Blake for their
very helpful suggestions during our discussions of this project.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Pyshkin, “Towards demystifying transformations of Tchaikovsky’s
children’s album with support of computational models: Problem con-
ceptualization,” in Proceedings of the 15th International Conference
on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
(ADVCOMP 2021).
IARIA, 2021, pp. 6–10.
[2]
D. Cope, “Experiments in musical intelligence (EMI): Non-linear
linguistic-based composition,” Journal of New Music Research, vol. 18,
no. 1-2, 1989, pp. 117–139.
[3]
——, Computer models of musical creativity.
MIT Press Cambridge,
2005.
[4]
P. Tchaikovsky, Children’s Album. Op 39.
Yurgenson, 1878.
[5]
A. Lazanchina, “Fenomen detstva v fortepiannykh tsiklakh R. Shumana
i P. Tchaikovskogo (The phenomenon of childhood in piano cycles
by R. Schumann and P. Tchaikovsky),” in Transactions of Russian
Academy of Science Samara Research Center.
RAS, 2015, pp. 1224–
1227, (In Russian).
[6]
I. Nekhaeva, “The modern measurement of Tchaikovsky (Definition
experience of the “modernity” concept on example of the “Children’s
Album” by PI Tchaikovsky),” in Tomsk State University Journal of
Cultural Studies and Art History.
Tomsk State University, 2018,
vol. 30, pp. 146–147, retrieved: Aug, 2022. [Online]. Available:
http://case.asu.ru/files/form 312-31545.pdf#page=146
[7]
R. Schumann, 43 Piano Pieces for the Youth. Op 68 (Orig. Title in
German: 43 Clavierst¨ucke f¨ur die Jugend).
Schuberth and Co., 1848.
[8]
“Tchaikovsky: Otkrytyi mir. Detskiy albom (Tchaikovsky: Open
world. Children’s Album,” 2015, retrieved: Aug, 2022 (In Russian).
[Online]. Available: https://www.culture.ru/catalog/tchaikovsky/ru/item/
archiv/detskiy-albom-24-legkih-pesy
[9]
L. Deahl, “Robert schumann’s” album for the young” and the com-
ing of age of nineteenth-century piano pedagogy,” in College Music
Symposium, vol. 41.
JSTOR, 2001, pp. 25–42.
[10]
P. da Silva, David Cope and Experiments in Musical Intelligence.
Spectrum Press, 2003.
[11]
D. Cope, Computers and musical style.
Oxford University Press
Oxford, 1991, vol. 6.
[12]
——, Experiments in Musical Intelligence, 2nd Ed.
A–R Editions,
2014.
[13]
J. Wołkowicz, Z. Kulka, and V. Keˇselj, “N-gram-based approach to
composer recognition,” Archives of Acoustics, vol. 33, no. 1, 2008, pp.
43–55.
[14]
M. Hontanilla, C. P´erez-Sancho, and J. M. Inesta, “Modeling musical
style with language models for composer recognition,” in Iberian
conference on pattern recognition and image analysis.
Springer, 2013,
pp. 740–748.
[15]
Y.-W. Liu and E. Selfridge-Field, “Modeling music as markov
chains:
Composer
identification,”
2002,
retrieved:
Aug,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi=10.1.1.460.8307&rep=rep1&type=pdf
[16]
M. A. Kaliakatsos-Papakostas, M. G. Epitropakis, and M. N. Vrahatis,
“Weighted markov chain model for musical composer identification,” in
European conference on the applications of evolutionary computation.
Springer, 2011, pp. 334–343.
[17]
G. Buzzanca, “A supervised learning approach to musical style recog-
nition,” in Music and artificial intelligence. Additional proceedings of
the second international conference, ICMAI, vol. 2002, 2002, p. 167.
[18]
Z. Hu, K. Fu, and C. Zhang, “Audio classical composer identification
by deep neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3195, 2013.
[19]
L. Mearns, D. Tidhar, and S. Dixon, “Characterisation of composer style
using high-level musical features,” in Proceedings of 3rd international
workshop on Machine learning and music, 2010, pp. 37–40.
[20]
J. Geertzen and M. van Zaanen, Composer classification using gram-
matical inference.
Narcis, 2008.
[21]
N. Hajj, M. Filo, and M. Awad, “Automated composer recognition for
multi-voice piano compositions using rhythmic features, n-grams and
modified cortical algorithms,” Complex & Intelligent Systems, vol. 4,
no. 1, 2018, pp. 55–65.
[22]
“Phyton implementation of music signature search algorithm based
on david cope’s approach,” retrieved: Aug, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/Nekobitlz/signatures
[23]
“Music21: A toolkit for computer-aided musicology,” retrieved: Jul,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://web.mit.edu/music21/
[24]
G. Loy, “Musicians make a standard: the midi phenomenon,” Computer
Music Journal, vol. 9, no. 4, 1985, pp. 8–26.
[25]
C. S. Sapp, “Online database of scores in the humdrum file format.” in
ISMIR, 2005, pp. 664–665.
[26]
A. Uitdenbogerd and J. Zobel, “Melodic matching techniques for large
music databases,” 01 1999, pp. 57–66.
[27]
A. Kandinskiy-Rybnikov and M. Mesropova, “Vremena goda i Det-
skiy albom Tchaikovskogo: Tsyklichnost i problemy ispolneniya
(Tchaikovsky’s The Seasons and Children’s Album: Cyclicity and
performing problems),” in Tchaikovsky: Voprosy istorii, teorii i ispol-
nitelstva (Tchaikovsky. Questions on history, theory, and performing).
Moscow Conservatory, 1990, pp. 120–137, (In Russian).
[28]
——, “O ne opublikovannoy P.I. Tchaikovskim pervoy redaktsii “Det-
skogo alboma” (On an unpublished first edition of the “Children’s
album” by P.I. Tchaikovsky),” in Voprosy muzykalnoy pedagogiki
(Issues of Musical Pedagogy).
Muzyka, 1997, pp. 138–161, (In
Russian).
[29]
P. Georges, “Western classical music development: a statistical analysis
of composers similarity, differentiation and evolution,” Scientometrics,
vol. 112, no. 1, 2017, pp. 21–53.
[30]
P. Georges and N. Nguyen, “Visualizing music similarity: clustering
and mapping 500 classical music composers,” Scientometrics, vol. 120,
no. 3, 2019, pp. 975–1003.
[31]
“Spectrum
analyzer,”
retrieved:
Aug,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://academo.org/demos/spectrum-analyzer/
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

