Detecting Suicide Risk Through Twitter 
Javier Fabra 
Aragón Institute of Engineering 
Research (I3A) 
Department of Computer Science and 
Systems Engineering 
Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain 
email: jfabra@unizar.es 
 
Ana B. Martínez-Martínez 
IIS Aragón 
Faculty of Health Sciences 
Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain 
email: amarmar@unizar.es 
 
 
Yolanda López-Del-Hoyo, María 
C. Pérez-Yus, Bárbara Oliván-
Blázquez 
IIS Aragón 
Department of Psychology and 
Sociology 
Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain 
emails: 
{yolandal, mcperezy, bolivan}@unizar.es 
Abstract— Mental illness is one of the main causes of illness 
worldwide. Currently, it is estimated that about 300 million 
people suffer from depression according to the World Health 
Organization (WHO). In this context, this work deals with the 
construction of a platform that allows to detect the risk of 
suicide using data from Twitter. This platform combines 
external emotional processing systems, clustering techniques 
and a system based on machine learning that facilitate the 
automatic classification of the information obtained. The entire 
process is articulated around a multidisciplinary team of 
professionals in Health Sciences and Information Technology, 
generating as a result a useful prototype for suicide prevention 
in the population. 
Keywords-mental 
health; 
suicide; 
prevention; 
Twitter; 
clustering; automatic classification. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mental illness is one of the main causes of illness 
worldwide. Currently, it is estimated that about 300 million 
people suffer from depression according to the World Health 
Organization (WHO). However, the provision of services for 
the identification, support and treatment of this type of 
mental illness globally is considered insufficient [1]. 
Although 87% of the governments of the different countries 
offer some type of basic care service for mental health 
problems, 30% of them do not have specific programs or 
budgets for mental health [1]. Furthermore, there are no 
definitive tests for the reliable diagnosis of most mental 
illnesses. The typical diagnosis is based on the patient's self-
reported experiences, behaviors reported by family and 
friends, and the clinical examination of their mental state. 
The 
data 
traditionally 
obtained 
through 
survey 
methodology are not a real-time reflection of the true state of 
mental and emotional health of individuals, which does not 
allow to offer a reliable estimate of the population's mental 
health. In Spain, suicide is the main cause of unnatural death, 
doubling the number of deaths in traffic accidents. The 
impact of suicide on families is devastating, when many of 
the deaths caused by suicide could be prevented [2]. 
Understanding how people communicate their suicidal 
tendencies is a cornerstone to preventing such deaths [3]. 
 
Social network platforms, such as Twitter, Instagram or 
Facebook are a source of faithful and real-time data on the 
emotional state of people [4]. In this work, we focus 
specifically on suicide-related aspects and propose the 
development of a platform capable of detecting and 
analyzing the emotional states of people globally and 
individually from the information available on social 
networks, specifically Twitter. The objective is twofold: on 
the one hand, to understand efficiently demand in the places 
and times that it occurs; on the other, to develop tools for 
suicide detection and prevention. In this first approach, we 
will focus on Tweets written in Spanish, although the 
methodology is applicable in other languages. 
As the literature review points out, Twitter is one of the 
most widely used social media platforms worldwide, and has 
been the subject of numerous previous studies. Geographic, 
daily, weekly, and seasonal patterns of positive and negative 
affect have been observed in some of these studies [5][6]. 
The measurement of happiness levels in the populations of 
certain countries has also been analyzed [7]. Happiness was 
found to correlate with demographic and general well-being 
characteristics. The potential of Twitter to detect depression 
has also been studied [4]. The greater detection of emotional 
patterns specifically related to mental health variables is of 
special interest for global health, by helping to understand 
the places and moments of greatest demand (unmet) and the 
effective provision of resources that respond to these needs 
[8][9]. 
Previous studies have collected and classified the Tweets 
related to suicide [6]-[11]. However, these databases are still 
insufficient and the development of models for automatic 
detection is still rather immature. Although Twitter may 
provide an unprecedented opportunity to identify those at 
risk of suicide [10], as well as an intervention mechanism for 
both at the individual and community level, valid, reliable 
and acceptable methods for online detection have not been 
developed yet [12]. The best modus operandi for suicide 
prevention through social media remains to be clarified, so 
this work points to address open and existing problems in 
this area. 
The potential of social media as data sources for 
improving people's health and quality of life is a relatively 
new phenomenon that society is beginning to value and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-812-9
ADVCOMP 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

understand. This work represents a step within the enormous 
range of possibilities that the use of social media opens in the 
area of health. Accessing data and managing the large 
amount of information that can be collected (millions of 
daily entries) is a complex task that requires the integration 
of different technologies in order to integrate the various 
sources of information with a data processing system that 
allows us to obtain an adequate analysis of the data collected. 
In this work, a deployment based on computer 
technologies for Tweet collection and analysis, as well as a 
system based on machine learning techniques that facilitate 
the automatic classification of the information obtained are 
depicted. This work deals with a subject and a set of 
technologies that have been previously considered by other 
researchers [13]-[16]. However, it represents a full 
framework, engineered and implemented using various 
technologies, and structured around a multidisciplinary team 
of professionals in Health Sciences and professionals in 
Information Technology. As a result, a useful prototype for 
suicide prevention and detection of real emotional states in 
the population has been developed. 
The techniques developed in this work are easily 
adaptable to other contexts and studies in mental health and 
even in other sectors and institutions. The use of a 
technological framework based on languages and tools for 
the processing of information flows (streams) in real time 
facilitates the reuse of the main concepts and ideas 
underlying this work in other areas. 
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II 
depicts the methodology and steps carried out and the 
architecture overview of our proposal. Section III presents 
implementation details, as well as the results from the 
experimentation conducted. Finally, Section IV concludes 
the paper and presents some related lines that currently are 
being addressed.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY AND ARCHITECTURE 
Figure 1 presents the methodology of the solution that we 
propose, and that corresponds to the workflow to be carried 
out. 
The first step is to obtain the Twitter entries from some 
keywords related to suicide. To identify potentially 
emotional tweets, a large vocabulary of emotional terms has 
been compiled from different sources, including The Spanish 
adaptation of Affective Norms for English words (ANEW) 
and the Spanish dictionary of the Linguistic Inquiry and 
Word Count (LIWC) [17][18]. ANEW provides a set of 
emotional normative scales for a set of words. Furthermore, 
LIWC is an analysis software that calculates the degree to 
which people use different categories of words across a wide 
spectrum of texts. Validation studies reveal that LIWC 
satisfactorily assesses positive and negative emotions. 
One of the hypotheses of our proposal is that adding 
properties to the text contained in the Tweet facilitates and 
improves the identification and classification of suicide risk 
groups. Therefore, a series of properties associated with the 
text are obtained and added below, which are based both on 
external natural language processing systems and platforms 
and on internal algorithms that obtain the information 
through a text evaluation platform by part of selected 
reviewers in the area of Health Sciences and Medicine. The 
emotional vocabulary has been organized by combining the 
hierarchy of emotions by W. G. Parrott [28] and the tree  
of emotions by Shaver et al. [29]. Each emotional word has 
been classified into six categories of primary emotions of 
love, joy, surprise, anger, sadness and fear, with 25 
subgroups of secondary emotions. This task has been carried 
out by integrating the execution of the Indico affective and 
emotional text processing tool [19]. 
 
Figure 1.  Methodology for early detection and prevention of suicide risk in Twitter. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-812-9
ADVCOMP 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Once the tweets with the properties have been obtained 
and annotated using Indico, a clustering is carried out to 
group the rich tweets. Clustering aims to generate data 
groups with similar characteristics. In our case, we want to 
identify suicide risk groups. The selected method for 
clustering is k-means [20]. This method is based on 
partitioning the data into k well-defined groups. To select 
this k value, two methods that offer good results have been 
used: the elbow method [21] and the cross validation [22]. 
The clusters that are obtained must be analyzed to know 
the characteristics of each one. This step must be carried out 
by a group of expert reviewers on the subject to make an 
evaluation of the clusters and to know the quality of the 
groups. The objective of this analysis is to validate that the 
clusters obtained correspond to suicide risk groups. At this 
stage, human coding is used to determine the degree of 
relationship of the classified Tweets, according to the 
judgment of the coding team made up of researchers from 
mental health and medicine. These researchers are 
specialized in suicide prevention and have training in 
detecting suicide risk. 
Finally, in the last step an automatic classifier fed with 
the clusters and Tweets is created. This classifier is capable 
of receiving new Tweets and classifying them into one of the 
groups in order to identify whether there is a risk of suicide 
or not. In this work, the use of a Long Short-Term Memory 
(LSTM) neural network has been chosen. The result of this 
process is a tool that is capable of predicting whether a 
Tweet is in the suicide risk group or not. Since neural 
networks improve as they feed, the tool will always be in 
constant advance. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS 
In this section, we will detail the implementation and 
experimentation that have been carried out in a first pilot 
study to validate the approach presented in this work. 
A. Obtaining and adding properties 
To obtain Tweets that contain the designed vocabulary of 
emotional-type words described in Section II, the Amazon 
Web Service infrastructure has been used. Multiple instances 
of Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) [23] have been used to 
receive the data stream through an application implemented 
with NodeJS and using the Twitter API [24]. The summary 
data has been stored in MongoDB for access from the web 
and API. As a result, 3,051 context-sensitive Tweets have 
been extracted. The Tweets with emotional information have 
been then annotated using the Indico API, providing more 
information about the characteristics of the text. 
 Let us to briefly describe the properties that have been 
extracted: 
• 
Positivity: value that represents the probability that 
the Tweet is positive or negative, if the value is 
greater than or equal to 0.6 the text has a positive 
feeling and if it is less than 0.6 the feeling is 
negative. 
• 
Engagement: probability that the text will be 
bookmarked or retweeted by other people. 
• 
Emotional content: they represent five values to 
determine the emotions that the author has 
expressed in the Tweet. The five emotions that are 
obtained as a result are: anger, joy, fear, sadness 
and surprise. 
• 
Personality: set of four values to define the author's 
personality traits. The four personalities are: 
extroversion, 
sincerity, 
sympathy 
and 
meticulousness. 
• 
People: there are sixteen values that represent the 
probability that the author adjusts to one of them. 
People are those described by Myers Briggs [25]. 
B. Clustering and expert’s evaluation 
Knime [26] has been used to implement clustering, 
although there are other equally valid alternatives (R or 
Weka, among others). Knime is a platform for data analysis 
that also integrates components for machine learning and 
data mining. Developed on the Eclipse platform and 
programmed, mostly in Java, it has a very comfortable 
interface that allows you to see the work done at all times. 
This is possible thanks to the workflows. A workflow is a 
graphical representation in which nodes and meta-nodes, a 
set of encapsulated nodes, are added to read data, do 
operations with them, or generate output data. 
The work with Knime is mostly graphic, but it also 
allows a high degree of configuration, addition of external 
code and integration with other tools, making it the most 
suitable candidate to carry out the clustering phase in this 
project. 
The corresponding workflows have been implemented to 
both calculate the optimal k and to cluster using the k-means 
method. As a result of the execution of the workflows, a 
value of k = 4 was obtained as optimal. 
Taking this value as optimal-k, the clusters were 
obtained. The results of the clustering process with k-means 
for k = 4 show a well differentiated distribution in the input 
collection. Table I shows some data about the Tweets that 
correspond to each of the clusters (C0 to C3), as well as the 
positivity and the five emotions detected from the contextual 
information of the Tweet. 
TABLE I.  
CLUSTERS OBTAINED WITH K=4 
 
 
As it is shown, cluster 0 groups 21% of the Tweets of the 
input collection (3051 Tweets), cluster 1 (C1) 29%, cluster 2 
20% and cluster 3 30%. Tweets classified in both clusters 0 
and 1 show a positivity above the mean (0.56), with values 
of 121% and 143% with respect to the mean. Clusters 2 and 
3, however, group negative Tweets (0.29 and 0.42, 
respectively).  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-812-9
ADVCOMP 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

The analysis of the emotions contained in the context of 
the Tweets allows us to detail the identified clusters. Tweets 
in cluster 0 show a low level of anger compared to the other 
clusters (65% of the mean, 0.22, compared to 107%, 113% 
and 110% with respect to the mean in the other clusters). The 
same occurs with joy, where both cluster 0 and cluster 1 
stand out (172% and 125% respectively compared to the 
mean, 0.18, and 58% and 51% of clusters 2 and 3, 
respectively). The fear analysis shows that the Tweets 
samples contained in cluster 3 have a value above the mean 
(129% above the mean, 0.17), while the other clusters 
remain below it (79% for cluster 0, 89% for cluster 1 and 
93% for cluster 2). From the analysis of sadness, values are 
obtained in line with expectations. Cluster 2 and 3 Tweets 
contain values above the average, 0.33 (122% and 118%, 
respectively), while the values of clusters 0 and 1 are below 
(around 80% of the half). Finally, the surprise analysis 
shows that the Tweets of cluster 3 are the ones that show the 
least surprise (56% with respect to the mean, 0.1), which 
indicates an apathetic or lazy profile in the context. The 
analysis of the other properties allowed to refine the results 
obtained. For example, engagement shows similar values for 
the four clusters (between 95% and 103%), indicating that 
there is not a predominant trend in any of the groups 
analyzed. 
Subsequently, a human coding was performed to 
determine the degree of relationship of the classified Tweets. 
Reviewers were asked to conceptualize the task as the level 
of concern they would have if they viewed that post on their 
own online social network and whether they would consider 
the post to require further investigation from a friend, family 
member, or a third party. Tweets were individually examined 
and coded according to a classification system validated by 
the research team. 
The analysis of the results obtained allows us to deduce 
that there is a direct relationship between the identified 
clusters and the possible suicide risk groups. Clusters 2 and 3 
have a strong emotional content that is reflected in states of 
anger and sadness, fear and apathy in their content. The 
population that is at high risk of committing suicide 
expresses boredom with their life, routine, very negative 
content (some talk of death, or of being tired of living) and 
fear of certain scenarios or situations (the negative sensitivity 
towards simple situations in the day to day increases 
significantly). 
In conclusion, the experts considered that the identified 
clusters fit perfectly into a classification of potential suicide 
risk, establishing it as follows: cluster 0 corresponds to 
tweets and individuals who have a very low risk of 
committing suicide, cluster 1 represents a low risk, cluster 2 
represents a medium risk (to be monitored, since the 
parameters indicate that it is closer to a high risk than a low 
risk), and cluster 3 a high risk. Therefore, this suggests that 
the subsequent phases of analysis will focus on cluster 3, 
since it is the indicator that this information should be 
analyzed with priority and work together with the Primary 
Care services to identify the authors of the Tweet and try to 
implement prevention procedures as soon as possible. 
C. Automatic classification 
The LSTM neural network has been designed with 
Tensorflow [27]. Tensorflow is a machine learning 
framework developed by Google, programmed in Python 
and C ++. It stands out for its simplicity when it comes to 
building and training neural networks, but at the same time 
obtaining great results. 
To create and train the neural network, we have 
developed scripts in Python. The network configuration is 
based on 10 LSTM hidden layers with 20 neurons in each 
layer. The output layer is a normal layer that produces a 
single output. The loss function measures the inconsistency 
between the actual values of the output and the predicted 
ones, in this case the mean of the absolute error is used as 
loss. The optimization function helps to minimize the loss 
and sight function. Adam (Adaptive Moment Estimation) has 
been used as it offers very low loss values. To evaluate the 
classifier, the accuracy will be used to obtain the percentage 
of correct answers in the predicted values. 
Regarding training, the input data used are the properties 
of the Tweets together with the cluster to which they belong. 
These data have been divided into training data (70% of the 
total) and test data (30% of the total). To improve training, 
the data that accounted for 70% of the total has been 
partitioned to have 80% of that set as training data and 20% 
as validation data. 
Each workout has been run 5 times to ensure that the 
result obtained is reliable. The training is done with 100 
iterations, adding a field to end the training before 
completing them if the loss value does not improve in 3 
consecutive iterations. When executing a problem appears, 
sometimes the best solution is not reached. To avoid this 
problem and ensure convergence, the 100 iterations have 
been left for the results shown below. 
Training has been considered providing the network with 
all the properties in the Tweet. With K = 4, the evaluation 
function returns an accuracy of 93.34%. The confusion 
matrix obtained can be seen in Table II. 
The first row represents the actual values that belong to 
cluster 0, the second row to cluster 1, the third row to cluster 
2, and the last row to cluster 3. The columns appear in the 
same order. The results obtained in this training are very 
positive. 
It can be observed that 24 data correspond to cluster 3, but 
belong to 1, and 16 data that belong to cluster 2 have been 
predicted as belonging to 3. For cluster 0, a success rate of 
98.96% is obtained, for cluster 1 the percentage is 99.26%, 
for cluster 2 87.79% is obtained and for cluster 3 the 
percentage is 87.23%. In the cases of cluster 0 and cluster 1, 
the percentages are very close to 100%. The other two 
clusters do not reach 90% but they get a very high 
percentage as well. 
The success rate that has been obtained is quite high, 
with an accuracy of 93.34% for the test data. Furthermore, 
the confusion matrix only presents a few false positives and 
negatives for cluster 3, assuming a fairly low percentage with 
respect to the successes achieved. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-812-9
ADVCOMP 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

TABLE II.  
CONFUSION MATRIX 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This work has addressed the problem of automatically 
identifying suicide risk groups in the context of Twitter. 
Based on a collection of Tweets obtained by keywords in 
relation to suicide, a series of properties have been added to 
enrich them. Then, clustering was applied using k-means 
with an optimal value of k = 4. The process has been 
validated by a group of experts in the context of mental 
health. This validation allowed establishing a relationship 
between the clusters obtained and the levels of suicide risk. 
Finally, an automatic classifier has been built using an 
LSTM neural network. The neural network has been 
configured with 10 hidden layers and 20 neurons per layer. 
After training and evaluating the neural network with the test 
data, an accuracy of 93.34% has been obtained. 
The proposal presented in this work shows very 
satisfactory and promising results. This approach is currently 
being extended, deploying the platform on an Amazon AWS 
infrastructure to automate the entire process and the different 
phases. As a result, direct connection with Primary Care 
Services is being worked on, so that the detection of a 
positive case allows initiating a series of actions to identify 
and contact the possible author of the content of the tweet. 
However, this is a very complex process that is being 
developed. 
In addition to the work done, there are several ideas to 
improve the results obtained. Regarding the clustering 
process, other distance functions could be used. When 
implementing k-means the distance function that has been 
used is the Euclidean distance. Using other types of distance 
could improve the clusters obtained. A good option would be 
to use the Tanimoto coefficients to find the similarity and 
diversity of the sample set. 
On the other hand, the properties could be hierarchized, 
studying the current properties to know which of them are 
more important in the generated groups. Then, we would 
have to add a weight to the most relevant properties so that 
they would have more importance when clustering or look 
for alternative techniques that allow us to apply these 
priorities. 
We have also considered the possibility of using other 
classification techniques. Neural networks generate very 
good results, but there are other techniques, such as Random 
Forest or Support Vector Machine. It would be interesting to 
classify with these or other methods and compare the results 
between them. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the JIUZ-2018-TEC-04 
project, granted by Fundación Ibercaja and Universidad de 
Zaragoza. The authors of this paper want to specially thank 
David Fustero for his collaboration in the implementation of 
the platform; Claudia García Martínez for her help and sup­ 
port in conducting the study; as well as the experts in Health 
Sciences and Medicine for providing us with the revisions of 
the data used in this study, and for giving feedback on the 
results: Lara Barahona, Alberto Barceló, María Beltrán, Luis 
Borao, Roberto Buil, Daniel Campos, Luis Cortés, Irene 
Delgado, Paola Herrera, Laura Izquierdo, Andrea Lafuente, 
Andrea Llera, Marta Modrego, Alicia Monreal, Héctor 
Morillo, Mar Posadas, Marta Puebla, Marta Puértolas, 
Yaravi Rodríguez, Samara Sáez, Sara Sin, Sol Torres, David 
Valera, and Francisco Daniel Vinués. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Detels, "Oxford textbook of Public Health", in Oxford 
medical publications, Oxford University Press, 2009. 
[2] J. M. Antón San Martín, "The impact of suicide on the family: 
the specific process of family grief", in Redes: Revista de 
Psicoterapia Relacional e Intervenciones Sociales (24), pp. 
109-123, 2010. 
[3] B. O'Dea, S. Wan, P. J. Batterham, A .L. Calear, C. Paris, and 
H. Christensen, "Detecting suicidality on Twitter", in Internet 
Interventions, vol. 2(2), pp. 183-188, 2015. 
[4] M. De Choudhury, M. Gamon, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, 
"Predicting Depression via Social Media", in the 7th 
International Conference on Web and Social Media 
(ICWSM), 2013.  
[5] P. S. Dodds, K. D. Harris, I. M. Kloumann, C. A. Bliss, and 
C. M. Danforth, "Temporal patterns of happiness and 
information", in A Global Social Network: Hedonometrics 
and Twitter. PloS one, vol. 6(12), 2011. 
[6] J. Luo, J. Du, C. Tao, H. Xu, and Y. Zhang, "Exploring 
temporal suicidal behavior patterns on social media: Insight 
from Twitter analytics", in Health Informatics Journal, vol. 
26(2), pp. 738–752, 2020. 
[7] L. Mitchell, M. R. Frank, K. D. Harris, P. S. Dodds, and C. 
M. Danforth, "The Geography of Happiness: Connecting 
Twitter Sentiment and Expression, Demographics, and 
Objective Characteristics of Place”, in PLoS ONE, vol. 8(5), 
pp. e64417, 2013. 
[8] M. J. Paul and M. Dredze, " Discovering Health Topics in 
Social Media Using Topic Models”, in PLoS ONE, vol. 9(8), 
pp. e103408, 2014. 
[9] S. Alotaibi, R. Mehmood, I. Katib, O. Rana, and A. S. 
Albeshri, "A Big Data Analytics Tool for Healthcare 
Symptoms and Diseases Detection Using Twitter, Apache 
Spark, and Machine Learning", in Appl. Sci., vol. 10, 2020. 
[10] J. Jashinsky et al., "Tracking suicide risk factors through 
Twitter in the US", in Crisis, vol. 35, pp. 51–59, 2013. 
[11] M. J. Vioulès, B. Moulahi, J. Azé, and S. Bringay, "Detection 
of suicide-related posts in Twitter data streams", in IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 7:1-
7:12, 2018. 
[12] H. Christensen, P. J. Batterham, and B. O'Dea, "E-health 
interventions for suicide prevention", in International Journal 
of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 11(8), pp. 
8193-8212, 2014. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-812-9
ADVCOMP 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

[13] P. Burnap, G. Colombo, R. Amery, A. Hodorog, and J. 
Scourfield, "Multi-class machine classification of suicide-
related communication on Twitter", in Online Social 
Networks and Media, vol. 2, pp. 32-44, 2017.  
[14] A. Abboute et al., "Mining Twitter for Suicide Prevention", in 
Natural Language Processing and Information Systems, vol. 
8455, pp. 250-253, 2014.  
[15] S. Fodeh, J. Goulet, C. Brandt, and A. T. Hamada, 
"Leveraging Twitter to better identify suicide risk", in 
Proceedings of The First Workshop Medical Informatics and 
Healthcare, 23rd SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining, PMLR 69:1-7, 2017. 
[16] K. D. Varathan  and N. Talib, "Suicide detection system 
based on Twitter”, in  2014 Science and Information 
Conference, pp. 785-788, 2014. 
[17] J. Redondo, I. Fraga, and I. Padrón, "The Spanish adaptation 
of ANEW (Affective Norms for English Words)", in Behavior 
Research Methods vol. 39, pp. 600–605, 2007. 
[18] J. Pennebaker, M. Francis, and R. Booth, "Linguistic inquiry 
and word count (LIWC)", 1999. 
[19] "Indico - Intelligent Process Automation for Document 
Intake, Understanding and Digitization", available at 
https://indico.io/ [Last access: 2020-09-11] 
[20] V. 
Faber, 
"Clustering 
and 
the 
continuous 
K-means 
algorithm", vol. 22, Los Alamos Science, 1994. 
[21] A. Hardy, "An examination of procedures for determining the 
number of clusters in a data set", in New Approaches in 
Classification and Data Analysis, pp. 178-185, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 1994.  
[22] M. Stone, "Cross-Validatory Choice and Assessment of 
Statistical Predictions", in Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society. Series B (Methodological), vol. 36(2), pp. 111-147, 
1974. 
[23] "Amazon 
Web 
Services", 
available 
at 
https://aws.amazon.com/es/ [Last access: 2020-09-11] 
[24] "Twitter 
for 
Developers", 
available 
at 
https://developer.twitter.com/en [Last access: 2020-09-11] 
[25] "16 
Myer 
Briggs 
personalities", 
available 
at 
https://www.16personalities.com/personality-types 
[Last 
access: 2020-09-11] 
[26] "KNIME", available at https://www.knime.com/ [Last access: 
2020-09-11] 
[27] "TensorFlow - open-source framework", available at 
https://www.tensorflow.org/ [Last access: 2020-09-11]
W.G. Parrott,  "Emotions in Social Psychology" in Psychology 
 
 
[28] 
         Press, Philadelphia, 2001.  
[29] P. Shaver, J. Schwartz, D. Kirson, C. O'Connor, "Emotion know­
       ledge: further exploration of a prototype approach", in J. Pers. Soc.
       Psychol., vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1061­1086, 1987.
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-812-9
ADVCOMP 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

