Virtual Reality Technology Applied in Maintaining Interior Walls Painted 
Buildings 
 
Alcínia Z. Sampaio, Daniel P. Rosário 
Dep. Civil Engineering and Architecture 
Technical University of Lisbon 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: zita@civil.ist.utl.pt, derosario@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—In a building, the paint coating applied to interior 
walls conveys their aesthetic character and also performs an 
important function of protection. It is a construction 
component which is exposed to agents of deterioration related 
to its use, needing the regular evaluation of its state of repair. 
The proposed advanced computational model supports the 
performance of such periodic inspections and the monitoring 
of interior wall maintenance, using Virtual Reality (VR) 
Technology. Used during an inspection visit, the application 
allows users to consult a database of irregularities, normally 
associated with paint coating, classified by the most probable 
causes and by recommended repair methodologies. In addition, 
with this model, a chromatic scale related to the degree of 
deterioration of the coating, defined as a function of the time 
between the dates of the application of the paint and the 
scheduled repainting, can be attributed to each element of 
coating monitored. This use of VR technology allows 
inspections and the evaluation of the degree of wear and tear of 
materials to be carried out in a highly direct and intuitive 
manner. The developed computer application is an advanced 
computation tool with innovative visualization and interactive 
capacities, and so brings a positive contribution on the 
construction filed. 
Keywords-Virtual 
Reality; 
maintenance; 
inspection; 
interaction 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The coating applied to building walls, naturally, performs 
an important aesthetic function: it is, however, essentially a 
protective element for the substrate on which it is applied as 
far as the action of environmental agents of wear and tear is 
concerned. The coating is fundamental to a proper overall 
performance of a building throughout its working life. 
Materials frequently used in the coating of ordinary 
buildings are paint, varnish, stone and ceramics [1]. In 
Portugal, where interior walls are concerned, the most 
commonly used coating is paint. It is a multi-purpose 
material, used under a variety of decorative effects, based on 
a widely-ranging palette of colours, patterns and textures and 
is easily applied on any type of surface. In addition, paint, 
compared to other materials, is less costly; not only as far as 
the product itself is concerned, but also in its application, 
since 
relatively 
non-specialised 
labour 
is 
required. 
Nevertheless, as deterioration is a given, maintenance is 
needed. 
Factors such as the constant exposure of the coating to 
the weather, pollutants and the normal actions of housing 
use, linked to its natural ageing and, in some cases to the 
unsuitable application of systems of painting give rise to its 
deterioration and to the appearance of irregularities, which 
can negatively affect its performance as both an aesthetic and 
a protective element. The weather significantly influence the 
state of use of peripheral walls of the building once the 
humidity through the wall thickness causing anomalies in the 
inner surface of the wall. According to Lopes [2], in normal 
conditions of exposure and when correctly applied, a paint 
coating can remain unaltered for about five years. 
Establishing suitable maintenance strategies for this type of 
coating is based on the knowledge of the most frequent 
irregularities, the analysis of the respective causes and the 
study of the most suitable repair methodologies. 
Currently, the management of information related to the 
maintenance of buildings is based on the planning of action 
to be taken and on the log of completed work. The capacity 
to visualize the process can be added through the use of 
three-dimensional (3D) models which, facilitate the 
interpretation and understanding of target elements of 
maintenance and of 4D models (3D + time) through which 
the evolution of deterioration can be visually demonstrated 
and understood. Furthermore, the possibility of interaction 
with the geometric models can be provided through the use 
of Virtual Reality (VR) technology. The developed VR/4D 
model is an advanced computer tool in the maintenance 
field. 
The work presented here is part of an on-going research 
project: Virtual Reality technology applied as a support tool 
to the planning of construction maintenance. PTDC/ 
ECM/67748/2006 [3] and as such is a component of the 
Project focussing on the support of the maintenance activity 
planning with particular reference to paint coating applied to 
interior walls of buildings for housing. 
The completed computer virtual model identifies the 
elements of the building which make up the interior wall 
coating so that monitoring can take place. The application is 
supported by a database, created for the purpose, of 
irregularities, their probable causes and suitable repair 
processes, which facilitates the inspection process. The 
information is recorded and associated to each monitored 
element, allowing subsequently, the inspection and repair 
activity log to be consulted, thus providing a tool for the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

definition of a rehabilitation strategy. In addition, the model 
assigns a colour to each of the coating elements, the colours 
defined by the time variable, so that the evolution of the 
deterioration of the coating material is clearly shown through 
the alteration in colour. The prototype is, then, a 4D model. 
The model integrates a virtual environment with an 
application developed in Visual Basic programming 
language. This allows interaction with the 3D model of 
buildings in such a way that it becomes possible to follow 
the process of monitoring the coating elements, specifically, 
painted interior walls, in terms of maintenance, throughout 
the life-cycle of the building. 
Advantages of 4D virtual environments are found in 
improving communication, increasing insight, supporting 
collaboration, and supporting decision-making. Namely 
Fumarola [4] discusses different approaches on the 
generation of virtual environments of real world facilities 
supporting decision-making. The development of several 
applications, have been successfully implanted, in different 
branches of construction and education domain. The 
requisites of the real environment can be illustrated by the 
different VR models developed within the research project 
[5]: The implemented virtual prototypes concern the 
management of a lighting system in a building [6], the 
construction activity [7] and the maintenance of building 
façades [8]. The research project follows a previous work 
related to the development didactic VR models regarding 
construction processes: the construction of a roof [9] and 
bridge decks using two different methods (the cantilever 
process [10] and the incremental launching method [11]). 
When comparing the present computer model with the 
previous work, the principal innovation concerns the 
incorporation of the capacity of changing the colour of the 
painted wall with the time parameter, when walking-through 
the virtual model. So the evolution of the deterioration of the 
coating material is visualized through the alteration in 
colour. 
The paper presents the main aspects of the maintenance 
of buildings with a focus on maintenance of painted walls. 
Then the anomalies that most often originate in the painted 
finish, which are listed in an identical manner to that used in 
the virtual model database. The text describes how to interact 
with the virtual model on the conduct of inspections and 
monitoring of wall elements. Finally it makes a comparison 
with the traditional way of performing and points out the 
major benefits in the use of the interactive computational 
tool of maintenance support. 
II. 
MAINTENANCE 
The General Regulations for Urban Buildings (RGEU) 
[12] stipulates the frequency of maintenance work, stating 
that existing buildings must be repaired and undergo 
maintenance at least once every eight years with the aim of 
eliminating defects arising from normal wear and tear and to 
maintain them in good usable condition in all aspects of 
housing use referred to in that document. 
The time-limit indicated is applicable to all elements of 
the buildings generally. It is clear, however, that the 
regulatory period is too long for some specific components 
and that, frequently enough, the time-limits for action are not 
respected. There are, too, inefficient rent policies, leading to 
long periods without rehabilitation, and that the prevailing 
culture is one of reaction on the part of the various parties 
involved in the maintenance process. To these aspects should 
also be added the defects sometimes registered during the 
construction of property developments, exacerbating the 
poor state of repair of the buildings. This gives rise to 
numerous irregularities which, in turn, frequently leads to 
inadequate safety conditions. 
According to Cóias [13], the purpose of maintenance is 
to prolong the useful life of the building and to encourage 
adherence to the demands of safety and functionality, 
keeping in mind the specific set of conditions of each case 
and its budgetary considerations. Satisfactory management 
of this activity is carried out by putting into practice a 
maintenance plan which must take into consideration 
technical, economic, and functional aspects arising with each 
case. 
Collen [14] points out that investment in the maintenance 
and rehabilitation sector in Portugal is still weak compared to 
that in the same sector in the construction industry in the 
other countries of the European Community. She makes it 
clear, however, on a more positive note, that some measures 
have already begun to be implemented here: some urban 
regeneration programmes have been created, legislation, 
which focuses on the sustainability of buildings, has been 
laid down, and the revision of constructive solutions has 
been carried out, all with the objective of guaranteeing that 
the maintenance of built heritage be an integral part of the 
construction sector. 
The maintenance of buildings, then, is an activity of 
considerable importance within the construction industry; its 
contributory aspects of conservation and rehabilitation work 
need to be supported by correct methodologies of action, 
underpinned by scientific criteria and by suitable processes 
for the diagnosis of irregularities and the evaluation of their 
causes. This paper aims to make a positive contribution to 
this field using the new computer technology tools of 
visualisation and interaction. 
III. 
PATHOLOGIES IN PAINT COATINGS 
The technical document Paints, Varnishes and Painted 
Coatings for Civil Construction published by The National 
Laboratory for Civil Engineering (LNEC), defines paint as a 
mixture essentially made up of pigments, binder, vehicle and 
additives [1]. It has a pigmented, pasty composition, and 
when applied in a fine layer to a surface, presents, after the 
dispersion of volatile products, the appearance of a solid, 
coloured and opaque film [15]. 
The durability of the painted coating depends on the 
environment in which it is used, and on the surface it is 
applied to as well as the rate of deterioration of the binder in 
the paint. The influence of the environment is the result of 
the action, in conjunction or alone, of a variety of factors 
such as the degree of humidity, the levels of ultraviolet 
radiation, oxygen, ozone and alkalis, variations in 
temperature and of other physical or chemical agents whose 
effect depends considerably on the time taken to apply it 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

[16]. When their influence is not counteracted or minimised, 
imperfections can arise in the coating film, such as, the 
appearance of defects in the layer or paint with the loss of 
functionality where the desired aim of the application is 
concerned. These irregularities manifest themselves in 
various ways and in different degrees of severity. Based on 
the study made of the causes of the defects, specific 
methodologies for their resolution were established. Figure 1 
shows common defects in painted interior walls. 
 
Figure 1.  Swelling, efflorescence, cracking and blistering [17]. 
The information gained from the pathological analysis of 
this type of coating was used to draw up a database 
supporting the interactive application. These data support the 
creation of inspection files related to the elements which are 
monitored in each case studied. 
In order to form a user-friendly database of relatable data, 
groups of pathologies, shown below in Table I, were 
considered. This classification provides the required 
automatism of access to the database and supports the 
presentation of synopses of the causes and repair 
methodology inherent in each pathology. 
During the process of an on-site inspection, the user of 
the application can refer to the database in order to classify 
the abnormality being observed, consulting the list of 
defects, which includes, in addition to their identification, the 
most relevant characteristics and some of the causes that 
could be at the root of their development. Table II lists two 
of the irregularities from the classification: Alteration in 
colour. 
The database was created with adequate relations 
between data, concerning each group of anomalies, in order 
to present the sequence of anomaly, provable cause and 
adequate repair work, to the engineer when it uses the virtual 
model in an inspection situation. The specialist must choose 
in each case the most appropriate sequence.  
IV. 
INTERACTIVE MODEL 
The completed application supports on-site inspections 
and the on-going analysis of the evolution of the degree of 
deterioration 
of 
the 
coating 
[18]. 
The 
following 
computational systems were used in its development: 
AutoCAD, in the creation of the 3D model of the building; 
[19], for the programming of the interactivity capacities 
integrated with the geometric model; Visual Basic 6 in the 
creation of all the windows of the application and in the 
establishment of links between components. All the systems 
were made available by the ISTAR/DECivil informatics 
laboratory of the Technical University of Lisbon. 
 
TABLE I.  
CLASSIFICATION OF IRREGULARITIES 
Classification 
Irregularity 
Repair methodology 
Alteration in 
Colour 
Yellowing 
 - Cleaning the surface and 
repainting with a finish both 
compatible with the existing 
coat and  resistant to the 
prevailing conditions of 
exposure in its environment 
Bronzing 
Fading 
Spotting 
Loss of gloss 
Loss of hiding 
power 
Deposits 
Dirt pick-up and 
retention 
- Cleaning the surface. 
Viscosity 
Changes in 
Texture 
Efflorescence 
- Removal by brushing scraping 
or washing; 
- repainting the surface; 
- When necessary apply sealer 
before repainting. 
Sweating 
Cracking 
Chalking 
Saponification 
Reduction in 
Adhesion 
Peeling 
- Proceed by totally or partially 
removing the coat of paint; 
- Check the condition of the base 
and proceed with its repair 
where necessary; 
- Prepare the base of the paint 
work. 
Flaking 
Swelling 
TABLE II.  
IRREGULARITIES AND CAUSES 
Classification 
Irregularity 
Characteristics and causes 
Alteration in 
colour 
Yellowing 
- A yellow colour caused by 
ageing of the film of the paint 
or varnish; 
- Action of environmental agents 
(solar radiation, temperature 
oxygen and humidity) on the 
binder in the paint provoking 
changes in its molecular 
structure. 
Discolouration 
- Partial loss of colour of the 
film of paint coating; 
- Action of environmental agents 
(solar radiation, temperature, 
polluted atmosphere and 
chemically aggressive bases 
of application) on the binder 
and/or the pigments of the 
painted coating. 
 
The main interface gives access to the virtual model of 
the building and to the inspection and maintenance modules 
(highlighted in Figure 2). The first step is to make a detailed 
description of the building (location, year of construction, 
type of structure, etc.; see Figure 3) and representative 
modelled elements of the interior wall coating, so that they 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

can be monitored. The model is manipulated in the virtual 
environment by using the mouse buttons (movement through 
the interior of the model and orientation of the camera, 
Figure 4). The coordinates of the observer’s position and the 
direction of his/her point of view are associated with the 
element during the process of identification. 
 
Figure 2.  The main interface of the virtual application. 
 
Figure 3.  Interface for the detailed description of the building. 
 
Figure 4.  Coordinates and manipulation commands in the virtual model. 
Thus, later, when an element in the database of the 
application is selected using the interface, the model is 
displayed in the visualisation window so that the target 
coating can be observed. Walking through the model with 
the aim of accessing all the elements of the building, the user 
needs to be able to go up and down stairs or open doors or 
windows.  
The virtual model has been programmed, using the EON 
system, in such a way that these capacities are activated by 
positioning the cursor over the respective objects, in that 
way, the user is able to walk through the whole model. Each 
wall surface in each of the rooms of the house is a 
component which has to be monitored and, therefore, to be 
identified. Using the model, the user must click the mouse on 
an element, and the message New Element is shown 
(highlighted in Figure 2). Associated to this selected element 
is the information regarding location within the house (hall, 
bedroom), wall type (simple internal masonry wall) and 
coating (paint), as shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Identification of an element in the virtual model. 
A. Making an Inspection 
Later, on an on-site inspection visit, the element to be 
analysed it selected interactively on the virtual model. The 
inspection sheet (Figure 6) is accessed by using the 
Inspection button which is found in the main interface 
(Figure 2). The data which identify the selected element are 
transferred to the initial data boxes on the displayed page 
(Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6.  Presentation of the information introduced into the inspection 
sheet. 
Next, using the database, the irregularity which 
corresponds to the observed defect, with its probable cause 
(ageing) and the prescribed repair methodology (removal and 
repainting) is selected (see highlighted area, Figure 7). The 
current size of the pathology should also be indicated since it 
reveals how serious it is (area of pathology, Figure 7). In the 
field Observations, the inspector can add any relevant 
comment (Figure 6), photographs obtained on site can also 
Inspection 
Maintenance 
Element not yet in database? 
Add? 
OK / Cancel 
Inspect New Element 
Case History 
Number of anomalies 
Coordinates of the virtual model 
Orientation of the virtual model 
Characteristics of the building 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

be inserted into the inspection window and the date of the 
on-site visit and the ID of the inspector should also be added. 
Several different irregularities in the same coating can be 
analysed (field Number of Pathologies, Figure 6) and other 
elements can be analysed and recorded and defects observed. 
Later, the files thus created, associated to each of the 
virtual model elements, can be consulted (Case History 
button in the Interface in Figure 6). This same window 
allows all the data referring to the building and to the 
completed inspection to be shown, in pdf format (Figure 8). 
 
Figure 7.  Interface for the selection of the irregularity, probable cause, 
area and repair methodology. 
B. Maintenance Monitoring 
How long the working life of any construction 
component might be is an estimate and depends on a set of 
modifying factors related to their inherent characteristics of 
quality, to the environment in which the building is set and to 
its conditions of use [13]. In maintenance strategy planning 
the probable dates when adverse effects might occur in each 
of these elements must be foreseen, and the factors which 
contribute to defects must be reduced and their consequences 
minimized. 
The completed model allows the user to monitor the 
evolution of wear and tear on the paint coating in a house. 
For this, technical information relative to the reference for 
the paint used, its durability and the date of its most recent 
application must be added (Figure 9) to each element 
through the Maintenance Interface (also accessed from the 
main interface, Figure 2) 
Based on these data, it is possible to link in the date the 
virtual model is consulted  and visualise, in the geometric 
model, the level of wear and tear as a function of time (see 
state of repair, Figure 9). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Inspection sheet. 
 
Figure 9.  Technical characteristics and the durability of the paint-work. 
The period of time between the date indicated and the 
date when the paint was applied is compared to the duration 
advised, in the technical literature, for repainting. The value 
given for this comparison is associated to the Red, Green, 
Blue (RGB) parameters which define the colour used for 
wall in the virtual model (Figure 10). In this way, the colour 
visualised on the monitored wall varies according to the 
period of time calculated, pale green being the colour 
referring to the date of painting and red indicating that the 
Pathologies 
Causes 
Repair methodology  
Area of pathology 
State of repair 
Technical and commercial characteristics 
Pathologies/Causes/ Repair Methodologies 
Pathology: Peeling 
Cause: Natural ageing of paint coating 
Repair methodology: Total or partial removal of paint coating. Check condition of the 
base and repair as necessary. Carry out the preparation of the base and the painting 
Observations 
No relevant observations to be recorded 
Manager 
Element details  
Location: Hall 1 
Type of wall: Interior 
Description Details: Simple masonry wall 
Coating: Paint 
Inspection sheet 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

date the model was consulted coincides with that advised for 
repainting (Figure 10). 
 
 
Figure 10.  Chromatic alteration of the coating according to its state of 
deterioration. 
The date for painting and repainting are saved to a list of 
coating elements to be monitored in the virtual model 
(Figure 11). When an element is selected from this list, the 
corresponding element is represented in the virtual model, 
through the preview window, in the colour that corresponds 
to the period of the consultation (Figure 10). 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Information relevant to the monitored elements.  
C. Principal innovations and benefits 
Normally, the inspection process of buildings is based on 
filling out paper files during the site survey. The inspector 
shall observe and analyze the anomalies observed, sort them 
and add comments that are timely, related to the degree of 
deterioration, so that, later, to establish a global repair work 
plan for the building. 
With the use of computer system supported on the basis 
of data relating to the maintenance of the interior wall paint 
coating, the inspector shall select among the possibilities 
listed, the anomaly, possible cause and repair methodology 
that seems more appropriate. Moreover you can add photos. 
The definition of the repair plan is based on the analysis of 
the data entered and selected in the system. The designer 
must establish on the basis of the needs and economic 
availability of a proper maintenance plan, encompassing the 
various anomalies observed. The computer system allows 
registration, during the inspection, deficiencies and their 
seriousness, by supporting the planning of repair work. 
The inspection process requires one or more visits to the 
site of the building [13]. There are made several observations 
which are annotated in sheets of paper. Based on these notes 
is elaborated a rehabilitation draft to the building. With the 
support of developed computer system the inspector can 
easily associate to the 3D model of the building the 
identification of the anomalies, know its extent and severity. 
The facility to incorporate photos from local helps assess the 
severity of repair work to be carried out later. The main 
innovation in the use of the model is to allow the designer to 
move within a virtual mode through the interior of the 
model, know the location, type and severity of each anomaly 
in relation to each wall area. In this way the designer can 
more easily analyze the global repair strategy. For an 
inspection based on paper there is no longer a global 
perspective of the house inspected and therefore the study of 
repair work to predict is more difficult. Furthermore, the 
virtual model has a history of documented inspections with 
timely remarks, comments and photos. You can add the 
repair operations after intervention and thus compare the 
observed problems and what the resolution applied. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This application supports the maintenance of painted 
interior walls and promotes the use of IT tools with advanced 
graphic and interactive capabilities in order to facilitate and 
expedite the inspection process. The virtual model, 
moreover, allows users to see, in the virtual environment, the 
state of repair of the coating. 
The information about pathologies, causes and repair 
methods, collected from a specialised bibliography, has been 
organised in such a way as to establish a database to be used 
as a base for the drawing up of a tool to support building 
maintenance. The main aim of the application is to facilitate 
maintenance enabling the rapid and easy identification of 
irregularities, as well as the possible prediction of their 
occurrence through the available inspection record. This 
analysis has been shown as playing an important role in 
conservation and in the reduction of costs related to the wear 
and tear of buildings and contributes to the better 
management of buildings where maintenance is concerned. 
In addition to the inspection component, a maintenance 
component was developed which, being visualized in a VR 
environment, as well as being highly intuitive, facilitates the 
analysis of the state of repair of buildings. By means of a 
chromatic scale applied to the monitored elements, displayed 
in the walk-through of the geometrically modelled building, 
it is possible to identify the elements which, predictably, will 
need timely action. With the possibility of altering the time 
parameter freely, the user can carry out this analysis either 
for past instants or for future events, being able, in this way, 
to forecast future operations. This capacity of the model, 
therefore, contributes to the avoidance of costs associated to 
irregularities which, with the passage of time, become more 
serious and therefore more onerous. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to thank the Foundation for Science and 
Technology for the financial support given for the 
development of the research project Virtual Reality 
technology applied as a support tool to the planning of 
construction maintenance. PTDC/ECM/67748/2006 [3]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Eusébio and M. Rodrigues, “Paints, Varnishes and Painted 
Coatings for Civil Construction”, CS 14, National Laboratory 
for Civil Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, 2009, ISBN: 
9789724917627. 
Local 
Initial date 
Repainting date 
Durability 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

[2] C. Lopes, “Anomalies in painted exterior walls: technic of 
inspection and structural evaluation”, Construlink Press, 
Monograph, nº22, Lisbon, Portugal, March/April 2004. 
[3] A. Z. Sampaio and A. M. Gomes, “Virtual Reality technology 
applied as a support tool to the planning of construction 
maintenance”, research project PTDC/ECM/ 67748/2006, 
FCT, Lisbon, Portugal,  2008-2011. 
[4] M. 
Fumarola 
and 
R. 
Poelman, 
“Generating 
virtual 
environments of real world facilities: Discussing four 
different approaches”, Automation in Construction , vol. 20 
(2011), pp. 263–269, http://www.sciencedirect.com/science 
/article/pii/S0926580510002074#sec3. 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2012] 
[5] A. Z. Sampaio, C. O. Cruz, and O. P. Martins, “Didactic 
models in Civil Engineering education: Virtual simulation of 
construction works”, Book: Virtual Reality, Ed. Jae-Jin Kim, 
ISBN: 978-953-307-518-1, chap. 28, 2011, pp. 579 – 598, 
http://www.intechopen.com/articles/show/title/didactic-
models-in-civil-engineering-education-virtual-simulation-of-
construction-works [Retrieved: January, 2012] 
[6] A. Z. Sampaio, M. M. Ferreira, and D. P. Rosário, 
“Management system integration supported on Virtual Reality 
technology: 
The 
building 
lighting 
devices”, 
Book: 
ENTERprise Information Systems, ISBN: 978-3-642-16401-
9, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 190, 2010, 
pp. 207-210. http://www.springerlink.com/content/978-3-642-
16401-9#section=825347&page=1 [Retrieved: July, 2012] 
[7] A. Z. Sampaio and J. P. Santos, “Interactive Models 
Supporting Construction Planning”, Proc. CENTERIS 2011 - 
International 
Conference 
on 
ENTERprise 
Information 
Systems, Algarve, Portugal, Oct. 5-7, 2011, pp. 40-50. 
[8] A. Z. Sampaio, A. R. Gomes, and J. P. Santos, “Virtual 
Environment 
in 
Civil 
Engineering: 
Construction 
and 
Maintenance of Buildings” Proc. ADVCOMP 2011, The 5th 
Int. Conf. on Advanced Engineering Computing and 
Applications in Sciences, Lisbon, Portugal, Nov. 20-25, 2011, 
pp. 13-20. 
[9] A. Z. Sampaio, C. O. Cruz, and O. P. Martins, “Interactive 
models based on virtual reality technology used in Civil 
Engineering education”, Book: Teaching through multi-user 
virtual environments: applying dynamic elements to the 
modern classroom, IGI Clobal, Ed. G. Vincenti, and J. 
Braman. ISBN: 978-1-61692-822-3, 2011, Chap. 21, 
pp. 387-413, 
http://resources.igiglobal.com/marketing/pdfs/vincenti/21.pdf 
[10] P. F. Studer and A. Z. Sampaio, “Virtual reality technology 
applied 
to 
simulate 
construction 
processes”, 
Book: 
Computational Science and Its Applications, Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, ISSN 0302-9743, vol. 3044/2004, pp. 817-826, 
http://www.springer 
link.com/content/1ww6af49ugj08d9d[Retrieved: July, 2012] 
[11] O. P. Martins and A. Z. Sampaio “The incremental launching 
method for educational virtual model”, Book: Cooperative 
Design, Visualization, and Engineering, Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, ISSN: 0302-9743, vol. 5738/2009, pp. 329-332, 
http://www.sprin gerlink.com /content/e63659p0746g4364/ 
[Retrieved: January, 2012] 
[12] “RGEU - General Regulations for Urban Buildings”, Decree-
Law, nº 38 382, August 7, 1951, Lisbon, Portugal.  
[13] V. Cóias, “Inspections and essays on rehabilitation of 
buildings”. Lisbon, Portugal, IST Press, pgs 448, ISBN: 978-
972-8469-53-5, (2ª Ed.) 2009. 
[14] I. Collen, “Periodic inspections in buildings”. Planet CAD 
studies, 
March, 
2003. 
http://www.planetacad.com/pre 
sentationlayer/Estudo_01.aspx?id=13&canal_ordem=0403 
[Retrieved: June, 2012] 
[15] M. B. Farinha, “Construction of Buildings in practice: guide 
oriented to the development of processes and methodologies 
of construction”, Vol. 2. Verlag Dashofer, ed. Psicosoma, 
Lisboa, 2010. http://www.psicosoma.pt/ [Retrieved: June, 
2012] 
[16] M. I. Marques, “Durability of plastic tint”, ITMC 2, National 
Laboratory for Civil Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, 1985. 
[17] A. Moura, “Characteristics and conservation state of painted 
façades: study case in Coimbra”, Master Dissertation in 
Construction, Coimbra, Portugal 2008. 
[18] D. P. Rosário, “Virtual Reality technology applied on 
building maintenance: painted interior walls”, Master 
Dissertation in Construction, Lisbon, Portugal, 2011. 
[19] “EON Studio - Introduction to working in EON Studio”, EON 
Reality, Inc. 2011. http://www.eonreality.com/ [Retrieved: 
January, 2012] 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

