Time Series Forecasting using Genetic Algorithm
A Case Study of Maintenance Cost Data For Tunnel Fans
Yamur K. Al-Douri, Hussan Al-Chalabi, Jan Lundberg
Division of Operation and Maintenance Engineering
Luleå University of Technology
Luleå, Sweden
emails: {yamur.aldouri, hussan.hamodi, jan.lundberg}@ltu.se
Abstract— Time series forecasting is widely used as a
basis
for
economic
planning,
production
planning,
production control and optimizing industrial processes. The
aim of this study has been to develop a novel two-level
Genetic Algorithm (GA) to optimize time series forecasting
in order to forecast cost data for fans used in road tunnels by
the Swedish Transport Administration (Trafikverket). The
first level of the GA is responsible for the process of
forecasting time series cost data, while the second level
evaluates the forecasting. The first level implements GA
based on the Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average
(ARIMA) model. The second level utilizes a GA based on
forecasting error rate to identify proper forecasting. The
results show that GA based on the ARIMA model produces
good forecasting results for the labor cost data objects. It
was found that a multi-objective GA based on the ARIMA
model showed an improved performance. The forecasted
data can be used for Life Cycle Cost (LCC) analysis.
Keywords—
ARIMA model;
Time
series
forecasting;
Genetic Algorithm (GA); Life Cycle Cost (LCC); Maintenance
cost data.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Time series forecasting predicts future data points
based on observed data over a period known as the lead-
time. The purpose of forecasting data points is to provide a
basis
for
economic
planning,
production
planning,
production control and optimizing industrial processes.
The major objective is to obtain the best forecast function,
i.e., to ensure that the mean square of the deviation
between the actual and the forecasted values is as small as
possible for each lead-time [1]. Much effort has been
devoted over the past few decades to the development and
improvement of time series forecasting models [2].
The Genetic Algorithm (GA) is often compatible with
nonlinear systems and uses a particular optimization from
the principle of natural selection of the optimal solution on
a wide range of forecasting populations [3]. The proposed
multi-objective GA optimizes a particular function based
on the ARIMA model. The ARIMA model is a stochastic
process modelling framework [4] that is defined by three
parameters (p,d,q). The parameter p stands for the order of
the autoregressive AR(p) process, d for the order of
integration (needed for the transformation into a stationary
stochastic process), and q for the order of the moving
average MA(q) process [4]. A stationary stochastic process
means a process where the data properties have the same
variance and autocorrelation [5].
The weakness of the ARIMA model is the difficulty of
estimating the parameters. To address this problem, a
process for automated model selection needs to be
implemented in the automated optimization to achieve an
accurate forecasting [6]. The GA is a well-established
method which helps in solving complex and nonlinear
problems that often lead to cases where the search space
shows a curvy landscape with numerous local minima. The
GA is designed to find the best forecasting solution
through automated optimization of the ARIMA model and
to select the best parameters (p,d,q) to compute point
forecasts based on time series data. The parameters of the
ARIMA model are influenced by the selecting process of
the GA. In addition, the GA can evaluate the forecasting
accuracy
using
multiple
fitness
functions
based
on
statistics models.
Vantuch & Zelinka [7] modified the ARIMA model
based on the Genetic Algorithm and particle swarm
optimization (PSO) to estimate and predict data of time.
They found that the Genetic Algorithm could find a
suitable ARIMA model and pointed to improvements
through
individual
binary
randomization
for
every
parameter input of the ARIMA model. Their model shows
the best set of coefficients obtained with PSO compared
with the best set obtained with a classical ARIMA
prediction. However, these authors present the ARIMA
parameters in a binary setting with limited possibilities and
they consider the forecasting based on an ARIMA
evaluation only.
Hatzakis & Wallace [3] proposed a method that
combines the ARIMA forecasting technique and a multi-
objective GA based on the Pareto optimal to predict the
next optimum. Their method is based on historical
optimums and is used to optimize AR(p) and MA(q) to
find a non-dominated Pareto front solution with an infinite
number of points. They found that their method improved
the prediction accuracy. However, these authors assumed
that the data were accurate and used the Pareto front
solution to select a proper forecasting. In addition, they did
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

not
use
any forecasting error rate
to evaluate the
forecasting results.
The aim of this study has been to develop a novel two-
level
multi-objective
GA
to
optimize
time
series
forecasting in order to forecast cost data for fans used in
road tunnels. The first level of the GA is responsible for
the process of forecasting time series cost data, while the
second level evaluates the forecasting. The first level
implements GA based on the ARIMA model. This level
gives possibilities of finding the optimal forecasting
solution.
The
second
level
utilizes
GA
based
on
forecasting error rate to identify a proper forecasting. We
argue that a GA decreases the complexity, increases the
flexibility, and is very effective when selecting an
approximate solution interval for forecasting.
II.
METHODOLOGY
A.
Data collection
The cost data concerns tunnel fans
installed in
Stockholm in Sweden. The data had been collected over
ten years from 2005 to 2015 by Swedish Transport
Administration (Trafikverket) and were stored in the
MAXIMO computerized maintenance management system
(CMMS). In this CMMS, the cost data are recorded based
on the work orders for the maintenance of the tunnel fans.
Every work order contains corrective maintenance data, a
component description, the reporting date, a problem
description, and a description of the actions performed.
Also included are the repair time needed and the labor,
material and tool cost of each work order.
In this study, we consider the one cost objects of labor
based on the work order input into the CMMS for the ten-
year period mentioned above. The selected data were
clustered, filtered and inputed for the present study using a
Multi-objective GA (MOGA) based on a fuzzy c-means
algorithm [14]. It is important to mention that all the cost
data used in this study concern real costs without any
adjustment for inflation. Due to company regulations, all
the cost data have been encoded and are expressed as
currency units (cu).
B.
Two-level system of Genetic Algorithms
In
this
study,
a
novel
two-level
GA
has
been
developed, as shown in Figure 1. The levels of the GA are
as follows: (1) a GA based on the ARIMA model for
forecasting the cost data, and (2) GA based on multiple
functions for measuring the forecasting accuracy for
validation of the forecasted data. Level 1 of the GA is
applied to the cost data objects (labor) to forecast data for
the next level and for each of 15 different generations. The
second level validates the forecasted data for the cost
object.
Using
two
levels
allows
us
to
reduce
the
computational cost [8], while reaching an effective and
reasonable solution [9].
Figure 1. Two-level of Genetic Algorithm (GA)
1) GA based on the ARIMA model
The
proposed
GA
method
uses
a
particular
optimization based on the principle of natural selection of
the optimal solution and applies this optimization on a
wide range of forecasting populations. The GA creates
populations of chromosomes as possible answers to
estimate the optimum forecasting [3]. This algorithm is
robust, generic and easily adaptable because it can be
broken down into the following steps: initialization,
evaluation, selection, crossover, mutation, update and
completion. The evaluation (fitness function) step creates
the basis for a new population of chromosomes. The new
population is formed using specific Genetic operators,
such as crossover and mutation [10], [11]. The fitness
function is derived from the ARIMA forecasting model. A
GA with automated optimization avoids the weakness of
the ARIMA model by estimating the parameters for
forecasting [6].
The GA is a global optimization technique that can be
used to achieve an accurate forecasting based on the
ARIMA model. The GA is known to help in solving
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

complex nonlinear problems that often lead to cases where
the search space shows a curvy landscape with numerous
local minima. Moreover, the GA is designed to find the
optimal
forecasting
solution
through
automated
optimization of the ARIMA model. In addition, the GA
can evaluate the forecasting accuracy using multiple
fitness functions based on statistical models.
The first level utilizes a GA which is based on the
ARIMA model and is implemented four different times
using a cross-validation randomization technique. The
technique aims to select the best time series data for
forecasting. The process is the following: a random
number of cost data are selected based on encoding in each
of the four implementations; the modified random cost
data are generated 15 times. The modifications are used to
find the optimal cost data for forecasting. The following
steps are implemented when applying the multi-objective
GA in level 1.
Step 1: Initial population
A
longitudinal
study
of
each
cost
object
(
) is used to forecast data using the multi-
objective GA for the two objects in parallel.
Step 2: First GA generation and selection
The first generation is performed by selecting each cost
object and checking whether the data are stationary (i.e.,
trend-stationary) or non-stationary using a Dickey-Fuller
test [12]. To apply the ARIMA model, the data should be
stationary, i.e. the null hypothesis of stationarity should not
be rejected. When applying the Dickey-Fuller Test (DFT)
in equation (1), the hypothesis p = 1 means that the data
are non-stationary and p < 1 that the data are stationary
[12].
(1)
α : constant estimated value of the time series data; 
p : the hypothesis is either p = 1 or p < 1;
t : time {1,…,k};
ε : the white noise of the time series data. 
Step 3: Encoding
Random values, either ones or zeros, are generated for
each cost data object. Encoding is
the process
of
transforming from the phenotype to the genotype space
before proceeding with GA operators and finding the local
optima.
Step 4: Fitness function
The fitness function is based on the ARIMA model for
the forecasting of time series cost data objects individually,
as seen in the equation below. The fitness function consists
of an autoregression (AR) part and a moving average
(MA) part [1]. The ARIMA model uses AR and MA
polynomials to estimate (p) and (q) [7].
The fitness function is formulated as the equation (2)
follows:
(2)
where the following notation is used:
μ : the mean value of the time series data; 
p : the number of autoregressive lags;
d : the number of differences calculated with the
equation
q : the number of lags of the moving average process;
σ : autoregressive coefficients (AR); 
θ : moving average coefficients (MA); 
ϵ : the white noise of the time series data. 
The
parameters
(p,q)
are
estimated
using
an
autocorrelation
function
(ACF)
and
a
partial
autocorrelation function (PACF) [1]. The estimated values
produced by the previous equation will be used to create a
forecast for 20 months (m) using the equation (3). These
forecasted values will be evaluated using the second level
of GA to find the optimal forecasting with high accuracy.
(3)
where fitness(t+m) is the time series forecasting at time
(t+m) and
m : months {1, 2, 3,…, m}.
Step 5: Crossover and mutation
In this study, a one-point crossover with a fixed
crossover probability is used. This probability decreases
the bias of the results over different generations caused by
the huge data values.
For chromosomes of length l, a
crossover point is generated in the range [1, 1/2 l] and [1/2
l, l]. The values of objects are connected and should be
exchanged to produce two new offspring. We select two
points to create more value ranges and find the best fit.
Randomly, ten percent of the selected chromosomes
undergo mutation with the arrival of new chromosomes.
For the cost object values, we swap two opposite data
values. The purpose of this small mutation percentage is to
keep
the
forecasting
changes
steady
over
different
generations.
Step 6: New generation
The
new
generation
step
repeats
steps
3
to
5
continuously for 15 generations. Fifteen generations are
enough for these data because the curves of the fitness
functions are repeated after fifteen generations. The
selected fifteen generations are used individually for the
second level to validate the forecasting accuracy for each
object and population. This step yields fully correlated data
for the next step.
2) GA for measuring the forecasting accuracy
In this level, the GA is applied longitudinally to the
data. The GA operates with a population of chromosomes
that contains labor cost and material cost objects. The GA
operates
on
the
selected
population
over
different
generations to find the appropriate forecasting accuracy.
During the GA generations, the chromosomes in the
population are rated concerning their adaptation, and their
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

mechanism
of
selection
for
the
new
population
is
evaluated. Their adaptability (fitness function) is the basis
for a new population of chromosomes. The new population
is formed using specific Genetic operators such as
crossover and mutation. The GA is used to evaluate the
forecasting accuracy for each generation of the first level.
Level 2 utilizes a GA which is based on different
forecasting error rates and is implemented for each
generation from the first level and for four different
populations
using
a
cross-validation
randomization
technique. This technique aims to select the best evaluation
of the time series data forecasting and the process is as
follows. A random number of cost data are selected based
on
the
encoding
in
each
generation
of
the
four
implementations, and the modified random cost data are
generated five times. The modifications are then used to
find the optimal cost data forecasting. In this study, due to
the size of the training data, five generations are sufficient
to
obtain
valid
results.
The
following
steps
are
implemented when applying the GA in level 2.
Step 1: Initial population
A
longitudinal
study
of
each
cost
object
(
) is used to forecast data using the
multi-objective GA for the two objects in parallel.
Step 2: First GA generation, encoding and selection
The first generation is performed by selecting each cost
object and encoding through generating random values,
either ones or zeros, for each cost data object. The
selection for each cost data object is based on encodings
with the value of 1. This selection is used to evaluate the
forecasted data using the multi-objective fitness function.
Step 3: Fitness function
The multi-objective fitness function is based on
multiple functions for measuring the forecasting accuracy.
The mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) is used to
evaluate the selected forecasting data from the previous
step [13]. The fitness functions are formulated as equation
(4):
(4)
where
and
: time
;
: the actual data over time;
: the forecasted data over time.
Step 4: Crossover and mutation
In this study, we use a one-point crossover with a fixed
crossover probability. This probability decreases the bias
of the results over different generations due to the huge
data values.
For chromosomes of length l, a crossover
point is generated in the range [1, 1/2 l] and [1/2 l, l]. The
values of objects are connected and should be exchanged
to produce two new offspring. We select two points to
create more value ranges and find the best fit.
Randomly ten percent of the selected chromosomes
undergo mutation with the arrival of new chromosomes.
For the cost object values, we swap two opposite data
values. The purpose of this small mutation percentage is to
keep
the
forecasting
changes
steady
over
different
generations.
Step 5: New generation
The
new
generation
step
repeats
steps
2
to
4
continuously for five generations. Five generations are
enough for these data, because the fitness function is
repeated after the fifth generation. The selected generation
is used for the second level to validate the forecasting
accuracy for each object. This step yields fully correlated
data that can be used for forecasts covering several
months.
III.
RESULTS OF THE TWO-LEVEL GAS
A. Results of Level 1: GA based on the ARIMA model
In this part of the study, we tested GA based on the
ARIMA model to generate forecasting data for the labor
cost object. The forecasted data for each population
obtained with 15 different generations were then evaluated
using the second level. The second level evaluation helped
in deciding the best generation of the forecasted data. In
this section, we present only the best forecasted curves
with the historical data because of the huge number of
possibilities considered in this study.
Figure 2 shows the forecasted labor data curve for 20
months from 2013 to 2015, for the second population and,
specifically, for generation 13. In addition, it shows the
historical data with the polynomial trend to illustrate the
relationship between the independent variables over a
timeline with monthly intervals. The selected labor data
show a better forecasting than that obtained with the
ARIMA model in that the forecasted data are close to the
actual data and the polynomial trend. The ARIMA
parameters for the selected labor cost data covering 47
months were p= 0.22, d= 1 and q= 0.23.
Figure 2. Labor cost data forecasting using the GA based on the
ARIMA model
The forecasted data for the labor cost object were
evaluated using the second level, applying a GA based on
the statistical forecasting error rate. The model for the
forecasting accuracy evaluated the forecasted data for 20
months from 2013 to 2015 based on the actual values of
this period. Implementing level 2, the accurate forecasted
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

data were found, i.e. the proper selection of data for each
object to be used for forecasting.
Figure 3 show an example of bias in forecasting at the
second population and seventh generation. The forecasted
data for the 20-month period do not seem to be in sync
with the historical data before the vertical line or with the
polynomial trend curve after the vertical line. The
forecasted
data
are
higher
than
the
historical
and
polynomial trends.
Figure 3. Labor cost data forecasting using the GA based on the ARIMA
model
B. Results of level 2: GA for measuring the forecasting
accuracy
The outcome from the first level, specifically for each
generation for each population, indicates the forecasting
accuracy for each cost object. For each generation, the GA
based on multiple fitness functions was used to find the
best fitness value through five different generations. The
fitness functions (forecasting error rate models) provide an
accurate data forecasting through comparing the behaviour
of the different models and revealing which forecasting
model is appropriate.
Selecting a proper population for the labor cost data is
quite difficult due to the variety of fitness values. In this
study, we considered the population that was selected by
fitness value that have a low forecasting error rate. The
twelve generation for the forth population was selected as
having the lowest forecasting error rate with a suitable
selection of input data. The labor cost data were selected
using fitness (MAPE), with value of 0.4 as seen in Figure
4.
Figure 4. Fitness(MAPE) for four populations
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
The GA based on the ARIMA model provides other
possibilities for calculating the parameters (p,d,q) and
improves the data forecasting. The outcome of the multi-
objective GA based on the ARIMA model can be used to
forecast data with a high level of accuracy, and the
forecasted data can be used for LCC analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Ali Ismail Awad,
Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, for his
support concerning the research methodology and for
allowing us to use the computing facilities of the
Information
Security
Laboratory
to
conduct
the
experiments in this study. In addition, we would like to
extend our gratitude to Prof. Peter Soderholm at the
Swedish
Transport
Administration
(Trafikverket)
for
supplying the data for this study.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. E. Box, G.M. Jenkins, G.C. Reinsel and G.M. Ljung,
Time series analysis: forecasting and control, John Wiley
& Sons, 2015.
[2]
Y. Chen, B. Yang, J. Dong and A. Abraham, "Time-series
forecasting using flexible neural tree model," Inf.Sci., vol.
174, no. 3, pp. 219-235, 2005.
[3]
I. Hatzakis and D. Wallace, "Dynamic multi-objective
optimization with evolutionary algorithms: a forward-
looking approach," in Proceedings of the 8th annual
conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation,
2006, pp. 1201-1208.
[4]
N. R. Herbst, N. Huber, S. Kounev and E. Amrehn, "Self-
adaptive
workload
classification
and
forecasting
for
proactive
resource
provisioning,"
Concurrency
and
computation: practice and experience, vol. 26, no. 12, pp.
2053-2078, 2014.
[5]
D. Kwiatkowski, P.C. Phillips, P. Schmidt and Y. Shin,
"Testing the null hypothesis of stationarity against the
alternative of a unit root: How sure are we that economic
time series have a unit root?" J.Econ., vol. 54, no. 1-3, pp.
159-178, 1992.
[6]
R. J. Hyndman and Y. Khandakar, Automatic time series
for forecasting: the forecast package for R, Monash
University, Department of Econometrics and Business
Statistics, 2007.
[7]
T. Vantuch and I. Zelinka, "Evolutionary based ARIMA
models for stock price forecasting," in ISCS 2014:
Interdisciplinary Symposium on Complex Systems, 2015,
pp. 239-247.
[8]
S. Thomassey and M. Happiette, "A neural clustering and
classification system for sales forecasting of new apparel
items," Applied Soft Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1177-
1187, 2007.
[9]
C. Ding, Y. Cheng and M. He, "Two-level Genetic
Algorithm for clustered traveling salesman problem with
application in large-scale TSPs," Tsinghua Science &
Technology, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 459-465, 2007.
[10] O. Cordón, F. Herrera, F. Gomide, F. Hoffmann and L.
Magdalena, "Ten years of Genetic fuzzy systems: current
framework and new trends," in IFSA World Congress and
20th NAFIPS International Conference, 2001. Joint 9th,
2001, pp. 1241-1246.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

[11] C. Shi, Y. Cai, D. Fu, Y. Dong and B. Wu, "A link
clustering
based
overlapping
community
detection
algorithm," Data Knowl.Eng., vol. 87, pp. 394-404, 2013.
[12] S. J. Leybourne, T.C. Mills and P. Newbold, "Spurious
rejections by Dickey–Fuller tests in the presence of a break
under the null," J.Econ., vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 191-203, 1998.
[13] R. J. Hyndman and A.B. Koehler, "Another look at
measures of forecast accuracy," Int.J.Forecast., vol. 22, no.
4, pp. 679-688, 2006.
[14] Yamur
K.
Aldouri,
Hassan
Al-Chalabi,
and
Zhang
Liangwei. "Data clustering and imputing using a two-level
multi-objective genetic algorithm (GA): A case study of
maintenance
cost
data
for
tunnel
fans."
Cogent
Engineering 5.1: 1-16, 2018.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

