A Taxonomy of the Future Internet Accounting Process
Igor Ruiz-Agundez, Yoseba K. Penya and Pablo Garcia Bringas
DeustoTech, Deusto Institute of Technology
University of Deusto
Bilbao, Basque Country
{igor.ira,yoseba.penya,pablo.garcia.bringas}@deusto.es
Abstract—Accounting is an old term that deﬁnes the activity
of keeping records of the money. However, accounting in
the Internet implies not only economic principles, but also
engineering aspects. Accounting has been used for studying
the impact on usage quotas, for dimensioning a provider
infrastructure or for registering the data ﬂow, among others.
Each evolutionary step of the Internet has its implications in
how the accounting process is performed. The new challenges
of the Future Internet and the Next-Generation Networks
(NGN) reveal the need of a revision of the accounting process.
Against this background, we present a taxonomy of the
accounting process of the Internet. This taxonomy classiﬁes
all the functions involved in accounting in a hierarchical
structure, representing their behaviour. The resulting taxonomy
helps deﬁning the terminology, requirements and working
framework of all the accounting-related studies. Further, it
helps through the learning, teaching and assessing process in
the area of accounting.
Keywords-Accounting; Internet; Taxonomy.
I. INTRODUCTION
Accounting is “the art of recording, classifying, and
summarizing in a signiﬁcant manner and in terms of money,
transactions and events which are, in part at least, of
ﬁnancial character, and interpreting the results thereof”
[1]. This activity is important for business and commercial
purposes but also for the Internet, when a service provider
charges a client with a fee for the usage of a certain service.
These services are as varied as voice, data, multimedia, e-
market places or any other emerging service.
In this scenario, the accounting process implies consider-
ing both engineering and economic aspects. It is essential
to enforce policies such as usage quotas, to dimension the
provider infrastructure, or to make statistical analysis of the
usages, among others [2]. Resource accounting has also an
important role in infrastructure congestion control due to the
usage fees applied to the consumers [3].
Nowadays, we can distinguish two main accounting
paradigms: the telecommunications world and the Internet
world [4]. In telecommunications, the accounting process
consist of apportioning the charges between the home en-
vironment, the serving network and the user. On the other
hand, in the Internet, the accounting process is deﬁned as the
set of functions that manages the data regarding the use of
the resources. In addition, traditionally, Internet accounting
was limited to transport accounting. Customers paid for the
use of the network resources of certain access providers
[5] and not for any other type of service. Nevertheless
and despite their differences, these worlds are converging,
and more accurate deﬁnitions of the accounting process are
emerging.
So far, in this converging model, accounting is under-
stood as the process of collecting the resource usage for
capacity and trend analysis, cost allocation, auditing and
billing [6]. However, the evolution of the Internet denotes
that this deﬁnition is not enough. It needs to refer to a
broader concept, considering all the possible functions and
related concepts [7]. This broader concept needs to meet
the new requirements of the Future Internet, helping on
accomplishing the new challenges that it implies.
Against this background, we introduce a new deﬁnition
of the accounting process. This deﬁnition meets the require-
ments of the evolution of the Internet, understood as in
the Future Internet [8] [9]. We also present a taxonomy of
the full accounting process, from the resource usage to the
ﬁnancial clearing of its use.
Originally taxonomies were used only to classify organ-
isms. Nowadays, taxonomies are used to classify things and
concepts of any indole. There are economic, biological and
even military taxonomies, each one specifying its domain
area. Furthermore, taxonomies can have a tree, network or
linear structure. All of them have proved to be useful for
learning, teaching and assessing [10] and a central part of
most conceptual models (ordering the elements into a model)
[11]. They are specially useful presenting limited views of
a model for human interpretation, and play an essential role
in reuse and integration tasks.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
Section II introduces the related work on taxonomies about
accounting. Section III presents an integrated vision of the
accounting process describing all the involved functions.
Finally, Section IV concludes and glimpses the future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Accounting of service usage is one of the main tasks
of service providers in their operation and management
processes, providing the necessary information for the sub-
sequent functions. Although accounting requirements are
111
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

studied in many books and articles, they rarely deﬁne a clear
taxonomy of the full accounting process.
Some authors refer to the terms pricing, charging, or
billing to represent the complete process of detecting the
speciﬁc usage of a service [12] [13]. There is a need of
disambiguating the accounting process employing a precise
terminology and splitting clearly all the functions involved.
In this paper, we refer to the accounting process as a meta-
concept that includes all the aforementioned functions.
On the other hand, we considered the application area of
each author. Different areas imply different terminology and
semantics. For instance, accounting on packet-switched net-
works [14], micro-payments [5], grid services [15], mobile
networks [16], VoIP services [17] or Wi-Fi connections [18].
Other researches tried to standardise the accounting pro-
cess on the Internet [19] [20]. Nevertheless, to our knowl-
edge, there is none that has performed a full taxonomy of
the accounting process for the Future Internet accounting
requirements making the learning, teaching and assessing
process much harder [10].
The present taxonomy was performed following the di-
rectives to develop a taxonomy [21]. We started this method
determining the requirements and identifying the concepts
involved in the area of Internet accounting. After, a ﬁrst draft
of the taxonomy was deployed. This draft was reviewed with
the users and the experts in the ﬁeld providing the authors
with feedback for a reﬁning process. Once a ﬁnal version
was deﬁned we started a maintaining process.
III. AN INTEGRATED VISION OF THE ACCOUNTING
PROCESS
The terminology regarding the billing process has always
been diffuse sometimes involving contradictory semantics.
The origin of this problem is not new and it dates back to
the evolution of the accounting through the years and the
inﬂuence of the different application areas in which it has
been applied.
As terminology of the accounting process is evolving and
is not standard [13], we studied the work done by other
authors. Each contribution gives a different vision of the
accounting process, creating a set of mixed concepts. How-
ever, after analysing the most relevant accounting process
paradigms, we found out that they share some common
characteristic that can be re-factored in order to have an
integrated accounting process.
This integrated vision is represented in Fig. 1. The process
starts with a resource usage which is registered by the meter-
ing function through the metering records. Afterwards, the
mediation function intercedes by generating the accounting
records for the accounting function. This function creates
session records, which are sent both to the pricing and
to the charging functions. The pricing function generates
a formula deﬁning how to price the session records that
is used by the charging function. The ﬂow continues with
Figure 1.
An integrated vision of the accounting process
the charging, which generates charge records for the billing
function. There, the ﬁnal bill is sent to the ﬁnancial clearing
function.
Throughout the accounting function, inter-domain ex-
changes between organizations could be performed. These
interchanges could happen at the accounting and billing
steps, enabling roaming capabilities and inter-organization
collaboration.
A. Metering
Metering is the function that collects the information
ﬂow regarding the resource usage of a certain service by a
consumer and its usage. This measurement data is formed by
service usage metrics provided by the monitoring function.
Fig. 2 shows an overview of the metering function.
Figure 2.
Metering function overview
112
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

This information is technical and is expressed in mea-
surable quantities of consumer resources [5]. Examples of
this measurable quantities are the number of data sent and
received within an Internet connection, the seconds of a
telephone call or the number of watts consumed.
This information is the starting point of the accounting
process and will be used in the entire process. It determines
the particular usage of resources within end-systems or
intermediate systems on a technical level, including Quality-
of-Service (QoS), management and networking parameters
[22].
This function is normally implemented in a meter reader
at a certain infrastructure point where the resource usage
data is accumulated as long as the memory is able to. This
point is known as metering point [23]. In addition, a meter
reader can be classiﬁed as a consumer side meter, in which
the meter reader is allocated with the consumer; or as a
provider side meter, in which the meter reader is allocated
in the providers infrastructure. In certain cases, meter readers
are between the consumer and the provider, allocated in a
third part or in a neutral infrastructure that both the consumer
and the provider trust.
The meter readers can also be classiﬁed by their nature
as intrusive (when there is an interface with the resource)
or non-intrusive (when there is not an interface with the
resource).
Additionally, the metering function is managed by a meter
manager. There is a number of parameters that must be set
for correct resource usage measurement. These parameters
will depend on the resource itself. However, the general
working procedure persists among the different resources.
The manager is responsible for the authentication and au-
thorization of the metering records, it must ensure the
conﬁdentiality of the data.
Monitoring is the function that collects the information
of a resource usage as raw data and provides usage metrics
to the metering function. The usage metrics reﬂect the use
of a resource by a consumer (human, machine or other
service) of a certain resource in measurable quantities. These
metrics deﬁne the rules that the monitoring device apply in
a classiﬁer by deﬁning the ﬁltering of usage data [24].
The monitoring function can be conditioned by the con-
sumers’ conﬁguration. That is, different consumers may
have different usage metrics monitored (also known as data-
points). The consumer conﬁguration refers to the function
that conﬁgures a service for its use. Normally, this conﬁg-
uration is set after the user is authenticated in the service
provider infrastructure [25].
B. Mediation
The metering records generated by the metering function
are usually stored in a homogeneous data format (account-
ing records). Fig. 3 shows an overview of the mediation
function.
Figure 3.
Mediation function overview
Mediation is intended to ﬁlter, collect, generate, aggregate,
correlate, and reconcile raw technical data by transforming
these metering records into a data format that can be used
for storing and further processing [22] [26]. In this way,
data processing is easier and the different functions of the
accounting process require less mash-ups and conversions,
resulting in a better performance [27].
In case different data formats are used, translation of
data is necessary in order to have all the information in
a homogeneous format as soon as possible. Conversion
rules, both syntactic and semantic, are required in order to
guarantee the integrity of the transformed data. This set of
rules is also known as mediation systems [28] and is very
common in the telecommunications world.
Further, the mediation can report to the accounting func-
tion in three different ways: push mode, poll mode or interval
mode [19] [26]. In the push mode, the mediation function
report the accounting function with accounting records as
soon as it receives them. On the other hand, in the poll mode,
the accounting function has to ask for the accounting records
to the mediation function. Finally, in the interval mode the
mediation function report to the accounting function each
certain interval.
C. Accounting
Other taxonomies [6] include resource usage measure-
ment, rating, charging, billing, and invoicing in this function.
Nevertheless, we decided to split these functions in order
to have a more representative organization. We also need
to stress the difference between the accounting process,
113
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

which implies the full process described in Fig. 1, and
the accounting function, which we are deﬁning now. Fig.
4 shows an overview of the accounting function.
Figure 4.
Accounting function overview
Accounting is the process of ﬁltering, collecting and ag-
gregating the information that reﬂects a resource usage by a
certain consumer. This process will generate session records
whose format will depend on the service infrastructure and
the service provider [27]. The session records represent
the resource usage over a session. Accounting gateways
creating the session records may do so by processing interim
accounting events or accounting events from several devices
serving the same user [6].
This accounting function is expressed in metered resource
consumption, e.g., for applications, calls, or any type of
connections [22], depending on the service provided, by
representing the technical speciﬁcations of the service. It
includes the supervision of the data gathering from the
mediation function, the collection and the storage of this data
[4]. Accounting policies deﬁne how these functions behave
and are speciﬁed by a set of generation rules [25].
The accounting data collection and storing is also known
as archival accounting and is performed at a measuring hub.
This function transports the metered data to a storage point
or measuring hub [12]. The measuring hub is the point where
the data from the metering readers is collected. It is also
known as storage point. The measuring hub collects data
from two main sources: the provider and the customer. Data
from the provider is created by internal and control meters,
and is used to control the provider’s infrastructure. On the
other hand, data from the customer represents the usage
consume and is used in the whole accounting process.
Data archival may be necessary because of the memory
limitations of the meter readers or because the information
may be needed for long periods of time. It is also used
to reconstruct missing entries, to prevent data loss and to
archive the data for long periods of time. Legal or ﬁnancial
requirements frequently mandate archival accounting prac-
tices, and may often dictate that data to be kept conﬁdential,
regardless of whether it is to be used for billing purposes or
not [6].
The concentration of the metering results in a measuring
hub may be necessary to correlate information from dis-
tributed meter readers and to process the data solely in one
point. The correlation are based on classifying functions that
group the accounting records by resources. All the available
resource accounts are stored by the correlating function,
which can also group the accounting records by grouping
the data from a distributed accounting organizing the data
from the different consumers.
D. Roaming
Roaming is the function that allows using more than
one provider while maintaining a formal, customer-vendor
relationship just with one [29]. In order to offer roaming
capabilities, providers need three main subsystems. The
consumers’ subsystem, which registers visiting consumers,
the authentication subsystem, which validates the credential
of the consumer, and the accounting subsystem, that has
already been described [30].
In order to allow consumers to roam, providers need
roaming agreements between them. They negotiate the legal
aspects of authentication, authorization and billing of the
visiting subscriber. There are several standards that create a
work ﬁeld framework for these agreements [31] [20].
Roaming can also be intra-domain or inter-domain [6].
Being intra-domain implies that there is an exchange of
session records between different accounting functions but
always in the same provider or administrative boundary.
On the other hand, in the inter-domain roaming the session
records travel from one provider to another, crossing their
administrative boundaries.
E. Pricing
Pricing is the function of giving a price to a certain
resource usage. It is a critical function for the full accounting
process because it deﬁnes the price that a basic quantity
of the service will cost. Some authors name it a rating
or pricing policy [6]. This pricing policy determines the
way a session record is rated. These records come from
the accounting functions and are correlated to the price that
is normally represented in monetary units and depends on
the pricing scheme used. Fig. 5 shows an overview of the
pricing function.
114
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

Figure 5.
Pricing function overview
This process may combine technical considerations, such
as resource consumption, and economical ones, such as ap-
plying tarifﬁng theory or marketing methods [22]. The price
can be calculated in many different ways (e.g. auctions, static
pricing, dynamic pricing, priority pricing, cost-volume-proﬁt
analysis scheme or based on market situation analysis) [32]
[33] [13]. However, it will always reﬂect the results of cost
and market analysis. This function translates the previous
economic considerations into technical quantities that can be
merged with the measurable quantities of consumer resource
usages.
Pricing is deﬁned by the pricing schemes, which are a
critical part of the business and are related to cost and
market analysis. It is a function for calculating a price. It
can be represented as a formula (pricing function) consisting
of the pricing variables (consumption measure metrics of
the session records) and pricing coefﬁcients [25]. Pricing
schemes can be based on many different paradigms, such
as pre-paid, post-paid, time-based, volume-based, ﬂat-rate,
usage-based or location-based, among others.
Tariffs are a special case of pricing. They are normally
regulated by a governmental institution and imply political
economic impacts. They have been applied to the traditional
telephone network, energy or gas markets. The tariffs are
deﬁned by the tariff models or functions. They determine
the tariff function for a resource usage.
These functions, pricing functions or tariff functions, are
applied in the charging function. They can be modiﬁed by
discount strategies, rebate schemes, marketing information
or any other parameter deﬁned by the service level agree-
ments.
F. Charging
Charging is the process of calculating the cost of a
resource usage, the function that translates technical values
into monetary units by applying a pricing function to the
session records [22]. It correlates session records, from
the accounting function, and resource usage unit price to
generate charge records [27] [4].
Charging acts as an umbrella term for charging options
and charging mechanisms. This separation emphasises both
the technical and the economic aspects of charging [15].
Some authors refer to charging as billing. Nevertheless, as
we will see later on, billing implies some different processes,
such as customers’ data management [22].
These charge records are formed by the technical quan-
tities of a resource usage and their corresponding monetary
units. The records can be used for multiple purposes of
business intelligence: statistical analysis, data mining, au-
diting, revenue estimation, ﬁnancial planning or structure
dimensioning.
The charging policies deﬁne when and how the billing
function is invoked. They deﬁne the frequency of cost
allocation every time accounting data is received, at regular
intervals of time (e.g. daily, each moth or each two moths) or
when requested by the charging function. They also deﬁne
the granularity of the billing function. Granularity is deﬁned
as how sub-divided a data ﬁeld is. For example, a postal
address can be recorded, with low granularity, as a single
ﬁeld (address) or with high granularity, as multiple ﬁelds
(street address, city, postal code, country).
The charging can be distributed between multiple parties
as deﬁned in the distribution policy. This policy will split the
costs between the different parties or consumers, allocating
an already-known cost among several entities [6]. Each party
has its own proﬁle that could contain the client pricing
function, discounts or special offers.
The consumers can also have different business rela-
tionships with the providers. This relation will deﬁne the
charging mode (e.g. subscribers or pay-per-use).
G. Billing
Billing, or invoicing, is the process of transforming charge
records into the ﬁnal bill, or invoice, summarizing the charge
records of a certain time period (usually a month) and
indicating the amount of monetary units to be paid by
the customer [4]. Fig. 6 shows an overview of the billing
function.
Figure 6.
Billing function overview
It may include information about the customer that is
gathered from the customers data management system. This
115
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

system contains all the customers’ personal data. The billing
function has also usage-sensitivity when depends on the
resource usage of the consumers. On the other hand, a
process that is not affected by the resource usage is non-
usage-sensitive [6].
There are also billing policies that deﬁne the type of bill
(paper or electronic), the time period that the bill represents,
the outlook and content, the payment deadline date and
how the ﬁnancial clearing is done, specifying the payment
method [27].
As charging, billing can also have different granularity.
An aggregated bill represents two or more charges together
and an itemised bill has all the charges individualised.
H. Financial clearing
Figure 7.
Financial clearing function overview
The ﬁnancial clearing function includes activities from a
commitment for a transaction to its settlement. In the case
of resource accounting, this function implies the payment of
a bill. Payment is the function of transferring the money of
the client to the service provider. The amount to transfer is
deﬁned by the bill. Fig. 7 shows an overview of the ﬁnancial
clearing function.
The payment function will use a traditional or electronic
payment system. Cash, paper checks and automatic bank
clearances are in the group of the traditional payment sys-
tems. On the other hand, credit card systems are grouped in
the electronic payment systems. This payment function will
have a well-deﬁned scheme specifying the way the money
is exchanged between all the participants [27] through a
payment gateway.
There is also a special type of payment, the micro-
payments. These payments have requirements of high speed
processing, delivery occurs immediately and in small sums
of money. These payments use a speciﬁc micro-payment
system, that are mainly electronic. A payment system also
supports money transfers, which are smaller than the mini-
mal economically feasible credit card payment [5].
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a taxonomy of the accounting
process. We have detailed all the functions involved in it,
looking at all the relationships between them. We believe
that the presented taxonomy contributes to the learning,
training and assessing in the area of accounting because it
gives an integrated vision of the process. As it deﬁnes a
common vocabulary, it is also useful for the deﬁnition of
the accounting requirements among different actors.
This taxonomy was deﬁned using a developing method,
as described in Section II, ensuring its quality and the
maintainability of the knowledge to potential changes.
Further, we proposed an uniﬁed and controlled vocabulary
that can be use in any operation related with the Internet
accounting. The taxonomies have been proved to help to
organize content and make connections between people and
the information they need [21].
Future works include performing a proof-of-concept of
the presented taxonomy by implementing it in an accounting
system. Furthermore, this taxonomy deﬁnes the pillars for
the developing of accounting related applications such as
fraud management systems [34] or data proﬁling [35] among
others. We also planned a validation of the proposed tax-
onomy, using both direct inspection and validation metrics
[36] as well as updating the taxonomy itself if there are
substantial changes in the area of Internet accounting.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Singh Wahla, “AICPA committee on terminology,” Ac-
counting Terminology Bulletin, vol. 1, p. Review and Rsum,
1941.
[2] V. Agarwal, N. Karnik, and A. Kumar, “Metering and ac-
counting for composite e-Services,” in Proc. 1st IEEE Intl
Conf. on E-Commerce, 2003, pp. 35–39.
[3] N. Blefari-Melazzi, D. D. Sorte, and G. Reali, “Accounting
and pricing: a forecast of the scenario of the next generation
internet,” Computer Communications, vol. 26, no. 18, pp.
2037 – 2051, 2003.
[4] M. Koutsopoulou, A. Kaloxylos, A. Alonistioti, L. Merakos,
and K. Kawamura, “Charging, accounting and billing man-
agement schemes in mobile telecommunication networks and
the internet,” IEEE Communications Surveys, vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 50–58, 2004.
[5] R. Prhonyi, “Micro payment gateways,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Twente University, 2005.
[6] B. Aboba, J. Arkko, and D. Harrington, “RFC2975: Introduc-
tion to Accounting Management,” RFC Editor United States,
2000.
116
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

[7] A. Pras, B. van Beijnum, R. Sprenkels, and R. Parhonyi, “In-
ternet accounting,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 39,
no. 5, pp. 108–113, 2001.
[8] S. Shenker, “Fundamental design issues for the future Inter-
net,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1176–1188, 1995.
[9] A. Gavras, A. Karila, S. Fdida, M. May, and M. Potts, “Future
internet research and experimentation: the FIRE initiative,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 37,
no. 3, p. 92, 2007.
[10] P. W. Airasian, K. A. Cruikshank, R. E. Mayer, P. R. Pintrich,
and J. R. M. C. Wittrock, A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching,
and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives, abridged edition ed., L. W. Andersonand
and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds.
Allyn & Bacon, 2000.
[11] C. Welty and N. Guarino, “Supporting ontological analysis of
taxonomic relationships,” Data and knowledge engineering,
vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 51–74, 2001.
[12] B. Stiller, G. Fankhauser, B. Plattner, and N. Weiler, “Pre-
study on Customer Care, Accounting, Charging, Billing, and
Pricing,” Computer Engineering and Networks Laboratory
TIK, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, Pre-study performed for the
Swiss National Science Foundation within the Competence
Network for Applied Research in Electronic Commerce, 1998.
[13] M. Kouadio and U. Pooch, “A taxonomy and design consid-
erations for Internet accounting,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, vol. 32, no. 5, p. 48, 2002.
[14] M. Karsten, J. Schmitt, B. Stiller, and L. Wolf, “Charging
for packet-switched network communication - motivation and
overview,” Computer Communications, vol. 23, pp. 290–302,
2000.
[15] C. Morariu, M. Waldburger, and B. Stiller, “An integrated
accounting and charging architecture for mobile grids,” in
Broadband Communications, Networks and Systems, 2006.
BROADNETS 2006. 3rd International Conference on, Oct.
2006, pp. 1–10.
[16] M. Koutsopoulou, A. Kaloxylos, and A. Alonistioti, “Charg-
ing, accounting and billing as a sophisticated and reconﬁg-
urable discrete service for next generation mobile networks,”
in IEEE Vehicular Technologhy Conference, vol. 4. Citeseer,
2002, pp. 2342–2345.
[17] L. Deri, “Open source VoIP trafﬁc monitoring,” SANE 2006,
2006.
[18] G. Detal, D. Leroy, and O. Bonaventure, “An adaptive three-
party accounting protocol,” in Proceedings of the 5th interna-
tional student workshop on Emerging networking experiments
and technologies.
ACM, 2009, pp. 3–4.
[19] C. Mills, D. Hirsh, and G. Ruth, “RFC1272: Internet Ac-
counting: Background,” RFC Editor United States, 1991.
[20] I. Programme, IPDR Service Speciﬁcation. Design Guide,
http://tmforum.org/ ed., TeleManagement Forum, September
2008.
[21] M. Whittaker and K. Breininger, “Taxonomy development for
knowledge management,” in World Library and Information
Congress: 74th IFLA General Conference and Council, Au-
gust 2008.
[22] B. Stiller, J. Gerke, P. Reichl, and P. Flury, “Management of
differentiated services usage by the cumulus pricing scheme
and a generic internet charging system,” in Proceedings of the
Symposium on Integrated Network Management.
Citeseer,
2001.
[23] N. Brownlee, C. Mills, and G. Ruth, “RFC2722: Trafﬁc ﬂow
measurement: architecture,” RFC Editor United States, 1999.
[24] S. Blake, D. Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, and
W. Weiss, “RFC2475: An Architecture for Differentiated
Service,” RFC Editor United States, 1998.
[25] T. Zseby, S. Zander, and C. Carle, “RFC3334: Policy-Based
Accounting,” Internet RFCs, 2002.
[26] I.
Programme,
IPDR
Business
Solution
Requirements,
http://tmforum.org/ ed., TeleManagement Forum, May 2009.
[27] B. Stiller, G. Fankhauser, B. Plattner, and N. Weiler, “Charg-
ing and accounting for integrated internet services - state of
the art, problems, and trends,” in Problems, and Trends; The
Internet Summit (INET98), 1998, pp. 21–24.
[28] G. Zhang, B. Reuther, and P. Mueller, “User Oriented IP
Accounting in multi-user systems,” in Integrated network
management VIII: managing it all: IFIP/IEEE Eighth Inter-
national Symposium on Integrated Network Management (IM
2003), March 24-28, 2003, Colorado Springs, USA.
Kluwer
Academic Pub, 2003, p. 59.
[29] B. Aboba, J. Lu, J. Alsop, J. Ding, and W. Wang, “RFC2194:
Review of Roaming Implementations,” RFC Editor United
States, 1997.
[30] B. Aboba and G. Zorn, “RFC2477: Criteria for Evaluating
Roaming Protocols,” RFC Editor United States, 1999.
[31] T. Hoc, “On the relaying capability of Next-Generation GSM
cellular networks,” IEEE Personal Communications, p. 41,
2001.
[32] M. Karsten, J. Schmitt, L. Wolf, and R. Steinmetz, “Cost
and price calculation for internet integrated services,” in
In Proceedings of Kommunikation in Verteilten Systemen
(KiVS99.
Springer, 1999, pp. 46–57.
[33] X. Chang and D. Petr, “A survey of pricing for integrated
service networks,” Computer communications, vol. 24, no. 18,
pp. 1808–1818, 2001.
[34] I. Ruiz-Agundez, Y. K. Penya, and P. G. Bringas, “Fraud
detection for voice over ip services on next-generation net-
works,” in Proceedings of the 4th Workshop in Information
Security Theory and Practices (WISTP 2010).
Passau,
Germany: Springer, 12-14 April 2010.
[35] S. Hung, D. Yen, and H. Wang, “Applying data mining to tele-
com churn management,” Expert Systems with Applications,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 515–524, 2006.
[36] S. Spangler and J. Kreulen, “Interactive methods for taxon-
omy editing and validation,” in Proceedings of the eleventh
international conference on Information and knowledge man-
agement.
ACM, 2002, pp. 665–668.
117
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

