Knowledge-Based Decision Support with  
Self-Learning Methods  
 
Klaus Peter Scherer, Constantin Rieder, Markus Germann  
Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,  
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 
e-mail: klaus-peter.scherer@kit.edu 
constantin.rieder@kit.edu 
markus.germann@kit.edu 
 
Joachim Baumeister, Stefan Plehn  
denkbares GmbH 
Würzburg, Germany 
e-mail: joachim.baumeister@denkbares.com  
stefan.plehn@denkbares.com
 
 
Abstract - Intelligent systems are available and helpful to 
support the decision process for diagnostics in complex 
technical processes. Normally, such a decision support system 
consists of a knowledge-based module, which is responsible for 
the real assistance power, given by an explanation and the 
logical reasoning processes. The knowledge acquisition and 
generation of the complex knowledge correlations are crucial, 
because there are different correlations between the complex 
parameters. So, in this approach, (semi)automated self-
learning methods are researched and developed for an 
enhancement of the quality of such a decision support system.  
Keywords 
– 
computer-aided 
assistance; 
self-learning 
methods; expert system; decision support; intelligent diagnostics; 
knowledge base.  
I. 
  INTRODUCTION  
     In the field of diagnostics for complex process behavior, 
the computer-based assistance is very important and useful. 
Concerning an enhancement and optimization of the decision 
making process of the diagnostic experts, there is a need to 
correlate all information obtained from the available data of 
the inspected process or system. Ideally, these data sets can 
be retrieved from the machine facility, the individual 
components, the functionality and the process parameters. 
For human beings, it is sometimes impossible to find out 
hidden knowledge in large data sets. This paper is divided in 
four sections:  
The second section outlines the necessary data and structures 
as well as technical properties that are important for 
presented self-learning methods and expert support. The 
third section describes certain techniques and methods that 
are used in the approach presented to implement a semi-
automated assistance through statistical and self-learning 
procedures. The last section discusses the results and 
possible procedures that can significantly support the work 
of an expert. 
II. 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
In the information technology, knowledge-based methods 
are predestined to make available both the human expertise 
and the background deep knowledge to perform the logical 
reasoning process [1]. So, the need is to find out a suitable 
structure to store and manage the heterogeneous distributed 
knowledge and the expertise of the experts. Furthermore, 
intelligent self-learning mechanisms can help to enhance the 
power of the knowledge base. 
A. Ontology and Dependencies 
On the basic layer, a frame-based information system is 
performed with all features of the different ontologies. The 
descriptive layer for the interested information categories is a 
hierarchical class–subclass system with a refinement process 
and a special specification from class to subclass. 
 An ontology concept [2] consists of the declarative part of 
the semantics, the meaning in this knowledge-based 
approach, the sources (publications, authors and so on) and 
multimedia representations (pictures, tables, movies) of the 
machine components, the parameters and the functionalities. 
On the next layer, the concept of the semantic dependencies 
is subdivided into weak and strong types of relations. The 
knowledge domains of the first layer can be correlated by so 
called weak links, i. e., semantic associations between the 
different domains. Considering a selected domain, the 
diagnostic expert is suggested to also regard the semantic 
neighbored knowledge domain. However, there exist no 
strong logical dependencies between the two knowledge 
items. The human expert can be guided from one point of 
interest to another in an intelligent manner. An additional 
type of relation is performed by a stronger relation, such as a 
rule in a rule based approach. If the premises of the first 
domain are given, then the second knowledge items result as 
a conclusion from the preconditions [3]. 
B. Knowledge Representations  
The frames represent the static multimedia information 
(text, pictures, and audio) including the source information 
(i.e., HTTP-addresses, literature and links). 
The context and the correlations between the different 
frames 
are 
represented 
as 
associations, 
sometimes 
undirected, sometimes logically directed as implications. 
This software component is responsible for an intelligent, 
context sensitive navigation through the knowledge base and 
the ontologies [4].  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

The 
rules 
represent 
the 
complex 
conditional 
dependencies by using the known operators NOT, AND and 
OR, based on predicate calculus. The visualization represents 
the frames as nodes and the used relations between the nodes 
as scripted edges. So, the information set can be shown by 
relations like a workflow in the ontology-based structure. 
C. Visualization 
Additionally to a wiki-based description of information 
by knowledge concepts and the relations, a well performed 
visualization enhances the fast understanding and leads to a 
better overview of the refinement structure of the semantic 
network and the relations within the net. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Circle Pack visualization [5] provides a useful 
alternative by representing hierarchical relations through 
containment. It is very convenient to see, in which classes 
(concepts) other classes are embedded. With a convenient 
zoom process, one bubble can be refined in its own 
substructure. So, it is possible to see an overview of the 
overall structure and the position of a certain information 
concept. Concepts are displayed as circles (Figure 1). Child-
concepts are located inside their circles. 
III. 
SELF-LEARNING ASSISTANCE  
Often, hidden knowledge is given by a lot of structured 
data like machine parameters. For humans, it is not possible 
to extract this knowledge. Self-learning methods are one 
method to extract and find out the hidden knowledge from 
the structured data set by using statistical methods. In the 
field of knowledge discovery, advanced methods and 
applications could be performed to produce machine and 
process correlations. So, new knowledge was generated by 
finding causal relations between the machine components, 
the process parameters and function parameters by a 
dependency ranking process. After transformation in 
association rules, logical based representations were 
available for the diagnostic experts to evaluate the new 
knowledge. This evaluation process is done by a human 
expert. 
A. Learning Methods  
With ontology based technologies, the diagnostic expert 
knowledge, including the background deep knowledge and 
the reasoning process, is modeled and represented. To do 
this, a special wiki-system is developed to represent this 
information in a declarative manner to the human experts. 
Additional semantic information is used for modeling the 
concepts and relations between them. This guarantees a 
comfortable navigation through the knowledge items. Data 
mining methods, especially subgroup analysis methods, are 
developed, extended and used to analyze and find out the 
correlations and conditional dependencies between the 
structured machine data. After finding causal dependencies, 
a ranking must be performed for the generation of rule-based 
representations. For this, the machine data are transformed 
into a computer understandable format. The imported data 
are used as input for algorithms of conditioned probability 
methods to calculate the parameter distributions concerning a 
special given goal parameter. This procedure is responsible 
for the rule generation. 
B. Results of Self-Learning  
The computer-based information and decision support 
system for human experts guarantees a high quality 
diagnostic decision of the human experts, as it enables them 
to navigate through the concepts and the relations in a 
semantic network, supported by a logical reasoning process. 
The entire knowledge base is subdivided into different 
domains, such as “machine parameters” and “process 
parameters”. It enhances the functionality of a classical 
information system and it is useful for understanding 
complex machine facilities by the explanation of the 
reasoning process. With knowledge discovery methods like 
subgroup analysis (i.e., data mining software VIKAMINE 
[6]), significant correlations can be found concerning one 
target parameter. After the generation of association rules, 
the human experts can evaluate or revise the knowledge 
gained from the machine learning process. So, the self-
learning process extends the knowledge base and is available 
as information system for further processing.   
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The aim and the advantage of such a (semi)automatic 
self-learning information system for diagnostics is the 
extension of the classical knowledge base by finding new 
parameter correlations. The discovered knowledge is 
transformed into association rules and can be used as a rule- 
based knowledge representation in the information system. 
Even more than one goal parameter of interest can be 
considered by the semi-automated learning process. With 
ranking procedures, the strongest premises and also 
conjunctive associated conditions can be found regarding the 
parameter of interest. This procedure detects the structure for 
new dependencies. So, the knowledge hidden in structured 
Figure 1. Circle Pack Visualization of Structured Classes 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

tables or lists can be extracted as rule-based representation. 
This is a real assistance power of the knowledge based 
decision for the diagnostics in complex technical processes.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research and development of the proposed semi self-
learning assistance system is funded by the national 
economical government of Germany. It is proposed to install 
a commercial system based on the results of the presented 
prototype at our industrial partners. The authors thank the 
project executing organization AiF in Berlin, which is 
responsible for the allocation of the budget to the research 
center and the commercial company. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Studer, R. Benjamins, and D. Fensel, “Knowledge 
engineering in Principles and methods”, in Data and 
Knowledge engineering Vol 25,  pp 161-197, 1988 
[2] V. R. Benjamins, D. Fensel, and A. Gomez Perez, 
“Knowledge 
management 
through 
ontologies”, 
in 
Proceedings on the Int. conf. on Practical Aspects of 
Knowledge Management (PAKM 98), Basel, Schweiz, 1998   
[3] K. P. Scherer, “Hypothesis Generation in the context of an 
ophthalmic application”, in Intern. Conf. on Applied 
Computer Science,   Genua, Italy, pp 130, 2009  
[4] J. Baumeister, J. Reutelshoefer, and F. Puppe, “Engineering 
Intelligent Systems on the Knowledge Formalization 
Continuum”, International Journal of Applied Mathematics 
and Computer Science (AMCS), Vol. 21, 2011 
[5] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: a task by data type 
taxonomy for information visualizations”, in Proceedings of 
the IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages,  pp. 336 – 343, 
1996 
[6] M. Atzmueller, and F. Lemmerich, “VIKAMINE – Open-
Source Subgroup Discovery, Pattern Mining, and Analytics”, 
in Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine 
Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge 
Discovery in Databases, Heidelberg, Germany, 2012 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

