A CADx Scheme in Mammography: Considerations on a Novel Approach
Bruno Matheus, Homero Schiabel
Department of Electrical Engineering
USP – ESSC
São Carlos, Brazil
bmatheus@sc.usp.br, homero@sc.usp.br
Abstract—This paper describes a prototype of a complete
CADx system developed in the last years in our research
groupp.
Its basic structure consists of pre-processing
corrections based on the image acquisition and digitization
procedures (FFDM, CR or film + scanner), a segmentation tool
to detect clustered microcalcifications and suspect masses and
a classification scheme, which evaluates the presence of
microcalcifications clusters and possible malignant nodules
based on their contour. The aim is to provide enough
information not only on the detected structures but also a pre-
report with a BI-RADS classification. At this time, the system
is still lacking an interface integrating all the modules. Despite
this, it is partially functional, as a prototype for testing.
Keywords-Mammography;
Mammographic 
CAD;
Microcalcification 
Detection;
Nodule 
Detection;
Nodule
Classification; Image Analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since all women over the age of 40 are recommended to
perform mammographic exams every
two years, the
demands on radiologists to evaluate mammographic images
in short periods of time has increased considerably. As a
tool to improve quality and accelerate analysis, CADe/Dx
(computer-aided detection/diagnostic) systems are being
researched, but very few complete CADe/Dx systems have
been developed and most are restricted to detection and not
diagnosis. The existent ones [1] [2] are associated to
specific 
mammographic 
equipment 
(usually
Digital
Radiology), which makes them very expensive.
Computer-aided 
Diagnosis 
(CAD) 
schemes 
are
addressed to accelerate and ease the evaluation of medical
images, sometimes serving as a second opinion. In
mammography, the lack of trained professionals makes the
careful evaluation of each image of each exam expensive
and restrictively time consuming, especially for second
opinions. Thus, several CAD schemes are being developed
focusing on mammography. However, the breast tissue is
commonly very difficult for analysis, which makes the few
CAD schemes approved by the American Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) highly expensive, in addition to be
only designed for detection (CADe) – indicating suspected
signals without classifying them.
Our research group has been developing in the past years
some 
processing 
schemes 
for 
both 
detection 
and
classification of signals regarding mammographic images.
These schemes include special attention to pre-processing
enhancements based on imaging acquisition quality
characteristics evaluation [3] [4] [5], detection of clustered
microcalcifications [6] [7] and detection and classification
of suspected masses [8] [9] [10] [11].
The purpose of this paper is to present the ensemble of
several years of research in this CADx scheme prototype,
including the results obtained individually by each module
(as well as joined at all) and to discuss the further
developments of this system in the near future. The scheme
corresponds to an automatic CADx system being developed
for free use and, in the future, to be connected to an online
image database [12] to aid in the medical reports.
This following paper contains a Methods section, where
the prototype system is described; this section is subdivided
by the function of the module described. The next section is
Results, where the results obtained so far with the prototype
are described. Lastly, the Conclusion section discuss the
future of the project.
II.
METHODS
This CADx scheme is divided in 3 major structures: Pre-
processing, CADx processing and Comparison to database.
A detailed diagram is presented in Figure 1. Each division is
described as following:
A. Pre-processing
Once the digital images are obtained, they are submitted
to pre-processing techniques for enhancement based on
imaging
intrinsic parameters,
determined by quality
assurance procedures. This process is composed of:
A.1 Breast and pectoral muscle segmentation
Initially, the digital image is segmented to remove tags
and as much as possible of the background, reducing the
size of
the image and, consequently, reducing the
computational cost of the following procedures. In this step,
the pectoral muscle is also segmented to be used in step
B.B.4.
This 
method 
consists 
of 
a 
logarithm 
contrast
enlargement [13] [14] followed by a segmentation using
Pun’s global threshold [15]. With this, the breast itself is
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-290-5
ADVCOMP 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

segmented from the background. The techniques used in this
step are fully detailed in [16].
A.2. Scanner/CR corrections
Another source of errors in this process is the image
conversion in digital format. The aim in this step is “to
correct” the final image according to the errors or distortions
due to the digitization process, from a film digitizer or other
electronic device in Computed Radiography (CR) or even
Digital
Radiology (DR)
systems
[5]. The procedure
essentially transforms the image intensity according to the
ideal relation between the optical density (or the beam
intensity) and pixel gray scale. This is particularly important
in film scanning, due to the relation between the film
sensitometric curve and the digitizer characteristic transfer
curve.
The technique used in this stage was previously
described. For its use, knowing the characteristic curve of
the scanner or CR/DR system is a requirement.
Figure 1. CADx diagram
B.
CADx processing
Once the image is digitized and transformed according
to the pre-processing techniques, the image is processed in
the 4 distinct modules below:
B.1 Density
In this module, the breast image has its density
evaluated, according to BIRADS [16] [17] classifications.
This evaluation is performed based on the average gray
scale intensity for the entire breast. Also, in this module,
both breasts are compared in each orientation (Mediolateral-
Oblique - MLO and Cranio-Caudal - CC) and analyzed for
density differences between breasts, characterizing an
asymmetry. If an asymmetry is detected, it is evaluated as a
nodule detection in step B.2.
The results of this system are of an average sensitivity of
94.6% with a false-positive rate of 26.35%. Comparing to a
well-recognized work in the field [18] - with a sensitivity of
90.38% and 32.12% false-positives rate - the proposed
module has better results.
B.2Nodules
This module is designed to detect and classify nodules.
First, the complete image is evaluated using neural network
techniques to detect Regions of Interest (RoIs), which
contain nodules [16]. The detected RoIs are then segmented
in order to separate the nodule itself from the background
using EICAMM [19]. Once the nodule is segmented, an
evaluation of the contour, texture and density is used to
classify the nodule between benign or malignant [19].
Early testing with this module presented the following
results: the detection scheme of this module yielded 74% of
sensitivity with 3.5 false positives per image; the
segmentation scheme matches 65.8% against a specialist
response and the classification process reached a sensitivity
of 81.28% with 20.28% false positive rate. More tests are
needed before a full comparison can be drawn to other
similar systems.
B.3Calcifications
This module uses a series of convolution filters derived
from Chan [20] and Schiabel [21] to detect, in the given
image, the location of clustered microcalcifications. The
filter is designed to match the format of a calcification,
increasing the signal when a match occurs and removing
most of the background. This filter is a reworking of Chan’s
filter for images of variable size.
This system has been shown to have good results with
different types of images specially using FFDM [22]. On
average, the system has 89% of sensitivity with 6.9 false-
positives per image. When evaluating only FFDM images,
the false positive rates are reduced to 1.4 per image. As a
comparison, the commercially available ImageChecker [1]
has 91% of sensitivity with 1.5 false-positives per image
and it is restricted to images produced by its own digitizer
system.
B.4 Pectoral muscle
This module takes the segmented pectoral muscle from
step A.1 and searches for nodules [16]. In the current
design, nodules are only detected, since, in most cases, they
will be linfonodes. The demarcation of them facilitates the
evaluation of spreading cancer by the radiologist.
This system simply finds the regional maximum
intensity of the previously segmented pectoral muscle.
These points are usually linfonodes.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-290-5
ADVCOMP 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

The results of this module have shown 74.9% of
sensitivity and 3.5 false positives per image.
B.5 BI-RADS classification
The system is designed to present a BI-RADS©
classification based on all the information obtained in the
previous modules. The final purpose is that the results
shown by this CADx system constitute a pre-report, so that
a radiologist can confirm or change as fit.
C. Comparison to database
Another step in the future development of this CADx
system includes integration with BancoWeb [12] database,
allowing the radiologist to see example of similar results to
those found in the image evaluated.
III.
RESULTS
Currently, the CADx scheme is almost fully developed,
but has not yet been integrated into a single system. For
example, the microcalcification module is fully functional,
but it was developed in MATLAB© and has not been
converted to JAVA© yet.
Hence, all results shown in this work are direct tests with
the different modules, not considering the pre-processing
step in the complete system.
The last two modules in the section above are not yet
completely 
developed 
(BI-RADS 
classification 
and
Comparison to database), since these two modules require
the rest of the program to be fully integrated for
development.
When all modules are working and tested the last step in
the development will be the interface itself, which will be
developed in association with experienced radiologists to
add as much useful functionality as possible.
Once the program is complete the validation will occur
in two formats. The first will be a comparison to the DDSM
database [23] that has over 2600 cases with complete
medical and pathological reports. This will be a direct
comparison between the program report versus the official
medical and pathological report.
The second form will be a comparison between the
program and trained radiologists with at least 10 years’
experience. This set of tests will compare the system results
to a trained radiologist and also the changes in results when
the radiologist has access to the results of the CADx system
before making his final call.
If the CADx improves the statistical results of the
radiologists, it can be considered useful as a second opinion.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The main purpose of this paper was to present a CADx
system that has been shown promising results as a
prototype. Once the interface is ready and all tools of the
system can work automatically, this will be one of the few
CADx systems available for general use.
Each tool has been showing promising results, at least
equivalent to others reported in the literature. For the future,
it is intended to be established in three formats:
downloadable software, an internet system integrated to the
BancoWeb database and a library in JAVA with all the tools
used to develop the system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
To FAPESP for the financial support of this project and
to Breast Research Group, INESC Porto, Portugal for the
INBreast database images.
REFERENCES
1. Hologic. Hologic - Imagechecker Analog Cad. Imagechecker
Analog CAD, 2012. Availible in:
<Http://Www.Hologic.Com/En/Breast-
Screening/Imagechecker/Screen-Film-Cad-Systems/>.
[Retrived: 18 Mar 2013].
2. Kodak. Kodak Mammography Cad Engine, 2004. Available
in:
<Http://Www.Fda.Gov/Medicaldevices/Productsandmedicalp
rocedures/Deviceapprovalsandclearances/Recently-
Approveddevices/Ucm079437.Htm>. [Retrieved: 5 Sep
2013].
3. Schiabel, H., Vieira, M. A. C., and Ventura, L. Preprocessing
For Improving Cad Scheme Performance For
Microcalcifications Detection Based On Mammography
Imaging Quality Parameters. SPIE MI 2009 Diagnosis.
Orlando, FL (Usa): . 2009. pp. 72602g-1 - 72602g-12.
4. Romualdo, L. S., Vieira, M. A. C., and Schiabel, H.
Enhancement Of Breast Images By Noise Reduction And Mtf
Compensation To Improve Microcalcifications Detection.
World Congress On Medical Physics And Biomedical
Engineering (IFMBE Proceedings, vol. 25iv). Munich
(Germany): . 2009. pp. 801-804.
5. Goes, R. F. and Schiabel, H. Computational Adjust
Technique To Digital Mammographic Images Based On
Digitizer Characteristic Curve. Journal Of Electronic
Imaging, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 043012-1 - 043012-9, 2008.
6. Goes, C. E., Schiabel, H., and Nunes, F. L. S. Evaluation Of
Microcalcifications Segmentation Techniques For Dense
Breast Digitized Images. Journal Of Digital Imaging, vol. 15,
pp. 231-233, 2002.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-290-5
ADVCOMP 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

7. Silva Jr., E. C., Schiabel, H., and Ventura, L. Detection Of
Clusters Of Microcalcification Based On Associated
Differential And Morphological Filters In Full Mammogram.
SPIE MI 2009: Image Processing. FL (USA): . 2009. pp.
72594-72594.
8. Schiabel, H., Santos, V. T., and Angelo, M. F. Segmentation
Technique For Detecting Suspect Masses In Dense Breast
Digitized Images As A Tool For Mammography Cad
Schemes. 23rd Annual Acm Symposium On Applied
Computing (Special Track: Computerapplications In Health
Care). Fortaleza, CE, Brasil: Acm New York. 2008. pp. 1333-
1337.
9. Ribeiro, P. B., Schiabel, H., and Patrocínio, A. C.
Improvement In Artificial Neural Networks Performance By
The Selection Of The Best Texture Features From Breast
Masses In Mammography Images. World Congress On
Medical Physics And Biomedical Engineering - IFMBE
Proceedings. Seul (South Korea): . 2006. pp. 2321-2324.
10. Patrocínio, A. C., Schiabel, H., and Romero, R. A. F.
Evaluation Of Bayesian Network To Classify Clustered
Microcalcification. SPIE MI 2004. San Diego: . 2004. pp.
1026-1033.
11. Patrocínio, A. C. et al. Tumoral Mass Classification By
Specialists And The Cad Scheme. World Congress On
Medical Physics And Biomedical Engineering - Ifmbe
Proceedings. Munich (Germany): . 2009. pp. 75-78.
12. Matheus, B. R. N. and Schiabel, H. Online Mammographic
Images Database For Development And Comparison Of Cad
Schemes. Journal Of Digital Imaging, 2010. vol. 24, no. 4 pp.
500-506, Jun 2011.
13. Gonzales, R. C. and Woods, R. E. Digital Image Processing.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2008.
14. Ferrari, R. J., Rangayyan, R. M., Desautels, J. E., and Frère,
A. F. Analysis Of Asymmetry In Mammograms Via
Diretional Filtering With Gabor Wavelets. IEEE Trans. On
Medical Imaging, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 953-964, Sep 2001.
15. Pun, T. Entropic Thresholding, The New Approach.
Computer Graphics And Image Processing, vol. 16, pp. 210-
239, Jul 1981.
16. Schiabel, H. and Menechelli, R. C. Automated
Characterization Of Secondary Signals Of Breast Cancer To
Compose A Module From A Cadx Scheme. 27th International
Congress On Computer Assisted Radiology And Surgery
(CARS 2013) In 15th International Workshop On Computer-
Aided Diagnosis. Heidelberg, Germany: . 2013. pp. 404-404.
17. American College Of Radiology. American College Of
Radiology (ACR) Breast Imaging Reporting And Data
System Atlas (Bi-Rads® Atlas). American College Of
Radiology Website, 2003. Available in:
<Http://Www.Acr.Org/Quality-
Safety/Resources/Birads/Mammography>. [Retrieved: Aug
2013].
18. Wu, J., Besnehard, Q. and Marchessoux, C. Automatic
Classification For Mammogram Backgrounds Based On Bi-
Rads Complaxity Definition And On A Multi Content
Analisys Framework. Medical Imaging 2011: Image
Processing, Proc. of SPIE 2011, Orlando, vol. 7962, pp.
79623f-79623f-12, Fev 2011.
19. Ribeiro, P. B., Romero, R. A. F., Oliveira, P.R, Schiabel, H.,
and Vercosa, L. B. Automatic Segmentation Of Breast
Masses Using Enhanced Ica Mixture Model.
Neurocomputing, vol. 120, pp. 61-71, March 2013. ISSN
0925-2312.
20. Chan, H. P., Doi, K., Vyborny, C. J., Lam, K. L. , and
Schmidt, R. A. Computer-Aided Detection Of
Microcalcifications In Mammograms: Methodology And
Preliminary Clinical Study. Investigative Radiology, vol. 23,
no. 9, pp. 664-671, 1998.
21. Nunes, F., Schiabel, H., and Goes, C.E. A Computerized
Scheme For Detection Of Clusters Of Microcalcifications By
Mammograms Image Processing. Medical Biological
Engineering Computing, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 705-705, 1998.
ISSN 0140-0118.
22. Matheus, B., Neto, J., and Schiabel, H. Clustered
Microcalcification Detection Scheme For Mammographic
Images. The 17th International Conference On Image
Processing, Computer Vision, & Pattern Recognition. Las
Vegas. IPCV pp. 904-908. 2013.
23. Cheng, H.D., Cai, X, Chen, X., Hu, L., and Lou, X.
Computer-Aided Detection And Classification Of
Microcalcification In Mammograms: A Survey. Pattern
Recognition, vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 2967-2971, 2003.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-290-5
ADVCOMP 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

