Virtual Environment in Civil Engineering 
Construction and Maintenance of Buildings 
 
Alcínia Z. Sampaio, Ana Rita Gomes, Joana Prata 
Dep. Civil Engineering and Architecture 
Technical University of Lisbon 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: zita@civil.ist.utl.pt, ritagomes05@hotmail.com, jo.p@sapo.pt 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes two prototype applications 
based on Virtual Reality (VR) technology for use in 
construction and maintenance planning of buildings. The first, 
applied to construction, is an interactive virtual model 
designed to present plans three-dimensionally (3D), connecting 
them to construction planning schedules, resulting in a 
valuable asset to the monitoring of the development of 
construction activity. The 4D application considers the time 
factor showing the 3D geometry of the different steps of the 
construction activity, according to the plan established for the 
construction. The 4D model offers a detailed analysis of the 
construction project. It allows the visualization of different 
stages of the construction and the interaction between all 
stakeholders during the actual construction activity. A second 
VR model was created in order to help in the maintenance of 
exterior closures of walls in a building. It allows the visual and 
interactive transmission of information related to the physical 
behavior of the elements. To this end, the basic knowledge of 
material most often used in façades, anomaly surveillance, 
techniques of rehabilitation, and inspection planning were 
studied. This information was included in a database that 
supports the periodic inspection needed in a program of 
preventive maintenance. This work brings an innovative 
contribution to the field of construction and maintenance 
supported by emergent technology. 
Keywords- Construction; Maintenance; Virtual reality; 
Interactive model. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The main aim of a research project, now in progress at 
the Department of Civil Engineering of the Technical 
University of Lisbon, is to develop virtual models as tools to 
support decision-making in the planning of construction 
management and maintenance, PTDC/ ECM/67748/ 2006, 
"Virtual Reality technology applied as a support tool to the 
planning of construction maintenance". A first prototype for 
the lighting system had already been completed [1]. A 
second prototype concerning construction planning is now 
complete [2] and the VR model concerning maintenance of 
the closure of exterior walls is also finished [3]. This paper 
describes these two later models created as part of the overall 
research project. 
These interactive models integrate Virtual Reality (VR) 
technology and applications implemented in Visual Basic 
(VB) language. The models allow interaction with the 3D 
geometric model of a building, visualizing components for 
each construction. They are linked to databases of the 
corresponding technical information concerning construction 
planning and the maintenance of the materials used as 
exterior closures. The principal objective of the interactive 
VR prototypes is to support decision-making in the area of 
planning. 
Information technology, namely 4D modeling (3D+time) 
and VR techniques is currently in use both in the 
construction activity and in education [4]. At the Department 
of Civil Engineering, some didactic models have already 
been generated. The research project presented in this paper 
follows on from that previous educational work: two 3D 
geometric models which support activity in the rehabilitation 
of buildings [5]; and three VR models developed to support 
classes in Civil Engineering (wall, bridge and roof 
construction) in Technical Drawing, Construction and Bridge 
disciplines [6]. The didactic VR models are in common use 
in both face-to-face classes and on an e-learning platform. 
Virtual Reality technology can support the management 
of data that is normally generated and transformed or 
replaced throughout the lifecycle of a building. This 
technology constitutes an important support in the 
management of buildings allowing interaction and data 
visualization. At present, the management of building 
planning can be presented in 3D form and various materials 
can be assigned to the fixtures and furnishing enabling the 
user to be placed in the virtual building and view it from 
inside as well as outside.This study contemplates the 
incorporation of the 4th dimension, that is, time, into the 
concept of visualization. The focus of the work is on 
travelling through time, or the ability to view a product or its 
components at different points in time throughout their life. 
In maintenance, the time variable is related to the progressive 
deterioration of the materials throughout the building’s 
lifecycle. It is implicit that the incorporation of the time 
dimension into 3D visualization will enable the designer/user 
to make more objective decisions about the choice of the 
constituent components of the building.  
In construction management, over the years, technical 
drawings have played a crucial role in communication 
between the numerous partners in a project. Generally, 
drawings 
represent 
formal 
solutions, 
and 
often 
incompatibility mistakes are only detected at advanced 
stages, on site, accruing additional costs. In this field 4D 
models promote the interaction between the geometric model 
and construction activity planning, allowing immediate 
perception of the evolution of the work. In planning, in 
correct evaluation and the meeting of needs as they arise, 4D 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

models constitute a positive contribution to decision-making 
when establishing planning strategies [7].  
Section II describes the maintenance model, highlighting 
the constitution of the database supporting the model, and the 
organization of a user-friendly interface designed to be used 
by an inspection worker. During the construction of this 
model, the basic knowledge of the topics involved, such as 
aspects related to the materials, the techniques of 
rehabilitation and conservation and the planning of 
maintenance is outlined and discussed. In addition, methods 
of interconnecting this knowledge with the virtual model are 
explored. This prototype was trialled in an actual project.  
These aspects of the construction activity are in constant 
evolution, so require the study of preventive maintenance, 
through, for example, the planning of periodic local 
inspections and corrective maintenance with repair activity 
analysis. For this reason, the model facilitates the visual and 
interactive access to results, supporting the drawing-up of 
inspection reports.  
The construction model, presented in Section III, brings 
an innovative aspect to 4D modelling as usually applied to 
construction planning, through the incorporation of pictures 
into the interface of the VR model, an important support 
element in the comparison between what is planned and what 
is in progress in situ after each construction task.  
II. 
THE WALL MAINTENANCE MODEL 
Façade coatings play an important role in the durability 
of buildings, since they constitute the exterior layer that 
ensures the protection of the wall against the aggressive 
actions of a physical, chemical or biological nature. 
Naturally, they should also give the façade the required 
decorative effect. Since this building component is exposed 
to adverse atmospheric conditions it frequently shows an 
evident degree of deterioration, requiring maintenance 
work.In order to arrive at the best solution for eventual 
maintenance and repair work, a survey of defects and 
deterioration must be conducted. 
In order to better understand the operation of façade 
coating, bibliographic research of materials usually applied 
to this type of material was carried out and a table of 
characteristics of these was drawn up. Subsequently, a 
survey was made of anomalies, probable causes, solutions 
and methods of repair for each of the coatings studied. The 
visualization of the maintenance data of a building and the 
impact of time on the performance of these exterior closure 
materials require an understanding of their characteristics [8] 
(Figure 1): 
• 
Types of material: painted surfaces, natural stone 
panels and ceramic wall tiles; 
• 
Application processes: 
stones (panel, 
support 
devices, adherent products, etc.); ceramic tiles (fixed 
mechanism, procedures, …); painted surfaces (types 
of paint products, prime and paint scheme surface, 
exterior emulsion paints, application processes); 
• 
Anomalies: dust and dirt, lasting lotus leaf effect, 
covering power, insufficient resistance to air 
permeability or weather-proof isolation, damaged 
stones or ceramic tiles, alkali and smear effect, 
efflorescence, fractures and fissures and so on; 
• 
Repair 
work: 
surface 
cleaning, 
wire 
truss 
reinforcing, cleaning and pointing of stonework 
joints, removing and replacement of ceramic wall 
tiles, removing damaged paint and paint surface, 
preparing and refinishing stone panels, etc.. 
 
Figure 1: Different types of materials applied as façade coatings. 
Depending on the role that the façade coatings play on 
the wall as a whole they can be classified as finishing, 
sealing or thermal insulation. The most frequent materials 
used as coating finishes are painting, tiling and, as sealing 
coating of the natural stone: 
• 
Paint coating contributes to the aesthetic quality of 
the building and its environment and also protects 
the surface of the exterior wall against corrosion, 
deterioration and penetration of aggressive agents 
[9]; 
• 
The ceramic coating consists essentially of tiling 
panels, cement and adhesive and the joints between 
the slabs. The application of ceramic tiling to 
building façades has considerable advantages 
particularly as some degree of waterproofing is 
afforded by the glazed surface along with a great 
resistance to acids, alkalis and vapour [10]; 
• 
The use of natural stone in the coating of façade 
surfaces is a good solution both technically and 
aesthetically. The principal characteristics of the 
stones are: reduced water absorption, sufficient 
mechanical resistance to bending and impact, 
abrasion and shearing parallel to the face of the 
slabs. 
A. The database 
The most frequent anomalies that occur in the coated 
façades were analysed in order to create a database linked to 
the virtual model that could support the planning of 
inspections and maintenance strategies in buildings. This 
database contains the identification of anomalies that can be 
found in each type of material used in façades and the 
corresponding probable cause. For each type of anomaly the 
most adequate repair solutions were also selected and 
included in the database. The following example, concerning 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

deficiencies in tiles, illustrates the methodology implemented 
in this virtual application (Table 1). 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLE OF ANOMALIES AND THE ASSOCIATED REPAIR 
SOLUTION 
Anomaly 
Detachment 
 
Cracking / Fracturing 
 
Specification 
of the 
anomaly 
Fall in areas with 
deterioration of support 
Failure of the support 
(wide cracks with well 
defined orientation) 
Repair 
solution 
Replacement of the coat 
(with use of a repair stand 
as necessary) 
Replacement of the coat 
(with repair of cracks in 
the support) 
Repair 
methodology 
1. Removal of the tiles by 
cutting grinder with the aid 
of a hammer and chisel; 
2. Timely repair of the 
support in areas where the 
detachment includes 
material constituent with 
it; 
3. Digitizing layer of 
settlement; 
4. Re-settlement of layer 
and tiles. 
1. Removal of the tiles by 
cutting grinder; 
2. Removal of material 
adjustment in the 
environment and along the 
joint; 
3. Repair of cracks, 
clogging with adhesive 
material (mastic); 
4. Settlement layer made 
with cement in two layers 
interspersed with glass 
fibre; 
5. Re-settlement of layer 
and tiles  
 
B. The interface 
The implementation of the prototype system makes use 
of graphical software programming, Microsoft Visual Basic 
6.0, software to establish a suitable database, Microsoft office 
access, graphical drawing system, AutoCAD Autodesk and 
VR technology based software, EON Studio [11]. 
Many potential users are not computer experts. Human 
perceptual and cognitive capabilities, therefore, were taken 
into account when designing this visualization tool with the 
result that the model is easy to use and does not require 
sophisticated computer skills. It uses an interactive 3D 
visualization system based on the selection of elements 
directly within the virtual 3D world. Furthermore, associated 
with each component, there are integrated databases, 
allowing the consultation of the required data at any point in 
time. 
The interface is composed of a display window allowing 
users to interact with the virtual model, and a set of buttons 
for inputting data and displaying results (Figure 2). For each 
new building to be monitored, the characteristics of the 
environment (exposure to rain and sea) and the identification 
of each element of the façades must be defined. The data 
associated to each element are the building orientation, the 
type of exterior wall (double or single), and the area and type 
of coating. 
 
Figure 2: The main interface of the interactive application. 
Once each monitored element has been chacterized, 
various inspection reports can be defined and recorded and 
thereafter consulted when needed. An inspection sheet is 
accessed from the main interface (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3: Inspection sheet interface 
Characteristics of a façade 
Characteristics of the building and a new 
inspection sheet 
Repair methodology 
Inspection interface 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

The inspection sheet includes the type of covering 
(natural stone, Figure 4), the anomalies (Cracking 
/Fracturing) and a list of possible causes to be selected and 
associated to the element. Several photos can be added. 
 
 
Figure 4: Selecting data in the inspection interface 
The repair methodology associated to the selected type of 
anomaly is also presented. These data are then linked to the 
element. A report history of inspections is permanently 
associated to the building so that during any later interaction 
with the model, the inspection report that was defined using 
the prototype can be accessed. 
To sum up, by using the drop-down menus allowed by 
the interface, the user can associate the characteristics of the 
observed anomaly to: a façade element; the type of anomaly, 
the specification, details and the probable cause of the 
anomaly, an adequate repair solution and pictures taken in 
the building. After completing all fields relating to an 
anomaly, the user can present the report as a pdf file. 
C. The case study 
First, the 3D geometric model of a building was created 
(Figure 5). In this case, the building consists of a ground-
floor, a 1st floor and an attic with dwelling space. The coating 
elements of the walls were then modeled as independent 
geometric objects. In this way, each element can then 
support characterization data of the applied material and 
different kinds of information related to maintenance. 
 
Figure 5: Steps in the geometric modeling process. 
All coatings studied were considered in this case-study. 
Thus the main façade was assumed to be tiled and the 
remaining façades painted while hall façades are of natural 
stone. Figure 6 shows how to identify a façade in the virtual 
model of the building. Figure 7 shows the inspection report 
of an anomaly. 
 
 
Figure 6: Identification of a façade element. 
 
Figure 7: An inspection sheet report. 
III. 
THE CONSTRUCTION PLANNING MODEL 
Construction management can be defined as the 
planning, co-ordination and control of a project from 
conception to completion (including commissioning) on 
behalf of a client [12]. This requires the identification of the 
client's objectives in terms of usage, function, quality, time 
and cost, and the establishment of relationships between the 
people involved, integrating, monitoring and controlling the 
contributors to the project and their output, and evaluating 
and selecting alternative solutions in pursuit of the client's 
satisfaction with the outcome of the project. It is essential, 
therefore, that the project designer has the depth of 
knowledge to be able to correctly identify the different stages 
of the construction planning, as well as to take into 
consideration the logistics and resources involved in the 
project. The construction planning used in the implemented 
prototype is realistic and considers the graphic and written 
documentation, 
measurements 
and 
quantities 
map, 
specifications and regulations relevant to the project [13]. 
Natural stone 
Cracking/Fracturing 
Repair solution 
Go to the element 
Inspection sheet 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

A prototype based on VR technology with application to 
these demands of construction planning, was created. This 
interactive virtual model presents the project in 3D, 
integrated with the construction planning schedule, resulting 
in a valuable asset in monitoring the development of the 
construction activity, compared to the construction planning 
already drawn up. The 4D application allows the time factor 
to be considered in conjunction with the 3D geometry of the 
different steps of the construction activity, according to the 
schedule established for the construction, thus offering a 
detailed analysis of the construction project. Additionally, 
VR technology allows the visualization of different stages of 
the construction and interaction with the real-time 
construction activity. This application clearly shows the 
constructive process, avoiding inaccuracies and building 
errors, thereby facilitating better communication between 
partners in the construction process. 
This application was developed in three stages: planning, 
modeling, and the integration of the first two stages. 
• 
Planning takes into consideration the final purpose 
of the presentation, and the definition of tasks; the 
details, therefore have to be in line with this idea. 
Using Microsoft Project 2007, the tasks are 
introduced and the relations between them defined; 
• 
Geometric modeling needs to relate correctly to the 
tasks as defined at the planning stage. Using 
AutoCAD 2010 as a modeling tool, the layers make 
the distinction between the different tasks and 
elements are created in enough detail to support 
correct comprehension. The application also presents 
a real-time illustration of the evolution of the 
construction through photographs of the site, taken at 
specific points in time; 
• 
The third stage, integration, makes use of two 
programs: EON Studio 5.0 and Microsoft Visual C# 
2008 Express Edition, where the first takes the 3D 
model created with AutoCAD and introduces it in the 
application developed using the second. 
A. The interface 
The application, developed in C#, integrates all the 
components described with the interface as shown in    
Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8: Application interface. 
The application his organized as outlined below: Virtual 
model (1); Pictures of construction site (2); Planning task list 
(3); Gantt map (4). The interaction with the application is 
made through 3 and 4. Both the task list items and Gantt map 
bars are buttons which, when pressed, send the information 
to the EON for the task selected, and in return EON presents 
the model in the current state, that is, it shows and hides 
specific elements depending on the specific stage of the 
construction. 
EON can interact with the model in a number of different 
ways. In this prototype only the state of the elements and 
camera position is changed. The state of an element is 
presented by its Hidden property, whether it is selected or 
not, whilst the camera position is determined by translation 
and rotation coordinates. EON Studio also offers the 
possibility of changing the material associated with each 
element, creating a more realistic model. 
Any new objects can be introduced into the application, 
just by modeling the new elements considering their 
positions relative to the ones already in the simulation and 
programming the associated action in EON Studio. 
Likewise, 
the 
application 
accepts 
any 
kind 
of 
construction project, as long as its implementation 
imperatives are met. Additionally, with the appropriate 
models, it can also be used in construction site management. 
The weakness of this prototype lies in the time needed to 
carry out the preparation for the actual interaction with the 
application. Modeling a building may not be very 
extensive.The programming of the actions in EON Studio, 
however, can be time-consuming. 
B. The case study 
As a method of testing the application, a construction 
project was undertaken, more particularly, the structure of a 
building, using both its graphic documentation, that is, the 
architectural and structural blueprints, and the project 
description and construction planning (Figure 9). 
 
Figure 9: Construction planning (list and Gantt map) and the 3D model of 
the building structure. 
1
2
4
3
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

The whole project was simplified to serve this paper’s 
academic purposes: the list of tasks was defined based on the 
more characteristic stages of a construction process, and a 
few tasks focused on the construction details of certain 
elements. As a result, AutoCAD layers were created for each 
task defined and the 3D model constructed. When finished, 
the 3D model was exported to EON Studio, where a diagram 
of events was created, after which the application was ready 
to be used. 
As explained above, the task list and the virtual model 
are connected: when selecting a task, the relevant 
construction stage is presented (Figure 10). The first scenario 
is the landscape and then the foundation work is shown 
(Figure 11). 
 
Figure 10: Application's virtual model and task list. 
In Figure 11, some construction details have been 
modeled. Progress across three different stages, of one of the 
columns, is shown in Figure 12. There being no picture 
associated, the camera symbol becomes visible instead. A 
detail of the reinforcement and concrete of a slab is shown in 
Figure 13. 
 
Figure 11: Visualization of the foundation work. 
 
Figure 12: Column construction: reinforcement, formwork and concreting. 
 
Figure 13: Construction of a slab. 
When constructing a building, the planning sometimes 
needs to be changed due to unexpected occurences. 
Implementing these changes in the prototype is actually very 
simple, as the user has only attribute new start and finish 
dates to the task in MS Project and load the new file into the 
application. 
When a task is selected in the construction planning chart 
the static position of the model is presented. A first view is 
always linked to a task. This was established to provide 
easier interaction with the 3D model, and to focus the 
attention of the user on the important sections of each task, 
guiding them through the proper course of development of 
the construction. 
Next, the user can manipulate the virtual model, in order 
to choose the identical perspective as that shown in the 
photo. So, with the visualization of what is planned and what 
has been done in the real building, the construction work can 
be better compared and analyzed (Figure 14).  
 
Figure 14: Rotation applied to the virtual model. 
In addition by manipulating the model the user can walk 
through the virtual building observing any construction detail 
he wants to compare. 
All steps have been modelled and linked to the planning 
chart. Figure 15 shows the details of the construction work. 
The date for each visualized task is shown in the upper left 
corner of the virtual model window. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

 
Figure 15: Sequence of the construction process. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Virtual Reality technology with its capability of 
interaction and connectivity between elements was employed 
in the developed prototypes within a research project, 
offering several benefits both in presenting and developing 
projects and in supporting decision-making in the 
maintenance domain. 
A VR model to support the maintenance of walls enables 
the visual and interactive transmission of information related 
to the physical behaviour of the elements. The model shows 
the characteristics of each element of the building in the 
model and the information related to inspection, anomalies 
and repair works. As the 3D model is linked to a database in 
an interactive environment and has a user-friendly interface 
with easily manipulation of the data, it engenders a 
collaborative system. With this application, the user may 
fully interact with the program referring to the virtual model 
at any stage of the maintenance process and can analyse the 
best solution for repair work. It can also support the planning 
of maintenance strategies. The developed software is easy to 
handle and transport for on-site inspections and comprises 
information of the causes, solutions and methods for 
repairing anamolies. 
Technical drawings and explanatory texts often have 
little detail and are frequently insufficient in fully 
comprehending the object. Using VR models means that 
mistakes can more easily be caught before construction 
starts, which translates into time and cost reduction. The 
construction planning model can be used with any kind of 
construction project and, being a flexible application, accepts 
new data when necessary, allowing for a comparison 
between the planned and the constructed. The prototype can 
also be expanded to include other aspects of construction 
management, such as resource administration, or to have 
real-time access to the construction, through the use of 
cameras installed on site. The use of new mobile 
technologies could move the application to the construction 
site, clarifying any doubts about location or position of each 
component. 
Both models support construction activity. The VR 
construction model allows the presentation of each step 
comparing what is planned with the real situation observed, 
the pictures taken in situ . The model, therefore, helps the 
designer and owner to redefine the early plan introducting 
changes to the work in progress. Thus, economic benefits of 
updating the planning schedule are achieved along with 
better, error-free construction with no unnecessary delays.  
The maintenance model supports the global analysis of 
the need for repair tasks in a building, helping the designer to 
define an adequate plan of rehabilitation work. The plan 
must incorporate the repair of all anomalies detected during 
an inspection visit, which are reported, with the help of the 
VR model, it, too, bringing economic benefits.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support 
of the Foundation for Science and Technology, a 
Governmental Organization for the research project PTDC/ 
ECM/67748/ 2006, "Virtual Reality technology applied as a 
support tool to the planning of construction maintenance", 
now in progress. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Sampaio, A.Z., Ferreira, M.M., and Rosário, D.P., 2009. 
Interactive virtual application on building maintenance: The 
lighting component, In Proc. IRF2009, 3rd International 
Conference on Integrity, Reliability and Failure: Challenges 
and Opportunities, Symposium Visualization and human-
Computer Interaction, Porto, Portugal, July 20-24, abstract 
pp. 221-222, paper 11 pgs. 
[2] Santos, J.P. 2010 ‘Construction Planning using 4D Virtual 
Models’, Integrated Master Degree Thesis in Construction, 
Technical University of Lisbon, Portugal. 
[3] Gomes, A.R., 2010. Virtual Reality technology applied to the 
maintenance of façades, Integrated Master Degree Thesis in 
Construction, Technical University of Lisbon, Portugal. 
[4] Mohammed, E.H., 2007. n-D Virtual Environment in 
Construction Education, the 2nd International Conference on 
Virtual Learning, ICVL 2007, pp. 1-6. 
[5] Sampaio, A.Z., Henriques, P.G., and Ferreira, P.S., 2006. 
Virtual Reality Models Used in Civil Engineering, IMSA'06 
Proceedings of the 24th IASTED international conference on 
Internet and multimedia systems and applications Education, 
ACTA Press Anaheim, CA, USA, USA.  
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1169188 
<retrieved: March, 2011> 
[6] Sampaio, A.Z., Ferreira, M.M. Rosário, D.P., and Martins, 
O.P., 2010. 3D and VR models in Civil Engineering 
education: Construction, rehabilitation and maintenance, 
Automation in Construction 19 (2010) 819–828. 
[7] Webb, R.M. and Haupt, T.C. 2003. The Potential of 4D CAD 
as a Tool for Construction Management, 7ª Int. Conf. on 
Construction Application of Virtual Reality, USA. 
[8] Gomes, A.M. and Pinto, A.P., 2009. Didactic text of 
construction materials, Technical University of Lisbon, IST, 
Lisbon, Portugal. 
[9] Ferreira, L., Coroado, J., Freitas, V., and Maguregui, I., 2009. 
Causes of the fall of tiles applied to exteriors of buildings. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Patterned 
tiling 
in 
buildings 
from 
1850-1920. 
In 
Conf.Patorreb, 3rd Meeting on Pathology and rehabilitation of 
Buildlings, FEUP, Porto, March 18 -20 
[10] Veiga, M. and Malanho, S., 2009. Natural stone coating: 
methodology of diagnosis and repair of anomalies. In 
Conf.Patorreb 3rd Meeting on Pathology and Rehabilitation of 
Buildings, FEUP, Oporto, Portugal, March 18-20 
[11] EON 
Studio, 
http://www.eonreality.com/ 
<retrieved: 
Septembre, 2010> 
[12] Walker, A. 2002. Project Management in Construction, 
Fourth edition, Oxford, Blachweel Publishing. 
[13] Casimiro, J., 2006. Integrated Planning of Deadlines and 
Costs in PME’s Small and Medium Bubsinesses, Civil 
Engineering, Final Report, Technical University of Lisbon, 
Portugal. 
. 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

