Characterizing Energy Efﬁciency in I/O System for
Scientiﬁc Applications
Javier Panadero, Sandra M´endez, Dolores Rexachs and Emilio Luque
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department (CAOS)
Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
javier.panadero@campus.uab.es
{sandra.mendez, dolores.rexachs, emilio.luque}@uab.es
Abstract—The increasing complexity of scientiﬁc applications
and the increase of scalability in high performance computing
systems demand a more powerful Input/Output system. This
requirement is present in both performance and power con-
sumption. For this reason, performance, power consumption,
energy and energy efﬁciency have become critical measures in
Input/Output systems. Nowadays, when a High Performance
Computing center buys a system of storage not only does it take
into account the price, but also the cost of its useful life cycle
as well as the energy cost. This paper proposes a methodology
to characterize the energy efﬁciency of the Input/Output system,
considering the Input/Output system at a device level, I/O library
and ﬁle system. The methodology provides a wide range of I/O
system parameters that have an impact on the energy efﬁciency.
Furthermore, we evaluate the impact of Input/Output intensive
applications in energy efﬁciency.
Keywords-Energy Efﬁciency; Consumption; I/O System; HPC;
Methodology.
I. INTRODUCTION
Energy efﬁciency has become an extremely important con-
sideration for the storage system, due to several factors,
among which the most important is the scalability of the
system, because we will not be able to expand the system
if we have consumed all the available energy [1]. Another
important factor to consider is the cost of the Input/Output
(I/O) system, due to the Kilowatt/hour rate imposed by the
electricity company. It is because of this reason that nowadays,
when a High Performance Computing center buys a system of
storage, not only does it take into account the price, but also
the cost of its useful life cycle.
These days, we can ﬁnd similar rankings to the Top500
[2] such as the Green500 [3], where we can obtain a list
of the supercomputers with the highest energy efﬁciency in
computing. The Green500 updates its ranking 3 times a year
in order to increase awareness about power consumption and
energy. Furthermore, they promote alternative total costs and
ensure that supercomputers do not only simulate the climate
change but they do not help to its degradation. For I/O systems,
it is not easy to ﬁnd analysis for comparing energy efﬁciency.
In considering power consumption and energy efﬁciency,
the scientiﬁc community has an extremely important challenge
to overcome [4]. When we take into account both the energy
efﬁciency and a determinate performance of the I/O system, it
is important to have common sense for the conﬁguration of the
I/O system. First of all, we are going to consider, how to do
an energy diagnosis; What can characterize of the I/O system;
How can analyze power consumption and energy efﬁciency;
What metric should we use. All these questions are necessary
to be able to plan and to propose improvements of energy
efﬁciency in the conﬁgurations of the I/O system. In this paper,
we offer a methodology for characterizing energy efﬁciency in
the I/O system. The proposed methodology relates application
phases to power consumption phases throughout the execution
time. This methodology considers the I/O system at device
level, I/O library and global ﬁle system. On the other hand,
it extracts information about throughput, power consumption,
energy and energy efﬁciency in a system with different device
access patterns. Considering this information, we analyze the
impact of energy efﬁciency for the different conﬁgurations of
the I/O system. The methodology allows us to characterize I/O
scientiﬁc applications such as EarthScience, NuclearPhysics,
CombustionPhysics, etc. This methodology serves as a starting
point to be able to decide on the dimensioning of the I/O
system that improves its energy efﬁciency. We also analyze
the impact of the executed benchmarks in the characterization
of the I/O system.
In this paper, we use a Watts UP pro ES digital power
meter to take measurements and analysis for the I/O system.
This meter provides a sampling each second.
This paper is organized as follows: in the next section
we brieﬂy review related work. In Section III, we introduce
our methodology for characterizing energy efﬁciency in the
I/O system. Then, in Section IV, we expose and analyze the
experimental results. Finally, in Section V, we present the
conclusions and future work.
II. RELATED WORK
The work that we introduce in this paper is related to the
analysis and characterization of the I/O system.
Ge [4] proposes a methodology to proﬁle the performance,
energy and energy efﬁciency considering the parallel I/O
access patterns and the CPU frequency. This study differs from
our work since we do not just consider the I/O access patterns.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Fig. 1.
I/O system
On the other hand, Hylick [5] proposes an analysis of power
consumption at device level, considering the dependence of the
locality of the data and the block size of access. Our study
differs from this one since we do not consider just the I/O at
the device level but also the I/O at the system level.
Another study proposed by Sehgal [6] analyzes the energy
and energy efﬁciency by considering several Linux local ﬁle
systems modifying the default options. Our work differs from
his study because we do not consider modifying the default
options but instead we consider different ﬁle system levels
(local, distributed and parallel).
In terms of massive storage, Dong [7] proposes an analysis
about power characteristics of read/write operations compared
with the power efﬁciency of different RAID levels. Our work
considers RAID levels as a part of the characterization of
device level.
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
In this section, we detail our methodology for the charac-
terization of the energy efﬁciency in terms of performance,
power, energy and energy efﬁciency.
We characterize at device level and at I/O system level.
Fig. 1 illustrates the I/O system; we characterize the elements
that include the device level and the I/O system level. The
methodology is divided into four parts:
• Metrics selection used during the characterization,
• Characterization at device level,
• Characterization at I/O system level and
• Characterization of the benchmark parameters.
Fig. 2 illustrates these parts and, in addition, the information
obtained in each part of the characterization.
A. Metrics used in the methodology
In this section, we detail the metrics used in the methodol-
ogy for: performance, power, energy and energy efﬁciency.
The performance of the I/O operations is normally quan-
tiﬁed using throughput (number of megabytes transferred per
second) and/or IOPs (Input/Output Operations Per Seconds).
The throughput (MB/sec) is obtained directly by the I/O
Fig. 2.
Characterization of the I/O system
benchmarks or Linux I/O tools and IOPs are obtained indi-
rectly analyzing the bandwidth and the duration time of I/O
operations.
We use the watt (W) as metrics for power and the Joule (J)
for the energy, both included in the international unit system.
The power meter obtains Watts directly and energy is derived
indirectly from the total execution time of the benchmark per
average consumption power of the benchmark execution.
There is not a standard measurement for energy efﬁciency.
Due to the interrelation between performance and energy,
Liu [8] proposes two new metrics for energy efﬁciency:
IOPS/Watt and MBPS/Kilowatt. For this study we have chosen
MBPS/watt as efﬁciency metrics. We use the equation men-
tioned above introducing the energy. For this reason, we use
the equation (1) and we obtain MB/J as the ﬁnal equation for
the energy efﬁciency.
1 Joule = 1 Watt ∗ 1 Second
(1)
B. Characterization at the device level
This phase consists of the characterization of the devices
and RAID system using I/O benchmark as Iozone [9] or/and
Bonnie++ [10]. These benchmarks generate and measure a
wide variety of ﬁle disk operations. During the characteri-
zation, we consider the access patterns (sequential, random,
stride), the request size of operations and the type of access
(block or character). For these operations, we characterize the
bandwidth, the power consumption, the energy and the energy
efﬁciency. We also consider the device’s different states of
power consumption.
C. Characterization of the I/O system level
This phase consists of the characterization of the I/O li-
brary, the ﬁle system (local, distributed and parallel), storage
connection (NAS, SAN, DAS, NASD) and the system buffer
cache. We obtain the bandwidth, the power consumption, the
energy and the energy efﬁciency. In order to characterize the
I/O system level, one could use the IOzone or/and Bonnie++
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

ﬁle system benchmarks. IOR [11] or/and PIO-bench [12] could
be used as I/O library benchmarks. These benchmarks leverage
the scalability of MPI to accurately calculate the throughput
of a given number of client machines. As we have already
illustrated in ﬁgure 1, this characterization is linked with the
characterization at the device level because the data follows
a process until it is written or read in the ﬁnal device (single
device or RAID system). For this reason, at the same time we
carried it out at the I/O system level and at the device level.
D. Benchmark parameters characterization
To characterize the different levels, we use I/O benchmarks.
These benchmarks have many conﬁguration parameters, the
access patterns (sequential, random, stride), the request size of
operations, the type of access (block or character), the number
of processors, the type of I/O library, amongst others.
The objective is to tune the speciﬁc parameters of the
benchmarks, according to the characterization that we are
doing.
E. Characterization of the I/O system
We carried out our characterization on two different sys-
tems. The ﬁrst system characterized was a Pentium 4 single
core, with a 512 MB RAM memory and a single device
Seagate Barracuda ATA ST340016A. It also has a capacity
of 80GB and a cache disk of 2MB. Fig. 3 illustrates the
power consumption speciﬁcations of each state and also the
transitions of the device. The local ﬁle system used was Ext4
with a DAS store network. The I/O library used was MPICH.
The second system characterized was the cluster Aohyper. This
cluster has 8 dual Core nodes AMD Athlon(tm) 64 X2, 2 GB
RAM memory, 150 GB local disk. The local ﬁle system used
was Ext4. Also has a 1 NFS server with RAID 1 (2 disks) with
230GB capacity and RAID5 (3 disks) with stripe=256KB and
917GB capacity, both with write-cache enabled (write back).
The networks used were two Gigabit Ethernet network, one
for communication and one for data.
We utilized the Watts UP pro digital power meter to
measure. It was connected to the output AC power source of
the computer. This meter provides a sampling each real-time
second.
These two systems have been characterized. Now, we
present how we characterized the I/O system. Although we
expose the workstation characterization, this characterization
is extensible for the cluster characterization or another system.
We describe the workstation characterization, however it could
be extended for the cluster characterization or any other
system.
1) The device characterization: What we did, ﬁrst of all,
was to characterize the effects of power-saving using state
controls. In order to do that, we used the benchmark IOR,
which was executed twice with an interval of 60 seconds
between each execution. Fig. 4 illustrates the result of the
execution with power-saving using state controls and without
power-saving. Fig. 5 shows the power consumption and the
energy required for the two executions. The result of execution
Fig. 3.
Speciﬁcations of power consumption
Fig. 4.
Execution both power saving and without power saving
is better without power-saving states than with power-saving
states. This is due to several factors such as: short Standby pe-
riods, the cost of spin-up transactions (time and power) and the
peaks obtained during the spin-up transactions. Applications
with short standby periods do not take advantage of power
saving states.
After that, we characterized different access patterns (se-
quential and random). In order to do that, we used the
benchmark IOzone with different requests sizes and a ﬁle size
of 1GB. Fig. 6 illustrates the result of the characterization
for sequential access patterns. Finally, Fig. 7 illustrates the
characterization for random access patterns. We observe the
following trends if we execute the sequential characterization
and the set of request sizes tested in read operations. In the
Fig. 5.
Power and energy for execution with power saving
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

(a) Bandwidth and Power
(b) Energy and energy efﬁciency
Fig. 6.
Characterization for sequential access patterns
case of a very small-sized request (16 KB - 32 KB), we
obtain a larger bandwidth, more power, less energy and an
increase in energy efﬁciency. On the other hand, in the case of
a request size of 8192KB, we obtain the worst bandwidth and
the lowest power of the whole set of request size. The result
is larger energy consumption and the worst energy efﬁciency.
In write operations, in terms of bandwidth, energy and energy
efﬁciency show the same trends. However, in terms of power,
by increasing the request size, the power increases. Despite
the small power variation that we observe, it has an inﬂuence
in the metrics of energy and energy efﬁciency. We observe the
following trends if we execute the random characterization and
the set of request size tested in read and write operations. In
the case of a larger request size, we obtain a larger bandwidth,
less energy and more energy efﬁciency. Because of the data
locality, as we increase the request size, data transferring time
is longer than data seeking time. Power consumption has two
different trends depending on the operation type. In write
operations, if we increase the request size we obtain more
power consumption. On the other hand, in read operations, if
we increase the request size the lowest power consumption is
obtained.
2) I/O system characterization: At I/O system level, we
characterized the inﬂuence of different cache levels on the
system. It is worth mentioning that we have included the
(a) Bandwidth and Power
(b) Energy and energy efﬁciency
Fig. 7.
Characterization for random access patterns
cache disk as part of the system cache hierarchy. We call
the buffer memory of the operating system buffer cache. For
that reason, we used the benchmark IOzone with different
request sizes and size ﬁle of 1GB. Fig. 8 illustrates the result
of execution with different levels of cache disabled. In this
ﬁgure, we observe the following trends: bandwidth and energy
efﬁciency decrease whereas power and energy increase as we
disable levels of cache. There are no substantial differences
between the power consumption without buffer cache disabled
and disk cache enabled; and there is no difference either
between power consumption without buffer cache disabled and
disk cache disabled. On the contrary, there are differences in
energy and energy efﬁciency for those conﬁgurations, because
of the inﬂuence of the bandwidth.
Moreover, we also characterized the inﬂuence of the I/O
library. To achieve these study objectives, we characterized the
MPICH library. In order to do that, we used the benchmark
IOR for 1 core, with different request sizes and a ﬁle size
of 1GB. The goal was to observe the inﬂuence in energy
efﬁciency with the insertion of the new layer in the I/O stack.
In Fig. 9, we observe the following trends: bandwidth and
energy efﬁciency decrease whereas energy increases for a
larger request size. Power consumption in write operations
increases until a request size of 512 KB and then, it begins to
decrease. In read operations, in the case of request size (16KB
– 512 KB), we obtain the same trend in relation to power. It
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

(a) Bandwidth and Power
(b) Energy and energy efﬁciency
Fig. 8.
Execution with different levels of cache disabled
begins to decrease from a 512 KB request size on. It also
inﬂuences energy efﬁciency.
IV. EXPERIMENTATION
In order to evaluate the methodology for the characteri-
zation, we selected the Block Tridiagonal (BT) application
of NAS Parallel Benchmark (NPB) suite. We executed this
application in the systems that were previously characterized.
On the workstation, the application was executed in its class
B and subtype full. That conﬁguration writes a ﬁle size of 1,5
GB. Whereas for the execution on the cluster, we executed the
application in its class C and subtype full for 16 processors.
That conﬁguration writes a ﬁle size of 6,5 GB.
Fig. 10 shows the trace of the application for the work-
station. The violet color represents write operations and the
green color represents read operations. We observe 3 differ-
ent phases; involves the computing and discontinuing write
operations of 128 KB request size. The second phase is I/O
intensive in write operations, whereas the last phase is I/O
intensive in read operations.
Fig. 11 illustrates power consumption during the application
execution. After an initial time when the state of the device
was idle, we executed the application. We observed 2 distinct
phases; in the ﬁrst phase, we observed more consumption
than in the second phase. This is due to application compute
(a) Bandwidth and Power
(b) Energy and energy efﬁciency
Fig. 9.
Characterizating the inﬂuence of the I/O library
Fig. 10.
Trace of the application NAS BT class B subtype FULL
and write discontinuous operations that took place during the
ﬁrst phase. Whereas in the second phase only intensive I/O
operations without compute were made. During the ﬁrst phase,
we observed peaks of consumption, which are caused by the
addition in write operations of power to compute power.
Fig. 12 shows the trace of the application for the cluster. The
application was executed with two different RAID conﬁgura-
Fig. 11.
Power of the execution application BT class C subtype FULL
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Fig. 12.
I/O Phases of NAS BT-IO by 16 processes FULL subtype
(a) RAID 1
(b) RAID 5
Fig. 13.
Power consumed for NAS BT-IO by 16 processes
tions (RAID 1 and RAID 5). The yellow color represents write
operations and the green color represents read operations. We
observe 2 different phases; the ﬁrst phase is I/O intensive in
write operations of 128 KB request size, whereas the second
phase is I/O intensive in read operations.
Fig. 13(a) illustrates the power consumption during the
application execution on the cluster for a RAID 1 conﬁgura-
tion, whereas the Fig. 13(b) illustrates the power consumption
during the application execution on the cluster for a RAID 5
conﬁguration.
After an initial time where the state of the devices was
idle, we observed 2 distinct phases for the two conﬁgurations.
The ﬁrst conﬁguration phase is the power consumption for
I/O intensive write operations; whereas the second phase is
the power consumption for I/O intensive read operations. We
observed that because the I/O system is apart from the compute
Fig. 14.
Real and references values obtained
TABLE I
PERCENTAGE (%) DEVIATION OBTAINED
Operation type
write
read
WorkStation
3%
7%
RAID 1
0.6%
0.8%
RAID 5
0%
0.5%
nodes, the power consumption values obtained are only of I/O
operations. Because of this, the intensive computation does
not have in the results.
Fig. 14 illustrates real values obtained during the application
execution and reference values obtained during the characteri-
zation for all systems characterized. We show the performance
and the power consumption. In terms of workstation, we
selected real values of performance and power consumption
obtained during the execution of the application’s second phase
because it is the I/O intensive phase. We selected the reference
values results of a 128Kb size request obtained in Fig. 9,
because the BT application is a parallel MPI application that
uses a 128 KB request size in I/O operations.
In terms of cluster values, because the I/O system is apart
from the compute nodes, we selected the real values obtained
in each phase. We selected the reference values from the
cluster characterization in the same way as we did before
for the workstation architecture. We observe close results in
power consumption in all characterized systems. However,
in bandwidth, we observe signiﬁcant differences for cluster
conﬁgurations. These differences are because the application
did not manage to stress the system.
Table I, shows the power consumption deviation of refer-
ence values with real values. We observe close results between
real and reference values.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new methodology to characterize
the energy efﬁciency in the I/O system. The methodology takes
into account performance and energy. Moreover, it extracts
information about the bandwidth, the power consumption, the
energy and the energy efﬁciency from different I/O bench-
marks. We evaluated the methodology with real applications
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

and we observed that the reference values of characterization
were close to the real values obtained with the application’s
execution. We also observed that in intensive operations of
the I/O system, power consumption changed to a small extent.
However, that change did modify energy and energy efﬁciency.
This paper is just a small part of our research and will serve
to ﬁnd new ways of investigating. Our ﬁnal goal will be to
propose a methodology for dimensioning the I/O system in
terms of energy and energy efﬁciency. That methodology will
be able to characterize, analyze and evaluate the I/O system
for dimensioning. We are also looking for a new method to
identify the signiﬁcant phases in terms of power consumption
at device level considering the writing and reading blocks. In
order to carry this out, we are also working in new metrics
for energy efﬁciency.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by MICINN-Spain under
contract TIN2007-64974.
REFERENCES
[1] T.
Minartz,
J.
Kunkel,
and
T.
Ludwig,
“Simulation
of
power
consumption of energy efﬁcient cluster hardware,” Computer Science
- Research and Development, pp. 165–175, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://www.springerlink.com/content/r21r2376730p7161/fulltext.pdf
[2] T. 500, “Top 500 supercomputing list,” Tech. Rep., [Retrieved:
September, 2011]. [Online]. Available: http://www.top500.org
[3] G. 500, “Green computing list,” Tech. Rep., [Retrieved: September,
2011]. [Online]. Available: http://www.green500.org
[4] R. Ge, X. Feng, S. Subramanya, and X. he Sun, “Characterizing
energy efﬁciency of i/o intensive parallel applications on power-aware
clusters,” in Parallel Distributed Processing, Workshops and Phd Forum
(IPDPSW), 2010 IEEE International Symposium on, april 2010, pp. 1
–8.
[5] A. Hylick, R. Sohan, A. Rice, and B. Jones, “An analysis of hard
drive energy consumption,” in Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of
Computers and Telecommunication Systems, 2008. MASCOTS 2008.
IEEE International Symposium on, sept. 2008, pp. 1 –10.
[6] P. Sehgal, V. Tarasov, and E. Zadok, “Optimizing energy and
performance for server-class ﬁle system workloads,” Trans. Storage,
vol.
6,
pp.
10:1–10:31,
September
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1837915.1837918
[7] Y. Dong, J. Chen, and T. Tang, “Power measurements and analyses of
massive object storage system,” in Computer and Information Technol-
ogy (CIT), 2010 IEEE 10th International Conference on, 29 2010-july
1 2010, pp. 1317 –1322.
[8] Z.
Liu,
F.
Wu,
X.
Qin,
C.
Xie,
J.
Zhou,
and
J.
Wang,
“Tracer: A trace replay tool to evaluate energy-efﬁciency of mass
storage systems,” in Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International
Conference
on
Cluster
Computing,
ser.
CLUSTER
’10,
2010,
pp.
68–77,
[Retrieved:
June,
2011].
[Online].
Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/CLUSTER.2010.40
[9] W. D. Norcott, “Iozone ﬁlesystem benchmark,” Tech. Rep., [Retrieved:
September, 2011]. [Online]. Available: http://www.iozone.org/
[10] R. Coker, “Bonnie++ ﬁlesystem benchmark,” Tech. Rep., [Retrieved:
September,
2011].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.coker.com.au/
bonnie++/
[11] . S. J. Shan, Hongzhang, “Using ior to analyze the i/o performance
for hpc platforms,” LBNL Paper LBNL-62647, Tech. Rep., [Retrieved:
September, 2011]. [Online]. Available: www.osti.gov/bridge/servlets/
purl/923356-15FxGK/
[12] F. Shorter, Design and analysis of a performance evaluation standard
for parallel ﬁle systems, [Retrieved: September, 2011]. [Online].
Available: http://books.google.com/books?id=g7sEOAAACAAJ
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

