Proposal of Clustering Approach Based on Structural Mechanics:
An Application of Multi-Dimensional Truss
Kazuyuki Hanahara and Yukio Tada
Graduate School of System Informatics
Kobe University
Kobe, Japan
Email: {hanahara, tada}@cs.kobe-u.ac.jp
Abstract—We deal with an approach of clustering based on
structural mechanics. Rupture of multi-dimensional truss due
to a universal repulsive force is adopted as the process of
clustering. The structural behavior of multi-dimensional truss is
formulated. The feasibility of the proposed approach is examined
and demonstrated by a number of calculation examples.
Keywords–Clustering; Multi-Dimension; Truss; Tidal force.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Clustering is one of the important processes for data
management, especially in the case of pattern identiﬁcation
and recognition [1]. Several methods of clustering have been
proposed [2][3]. There are typical approaches such as hier-
archical algorithms e.g., the group average method and the
Ward method and partitioning algorithms e.g., the k-means
method and its families. Another approach such as based on
PCA (Principal Compoment Analysis) has also been developed
and studied [4]. These approaches having being developed so
far are basically based on some mathematical or geometrical
viewpoints. The authors see that these approaches are some-
what artiﬁcial, in the sense that the clustering processes are
controlled by one or more mathematical parameters that are
intentionally determined.
In the current study, we deal with an approach of clus-
tering based on structural mechanics. Taking account of the
mechanical characteristics of the target data set, a clustering
of somewhat natural manner is considered to be possible. One
of the signiﬁcant problem is that structural systems dealt with
in structural mechanics are two or three-dimensional entities,
but the data set to be clustered can be an entity of higher
dimensional space. In the case of truss structural system,
however, it is possible to formulate the structural mechanical
characteristics such as the stiffness matrix even in the case of
a truss structure of four or higher dimensional space.
In this article, we regard the data elements to be clustered
as the truss nodes. We develop the formulation of stiffness
matrix of truss structure of general dimension. Rupture of the
truss structure due to universal repulsive force is calculated;
the obtained separated parts are recognized as the clusters.
In Section II, a general formulation of the nodal stiffness
matrix of multi-dimensional truss is introduced. The devel-
oped clustering procedure is explained in Section III. Some
preliminary example calculation results are demonstrated and
discussed in Section IV and Section V gives the conclusion
and future work.
II.
MULTI-DIMENSIONAL TRUSS
A truss structure consists of a number of truss nodes and
truss members connecting them. We denote the truss nodal
positions vector as X = [xT
1 , · · · , xT
N]T , where xn is a D-
dimensional vector corresponding to the nth element of the
data set to be clustered. Truss member connections are denoted
as C = {c1, · · · , cM}, where cm = {cm0, cm1} and cm0 and
cm1 correspond to the two truss nodes connected by the mth
truss member.
A. Geometrical Relation
We denote the truss member lengths vector as L =
[l1, · · · , lM]T . Each of the member lengths is given as the
Euclidean distance between the corresponding nodes expressed
as
lm =
[
(xcm1 − xcm0)T (xcm1 − xcm0)
](1/2)
(1)
For all of the truss member lengths and the truss nodal
positions, (1) can be collected and expressed in the following
form:
L = L(X)
(2)
The total differential of (2) is given as
dL = ∂L
∂XdX
(3)
which is obtained as the collection of the total differential of
(1) expressed as
dlm = xcm1 − xcm0
lm
dxcm1 − xcm1 − xcm0
lm
dxcm0
(4)
B. Stiffness Matrix
In the case of linear elastic model with small deformation,
the strain energy U of the entire truss under deformation is
expressed as
U =
M
∑
m=1
1
2kmr2
m = 1
2RT KLR
(5)
where km and rm are the stiffness and the elastic change in
length of the mth truss member, R = [r1, · · · , rM]T is the
member deformation vector and KL = diag[k1, · · · , kM] is
the member stiffness matrix. Since we deal with the case
of small deformation, the nodal displacement vector U =
[uT
1 , · · · , uT
N]T and the member deformation vector have the
following linear relation referring to (3):
R = ∂L
∂XU
(6)
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Substituting (6) for (5), we obtain
U = 1
2UT
(∂L
∂X
)T
KL
∂L
∂XU = 1
2UT KXU
(7)
where
KX =
(∂L
∂X
)T
KL
∂L
∂X
(8)
is the nodal stiffness matrix of the given truss structure.
III.
CLUSTERING BASED ON RUPTURE OF TRUSS
The clustering is dealt with in terms of rupture of the
truss structure corresponding to the given data elements, which
experiences a kind of universal repulsive force.
A. Generating Member Connection
In the current study, we deal with two types of member
connections among the truss nodes corresponding to the data
elements. One is the full-connection type, where all of the
combination of two nodes are connected by truss members.
The other is a simplex-connection type, where truss members
are connected to form appropriate simplices in the given
dimensional space. Figure 1 shows such examples of member
connections in 2D space. For the simplex-connection, we adopt
the truss members in the order of length, from the shortest,
among all the possible connections. The full-connection type
is easy to generate; however, it is not natural from the
viewpoint of truss structural system. On the other hand, the
computational time to generate the simplex-type connection
is not insigniﬁcant in the case of higher dimensional space;
however, the obtained member connection is natural and more
reasonable as a truss structural system.
Mechanical characteristics of a truss structure also depends
on the stiffness of the members. We use the following relation
to determine the stiffness of the truss members taking into
account the weight values assigned to the data elements:
km = CS
1
lSm
wcm0wcm1
(9)
where CS is an adequate constant, S is the distance-evaluation
parameter and wcm0 and wcm1 are the weight values of the data
element nodes to be connected by the truss member m. The
equation indicates that in the case of higher order of S, the
connection strength of two data elements decreases rapidly in
accordance with their distance.
B. Universal Repulsive Force
As the force to deform and rupture the truss structure, we
introduce a universal repulsive force among the truss nodes
corresponding to the data elements. The force between any
two nodes is expressed as
fni = CR(xn − xi)dR−1
ni
wnwi,
dni = ∥xn − xi∥
(10)
(a) Data elements
(b) Full-type
(c) Simplex-type
Figure 1. Two types of member connection. (2D case example)
where CR is an adequate constant, wn and wi are the mass
assigned to the two nodes corresponding to the weight values
assigned to the data elements, and R is the parameter which
denotes the nature of the repulsive force. On the basis of the
introduced universal repulsive force between two nodes written
as (10), the nodal force vector is obtained as follows:
FX = [fT
1 , · · · , fT
N]T ,
fn =
N
∑
i=1
fni (i ̸= n)
(11)
It should be noted that the repulsive nodal force pattern for the
case R = 1 is corresponding to the so-called tidal force, though
the obtained force is not uni-directional but multi-directional.
C. Clustering Procedure
We deal with two-group clustering of the given data
elements x1, · · ·, xN having the weight values w1, · · ·, wN.
The process is performed as follows:
Step 0
Generate truss member connections C.
Step 1
Calculate the nodal stiffness KX and the nodal
force FX.
Step 2
Solve the stiffness equation
KXU = FX
(12)
taking into account the condition of rigid body
motion and obtain the nodal displacement U.
Step 3
Calculate the member deformation R by (6) and
obtain the magnitude of the member strain as
follows:
ϵm = |rm/lm|
(m = 1, · · · , M)
(13)
Note that the obtained value immediately corre-
sponds to the magnitude of the member stress,
since we assume uniform structural material.
Step 4
Delete the truss member connections in the order
of the magnitude of strain until the truss corre-
sponding to the data set is separated into two
parts.
Characteristic of the proposed clustering approach is de-
termined by the type of member connection, the distance
evaluation parameter S and the repulsive force parameter R.
The constants CS and CR do not affect the clustering result.
IV.
EXAMPLE CALCULATIONS
Since this is a study still at a preliminary stage, we conduct
example calculations in order to examine the feasibility of
the proposed clustering approach. Inﬂuence on the clustering
results of the types of truss member connection as well as the
introduced two parameters is also discussed.
For each of the data sets to be clustered, the nth data
element in D-dimensional space, xn = [xn(1), · · · , xn(D)]T ,
is generated by the following equation for i = 1, · · · , D as
xn(i) =





+DG
2
+ DR
(n = 1, · · · , N
2 )
−DG
2
+ DR
(n = N
2 + 1, · · · , N)
(14)
where N is the number of data elements, DG is the assumed
gap parameter between the two cluster centers and DR is a
random number. In the following calculation examples, the
number of elements is N = 50, the gap parameter is DG = 0.6
and the random number DR is assumed to have the normal
distribution of standard deviation 0.2.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

A. Evaluation of Member Connection Type
First, we examine the difference between the results based
on the two types of member connections. We use S = 2
and R = 1 a priori as the two parameters in the following
examples. The distance evaluation parameter S = 2 is se-
lected from the clustering point of view, which indicates that
the thickness of truss member connection between two data
elements becomes thinner in accordance with their distance.
The repulsive force parameter R = 1 is selected because the
value corresponds to a really existing repulsive force, that is
the tidal force, although this is not unidirectional.
Figure 2 shows typical clustering results based on the two
types of member connections. Figures (a) and (b) are the
examples respectively based on the full-connection and the
simplex-connection of truss members. Figures (a-1) and (b-1)
are the same data elements to be clustered and Figures (a-2)
and (b-2) are the clustering results. The data elements of the
obtained major cluster are depicted as a ﬁlled circle (•) and the
others are depicted as an empty circle (◦). Both obtained results
shown in Figures (a-2) and (b-2) are similar and considered to
be acceptable; however, small difference is observed with the
two data elements at the right-hand side of the center.
Figure 3 shows another clustering results based on the
data elements shown in Figure (a-1). On the basis of the
full-connection type truss, the ﬁrst clustering result and the
succeeding second clustering result respectively shown in Fig-
ures (a-2) and (a-3) are considered insufﬁcient. The succeeding
third clustering result shown in Figure (a-4) does not seem
natural. On the basis the simplex-connection type truss, the ﬁrst
clustering result shown in Figure (b-1) can also be regarded as
insufﬁcient; however, the result having a cluster of single data
element is unacceptable from the clustering point of view. The
succeeding second result shown in Figure (b-2) is considered
(a-1) Data elements
(a-2) Clustering result
(a) Based on full-connection truss
(b-1) Data elements
(b-2) Clustering result
(b) Based on simplex-connection truss
Figure 2. Evaluation of connection-type based on data set A.
(S = 2, R = 1)
to be reasonable.
The examples shown in Figures 2 and 3 are typical results.
Another clustering calculation examples also show similar
tendency. In the following calculation examples, we use the
simplex-connection type truss members for the clustering.
B. Evaluation of Two Introduced Parameters
We examine the inﬂuence of two parameters S and R.
Another data set is adopted this time, since no signiﬁcant
difference with the parameters is observed in the clustering
results based on the two data sets adopted in the previous
examples. The case shown in Figure 4 is adopted as the
reference. Figure (a) is the adopted data set for the parameter
evaluation and Figure (b) is the clustering result based on
S = 2 and R = 1. Clusters of this data set are comparably
unclear; however, the clustering result shown in Figure (b) is
considered to be reasonable.
Figure 5 shows the clustering results based on different
values of S in the case of R = 1. Figures (a), (b) and (c)
respectively based on S = 0, S = 1 and S = 3 exhibit
different results. It can be observed for all the cases that the
(a-1) Data elements
(a-2) 1st clustering result
(a-3) 2nd clustering result
(a-4) 3rd clustering result
(a) Based on full-connection truss
(b-1) 1st clustering result
(b-2) 2nd clustering result
(b) Based on simplex-connection truss
Figure 3. Evaluation of connection-type based on data set B.
(S = 2, R = 1)
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

(a) Data elements
(b) Clustering result
Figure 4. Reference clustering result based on data set C.
(S = 2, R = 1)
(a-1) 1st clustering result
(a-2) 3rd clustering result
(a) S = 0
(b-1) 1st clustering result
(b-2) 2nd clustering result
(b) S = 1
(c-1) 1st clustering result
(c-2) 3rd clustering result
(c) S = 3
Figure 5. Evaluation of parameter S based on data set C.
(R = 1)
ﬁrst clustering results shown in Figures (a-1), (b-1) and (c-1)
are insufﬁcient. The second clustering result shown in Figure
(b-2) in the case of S = 1 and the third clustering result shown
in Figure (c-2) in the case of S = 3 are, however, considered to
be reasonable results. The case S = 0 is clearly not acceptable
(a) R = 0
(b) R = 2
(c-1) 1st clustering result
(c-2) 2nd clustering result
(c) R = 3
Figure 6. Evaluation of parameter R based on data set C.
(S = 2)
(a) xy-plane
(b) zw-plane
Figure 7. Four-dimensional example clustering result example
based on expanded data set C. (S = 2, R = 1)
even for the third clustering result shown in Figure (a-2). Since
all of the member stiffness values are assumed to be the same
irrespective of their lengths in this case, the thickness of the
assumed truss member becomes larger in accordance with the
distance of the two data elements to be connected. This type of
truss structural system is considered to be unreasonable from
the clustering viewpoint.
Figure 6 shows the clustering results based on different
values of R in the case of S = 2. As shown in the ﬁgure, the
inﬂuence of different values of R is less signiﬁcant than the
case of S. The reference clustering result of R = 1 shown in
Figure 4(b) is the same as the results of R = 0 and R = 2
respectively shown in (a) and (b) of Figure 6. Only the case
of R = 3 shown in Figure 6(c) is slightly different.
Other calculation results that have been conducted so
far exhibit similar tendencies. As a preliminary result, we
conclude that the parameters determined a priori, S = 2 and
R = 1, are considered to be appropriate, though the further
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

examination is required especially for the case of R.
C. Higher Dimensional Examples
Figure 7 shows an example clustering result of four di-
mensional data. The adopted data set in xy-plane is the same
as the previous case shown in Figure 4(a), but it is expanded
to z and w axes this time. In Figure 7, the clustering result
plotted on xy-plane shown in (a) is slightly unreasonable but
the result plotted on zw-plane shown in (b) demonstrates its
adequateness.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed an approach of clustering based on struc-
tural mechanics, which is an application of multi-dimensional
truss. The feasibility of the proposed approach was examined
based on a number of calculation examples. As a preliminary
result, we conclude that the clustering process based on the
truss of simplex-type connection with the distance-evaluation
parameter S = 2 and the repulsive force parameter R = 1 is
considered to be adequate.
In the current study, the example artiﬁcial data sets are
assumed to consist of only two clusters. In the case of a data
set consisting of more clusters, iterative use of the proposed
approach for the obtained clustering results is considered to be
applicable. More detailed characteristics of the approach have
to be studied with various patterns of data set examples. On the
basis of the insights to be obtained, application of the approach
to some practical problems has to be taken into consideration.
These are considered to be part of the future work.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
Springer-
Verlag New York, 2006.
[2]
B. S. Everitt, S. Landau, M. Leese, and D. Stahl, Cluster Analysis, 5th
Edition.
John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[3]
F. Murtagh, “A Survey of Recent Advances in Hierarchical Clustering
Algorithms,” The Computer Journal, vol. 26, 1983, pp. 354–359.
[4]
B. McWilliams and G. Montana, “Subspace Clustering of High-
Dimensional Data: A Predictive Approach,” Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, vol. 28, 2014, pp. 736–772.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

