A Fuzzy-Genetic Algorithm Method for the Breast Cancer Diagnosis Problem  
 
Abir Alharbi and  Fairouz Tchier 
Mathematics Department, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
e-mails: {abir, ftchier}@ksu.edu.sa  
 
 
 
Abstract—The computer-aided medical diagnosis of complex 
systems, such as breast cancer is an important medical problem. 
In this paper, we focus on combining two major methodologies, 
namely, the fuzzy-based systems and the evolutionary genetic 
algorithms to find a computer aided diagnosis system that will 
aid physicians in an early diagnosis of breast cancer in Saudi 
Arabia. Our results show that the fuzzy-genetics approach 
produces systems that attain high classification performance, 
with simple and well interpretive rules and a good degree of 
confidence. 
Keywords-Breast cancer diagnosis problem; Fuzzy systems; 
Genetic 
algorithms; 
Rule-based 
system; 
Computer-aided 
diagnosis. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
     In medical science, diagnosis of a disease is a 
complicated problem and confirming a diagnosis is difficult 
even for medical experts. This has given rise to 
computerized aided diagnostic tools, intended to aid the 
physician in making primary medical decisions. A major 
area for such computerized tools is in the domain of breast 
cancer; to know early on whether the patient under 
examination exhibits the symptoms of a benign, or a 
malignant case helps to determine a suitable treatment for 
the cancer. The automatic diagnosis should attain the 
highest possible performance, which means they must 
correctly classify cases with a good degree of confidence. 
Moreover, it would be desirable for such diagnostic systems 
to be well interpreted by the physicians. 
In this research paper, an automated diagnosis system for 
breast cancer is designed by combining two methodologies, 
namely, the fuzzy rule based systems and the genetic 
algorithms. Medical diagnosis is a decision-making problem 
that commonly has uncertainty involved; therefore, fuzzy set 
theory has emerged in this field. The major advantage of 
fuzzy systems is the simple interpretation; however, finding 
good fuzzy systems is a hard task. This is where the role of 
genetic algorithms comes up in tuning the parameters of the 
fuzzy systems, based on a database of training cases. There 
are several different examples of the application of fuzzy 
systems and evolutionary algorithms in the medical domain, 
such as applying them to the Wisconsin Breast Cancer 
Diagnosis Data (WBCD) in USA [4], or applying them on 
pathogenesis of acute sore throat conditions in humans [5], 
or combining with wavelets, as in [20]. In our paper, we 
describe the fuzzy-genetic approach, which we developed for 
the Saudi breast cancer data consisting of 260 patients. 
In Sections II and III, we provide a brief overview of 
fuzzy systems and genetic algorithms respectively. Then, in 
Section IV, we describe the fuzzy-genetic approach, which is 
developed in this work for the Saudi breast cancer data 
discussed in Section V. In Section VI, we discuss the 
parameters settings in our approach and show the results of 
our best system evolved, and finally, we present our 
concluding remarks and future work in Section VII. 
II. FUZZY SYSTEMS  
     Fuzzy logic is a computational method manipulating 
information in a way that resembles human logical 
reasoning processes [23][24]. A fuzzy variable is 
characterized by its fuzzy variable A and the membership 
functions of these variables; with a membership value 
(
, to a given real value u(R). A fuzzy inference system 
is a rule-based system that uses fuzzy logic, rather than 
Boolean logic [26][27]. The structure includes four main 
components: a fuzzifier, which translates crisp (real-valued) 
inputs into fuzzy values, an inference engine which applies 
a fuzzy reasoning mechanism to obtain a fuzzy output, a 
defuzzifier, that translates the output back into a crisp value, 
and a knowledge base, containing both an ensemble of 
fuzzy rules (the rule base), and a group of connection 
membership functions (the database); see Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Basic structure of a fuzzy-Genetic system 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

      Moreover, the decision-making process is performed in 
the inference engine using the rules contained in the rule 
base. A fuzzy rule has the form “IF antecedent THEN 
consequent”, where the antecedent is a fuzzy-logic 
expression composed of one or more simple fuzzy 
expressions connected by fuzzy operators, and the 
consequent is an expression that assigns fuzzy values to the 
output variables. The inference engine performs the learning 
phase, where it evaluates all the rules in the rule base and 
combines the weighted consequents of all relevant rules into 
a single fuzzy set using the aggregation operation [16][28]. 
An example of a fuzzy rule in our case would be: if (v1 is 
Low) and (v2 is Low) then (output is benign), where v1 and 
v2 are variables given in the data set. 
      Using the direct fuzzy model with knowledge from a 
human expert, the fuzzy simulation identifies the parameters 
of a fuzzy inference system, so that a desired decision can be 
made. This task is difficult when the problem space is 
complex and very large; thus, motivating us to use genetic 
algorithms to produce fuzzy models. In the literature, there 
are several approaches to fuzzy modelling based on neural 
networks [10][12], genetic algorithms [1][6][8], and other 
hybrid methods [25]. Selection of relevant variables and 
adequate rules is critical for obtaining a good accurate 
classification system. One of the major problems in fuzzy 
simulation is that the amount of computation grows 
exponentially with the number of variables. 
III. GENETIC ALGORITHM  
    A Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a search heuristic that 
mimics the process of natural selection. Genetic algorithms 
are used to generate solutions to optimization and search 
problems. They belong to the larger class of evolutionary 
algorithms, used to generate solutions to optimization 
problems using techniques inspired by natural evolution,  
such as inheritance, mutation, selection based on a relative 
fitness, and crossover [13]. Genetic algorithms are usually 
applied to spaces which are too large to be exhaustively 
searched and  have applications in bioinformatics, industry, 
medical, science, engineering, chemistry, computational 
mathematics [3],  and many other fields.  
 The genetic algorithm method is an iterative procedure 
that involves a population representing the search space for 
solutions to the problem, as individuals, each one 
represented by a finite string of symbols, called the genome. 
The basic procedure proceeds as follows: an initial 
population of individuals is generated at random or 
heuristically. In every evolutionary step (generation), the 
individuals in the current population are decoded and 
evaluated according to a fitness function that describes the 
optimization problem in the search space. To form a new 
population (the next generation), individuals are selected 
according to their fitness, a fitness function is a particular 
type of objective function that is used to measure how close 
the given individual is to achieving the set aims of the 
problem [18]. Many selection procedures are available, one 
of the simplest being fitness-proportionate selection, where 
individuals are selected with a probability proportional to 
their relative fitness. This ensures that the expected number 
of times an individual is chosen is approximately 
proportional to its relative performance in the population. 
Thus, high-fitness individuals stand a better chance to 
reproduce and bring new individuals to the population, 
while low-fitness will not. Genetic algorithms are stochastic 
iterative processes, which are not necessarily guaranteed to 
converge, and the stopping condition may be specified as a 
maximal number of generations or a chosen level of the 
fitness. 
IV. FUZZY-GENETIC ALGORITHMS 
     Since GAs are used to search large complex search 
spaces and are able to give optimal and near-optimal 
solutions on numerous problems; therefore, fuzzy–genetic 
algorithms can be considered as an optimization process 
where the parameters of a fuzzy system constitute the 
search space. Many researchers investigated the application 
of evolutionary techniques in the domain of fuzzy 
modelling [1][5][4], where the tuning of fuzzy inference 
systems involved in control tasks were done by genetic 
algorithms. Fuzzy–genetic modelling has been applied to 
many domains [6][8][11][19], branching into many areas as 
electric 
engineering, 
chemistry, 
telecommunications, 
biology, geophysics and medicine. The GA can be used to 
tune the knowledge contained in the fuzzy system by 
finding membership function values. An initial fuzzy 
system is defined by an expert; then, the membership 
function values are encoded in a genome, and a genetic 
algorithm is used to find systems with high performance. 
GAs often overcomes the local-minima problem seen in 
other gradient descent-based optimization methods [18]. 
GAs can be applied in different stages of the fuzzy system 
parameters search depending on several conditions, like the 
availability of a priori knowledge, the size of the parameter, 
and the availability and completeness of input/output data. 
The fuzzy parameters used to define targets for genetic 
fuzzy modelling are: structural parameters, connective 
parameters, and operational parameters.  
 In many cases, the available information about the 
system is composed almost exclusively of input/output data, 
and specific knowledge make up the system structure. In 
such a system, evolution has to deal with the simultaneous 
design of rules, membership functions, and structural 
parameters. Structure learning permits to specify other 
criteria related to the interpretability of the system, such as 
the number of membership functions and the number of 
rules, while, the strong interdependency among the 
parameters involved in this form of learning may slow down 
the convergence of the genetic algorithm. Both connective 
and structural parameters simulation [1][11] are viewed as 
rule base learning processes with different levels of 
complexity. In most GA applications, the main approaches 
for evolving such rule systems are the Michigan approach 
[1], the Pittsburgh approach [13] and the iterative rule 
learning approach [11]. 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

V. BREAST CANCER DATA BASE 
    Breast cancer is known as one of the most common 
cancers type affecting the female population. It is one of the 
major causes of death among women and a true emergency 
for health care systems of industrialized countries. One of 
the epidemiological studies conducted by AlDiab et al. [2] 
reported that the incidence of breast cancer in Saudi Arabia 
was 19.8% of all the female cancers detected in Saudi 
Arabia. Researchers in the field [7][21] have shown that 
breast cancer is the second most common malignancy for  
women in Saudi Arabia. Nevertheless, there is a paucity of 
detailed published epidemiologic data. An earlier report 
according to Saudi National Cancer Registry, mentioned an 
increasing proportion of breast cancer among women of 
different ages from 10.2% in 2000 to 24.3% in 2005 [7]. 
The presence of a breast mass is an alert, but it does not 
always indicate a malignant cancer. Fine needle aspiration 
 of breast masses is a cost-effective, non-traumatic, 
and mostly non-invasive diagnostic test that obtains 
information needed to evaluate malignancy. The medical 
diagnosis data of breast cancer used in this study is from 
patients in Saudi Arabia. The database is similar to the 
WBCD dataset of the University of Wisconsin Hospital 
[17], where diagnosis of breast masses is based solely on an 
FNA test [15]. Nine visually assessed characteristics of an 
FNA sample considered relevant for diagnosis are 
identified, and were assigned an integer value between 1 
and 10. The diagnostics in the database were done by 
specialists in the field, and the database itself consists of 260 
cases, with each entry representing the classification for a 
certain ensemble of measured values, (Case number, [
,
 
, 
, … , 
, Diagnostic: Benign or Malignant). The 
measured variables are as follows: 
 is clump thickness, 
 is uniformity of cell size, 
 is uniformity of cell shape, 
 is marginal adhesion, 
 is single epithelial cell size, 
 
is Bare nuclei, 
 is bland chromatin, 
 is  normal 
nucleoli and 
 is  mitosis. 
      Basically, an initial fuzzy rule base is defined by an 
expert, for example a fuzzy rule in this case would be: if [v1 
is Low] and [v7 is Low] then (output is benign). Therefore, 
each of the nine variables (v1-v9) has two parameters P and 
d, defining the start point and the length of the membership 
function, respectively. Then, the GA fine-tunes the 
membership functions. Also for the antecedents:  the ith rule 
has the form if (v1 is M1
i) and (v7 is M7
i) then (output is 
benign), Where  Mj
i represents the membership function 
applicable to variable vj , Mj
i can take on the values: 1 
(Low), 2 (High). The GA is also used to find either the rule 
consequents, or other subset rules to be included in the rule 
base. As the membership functions are fixed this approach 
lacks the flexibility to modify substantially the system 
behaviour. One of the major disadvantages of knowledge 
tuning is its dependency on the initial setting of the 
knowledge base. Furthermore, as the number of variables 
and membership functions increases, large dimensionality 
decreases the system’s performance.  Evolutionary structure 
modelling is done by encoding within the genome an entire 
fuzzy system using the Pittsburgh approach. The fuzzy 
system computes a continuous appraisal value of the 
malignancy of a case, based on the input values. According 
to the fuzzy system's output the threshold unit then outputs a 
benign or malignant diagnostic. In order to evolve the fuzzy 
model, as seen in Figure 2, we must set some preliminary 
parameters in the fuzzy–genetic system itself encoding. 
VI. FUZZY-GENETIC PARAMETERS 
    All previous knowledge about the problem and about the  
existent rule-based models gives us valuable information 
for our choices of fuzzy parameters. Since all the labels 
have semantic meaning, for each label, at least one element 
of the space should have a membership value equal to one. 
Hence, a Low membership value of 0.8 entails a High 
membership value of 0.2, and for each element the sum of 
all its membership values should be equal to one. The 
parameter settings are set as in the following. 
A. The Fuzzy-Genetic System Parameter Settings 
 
Number of input membership functions: is set to two, 
(Low and High).  
 
Number of output membership functions: is two 
singletons for the benign and malignant diagnostic 
cases. 
 
Number of rules: is fixed to three.  
 
Antecedents of rules: is found by the genetic algorithm.  
 
Consequent of rules: the algorithm finds rules for the 
benign diagnostic; the malignant diagnostic is an else 
condition. 
 
Rule weights: the learning is done by letting active 
rules have a weigh of value 1, and the else condition 
has a weight of 0.25.  
 
Input membership function values: is found by the 
genetic algorithm.  
 
Output membership function values: following the 
database, we used a value of 2 for benign and 4 for 
malignant. 
 
    We applied the Pittsburgh-style-structure learning, using 
a genetic algorithm to search for three parameters, namely, 
the genome (encoding relevant variables), input membership 
function values, and antecedents of rules: Relevant variables 
are searched for implicitly by letting the algorithm choose 
non-existent membership functions as valid antecedents; in 
such a case the respective variable is considered irrelevant. 
To evolve the fuzzy inference system, we used a genetic 
algorithm with a fixed population size of 50 individuals. 
The algorithm terminates when the maximum number of 
generations is reached at 300, or when the increase in fitness 
of the best individual over five successive generations falls 
below a certain threshold, set  at 2 × 10 -6. Our fitness 
function F is set to the classification performance, computed 
as the percentage of cases correctly classified, given by  
F=Fr−α Fc                                     (1) 
where α = 0.1, Fr, the ratio of correctly diagnosed cases, 
which is the most important measure of performance, and 
Fc measures the confidence, penalizing systems with large 
number of low  appraisal value cases i.e., cases that are 
diagnosed with low confidence. The crossover between the 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

two chosen parents genome is done at a single point 
randomly chosen with probability 0.8 to produce the new 
generation offspring. The selection operator of parent’s 
genome is set to the stochastic uniform selection method, 
and the mutation done on the new offspring has probability 
0.01. Hence, the experiment starts by finding from a 
population of 50 genomes of length 45, where the first 18 
bits represent the parameters of the membership functions 
(Pi, di) of each vi and the remaining 27 bits are the output 
function Mj
i for each vi in the three rule base system 
showing Low or High or irrelevant. Table I shows the 
parameters encoding to form a single individual's genome. 
The GA runs throughout the generations to find the best 
genome in this population. The best genome is the one 
which classifies correctly the largest number of the 260 
cases given in the data set. After all 300 generations 
(repeated 50 times), the genetic algorithm found the 
optimum genome; hence, it found the best diagnostic system 
with three rules given in Figure 2.  
TABLE I.  PARAMETER ENCODING IN  A GENOME  
Parameter 
values 
Total number of bits 
(45) 
P 
1-8 
9 
d 
1-8 
9 
M 
0-2 
27 
 
Database 
 
𝑣1 
𝑣2 
𝑣3 
𝑣4 
𝑣5 
𝑣6 
𝑣7 
𝑣8 
𝑣9 
P 
2 
5 
8 
4 
6 
3 
4 
5 
4 
d 
5 
3 
1 
2 
1 
6 
3 
2 
1 
  
Rule  base 
Rule 1 : if (𝑣3 is Low) and ( 𝑣7 is Low) and 
(𝑣8 is Low) and (𝑣9 is Low) then 
 (output is  benign) 
 
Rule 2 : if (𝑣1 is Low) and (𝑣2 is Low)  
and (v4 is Low) and (v5 is High) and (v9 is Low)  
then (output is benign)   
Rule 3 : if (v1 is Low) and (v4 is Low) and  
(v6 is Low) and (v8 is Low) then (output is benign) 
                else (output is malignant)  
 
Figure 2.  The best evolved fuzzy-gnetic diagnostic system with three 
rules which exhibits an overall classification rate of 97.33%. 
B. Results 
    The solution scheme we present for the Saudi breast 
cancer diagnosis problem consists of a fuzzy system model 
and a threshold unit. The fuzzy system computes a 
continuous appraisal value of the malignancy of a case, 
based on the input values. The threshold unit then outputs a 
benign or malignant diagnostic according to the fuzzy 
system's output. In order to evolve the fuzzy model, we 
must set the fuzzy system parameters and the genetic 
algorithm encoding according to the previous discussion in 
part A. The evolutionary performed experiments fall into a 
learning category, in accordance with the data partitioning 
into two distinct sets: training set and testing set, Training 
set contains 50% of the database cases and the testing set 
contains the remaining 50% of the cases. Fifty evolutionary 
runs were performed, all of which found systems whose 
classification performance exceeds 95%. MATLAB Genetic 
Toolbox [29] was modified to implement the fuzzy-genetic 
algorithm and to generate the results. Taking into account 
the performance classification rate, the best diagnostic 
system with three rules stated in details in Figure 2 is the top 
one over all 50 evolutionary runs. It obtained 98.3% correct 
classification rate over the benign cases, 96.2% correct 
classification rate over the malignant cases, and an overall 
classification rate of 97.33%. The performance value 
denotes the percentage of cases correctly classified. Three 
such performance values are shown in Table II: the 
performance over the training set, the performance over the 
test set, and the overall performance on the entire database. 
Figure 3 shows a close up of the plot of the best fitness 
value over the generations, which scored on average 254 
cases accurate out of the 260 data cases. Figure 4 shows the 
best individual (45 parameters) for the evolved fuzzy three 
rule diagnostic system described in Figure 2. In Figure 5, we 
can see the average distances between individuals for the 
evolved fuzzy three-rule system throughout the generations. 
Figure 6 shows the best, worst, and mean fitness scores 
reached by the evolved fuzzy three-rule system during the 
procedure. 
 
Figure 3 The best fitness value for the evolved three rule fuzzy-genetic 
system.        
 
    The proposed fuzzy system described in this paper 
performs very well and reached comparable results similar 
to work done on the WBCD data by Andres et al. [4], and 
Setiono [22] in terms of both performance and simplicity of 
rules as seen in Table III. It is worth noting that [4] had 699 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

 
cases in the WBCD dataset from patients in USA and they 
used 
a 
different 
fitness 
function 
denoted 
F=Fc−0.05Fv−0.01Fe, such that Fc, the number of 
correctly diagnosed cases, Fv measures the linguistic 
integrity (interpretability), and Fe adds selection pressure 
towards systems with low quadratic error. Moreover, 
Setiono [22] used an application of neural networks that 
involves Boolean rule bases extracted from trained neural 
networks. Table III shows the classification performance 
values obtained by these different approaches, looking very 
close in terms of accuracy and in time efficiency. 
 
Figure 4. Current best individual in the three rule fuzzy-genetic system.  
   Following these steps and obtaining the results complete 
the fuzzification phase; it is time for the inference engine to 
compute the truth value of each rule, by applying the fuzzy 
‘and’ operator to combine the antecedent clauses in a fuzzy 
manner. This results in the output truth value, which is a 
continuous value which represents the rule’s degree of 
activation inference. Thus, a rule is not merely either 
activated or not, but in fact is activated to a certain degree 
represented by a value between 0 and 1. The inference 
engine now goes on to apply the aggregation operator and 
combining the continuous rule activation values to produce 
a fuzzy output with a certain truth. Then, the defuzzifier 
works to produce the final continuous value of the fuzzy 
system; this latter value is the value that is passed on to the 
threshold unit. For our best three rule fuzzy system we 
calculate the membership values for each 260 patients and 
with the “and" function we get the appraisal value in the 
range [3,5] . We chose to place the threshold value at 3, with 
inferior values classified as benign, and superior values 
classified as malignant. Hence, a value of 2.42 is classified 
as benign, which is correct; but, it is among the closest to 
the threshold value, and its confidence is low. Most other 
cases result in an appraisal value that lies close to one of the 
extremes (i.e., close to either 2 or 4). Thus, in a sense, we 
can say that we are somewhat less confident where this case 
is concerned, with respect to most other entries in the 
database. Moreover, the appraisal value can accompany the 
final output of the diagnostic system, serving as a 
confidence measure. This demonstrates a prime advantage 
of fuzzy systems, namely, the ability to output not only a 
(binary) classification, but also a measure representing the 
system’s confidence in its output. For our  best three rule 
system presented here, only 13 cases out of 260 were 
diagnosed with low confidence. 
 
     Figure 5. The best, worst and mean fitness scores for the three rule 
fuzzy-genetic system.  
TABE II.   RESULTS OF 50 EVOLUTIONARY RUNS, DIVIDED   ACCORDING TO 
THE THREE CATAGORIES 
 
Training/test 
     50/50 
     Performance 
Training set 
Test set 
Overall 
97.70 % 
96.91 % 
97.33 % 
 
TABLE III. COMPARING OUR RESULTS FOR A THREE RULE BASE SYSTEM 
WITH OTHER APPROACHES 
This work 
Andres, Pena and 
Sipper [4] 
Setiono [22] 
97.33 % 
97.80 % 
97.14 % 
 
VII.   CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 In this paper, we applied a combined fuzzy-genetic 
approach to the Saudi breast cancer diagnosis database. Our 
evolved three rules system exhibits both high classification 
performance and a good confidence measure. Our results 
suggest that the fuzzy-genetic approach could be highly 
effective on medical diagnosis problems and may help in 
designing computer-aided software to obtain an early 
diagnosis 
and 
reduce 
treatment 
expenses, 
which 
are considered to be among the highest sanitary priorities in 
many countries. Our future work will involve finding more 
rule bases and making comparisons. We also plan to apply 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

 
 
the fuzzy-genetic approach to other complex real-world 
diagnosis problems and extend our work to data from all 
over the Middle East. We will also try alternative fuzzy 
logic approaches, such as neuro-fuzzy networks or fuzzy-
Petri with the evolutionary genetic algorithm method. In 
addition, we will explore another promising area combining 
genetic algorithm with neural networks such as adaptive 
neuro-fuzzy inference systems.  
 
Figure 6. The average distance between individuals for the best three rule 
fuzzy-geneic system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project was supported by a grant from the 
“Research Centre of the Female Scientific and Medical 
Colleges”, Deanship of Scientific Research, King Saud 
University. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. T. Alander, “An indexed  bibliography of genetic 
algorithms 
with 
fuzzy 
logic”, 
Fuzzy 
Evolutionary 
Computation, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997, pp. 299–318. 
[2] A. R. AlDiab, S. Qureshi, K. A.  AlSaleh, F. H. AlQahtani, A. 
Aleem, V. F. Qureshi, and M. R. Qureshi,. “Studies on the 
Methods of Diagnosis and Biomarkers Used in the Early 
Detection of Breast Cancer in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia”, 
World Journal of Medical Science, 2013, pp. 72-88.  
[3] A. Alharbi, W. Rand, and R. Rolio, “Understanding the 
Semantics of Genetic Algorithms in Dynamic Environments 
A case Study Using the Shaky Ladder Hyperplane-Defined 
Functions”, Workshop on Evolutionary Algorithms in 
Stochastic and Dynamic Environments, 2007. 
[4] C. Andres, P. Reyes, and M. Sipper, “A fuzzy-genetic 
approach to breast cancer diagnosis”, Artificial intelligence in 
Medicine, vol. 17, Elsevier, 1999, pp. 131-155. 
[5] C. J. Carmona, V. Ruiz-Rodado, M. J. del Jesus, A. Weber, 
M. Grootveld, P. González, and D. Elizondo, “A fuzzy 
genetic programming-based algorithm for subgroup discovery 
and the application to one problem of pathogenesis of acute 
sore throat conditions in humans”, Information Sciences, vol. 
298, 2015, pp. 180-197. 
[6] O. Cordon, F. Herrera, and M. Lozano. “On the combination 
of fuzzy logic and evolutionary computation: a short review 
and bibliography”, Fuzzy Evolutionary Computation, Kluwer, 
1997, pp. 33–56. 
[7] S. M. El-Akkad, M. H. Amer, G. S. Lin, R. S. Sabbah, and J. 
T. Godwin, “Pattern of cancer in saudi Arabia referred to 
King Faisal Hospital Cancer”, vol. 58, 1986, pp. 1172-1178.  
[8] H. Heider and T. Drabe,”Fuzzy system design with a 
cascaded genetic algorithm. IEEE International Conference 
on Evolutionary Computation, 1997, pp. 585–588. 
[9] F. Herrera, M. Lozano, and J. L. Verdegay, “Generating fuzzy  
rules from examples using genetic algorithms”, Fuzzy Logic 
and Soft Computing, World Scientific, 1995, pp. 11–20. 
[10] J. R. Jang and C. T. Sun, “Neuro-fuzzy modeling and 
control”, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 83 (3), 1995, pp. 378-
406. 
[11] C. L. Karr, “Genetic algorithms for fuzzy controllers”, A I 
Expert, vol. 6(2), 1991, pp. 26–33.  
[12] B. Kovalerchuk, E. Triantaphyllou, J. F. Ruiz, and J. Clayton, 
“Fuzzy logic in computer-aided breast cancer diagnosis” 
Artif. Intell.  Med., vol. 11 (1), 1997, pp. 75–85. 
[13] J. R. Koza, Genetic Programming, MIT Press, 1992. 
[14] M. A. Lee and H. Takagi, “Integrating design stages of fuzzy 
systems using genetic algorithms”, IEEE International 
Conference on Fuzzy Systems, 1993, pp. 612–617. 
[15] O. L. Mangasarian, W. N. Street, and W. H. Wolberg, “Breast 
cancer diagnosis and prognosis via linear programming”,  
Mathematical Programing Technical Report, 1994, pp.94-101. 
[16] J. M. Mendel, “Fuzzy logic systems for engineering: a 
tutorial”, Proceeding of the IEEE, vol. 83, 1995, pp. 345-377. 
[17] C. J. Merz  and P. M. Murphy, “UCI repository of machine 
learning-databases”, [retrieved; Oct. 2014] http : // www. 
ics.uci.edu  / ∼mlearn /MLR epository, 1996. 
[18] Z. Michalewicz, Genetic Algorithms+Data Structures= 
Evolution Programs, 3rd edition, Springer-Verlag, 1996. 
[19] S. Muthukrishnan, “GFS: Adaptive Genetic Fuzzy System for 
medical data classification B Dennis”, Applied Soft 
Computing, 2014, Elsevier. 
[20] T. Nguyen, A. Khosravi, D. Creighton, “Classification of 
healthcare data using genetic fuzzy logic system and wavelets”, 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 42, Issue 4, 2015, pp. 
2184-2197. 
[21] K. Ravichandran, N. A. Hamdan, and A. R. Dyab, “Population 
based survival of female breast cancer cases in Riyadh Region, 
Saudi Arabia”, Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention, 
vol. 6, 2005, pp. 72-76.  
[22] R. Setiono, “Extracting rules from pruned neural networks for 
breast cancer dianosis”, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 
1996, pp. 37-51. 
[23] F. Tchier, “Relational Demonic Fuzzy Refinement”, Journal 
of Applied Mathematics, 2014, pp. 17-21. 
[24] F. Tchier, “Fuzzy Demonic refinement”, International 
Conference on Basic and Applied Sciences Regional Annual 
Fundamental Science Symposium 2013, Johor, Malaysia.  
[25] P. Vuorimaa, “Fuzzy self-organizing map”, Fuzzy Sets Syst, 
vol. 66, 1994, pp. 223-231. 
[26] R. R. Yager and D. P. Filev, Essentials of Fuzzy Modeling 
and Control, Wiley, 1994. 
[27] R. R. Yager, L. A.  Zadeh, Fuzzy Sets, Neural Networks, and 
Soft Computing, New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1994. 
[28] L. A. Zadeh, "Fuzzy sets”, Information and Control, vol. 8, 
no. 3, 1965, pp. 338-353. 
[29] Matlab optimization Tool box user guide [retrieved: Jan 2015] 
from http://www.mathworks.com/help/optim/index.html.
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-419-0
ADVCOMP 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

