Intelligent Classiﬁcation of Odor Data Using Neural
Networks
Sigeru Omatu
Department of Electronics, Information, and Communication Engineering
Osaka Institute of Technology
Osaka, 535-8585, Japan
omatu@rsh.oit.ac.jp
Hideo Araki
Department of Computer Science
Osaka Institute of Technology
Hirakata, 573-0196, Japan
araki@is.oit.ac.jp
Toru Fujinaka
Graduate School of Education
Hiroshima University
Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8524, Japan
fjnk@hiroshima-u.ac.jp
Mitsuaki Yano
Department of Electronics, Information, and Communication Engineering
Osaka Institute of Technology
Osaka, 535-8585, Japan
yano@elc.oit.ac.jp
Abstract—Metal oxide semiconductor gas (MOG) sensors and
quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) sensors are used to measure
several kinds of odors. Using neural networks to classify the
measured data of odors, artiﬁcial electronic noses have been
developed. This paper is to consider an array sensing system of
odors and to adopt a layered neural networks for classiﬁcation.
Furthermore, we consider mixied effect of odors for classiﬁcation
accuracy. For simplicity, we will treat the case that two kinds of
odors are mixed, since more than two becomes too complex to
analyze the classiﬁcation efﬁciency. In order to consider the mixed
effect, we use as the test data two out of four kinds of odors.
An acceptable result, although not perfect, has been achieved
for the classiﬁcation of mixed odors, by using aht lruered neural
network.
Keywords-odor classiﬁcation; odor sensors; sensor array;
mixed odors; neural networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
The problem of recognition and classiﬁcation of odors
are important to achieve the high quality of information
like human being since the smell is one of ﬁve senses.
We have used these ﬁve senses to enjoy comfortable human
life with communication and mutual understanding. Artiﬁcial
odor sensing and classiﬁcation systems through electronic
technology are called an electronic nose and they have been
developed according to various odor sensing systems and
several classiﬁcation methods [1][2][3][4].
We have developed electronic nose systems to classify the
various odors under different densities based on a layered
neural network and a competitive neural network of the
learning vector quantization method [5][6][7].
Based on the experience, we have developed a new mea-
surement system such that precise evaluation of the odor can
be done with many sensors and by controlling dry air ﬂow rate,
temperature, and humidity. Furthermore, we have attached
a sensing system with both Metal oxide semiconductor gas
(MOG) sensors array and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM)
sensors array.
After brief survey of the electronic nose and its measure-
ment and classiﬁcation methods, we consider the electronic
nose accuracy when two odors are mixed after each of the
original odors has been classiﬁed precisely by using a neural
network. We will consider the classiﬁcation of mixed odors
based on the sensing data by using QCM sensors. The QCM
sensors are more sensitive than MOG sensors to some kinds of
odor and the environmental condition for sensing odors. Using
many QCM sensors, we will try to separate the mixed odors
into the original odors based on the neural network classiﬁer.
II. HUMAN OLFACTORY PROCESSES
Although the human olfactory system is not fully under-
stood by physicians, the main components about the anatomy
of human olfactory system are the olfactory epithelium, the
olfactory bulb, the olfactory cortex, and the higher brain or
cerebral cortex, as shown in Fig. 1.
The ﬁrst process of human olfactory system is to breathe or
to sniff the smell into the nose, as shown in Step 1 of Fig. 1.
The difference between the normal breath and the snifﬁng is
the quantity of odorous molecules that ﬂows into the upper
part of the nose. In case of snifﬁng, most air is ﬂown through
the nose to the lung and about 20% of air is ﬂown to the upper
part of the nose and detected by the olfactory receptors.
In case of snifﬁng, the most air ﬂow directly to the upper
part of the nose interacts with the olfactory receptors. The
odorous molecules are dissolved at a mucous layer before
interacting with olfactory receptors in the olfactory epithelium,
as shown in Step 2 of Fig. 1.
The concentration of odorous molecules must be over the
recognition threshold. After that, the chemical reaction in
each olfactory receptor produces an electrical stimulus. The
electrical signals from all olfactory receptors are transported
to olfactory bulb, as shown in Step 3 of Fig. 1.
The input data from olfactory bulbs are transformed to be
the olfactory information to the olfactory cortex, as shown
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

in Step 4 of Fig. 1. Then the olfactory cortex distributes
the information to other parts to the brain and human can
recognize odors precisely, as shown in Step 5 of Fig. 1. The
other parts of the brain that link to the olfactory cortex will
control the reaction of the other organ against the reaction
of that smell. When human detects bad smells, human will
suddenly expel those smells from the nose and try to avoid
breathing them directly without any protection. This is a part
of the reaction from the higher brain.
Finally, the cleaning process of the nose is to breathe
fresh air in order to dilute the odorous molecules until those
concentrations are lower than the detecting threshold, as shown
in Step 6 of Fig. 1. The time to dilute the smell depends on
the persistence qualiﬁcation of the tested smell.
Step 1. Sniff to bring odorous molecules to the nose
Step 2. Odorous molecules are dissolved and detected by 
the olfactory receptors
Step 3. Signals from olfactory receptors are transported to 
olfactory bulb
Step 4. Olfactory bulb transforms the information of 
olfactory bulb to the information of olfactory cortex  
Step 5. Information of olfactory cortices is distributed    
to the other parts of brain and human can identify the smell 
Step 6. Clean the nose by breathing fresh air
Fig. 1.
Olfactory system.
III. ELECTRONIC NOSE SYSTEM
The electronic nose system is an alternative method to
analyze smell by imitating the human olfactory system. In this
section, the concept of an electronic nose is explained. Then
various sensors for odors applied as the olfactory receptors are
explained. Finally, the mechanism of a simple electronic nose
that will be developed in this paper is described in detail by
comparing the function of each part with the human olfactory
process.
The mechanism of electronic nose systems can be divided
into main four parts as shown in Fig. 2.
A. Odor delivery system
The ﬁrst process of the human olfactory system is to sniff
the odorous molecule into the nose. Thus, the ﬁrst part of the
electronic nose system is the mechanism to bring the odorous
molecules into the electronic nose system. There are three
Odor delivery system
Odor sensor array
Data recording
Data processing
Fig. 2.
Main parts of electronic nose systems.
main methods to deliver the odor to the electronic nose unit,
sample ﬂow, static system, and pre-concentration system.
The sample ﬂow system is the most popular method to
deliver odorous molecule to the electronic nose unit. Some
carrier gas such as air, oxygen, nitrogen, and so on, is provided
as a carrier gas at the inlet port to ﬂow the vapor of the
tested smell through the electronic nose unit via the outlet
port. The mechanism to control the air ﬂow of an electronic
nose may contain various different parts such as a mass ﬂow
controller to control the pressure of the carrier gas, a solenoid
valve to control the ﬂow of inlet and outlet ports, a pump to
suck the tested odor from the sampling bag in case that the
tested odor is provided from outside, a mechanism to control
humidity, and so on. Most commercial electronic noses contain
complicated odor delivering systems and this makes the price
of the electronic noses become expensive.
The static system is the easiest way to deliver odorous
molecules to the electronic nose unit. The electronic nose
unit is put into a closed loop container. Then an odor sample
is injected directly to the container by a syringe. It is also
possible to design an automatic injection system. However,
the rate to inject the test odors must be controlled to obtain
accurate results. Normally, this method is applied for the
calibration process of the electronic nose. But, in this case, the
quantity of the odor may not be enough to make the sensor
reach the saturation stage, that is, the stage that sensor adsorbs
the smell fully.
The pre-concentration system is used in case of the tested
smell that has a low concentration and it is necessary to
accumulate the vapor of the tested odor before being delivered
to the electronic nose unit. The pre-concentrator must contain
some adsorbent material such as silica and the tested odor
is continuously accumulated into the pre-concentrator for
speciﬁc time units. Then, the pre-concentrator is heated to
desorb the odorous molecule from the adsorbent material. The
carrier gas is ﬂown through the pre-concentrator to bring the
desorbed odorous molecules to the electronic nose unit. By
using this method, some weak smells can be detected by the
sensor array in the electronic nose unit.
B. Odor sensor array
The second process of the human olfactory system is to
measure various odors corresponding to various receptors in
the human olfactory system. In order to realize many receptors
artiﬁcially, we adopted two types of sensors. One is MOG type
n [8] and the other is QCM type p [7]. The idea of the present
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

paper is to use many sensors which are allocated in an array
structure for each type of MOG and QCM types. This structure
is adopted based on the human olfactory system. As we will
explain in what follows, the odor sensors are not so small,
which results in a large space to measure odors.
C. Data recording
The data recording is corresponding to temporal memory for
the human olfactory system. In the latter case, after learning
odors we could identify an odor suddenly, we store sensing
data of odors in a computer. To make reading and writing the
data, we make an efﬁcient structure of data base.
D. Data processing
Using the data base of odors, we must apply an intelligent
signal processing technique to recognize odors correctly. We
make pre-processing the odor data such as noise reduction,
normalization, feature extraction, etc. Then we use neural
networks for classiﬁcation of odors. Basically, we use a
layered neural networks and competitive networks for odor
classiﬁcation since learning ability and robustness are impor-
tant in odor classiﬁcation. The most difﬁcult and important
process in the odor classiﬁcation is to ﬁnd excellent features
which are robust for environment like temperature, humidity,
and density levels of odors.
IV. PRINCIPLE OF ODOR SENSING
Nowadays, there are many kinds of sensors that can measure
odorous molecules. However, only a few kinds of them have
been successfully applied as artiﬁcial olfactory receptors in
commercial electronic noses. We show two types of odor
sensors which are major for odor sensing. One is a MOG
sensor and the other is a QCM sensor, which will be explained
in what follows.
A. Principle of MOG sensors
MOG sensors are the most widely used sensors for making
an array of artiﬁcial olfactory receptors in electronic nose
systems. These sensors are commercially available as the
chemical sensor for detecting some speciﬁc smells. Generally,
an MOG sensor is applied in many kinds of electrical appli-
ances such as a microwave oven to detect the food burning,
an alcohol breathe checker to check the drunkenness, an air
puriﬁer to check the air quality, and so on.
The picture of some commercial MOG sensors are shown
in Fig. 3. Various kinds of metal oxides, such as SnO2, ZnO2,
WO3, TiO2 are coated on the surface of a semiconductor. But,
the most widely applied metal oxide is SnO2. These metal
oxides have a chemical reaction with the oxygen in the air
and the chemical reaction changes when the adsorbing gas is
detected. The scheme of chemical reaction of an MOG sensor
when adsorbing with the CO gas, is shown as follows:
1
2O2 + (SnO2−x) → O−ad (SnO2−x)
(1)
CO + O−ad (SnO2−x) → CO2 + (SnO2−x)
(2)
Fig. 3.
MOG sensors.
When the metal oxide element on the surface of the sensor is
heated at a certain high temperature, the oxygen is adsorbed
on the crystal surface with the negative charge as shown in
Fig. 4. In this stage, the grain boundary area of the metal
oxide element forms a high barrier as shown in the left hand
side of Fig. 4.
Then, the electrons cannot ﬂow over the boundary and this
makes the resistance of the sensor become higher. When the
deoxidizing gas, e.g., CO gas, is presented to the sensor, there
is a chemical reaction between negative charges of oxygen at
the surface of the metal oxide element and the deoxidizing gas
as shown in (1). The chemical reaction between adsorbing gas
and the negative charge of the oxygen on the surface of MOG
sensor reduces the grain boundary barrier of the metal oxide
element as shown in the right hand side of Fig. 4. Thus, the
electron can ﬂow from one cell to another cell easier. This
makes the resistance of MOG sensor lower by the change of
oxygen pressure according to the rule of (2). Thus, (1) means
that CO2 is reduced and (2) means that CO is oxidized.
The relationship between sensor resistance and the concen-
tration of deoxidizing gas can be expressed by the following
equation over certain range of gas concentration:
Rs = A[C]−α
where Rs =electrical resistance of the sensor, A = constant,
C = gas concentration, and α =slope of Rs curve. The electric
Fig. 4.
Principle of MOG sensor [8].
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

circuit for the MOG sensor is shown in Fig. 5. Electrical
voltages are provided to the circuit (Vc) and the heater of the
sensor (Vh). When the MOG sensor is adsorbed with oxygen
and the deoxidizing gas, the resistance of the sensor (Rs) is
changed. Thus, we can measure the voltage changes (Vout)
while the sensor is adsorbing the tested odor.
MOG sensors need to be operated at high temperature,
so they consume a little higher power supply than the other
kinds of sensors. The reliability and the sensitivity of MOG
sensors are proved to be good to detect volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), combustible gas, and so on [8]. However,
the choices of MOG sensors are still not cover all odorous
compounds and it is difﬁcult to create an MOG sensor that
responds to one odor precisely. Generally, most commercial
MOG sensors respond to various odors in different ways.
Therefore, we can expect if we use many MOG sensors to
measure a smell, the vector data reﬂect the speciﬁc properties
for the smell. Generally, it is designed to detect some speciﬁc
sensor
Fig. 5.
Principle of MOG sensors.
smell in electrical appliances such as an air puriﬁer, a breath
alcohol checker, and so on. Each type of MOG sensors has its
own characteristics in the response to different gases. When
combining many MOG sensors together, the ability to detect
a smell is increased. The main part of the MOG sensor is
TABLE I
LIST OF MOG SENSORS FROM THE FIS INC. USED IN THIS EXPERIMENT.
Sensor Model
Main Detecting Gas
SP-53
Ammonia, Ethanol
SP-MW0
Alcohol, Hydrogen
SP-32
Alcohol
SP-42A
Freon
SP-31
Hydrocarbon
SP-19
Hydrogen
SP-11
Methane, Hydrocarbon
SP-MW1
Cooking vapor
the metal oxide element on the surface of the sensor. When
this element is heated at certain high temperature, the oxygen
is adsorbed on the crystal surface with the negative charges.
The reaction between the negative charge of the metal oxide
surface and deoxidizing gas makes the resistance of the sensor
vary as the partial pressure of oxygen changes [8]. Based on
this characteristic, we can measure the net voltage changes
while the sensors adsorb the tested odor.
B. Principle of QCM sensors
QCM sensors have been well-known to provide a very
sensitive mass-measuring devices in Nano-gram levels, since
the resonance frequency will change upon the deposition of
the given mass on the electrodes. Synthetic polymer-coated
QCM sensors have been studied as sensors for various gasses
since a QCM sensor is coated with a sensing membrane works
as a chemical sensor. The QCM sensors are made by covering
the surface with several kinds of a very thin membrane with
about 1 µm as shown in Fig. 6.
Since the QCM sensor oscillates with a speciﬁc frequency
depending on the cross section corresponding to three axis
of the crystal, the frequency will change according to the
deviation of the weight due to the adsorbed odor molecular
(odorant). The membrane coated on QCM sensor has selective
adsorption rate for a molecular and the frequency deviation
show the existence of odorants and their densities. Odorants
and membranes are tight relation while it is not so clear whose
materials could be adsorbed so much.
In this paper, we have used the following materials as shown
in Table II. The reason why ﬂuorine compounds are used
here is that the compounds repel water such that pure odorant
molecular could be adsorbed on the surface of the membrane.
To increase the amount of odorants to be adsorbed it is impor-
tant to iron the thickness of the membrane. In Table II, we have
tried to control the density of the solute in the organic solvent.
The basic approach used here is a sol-gel method. The sol-gel
process is a wet-chemical technique used for the fabrication
of both glassy and ceramic materials. In this process, the sol
(or solution) evolves gradually towards the formation of a
gel-like network containing both a liquid phase and a solid
phase. Typical precursors are metal oxides and metal chlorides,
which undergo hydrolysis and polycondensation reactions to
form a colloid. The basic structure or morphology of the solid
phase can range anywhere from discrete colloidal particles to
continuous chain-like polymer networks.
TABLE II
CHEMICAL MATERIALS USED AS THE MEMBRANE WHERE E:ETANOL,
W:WATER, DA:DILUTE NITRIC ACID, EA:ETHYL ACRYLATE,
MTMS:TRIMETHOXY SILANE, PFOEA:PERFLUOROOCTYLETHYL
ACRYLATE.
Sensor number
Materials of membrane
Sensor 1
E(4ml), DA(0.023ml),
Sensor 2
W(3.13ml), E(4ml), EA(0.043ml), MTMS
Sensor 3
W(3.13ml), E(4ml), EA(0.014ml), MTMS, PFOE
Sensor 4
W(3.13ml), E(4ml), EA(0.015ml), MTMS, PFOE
Sensor 5
W(0.30ml), E(4ml), EA(0.043ml), MTMS, PFOE
Sensor 6
W(0.05ml), E(3.0ml), EA(0.043ml), MTMS, PFOE
Sensor 7
W(0.30ml), E(3.2ml), EA(0.043ml), MTMS, PFOE
Sensor 8
No membrane
V. ODOR SENSING SYSTEM
Generally, odor sensors are designed to detect some speciﬁc
odor in electrical appliances such as an air puriﬁer, a breath
alcohol checker, and so on. Each of odor sensors such as
MOG sensors or QCM sensors has itself characteristics in
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Oscillation circuit
     (front view)
Oscillation circuit
     (side view)
 Electrodes
Sockets
Quartz plates
 Electrodes
Lead lines
Sensitive membrane 
Odorants
Odorants
Fig. 6.
Principle of QCM sensors. The odorants attached on a sensitive
membrane will make the weight change of quartz plane. Thus, the original
frequency of the crystal oscillation will become smaller according to the
density of odorants.
Dry air 
cylinder
Pressure 
meter 1
Dry air
Needle 
valve 1
Dry air
Permeater
Thermostatic 
chamber 
Flow
meter 2
Pressure 
control 
valve 2 
Pressure 
control 
valve 1 
Pressure 
meter 2
Flow
meter 1
Needle 
valve 2
Smell 
material
Smell 
gas
Tube 
holder
Sampling box
Fig. 7.
Odor sensing systems. The air will be emitted from the dry air
cylinder. Air ﬂow is controlled by pressure control valves 1 and 2. By using
the needle valve 2, more precise ﬂow rate of the dry air can be achieved and
the thermostatic chamber in the permeater can control the temperature of the
dry air. Finally, the air is pull in the sampling box where the MOG sensors
and/or QCM sensors are attached on the ceiling of the box.
the response to different odors. When combining many odor
sensors together, the ability to detect an odor is increased. An
electronic nose system shown in Fig. 7 has been developed,
based on the concept of human olfactory system. The combi-
nation of odor sensors, listed in Tables I and II, are used as
the olfactory receptors in the electronic nose.
VI. CLASSIFICATION METHOD OF ODOR DATA
In order to classify the odors we adopt a three-layered neural
network based on the error back-propagation method as shown
in Fig. 8.
The error back-propagation algorithm which is based on a
gradient method is given by the following steps.
Input pattern
Output pattern
Desired pattern
INPUT LAYER
OUTPUT LAYER
HIDDEN LAYER
Output error
i
j
k
+
-
+
+
-
-
dk
Ok
ek
wkj
wji
Fig. 8.
Three layered neural network with the error back-propagation. The
neural network consists of three layers, that is, an input layer i, a hidden
layer j, and an output layer k. When the input data xi, i = 1, 2, . . . , I are
applied in the input layer, we can obtain the output Ok in the output layer
which is compared with the desired value dk which is assigned in advance. If
the error ek = dk − Ok occurs, Then, the weighting coefﬁcients wji, wkj
are corrected such that the error becomes smaller based on an error back-
propagation algorithm.
Step 1. Set the initial values of wji, wkj, θj, θk, and η(> 0).
Step 2. Specify the desired values of the output dk, k =
1, 2, . . . , K corresponding to the input data xi, i = 1, 2, . . . , I
in the input layer.
Step 3. Calculate the outputs of the neurons in the hidden layer
and output layer by
netj
=
I
∑
i=1
wjixi − θj, Oj = f(netj), f(x) =
1
1 + e−x
netk
=
J
∑
j=1
wkjOj − θk, Ok = f(netk).
Step 4. Calculate the error en and generalized errors by
ek
=
dk − Ok, δk = ekOk(1 − Ok)
δj
=
K
∑
k=1
δkwkjOj(1 − Oj).
Step 5. If ek is sufﬁciently small for all k, END and otherwise
∆wkj
=
ηOjδk,
wkj ⇐ wkj + ∆wkj
∆wji
=
ηOiδj,
wji ⇐ wji + ∆wji.
Step 6. Go to Step 3. Using the above recursive procedure,
we can train the odor data. The measurement data is an
eight-dimensional vector which are obtained with eight sensors
stated in Table II.
VII. CLASSIFICATION RESULTS USING MOG SENSORS
We have measured four types of tea using MOG sensors
shown in Table I. The odors used here are shown in Table
III. Note that the chemical properties of these odors are very
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

similar and it has been difﬁcult to separate them based on the
measurement data by using MOG sensors. We have examined
TABLE III
TEAS USED IN EXPERIMENT I.
Label
Materials
Samples
A
English tea
20
B
Green tea
20
C
Barley tea
20
D
Oolong tea
20
two examples, Experiments I and II. For Experiment I, we
classify kinds of teas. The numbers of neurons for this
experiment are eight in the input layer, four in the hidden
layer, and four in the output layer, that is, 8-4-4 structure.
The number of training samples is ﬁfteen and the number
of test samples is ﬁve. We change the training data set for
100 times and check the classiﬁcation accuracy for the test
data samples. Thus, we have obtained 500 test samples as
the total number of classiﬁcation. The classiﬁcation results
are summarized in Table IV. Average of the classiﬁcation is
96.2 %. For Experiment II, we consider to classify the ﬁve
TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS FOR EXPERIMENT I.
Classiﬁcation results(96.2%)
Odor data
A
B
C
D
Total
Correct
A
500
0
0
0
500
100.0%
B
0
494
6
0
500
98.8%
C
0
71
429
0
500
85.8%
D
0
0
0
500
500
100.0%
kinds of coffees as shown in Table V where the smell data
A, B, and C are the coffees of Mocha made from different
companies. The numbers of neurons are eight in the input
layer, ﬁve in the hidden layer, and ﬁve in the output layer,
that is, 8-5-5 structure.
The numbers of training samples are twenty and he number
of test samples is ﬁfteen. We change the training data set for
hundred times and check the classiﬁcation accuracy for the
test data samples. Thus, we have obtained 1,500 test samples
as the total number of classiﬁcation. The classiﬁcation results
are shown in Table VI. From Table VI we can see that the
TABLE V
SMELL DATA OF TEAS USED IN EXPERIMENT II.
Label
Materials
No. of samples
A
Mocha coffee1
35
B
Mocha coffee2
35
C
Mocha coffee3
35
D
Kilimanjaro coffee
35
E
Char-grilled coffee
35
total classiﬁcation is 88.8%. Compared with Table
IV, this
case is worse by about 7%. In the latter case, the classiﬁcation
of Mocha coffees 1, 2, and 3 is not so good. The difference
of the company may affect the classiﬁcation results in a bad
way although the smells are similar.
TABLE VI
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS FOR EXPERIMENT II.
Classiﬁcation results(88.8%)
Odor data
A
B
C
D
E
Total
Correct
A
1190
253
29
27
1
1500
79.3%
B
225
1237
9
10
19
1500
82.5%
C
142
7
1325
26
0
1500
88.3%
D
9
14
3
1437
37
1500
95.8%
E
0
18
0
11
1471
1500
98.1%
TABLE VII
KINDS OF ODORS MEASURED OF EXPERIMENT III.
Symbols
Kind of odors
A
Ethanol
B
Water
C
Methyl-salicylate
D
Triethyl-amine
VIII. CLASSIFICATION RESULTS USING QCM SENSORS
FOR MIXED ODOR DATA
We have measured four types of odors, as shown in Ta-
ble VII. The sampling frequency is 1 [Hz], the temperatures
of odor gases are 24∼26 [◦C], and the humidity of gas is
6∼8 [%]. To control the density of gases, we use diffusion
tubes. Odor data are measured for 600 [s]. They may include
impulsive noises due to the typical phenomena of QCM
sensors. We call this experiment as Experiment III.
To remove these impulsive noises we adopt a median ﬁlter
which replaces a value at a speciﬁc time by a median value
among neighboring data around the speciﬁc time. In Fig. 9,
we show the measurement data for the symbol A (ethanol)
where the horizontal axis is the measurement time and the
vertical axis is the frequency deviation from the standard
value (9M [Hz]) after passing through a ﬁve-point median
ﬁlter.
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Sensor 3
Sensor 4
Sensor 5
Sensor 6
Sensor 7
Sensor 8
0
800
0
-4
-8
-12
Time[s]
∆f [Hz]
Fig. 9.
Measurement data of Experiment III. Here, eight sensors are used
and for 800 [s] the data were measured. The maximum value for each sensor
among eight sensors is selected as a feature value for the sensor. Therefore, we
have eight dimensional data for an odor and they will be used for classiﬁcation.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

TABLE VIII
TRAINING DATA SET FOR ETHANOL (A), WATER (B),
METHYL-SALICYLATE (C), AND TRI-ETHYLAMINE (D) FOR
EXPERIMENT III.
Symbols
Output A
Output B
Output C
Output D
A
1
0
0
0
B
0
1
0
0
C
0
0
1
0
D
0
0
0
1
TABLE IX
TESTING THE MIXED ODORS FOR EXPERIMET III. HERE, BOLD FACE
DENOTES THE LARGEST VALUE.
Symbols
Output A
Output B
Output C
Output D
A and B
.673
.322
.002
.001
B and C
.083
.696
.174
.001
C and D
.001
.004
.016
.992
D and A
.003
.003
.002
.995
A and C
.992
.006
.002
.000
B and D
.003
.003
.003
.995
A. Training for Classiﬁcation of Odors
In order to classify the feature vector, we allocate the desired
output for the input feature vector where it is nine-dimensional
vector, as shown in Table VIII since we have added the
coefﬁcient of variation to the usual feature vector to reduce
the variations for odors. The training has been performed until
the total error becomes less than or equal to 0.5 ×10−2 where
η=0.3.
B. Classiﬁcation Results and Discussion for Mixed Odor Data
After training such that all the smells, A, B, C, and D,
have been classiﬁed correctly, we have tested the mixed data
sets such that two kinds of odors are mixed with the same
rate where the data set of mixed smells are {A&B, B&C,
C&D, D&A, A&C, B&D}. Then, the classiﬁcation results are
shown in Table IX where the values in boldface denote the
top case where the maximum output values are achieved. The
maximum values show one of the mixed odors. But, some of
them do not show the correct classiﬁcation for the remaining
odor. Thus, we have modiﬁed the input features such that
z = x − 0.9y,
where x is the feature, y denotes the top value of each
row in Table IX, and z is a new feature. Using the new
feature vector, we have obtained the classiﬁcation results as
shown in Table X. By changing the features according to the
above relation, better classiﬁcation results have been obtained.
But, the coefﬁcient 0.9 used in the above equation is not
necessarily appropriate. The value might be replaced by the
partial correlation coefﬁcient in multivariate analysis.
IX. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a new approach to odor classiﬁcation has been
presented and discussed by using MOG sensors and QCM
sensors. After surveying the smell sensing and classiﬁcation
methods, we have examined two examples, Experiment 1 and
Experiment II. Then, mixed effects of two different odors have
TABLE X
TESTING THE MIXED ODORS WHERE EXCEPT FOR THE LARGEST VALUE
THE TOP IS SELECTED AS THE SECOND ODOR AMONG THE MIXED ODORS
FOR EXPERIMENT III. HERE, ASTERISK * DENOTES THE TOP EXCEPT FOR
THE LARGEST VALUE.
Symbols
Output A
Output B
Output C
Output D
A and B
.263
.290*
.166
.066
B and C
.358
.029
.631*
.008
C and D
.002
.071
.644*
.163
D and A
.214*
.004
.037
.230
A and C
.031
.020
.527*
.026
B and D
.108
.010
.039*
.325
been considered in Experiment III. From these results, we
could know that the electronic nose systems might be applied
to many applications in real world such that small detection of
bad gas or uncomfortable smell, Odor classiﬁcation of perfume
of joss tics kinds, food freshness, etc.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid
for Scientiﬁc Research(B)(23360175). The authors would like
to thank JSPS to support this research work.
REFERENCES
[1] Milke J. A. (1995), “Application of Neural Networks for discriminating
Fire Detectors”, International Conference on Automatic Fire Detection,
AUBE’95, 10th, Duisburg, Germany, pp. 213–222
[2] Bicego M. (2005), “Odor classiﬁcation Using similarity-Based Represen-
tation”, Sensors and Actuators B, Vol. 110, pp. 225–230.
[3] Distante C., Ancona N., Siciliano P., and Burl M. (2003), “Support Vector
Machines for Olfactory Signal Recognition”, Sensors and Actuators B,
Vol. 88, pp. 30–39.
[4] Gardner J. and Bartlet P. (1998), “Electronic Noses: Principles and
Applications”, Oxford University Press, Pennsylvania, USA, pp. 1–30.
[5] S. Omatu and M. Yano (2011), “Intelligent Electronic Nose System Inde-
pendent on Odor Concentration”, International Symposium on Distributed
Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Salamanca, Spain, pp. 1–9.
[6] S. Omatu (2012), “Pattern Analysis for Odor Sensing System”, IGI
Global, pp. 20–34.
[7] T. Fujinak, M. Yoshioka, and T. Kosaka (2008), “Intelligent Electronic
Nose Systems for Fire Detection Systems Based on Neural Networks”,
The second International Conference on Advanced Engineering Comput-
ing and Applications in Sciences, Valencia, Spain, pp. 73–76.
[8] General Information for TGS sensors, Figaro Engineering, available at
www.ﬁgarosensor.com/products/general.pdf (2012).
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

