A Second-Order Regularization Method of Object Reconstruction
in Hydrodynamic Experiments
LingHai Kong, HaiBo Xu
Institute of Applied Physics and Computational Mathematics
Beijing, PR China
email: {kong_linghai, xu_haibo) @iapcm.ac.cn
Abstract—
A
new
higher-order
regularization
model
is
investigated under the assumption of mixed Laplace-Gaussian
noise,
which
plays
an
important
role
in
tomography
reconstruction and quantitative analysis of hydrodynamic
experiments.
To
solve
the
model
numerically,
adaptive
stopping functions are introduced to improve the classical
augmented
Lagrangian
method,
and
an
adaptive
soft-
shrinking formula is derived. To acquire efficiency and
reliability, it is further combined with a variant of the
expectation maximization method. Some experimental tests are
performed for image denoising and object reconstruction.
Keywords- Regularization Method; Mixed Laplace-Gaussian
Noise; ALM; EM;Image Reconstruction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Image reconstruction is an indispensable process in
image processing and data analysis, whose goal is to rebuild
an ideal image from noisy or even blurred data. Some
different types of mixed noise models have been investigated
in the literature, such as Poisson and Gaussian noise [1][2],
impulse and Gaussian noise [3]-[5], etc.. With regards to
impulse noise, two special cases have drawn much research
interest, that is, salt-and-pepper noise and random-valued
noise. Nevertheless, in some applications, such as harsh
hydrodynamic experiments, additive white Gaussian noise is
introduced as expected during image acquisition, while non-
Gaussian noise, especially additive Laplace noise, is also
encountered for more accurate modeling transmission in
Charge-coupled Device (CCD) channels and interaction
between shielding and photons. Accordingly, this paper
considers the task of removing mixed Laplace-Gaussian
(MLG) noise, where the observation f of an ideal image
is
modeled by
U denotes the image domain, n(x) is regarded as a
realization of independent and identically distributed (iid)
random variables Z(x), which has the probability density
function (PDF)
(1)
where
is a parameter set,
represents
the
mixture
ratio
satisfying
.
Additionally, H can be an identity, blur or projection
operator in this paper. The problem of this paper is then to
reconstruct u from the observation f with an unknown
parameter set
.
The First-Order Total Variation (FOTV) regularization
method, designed originally for Gaussian noise removal, is
now one of the most popular approaches for studying
inverse problems
under
various
assumptions of noise
including Poisson, Speckle, impulse, or even mixed noise.
Among
the
works
in
the
literature,
the
first-order
regularization models given in [6]-[8] are of benefit to our
work.
Given the success of FOTV-based
models, various
modifications have been developed to surmount its artifact,
such as the staircase effect and the shortage of smoothness.
Among the modifications, we concentrate on the following
Higher-Order TV (HOTV) regularization methods. Li, Shen,
Fan, Shen [9] proposed the following model
(2)
for Gaussian noise removal, where
is a stopping function
producing anisotropic diffusion and a weighted fourth-order
diffusion equation is derived by steepest descent method.
Papafitsoros and Shcönlieb [10] considered the Gauss noise
model
and
the
impulse
noise
model
separately,
and
established a theoretical and numerical framework of the
minimization problem
(3)
where s=1,2,
is a known linear operator,
are
regularization parameters, and the convex functions
have at most linear growth at infinity. They also assured that,
by implementing a higher order extension of FOTV, the
proposed model can significantly reduce the staircase effect
in image restoration.
As mentioned above, the primary goal of this paper is to
find an appropriate model for mixed noise removal and
image reconstruction. Most existing regularization models
have the data fidelity terms determined by the probability
distributions of the noises, such as
norm for Gaussian
noise and
norm for impulse noise. In applications,
however, it is still not well-founded for the noise model, as
well as higher-order regularization methods used for hydro-
dynamic experiments, since the parameters of the PDF are
unknown in advance and has to be considered carefully.
Moreover, it is not unnecessary to reconsider the assemblage
of the punishing functions, and the weighting functions
should have been investigated in a more natural and practical
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-599-9
ADVCOMP 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

way. In view of that, the problem of image reconstruction is
reconsidered and a new framework of the second order
regularization
method
is
proposed.
Noting
that
noise
modeling is indispensable for image processing and data
diagnosing, the first main contribution of this paper is to
introduce
an
applicable
calculation
method
for
the
parameters of the PDF, which can be generalized to more
intricate simulations of real noise. The second contribution
lies in designing an efficient and reliable Augmented
Lagrange
Method
(ALM)
to
solve
a
constrained
minimization problem, where some kind of positive control
functions are designed to enhance significant details. The
numerical discussion confirms that the proposed model
succeeds in avoiding the undesirable pseudo-features in the
reconstructed data.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2,
applying
Bayesian
inference
theory,
a
new
hybrid
regularization model is proposed. Furthermore, its algorithm
is established with some modification of the ALM. In section
3, some numerical experiments are conducted to prove the
applicability of the proposed models. Finally, in section 4,
some additional remarks and future work on the model and
its algorithm are discussed.
II.
MAIN MODEL AND ITS ALGORITHM
A.
Mathematical Modeling
The main idea is to configure a regularization model by
combing FOTV functionals with HOTV ones through some
kinds of weighting functions, intending to enhance true
edges and polish fake or insignificant information in the
reconstructed images.
By applying the Bayesian inference theory [11] in
continuous settings, the maximum a-posteriori probability
(MAP) estimator of
is given by
(4)
It follows from the ideas in [10] that the a priori probab-
ility density function,
can be defined by
(5)
where
are positive parameters. On the other hand, by the
independency assumption, there holds that
We then have a negative log-likelihood functional of the
MLG model
(6)
The difficulty of computing the minimizer of the funct-
ional (6) lies in the log-sum operation. Fortunately, it can be
surmounted in the following way. Introduce a vector-valued
function
[4], [12] in
and define a functional
(7)
where
.
Then, perform the following iteration scheme
(8)
for given
, where
denotes the inner iteration number.
Utilizing the updating equation
(9)
it can be proven that the above scheme leads to the same
global minimize of
Thus, we turn to consider the following minimization
problem (MLG-TVBH)
(10)
B.
Proposed algorithm of MLG-TVBH
The algorithm for MLG-TVBH is based on the variable
splitting method and the ALM, where penalty parameters in
the quadratic infeasibility terms of ALM are replaced by
adaptively selective functions. Indeed, reuse the pattern of (8)
and split (10) into several minimization sub-problems. Use v
to detonate the iteration number.
is a coarse guess of the
parameters
, then the minimizer
are given by
(11)
iteratively.
In terms of calculating
, it yields by direct compu-
tation that
,
,
(12)
(13)
As for the
-minimization problem of (11), it can be
proven that there exists a unique solution in the space of
bounded Hessian (BH) [10], the details of which are omitted
in this paper.
To circumvent the non-differentiability of the
norm
arisen in our model, a modification of the Alternating Dire-
ction Augmented Lagrangian (ADAL) method [13][14] is
proposed, as follows.
Firstly, introduce auxiliary vector-valued variables
,
and split the minimization problem into
subject to
Secondly, configure an alternating minimization process.
More specifically, use a third variable k to approximate the
fidelity term
, and introduce spatially detail selective
functions
,
and
then consider the
following functional
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-599-9
ADVCOMP 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

where
,
is the
vector of positive penalty functions to be specified latter,
is the vector of Lagrange multipliers.
Given initial values
. If
are the
current approximation to the multiplier vector, the fidelity
term, the gradient and the Hessian of the original data, then
we turn to consider the following problems
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
For the minimization problem (14), which is a quadratic
problem, by a routine computation, it yields the following
fourth-order Euler-Lagrange equation
(19)
(20)
with boundary conditions
where
is the outward unit normal vector to the
boundary,
is the adjoint operator of H.
For the problem (15), combine it with the updating of
in (18). Introduce an auxiliary variable m to approximate
utilize the dual method, we find that the
maximize
fulfills
Detonate
consider
where
there holds the following iteration scheme for solving (15):
(21)
In a similar way, the minimization problem (16), (17)
can be solved. Indeed, there have
(22)
and
(23)
In summary, an alternating minimization algorithm of
the MLG-TVBH model is given as follows.
Algorithm
Given a tolerance
. Choose initial guess
.
Set
do
Step 1. Calculate
by equation (9).
Step 2. Calculate
by (19),(20).
Step 3. Calculate
and
by
(21)-(23), respectively.
If
, end the recurrence. Otherwise, go
to the next steps.
Step 4. Calculate
by (12), (13).
Step 5. Set v=v+1, go to step 1.
It can be seen that only step 2 is time-consuming, while
the others can be calculated explicitly.
III.
APPLICATIONS
In this section, the proposed method is applied for image
denoising with H representing the identity operator and data
reconstruction with H representing the Abel transform [15]
[16], i.e.,
(24)
The intensity of the observed image is rescaled to the interval
[0,1] before operation. Some synthetic images are utilized,
and degenerated versions are obtained by adding random
noise to the clean ones with certain proportion. The programs
were coded in C++ and run on a personal computer with four
2.83 GHz CPU processors.
A.
Configuration of ρ
Based on the ideas in [9][16], the second-order total
variation is used to restrain the staircase effect in the restored
images. Meanwhile, the strictly positive penalty functions
and
act as stopping functions preventing from
over-blurring. The stopping functions can be defined by
,
,
and
respectively, where
is the Gaussian filter with fixed
parameter
,
denote
the convolution operator. In
application,
are positive valve with
. The
former is the valve of true edges in the original image, and
the other is used to distinguish pseudo signal caused by the
staircase effect.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-599-9
ADVCOMP 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

B.
The numerical scheme for (19)
It is noted that there have been many approaches of
computing u in the literature, such as steepest descent
method (e.g., [17]), lagged-diffusivity fixed-point method
(e.g., [18]), additive operator splitting (AOS, e.g., [19], [20]),
dual method (e.g., [21]), and so on.
In this paper, the gradient descent method and the semi-
implicit AOS scheme are utilized to get the solution of (19).
Intuitively, in homogeneous regions of a given image,
is significantly smaller than
, and thus, integrate
the
fourth-order divergence term into the source term
, and
consider the following evolution equation
(25)
with initial-boundary conditions. It can be seen that the
stopping functions
are fundamental in our method,
since isotropic diffusion is undesired as they are spatially
invariable.
To meet the boundary condition, we utilize the trick of
continuous extension to the boundary of original images. The
scale derivative term, i.e.,
, is approximated by a forward
difference scheme. The first-order divergence term is approx
-imated by the standard central difference, and the second-
order divergence term is approximated by finite forward
and/or backward differences (e.g., [9]). Hence, equation (25)
can be solved by a semi-implicit AOS scheme, which can be
used to deal with the heat flow equation to compute the
Gaussian convolution.
Additionally, to assess the reconstruction performance,
the quality index of restoration
(26)
is adopted in this paper.
C.
Initial value and parameter selection
In applications, we pay more attention is the selection
of parameters
and the valve value
than
the other parameters, such as
and the scale step size
, since they are less sensitve and almost consistent in
our experiments. For example, in this paper,
,
and
. The stopping criterion in our experiments is
In this paper,
.
D.
Image denoising
In this section, some experiments of the proposed
model are listed for reconstructing images corrupted by
different kinds of mixed noise.
Figure 1 shows an experiment of removing mixed
Lapla ce-Gaussian noise. Figure 1A) is a synthesized image
according to [10], Figure 1B) is a degenerated version of
Figure 1A) with PSNR =26.45dB by adding 30% Laplace
noise (
) and Gaussian noise (
) to
Figure 1A).
Figure 1C) is a recovered image using our
proposed model, PSNR=33.07dB,
Figure 2 presents another experiment. Figure 2A) is a
synthesized image composed of two triangles and one circle.
Figure 2B) is obtained by adding Laplace-Laplacian noise to
Figure 2A) with PSNR=19.61dB. Figure 2C) is recovered
by the proposed model with PSNR=36.25dB,
Figure 3 shows the validation of mixed Gaussian noise
removal. Figure 3A) is the standard Lenna image. Figure 3B)
is a noisy image of Figure 3A) by additive Gaussian noise
with PSNR=19.29 dB. Figure 3C) is obtained by our
proposed method with PSNR =10.18dB.
E.
Object reconstruction
In this section, we give only one experiment on the
France Test Object (FTO).
In Figure 4, Figure 4A) is the original image of its
density distribution. Figure 4B) is its projection image,
which is corrupted by mixed Laplace (
) and
Gauss (
) noise. Figure 4C) is a reconstructed
image of Figure 4B) using the Abel inversion formula (e.g.,
[15]). Figure 4D) is a reconstructed version obtained by our
proposed
method
with
parameters
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND REMARKS
In this paper, a new modeling framework is proposed,
which is based on the assumption of mixed Laplace-
Gaussian noise. The proposed model can be seen as an
improvement of some known works, such as those in [8]-
[10].
The algorithm of the proposed model is also investigated
via the splitting tactics and the ALM with some modification.
Spatially adaptive functions are introduced to enhance
significant information in the original images. Also, a new
soft shrinking formula is obtained. Numerical experiments
illuminate its validation of recovering images in the presence
of varies kinds of mixed noise.
The proposed model can be further extended to process
images degenerated by blur and inhomogeneous light field,
which is to be discussed in future work.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Zhang, M. J. Fadili, J. I. Starck, “Multiscale variance-
stabilizing transform for mixed-Poission-Gaussian processes
and
its
application
in
bioimaing,”
IEEE
Interational
Conference on Image Processing, 2007, pp. 233-236.
[2]
A. Foi, M. Trimeche, K. Eqiazarian, “Practical Poissonian-
Gaussian noise modeling and fitting for single-image raw-
data,”IEEE Trans. Image Processing, 2008, vol. 17, pp. 1737-
1754.
[3]
J. F. Cai, R. Chan, M. Nikolova, “Two-phase methods for
deblurring images corrupted by impulse plus gaussian noise,
” Inverse Problem Imaging, 2008, vol. 2, pp. 187-204.
[4]
J. Liu, X.-C. Tai, H.-Y. Huang, Z.-D. Huan, “A weighted
dictionary learning model for denoising images corrupted by
mixed noise,” IEEE Trans. Image Processing, 2013, vol.
22(3), pp. 1108-1120.
[5]
J. Delon, A. Desolneux A, “A patch-based Approach for
removing impulse or mixed Gaussian-impulse noise,” SIAM
J. Imaging Sciences, 2013, vol. 6(2), pp. 1140-1174.
[6]
J. Liu, H.-Y. Huang, Z.-D. Huan, H.-L. Zhang, “Adaptive
variational method for restoring color images with high
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-599-9
ADVCOMP 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

density impulse noise,” Inter. J. Comput. Vis., 2010, vol. 90,
pp. 131-149.
[7]
M. Hintermüller, A. Langer,. “Subspace correction methods
for a class fo nonsmooth and nonadditive convex variational
problems with mixed L1/L2 data fidelity in image processing,”
SIAM J. Imaging Sci., 2013, vol. 6(4), pp. 2134-2173.
[8]
Z.Gong, Z. Shen, K. C. Toh, “Image restoration with mixed
or unknown,” Multiscale Model. Simul., 2014, vol.12(2), pp.
458-487.
[9]
F. Li, C.-M. Shen, J. Fan, C.-L. Shen, “Image restoration
combining a total variational filter and a fourth-order filter,”
J. Vis. Commun. Image R., 2007, vol. 18, pp. 322-330.
[10] K. Papafitsoros, C.B. Shcönlieb, “A combined First and
second order variational approach for image reconstruction,” J.
Math. Imaging Vis., 2014, vol. 48, pp. 308-338.
[11] J. Idier,. Bayesian approach to inverse problems. Wiley, New
York, 2008.
[12] J.Liu, H.-L. Zhang, “Image segmentation using a local GMM
in a variational framework,” J. Math. Imaging Vis., 2013,
vol.46, pp. 161-176.
[13] D. P. Bertsekas, J. N. Tsitsiklis, “Parallel and distributed
computation:
numerical
methods,”
Athena
Scientific,
Belmont, Massachusetts, 1997.
[14] V. P. Gopi, P. Palanisamy P, K. A. Wahid, “Micro-CT image
reconstruction based on alternating direction augmented
Lagrangian method and total variation,” Comput. Medical
Imaging Graph., 2013, vol. 37, pp. 419-429.
[15] R. Abraham, M. Bergounioux, E. Trĕlat,  “A penalization 
approach for tomographic reconstruction of binary axially
symmetric objects,” Appl. Math. Optim., 2008, vol.58, pp.
345-371.
[16] R. H. Chan, H. Liang, S. Wei, M. Nikolova, X.C. Tai, “High-
order total variation regularization approach for axially
symmetric object tomography from a single radiograph,”
Inverse Problems & Imaging, 2015, Vol.9(1), pp. 55-77.
[17] A. Chambolle, P. L. Lions,“Image recovery via total variation
minimization and related problems,” Numer. Math., 1997,
vol.76, pp. 167-188.
[18] M. Lysaker, X.-C. Tai, “Iterative image restoration combining
total variation minimization and a second-order functional,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., 2006, vol.66(1), pp. 5-18.
[19] T.-T. Wu, Y.-F. Yang, Z.-F. Pang, “ A modified fixed-point
iterative algorithm for image restoration using fourth-order
PDE model, ” Applied Numer. Math., 2012, vol. 62, pp. 79-
90.
[20] T. Lu, P. Neittaanmaki, and X.-C. Tai, “A parallel splitting up
method and its application to Navier-Stokes equations,”
Applied Mathematics Letters, 1991, vol.4(2), pp. 25-29.
[21] J. Weickert, B. ter Haar Romeny, and M. Viergever,
“Efficient and reliable schemes for nonlinear diffusion
filtering,” IEEE Trans. Image Proc., 1998, vol.7, pp. 398-410.
[22] A.Chambolle, T. Pock, “A first-order primal-dual algorithm
for convex problems with applications to imaging,” J. Math.
Imaging Vis., 2011, vol.40(1), pp. 120-145.
Figure 1.
A) (Left) An synthesized noise-free image[10]; B) (Center) Mixed Gaussian-Laplacian noise added to A); C) (Right) Restored version by our
model.
Figure 2.
A) (Left) A synthesized image; B) (Center) Mixed Laplacian-Laplacian noise ;C) (Right) A restored version using our proposed model.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-599-9
ADVCOMP 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Figure 3.
A) (Left) Lenna image; B) (Center) A noisy version of A) by adding mxied Gaussian noise; C) (Right) A restored version obtianed by our
proposed method
Figure 4.
A) (Left) The original density distribution image of FTO; B) (MidLeft) A degenerated image of the projection of A), obtianed by utilizing the
Abel formulation (20) firstly, and then adding mixed Laplace-Gauss noise. C) (MidRight) A reconstructed image of B) using the Abel Inverse formula [15]
D) (Right) A reconstructed image using our proposed method.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-599-9
ADVCOMP 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

