Visualization of Numerical Information for Construction Project Management
using BIM Objects
Leen-Seok Kang
Dept of Civil Engineering
Gyeongsang National University
Jinju, Korea
lskang@gnu.ac.kr
Chang-Hak Kim
Dept of Civil Engineering
Gyeongsang National University of Science and
Technology
Jinju, Korea
Ch-kim@gntech.ac.kr
Soo-Young Yoon
Dept of Civil Engineering
Gyeongsang National University
Jinju, Korea
sionesoju7@naver.com
Hyeon-Seong Kim
Dept of Civil Engineering
Gyeongsang National University
Jinju, Korea
wjdchs2003@gmail.com
Young-Hwan Kim
Dept of Civil Engineering
Gyeongsang National University
Jinju, Korea
over2391@naver.com
Bit-Na Cho
Dept of Civil Engineering
Gyeongsang National University
Jinju, Korea
Bey2020@naver.com
Abstract— Construction projects are recently growing in size
and a wide array of new construction techniques is being
introduced, gradually increasing relevant project information.
In most construction fields, however, project management
operations are undertaken in a way that is heavily dependent
upon the experience-based intuition of managers. For those
reasons, 4D, 5D, and nD CAD systems are being applied to
visualize
construction
progress
information.
Augmented
Reality (AR) technique is also being an important factor for
using
Building
Information
Modeling
(BIM)
system for
construction project. In addition, because the risk analysis
information is provided as a mathematical analysis basis, the
visualization system of construction risk information is being
developed using the BIM tool. This study presents a various
application cases of nD CAD objects for the construction
project.
Keywords-nD CAD object; simulation; building information
modeling; project management.
I.
INTRODUCTION
BIM (Building Information Modeling) based
on 3-
dimensional information models contribute most noticeably
in the visualization of construction information throughout a
lifecycle.
The
chief
effects
would
be
interference
management
at the design
phase using 3D blueprint
information and schedule management at the construction
phase using 4D CAD. The visualization range has included
cost and resource information to 4D objects to expand into
5D and 6D CAD systems. Fig. 1 represents a conference
method transitioning from numerical information reliance to
BIM-based visual information reliance.
The areas of improvement within construction using BIM
can
be
divided
into
the
technical
(BIM
function
improvement) and policy-based aspects (BIM applicability
improvement). This paper suggests a direction for function
improvement, which requires a distinction between passive
and active BIM systems.
Figure 1.
Using
BIM
to
visually
represent
numerical
construction information
Passive BIM that is the current BIM system is a tool that
expresses the task situation visually. Active BIM goes one
step further and contributes analysis that can help offer an
optimized solution given task constraints. This paper uses a
4D CAD system, which is used mostly at the construction
phase, to present an example of active BIM functions.
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Recently, there is much research for the visualization of
construction information. Most of them are focused on
building structures and plant project. Succar [4] suggests that
BIM
is
an
expansive
knowledge
domain
within
the
Architecture, Engineering, Construction and Operations
(AECO) industry. Zhang [5] developed an automated safety
checking platform using BIM that informs construction
engineers what safety measures are needed for preventing
fall-related accidents before construction starts. For the risk
information
analysis,
Carr
and
Tah
[1]
presented
a
hierarchical risk classification system as an official model for
accurate risk evaluation and a prototype model for risk
management system. Zeng et al. [2] proposed new risk
analysis methodology based on the fuzzy theory to overcome
the failure of conventional risk analysis methods to deal
immediately
with
complex
and
diverse
construction
environments.
These
studies
suggest
mathematical
interpretation-based analysis methods with limited practical
applicability. Moon et al. [3] suggested a method to visualize
construction risk information using BIM functions.
II.
CONSTRUCTION PROGRESS MANAGEMENT WITH
VISUAL INFORMATION
For the 4D system to replace the existing construction
management tools, a methodology to create and visualize 3D
objects-based on plan versus actual progress is required.
Such a progress management function is an essential part of
schedule management visualization, and should be applied to
4D system. The system developed by this research team has
both a general 4D implementation function and a 4D
progress management function that allows analysis of
progress state at each point. Fig. 2 expresses visual progress
management distinguished by colors, shown in the 4D
system.
The progress information visualized this way distinguishes
delayed activities as well as activities ahead of schedule by
different colors, making it possible for users to establish
more advanced schedule management plans when compared
to a schedule management tool based on numerical progress
information. In Fig. 2, the actual progress versus plan is
shown as ahead of schedule, delayed and normal operation,
which are marked in colors blue, red and green, respectively.
In other words, a methodology is introduced to distinguish
ahead-of-schedule areas or delayed areas versus initial plan
based
on
the
progress
rate
calculated
by
schedule
management module with each area shown in different
colors, enabling visualization of the current progress state.
This
visualized
progress
areas
can
express
detailed
information such as ahead of schedule or delay in schedule
with numerical information.
Figure 2.
Application of BIM object for construction project
The progress status compared to planned progress is
marked with green (ahead of plan), blue (normal progress
compared to plan), and red (delayed compared to plan), to
allow visual understanding of the overall progress status.
In particular, the progress information visualized this way
lets users understand not only progress versus plan but also
such specific items as scheduling information, location, and
preceding and succeeding activities. Therefore it can be used
as effective information when establishing revised plans for
delayed activities.
III.
4D APPLICATION TO TUNNEL CONSTRUCTION
PROJECT
Of tunnel construction works, long tunnels often exceed
10km in length, and the case to which the system is applied
to is a road tunnel construction site whose length is
10.965km long. Therefore, it is bound to limit intuitive
management, unlike in the case of buildings, plants and
bridge constructions, where users can see relevant structures
on a screen. A function would allow management of tunnels
by “section” in the process of actual construction, as in Fig. 3.
Figure 3.
4D process management function through “section”
segmentation at a super long tunnel construction site
While it is possible to see a 3D model of the entire
structure in one screen, it will be less efficient when
compared to structures and bridge works which allow
viewing of entire construction progress at one glance. For 4D
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

process
management
of
civil
engineering
structures
involving a large or long site, effective division of functions
into one that manages sections (manageable size) and
another that manages the entire work as a whole is a key to
enhancing the system’s efficiency.
For
this
particular
case,
a
function
utilizing
both
measurement data and quality test data at a 3D model of the
4D system was developed and applied, in addition to the 4D
process management function. Also, video image of CCTV
was used in conjunction with 3D to implement the tele-
presence functionality.
IV.
4D APPLICATION TO RIVER FACILITY CONSTRUCTION
River facility construction is extensive in nature, so
application of a system that combines Google Earth’s
functionality with 4D for management may be of great use.
In this case of application, a system that combines Google
Earth with 4D system for management was developed and
applied to an actual site (see Fig. 4).
Figure 4.
4D application for river facility project
Fig. 5 shows the process of 4D simulation that includes
temporary
works
that
are
assembled
and
dismantled
afterwards (coffering works, etc. in this case). In other words,
it describes the entire construction process that includes even
temporary facilities that are built temporarily to help build
permanent structures and then dismantled afterwards, rather
than permanent works that are built consecutively and exist
continuously.
Figure 5.
Simulation of girder structure installation process
during river facility construction
In addition, in this case of river facility construction, 4D
system was utilized as a way to visualize flood management.
A system to visually predict and confirm flood levels based
on anticipated precipitation was developed within a 4D
system for application; such a technology can be utilized as a
useful tool for disaster management during river facility
construction projects (see Fig. 6).
Figure 6.
Prediction of flood levels using 4D CAD system
V.
VISUALIZATION OF CONSTRUCTION RISK
INFORMATION
The analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and fuzzy analysis
can be used for the risk analysis of construction information,
as described in Fig. 7. First, construction environment factors
affecting risk criteria are analyzed and are selected as risk
evaluation factors. For example, three risk factors - risk
analysis on delay in the construction period (time), risk
analysis on greater-than-planned construction budget (cost),
and risk analysis on accidents during construction work
(work condition)―are calculated in line with AHP analysis 
procedures. The results are provided for fuzzy analysis
procedures to quantify risk criteria in accordance with
evaluation factors. The quantitative analysis values of each
risk factor are calculated on the basis of fuzzy procedures.
For this purpose, linguistic variables are defined as very low
(VL), low (L), moderate (M), high (H) and very high (VH).
The analysis results of each risk criteria are thus suggested as
risk level and comprehensive priorities.
Figure 7.
AHP and Fuzzy analysis Procedures
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

To visualize the process risk, a fuzzy method is used to
link to the 4D object. The colors of each process are then
changed depending on the level of risk, and the simulation is
run for the 4D object. Project managers should be able to
recognize which processes will have an especially high
amount of risk, increasing their effectiveness. Fig. 8 shows
an example of process risk simulation.
Figure 8.
Active 4D CAD system(e.g., representing process
risk levels)
The example used in Fig. 8 is a bridge construction project
currently underway with 250 separate activities. For risk
analysis, each task’s possible risk of a safety accident was
used as the basis, and further initial information was found
through expert interviews and input into the system. Each
process was given a probability P and an intensity I by the
on-site experts. To objectify the subjective risk levels, a
fuzzy analysis was used to set a priority order depending on
risk, 5 levels were designated, and the 4D object was
simulated. Representing tasks and processes with higher
risks visually will allow high risk processes to be managed at
a higher level of care by project managers.
VI.
ENVIRONMENT IMPROVEMENT FOR BIM APPLICATION
Fig.
9
outlines
the
functions
required
to
improve
generation convenience in 3D and 4D objects. The first item
required is a method to easily transform 2D objects into 3D
objects. A possible method may be to create a library for
important structure schedules to make schedule information
composition
of
4D
objects
a
simpler
process.
The
convertibility of 3D objects by parametric variables is also
necessary.
In addition, the 3D objects that compose the design phase
of construction are mostly single layer objects that are final
products of separate complex processes. As a 4D object must
be comprised of multiple objects with layers specified to the
process level, a simple object disassembly function must be
developed. Aside from these former improvements, creating
a widely diverse library of 3D objects for vital structural
parts is necessary.
Figure 9.
Establishing enhanced convenience in creating 3D
and 4D objects
Fig. 10 presents the necessary functions for establishing
compatibility with BIM objects including 3D objects. First,
the comprehensive completion of IFC codes must advance
for open BIM to be created, and developing IFC codes for
civil engineering facilities must progress at a faster rate.
Figure 10.
Establishing BIM object compatibility
Fig.
11
details
the
necessary
diversification
of
specification of BIM tools and evaluation methods. For civil
engineering work to move away from the established 2D-
based
management
system
to
a
BIM
based
system,
application guidelines and regulations must be introduced.
There is also a need for tools that can evaluate a specific
BIM management system’s applicability and select specific
BIM
systems
based
on
the
construction
project’s
characteristic properties.
Figure 11.
BIM operation system guidelines and product
evaluation
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

VII.
CONCLUSION
This research presented a BIM operating process for the
construction phase that can raise the usefulness of BIM on
civil construction projects. The proposed BIM operating
process enables integrated management of construction data
through analysis of progress, sequencing errors and risks.
Also as the system uses visual representation of complex and
numerical information, it can be expected that the system
will be actively used as an effective decision making tool.
To validate the system’s applicability in real situations, a
case study was carried out using bridge, tunnel and railway
projects. Because the BIM functions can be used for
visualizing the most information through the construction
life-cycle, the application of information technology and
computer science tools will be gradually increased for the
construction project management.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea
government (No. 2011-0016064).
REFERENCES
[1]
V. Carr and J. H. Tah, “A fuzzy approach to construction
project risk assessment and analysis : construction project risk
management system,” Advances in Engineering Software, vol. 32,
pp. 847-857, October-November 2001.
[2]
J. Zeng, M. An, and N. J. Smith, “Application of a fuzzy
based decision making methodology to construction project risk
assessment,” International Journal of Project Management, vol. 25,
pp. 589-600, August 2007.
[3]
H. S. Moon, H. S. Kim, L. S. Kang and C. H. Kim,
“Development of Active BIM Functions for Supporting and
Optimized
Construction
Management
in
Civil
Engineering
Projects,” The proceedings of ISARC conference (ISARC 2012),
June. 2012.
[4]
B. Succar, “Building information modelling framework:
A research and delivery foundation for industry stakeholders,”
Automation in Construction, vol. 18, pp. 357-375, May 2009.
[5]
S. Zhang, J. Teizer, J. K. Lee, C. M. Eastman and M.
Venugopal, “Building Information Modeling (BIM) and Safety:
Automatic
Safety
Checking
of
Construction
Models
and
Schedules,” Automation in Construction, vol. 29, pp. 183-195,
January 2013.
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

