Bringing Viability to Service-Oriented Enterprises in 
Cloud Ecosystems 
 
Nizami Jafarov, Edward Lewis and Gary Millar 
School of Engineering and Information Technology, University of New South Wales at Australian Defence Force Academy 
nizami.jafarov@student.adfa.edu.au, e.lewis@adfa.edu.au, g.millar@adfa.edu.au 
 
   
  Abstract - Cloud Computing is the next evolution of computing 
systems, which shifts the whole application infrastructure away 
from old monolithic architectural models to more open, 
interoperable, modular, reusable and agile building blocks. Many 
Enterprises realise the benefits of Cloud Computing and position 
it as the Information Technology (IT) outsourcing solution, which 
is cheaper to operate and maintain. However, Cloud Computing 
is not just a technology behind an infrastructure, but also a new 
model, which needs to be properly merged with legacy paradigms 
of an Enterprise. In our work, we are focused on the challenges 
Cloud Computing is bringing to an Enterprise along with the 
promising benefits. The central issue in the transformation of IT 
infrastructure of an Enterprise into the Cloud is the uncertainty 
it is able to bring to a well established Business Architecture (BA) 
and Business Models (BM) of a system. This disruptive 
uncertainty, which can be driven by an introduction of new 
technologies or modification of already integrated ones, needs to 
be addressed properly and governed accurately to guarantee a 
viability of an Enterprise. This work proposes solutions to the 
issues an Enterprise might face in its Cloud transformation 
initiative. 
 
Keywords–cloud computing; enterprise architecture; technological 
innovations; uncertainty management. 
 
I.    INTRODUCTION 
 
   Cloud and Cloud Computing are no more buzzwords in the 
world of Enterprises. Corporations and organisations slowly 
realise what Cloud-based solutions can offer and what benefits 
they can bring. Researchers worldwide, in academia and 
industry, are involved into analysis of impacts of Cloud 
Computing on IT infrastructures, organisational changes, 
business operations, system architectures to mention a few. 
Research challenges in Cloud Computing are systematically 
reviewed and addressed in academia [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Many 
white papers are also trying to give a clear definition of the 
Cloud and its capabilities in system architecture [7, 8, 9]. 
Market 
analysts 
suggest 
that 
the 
Cloud 
Computing 
capitalisation is already, almost three times more in 2012 than 
that of in 2008 [10]. Though, Cloud has slowly became a trend 
in the world of IT, active research and wide range of 
definitions clearly indicate that Cloud Computing is still 
immature as a paradigm. Thus, its integration with complex 
systems might lead to unpredictable consequences in systems 
architectures which position Cloud as a source of uncertainty 
which needs a clear realisation and governance. 
 
    In our work, we are looking at the challenges in Cloud 
ecosystems from the Enterprise Architecture (EA) perspective.  
 
Amongst the typical domains of EA such as Data 
Architecture, Application Architecture and Technology 
Architecture we identify the Business Architecture (BA) as the 
domain of interest, which is purely addressed in academia, 
however vital for an Enterprise to remain viable and 
competitive on the market in times of insertions of innovative 
technologies. In our research, we position Cloud Computing 
as the disruptive technology which is capable of bringing 
uncertainty to a BA of an Enterprise in times of technological 
insertions, in one or more of the following scenarios: 
 
1. Modifications in already integrated technologies 
    In times, when an Enterprise faces the changes in the scope 
of operations of already integrated technologies consumed 
over the Cloud (e.g., Public Cloud). 
 
2. Introduction of new technologies 
    In times, when new technologies got introduced to the 
public, but their benefits are not yet realised by an Enterprise. 
 
3. Parallel Innovations 
    In times, when an introduction of new technologies and 
changes to already integrated ones are happening at the same 
time. 
 
    In our work, we aim to overcome the above mentioned 
challenges by bringing Cybernetic concepts to the domain of 
EA to model a system accompanied with the decision models, 
uncertainty management and risk remedy mechanisms, which 
would help it remain viable in times of technological 
innovations.  
 
    This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 gives a 
detailed overview on the risks and challenges Cloud 
Computing brings to the EA; Section 3 proposes various 
solutions to overcome the issues Enterprises face in the Cloud 
and Section 4 summarises the findings and gives a glimpse on 
our future work. 
 
II.   BACKGROUND AND CHALLENGES 
 
   Nowadays, reliance of IT systems on remote computational 
power is accepted as a matter of fact and service providers 
such as Google, Citrix, Microsoft, VMWare, etc. offer a wide 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

range of diverse solutions which can be integrated into 
architectures of any IT-enabled Enterprises over the Cloud. 
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
defines Cloud Computing, as “a model for enabling 
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, 
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort or 
service provider interaction. This cloud model promotes 
availability and is composed of five essential characteristics, 
three service models, and four deployment models.“ [11] 
 
   Amongst the deployment models of Cloud Computing such 
as Community Cloud, Private Cloud, Public Cloud and Hybrid 
Cloud, we consider the latter models and Public Cloud in 
particular as more challenging, since in the Public Cloud, 
Enterprises leverage on remote computational power, which 
might be out of their direct governance. Absence of direct 
governance of IT can be challenging to the BA of an 
Enterprise, since for an Enterprise whose mission is to remain 
competitive and viable on the market in the long run, BA is 
considered to be the core unit of its business operations and 
Enterprise identity. BA is “a blueprint of the Enterprise that 
provides a common understanding of the organisation and is 
used to align strategic objectives and tactical demands. “ [12] 
In a typical Enterprise, such a blueprint might require 
continuous monitoring, revision of its artefacts and relevant 
BMs to remedy possible risks at global and local scales. 
However, in nowadays IT-enabled Enterprises these types of 
risks can possibly be part of BMs of BA, which can arise from 
a reliance on a remote computational power. 
 
A.    Risks of modifications in already integrated technologies 
    Amongst the main challenges of an Enterprise is preserving 
its identity in a long run and therefore continuously governing 
and maintaining its BA, which represents corporate values. 
Enterprises of modern age are trying to be pro-active, rather 
than reactive to possible changes in their business operations 
and this in fact requires significant investment of time and 
money into the management of relevant business units of the 
EA. One of the widely used system design paradigms, such as 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) is able to bring agility to 
a BA of an Enterprise through the decomposition of complex 
BMs into small ones and decoupling of business logic from 
operational logic. However, this might not be enough when an 
Enterprise is running its operations in the Cloud. Impacts of 
SOA and effects of introduction of Cloud to an Enterprise 
were addressed in range of papers in academia [2, 5, 13]. 
However, none of the existing works comprehensively 
analysed the impacts of Cloud Computing on BA of an 
Enterprise. 
 
    The core issue with the Public Cloud deployment model 
integrated with the IT infrastructure of an Enterprise is that the 
external services can be part of internal BMs. Though, this is 
one of the main missions of the Cloud Computing, such 
integration can also become a source of unexpected risks, 
which might question the viability of an entire Enterprise. In a 
Cloud SOA-enabled ecosystem services can be provided and 
consumed by a range of participants (i.e., service providers 
and service consumers). In fact, a service consumer on one 
side is only aware of the end-point on the other, whereas the 
end-point itself can be a consumer of services external to its 
Enterprise scope and therefore play a role of a medium. Such 
role, though promotes the core benefits of service-oriented 
systems, can still be challenging for an Enterprise when a 
change in an operational scope of any service in the service 
consumption chain is happening independently at different 
levels of service consumers hierarchy (Fig. 1). 
 
 
Fig. 1. Impacts of technological modifications 
 
    Though, the best practices of SOA teach us the ways to 
avoid possible risks through the use of dynamic and redundant 
service contracts and other relevant SOA patterns, they are 
unable to remedy risks associated with the propagation of 
technological changes in service consumers hierarchy by the 
time they got introduced to the end-point Enterprise. Which as 
a result can affect the BA of an Enterprise in times of Vertical 
and Horizontal integrations. 
 
B.   Risks of introductions of new technologies 
    Another challenge to the BA of an Enterprise is the 
introduction of new technologies. For Enterprises innovations 
of any kind can be disruptive and shall be managed according 
to organisational objectives and tactical demands. In modern 
IT-enabled Enterprises sources of innovations, and thus 
disruption, can be various Cloud deployment models 
integrated with the IT infrastructure. Various works [2, 5] in 
academia position Cloud Computing as a disruptive 
technology, but no solutions are proposed and much work 
done towards analysing and overcoming possible risks Cloud 
ecosystem can generate. 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

 
Fig. 2. Impacts of new technologies introductions 
 
    Scenarios that need deeper understanding and scientific 
analysis are those associated with the merge of an 
infrastructure of an Enterprise with the Public or Hybrid Cloud 
deployment models. In such scenarios an Enterprise does not 
have direct governance over some parts of its IT infrastructure 
and thus any introduction of a new technology can confuse 
decision makers (Fig. 2). In other words, time required for an 
Enterprise to realise possible opportunities or dangers of a 
newly introduced technology might not be enough and as a 
result increase or decrease its competitiveness on the market 
as well as question its viability. 
 
C.    Risks of Parallel Innovations 
    Lastly, a challenge, which needs careful analysis, is the one 
associated with the decision making in times of Parallel 
Innovations. We position Parallel Innovations as the process 
of simultaneous modifications in existing technologies and 
introductions of new ones to an Enterprise. In the context of 
Parallel Innovations we divide an introduction of a new 
technology into two processes: 1) introduction of a technology 
closely related to the one already integrated into the 
infrastructure of an Enterprise; 2) introduction of a 
technology which is not yet integrated and unrelated to any 
existing technology of an Enterprise; whereas innovation in 
already integrated technologies is a sole process of 
modifications in the scope of services functionalities in the 
hierarchy of service consumers. All these processes are 
capable of bringing uncertainty to an Enterprise and require 
relevant tools to support the management in making relevant 
decisions based on the possible events. For example, a new 
technology, closely related to the already integrated one, can 
substitute the old technology and bring financial benefits to an 
Enterprise, whereas a technology unrelated to the existing can 
bring uncertainty or destruction to the BA and Enterprise 
itself. There are of course various other possible scenarios of 
BA evolution in such integration initiatives that require deeper 
research and analysis. 
 
III.   METHODS AND SOLUTION SEEDS 
 
A.    Using Ontologies 
    One of the solution seeds, which can help in handling 
possible issues in propagation of risks from IT to a BA of an 
Enterprise, is to decouple these domains from each other. Such 
an approach was addressed in a number of works in academia 
[14, 15] and suggests the use of ontologies as mediums 
between these domains. In Information Science (IS), ontology 
is 
a 
"formal, 
explicit 
specification 
of 
a 
shared 
conceptualisation" [16]. Aier and Winter [14] propose a 
method for the identification of alignment artefacts using the 
example of domain clustering which is reflected in their Meta 
model. Kalogeras et al. [15] suggest using Web-Services 
technology as universal interfaces to achieve the decoupling of 
IT from BMs due to their wide utilization of open standards. 
Both 
approaches 
claim 
that 
through 
ontologies 
any 
modifications to the IT infrastructure of an Enterprise will 
have less impact on its BMs and therefore bring more agility 
to the BA. However, both methods have flaws and it was 
identified that the decoupling through ontologies can aid the 
BA, but is not enough for an Enterprise to become pro-active 
to possible technological modifications in the chain of service 
providers. 
 
    The core issue with the use of the methods is associated 
with the lexicon terms in system ontologies, which in times of 
technological innovations can sometimes encompass wider 
meanings and system might not necessary be aware of this 
(e.g., when there is change in a technology, somewhere in the 
chain of service providers). In most cases, a careful design of 
ontologies may not help, since the core issue is the - 
unexpected change in a service scope. So, for instance a 
service, which was proving radar services, will still be 
providing radar services, but the radius it covers might change 
from 5km to 10km, which will eventually affect a BM that 
consumes it. Another significant issue is that, it is not that easy 
to change system ontologies once they are established, more 
than that if such a decision was made it might lead to over-
cluttering of system taxonomy. Semantically-aware approach 
seem to be a solution, but once it got integrated into a system 
it acts as a black-box and interpreting inputs just from outputs 
might not be so effective, since a dangerous output can only 
be statistically detected after a particular amount of inputs, 
period of time, which means: lose of opportunities, decrease of 
competitiveness, viability and so on. Both works [14, 15] 
suggest automation, which makes sense in such complex 
systems, but this automation lacks a feedback mechanism. 
More importantly, feedback mechanism is not enough and 
such systems need a more comprehensive tool. We see a need 
for the Decision Support System (DSS), a tool that can aid 
overall Enterprise design and governance of its underlying 
systems. In our work, this tool is inspired by Cybernetics 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

concepts and therefore called the Cybernetic Decision Model 
(CDM). 
 
B.    Modeling Decision Support System 
    The goal of the CDM is to become a comprehensive EA 
tool that will bridge the gap between what is needed for 
planning for the viable systems in times of disruptive change 
and what is available. Its main application is within a DSS and 
it based on the GRAI Grid Decisional Model [17] developed 
in the University of Bordeaux. The CDM incorporates the 
GRAI’s concepts of horizons and periods to support 
continuous improvement of overall EA. In CDM ontologies 
can play a role of seeds with terms, which can form the pieces 
of decisional solutions (e.g., sentences). Domains of 
ontologies can be modeled as decision centres and impacts of 
changes in IT domain can be initially analysed at these centres 
and then decisions can be made to either approve or decline 
the integration of a particular service into the BMs (in a 
manual and automated fashions). GRAI can also be used to 
decompose each process based on various possible criteria, 
such as: resource structure, steps of transformation, etc. CDM 
can help in the analysis of possible changes in system 
evolution through horizons, which are used in the context of 
future planning. Future planning is associated with services 
that are part BMs of a system, and relevant analysis can be 
conducted on tasks basis to emulate likelihood of possible 
events in times of technological innovations. As in GRAI, in 
CDM horizons are quantified and aim to represent decisions 
scopes in short-term, mid-term and long-term time scales. 
That is, if a plan was made for six months then a horizon is six 
months. Horizons can be key instruments of decision-making 
and are also useful in the assessment of likelihood of 
ungoverned system shifts (e.g. technological, management). 
Periods of CDM aim to re-evaluate the time allocated to a 
particular plan and can either shrink the time or extended it. 
Periods allow managers to take into account dynamic changes 
in the environment of a DSS. This change might include 
internal (e.g. change of system managers, change of system 
architecture) 
and 
external 
(e.g. 
service 
modification, 
introduction of new platforms) disruptions. 
 
C.    Building Uncertainty Management Engine 
    There is also a need for the tool that would help in 
computation of conditional probabilities. In our system, this 
tool is based on the Bayesian Belief Network (BBN). The aim 
of this tool is to analyse posterior probability distribution to 
aid the governance and course of evolution of EA. One of the 
core advantages of the Bayesian Network (BN) over the most 
of predictive models, such as neural networks, is its capability 
to explicitly represent the interrelationships between the 
dataset attributes [18]. Periods of the CDM can be 
transformed into forecasting centres that can use Bayesian 
Belief Network for the assessing the circumstances and 
conditions that influence system performance. This in turn can 
create system buffers where possible deviations from the 
forecasted system evolution path are calculated. 
 
D.    Bringing Viable System Model into the Cloud 
    The heart of the CDM is built upon the Cybernetic model 
developed by Stafford Beer in 1972 [19]. This model, called 
the Viable System Model (VSM), consists of 5 sub-systems 
that help an entire system to operate autonomously, make 
strategic decisions and remain viable in continuously changing 
environments. The VSM has a feedback mechanism that 
escalates alarms and rewards through different levels of 
recursion when there is a change in a system performance. The 
CDM incorporates the VSM to aid the viable design of an 
Enterprise and handle the impacts of technological innovations 
on the performance of a BA. Various sub-systems of the VSM 
are different roles in the decision-making. That is, System-1 
and System-2 are used in the analysis of current states of a 
system, whereas System-3 and System-4 are used in the 
analysis and forecasting of future states. 
 
E.    Risk Remedy System Design 
    Contemporary Enterprises deliver their goods through 
services, which in fact are their end products. Shift towards 
service delivery requires understanding of complex system 
processes and designs to secure investments and guarantee 
increasing scalability of a system in the future. SOA [20] and 
Service Oriented Enterprise Architecture (SOEA) [21] 
paradigms are the most modern approaches that can handle 
and meet these needs. The philosophies of SOA and SOEA are 
based on open system architecture and can help in building 
systems with time buffers so critical for the smooth integration 
of innovative technologies and management of uncertainty in 
times of integrations. 
 
IV.   CONCLUSION, DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
    In this work, we highlighted various challenges Cloud 
Computing can bring to the world of EA in the context of BA 
and proposed the methods that can be used to overcome them. 
These challenges are associated with the modifications in 
technologies integrated into existing BMs of an Enterprise; 
introductions of new technologies; as well as challenges in 
decision-making when both modifications and introductions 
are happening at the same time. 
 
    There are various tools that can assist, the transition process 
of moving an IT system into the Cloud; however, no tools are 
provided to support Information Systems Management (ISM) 
once in the Cloud. Our future work aims to develop a method 
that can analyse relationships between resources across 
business processes, forecast their evolution at various time 
scales, and improve the overall quality of systems 
management. The method is the practical implementation of 
the CDM that is based on the GRAI Decisional Model and 
amalgamates the Design Structure Matrices and the 
Cybernetic concepts of the VSM. It is to be used to determine 
shifts in system states, detect deviations in the course of 
system evolution, and aid decision makers with clear schemata 
of all system entities. 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

REFERENCES 
 
[1]   L. Mei, W. Chan, and T. Tse. A Tale of Clouds: Paradigm comparisons 
and some thoughts on research issues. In Asia-Pacific Services 
Computing Conference, 2008. APSCC’08. IEEE, pages 464–469. IEEE, 
2008. 
[2]   I. Sriram and A. Khajeh-Hosseini. Research agenda in Cloud 
technologies. Arxiv preprint arXiv:1001.3259, 2010. 
[3]   M. Vouk. Cloud computing–issues, research and implementations. 
Journal of Computing and Information Technology, 16(4):235–246, 
2004. 
[4]   A. Fox, R. Griffith, et al. Above the Clouds: A Berkeley view of Cloud 
computing. Dept. Electrical Eng. and Comput. Sciences, University of 
California, Berkeley, Rep. UCB/EECS, 28, 2009. 
[5]   A. Khajeh-Hosseini, I. Sommerville, and I. Sriram. Research challenges 
for Enterprise Cloud Computing. Arxiv preprint arXiv:1001.3257, 2010. 
[6]   L. Youseff, M. Butrico, and D. Da Silva. Toward a unified ontology of 
Cloud computing. In Grid Computing Environments Workshop, 2008. 
GCE’08, pages 1–10. Ieee, 2008. 
[7]   J. Carolan, S. Gaede, J. Baty, G. Brunette, A. Licht, J. Remmell, L. 
Tucker, and J. Weise. Introduction to Cloud computing architecture. 
White Paper. 2009. 
http://www.gtsi.com/eblast/corporate/cn/09_09_2009/PDFs/Sun.pdf, 
[retrieved: May 2012]. 
[8]   J. Viega. Cloud computing and the common man. Computer, 42(8):106–
108, 2009. 
[9]   D. Chappell. Introducing the Azure services platform. White Paper. 
David Chappell & Associates. 2010. 
http://www.davidchappell.com/writing/white_papers/Introducing_the_
Windows_Azure_Platform,_v1.4-Chappell.pdf, [retrieved: May 2012]. 
[10]   E. Gleeson. Computing industry set for a shocking change, 2009. 
http://www.moneyweek.com/investment-advice/computing-industry-set-
for-a-shocking-change-43226, [retrieved: May 2012]. 
[11]   NIST. Definition of cloud computing v15. 2011. 
http://www.nist.gov/itl/csd/cloud-102511.cfm, [retrieved: May 2012]. 
[12]   O. M. Group. 
Business Architecture Working Group definition of 
Business Architecture, 2010. http://bawg.omg.org/, [retrieved: May 
2012]. 
[13]   P. Patrick. Impact of SOA on Enterprise Information Architectures. In 
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMOD International. 
[14]   S. Aier and R. Winter. Virtual decoupling for IT/Business alignment–
conceptual foundations, architecture design and implementation 
example. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 1(2):150–163, 
2009. 
[15]   A. Kalogeras, J. Gialelis, C. Alexakos, M. Georgoudakis, and S. 
Koubias. Vertical integration of Enterprise industrial systems utilizing 
web services. Industrial Informatics, IEEE Transactions on, 2(2):120–
128, 2006. 
[16]   T. Gruber. A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. 
Knowledge Acquisition, 5(2):199–220, 1993. 
[17]   G. Doumeingts, B. Vallespir, and D. Chen. GRAI Grid Decisional 
Modelling. Handbook on Architectures of Information Systems, pages 
321–346, 2006. 
[18]   J. Cheng and R. Greiner. Learning Bayesian Belief Network classifiers: 
Algorithms and System. Advances in Artificial Intelligence, pages 141–
151, 2001. 
[19]   S. Beer. Brain of the firm: A Development in Management Cybernetics. 
Herder and Herder, 1972. 
[20]   T. Erl. Service-oriented Architecture: Concepts, Technology, and 
Design. Prentice Hall PTR, 2005. 
[21]   R. Knippel. Service Oriented Enterprise Architecture. IT University of 
Copenhagen, 2005. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-237-0
ADVCOMP 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

