From Grids to Clouds: A Collective Intelligence Study 
for Inter-cooperated Infrastructures
Stelios Sotiriadis, Nik Bessis, Paul Sant, Carsten Maple
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Bedfordshire, United Kingdom
(stelios.sotiriadis, nik.bessis, paul.sant, carsten.maple)@beds.ac.uk
Abstract – Recently, more effort has been put into developing 
interoperable and distributed environments that offer users 
exceptional  opportunities  for  utilizing  resources  over  the 
internet. By utilising grids and clouds, resource consumers and 
providers,  they gain  significant benefits  by either  using or 
purchasing  the  computer  processing  capacities  and  the 
information provided by data centres. On the other hand, the 
collective  intelligence  paradigm  is  characterized  as  group 
based intelligence that emerges from the collaboration of many 
individuals,  who  in  turn,  define  a  coordinated  knowledge 
model. It is envisaged that such a knowledge model could be of 
significant advantage if it is incorporated within the grid and 
cloud community. The dynamic load and access balancing of 
the grid and cloud data centres and the collective intelligence 
provides  multiple  opportunities,  involving  resource 
provisioning and development of scalable and heterogeneous 
applications. The contribution of this paper is that by utilizing 
grid and cloud resources, internal information stored within a 
public profile of each participant, resource providers as well as 
consumers, can lead to an effective mobilization of improved 
skills  of  members.  We  aim  to  unify  the  grid  and  cloud 
functionality  as  consumable  computational  power,  for  a) 
discussing the supreme advantages of such on-line resource 
utilization  and  provisioning  models  and  b)  analyzing  the 
impact of the collective intelligence in the future trends of the 
aforementioned technologies.
Keywords – Grid  computing; Cloud computing; Collective 
Intelligence; Mobility Agents
I.
INTRODUCTION
Grid computing is defined as the combination of several 
distributed  resources  from  multiple  Virtual  Organisations 
(VOs) for solving  a single  problem,  which  is usually a 
scientific or technical problem [13]. A VO is a group of 
members whose resources function as a unit. This form of 
distributed computing tends to be distinguished from the 
conventional  systems,  by  offering  a  heterogeneous 
environment of loosely coupled connections. On the other 
hand, over recent years the notion of clouds has proven to 
be a model that has had significant commercial success [15]. 
The commercialized distributed resources are spread across 
the internet and are available for purchase from users by 
offering  capabilities  of  resource  management  and 
provisioning. It may be noted that the concepts behind grid 
and  clouds  can  be  described  from  a  technological 
perspective  as  a  novel  way  for  a)  achieving  inter-
collaboration among several users or distributed resources 
(from the grid viewpoint) and b) a high quality and on-
demand  resource  provisioning  model  involving  various 
stakeholders (from the cloud viewpoint). In other words, 
clouds can utilise enterprise resources by serving multiple 
users  across  an  inter-cooperated  grid  environment. 
Fundamentally, the service-oriented infrastructures of both 
technologies  aim  to  provide  a  virtualization  model  of 
entities  as  services  and  the  seamless  interactions  and 
integration of these services. In terms of virtualization we 
define everything that can be virtualized in any environment 
separated by the underlying location and spread across the 
internet. In general, cloud technology is derived from grid, 
virtualization,  and  utility  computing  [14],  [18].  Utility 
computing is a priced service of server’s capacity that is 
accessed  over  the  grid  [15].  In  any  case,  all  the 
aforementioned  technologies  collaborate with each  other, 
aiming to offer a user resource over the internet.
One  of  the  major  advantages  of  on-demand 
technologies, e.g., cloud, utility and virtualized computing is 
that by a subscribing cost users don’t have to deal with 
hardware and software licences, versions, incompatibilities, 
failures and maintenance. On the other hand, the complex 
requirements  of  users,  which  include  subscription  cost 
versus  the  usage,  are  drawbacks  of  clouds.  In  general, 
several resources including hardware and software can be 
delivered  to  users  with  different  needs.  The clients  that 
utilize the resources may be categorized as uncomplicated 
consumers,  business  and  enterprises  as  well  as  multi-
tenancy users. So, the different requirements raise several 
complications and complexities. A simple example is that, 
companies  are  reluctant  that  their data are outside their 
firewall. From the user perspective, cloud participants want 
to be charged only for the amount of resources that they use. 
However, cloud and grid, have proven to be secure, reliable 
and  scalable  and  the  resources  which  are  put  to  use 
according  to  actual  requirements  have  an  efficient  load 
balancing  feedback  mechanism  [18].  In  the  case  of 
uncertain  or  pre-specified  boundaries  the  complexity  of 
users’  requirements  may  be  approached  by  a  more 
generalised  model  [1].  It  is  apparent  that  the  actual 
capabilities of several resources are dependent on how grids 
or clouds are employed. Since clouds are related to usage 
concepts and grid is relative with technological concepts, 
the collective intelligence goes one step further with on-
demand  resource  provisioning.  This  may  eliminate  and 
142
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

remove the need to over-provision in order to meet the 
demands of millions of users by evaluating their knowledge.
The collective intelligence is a paradigm suggesting a 
new source of empowerment by monitoring the exchanged 
intelligence among cloud and grid users. This is when data, 
software  applications  or  computer  processing  power  are 
accessed by a cloud of online resources and can be reused to 
support decision making and team building [17]. The digital 
communication and sharing of data can be collected and be 
analysed  by a perception model. The collective learning 
may offer (in the future) grids and clouds that employ a 
creative method by evaluating current data and offering new 
knowledge  to  a  neighbourhood  of  users.  The  inter-
cooperation  model  among  unknown  members  may 
significantly  improve  the  production  of  collective 
intelligence knowledge, and especially in a competitive and 
sharp environment.
In the following sections, we discuss the motivation of 
the study (Section 2), and the related work and definition of 
similar  technologies  (Section  3).  We  then  continue  by 
introducing the inter-cooperation model of grids and clouds 
and the collective intelligence application (Section 4, 5). We 
then use this to discuss a case study of clouds and grids as a 
means  of  forming  the  collective  intelligence  method 
(Section 6). Finally, we conclude our study with the future 
work section and the proposed challenges part (Section 7).
II.
MOTIVATION
Various approaches and definitions of clouds exist [14, 
18],  all  conclude  that  cloud  is  comprised  of  grid, 
virtualization and utility computing notions [13]. Each of 
these  technologies  may  be  seen  as  a set  of  layers  that 
encompass the cloud, which could exploit user behaviour 
and draw collective intelligence. In a broader view, a cloud 
can be seen as a customized grid. The members forming the 
cloud can access resources, solve problems similar to grids 
but  in  a  more  structured,  scalable  and  personalised 
management manner; as well as by charging a subscription 
cost.  A  grid  VO  may  offer  the  cloud  a  geographically 
distributed  environment  formed  under  a  common  policy 
management scheme either centralized, or de-centralized. 
Consequently, VO members may utilize resources to solve 
VO defined problems.
 It is common that within a VO, members or resources 
perform interactions based on two different perspectives. 
Firstly,  the centralized management  system  monitors the 
procedure and is responsible for the service negotiation. 
Secondly, the decentralized control system of autonomous 
acting VO members. A typical VO will have access to many 
facilities which are not owned and managed by the VO [13]. 
These  facilities  may  be  multi-participant  communities, 
resources or VOs. Mutually, in a VO, a universally agreed 
model of policies has been adopted by each individual, and 
determines the accessibility factor of each resource.
From the viewpoint of the decentralized solution, the 
mobility  agents’  paradigm  offers  a novel  technology  of 
achieving  communication  among  loosely  coupled 
connections of multi-institutional VOs [4]. By considering 
the  grid  as  a  coordinated  problem  solving  approach  in 
dynamic environments, agents may be the means of acting 
dynamically and autonomously whilst performing migration 
to any inter-connected member [10]. Moreover, collected 
knowledge among cloud or grid members may be organised 
and shared by utilizing the intelligent  agent  model. The 
essence of the aforementioned standard may be achieved by 
using  the  framework  of  Self-led  Critical  Friends (SCF) 
which  fills  the  gap  between  consumer’s  providers  and 
enables inter-operation of nodes from various grid VOs [6], 
[7]. The ultimate goal is to extend the conventional grid’s 
bounded  VO  topology  to  a  wider  dynamic  community 
established  upon  SCFs  knowledge  of  members  from 
different grid and clouds domains also known as  Critical 
Friends Community members.
Originally, the SCFs act as intermediate stations in the 
communication  between  multiple  grids  by  providing  an 
extended environment. SCFs may act among a cloud of 
users,  so  the  collective  intelligence  may  be  extended. 
Essentially, an expanded intelligent agent takes information 
about  their  interest,  problems  and  behaviour  and 
recommends  to  users,  and  companies,  solutions  and 
information for improving services as well as proposing 
new forms of social applications. As typical to Web 2.0 
applications an online community’ interests and activities 
can be captured by software APIs of any device and give 
profit to stakeholders; even if they are providers, resellers, 
adopters or users [8]. The SCFs could fulfil the gap among 
resource  consumer  and  providers  by  expanding  the 
community boundaries.
III.
RELATED TECHNOLOGIES AND DEFINITIONS
The related technologies are slightly different in the use 
of terminology and it is hard to be distinguished as they 
usually offer the same type of services [14]. For that reason, 
we suggest that shared resources should be separated in the 
following ways according to their service orientation:
a)
The  Software  as  a  Service  (SaaS)  framework 
provides  specific  cloud  capabilities  concerning  software 
functionalities  available  through  the  internet.  Each 
individual can access the applications from any device [18]. 
Examples include commercial SaaS, project online tools and 
customer relationship management tools.
b)
The Hardware as a Service (HaaS) framework, also 
known  as  infrastructure  as  a  service  (IaaS)  provides 
computational power and resources [18]. This type of cloud 
is  similar  to  the  virtualization  environments  in  which 
applications are separated from infrastructures and computer 
capacity is shared over the web.
Similarly,  service  orientation  clouds  can  be  also 
separated according to their deployment orientation [18]. 
Firstly,  there  are  private  and  public  clouds  whose 
functionality is to behave as intra and inter collaborated 
environments.  In  both  scenarios,  clouds  are  similar  to 
143
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

private and public VOs. It is also essential that specific 
measures and policies are applied by a VO management 
control  system.  Secondly,  there  are  community  clouds 
which  are  typically  similar  to  grid  technology,  and  can 
aggregate  public  clouds  or  dedicated  resource 
infrastructures.
We can hence separate clouds according to their service 
or deployment orientation; however, the data centres which 
initiate  cloud  capabilities  may  consider,  from  either 
perspective, that a collective intelligence concept can be 
utilized. It should be mentioned that members of grid or 
clouds can behave as resource owners as well as resource 
consumers, so they have to respect policies and credentials 
of VOs  or VO members.  From  the view of a resource 
consumer, their requirements may be organized as follows 
[16]:
a)
May belong to one or more VOs or clouds
b)
May have several roles and actions 
c)
May control internal roles, actions and memberships
d)
May assign priorities to members jobs
e)
May  list  resources  and  internal  knowledge  in  a 
metadata snapshot profile
f)
May assign special credentials to specific members
g)
May enable or not authentication to other members
h)
May select or deselect roles and actions
On the other hand the requirements from the perspective 
of the resource providers are organised as follows:
a)
VOs or clouds should control resource participation
b)
VOs or clouds should specify their own policies and 
resource authentication
c)
VO or clouds should have a consistent authorization 
process
d)
VO or clouds must be able to specify requirements 
on any resource for specific roles.
e)
Within a VO or a cloud a common policy model 
should be agreed
Not  all  of  the  above  requirements  are  necessary 
attributes of grid or cloud members. However, it is the basis 
for a collective intelligence model of policies and strong 
communication  links. Resource providers  and  consumers 
should  support  such  infrastructures  aiming  to  improve 
performance and profit.
Overall, grid and cloud environments provide a way to 
implement future applications about monitoring knowledge 
and improving software intelligence. It is evident that the 
analysis of requirements is a difficult aspect of such designs. 
Finally,  an  intelligent  agent  model  may  assist  in  the 
consolidation of a requirement scheme, based in a secure 
and elastic scalability model. In order to organize such a 
strategic model, it is crucial to identify the accessibility 
factor of each VO. In this direction, we suggest that it is 
necessary  to  store  agreement  protocols  within  each 
member’s  public  profile.  We  define  this  storage  as  the 
metadata snapshot profile, which is available upon request 
from any member. The profile stores data about a member’s 
potential. In other words, it is a unique intelligence storage 
place for each individual. By viewing it as such, we can 
construct several metadata snapshot profiles, and realize a 
collective intelligent model of inter-cooperating members.
IV.
CO-OPERATING GRIDS AND CLOUDS 
It has been proposed that “the real and specific problem 
underlies the grid concept is coordinated resource sharing 
and problem solving in dynamic, multi-institutional virtual 
organizations”  [10].  In  other  words,  they  suggest  that 
resource sharing must be synchronized clearly negotiated 
and  defined  among  resource  owners,  consumers  and 
providers. Finally, the multi-institutional statement refers to 
a collaborating environment of several VOs. 
It is very important that the resource discovery method 
of resources fulfils the needs of resource consumers and 
providers. The resource discovery method in such uncertain 
environments starts when a member requests information 
from the metadata snapshot profile of any connected grid or 
cloud  participant.  The  profile  contains  various  data  but 
initially we are seeking for the addresses of well known and 
trusted nodes. In figure 1 we assume that n1 can access n2 as 
well as any other member of VO1. However n2 contains a 
new address of the related (and inter-connected) member b1, 
so n2 assigns a reference contract to the SCF contract and 
updates the profile of  n1. At this stage  n1 is capable of 
establishing a connection with b1. However n1 then requests 
information from  b1 as they are both trusted members so 
they follow the same procedure and the new updated profile 
of  n1 contains the addresses of all members of VO2. The 
procedure continues and all members from both VOs have 
access  to  any  resource  available  to  the  mutually 
interconnected VOs.
N1 VO1
B1
VO2
Self-led Critical 
Friends
N2
B2
N2VO1
N3VO1
...
B1VO2
B2VO2
...
N1VO1
N3VO1
...
B1VO2
...
B2VO2
B3VO2
...
N2VO2
...
B1VO2
B4VO2
...
N2
Updates
N1
B1
Updates
N1
Figure 1:
The SCFs communication model
In such situations mobile agent functionality may serve 
the aforementioned model by traversing a specific route. By 
moving from one location to another it visits all individuals 
of a VO. Each time an agent moves to a specific location it 
carries internal data about physical resources and internal 
knowledge. During their route traversal agents are capable 
of  visiting  different  platforms  and  by  collecting  and 
updating internal data as they continue the journey. In other 
144
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

words, the collective intelligence carries the internal data 
from member to member as a list of addresses, capacities 
and information such as beliefs and desires. This has the 
potential for stakeholders, including providers, resellers, and 
users to utilize a users’ demands and requests to identify 
solutions for well defined problems in a fast and reliable 
manner.
V.
COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE
The  goal  of  collective  intelligence  is  to  harness  the 
system of self-centred grids, clouds and agents to secure a 
sustainable relationship, so that coordinated individuals may 
solve  problems  more  efficiently  [5],  [9].  In  general, 
collective intelligence of unified and synchronized grid and 
cloud communities can offer significant advantages. A clear 
example in nature is the ants; an individual ant is not very 
powerful,  but  a  colony  of  ants  can  achieve  significant 
results.  Collective  intelligence  can  be  found  in  many 
systems, and it is known as swarm intelligence, ant colony 
optimization and neural networks. So, we may describe such 
a method as collective intelligence, which can be seen as an 
infrastructure or environment in which individuals can do 
simple operations, however by working they are able to 
perform and solve complex problems. It is almost certain, 
that the complexity of the aforementioned environments is 
high as they are formed from different resource consumers 
and providers connected in loosely coupled groups. In our 
vision,  intelligent  agents  fulfil  the  gaps  of  security  and 
transparency in grid or cloud members’ communication. So, 
their characteristics are that they:
a)
Present  a  digital  community  with  information 
exchange capability as well as purchasing, selling, 
storing, transmitting and processing means
b)
Collect information about other member’s potentials
c)
They categorise facts, comments and opinions of 
members
d)
Offer  a  secure  sustainable  relationship  among 
resource providers and consumers
e)
Migrate to any members’ device by moving a part 
of their code
Inside  a  grid  or  cloud  community  the  need  for 
reinforcing a collective intelligence model may be prove to 
be significantly profitable for all the participant groups. This 
is the case when the individuals’ contribution to the grid or 
cloud is equal. However, a division of labour model can be 
applied to these communities as each member may have a 
different  domain  of  specialisation.  In  other  words, 
limitations of one member may be satisfied from any other 
member. Since not everybody can perform all tasks, a group 
where different individuals contain different knowledge will 
collectively cover a much larger domain.
VI.
CASE STUDY:
 AN INTER-COOPERATED CROWD-Y CLOUD
By crowd-y cloud we define a community aware cloud 
in which users’ perceptions and desires are captured from 
artificially intelligent agents. The crowd contains all kinds 
of devices that can access the grid or cloud and can utilize 
resources for any purpose [21]. In our view the intelligent 
agent model can serve the aforementioned vision as a means 
of achieving decentralization of grid and cloud VOs. 
The Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents (FIPA) 
provides a framework for an interoperable agent solution 
that can be used for the development of co-operating agent 
systems  [19].  The  agent  service  of  the  above  standard 
provides an environment for organising the procedure of an 
agent travelling within unknown large scale domains with 
dynamic behaviour. We have proposed an approach that 
separates each mobile grid service into static and mobile 
parts  that  can  dynamically  migrate  across  grid  nodes is 
presented in [11]. The specific design based on the FIPA 
agent management specification is the following:
a)
Agent Management System as the place to create 
the agent life-cycle
b)
Directory facilitator as a yellow page directory of 
the well known and trusted members addresses
c)
Agent Container Service which provides the run-
time environment of agents
d)
Message  Transport  System  which  constitutes  the 
communication bus among the agent platforms
In  a previous work [2] we have discussed the resource 
discovery methods of interoperable grid agents based on the 
above FIPA specification. We analyzed existing resource 
discovery methods of agents and proposed a new solution 
for inter-collaborated agents [1]. In this paper we suggested 
that  resource  discovery  is  a  systematic  and  continually 
updating process occurring directly within a VO. Finally, 
we  concluded  that  solution  of  discovery  includes  either 
internal broadcasting agents, or internal travelling agents as 
a decomposition model of local agents in order to achieve 
an efficient and effective low response time.
In the following section we describe commercial efforts 
of the crowd-y clouds. In this way, we aim to utilize the 
intelligent  agents’  paradigm  for  delivering  high  quality 
applications, which implement major parts and concepts of 
grid  and  clouds.  It  is  essential  that  we  use  specific 
middleware  based  on  the  Java  Agent  Development 
Framework  (JADE) and that it is installed  on all cloud 
devices [12]. In our case study, the grid technology serves a 
cloud by providing the problem solving environment, and 
the cloud provides the personalised view of the problem 
description. Notably, the underlying infrastructure maintains 
standard policies and securities articulated from the VO. In 
previous works we have defined the minimum requirements 
that need to be addressed and supported by grid members 
[1],  [3].  We  have  organised  the  profile  information  to 
145
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

include Policy Management Control for identifying the level 
of agreed protocols for communication between different 
parties and addresses of trusted members. Then Knowledge 
Base Pairing is used as the procedure for job description 
coupling  and  the  Physical  Resources  Announcement 
provides the mechanism for advertising internal hardware 
and  software  capabilities.  Finally,  Time  Constraints  for 
storing historical data about execution and communication 
times from previous delegations are also utilised. It is vital 
to acknowledge policies among different VO parties as well 
as respecting internal VO rules and actions.
In our study we aim to improve the Knowledge Base 
Pairing for collaborating members of a crowd-y cloud. More 
specifically,  the agents  travel  through  the cloud  and  by 
collecting information from each member’s public profile, 
return back to their starting point. This position may be a 
stakeholder, and may be either the resource provider or the 
resource consumer. Our Example (Figure 2) we demonstrate 
the cloud of members, including providers and consumers. 
It should be mentioned that we decompose the cloud into 
smaller neighbourhoods that act as VOs. In  addition the 
SCF offers a novel resource discovery method by acting a 
mediator in communication between  the loosely coupled 
members.
Figure 2:
The crowd-y cloud of users
Each resource of the aforementioned figure contains the 
agent middleware for creating and destroying agents. Our 
example (Figure 3) consists of three members that are able 
to communicate with each other. A node is selected to be 
the host, which in our case will be able to create the agent 
service. The remaining nodes are capable of creating a sub-
platform  specification  which  refers  to  the Host  member 
platform. The platforms consist of containers which could 
be scattered among many different hosts with one main 
container on a host running the Remote Method Invocation 
(RMI) service. All the agents on one platform communicate 
using the RMI protocol which is the intra communication 
mechanism  internal  to  a platform.  In  other  words,  sub-
platforms accept communication from an agent A, while an 
internal agent waits for the connection. The agent  starts 
from the host platform and by traversing a route to each 
node collects and updates the internal information and then 
returns back to the host.
The  service  can  be  repeated  with  any  of  the  other 
members, however each time other parties should be alerted 
of the service creator address. On the other hand, inter-
platform agents offer a decentralized model which creates 
platforms dynamically for each individual without having to 
know  the  other  members  platform  settings.  In  such 
environments  each  VO  member  contains  a  different 
platform which is created locally and generates an agent. 
Agent functionality involves waiting for requests from other 
agent platforms in order to exchange internal knowledge. In 
other words, any of the agents are capable of performing 
communication directly so a new service can be created 
dynamically. Figure 3 illustrates this procedure.
B
A
A
A
C
Host 
Node
Node1
Node2
moves
moves
returns
Inter-
Platform B
Inter-
Platform A
Inter-
Platform C
Creates Agent A
Creates Agent B
Creates Agent C
Information
exchange
Information
exchange
Figure 3:
The inter-platform agent communication
The case discussed above illustrates the inter-platform 
communication  model;  in  which  agents  are  dynamically 
created  by  the  inter-platform  utility.  The  mobile  agent 
migrates to a different platform and exchanges information 
with local agents. This solution predisposes the need for 
compatibility  between  different  platforms  and  security 
issues are resolved by the agents. The economic gains of 
such an application to resource stakeholders are huge if we 
consider that these resource clouds may be transparent to 
the user and reliable to the provider. The virtualisation of 
the  computational  power,  in  conjunction  with  the 
heterogeneous nature of the grid,  creates  a scalable and 
elastic  environment.  Overall,  the  crowd-y  cloud  may 
address similar issues within any cloud system, but more 
importantly, we aim for a collective intelligence model of 
agents rather than a cloud of members.
The major benefits of a crowd-y cloud can be described 
from  two  perspectives;  the  resource  consumer  and  the 
resource owner. We assume that each member contains a 
sensor API which may receive users’ perceptions. These 
perceptions include noise levels, allergies, diseases and air 
pollution from the device holder environment, for example. 
The  collected  data may  be transferred  from  member  to 
member instantly as a form of resource information and 
may suggest, to users, statistics about low, medium, good 
and high quality for a particular locations or set of locations. 
By  getting  evidence  from  the  environment  as  well  as 
utilizing the grid  functionality we may improve disaster 
relief, and in general generate environmental reports about 
4
146
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

specific geographical locations. Furthermore, policy makers 
may  categorise  the  leasing  opportunities  for  buying  or 
selling  properties  according  to  noise  levels.  Also, 
governments may generate reports and warnings for health 
issues and welfare levels. In other words, future trends and 
technological  possibilities  are  derived  from  the 
collaboration  of  technologies  such  as  cloud,  grid  and 
virtualization, aiming to deliver a personalised product to 
users. By organising this collective intelligence we aim to 
propose that a larger collection of members are smarter than 
an  elite  few  at  solving  problems,  fostering  innovation, 
coming to wise decisions, and predicting the future. The 
knowledge which is distributed everywhere can always be 
promoted, cultivated and improved. This could lead to an 
effective mobilization of skills. These skills are collected 
from  an  agent  and  stored  within  the  metadata  snapshot 
profile of a member.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In our study we have discussed a sufficient collaboration 
opportunity among grid and cloud computing, aiming to 
provide a collective intelligence model. The grid consists of 
VO  members  utilizing  resources  in  order  to  solve  VO 
defined problems but clouds are about users utilizing these 
resources to solve problems and proposing solutions. The 
future trend of these technologies is “reducing the carbon 
footprint”  [18]  so  it  makes  them  friendlier  to  the 
environment,  and  is  also  known  as  Green  IT.  We may 
consolidate numerous users in this direction by presenting 
the  crowd-y  cloud  idea  as  an  inter-collaboration 
environment with extensive capabilities. The market players 
should be ready for this step forward in order to improve 
their  business  by  overcoming  the  obstacle  of  user 
requirements complexity. In this direction the agents based 
model may assist the resource provisioning model in a very 
proficient manner.
REFERENCES
[1]
Sotiriadis S., Bessis N., Huang Y., Sant P., and Maple C., “Defining 
minimum requirements of inter-collaborated nodes by measuring the 
heaviness  of  node  interactions”.  In:  International  Conference  on 
Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems (CISIS 2010), 
IEEE, Krakow, Poland, February 2010.
[2]
Sotiriadis S., Bessis N., Huang Y., Sant P., and Maple C., “Towards 
to decentralized grid agent models for continuous resource discovery 
of  interoperable  grid  Virtual  Organizations”,  In:  The  third 
international conference of Applications and Digital information and 
Web technologies (ICADIWT), Instabul, Turkey, July 2010 
[3]
Sotiriadis S., Bessis N., Sant P., and Maple C., “Encoding minimum 
requirements  of  ad hoc  inter-connected grid  virtual  organisations 
using a genetic algorithm infrastructure”. In: IADIS multi conference 
on  computer  science  and  information  Systems (MCCSIS  2010), 
Freiburg, Germany, July 2010.
[4]
Sotiriadis S., Bessis N., Sant P., Maple C., “A mobile agent strategy 
for  grid  interoperable  virtual  organisations”.  In:  IADIS  multi 
conference on computer science and information Systems (MCCSIS 
2010), Freiburg, Germany, July 2010. 
[5]
Mc Evoy, G. V., and Schulze, B., “Using clouds to address grid 
limitations”. In:  Proceedings of the 6th international Workshop on 
Middleware For Grid Computing (Leuven, Belgium, December 01 - 
05, 2008). MGC '08. ACM, New York, NY, 1-6.
[6]
Huang Y., Bessis N., Brocco A., Sotiriadis S., Courant M., Kuonen 
P.,  and Hisbrunner B., "Towards an integrated vision across inter-
cooperative  grid  virtual  organizations".  In:  Future  Generation 
Information Technology (FGIT 2009), pp.120-128, Springer LNCS, 
Jeju island, Korea, 2009. 
[7]
Huang  Y.,  Bessis  N.,  Kuonen  P.,  Brocco  A.,  Courant  M.,  and 
Hirsbrunner B., “Using Metadata Snapshots for Extending Ant-based 
Resource  Discovery  Functionality  in  Inter-cooperative  grid 
Communities”.  In:  International  Conference  on  Evolving  Internet 
(INTERNET 2009), IEEE, Cannes/La Bocca, France, August 2009. 
[8]
Hintikka,  K.  A..  “Web  2.0  and  the  collective  intelligence”.  In: 
Proceedings of the 12th international Conference on Entertainment 
and Media in the Ubiquitous Era, Tampere, Finland, October 07 - 09, 
2008). MindTrek '08. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 163-166
[9]
Weiss, A. “The power of collective intelligence”.  netWorker 9, 3, 
September, 2005, pp. 16-23. 
[10] Foster, I., Kesselman, C., and Tuecke, S., “The Anatomy of the Grid: 
Enabling Scalable Virtual Organizations”, In:  International Journal 
of High Performance Computing Applications, 15, 3, 2001, pp. 200-
222
[11] Athanaileas, T. E., Tselikas, N. D., Tsoulos, G. V., and Kaklamani, 
D. I. 2007. “An agent-based framework for integrating mobility into 
grid services”. In: Proceedings of the 1st international Conference on 
Mobile Wireless Middleware, Operating Systems, and Applications 
(Innsbruck, Austria, February 13 - 15, 2008). MOBILWARE, vol. 
278. ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences Social-Informatics and 
Telecommunications Engineering), ICST, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 1-6.
[12] Bellifemine, F., Caire, G., Poggi, A., and Rimassa, G., “JADE: A 
software  framework  for  developing  multi-agent  applications”,  In: 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Intelligent Agents VII Agent 
Theories Architectures and Languages, pp. 42-47. Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, 2001
[13] Winton,  L.  J.  A  simple  virtual  organisation  model  and  practical 
implementation. In: Proceedings of the 2005 Australasian Workshop 
on Grid Computing and E-Research - Volume 44 (Newcastle, New 
South Wales, Australia). R. Buyya, P. Coddington, P. Montague, R. 
Safavi-Naini, N. Sheppard, and A. Wendelborn, Eds. Conferences in 
Research and Practice in Information Technology Series, vol. 108. 
Australian  Computer  Society,  Darlinghurst,  Australia,  pp.  57-65, 
2005
[14] Pokharel, M. and Park, J. S. 2009. Cloud computing: future solution 
for  e-governance.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  3rd  international 
Conference  on  theory  and  Practice  of  Electronic  Governance 
(Bogota, Colombia, November 10 - 13, 2009). ICEGOV '09, vol. 322. 
ACM, New York, NY, 409-410. 
[15] EU DataGrid WP6, “Data Grid, EDG Users. Guide”, October, 2003, 
Available at: http://marianne.in2p3.fr/datagrid/documentation
/EDG-Users-Guide-2.0.pdf, Accessed at 10/10/2010
[16] Gregg, D. G, “Designing for collective intelligence”. In:  Commun. 
ACM 53, 4, April, 2010,  pp.134-138.
[17] Schubertt,  L.,  Jeffery,  K.,  and  Neidecker-Lutz,  B.,  Expert Group 
Report, The future of Cloud Computing: Opportunities for European 
cloud computing beyond 2010, European commision, Belgium, 2010, 
Available  at:  http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/ssai/docs/cloud-report-
final.pdf, Accessed at: 10/10/2010.
[18] The Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents (FIPA), Available at: 
http://www.fipa.org, Accessed at 10/10/2010
[19] Bessis, N. (2010), ‘Using Next Generation Grid Technologies for 
Advancing Virtual Organizations’, Keynote Talk, In:  International 
Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems 
(CISIS 2010), 15-18, February, 2010, Krakow, Poland
147
ADVCOMP 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-101-4

