Multi-Factor Authentication for Public Displays  
using the Semantic Ambient Media Framework 
 
David Bouck-Standen, Josefine Kipke 
Kingsbridge Research Center 
Hamburg, Germany 
email: {dbs, jfk.student}@kingsbridge.eu 
 
 
Abstract—In our interconnected society, public displays deliver 
private and personalized content. This presents the need to 
authenticate users in order to protect personal and private 
information or sensitive contexts of use. In general, 
authentication mechanisms on public displays are subject to a 
number of risks, especially, if displays offer multi-touch 
interfaces or grow even larger. In this contribution, we present 
a multi-factor authentication system for public displays using 
the Semantic Ambient Media Framework. In our approach, at 
first, users use their personal mobile devices, such as 
smartphones or tablets, to authenticate themselves securely. 
On the smartphone, a graphical code is displayed, which the 
user enters on a grid shown on the public display. In a last 
step, the user confirms the authentication on his smartphone. 
The code displayed on the smartphone is a one-time and 
location-based code and no actual credentials have to be typed 
in on the public display. Thus, this method protects against 
threads, such as shoulder surfing, thermal attacks, or smudge 
attacks. 
Keywords-Multi-factor Authentication; Pervasive Displays; 
Secure Public Authentication; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Large multi-touch displays are already deployed in public 
spaces, such as public squares, airports, train stations, or in 
streets. Public displays consist of large multi-touch displays 
connected to a content providing system via the Internet. 
Today however, there is an increasing demand for public 
displays to offer access to personalized or context-specific 
content or functionalities [1]. Accessing protected data and 
contexts on public displays presents the need of a secure 
method for user authentication. 
Authentication in general requires a user to enter 
credentials or other means for personal identification, only 
known to or in possession of the user himself. This could be, 
e.g., classically a username-password combination, or a 
thumbprint, iris or other biometrical information unique to 
the user [2].  
The increasing use and functionality of public displays 
require providing a solution that protects against threats. 
These can be for example shoulder surfing attacks (a), where 
the user is observed while authenticating [3], thermal attacks 
(b), where heat traces resulting from the user’s interactions 
are made visible revealing the sensitive authentication data 
[4][5], or smudge attacks (c) that exploit the residues from 
finger prints on touch-screens [6]. Research on these 
techniques indicate that shoulder surfing occurs in daily 
contexts [3]. All three attack methods have in common that 
displaying a digital keyboard or using a software keyboard is 
vulnerable to them. For this reason and to prevent possible 
attacks exploiting the users’ interactions with the systems, 
systems for biometrical authentication or gaze-touch have 
been proposed [7]. 
Using additional hardware, such as bio-scanners or 
cameras, for public displays comes with costs and the need 
to retrofit most public displays currently deployed. A 
solution with minimal hardware requirements is more likely 
to be widely accepted. Thus, one of the challenges of this 
work is to find a solution that does not require hardware 
upgrades of public displays. 
Modern smartphones are personal devices, equipped with 
different sensors and mostly more than one camera. The 
smartphone is still on the rise due to its connectivity, as 
almost 8 out of 10 Internet users in the EU surfed via a 
mobile or smartphone. The trend toward mobile technology 
and mobile Internet usage can be observed globally [8]. 
In this work, we present a technical solution we 
developed as prototype at the Kingsbridge Research Center 
(KRC), which addresses these challenges with a minimal 
technical solution. This makes use of a multi-factor 
authentication (MFA) [2]: The first factor is the ownership 
(i) of a personal mobile device, such as a smartphone. The 
second factor is knowledge (ii) of personal credentials, such 
as the combination of username and password. Using GPS 
data, we also use the users and display’s location (iii) as third 
factor. 
The concept of this work makes use of the 
interconnectedness of the devices through the Internet, using 
the Semantic Ambient Media Framework (SAM.F) [9] as an 
authoritative interface between smartphones and public 
displays. 
In this contribution, we regard related work in Section 2, 
and present a practical scenario in Section 3. In Section 4, we 
outline the systems concept and architecture and describe our 
prototype implementation. In the final section, we 
summarize our work and illustrate future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This work takes place in the research field of public 
displays. Related work indicates a general increase in the 
deployment of public displays [10]. Today, public displays 
are widely connected in client-server-applications for content 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-737-5
ADVCOMP 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

serving purposes, and they are connected through the 
Internet [10]. For example, Memarovic et al. focus on 
interconnecting displays, e.g., with social media [11]. Our 
work ties onto related work through its modular client-
server-based architecture. As this work depends on Web-
based and modular technology, it can be integrated into 
existing projects. 
Another research field of interest is the field multi-factor 
authentication, as recently surveyed by Ometov et. al [2]. 
Ometov et. al outline state of the art methods for MFA, 
illustrate technical requirements, and identify commercial, 
governmental, and forensic applications as three market-
related groups of applications for MFA. In context with 
public displays, this work can potentially be deployed in all 
three field, but the use in commercial applications is most 
likely. 
One of the main challenges of MFA is the absence of a 
correlation between the user identity and the identities of 
smart sensors and systems or devices, as Ometov et. al 
observe [2]. They propose a user-friendly process to 
establish a trust relationship to gain access rights, whereas 
Mannan et. al [12] propose a concept to use a personal 
device to strengthen password authentication from untrusted 
computers. We apply these theoretical approaches to our 
technically limited setting, as outlined above, and present a 
feasible solution for the MFA for public displays using 
SAM.F. 
The research field of semantic frameworks is also of 
value to this contribution. These frameworks are used to 
model data structures and interconnect media with 
applications, services and devices [9][13][14]. 
With the system called Tacita, Shaw et. al [10] 
demonstrate a system to personalize public display 
experience by utilizing proximity detection for user’s mobile 
devices, e.g., with iBeacon technology. Tacita ubiquitously 
personalizes public displays’ content, whereas GTmoPass 
proposed by Khamis et. al relies on gaze-touch detection 
through the smartphone and the identification of the display 
via a Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacon [7]. These 
approaches are distinguished from the approach presented in 
this contribution, as the system we develop directly 
authenticates users and requires a direct user interaction on 
the public display. It therefore supports direct use, which 
features the use of public displays in both unauthenticated, as 
well as authenticated contexts, especially, if personal 
information or private functionality is displayed. In addition, 
the solution proposed in this article does not need any 
supplementary hardware, such as BLE beacons. 
The following scenario illustrates exemplary use-cases 
for the system proposed in this article. 
III. 
SCENARIO 
Today, a system administrator is servicing the systems of 
a museum in Hamburg. On the front wall outside the 
museum, public displays are installed. To carry out his task, 
he needs to access the systems and log onto the administrator 
mode. Standing in front of the display, the administrator uses 
his smartphone to authenticate him. Then, on the 
smartphone, a code is displayed. On the public screens, the 
administrator now accesses the login menu and a grid of 9 
symbols appears. He enters the code from his smartphone by 
touching the five symbols in the correct order. A stroller 
passes by, curiously watching him entering the code, but the 
administrator is not alarmed, as the public display now 
shows a hint indicating, that he has to confirm the login on 
his smartphone. Using his mobile device, the administrator 
sees a prompt showing the display name and location. He 
finds this information is correct and confirms the login. 
Instantly, the public display changes and shows the 
administrator’s dashboard. 
The scenario shows an exemplary use case, in which 
after a successful logon, the administrator can access features 
that are hidden from unauthenticated users and also from 
users, who are not assigned to the administrator group. 
However, this work only focuses on the authentication 
process. Thus, modeling the use case is subject to the 
application applying the login to their system. 
IV. 
SYSTEM CONCEPT AND ARCHITECTURE 
For this approach and under consideration of the 
technical limitations outlined above, the following is the 
starting point for this work: 
• users are in possession of a smartphone or equivalent 
device connected to the Internet. They have already 
registered an account with credentials known to 
SAM.F beforehand, as this is a preliminary 
requirement of this work. 
• public displays are connected to the Internet and run 
on Web-based technology, e.g., showing Web-based 
contents in a browser-based system. 
• the user sojourns in the vicinity of a public display 
and intentionally starts a private context. 
Figure 1 illustrates the system’s architecture and the 
starting point. In a single location, one or more users and one 
or more displays can be present. A user interacts with a 
single display and is in possession of a personal mobile 
device, as depicted in Figure 1. All public displays and user’s 
devices are connected to SAM.F through the internet. 
However, a direct connection between a smartphone and any 
public display does not exist. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-737-5
ADVCOMP 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Inside SAM.F, the multi-factor authentication for public 
displays (MFA4PD) module is hosted. Public displays and 
user’s devices connect to the MFA4PD module through the 
Internet. In addition, public displays connect to external 
content providers, which are not illustrated in Figure 1, for 
simplification purposes. 
The system’s architecture benefits from the technical 
limitations outlined above. As there is no direct connection 
necessary between the personal mobile device of a user and 
the public display used for authentication, there is no need 
for the display provider to open up his network for foreign 
devices. Thus, a multi-device ecology within the network of 
the display provider is not required, resulting in less 
administrative effort. From Figure 1, it can also be observed 
that no additional hardware, such as, e.g., BLE beacons, is 
required. 
The system concept relies on the interconnection of 
mobile devices and public displays through SAM.F, which is 
described in Section A. To begin using a personal or private 
context on a public display, the user completes the 
authentication process, as illustrated in Section B. We 
discuss our approach in terms of security in Section C and 
describe the prototype implementation in Section D. 
A. SAM.F 
The Semantic Ambient Media Framework (SAM.F) we 
develop at KRC is a framework semantically interconnecting 
(a) media, (b) devices, and (c) services, which are enriched 
by digital properties in the form of semantic annotations [9]. 
In SAM.F, media consists of text, photos, audio, videos, 
animations, 3D objects, which are extended by digital 
properties, e.g., by classifying the media’s content using the 
OWL Web Ontology Language in the internal model of 
SAM.F.  
Digital properties are also Meta data from the original 
file, such as Meta information on MIME type or encoding. 
For devices, in SAM.F we model digital properties 
reflecting, e.g., the devices’ capabilities’, location, capacity 
or screen size. 
All digital properties are used by the services in SAM.F. 
Using a dedicated application model, an application accesses 
the services in SAM.F through Web-based interfaces. Each 
service 
serves 
a 
dedicated 
purpose, 
interconnecting 
applications through the shared use of devices and media.  
The architecture of SAM.F, although described here only 
with reference to the MFA4PD module, consists of a layer-
based system concept, as illustrated in Figure 2. A client 
application, such as the display or mobile application of this 
work described in more detail below, connect to the SAM.F 
API Web Services through the API Security Layer. Data is 
exchanged between applications and services, which reside 
in the Service Logic layer, in the form provided by the 
specification of the API Client Data Model. Internally, 
SAM.F works with a dedicated Data Model, as illustrated in 
Figure 2. Any data is mapped from the Datastore, which 
includes external (semantic) databases, as well as binary data 
stores, to the internal Data Model, which applies a 
homogenous model to potentially heterogenic data. For 
simplification purposes, and in order to reduce the learning 
curve when implementing applications accessing SAM.F, the 
internal Data Model is only used in the Provider Layer, 
which contains, e.g., authentication or data providers to be 
accessed by the upper Service Layer, and in the Service 
Layer, as shown in Figure 2. Any data provided by a service 
to a client is mapped to the specific API Client Data Model 
before being served through the API Web Services and the 
API Security Layer. 
Applying data mapping in SAM.F produces constant 
overhead, but services and applications, as well as their 
developers, benefit from only working with data models that 
are specific to the requirements of the services’ or 
applications’ context, reducing overhead when loading large 
sets of data. Data in this respect describes media, devices and 
services. 
In context of this work, SAM.F serves as authentication 
provider, which validates user credentials via its standard 
user service. This work extends the Service Layer of SAM.F 
by adding the MFA4PD module, which implements the 
authentication process described in the following section. 
B. Authentication Process 
To start a private session on one of the public displays, 
the user opens up the mobile application of MFA4PD on his 
personal smartphone. The user then enters his credentials 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of the system’s architecture and network. 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of SAM.F. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-737-5
ADVCOMP 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

previously registered with SAM.F, which the Web 
application submits to MFA4PD, as illustrated in Figure 3. 
At this point, the process of authentication might be 
enhanced by further means of MFA, such as gathering 
biometrical data from fingerprint sensors, facial recognition, 
or voice sensors. These extensions however might require at 
least a hybrid application deployment for mobile devices, in 
order to access the appropriate sensor data. For this reason, 
in this initial approach, we focused on the Web application 
combining MFA with ownership and knowledge factors. 
The users are identified and authenticated by MFA4PD 
through their credentials. During the entire process, 
MFA4PD continues to check the actual location of the user. 
The location is determined from the GPS data, which is 
accessible through the smartphone’s Web browser API. If 
any location mismatch occurs, the process to establish a 
secure session or the session itself will be terminated 
immediately for security reasons. This feature might prove 
useful, whenever a user leaves the location of a public 
display. However, we did not evaluate this feature’s aspect 
nor the accuracy required from GPS data in order to work in 
an everyday scenario, yet. 
After the user’s location and credentials are validated, 
SAM.F generates a code consisting of five symbols, which is 
shown to the user on his mobile device, as illustrated in 
Figure 3. The code is valid for a short period of time and the 
specific user only. 
In order to authenticate him- or herself on a public 
display, the user has to enter the one-time code shown on his 
smartphone. The user opens up the login dialogue of the 
display application on the public display, and a grid of 
symbols is displayed. Within this grid, the user now selects 
the symbols shown on his or her smartphone. The display 
application communicates the code back to the MFA4PD 
module, as shown in Figure 3. This serves two purposes: 
a. to identify the display, the user selected from the 
number of public displays available, and 
b. to identify the user, who chose a public display. 
However, the session is not yet usable. The last step to 
enable the session on the public display requires the user to 
again interact with his smartphone in using the confirm 
mechanism. As illustrated in Figure 3, the MFA4PD module 
sends an authentication request to the mobile application. 
The dialogue shown indicates a login event took place, 
together with the name and location shown on the public 
display. Without the user confirming his or her login on the 
public display, the session will not be unlocked. 
The session on the public display is released after the 
user’s confirmation using the mobile application.  
The users can now put their smartphones away and start 
using the public display, until they log out.  
An additional timeout mechanism prevents misuse of the 
session on a public display.  
The users can also close the session at any time using 
their smartphones, e.g., in case they forgot to select the 
logout function on the public display. In addition, SAM.F 
monitors the users’ location throughout the entire process 
and session in order to prohibit misuse of login or 
automatically logout a session after a user clearly left the 
screens location. 
Now that the systems architecture and concept have been 
illustrated, in the following section, this approach is viewed 
with regard to security. 
C. Security 
As outlined above, related work identifies possible means 
to attack public display authentication, such as shoulder 
surfing attacks (a), thermal attacks (b), or smudge attacks (c). 
Combining ownership and knowledge factors together 
with the confirm mechanism, only initially entering the user 
credentials on the mobile application is vulnerable to 
shoulder surfing attacks. However, once the trust relationship 
is established between SAM.F and the users’ smartphone for 
the current location, another mobile application login is 
prohibited for the duration of that trust membership.  
In our prototype, we use session cookies and device 
cookies to temporarily store trust relationship data. In future 
work, we will improve and further enhance security, possibly 
by integrating the Web application into a hybrid application. 
This way, the device ownership factor is strengthened. In 
hybrid applications it will be possible, e.g., to read the 
device’s hardware id and bind session. 
With regard to the one-time code displayed on the mobile 
application, as well as the user’s input of this code on the 
display application, they are not vulnerable to shoulder 
surfing attacks. Again, the confirmation mechanism protects 
the theft of the session. If any irregularity occurs, the user 
just declines unlocking the session and generates a new code.  
If a user accidentally confirms a session for a code that 
was used on another display or by anyone else, the simplest 
way is to just close the session from the user’s smartphone 
immediately. However, this case is unlikely to occur due to 
the one-time code concept and the narrow time frame in 
which a code can be used. 
Both thermal attacks and smudge attacks cannot be used 
on public displays in this approach. Once the one-time code 
has been used, it is invalidated. The statistical possibility of 
guessing a one-time code can be decreased by a higher 
 
Figure 3. Sequence diagram showing the authentication  
of one session by a user. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-737-5
ADVCOMP 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

number of symbols used in the one-code, a larger symbol 
inventory, or a larger grid. 
The users are identified and authenticated by MFA4PD 
through their credentials. During the entire login process and, 
in concept, during the entire authenticated session, MFA4PD 
continues to check the user’s location. The location is 
determined from the GPS data, which is accessible through 
the smartphone’s browser API. If any location mismatch 
occurs, the process to establish a secure session is aborted. 
Also, in theory, any ongoing session will be terminated 
immediately for security reasons. This feature might prove 
useful in case a user leaves the location of a public display 
without logging out. However, the evaluation of this feature 
or the accuracy required from GPS data in order for this 
concept to work in an everyday scenario will be carried out 
in future work. For Android and iOS devices, we note that 
continuously monitoring the user’s location requires 
background activity privileges for an application, which a 
Web browser application usually does not have. Thus, to 
enhance security by these means currently requires 
implementing a hybrid app for smartphones. 
In summary, with regard to security, the system’s 
concept offers protection against shoulder surfing attacks, 
thermal attacks, or smudge attacks. In future work, we will 
also address the question of whether the server can be 
compromised. We will also focus on possible security issues 
with regard to client-server communication, in this case the 
communication between the display application, the mobile 
application and SAM.F. 
D. Prototype Implementation 
The prototype consists of three components: (1) the 
MFA4PD module extending the services of SAM.F, (2) the 
mobile application and (3) the display application. 
SAM.F is developed as Internet Information Services 
(IIS) application for Windows Servers, as outlined above. 
The MFA4PD module is implemented as ASMX Web 
service and a backend-only application, which adds an 
ASMX Web service to the framework and interfaces with 
SAM.F. 
The mobile application is also developed as IIS 
application and interfaces with the MFA4PD service. It 
consists from an ASPX form using JavaScript and AJAX to 
interact with the frameworks service, whereas the graphical 
user interface can be customized using HTML and CSS. 
The display application consists of a graphical 
component including the necessary HTML, CSS and 
JavaScript code. It interfaces with the MFA4PD module via 
JavaScript through AJAX. The display application also 
comes with a lightweight backend for session management, 
that also interfaces with the MFA4PD module. This is 
currently implemented in ASP.NET.  
In order to incorporate the display application into an 
existing application, we provide code snippets that can be 
integrated into any application. If a target project does not 
run ASP.NET, the required server-side code can be 
translated for other frameworks. 
We plan to make the prototype available for non-
commercial use later this year. 
E. Results and Future Work 
We tested the prototype under laboratory conditions with 
mobile devices running Android with Firefox, Edge and 
Chrome Web browsers. In all tests, we were able to complete 
the authentication process. However, an evaluation in an 
everyday setting with a heterogenic group of users is still 
pending. In addition, the system still has to be evaluated 
quantitatively with a larger number of users, for example 
with regard to system’s performance, usability, the user’s 
acceptance, or security. 
In order to detect if user’s change their location, we 
currently detect their GPS position through the Web 
browsers API on their mobile device. We have not evaluated 
the accuracy of this feature as part of this work. Known 
issues using this approach are, e.g., the lack of accuracy of 
GPS in buildings, or that this approach cannot be used under 
lock screen mode of smartphones. Although the latter issue 
may be resolved by using a hybrid app, we will also look at 
other approaches to detect if users leave the location of the 
public display without logging out of their session, without 
using additional hardware in the installation next to the 
public display. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Public display authentication is vulnerable to various 
attacks and technically presents a challenge, whenever public 
displays are connected to protected networks that are 
inaccessible for other devices and public displays are not 
equipped with dedicated user authentication hardware.  
In this contribution, we present a technical solution we 
developed at the Kingsbridge Research Center (KRC), which 
addresses these challenges with a minimal technical solution. 
This makes use of a multi-factor authentication (MFA) 
applying the factors of ownership, knowledge and location. 
Not requiring any hardware upgrades for public displays, the 
solution implemented as a prototype makes use of the 
personal mobile devices of users, connecting them, as well as 
public displays to the Semantic Ambient Media Framework 
(SAM.F). Through a dedicated Web service module multi 
factor authentication is provided for public displays in three 
steps. In the first step, the user is authenticated using his 
smartphone. In the second step, the user enters a one-time 
code on the public display, which is displayed on his 
smartphone. In the third and final step, the user confirms his 
session on that particular private display on his smartphone. 
In the first prototype, authentication on the smartphone is 
carried out by entering a username-password combination.  
Although this work does not focus on implementing 
more factors at this stage, together with the knowledge 
factor, the system can be extended with biometrical factors, 
using supplementary sources for multi-factor authentication, 
such as fingerprint scanners, facial recognition, or voice 
biometrics. 
We have technically validated our approach under 
laboratory conditions. In the future, we plan to evaluate the 
system with a large number of users under everyday 
conditions, in the best case together with a project partner 
and by using publicly accessible public displays. Research 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-737-5
ADVCOMP 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

questions in this area also relate to the degree of security 
measures, that users are willing to accept in their everyday 
dealings with digital systems, as well as the question of how 
they perceive security issues with regard to their use of 
personal and private data and contexts on public displays. 
The Kingsbridge Research Center is a non-profit research 
company based in Hamburg, Germany. With our research it 
is one of our goals to strengthen the use of digital technology 
in public environments in our digital society. We achieve this 
goal through our scientific and project-oriented work. 
Currently, our non-profit activities and the development of 
new future-oriented projects is funded privately. At a time, 
when many are confronting digitization with skepticism and 
uncertainty, we are committed to communicating security in 
the mindful use of these technologies and through fostering 
awareness. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Kubitza, S. Clinch, N. Davies, and M. Langheinrich, 
‘Using Mobile Devices to Personalize Pervasive Displays’, 
SIGMOBILE Mob Comput Commun Rev, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 
26-27, Feb. 2013. 
[2] A. Ometov et al., ‘Multi-Factor Authentication: A Survey’, 
Cryptography, vol. 2, pp. 1-31, 2018. 
[3] M. Eiband, M. Khamis, E. von Zezschwitz, H. Hussmann, 
and F. Alt, ‘Understanding Shoulder Surfing in the Wild: 
Stories from Users and Observers’, in Proceedings of the 
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 4254-4265. 
[4] Y. Abdelrahman, M. Khamis, S. Schneegass, and F. Alt, 
‘Stay Cool! Understanding Thermal Attacks on Mobile-based 
User Authentication’, in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 3751-3763. 
[5] K. Mowery, S. Meiklejohn, and S. Savage, ‘Heat of the 
Moment: Characterizing the Efficacy of Thermal Camera-
based Attacks’, in Proceedings of the 5th USENIX 
Conference on Offensive Technologies, Berkeley, CA, USA, 
pp. 6-6, 2011. 
[6] E. von Zezschwitz, A. Koslow, A. De Luca, and H. 
Hussmann, ‘Making Graphic-based Authentication Secure 
Against Smudge Attacks’, in Proceedings of the 2013 
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, New 
York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 277-286. 
[7] M. Khamis, R. Hasholzner, A. Bulling, and F. Alt, 
‘GTmoPass: Two-factor Authentication on Public Displays 
Using Gaze-touch Passwords and Personal Mobile Devices’, 
in Proceedings of the 6th ACM International Symposium on 
Pervasive Displays, New York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 8:1-8:9. 
[8] Eurostat, ‘Internet use by individuals’, 260/2016, Dec. 2016. 
[9] D. Bouck-Standen, ‘Introducing SAM.F: The Semantic 
Ambient Media Framework’, in AMBIENT ’19, Porto, 
Portugal, In Press, 2019. 
[10] P. A. Shaw, M. A. Mikusz, P. T. Nurmi, and N. A. J. Davies, 
‘Tacita-A Privacy Preserving Public Display Personalisation 
Service’, UbiComp 2018, pp. 448-451, 2018. 
[11] N. Memarovic, I. Elhart, A. Michelotti, E. Rubegni, and M. 
Langheinrich, ‘Social Networked Displays: Integrating 
Networked Public Displays with Social Media’, in 
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Conference on Pervasive and 
Ubiquitous Computing Adjunct Publication, New York, NY, 
USA, 2013, pp. 55-58. 
[12] M. Mannan and P. C. van Oorschot, ‘Using a Personal 
Device to Strengthen Password Authentication from an 
Untrusted Computer’, in Financial Cryptography and Data 
Security, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 88-103. 
[13] D. Bouck-Standen, ‘Construction of an API connecting the 
Network Environment for Multimedia Objects with Ambient 
Learning Spaces’, Master Thesis, 2016. 
[14] D. Bouck-Standen et al., ‘Reconstruction and Web-based 
Editing of 3D Objects from Photo and Video Footage for 
Ambient Learning Spaces’, Int. J. Adv. Intell. Syst., vol. 11, 
pp. 91-104, 2018. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-737-5
ADVCOMP 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

