A Survey of Recent Applications of the PISALE
Code and PDE Framework
Alice Koniges
Information and Computer Sciences
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: koniges@hawaii.edu
David Eder
Physics and Astronomy
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: dceder@hawaii.edu
Jonghyun Lee
Civil & Env Eng and Water Res Center
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: jonghyun.harry.lee@hawaii.edu
Aaron Fisher
Information Technology Services
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: fallen@andcheese.org
Yuriy Mileyko
Mathematics
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: ymileyko@hawaii.edu
Monique Chyba
Mathematics
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: chyba@hawaii.edu
Jack McKee
Mathematics
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: jmckee@math.hawaii.edu
Young-Ho Seo
Civil & Env Eng and Water Res Center
University of Hawai’i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
email: yhseo@hawaii.edu
Peter Yip
Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
email: yipxx043@umn.edu
Thomas Schwartzentruber
Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
email: schwart@umn.edu
Claudia Parisua˜na
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA USA
email: cparisua@stanford.edu
Siegfried Glenzer
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Stanford University
Menlo Park, CA USA
email: glenzer@slac.stanford.edu
Abstract—We review the basic equations, numerical solution
techniques, and new application areas of a novel multi-purpose
computer code framework, PISALE, for the solution of complex
Partial Differential Equation (PDE) systems on modern com-
puting platforms. We describe how the code solves equations in
the fluid approximation using a novel combination of Arbitrary
Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) and Adaptive Mesh Refinement
(AMR) methods. Sample problems from areas of ground water
flow, high-speed impacts, and X-ray Free Electron Laser (XFEL)
experiments are given.
Keywords—Adaptive Mesh Refinement; Computational Fluid Dynam-
ics; Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian Methods; Volume of Fluid; High
Performance Computing; Surface Tension; Ground Water Flow.
I. INTRODUCTION
The PISALE codebase contains a Partial Differential Equa-
tion (PDE) solver framework based on the combined methods
of Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) dynamics and struc-
tured Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR). The PISALE code
uses an explicit time-marching Lagrange step to advance the
flow-field through a physical time step. The optional second
phase involves a modification of the grid and a remapping
(interpolation) of the solution to the new grid. The solution
of PDEs on modern High Performance Computing (HPC)
platforms is essential to the continued success of research
and modeling for a wide variety of areas. The PISALE code
name comes from the acronym Pacific Island Structured-AMR
with ALE. In some earlier papers (e.g., [10]) the code is
called ALE-AMR as it was one of the first codes to combine
those two methods. There are several branches of PISALE
to deal with disparate applications. These applications range
from high energy density physics problems to geothermal
flows. In this paper, we detail some of the wide variety of
applications suitable for modeling with PISALE and discuss
recent improvements to the code base.
In Section II, we give an overview of the equations used
in the PISALE code. In Subsection II-A, we describe how
the different physics modules are coupled using operator
splitting. We also provide some additional information on the
surface tension modules used in PISALE. In Section III, we
give a summary of past PISALE applications followed by
discussion on modeling groundwater flow in Subsection III-A.
We then discuss recent hypervelocity impacts simulations with
a comparison of PISALE results with experimental data and
with results from other codes in Subsection III-B. The third
new application is discussed in Subsection III-C, where we
describe the modeling of droplet dynamics. We provide some
conclusions and comments on future work in Section IV.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-107-7
ADVCOMP 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

II. PISALE EQUATIONS
The numerical methodology of PISALE was initially devel-
oped for pure gas dynamics and its novelty at the time was
based on the coupling of AMR with a Lagrangian formulation
that retains accuracy in standard two- and three-dimension
problems, such as Sedov blast wave simulations [1]. By adding
a complex Right Hand Side (RHS) to the basic gas dynamics
with elastic/plastic flow terms, we are able to use operator
splitting methods to model an extremely diverse variety of
physical processes, each affecting the dynamically evolving
fields at successive time intervals according to timescales.
An example of a complex RHS is the use of anisotropic
material failure models with material history in multi-material
problems. Unlike the first implementations of these numerical
techniques such as Wilkins [26], PISALE was written from
the ground-up to be modular and take advantage of parallelism
opportunities on HPC platforms. PISALE operates on top of
the Structured AMR Application Interface (SAMRAI) library
[8] and contains a general purpose PDE solver that uses a
staggered-grid, Lagrangian formulation, written for coupled
plasma/fluids with position and velocity being nodal variables
and density, internal energy, temperature, pressure, strain, and
stress being zonal (cell centered) variables. This basic solver
is primarily for equations that can be written in conservation
form and uses a volume of fluid approach. Thermal conduction
and radiation transport coupled to the basic conservation law
equations are solved by implementing the diffusion approx-
imation, which uses a nodal radiation energy and a zone-
averaged nodal temperature. These plasma/fluid equations in
a Lagrangian formulation (in vector and indicial notation
i, j, k = 1, 2, 3) are:
Dρ
Dt
=
−ρ∇ · ⃗U = ρUi,i
(1)
D⃗U
Dt
=
1
ρ∇ · σ = 1
ρσij,j
(2)
De
Dt
=
1
ρV s : ˙ε − P ˙V = 1
ρV (sij ˙εij) − P ˙V
(3)
where
D
Dt =
∂
∂t + ⃗U · ∇ is the substantial derivative, ρ is the
density, ⃗U = (u, v, w) is the material velocity, t is time, σ is
the total stress tensor, P is the pressure, e is the internal energy,
V is the relative volume (ρV = ρ0 where ρ0 is the reference
density), s is the deviatoric stress defined as sij = σij + Pδij
where δ is the Kronecker delta and ˙ε is the strain rate tensor.
PISALE has a range of different strength and failure models
that can be used for impact and other applications.
A. PISALE Physics Modules
PISALE has significant physical modeling capabilities in
addition to the core ALE hydrodynamics and structural me-
chanics. These capabilities are provided through a flexible
physics module system which allows their PDEs to be updated
separately from the hydrodynamic models with a classical
operator splitting scheme. Field variables in these physics
modules are advanced in time after the hydrodynamic time
step and the modules have hooks that allow them to update
the field quantities when the ALE hydrodynamics alters the
underlying mesh. Physical models provided in this manner
include a laser ray tracing package [14], various surface
tension models [11] [12], heat conduction, and diffusion-based
radiation transport [7].
PISALE includes infrastructure to lower the barriers for
the introduction of additional physics modules. Currently, this
includes tools for transforming data and meshes from a block
structured format to an unstructured indexing format, tools
for tracing rays through meshes, and a basic Finite Element
Method (FEM) framework for discretizing PDEs, see Figure
1. Field data in PISALE physics modules is updated after
the ALE hydrodynamics step is complete. First field data is
collected from the SAMRAI patch-AMR hierarchy into a par-
allel composite mesh, which can be utilized with unstructured
solvers. Then FEM-based PDE discretizations are applied on
the composite mesh to update the relevant field data. The
updated field data on the composite mesh is then transformed
back into the patch-AMR hierarchy. This approach enables the
development of external solvers for PISALE without requiring
the data to be represented as a SAMRAI patch hierarchy.
Fig. 1. Field data on PISALE patch mesh is transferred to composite mesh
prior to solution by external PDE solver and then updated on patch mesh.
The current PISALE FEM framework includes only first
order H1 quadrilateral and hexahedron elements in 2D and
3D. This works well for the diffusion equation solvers utilized
in the heat conduction and radiation diffusion modules. We are
exploring the addition of elements from the H(curl), H(div),
and L2 spaces that would open up a path to discretizing a
wider array of PDEs in topic as diverse as: plasma physics,
mesoscale material modeling, seismicity in geophysics, and
electromagnetics. The current FEM framework in PISALE
only supports AMR in 2D. We are exploring FEM frameworks
with 3D AMR capability that would improve the existing heat
conduction, radiation diffusion, and surface tension models in
PISALE. Some examples are Modular Finite Element Methods
(MFEM) library [16] and the Multiphysics Object-Oriented
Simulation Environment (MOOSE) [17].
1) Surface Tension: A major use case of the operator
splitting system is the surface tension package, which models
2D and 3D surface tension using a multi-fluid Volume-of-Fluid
(VOF) paradigm[4]. The VOF paradigm avoids tracking an ex-
plicit representation of fluid boundaries, instead reconstructing
them at each time step based on the relative volume fractions
of each fluid within every cell. This was chosen because
volume fractions are already a core aspect of PISALE’s multi-
material formulation, meaning the surface tension package
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-107-7
ADVCOMP 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

only needs to generate and apply a body force. A height
function for each fluid is generated by summing up relative
volume fractions along columns of a 3x5 or 3x3x5 stencil.
Orientation and position of the stencil is chosen so that the
interface is always in the central cell of the stencil, the fluid
body is always on the ”bottom” of the stencil, and the first
derivatives of the height function are minimized. See Figure
2.
In 2D, three points are chosen based on the height function
and mapped back to real coordinates, where they are used
to generate a three-point circular fit of the boundary, which
approximates an osculating circle. This scheme is robust to
nonlinear meshes with regular column widths, but a correc-
tion term must be applied in the case of irregular column
widths[15]. A circular fit of this kind can be shown second-
order accurate when the mesh is regular enough[3], although
is only first-order accurate when the mesh is non-orthogonal or
nonlinear. Because the calculation of surface tension does not
rely on mesh regularity, surface tension can be incorporated as
a body force during Lagrangian time steps, allowing full ALE
simulations with properly coupled surface tension effects.
Fig. 2. Visual depiction of surface tension calculation using height functions
in 2D.
In 3D, six points are chosen for a linear least-squares
polynomial fit of the boundary with a quadratic polyno-
mial P(i, j) of the logical coordinates[12]. The polynomial’s
derivatives are then mapped through the mesh Jacobian to find
first and second derivatives of the corresponding approximate
parameterization p(x, y) in real coordinates, which are used to
calculate the mean curvature of the surface. Since the current
3D curvature calculation relies on a linear approximation of
the mesh, the surface tension force can only be applied after
the remap phase, and with mesh adaptation disabled.
III. RECENT APPLICATIONS AREAS
PISALE has been applied to a wide range of applications.
One early application was the protection of optics and diagnos-
tics at the National Ignition Facility (NIF) and other large laser
facilities [6]. It was also used to model ion heating experiments
at Neutralized Drift Compression Experiment-II (NDCX-II)
to study Warm Dense Matter (WDM) properties [2]. One of
the early applications that used the surface tension capability
of the code was modeling the dynamics of tin droplets for
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography [22]. Our recent ap-
plications include groundwater flow simulations for Hawaiian
aquifers[23], impacts of particulates and rain droplets on hy-
personic vehicles[27], and a range of experiments at Stanford
Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC), a Department of Energy
(DOE) Office of Science User Facility. Experiments include
X-ray Free Electron Laser (XFEL) beam heating of hydrogen
and water droplets[18] and interaction of laser produced proton
beams with different materials. We summarize recent work in
these three new application areas.
A. Groundwater Flow and Transport in Pacific Islands
Density-dependent miscible seawater-freshwater systems in
island aquifers have been previously modeled with finite
element or finite volume methods in an Eulerian framework.
These simulations however, are deemed inadequate due to
inappropriate grids and problems with scalability. Due to the
density dependency, the governing Darcy-type flow equation
is nonlinearly coupled with the mass and/or heat transport
equations with a constitutive relationship, ρ = ρ(p, T, c) where
ρ is the density, p is the pressure, T is the temperature, and c
is the salinity.
For seawater-freshwater simulation in the subsurface, the
isothermal assumption, e.g., ρ = ρ(c) under Boussinesq
approximation is typically used for coupled flow and transport
with appropriate boundary conditions [5]:
∇ · q = 0
(4)
q = −ρ0gk
µ
 ∇p
ρ0g + ρ − ρ0
ρ0
∇z

(5)
ϕ∂c
∂t + ∇ · (qc − ϕDeff∇c) = 0
(6)
where q is the fluid flux, ρ0 is the density at the reference c
and T, g is the gravity constant, k is the permeability tensor
of the porous medium, µ is the dynamic viscosity, ϕ is the
porosity, and Deff is the dispersion coefficient tensor.
Fig. 3. Conservative tracer transport with heterogeneous hydraulic conduc-
tivity field at t = 0 yr (left) and 37.8 yrs (right).
A critical previously unaddressed challenge is the simulation
of salinity transport in a large-scale aquifer with a spatially
heterogeneous permeability field. Typically, and unsatisfac-
torily, coarse meshes with large diffusion coefficients (i.e.,
dispersivities) are implemented as numerical compromises
at the cost of overestimated mixing physics. The simulated
groundwater flow velocities are then used for reactive transport
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-107-7
ADVCOMP 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

modeling, which often leads to the underestimated residence
time of contaminant plumes and associated overly promising
groundwater remediation decisions with increasing risks of
cleanup operation failure. The flexibility of PISALE, with its
ability to define interfaces and the use of AMR to dynamically
define the grid, addresses these issues as shown in Figure
3. We show convective tracer transport with a heterogeneous
hydraulic conductivity field and its corresponding groundwater
velocity. Additionally, PISALE generally reduces simulation
time to a tractable problem via the parallel HPC performance
of the underlying scalable SAMRAI library.
Fig. 4.
Recent comparison of PISALE results with two openly published
results from large code efforts (neither is open source) and experimental
impact data.
B. Hypervelocity impacts
Impacts by particulates and rain droplets on hypersonic
(Mach 5 and above) vehicles pose a major concern for safety
of flight. It is understood that particulates of even micron-
size are capable of impacting the surface quality of the
vehicle [9]. Therefore, larger particles are likely to induce
more surface damage and additional material erosion. To make
the result more complex, the particles must traverse a shock
discontinuity formed from hypersonic flight. As a particle
traverses the shock, the post-shock conditions may result in
a pressure, density, and temperature differential that leads to
a spatio-temporal dependent particle shape change prior to
making contact with the surface. PISALE offers the capability
to capture such high-rate loading in a computationally cost
effective manner with the implementation of AMR. PISALE
has been verified and validated in its ability to capture hy-
pervelocity impact phenomena of well-characterized ductile
metals. Figure 4 shows impact crater depth in Al 6061-T6
as a function of time caused by an aluminum projectile with
PISALE results in excellent agreement with experimental data
[20]. The projectile has a diameter of 6.35mm and a velocity
of 7 km/s. Figure 5 shows the PISALE simulation of the
impact at three times.
Fig. 5. PISALE simulation showing time of impact and crater at 5 and 15
µs.
t = 4.5 ns
PISALE Simulation
SLAC Optical Image
XFEL heating
water droplet
Fig. 6. Comparison of PISALE simulation of a water droplet heated by an
XFEL with experimental image.
C. Modeling of SLAC experiments using XFEL beams
XFEL beams can be used to produce and study matter under
extreme conditions. Liquids provide a means of bringing sam-
ples into the path of the X-ray beam for analysis. Ultrabright
x-rays can blow up samples within a tiny fraction of a second,
and modeling the dynamics of this interaction is critical to
understanding which droplets can be used to collect data.
These ultrashort (∼ 50 fs), high energy (∼ 8 keV), coherent
x-ray sources can be used to both heat and probe targets. We
discuss some recent results in modeling XFEL heating of water
and hydrogen droplets. Figure 6 shows early time dynamics
from a 3D PISALE simulation of a water droplet heated by
an XFEL beam with a comparison to an experimental optical
image [24] at the Coherent X-ray Imaging (CXI) instrument
at SLAC. Previous work [19] modeling early stages of liquid-
water-drop explosion showed 1D and 2D results assuming
axisymmetry. This assumption is broken for later times due to
distortions of the cavity boundary [19]. Therefore, the need of
a 3D simulation not only as a diagnostic tool for early times,
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-107-7
ADVCOMP 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

but also for modeling reflection and spallation mechanisms
that lead to fragmentation and expansion observed in water
under extreme conditions at later times [25].
The need for High Repetition Rate (HRR) targets in High
Energy Density Science has been stated many times as the
areas moves towards HRR facilities [21] [13]. When using
droplets as HRR targets, fratricide can occur. This is caused
by the explosion of a heated droplet impacting the following
droplet, which can make it ineffective for the following shot.
The need to skip this perturbed droplet causes a reduction in
the effective repetition rate and data acquisition quality. Figure
7 shows a 3D PISALE simulation of three hydrogen droplets
with the first droplet (lowest in the image) already exploded
after being heated by an XFEL beam. The image is 9 ns after
the XFEL beam passes through the first droplet. The resulting
explosion creates debris seen impacting the following droplets.
The middle droplet is clearly perturbed by the debris causing
a reduction of the effective repetition rate factor of this target
system by at least by factor of 2 because this perturbed droplet
cannot be used as a target. The XFEL beam travels along the
x-axis, which passes through the center of the lowest droplet.
The orientation (not the location) of the three axes is shown
for the inline and side views.
Fig. 7.
Three dimensional PISALE simulation of three hydrogen droplets.
The droplet following the XFEL heated droplet shields the second following
droplet. The inline view is along the XFEL beam.
Surface tension can impact droplet dynamics in the lower
temperature regions of this experiment. Early simulations show
that enabling the surface tension package impacts the large-
scale dynamics of the system. Figure 8 shows the side views of
3D PISALE simulations of hydrogen droplets with and without
including surface tension effects. Even with surface tension
forces included, the following droplet is still significantly
perturbed by the exploding droplet. There is experimental
evidence of larger water droplets heated by XFEL beams
perturbing following droplets [24] but to our knowledge no
published results for hydrogen droplets. Our modeling results
for hydrogen show that fratricide is also a concern for these
droplets and reduces the effective repetition rate.
Fig. 8. Effects of surface tension are important for modeling. Comparison of
PISALE simulation of hydrogen droplet heated by an XFEL without surface
tension model (left) and including surface tension (right) at t = 8 ns.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The PISALE code is being used in a wide variety of new
areas showing excellent agreement with experimental data and
contributing to a basic understanding of the physical processes.
Three dimensional simulations are critical to most of these
physical processes, and this is enabled through modern HPC
platforms and appropriate numerical techniques and program-
ming models. The combination of AMR with ALE is a pow-
erful numerical approach with unique capabilities. Significant
physics effects can be included in the numerical methods with
careful implementation of the operator splitting approach. We
are exploring paths discretize a wider array of PDEs relevant
to plasma physics, mesoscale material modeling, seismicity
in geophysics, and electromagnetics. We are also exploring a
FEM framework with 3D AMR capability that would improve
the existing heat conduction, radiation diffusion, and surface
tension models in PISALE.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank additional members of the PISALE
team for their expertise and contribution to the code. The
PISALE code is supported by the National Science Founda-
tion, under Office of Advanced Cyber Infrastructure Award
Number 2005259, the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of
Science, under Fusion Energy Sciences Research Division
Award Numbers DE-SC0021374 and DE-SC0023475, and the
Office of Naval Research (ONR), under ONR MURI Award
Number N00014- 20-1-2682. This research used resources of
the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center
(NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science
User Facility located at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab-
oratory, operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231
using NERSC awards ERCAP0024761 and EERCAP0024762.
The technical support and advanced computing resources
from University of Hawaii Information Technology Services
– Cyberinfrastructure, funded in part by the National Science
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-107-7
ADVCOMP 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Foundation MRI award Number 1920304, are gratefully ac-
knowledged.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. W. Anderson, N. S. Elliott, and R. B. Pember. “An ar-
bitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian method with adaptive mesh
refinement for the solution of the Euler equations”. In:
Journal of Computational Physics 199.2 (Sept. 2004),
pp. 598–617.
[2]
J. Barnard et al. “NDCX-II target experiments and
simulations”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrome-
ters, Detectors and Associated Equipment 733 (2014),
pp. 45–50.
[3]
G. Bornia, A. Cervone, S. Manservisi, R. Scardovelli,
and S. Zaleski. “On the properties and limitations of the
height function method in two-dimensional Cartesian
geometry”. In: Journal of Computational Physics 230.4
(2011), pp. 851–862.
[4]
J. U. Brackbill, D. B. Kothe, and C. Zemach. “A
continuum method for modeling surface tension”. In:
J. Comput. Phys. 100 (1992), pp. 335–354.
[5]
H.-J. G. Diersch. FEFLOW: finite element modeling of
flow, mass and heat transport in porous and fractured
media. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[6]
D. C. Eder, A. C. Fisher, A. E. Koniges, and N. D.
Masters. “Modelling debris and shrapnel generation
in inertial confinement fusion experiments”. In: Nucl.
Fusion 53 (2013), p. 113037.
[7]
A. C. Fisher et al. “Modeling heat conduction and
radiation transport with the diffusion Equation in NIF
ALE-AMR”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series
244 (2010), p. 022075.
[8]
B. T. N. Gunney and R. W. Anderson. “Advances
in patch-based adaptive mesh refinement scalability”.
In: Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 89
(2016), pp. 65–84.
[9]
J. B. Habeck, M. D. Kroells, T. E. Schwartzentruber,
and G. V. Candler. “Characterization of particle-surface
impacts on a sphere-cone at hypersonic flight condi-
tions”. In: AIAA SCITECH 2023 Forum AIAA 2023-
0205 (2023).
[10]
A. Koniges et al. “Multi-material ALE with AMR for
modeling hot plasmas and cold fragmenting materials”.
In: Plasma Sci. and Technol. 17 (2015), pp. 117–128.
[11]
W. Liu et al. “Using a Korteweg-type model for model-
ing surface tension and its application”. In: 54th Annual
Meeting of the APS Division of Plasma Physics abstract
id. BP8.058 (2012).
[12]
W. Liu et al. “Surface tension models for a multi-
material ALE code with AMR”. In: Computers and
Fluids 151 (2017), pp. 91–101.
[13]
T. Ma et al. “Accelerating the rate of discovery: Toward
high-repetition-rate HED science”. In: Plasma Physics
and Controlled Fusion 63.10 (2021), p. 104003.
[14]
N. D. Masters, T. B. Kaiser, R. W. Anderson, D. C.
Eder, A. C. Fisher, and A. E. Koniges. “Laser ray trac-
ing in a parallel arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian adaptive
mesh refinement hydrocode”. In: Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 244 (2010), p. 032022.
[15]
J. McKee, Y. Mileyko, A. Fisher, and A. Koniges.
“Developing a modern CFD framework with parallel
algorithms and mesh adaption”. In: Eleventh Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Fluid Dynamics
(ICCFD11) (2022). Paper 1301.
[16]
MFEM. https://mfem.org/. Accessed: 2023-09-18.
[17]
MOOSE. https://mooseframework.inl.gov/. Accessed:
2023-09-18.
[18]
C. Parisuana, D. C. Eder, M. Gauthier, C. Schoen-
waelder, C. A. Stan, and S. H. Glenzer. “CFD modeling
of droplets heated by an x-ray free electron laser”.
In: Eleventh International Conference on Computational
Fluid Dynamics (ICCFD11) (2022). Paper 2003.
[19]
T. Paula, S. Adami, and N. A. Adams. “Analysis of the
early stages of liquid-water-drop explosion by numeri-
cal simulation”. In: Physical Review Fluids 4.4 (2019),
p. 044003.
[20]
E. Pierazzo et al. “Validation of numerical codes for
impact and explosion cratering: Impacts on strengthless
and metal targets”. In: Meteoritics & Planetary Science
43.12 (2008), pp. 1917–1938.
[21]
I. Prencipe et al. “Targets for high repetition rate laser
facilities: needs, challenges and perspectives”. In: High
Power Laser Science and Engineering 5 (2017), e17.
[22]
M. A. Purvis et al. “Advancements in predictive plasma
formation modeling”. In: Proc. SPIE 9776. Extreme
Ultraviolet (EUV) Lithography VII. 2016, 97760K–
97760K.
[23]
Y. Seo, J. Lee, A. Koniges, and A. Fisher. “Develop-
ment of the PISALE codebase for simulating flow and
transport in large-scale coastal aquifer”. In: Eleventh
International Conference on Computational Fluid Dy-
namics (ICCFD11) (2022). Paper 1502.
[24]
C. A. Stan et al. “Liquid explosions induced by X-ray
laser pulses”. In: Nature Physics 12.10 (2016), pp. 966–
971.
[25]
C. A. Stan et al. “Negative pressures and spallation in
water drops subjected to nanosecond shock waves”. In:
The journal of physical chemistry letters 7.11 (2016),
pp. 2055–2062.
[26]
M. L. Wilkins. Computer simulation of dynamic phe-
nomena. Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.
[27]
P. T. Yip et al. “Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian simula-
tions of high speed particle impacts encountered during
hypersonic flight”. In: Eleventh International Confer-
ence on Computational Fluid Dynamics (ICCFD11)
(2022). Paper 2202.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-107-7
ADVCOMP 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

