e-Reverse Logistics for Remanufacture-to-Order: An Online Auction-based and Multi-
Agent System Supported Solution 
Bo Xing, Wen-Jing Gao, Kimberly Battle, Fulufhelo Vincent Nelwamondo, and Tshilidzi Marwala 
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment (FEBE) 
University of Johannesburg 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
bxing2009@gmail.com, wgao2011@gmail.com, kbattle@uj.ac.za, vnelwamondo@gmail.com, tmarwala@uj.ac.za 
 
 
Abstract—Due to the rapid obsolescent nature of consumer 
products, the remanufacture-to-stock strategy, in which 
remanufacturers tend to collect certain amount of end-of-life 
products, remanufacturing them as many as they can and keep 
these remanufactured products in stock waiting for customers 
come to buy, is not always an optimal solution. Under this 
circumstance, remanufacture-to-order policy, as an effective 
complement, provides a good trade-off for remanufacturers 
between meeting consumers’ demand and, in the meantime, 
keeping the inventory cost at a lower level. To remanufacture 
the used items, the manufacturer must retrieve them from the 
market where they are dispersed among consumers. This is 
accomplished by means of a reverse logistics chain that is 
comparable to the new product distribution system in reverse. 
However, the current reverse logistics do not respond to 
remanufacture-to-order at an efficient level. Therefore it is a 
necessity to develop a novel infrastructure, which can deal with 
these issues. This paper presents a framework called e-reverse 
logistics that aims at filling this gap. The major features and 
architecture of the proposed e-reverse logistics are detailed in 
this work. 
Keywords-EoL (End-of-Life) product recovery; RMTO 
(Remanufacture-to-Order); RL (Reverse Logistics); auction; 
MAS (Multi-Agent System) 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The EoL (End-of-Life) product recovery field has grown 
considerably during the past decades, due to its economical 
benefits and environmental requirements. Among various 
recovery options, remanufacture is an industrial process 
where EoL products are restored to like-new condition.  
As remanufacturers strive to gain a competitive 
advantage by shortening their quote-to-delivery cycles; 
driving out operational costs and non-value add processes; 
keep lower inventories and better customer service etc., 
many remanufacture companies consider to employ the 
strategies associated with “RMTO (Remanufacture-to-
Order)”, where used products are acquired and available as 
needed to meet needs of remanufacture. RL (Reverse 
Logistics) plays a key role in achieving this goal. In the 
literature, the research of RL involves many aspects such as 
network design and inventory management. Various methods 
have also been applied to deal with RL; see [1] for a recent 
survey. It can be seen from this review that the problems 
encountered 
in 
RL 
always 
require 
multi-objective 
optimization. Therefore, artificial intelligence seems to be a 
promising and most widely used tool to deal with these 
issues. 
In [2], an attempt was made to design the structure of e-
RL (e-Reverse Logistics) to cope with RMTO. Consequent 
to the previous study, in this research, a novel solution based 
on auction theory and agent technology is posed to realize e-
RL in the context of RMTO. Present study focuses on the 
implementation of integrated decision-making processes of 
various actors within an e-RL process.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
identifies several key challenges of employing RMTO 
strategy; the proposed e-RL architecture is detailed in 
Section III; Section IV describes auction based and multi-
agent system supported solution for realizing e-RL; finally, 
the conclusion and future work of the current research are 
drawn in Section V. 
II. 
CHALLENGES FOR REMANUFACTURE-TO-ORDER 
Remanufacturing 
has 
been 
considered 
as 
the 
transformation of used units, consisting of components and 
parts, into units that satisfy exactly the same quality and 
other standards as new units. As seen from Figure 1, the 
general activities involved in EoL product remanufacturing 
are as follows: 
 
 
Figure 1.  RL process for EoL product remanufacturing. 
• 
Normally, the initial actor group can be identified as 
the EoL product owners. They are regarded to be the 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

source of the EoL products emergence. In order to 
obtain a remanufactured product, an EoL product has 
to be first collected from its last owners. 
• 
The second group is represented by a set of EoL 
collectors such as 3PRLP (Third Party Reverse 
Logistics 
Provider), 
authorized 
EoL 
product 
dismantler, and retailer. Though the functionalities 
of these three types of collectors are slightly 
different, they act the common role of collecting as 
many of EoL products as possible from end 
consumers. 
• 
Remanufacturer is often treated as the third acting 
group 
in 
the 
practice 
of 
EoL 
product 
remanufacturing. It is mainly responsible for EoL 
product 
disassembly, 
cleaning, 
testing, 
and 
reassembly. In real world, 100% recovery rate of 
EoL product is not always achievable, so the 
remanufacturer not only has to procure new 
components to finish a remanufactured product, but 
generating certain amount of product waste and 
residue as well. 
A. The Importance of RMTO 
Due to the fact that high uncertainty involved in 
remanufacturing process such as the problem of imperfect 
correlation between supply of cores and demand for 
remanufactured units, the part matching problem and the 
uncertainties in the quantity and timing of returned products, 
etc., RMTO is often a practice in industry. Typically an 
RMTO remanufacturer deals with a customer’s enquiry 
through the following stages: 
• 
First, remanufacturer will receive an order from 
customer through its ordering system. 
• 
The first stage is an initial evaluation to determine 
whether the remanufacturer wishes to make a bid for 
the order. The outcomes of this stage are the 
decisions to prepare or refuse a bid, and possibly to 
seek further clarification on the request if it accepts 
the bid. The availability of cores is one of the 
reasons that influence remanufacturer’s decision. 
• 
In the second stage, the remanufacturer decides how 
the cost estimates will be prepared. This means 
specifying how much time should be spent in the 
estimation process. 
• 
The third stage is the process of preparing the cost 
estimates themselves. This includes specifying and 
configuring in detail how the job will be made and 
also deciding upon material and process plan of the 
job. 
• 
The final stage is to set the price and lead time to 
bid. Here the question is to decide the margin of 
profit to attach to the cost estimates. 
After these four stages, the proposal is put to the 
customer, who may accept it, reject it, or may ask for further 
negotiations. A further negotiation may just be a request for a 
lower price or could be a joint exploration of ways to change 
the specification to reduce the cost. Another possibility on 
behalf of the customer is to ask the remanufacturer for a new 
price for a specific delivery date, different to the one 
proposed by the RMTO remanufacturer [3]. 
B. The Role of Reverse Logistics 
In order to shorten the lead time of a required 
remanufactured product, it is essential to have, at any time, 
the parts needed to assembly a new product, which has been 
ordered. It is made possible if there is on the shelf an 
exhaustive and comprehensive stock of spare parts (both new 
and reusable ones). This solution results obviously in a 
significant cost for any remanufacturer and is not always 
technically achievable in practice. The alternative strategy is 
to be able to create an effective required parts supply system 
to proceed to the remanufacturing process [4]. Under these 
circumstances, RL, in recent years, have emerged as an 
important research area due to a tendency towards stricter 
environmental regulations in industry and an awakening to 
the economic attraction of recovering products rather than 
taking the disposal alternative [1]. There are several 
definitions of RL available in the literature. In this research, 
the following definition provided by [5] is accepted: RL “is a 
process in which a manufacturer systematically accepts 
previously shipped products or parts from the point for 
consumption for possible recycling, remanufacturing, or 
disposal.” 
However, TRL (Traditional Reverse Logistics) process 
suffers many disadvantages such as core collection speed 
slow, core delivery delays, and core delivery mistake. 
Among them, one major challenge faced by the RMTO 
industry is how to achieve satisfying dearth of good 
information system while dealing with the inherent 
variability in TRL. The variability might be caused by a 
variety of reasons, for example: fluctuating demands, 
uncertainty of job arrivals, product variety or technological 
changes. Facing various constraints, the next questions which 
would probably be asked are: what is the best way to get 
effective information? How would it be possible to control 
information to minimize the variability? Meanwhile, there is 
lacking of system architecture that actually realizes RL.  
III. 
PROPOSED E-REVERSE LOGISTICS ARCHITECTURE  
In this section, a brief overview of proposed e-RL is 
provided. As shown in Figure 2, the realization of e-RL 
relies on an in-depth understanding of TRL activities 
together with computer support and communication 
technologies, namely EPC (Electronic Product Code), NFC 
(Near Field Communication), and cloud computing. 
 
 
Figure 2.  What is e-RL? 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

In the “e-RL” circle, research is focused on Internet-
based decision making models with various distributed 
sources and human interaction, which would allow the 
decision structures to be adaptive and more responsive. 
Additionally, information exchange is required to influence 
other parties’ local decisions, to act coherently and to 
achieve better results for the entire system. Briefly, the e-RL 
framework works as follows: 
• 
Step 1: The EoL product owners use their NFC 
enabled mobile device to publish pieces of used 
product information online, by simply scanning the 
ready-to-discard products’ integrated EPC tag. 
• 
Step 2: When a remanufacturer lodges a core request 
to a 4PLP (Forth Party Logistics Provider), she will 
search online to look for appropriate EoL product 
information (i.e., an event been published by used 
product’s last owner). Once 4PLP captures pieces of 
information, she will immediately forward them to 
the remanufacturer for further confirmation. 
• 
Step 
3: 
Supported 
by 
cloud 
computing, 
remanufacturer 
can 
verify 
the 
EoL 
product 
information through EPCglobal network, and this 
will in turn help remanufacturer to evaluate the 
residue value of a certain used product. Once the 
remanufacturer decides which core is suitable for his 
needs, he will send the feedback to 4PLP. 
• 
Step 4: When a 4PLP receives a confirmation 
message, she will distribute the collection orders 
among a set of other companies with actual transport 
capacity such as 3PRLP, EoL product dismantler, 
and retailer. 
• 
Step 5: Once a collector successfully gets the order 
from 4PLP, she will handle any return from the 
customer to remanufacturer including the physical 
movement of the goods and so on. 
The purpose of establishing e-RL is to achieve lower core 
acquisition costs for remanufacturer, lower barriers for new 
suppliers to enter the market of remanufacture, more 
convenient and environmental conscious ways of discarding 
EoL products for end customers, and consequently better 
EoL products remanufacture market efficiency which will in 
turn make RMTO possible.  
Though e-RL is theoretically promising, it still faces 
some challenges in the real-life implementation: first, the 
core information provided by 4PLP is multiple and the 
remanufacturer needs a way to determine which one is the 
best; second, in order to acquire the collection order from 
4PLP, the EoL product collectors such as retailer, 3PRLP 
and dismantler need an environment that they could 
negotiate with 4PLP and end customers simultaneously so 
that a optimal collection solution can be achieved; third, in 
stead of being passively join the EoL product recovery, 
which in some degree may decrease the efficiency of whole 
e-RL process, the end customers also need an environment to 
support them actively choosing the best option to discard an 
EoL product; last but not the least, the e-RL process involves 
many dynamic factors, information and communication 
technologies do cease these problems to certain degree, but 
still a more advanced method should be proposed to cope 
with these dynamic influences.  
IV. 
ONLINE AUCTION BASED AND MULTI-AGENT 
SYSTEM SUPPORTED SOLUTION FOR E-REVERSE LOGISTICS 
In this work, the e-RL process is treated as a cooperative 
distributed system that integrates participating business 
entities in RMTO, including various EoL product owners, 
several EoL product collectors, one or more 4PLPs and 
remanufacturers. This architecture enables and facilitates 
common economic services and commerce transactions 
between the consumers and suppliers, such as brokering, 
pricing, and negotiation, as well as cross-enterprise 
integration and cooperation in whole reverse logistics. In the 
conceptual architecture, the e-RL exists as a collection of 
economically motivated software agents. 
 
 
Figure 3.  e-RL for RMTO and Auction Sessions. 
The online auction based and MAS supported e-RL 
solution incorporates three auction sessions (see Figure 3) 
and each of which is viewed as a separate market 
environment. Different auction mechanisms are employed in 
every auction session and each participant agent (consumer 
or supplier) in certain auction session acts independently and 
contracts to buy or sell at a price agreed upon privately.  
A. Auction Sessions 
The three auction sessions are detailed in the following 
subsections: 
1) Auction Session 1_Reverse Vickrey Auction: In this 
session, a remanufacturer will publish the core request 
information, and a 4PLP will look for a suitable core. The 
underlying auction mechanism of this session is reverse 
Vickrey auction. In practice, the reverse auction is often used 
to refer to purchasing auctions (i.e., the roles of the buyer 
and the seller are swapped). The reason that Vickrey 
mechanism is chosen lies in that this auction has shown that 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

bidding one’s true evaluation is the dominant strategy. As 
such, the Vickrey auction eliminates the need for 
strategizing. Since there is an easy dominant strategy the 
bidders do not have to think about what they should do. They 
just play their dominant strategy and bid their true valuation. 
Thus makes it a very attractive auction in terms of its 
efficiency compared with other auction types. 
Basically, there are three sets of agents in this session as 
shown below: 
• 
Core_Request_Agent: Representing the role of 
remanufacturer to ask for cores via Internet. 
• 
Search_Agent: It works for 4PLP to look for core 
information online.  
• 
Auctioneer_Agent: It has the capability to carry out 
the buying task in this session.  
In general, Auction Session 1 works as follows: the 
core_request_agent formulates a purchase-order and assigns 
it to an auctioneer_agent in Session 1. The auctioneer_agent 
receives a request from the core_request_agent to process the 
purchase-order. 
Consequently, 
the 
auctioneer_agent 
formulates an “announcement” including all the auction 
parameters supplied by the core_request_agent such as the 
required item details, quantity, minimum price and desired 
required deadline. This “announcement” is encapsulated in 
side a “call-for-bid” message that is sent out to all potential 
bidder agents registered with the current auction session. At 
a certain time, the auctioneer_agent send “propose” 
messages to all search_agents indicating the start of the 
bidding process. Search_agents express their preferences in 
the format of universal bidding language and send “bid” 
message back to the auctioneer_agent. When the purchase 
deadline reaches, the auctioneer_agent ceases to accept any 
messages and send a “reject” message for late arriving 
messages. Immediately after this, the bid evaluation process 
commences by comparing the structure of aggregated bids 
against certain classes of bids that indicate an optimal 
allocation of winners and calculation of payments is 
ultimately guaranteed. Otherwise, the auctioneer_agent runs 
a heuristic algorithm in order to arrive at a computationally 
feasible approximate winner allocation. Finally, the 
auctioneer_agent 
sends 
“inform” 
messages 
to 
all 
search_agents as well as the core_request_agent to notify 
them of the auction result. Then each agent is responsible for 
notifying its representative human player of the auction 
outcome at the end of this auction session. 
2) Auction Session 2_Reverse Combinatorial Auction: 
In this session, 4PLP will publish the EoL product collection 
information, and different collectors will bid for packages of 
various EoL products. Reverse combinatorial auction 
mechanism will be employed in Auction Session 2. In 
combinatorial auction setting, the bidders can place bids for 
sets of items instead of just placing one bid for each item for 
sale. This is arguably a more attractive option compared with 
other auction types in the context of this session. 
Thus, apart from auctioneer_agent (see Auction Session 
1), there are four sets of agents involved in this session: 
• 
Advertise_Agent: Working for 4PLP to redistribute 
the EoL product collection order confirmed by 
remanufacturer. 
• 
3PRLP_Agent: On behalf of 3PRLP to bid EoL 
products collection. 
• 
Dismantler_Agent: Representing EoL products 
dismantler to bid the collection order. 
• 
Retailer_Agent: It stands for retailer to participate 
in auction. 
• 
Auctioneer_Agent: It has the capability to carry out 
the buying task in session 2.  
In principle, this session works as follows: considering a 
4PLP, who manages multiple wanted EoL goods to be 
collected and transported to different destinations, using 
auctions to make short-term contracts with carriers. When 
4PLP has a list transportation orders from remanufacturer, all 
the carriers that would like to participate in the auction 
observe the orders and submit their bids for various packages 
of orders. 
3) Auction Session 3_First-Price, Sealed-Bid Auction: 
In this session, EoL product owners will publish the EoL 
product information, and the collectors will bid for them. In 
order to increase the customers’ willingness-to-return, the 
first-price, sealed-bid auction is chosen in this session. 
Generally, in this auction, each bidder places his bid in a 
sealed envelope. These bids are given to the auctioneer who 
then picks the highest bid. The winner must pay his bid 
amount.  
In addition to the same agents as described in Auction 
Session 
2 
like 
3PRLP_agent, 
dismantler_agent, 
retailer_agent, and auctioneer_agent, Auction Session 3 has a 
new agent set, that is, mobile_agent and its characteristics are 
described as below: 
• 
Mobile_Agent: mobile_agent acts as the EoL 
product owner. Basically a mobile_agent is capable 
of moving over a network, such as the Internet, while 
interacting with foreign hosts, gathering information 
on behalf of the user and returning to the user after 
performing its assigned duties. 
In general, Auction Session 3 works is this way: when a 
mobile_agent publish a piece of EoL product information, 
different 
bidder 
agents 
such 
as 
retailer_agent, 
dismantler_agent and 3PRLP_agent will submit their bids 
privately and the highest bidder will eventually win the 
auction and pays his own bidder. 
Meanwhile, in order that multiple sellers and multiple 
buyers can trade simultaneously, CDA (Continuous Double 
Auction) mechanism is selected as a connection between 
different auction sessions. In CDA setting, buyers and sellers 
can continuously update their bids and asks at any time 
throughout the trading period.  
B. Agent Architecture 
In a trading framework agents must interact with each 
other, selling and buying resources. Trading agents should 
sell for the higher proposal and vice-versa for buying. Each 
negotiation consists of a sequence of interactions [6] and thus 
each committee of agents can be viewed as a player in a 
game [7]. Basically, every agent consists of knowledge and 
capability packages, each of which is tailored according to 
the agent’s specific role. An auction-based e-RL mainly 
recognizes eight sets of agents, namely, auctioneer_agent, 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

core_request_agent, 
search_agent, 
advertise_agent, 
3PRLP_agent, 
dismantler_agent, 
retailer_agent, 
and 
mobile_agent. They belong to two types of agents 
respectively: auctioneer-type agent and bidder-type agent.  
In an auctioneer-type agent, the knowledge package 
contains the information in the agent’s memory about the 
environment and the expected world. This includes the agent 
self-model, other agents' model, goals that need to be 
satisfied, possible solutions generated to satisfy each goal, 
and the local history of the world that consists of all possible 
local views for an agent at any given time. The agent’s 
knowledge also includes the agent's desires, commitments 
and intentions toward achieving each goal [8]. The capability 
package includes the reasoning component, the domain 
actions component which contains the possible set of domain 
actions that when executed the state of the world will be 
changed, and the communication component where the agent 
sends and receives messages to and from other agents and 
the outside world. The architecture of auctioneer-type agent 
is show in Figure 4 (a).  
 
 
Figure 4.  Architecture of auctioneer-type and bidder-type agent. 
When bids via agents’ communication messages coming 
from the bidder-type agents through the communication 
component assigns a goal-state. The problem-solver 
component is responsible for the collection of bids and the 
winner determination process to allocate the item or bundles 
and their respective prices. Through the interaction 
component, the auctioneer-type agent sends out an “accept” 
message at the beginning of auction session informing the 
supplier-agent that the auction will be carried on its behalf. 
Once the auction ends, the outcome must be reported to all 
participants. This information is encapsulated in outgoing 
messages and sent to the outside world through the 
communication component. 
The role of the bidder-type agent is to express its 
preferences in bid format and sends “bid” messages out to 
the auctioneer-type agent. The problem solver component 
contains a bid class that implements a cyclic behavior in 
order to respond to incoming messages from the auctioneer-
type agent that requests bids. This class implements all the 
bidder-type agents’ tasks such as registrations and bid 
valuations. Similarly, as shown in Figure 4 (b), the bidder-
type agent is designed using the same agent architectural 
principles.  
The bidder-type agent interacts with the consumer via a 
user-interface designed to express the atomic bids as well as 
constraints that signify which item/bundle is mutually 
exclusive. The formulated bid represents the body of the 
agent’s communication message that will be sent to the 
auctioneer-type agent via the communication module. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented an ongoing research on developing 
a robust architecture of e-RL for meeting RMTO 
requirements. 
By 
integrating 
advanced 
information 
technologies, this framework provides the users with a more 
convenient option of discarding EoL products, and in the 
meantime, the framework also allows RMTO practitioners to 
take decisions on accepting or rejecting customers’ demand 
in a more real-time manner.   
During the development of the online auction based and 
MAS supported solution for proposed e-RL model, several 
difficulties were faced by the authors. The first one was 
related with a lack of commercial available module that 
would be able to translate end users’ RFID data into 
appropriate events (i.e., pieces of EoL products information). 
But according to the literatures, an open source solution 
called LogicAlloy [9] has been selected as an RFID 
application level event middleware. LogicAlloy collects and 
filters the raw data from RFID readers, generates electronic 
code report and then subscribes the report into other 
applications. Furthermore, in order to assess the EoL 
products 
(i.e., 
core 
remanufacturability 
evaluation), 
remanufacturers have to access EPCIS (EPC Information 
Service) database. Currently, such EPCIS repository does not 
exist. Therefore, another choice of open source software 
compliant with the EPCIS standard called Fosstrak EPCIS 
Repository [10] was made in this research. The third 
difficulty was to model and simulate the proposed solution 
for e-RL model. By balancing the usability and functionality, 
NetLogo [11] was chosen in this work. As an agent-based 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

complex system modeling software environment, NetLogo 
offers modelers the opportunity to give hundreds or 
thousands of “agents” all operating independently. This 
makes it possible to explore the connection between the 
micro-level behavior of individuals and the macro-level 
patterns that emerge from the interaction of many 
individuals. It is believed that through the aforementioned 
steps, the feasibility of e-RL can be demonstrated. 
As a future work, the authors intend to develop a 
comparison scheme to validate the effectiveness of e-RL in 
contrary to TRL. The building blocks of this scheme must be 
able to show that: (1) the customers’ willingness-to-return 
rate has been improved which can be measured by consumer 
happiness index; (2) the response delay has been largely 
reduced in the context of RMTO and (3) the cooperation 
degree among various EoL product collectors has been 
increased. 
The current version of this research services as an 
architectural description and main features’ explanation of 
proposed e-RL. It is believed by combining aforementioned 
future work plan, the e-RL could permit a robust use of 
RMTO strategy which, in turn, will make a better 
contribution to EoL product recovery management. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially supported by National Research 
Foundation (NRF), South Africa and Dean’s Office, Faculty 
of Engineering and the Built Environment, University of 
Johannesburg, South Africa. The authors also gratefully 
acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions of the 
reviewers, which have improved the presentation. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Xing, W. -J. Gao, K. Battle, F. V. Nelvamendo, and T. Marwala, 
“Artificial intelligence in reverse supply chain management: the state 
of the art,” Proc. of the Twenty-First Annual Symposium of the 
Pattern Recognition Association of South Africa (PRASA 2010), 
Stellenbosch, South Africa, November 2010, pp. 305-310. 
[2] B. Xing, W. -J. Gao, K. Battle, F. V. Nelvamendo, and T. Marwala, 
“e-Reverse logistics for remanufacture-to-order: architecture design,” 
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment (FEBE), 
University of Johannesburg, South Africa, Report: FEBE-2011-June-
01, 2011, unpublished. 
[3] A. Nandi, "Input control strategies for make-to-order manufacturing 
systems via order acceptance/rejection," PhD Thesis, Department of 
Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 2000. 
[4] F. Pérès and D. Noyes, “Envisioning e-logistics developments: 
making spare parts in situ and on demand State of the art and 
guidelines for future developments,” Computers in Industry, vol. 57, 
2006, pp. 490-503. 
[5] S. Dowlatshahi, “Developing a theory of reverse logistics,” Interfaces, 
vol. 30, May-June 2000, pp. 143-155. 
[6] P. Mariano, et al., “Simulation of a trading multi-agent system,” Proc. 
of IEEE Int. Conf. on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC 2001), 
Tucson, Arzon, USA, October 2001, pp. 3378-3384. 
[7] T. Marwala, et al., “Scalability and optimisation of a committee of 
agents using genetic algorithm,” Proc. Fourth Int. ICSC Symposium 
Soft computing and Intelligent Systems for Industry (SOCO/ISFI 
2001), Paisley, Scotland, United Kingdom, June 2001, pp. 1-7. 
[8] H. Ghenniwa, J. Dang, M. Huhns, and W. Shen, “eMarketplace 
model: an architecture for collaborative supply chain management 
and integration,” in Multiagent based supply chain management. vol. 
28, B. Chaib-draa and J. P. Müller, Eds. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2006, pp. 29-62. 
[9] LogicAlloy, <http://www.logicalloy.com> 25.09.2011 
[10] Fosstrak EPCIS Respository, <http://www.fosstrak.org> 25.09.2011 
[11] U. Wilensky, “NetLogo (4.1 ed),” Center for Connected Learning and 
Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL., 
<http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/> 25.09.2011   
  
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

