Modeling and Visualization of Cataract Ontologies 
- A prototypical application in ophthalmic hospitals - 
 
Klaus Peter Scherer, Constantin Rieder, Christian 
Henninger, Markus Germann  
 Applied Computer Science 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,  
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 
klaus-peter.scherer@kit.edu 
Joachim Baumeister, Jochen Reutelshöfer 
denkbares GmbH 
Würzburg, Germany 
joachim.baumeister@denkbares.com
 
 
Abstract—For handling the complex ophthalmic knowledge 
concerning surgical cataract interventions on human eyes 
knowledge domains are modeled as ontologies to guarantee a 
consistent knowledge at each moment. The different 
ophthalmic knowledge domains are developed with special 
wiki models (Semantic Wiki KnowWe). Based on the concepts 
and the relations between these concepts, the knowledge is 
represented by a semantic network. For user specific 
comfortable 
handling 
of 
the 
information, 
different 
visualization methods are designed, realized and compared. 
The visualization aims to satisfy the needs of ophthalmic 
experts (clinical surgeons) as well the knowledge engineers. So, 
different approaches of visualization are shown and evaluated 
by the clinical partners of the project.  
Keywords-knowledge base; computer aided assistance; 
knowledge representations; visualization; wiki representation; 
surgical intervention; ontology modeling ;semantic net. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Concerning the complex surgical interventions on human 
eyes [1], it is very helpful for the clinical experts to get a 
support by a computer based knowledge system. Such a 
support system must guarantee a well-structured consistent 
information and a comfortable access to this information [2] 
[3]. The knowledge has to be formalized also for a logical 
reasoning process of the system. The final aim is to support 
the decision process of the ophthalmic surgeons by the 
visualized semantics. Different graphical visualization 
methods enhance the decision support of the doctors and 
enhance so the quality of the surgical process.  
In Section II, a short medical background for the cataract 
surgical interventions is illustrated. The complex situation 
leads to a knowledge based approach, which is performed by 
the ontologies in Section III. Section IV shows the most 
important concepts and relations, realized for the cataract 
situation. In Section V, the same ontologies are represented 
by different visualizations, which the surgeon can choose 
and switch, dependent on his demand. 
II. 
MEDICAL BACKGROUND 
     In the biomechanical system of the human eye, the 
intraocular lens is the most important component for the 
refraction process to focus the rays to the retina. Parallel to 
the human aging process there is no possibility to prevent a 
fix dark cloudy lens with medical treatments. Cataract 
surgical interventions on human eyes are the single method 
to replace the old dark cloudy human lens by a new clear 
artificial lens [1]. This is performed about 700.000 times per 
year only in Germany. On the market, a lot of lens systems 
with different haptics, optics, materials and power refraction 
values complicate the selection of the most appropriate 
system (Fig. 1). A special configuration and selection of a 
patient related lens system can guaranteed by a computer-
aided decision support system. 
III. 
CONCEPT OF ONTOLOGY SUPPORT 
        For the ophthalmic surgical assistance different 
knowledge domains are used as ontologies, realized as a 
network of concepts and special relations between these 
concepts [4]. In order to build a semantic net and provide 
the users more expressive types of knowledge, domain-
specific relation types between the so called concepts are 
created in the ontology network:  
“subconcept”: A refinement of the given concept, used to 
arrange the concepts in a hierarchical order. 
“has to”: Connection between complications, which may 
occur due the operation and their necessary treatments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Planning a special lens implantation. 
dark cloudy 
lens 
lot of lens 
types 
clear artificial 
implant 
op planning 
surgical process 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

“can”: A relation used to identify possible reactions to the 
given state of the patient. 
“cave”: This relation is used to connect concepts that 
should be urgently considered. 
The resulting ontology is formalized in the RDF vocabulary 
description language. 
IV. 
OPHTHALMIC ONTOLOGIES 
A. Knowledge concepts and relations 
     Fig. 2 shows a developed wiki-based knowledge concept, 
describing the domain “Augenuntersuchung Befund” (eye 
examination results) in its special structure. In an analogue 
way each concept is structured under the following two 
aspects. A custom concept definition markup defines a new 
concept of the ontology (A). A list of subconcepts defines 
the 
hierarchical 
structure 
of 
this 
given 
concept 
(“Unterkonzepte”) (C). Furthermore, relations of the 
selected concept within the semantic network can be defined 
(D). The informal description of the concepts is described in 
standard wiki syntax (E) [6]. 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
B. Realisation by special wikis 
    In the left panel of Fig. 2, a hierarchical collection of 
concepts is shown (H). It resembles a selection of the 
domain concepts from the ontology that recently were 
within the focus of the user, i.e., that have been used for 
editing or appeared on the visited documents. For the 
editing of the formalized parts of the content, i.e., the 
comma-separated lists of sub-concepts or other kinds of 
relations, the system enables drag-and-drop editing. Any 
concept within the left panel can be dragged onto a list of 
the document content and will be appended to it in the 
source text of the document. When a desired concept is 
currently not present in the left panel, it can be looked up 
using the search slot above it. The auto-completion 
functionality allows selecting the concept and adds it to the 
collection of concepts. In this way, the whole semantic 
network can easily changed by using drag-and-drop 
methods, while freedom and simplicity of document editing 
is retained [8]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The wiki document of the concept “Augenuntersuchung” with subconcepts and relations. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

V. 
VISUALISATION CONCEPTS 
Additionally to the wiki-based description of knowledge 
concepts and the relations, a good performed visualization 
enhances the fast understanding and leads to a better 
overview about the refinement structure of the semantic 
network and the relations within the net. The visualization 
methods are oriented at the different user interesting cases. 
As user requests by knowledge acquisition following results 
are found:  
- Obtain an overview of the knowledge base by reducing 
complexity by using visualization methods. 
- Obtain an overview of the processes and dependencies 
between procedure steps of ophthalmic surgery. 
- Browsing through the entire knowledge base to identify 
interesting spots. 
- Retrieve detailed information on special relations 
between concepts and procedure steps on demand. 
- Help the user to find quickly the category of a concept. 
Concerning these demands, the following visualizations are 
modeled and realized. 
  
A. Hierarchical forest Visualization 
The hierarchical forest visualization is a combination of 
the process history and the classical graph representation 
with hierarchical refinement (Fig. 3). This representation is 
very comfortable to combine time dependant concepts with 
the temporal relation ”before” or “after” and the “consists 
of” relation of a concept in the vertical direction. Based on 
this combined workflow-refinement concept, the user can 
find out the time scale, where special concepts are integrated. 
Furthermore a class-subclass structure is represented from 
each basic concept in the upper temporal process chairs. 
B. Circle Pack Visualization 
 As seen before the hierarchical view of concepts is well 
represented by a tree structure. However, the view becomes 
confusing very quickly by presenting the entire content of a 
large knowledge base. The tree diagram  
 
 
Figure 3.  Hierarchical Forest visualization. 
.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Circle Pack visualization. 
 
becomes too large when too many nodes and branches must 
be placed on a single page. Addressing those disadvantages, 
the Circle Pack visualization (Fig. 4) provides a useful 
alternative by representing hierarchical relations through 
containment. It is possible to see an overview of the overall 
structure and the position of a certain concept. Concepts are 
displayed as circles. Child-concepts are located inside their 
parents. 
C. Reingold Tilford tree 
The Reingold Tilford tree (Fig. 5) has advantages by 
concentrating the representation of many concepts with their 
relations on a very small space.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Reingold Tilford tree with radial orientation. 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

The semantic refinement, based on the subgraphes is 
performed by a radial orientation. The basic nodes are in the 
centre. 
The 
different 
sublevels 
are 
represented by 
concentrated circles around the superclass. The level of 
refinement is shown very directly. The semantic topology is 
the same as for the other representations, but the graphical 
visualization is different. 
D. Collapsle Tree 
A collapsible tree (Fig. 6) is a classical representation of 
hierarchical graphs, well known from the structure of 
explorer data files. This concept is accepted and very easy 
understandable. The hierarchical structure is based on the 
concepts and the refinement method by subconcepts. So, the 
information, embedded in concepts, can be refined to a very 
special subclass with specific features (attributes). This fact 
allows a very comfortable navigation on each semantic level. 
By selecting interactively a concept, the following subtree is 
expanded and the specialized subconcepts are graphically 
represented. Otherwise, concepts, not interesting at the 
moment can be retracted. The semantic relation is “consists 
of” with the inverse relation “belongs to”. 
     All visualizations try to implement the well-known 
visualization mantra by Shneiderman: Overview First, 
Zoom and Filter, Then Details-on-Demand [9]. The 
implementation was realized with the JavaScript library 
jsPlumb and with d3js. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The developed knowledge based assistance system is 
suitable to support the surgeon’s decision for complex 
cataract operations.  Especially the model of the knowledge 
continuum based on ontologies is responsible and necessary 
for a correct consistent enhancement of the knowledge 
domains. The different visualization methods are useful for 
the development of the ontology as well as for the   
 
Figure 6. Collapsible Tree visualization. 
 
application in user cases. Situation dependent and user 
dependent, classical hierarchical tree representations or 
semantic networks with their refinement possibilities are 
modeled and realized. They are used from the clinical 
experts (surgeons) in use of decision support and for tutoring 
system. The user has also the possibility to switch from one 
visualization model to another and can select the currently 
best for him. So, the user has a comfortable access to the 
information he needs. Because of that the ontology 
visualization models and their realization are accepted in the 
clinical process. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research and development of the proposed cataract 
surgical assistance system is funded by the national 
economical government of Germany. It is proposed to install 
a commercial clinical system based on the results of the 
presented prototype at clinical partners. The authors also 
thank the project executing organisation AiF in Berlin, which 
is responsible for the allocation of the budget to the research 
centre and the commercial company.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  A. 
J. 
Augustin, 
„Augenheilkunde“, 
Springer 
Verlag,            
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, ISBN 3-540-65947-1, 2001. 
[2]  R. Studer, R. Benjamins, and D. Fensel, “Knowledge 
engineering” in Principles and methods, Data and Knowledge 
engineering, vol. 25, 1988, pp. 161-197. 
[3]  V. R. Benjamins, D. Fensel, P. Gomez, and A. Perez, 
“Knowledge management through ontologies”, Proceedings 
on the Int. conf. on Praktical aspects of Knowledge 
management (PAKM 98), Basel, Schweiz, 1998.   
[4]  K. P. Scherer, “Hypothesis Generation in the context of an 
ophthalmic application”, Intern. Conf. on Applied Computer 
science, Genua, Italy, Oct. 2009, pp. 130-134.  
[5]  J. Baumeister, J. Reutelshoefer, and F. Puppe, “Engineering 
Intelligent Systems on the Knowledge Formalization 
Continuum”, International Journal of Applied Mathematics 
and Computer Science (AMCS), vol. 21, 2011. 
[6]  J. Baumeister, J. Reutelshöfer, and F. Puppe, “KnowWE: A 
Semantic Wiki for Knowledge Engineering”, Applied 
Intelligence, vol. 35, 2011, pp. 323-344. 
[7] M. 
Musen, 
“Automated 
generation 
of 
Model-Based 
Knowledge Acquisition Tools”, Pitman Publishing London, 
1989. 
[8]  M. Molina, and G. Blasco, “Using electronic documents for 
knowledge 
acquisition 
and 
model 
maintenance” 
in 
Knowledge Based intelligent Information and Engineering 
Systems, vol. 2774 of LNCS, Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2003, pp. 1357-1364. 
[9] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: a task by data type 
taxonomy for information visualizations”, in Proceedings of 
the IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, 1996,  pp. 336 - 
343. 
 
 
 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-354-4
ADVCOMP 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

