Higher Education Cloud Computing in Zimbabwe: Towards Understanding Trends 
of Adoption 
 
Maxmillan Giyane 
School of Computing, College of Science and Engineering 
University of South Africa 
Florida Campus, South Africa 
E-mail: giyanem@msu.ac.zw 
Sheryl Buckley 
Postnet Suite #35, P. Bag X1, Florida Hills, 1716 
 Florida, South Africa 
E-mail: sherbuck@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract – Cloud computing has gained attention in the field of 
Information Technology (IT). The technology has created new 
opportunities 
for 
many 
organisations 
worldwide.  
Organisations have adopted cloud computing due to its 
enormous economic benefits. Cloud computing can be used by 
the education sector as a computing solution required to 
deliver improved services to stakeholders. The majority of 
studies carried out are more biased towards business 
organisations. The educational sector has received little 
attention with regards to cloud computing technology. 
Therefore this study investigates the trends of adoption of 
cloud computing by Zimbabwe state universities. A sample of 5 
IT directors was selected from 5 universities under study. In-
depth interviews were used to uncover the trends of adoption 
of this cutting-edge technology. Literature was used to 
corroborate the findings. The encouraging factors and 
challenges confronting the extensive adoption and utilization of 
cloud services were also investigated. The results indicated that 
all the universities under study adopted cloud computing to a 
certain extent. The library services and anti-plagiarism 
systems were the major services adopted. The universities were 
though not fully enjoying the benefits of the technology due to 
bandwidth, security and privacy issues. The paper concludes 
by recommending strategies to mitigate the challenges being 
faced by universities. 
Keywords - Cloud computing; Cloud adoption; Zimbabwe state 
universities; Higher education. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Universities in developing countries face problems in 
acquiring the right type of technologies in order to execute 
tasks in an efficient and effective way. Distance learning is 
often affected by software and hardware which is limited 
and sometimes non-existent. State owned universities also 
suffer from inadequate funding by the Government. To 
reduce technology-driven overheads, while at the same time 
improving end-user productivity, a subscription-based 
model that provides computing utilities is adopted by many 
institutions. Computing solutions that do not involve huge 
initial capital investments and that have minimal difficulties 
in maintaining complex IT infrastructure are being opted for 
by a number of organizations.  
In order for universities to overcome their IT-related 
problems, cloud computing [1] is the solution they can 
implement. 
Cloud 
computing 
can 
help 
students 
communicate with lecturers within and outside universities 
[1]. Services, such as learning management systems, library 
management systems and document creation can be adopted 
at affordable costs [2][3]. According to Ding et al. [4], cloud 
computing technology can give support in online learning, 
virtual learning, distance learning and the assessment 
system in universities. Collaboration is facilitated and 
hardware, software and maintenance costs are reduced 
[5][6]. Virtual laboratories can be developed to improve 
students’ academic performance through cloud computing.  
The majority of research done in the field of cloud 
computing concentrated on business organisations and few 
studies have been done in the education sector [7][8][9]. 
Previous studies focused on the factors that influence the 
adoption of cloud computing in the education sector 
[5][10][11][12]. More empirical studies were called upon in 
the education sector by Hashin et al. [13]. Some state 
universities might have adopted cloud computing services in 
Zimbabwe, and there is need to investigate and understand 
cloud computing adoption trends, the reasons for adoption 
and the challenges faced by Zimbabwe state universities in 
the adoption and utilization process. 
In Section II, the specific objectives of the paper will be 
presented, Section III will shade light on the actual data 
gathering techniques that were used for the study. Section 
IV will describe related work and justify the reasons for 
undertaking this study so as to contribute more to the 
knowledge in the field of cloud computing. Section V 
presents a discussion of the findings obtained. In Section 
VI, a summary of the findings is explained. Section VII 
gives an overall conclusion and recommendations for future 
research in the education sector in relation to cloud 
computing in Zimbabwe. 
II. 
STUDY OBJECTIVES 
The aim of this study is to investigate cloud computing 
adoption trends in the higher education sector in Zimbabwe. 
The study concentrates on the 5 selected state universities. 
To achieve the main goal, the following are the specific 
objectives of the study: 
1. To determine the adopted cloud computing service by                      
each university under study.  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-506-7
ADVCOMP 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

2. To identify the delivery and deployment models that are 
currently adopted by the universities. 
3. To understand the major reasons for the adoption of cloud 
computing and challenges which hinder the utilization of 
this technology. 
4. To assess the technological readiness of each university. 
5. To recommend strategies to mitigate challenges faced by        
universities. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The case study approach was used to understand the 
adoption trends in Zimbabwe state universities. Having a 
total of 10 provinces in Zimbabwe, 5 provinces were 
conveniently chosen for the study and 1 university was 
purposively chosen from each province. An IT director from 
each university was interviewed and literature was used to 
corroborate the findings. The inquiry was qualitative and a 
relatively small sample was purposefully selected [14]. The 
identity of the chosen IT directors who participated in the 
study was made anonymous so as to get more information 
pertaining to the adoption trends in state owned universities 
of Zimbabwe [15]. Appointments were made with the 
directors and, due to their tight schedules, face-to-face 
interviews were conducted with only 1 IT director and the 
rest were telephone interviews. Semi-structured questions 
were used in the interviewing process and also follow up 
interviews were conducted for clarity sake. All interviews 
were recorded with the consent of the interviewee and later 
on transcribed into a document. 
IV. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Cloud Computing 
Cloud computing has received different definitive 
definitions from different researchers. No definition of 
cloud computing has been universally accepted, though the 
National Institute of Standards Technology (NIST) [16] 
definition is widely used since it offers a more detailed 
definition. In its broader sense, cloud computing is a model 
that offers IT services as computing utilities that are paid for 
per-use, and accessed through the Internet. The cloud has 5 
essential characteristics, 3 service/ delivery models and 4 
deployment models [16]. Fig. 1 depicts the essential 
characteristics of cloud computing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Essential characteristics of cloud computing [16] 
 
A consumer can access cloud services without support 
from the service provider (on-demand self-service), various 
devices with Internet capabilities can access the cloud 
services worldwide (broad network access), multiple users 
can access shared resources concurrently (resource 
pooling), services are flexible, they can expand or contract 
depending on the user’s demands (rapid elasticity) and 
lastly consumers pay for the services they would have used 
(measured service) [16][17][18]. 
Cloud computing can be delivered using Software-as-a-
Service (SaaS), Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) and 
Platform-as-a-Service [16][17][19]. Software packages that 
can be accessed through the web browser yet they reside on 
someone’s infrastructure fall under SaaS [18], computing 
power and hardware resources are delivered as a service to 
consumers under IaaS delivery model. In PaaS, a platform 
for 
designing, 
testing, 
debugging, 
deployment 
and 
implementation is offered to developers over the Internet 
[20]. 
B. Cloud computing in education 
Universities provide the necessary education that allows 
the economy of every nation to grow, decrease disparities 
among citizens and greatly reduce poverty. For universities 
to carry out their educational activities, they need resources. 
The appropriate hardware and software required is scarce or 
sometimes non-existent and cloud computing can be the 
right computing solution to alleviate the IT-related problems 
[10]. Cloud computing therefore can be used in teaching and 
learning activities [21]. Distance learning, online learning 
and formative assessment systems in universities can be 
supported by this cutting-edge technology. Students can 
communicate with lecturers or their peers regarding 
educational issues through communication tools such as 
Google hosted students and academic staff electronic mails 
(emails) [1][4][22]. Students in rural areas can be engaged 
in the learning process as long as they have an Internet 
connection and a gadget with the capability to access the 
“mother” of all networks, thereby bridging the digital 
divide. Cloud computing can then be used as a tool that 
supports collaboration in the education sector. Learning 
management systems, library management systems and anti-
plagiarism systems can also be supported by this technology 
[3][23][24]. The costs of acquiring appropriate software and 
hardware are therefore reduced, even the maintenance costs 
are minimised since a third party will be responsible for 
maintaining the outsourced hardware and software [5]. 
Students in the IT sector can develop, test, debug and 
deploy their applications over the Internet through the PaaS 
delivery model [20]. 
Previous studies indicate that the educational sector has 
few studies in cloud computing especially in resource 
constrained environments. In Zimbabwe, cloud computing 
has received few studies. The studies conducted concentrate 
on business organisations such as Small and Medium 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-506-7
ADVCOMP 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Enterprises (SMEs). Very little has been done in the 
education sector, yet education is the pillar of every nation. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. University A 
Results show that university A adopted cloud computing. 
The services adopted include Domain Name System (DNS) 
server, Google hosted students and staff electronic mails, 
electronic mail routing, anti-plagiarism system and library 
services 
(library 
management 
system, 
institutional 
repository and library management system backup). The IT 
director mentioned that the services were adopted due to the 
fact that the technology offers the service at any time and 
can be accessed through thick and thin clients over the 
Internet, the services open doors for advanced research and 
support offline usage. It can be noted that the delivery 
models that were adopted are SaaS and IaaS. The 
aforementioned library services, anti-plagiarism system and 
Google hosted staff and student electronic mails fall under 
SaaS. The library virtual server and the DNS server fall 
under IaaS. The university uses a hybrid deployment model, 
thus both the private and public model are used. The private 
model is used onsite and is used to service multi campuses 
of the university. Sensitive data of the university such as 
student records, registration details and student grades 
resides on an onsite server.  
Since the cloud services are accessed through the 
Internet, it was rendered imperative to assess the 
technological readiness of the university. Stakeholders of 
the university that use cloud services were noted to have 
adequate Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) equipment which included desktops, laptops, tablets 
and smart phones among other gadgets with Internet 
capabilities. Internet connectivity and its transmission speed 
was regarded as acceptable. A bandwidth of 750Mbps was 
found to be sufficient. The university uses optic fiber as a 
transmission medium and networking nodes are connected 
using a star topology, which is used as a backbone of the 
wireless network within the institution. It was also noted 
that the IT support staff was experienced and supported the 
users in an acceptable way. In terms of compatibility and 
complexity, the IT director highlighted that the technology 
is compatible with the technological infrastructure currently 
in place, the culture, work style and performance. The users 
of the services within the institution were said not to be 
aware that some services they are using are offsite. 
Though the technology was adopted there were some 
challenges that hindered the extensive adoption and 
utilization of this technology. The issue of limited 
bandwidth, sanctions and Internet services were mentioned 
as some of the challenges. If the issue of bandwidth is not 
addressed then utilization of the technology will be 
impossible. Some services are not offered in Zimbabwe due 
to sanctions imposed on the country and lastly cloud 
services depend on the Internet and if there is no connection 
then it will be difficult, if not impossible, to access the 
services. Economic sanctions limited trade and financial 
relations which crippled the Zimbabwean economy. The 
economic status of the country affected adversely the 
operations of the state owned universities. The monetary 
resources needed to support the innovation are scarce and 
some cloud services cannot be afforded by the state 
universities. 
B. University B 
University B adopted cloud computing technology; 
though not as many services as adopted by university A, the 
university managed to adopt the following services offered 
by the technological innovation: anti-plagiarism system and 
learning management system. The IT director vowed that 
though few services were adopted they were planning to 
adopt more cloud services but of interest the IT director did 
not have the knowledge on whether they had adopted cloud 
computing or not. The term cloud computing was still 
cloudy to the IT director. After in-depth interviews it was 
uncovered that the aforementioned services were actually 
adopted by the institution. It was noted that the delivery 
model adopted by university B was SaaS as evident by the 
anti-plagiarism and learning management system adopted. 
The hybrid deployment model was adopted by this 
institution, with the private cloud being used to store 
sensitive data while the public cloud being used to store less 
sensitive data. The major reasons for adopting the cloud 
services were reduced costs, infrastructure maintenance and 
reduced mobility. 
It was noted that the ICT equipment with Internet 
capabilities existed in the institution. The Internet 
connectivity was deemed reliable and a bandwidth of 
71Mbps was regarded sufficient since the institution has few 
users who consume the bandwidth. Optic fiber was used to 
connect the wired star network which works as the 
backbone of the wireless network. The IT director revealed 
that cloud computing was consistent with their culture, 
needs and past experience, and also users are embracing the 
technology without any difficulties. Limited bandwidth, 
security and reliable Internet connections were noted as 
challenges that hinder the adoption and utilization of the 
technological innovation fully.  
C. University C 
The library management system, institutional repository 
and the anti-plagiarism system are the services that the 
institution allowed a third party to host. The services fall 
under the SaaS delivery model. The institution uses the 
hybrid deployment model, as some services are hosted by a 
third party and some are hosted locally to service users in 
their geographically dispersed multi campuses. The 
adoption of the services was mainly due to reduced costs 
and transfer of the management to a third party. The IT 
director of this institution knew that some services were 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-506-7
ADVCOMP 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

hosted by a third party but the term cloud computing was 
still confusing and cloudy. 
ICT equipment that is required to access cloud services 
is possessed by the stakeholders, a bandwidth of 220Mbps 
was adjudged sufficient and IT support staff was seen to be 
experienced. The institution has a hybrid topology and it 
uses fiber optic and UTP cables as transmission media. The 
IT director vowed that users were using the services without 
any complications and also the technology was compatible 
with their work style and culture which in turn improved 
performance. Resistance from other users who fear 
technology, limited bandwidth and capacity were seen to be 
challenges that hinder the institution to fully enjoy the 
benefits of the technological innovation. 
D. University D 
The institutional repository, international databases and 
an anti-plagiarism system are the services that are leased 
from the cloud service provider. The institution once 
adopted a learning management system but subsequently 
resorted to an in-house developed e-learning platform. The 
reason towards resorting to an in-house e-learning system 
was that leasing the system from a third party was more 
expensive than employing a full time specialist. The 
institution is also planning to adopt Google hosted student 
e-mails. The services adopted fall under the SaaS delivery 
model. The deployment model currently being used is the 
hybrid model; a private cloud is used to service the five (5) 
campuses of the institution. The technology was seen to be 
compatible with the existing infrastructure, norms and 
values, work style and performance. The users of the 
services do not face challenges in using them which means 
the technology is not complex.  
ICT equipment which can connect to the Internet is 
available within the institution, a bandwidth of 65Mbps was 
said to be sufficient and the institution uses fiber optic as a 
medium for transmission. Internet dependency, limited 
bandwidth and lack of foreign currency were seen as major 
factors negatively affecting the effective utilization of the 
technology.   
E. University E 
University E adopted the following cloud services; web 
hosting, library services and an anti-plagiarism system. Lack 
of adequate resources and low costs forced the institution to 
adopt the cloud services. SaaS and PaaS delivery models 
were adopted whereby web hosting falls under PaaS and the 
remaining services fall under SaaS. A hybrid deployment 
model is used by the university, the private cloud is used to 
service the institution’s multi campuses and that is where 
more sensitive data resides. The technology was adjudged 
compatible with the culture and work style and users were 
using its services easily. 
In order to use the cloud services, the stakeholders have 
got a variety of ICT gadgets that can connect to the Internet. 
The institution uses optic fiber as a transmission medium. 
The Internet can be accessed from both a wired and a 
wireless mode. The IT director revealed that the current 
bandwidth of 150Mbps was inadequate and the institution is   
planning to increase it. The issue of limited bandwidth was 
seen as a hindrance towards the utilization of cloud 
computing technology. 
VI. 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 
All the universities under study adopted cloud 
computing and the major services adopted included library 
services and anti-plagiarism systems. In support of this 
[3][23][24] state that the services that are mainly adopted by 
institutions of higher learning are library management 
systems and learning management systems. The findings of 
this research showed that learning management systems are 
not widely adopted by state owned universities in 
Zimbabwe. A single university adopted the learning 
management system but it is no longer using it. The 
universities under study adopted the SaaS delivery model. 
Organisations mainly adopt SaaS delivery model [25][26]. 
Organisations in Zimbabwe mainly adopted communication 
applications which fall under SaaS delivery model [27]. In a 
study conducted in Nigeria, it was found out that 
universities adopted IaaS, PaaS and SaaS with a proportion 
of 10%, 20% and 70% respectively [28]. It was realised that 
all universities adopted SaaS, university A added IaaS and 
university E also added PaaS.  
The hybrid deployment model was adopted by all 
universities investigated in order to separate data. Business 
critical data and services are hosted on a private cloud and 
non-business critical data and applications are hosted on the 
public cloud. The result was supported by other scholars 
[17][29]. 
All 
universities 
were 
adjudged 
to 
be 
technologically ready, ICT equipment with Internet 
capabilities was seen to be available, the Internet was easily 
accessible through a wired and wireless mode and technical 
support was available to give support on the cloud service. 
A different view was reported by a study which realised that 
the accessibility and availability of the ICT infrastructure is 
not enough and sometimes does not exist in universities 
[30]. 
Universities adopted cloud services but they have not 
fully enjoyed the benefits brought by the technological 
innovation due to some challenges. Bandwidth is a major 
challenge. This was also reported in a study by [31]. 
Security and privacy are also issues that affect the full 
utilization of cloud computing. Universities lack trust of 
cloud services offered by the cloud as witnessed by the 
adoption of the hybrid deployment model. Universities also 
have problems with reliable Internet connections due to 
various problems like power shortages that affect the nation 
as a whole. Some applications also cannot run on the cloud 
and some services are not offered in Zimbabwe. Table 1 
shows an overview of the key findings. 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-506-7
ADVCOMP 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. OVERVIEW OF THE KEY FINDINGS 
 
 
University A 
University B 
 
University C 
University D 
University E 
Adopted 
cloud 
computing? 
YES 
YES 
 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Services 
Adopted 
DNS server, e-
mail, e-mail 
routing, anti-
plagiarism 
software, Library 
Management 
System, 
institutional 
repository, LMS 
backup 
Learning Management 
System, anti-plagiarism 
software. 
 
Library services, 
anti-plagiarism 
software. 
Library services, 
institutional 
repository, 
international 
databases, anti-
plagiarism 
software. 
Web hosting, 
library services, 
anti-plagiarism 
software. 
Delivery 
models 
adopted 
SaaS and IaaS 
SaaS 
 
SaaS 
SaaS 
SaaS and PaaS 
Deployments 
models 
adopted 
Hybrid 
Hybrid 
 
Hybrid 
Hybrid 
Hybrid 
Reasons for 
adoption 
Virtual continuous 
operation, 
advanced research, 
offline usage. 
Reduced costs, 
infrastructure 
maintenance and 
mobility 
 
Affordable 
services, easy 
maintenance 
Availability of 
services on time 
of need. 
Lack of adequate 
resources, reduced 
costs 
Gadgets 
available 
Desktops, laptops, 
tablets, smart 
phones 
Desktops, laptops 
mobile phones, PDAs 
 
Laptops, desktops, 
smart phones, 
tablets 
Desktops, 
laptops, tablets, 
smart phones 
Desktops, laptops 
mobile phones, 
tablets 
Bandwidth 
750Mbps 
71Mbps 
 
220Mbps 
65Mbps 
150Mbps 
Transmission 
medium used 
Fiber optic 
Fiber optic 
 
Fiber optic and 
UTP 
Fiber optic 
Fiber optic 
Network 
Topology 
Star topology 
Star topology 
 
Hybrid topology 
Star topology 
Star and Ring 
topology 
IT Support 
staff 
experience 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory  
Satisfactory  
Relative 
advantage 
Virtual continuous 
operation, Risk 
shifted to a third 
party, pay per use, 
increased 
production, access 
to latest version of 
software, sharing 
of limited 
resources. 
Reduced costs, 
mobility, reduced 
workload. 
 
Easy access to 
resources, easy 
management. 
24-7 access to 
resources 
Reduced costs, 
pay-per-use, 
sharing limited 
resources. 
Challenges 
Bandwidth, 
Sanctions and 
Technology 
affected by 
absence of Internet 
Services. 
Bandwidth, Security, 
reliable Internet 
connections. 
 
Resistance by staff 
members, lack of 
funds, bandwidth. 
Absence of 
Internet services, 
misuse of the 
Internet, 
bandwidth, lack 
of funds. 
Limited 
bandwidth , 
interfacing 
Compatibility 
Compatible 
Compatible 
 
Compatible 
Compatible  
Compatible 
Complexity 
Technology is easy 
to use.  
Learning the technology 
usage is 
straightforward. 
 
Technology is not 
complicated. 
Technology is 
easy to use. 
Technology is 
easy to understand 
and use. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-506-7
ADVCOMP 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

VII. CONCLUSION, RECOMMENDATIONS AND FURTHER 
STUDY 
It is evident that Zimbabwe state universities adopted 
cloud computing technology, but they are not fully utilizing 
the technology due to some challenges being faced. All 
universities currently adopted SaaS service model due to 
reduced initial investments, reduced maintenance costs, 
reduced licensing costs and availability of services at any 
given moment in time. The hybrid deployment model was 
adopted by the universities since they do not trust the cloud 
with their institutional data. It was established that the 
universities were technically ready since they possessed the 
ICT equipment which is used to access cloud computing 
services. It was also noted that some IT directors had little 
knowledge about cloud computing, they adopted the 
services without background information about the 
technology. Sometimes universities adopt cloud services 
without proper planning, thus adopting the technology 
without forecasting what the future holds. The stumbling 
blocks that emerged were security concerns, limited 
bandwidth and lack of reliable Internet connections. These 
challenges negatively affect the full utilization of cloud 
computing. 
Based on the findings, it is recommended that before 
universities adopt cloud services, they should engage the 
end users of the services. The users should be aware of the 
impending developments so that they understand the 
concept and realise the importance of the technology, as 
well as the skills required to use the services. IT directors 
and decision makers should also be sent to conferences, 
seminars and workshops so that they gain the required 
knowledge of this emerging technology.  Collaboration is 
critical among universities where knowledge about this 
technology can be shared. Since users login to access cloud 
services, they should be allocated the bandwidth to use so 
that they do not misuse the available bandwidth. Different 
fund raising projects should be undertaken by universities so 
that they sustain themselves to a certain level rather than 
relying 
on 
funds 
from 
the 
Government. 
Forming 
partnerships with organizations in developed countries can 
help in acquiring skills and raw materials for projects, IT 
students can build and sell computers to raise funds to 
sustain the university. Students can develop applications and 
test them using Google cloud which is a cost-effective 
technology that can be adopted by universities. To mitigate 
high bandwidth costs, universities can invest in Google 
University Access Program. Further study should seek to 
develop a cloud computing security model that would work 
between the universities and service providers in order to 
ensure a secure cloud and increase trust. A cloud computing 
adoption framework can also be developed so that 
universities follow a step by step approach in the adoption 
process.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank all the Registrars from the 
universities where data was gathered for approving our 
requests to carry out this study. Special mention goes to the 
IT directors who participated in this study, the information 
they provided was of great value. Lastly, we thank Mr T. G. 
Rebanowako for language editing this paper. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. S. Lee and R. D. Mautz Jr, “Using cloud computing to 
manage costs,” Journal of Corporate Accounting & Finance”, 
23(3), pp. 11-15, 2012. 
[2] E. Aljenaa, F. S. Al-Anzi, and M. Alshayeji, “Towards and 
efficient e-learning system based on cloud computing,” In 
Proceedings of the Second Kuwait Conference on Eservices 
and E-Systems, pp. 13-18, 2011. 
[3] Y. Han, “On the clouds: a new way of computing,” 
Information Technology and Libraries, vol. 29, pp. 87-92, 
2010. 
[4] Q. Ding, X. Li, Y. Liu, and Z. Shi, “Research on remote 
collaborative engineering practices for Master of Software 
Engineering based on cloud computing environment,” In 
Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEE&T), 
2012 IEEE 25th Conference on, pp. 110-114, 2012. 
[5] M. Mircea and A. I. Andreescu, “Using cloud computing in 
higher education: A strategy to improve agility in the current 
financial crisis,” Communications of the IBIMA, pp. 1-15, 
2011. 
[6] S. Stein, J. Ware, J. Laboy, and H. E. Schaffer, “Improving K-
12 pedagogy via a Cloud designed for education,” 
International Journal of Information Management, 33(1), pp. 
235-241, 2013. 
[7] N. Lim, A.  Gronlund, and A. Andersson, “Cloud computing: 
The beliefs and perceptions of Swedish school principals”, 
Computers & Education, 84, pp. 90-100, 2015. 
[8] H. Gangwar, H. Date, and R. Ramaswamy,  “Understanding 
determinants of cloud computing adoption using an integrated 
TAM-TOE model”, Journal of Enterprise Information 
Management, 28(1), pp. 107-130, 2015. 
[9] C. K. Flack and P. Dembla, “Influence of Cloud-Based 
Computing on User Productivity”, pp. 1-7, 2014. 
[10] M. Giyane and S. Buckley, “Cloud Computing Adoption in 
Zimbabwean 
State 
Universities: 
An 
Empathetic 
Examination”, IST-Africa 2015 Conference Proceedings, Paul 
Cunningham 
and 
Miriam 
Cunningham 
(Eds), 
IIMC 
International Information Management Corporation, ISBN: 
978-1-905824-50-2, 2015. 
[11] H. S. Hashim and Z. B. Hassan, “Factors that influence the 
user's adoption of cloud computing services at Iraqi 
universities: An Empirical Study”, Australian Journal of Basic 
and Applied Sciences, 9(27), pp. 379-390, 2015. 
[12] C. Low, Y. Chen, and M. Wu, “Understanding the 
determinants of cloud computing adoption”, Industrial 
management & data systems, 111(7), pp. 1006-1023, 2011. 
[13] H. S. Hashim, Z. B. Hassan, and A. S. Hashim, “Factors 
Influence 
the 
Adoption 
of 
Cloud 
Computing: 
A 
Comprehensive Review”, International Journal of Education 
and Research 3(7), pp. 295-306, 2015. 
[14] M. Q. Patton, “Qualitative evaluation and research methods,” 
SAGE Publications, inc., 1990. 
[15] H. Simons, “Case study research in practice,” SAGE 
publications, 2009. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-506-7
ADVCOMP 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

[16] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing,” Gaithersburg: Computer Security Division 
Information Technology Laboratory National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, 2011. 
[17] C. Harding, “Cloud Computing for Business-The Open Group 
Guide,” Van Haren, 2011. 
[18] B. Williams, “The economics of cloud computing,”  Cisco 
Press, 2012. 
[19] The Defense Science Board, “Cyber Security and Reliability 
in a Digital Cloud”, Washington, D.C.: Office of the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and 
Logistics, 2013. 
[20] H. S. Lamba and G. Singh, “Cloud Computing Future 
Framework for e-management of NGO's,” arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1107.3217. 2011. 
[21] L. M. Vaquero, “EduCloud: PaaS versus IaaS cloud usage for 
an advanced computer science course”, IEEE Transactions on 
Education, 54(4), pp. 590-598, 2011. 
[22] Z. Guoli and L. Wanjun, “The applied research of cloud 
computing platform architecture in the E-Learning area”, In 
Computer and Automation Engineering (ICCAE), 2010 The 
2nd International Conference on (Vol. 3, pp. 356-359), IEEE, 
2010. 
[23] M. Al-Zoube, “E-learning on the cloud. International Arab 
Journal of E-Technology, 1(2), pp. 58-64, 2009.  
[24] H. Kan, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, and N. Qi, “Research on library 
management system for CDs attached to books based on 
Cloud Computing,” In Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work in Design (CSCWD), 2010 14th International 
Conference on pp. 744-747, IEEE, 2010. 
[25] C. Hinde and J. P. Van Belle, “Cloud computing in South 
African SMMEs: Risks and rewards for playing at altitude,” 
International Journal of Computer Science and Electrical 
Engineering, 1(1), pp. 1-10, 2012. 
[26] A. Rath, S. Mohapatra, S. Kumar, and R. Thakurta, “Decision 
points for adoption cloud computing in small, medium 
enterprises (SMEs),” In Internet Technology and Secured 
Transactions, 2012 International Conference for, pp. 688-691, 
IEEE, 2012. 
[27] T. G. Zhou, C. Gosho, and M. Giyane, “Cloud Computing 
Adoption and Utilization amongst Zimbabwean NGOs: A 
Case of Gweru NGOs,” International Journal of Science and 
Research (IJSR) ISSN (Online): 2319-7064, 2014. 
[28] C. A. Oyeleye, T. M. Fagbola, and C. Y. Daramola, “The 
Impact and Challenges of Cloud Computing Adoption on 
Public Universities in Southwestern Nigeria,” International 
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 
5(8), pp. 13-19, 2014. 
[29] M. Biddick “A Walk in the Clouds. Information Week 
Analytics Reports,” Manhassett, NY: United Business Media 
Limited, 2008. 
[30] G. Muriithi and E. Kotze, “Cloud computing in higher 
education: implications for South African public universities 
and FET colleges,” In 2012 Conference, pp. 4-24, 2012. 
[31] M. J. Mohlameane and N. L. Ruxwana, “The Awareness of 
Cloud Computing: A Case Study of South African SMEs,” 
International Journal of Trade, Economics and Finance, 5(1), 
pp. 
6, 
2014.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-506-7
ADVCOMP 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

