CLINIC: A Web Healthcare Management System for Enhancing Clinical Services
Ahmad R. Qawasmeh, Dema Awni, Raghad Mohammed, Rufaida Sabri, Ghydaa Ahmad
Department of Computer Science
The Hashemite University
Zarqa, Jordan
Email: ahmadr@hu.edu.jo, Owais.dema96@gmail.com, raghad-aboawais@bayt.net,
rufaida.sabri@yahoo.com, ghydaaah22@yahoo.com
Abstract—Clinic systems have become widely used nowadays by
everyone involved in the medical ﬁeld. These systems can be
either desktop applications, Web applications, or even mobile
applications. However, most of the currently available systems
are either limited to one clinic, hospital or organization, restricted
in terms of usability, hard to maintain and modify, or lacking
important communication features. In this work, we propose an
open-source medical Web application called CLINIC targeting
patients and clinicians worldwide. CLINIC allows clinicians to
register upon identity veriﬁcation. It enhances patient-clinician
communication and provides new useful services that include,
but are not limited to secure registration by patients and
doctors, secure storage of patients’ records, instant chatting for
consultation, helpful medical articles and ﬁrst aid tips, and user-
friendly interface. CLINIC has good potential to become widely
used because of its new features, services, and ambitions.
Keywords–Clinic system; Performance analysis and improve-
ment; Patients monitoring; Healthcare management system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Clinic systems have been growing rapidly in the last few
decades to provide better healthcare for patients via reliable
computer-based applications. Clinic systems are responsible
for the management of a healthcare facility while meeting the
high standards of security, functionality and technology that
must be associated with patients’ medical records.
According to [1], a healthcare system contains four nested
levels: (1) the patient; (2) the care team (e.g., physicians,
pharmacists, family members, etc); (3) the organization (e.g.,
clinic, hospital, etc.); and (4) the political and economic
environment (e.g., regulations, ﬁnancial payment methods).
Any computerized healthcare system should adapt to the
aforementioned levels in one way or another.
Due to the massive growth of modern computer-based
methods, it has become much easier to simplify the difﬁculty of
maintaining patients’ manual records by computerizing them.
This computerization process has many advantages that include
efﬁcient patient data retrieval and sharing, secure data protec-
tion, conﬁdential accessing, better clinic productivity, and low
management costs while reducing human errors. While a clinic
system can be developed as a desktop application or mobile
application, Web applications can provide better features with
more convenient access. In terms of desktop applications,
they have to be installed separately on each computer while
also having a usability constraint depending on the physical
location where they are installed. On the other hand, mobile
applications overcome the aforementioned desktop constraints,
but convenient usability remains a big issue especially when
it comes to clinic systems where management is the main
concern.
In this work, we propose an open-source Web healthcare
application (CLINIC) that provides various features and ser-
vices commonly used and required in clinic systems. The
application offers a suitable environment for users (clinicians,
nurses, patients, and administrators), who are involved in the
healthcare process. Our application provides an interactive way
for communication between clinicians, nurses and patients,
while maintaining high standards of security and functionality.
CLINIC offers a variety of services to any clinician who needs
a reliable management system to his/her clinic.
The main motivation of this work lies in the following
points:
•
Clinicians need to have an interactive system that
allows them to manage and access the records of their
patients conveniently regardless of location or any
other constraints especially in the case of emergency.
•
Patients need a user-friendly system that allows them
to check the status of their cases, schedule a new
appointment, get information about clinicians, and
check the orders of their pharmacy medications and
labs while saving cost, time and effort.
•
Requesting a consultancy through common websites
may take so long. This makes online chatting very
useful and even necessary in urgent cases.
•
Maintenance, usability, security, cost and performance
are critical factors that must be handled efﬁciently by
any clinic system.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the
related work. Section 3 describes the methodology, implemen-
tation, and Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the proposed
system. Finally, Section 4 concludes our contributions and
mentions directions for the future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Different desktop, Web and mobile applications have been
developed to facilitate the process of healthcare all around the
world. These applications vary in terms of efﬁciency, usability,
reliability, and security. In this section, we tried to cover the
most recent and relevant clinic systems.
Hakeem [2] is a program that was developed to automate
the public healthcare sector in Jordan. Hakeem aims to provide
high-quality healthcare in Jordan via the implementation of an
Electronic Health Record (EHR) solution. Hakeem provides
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Figure 1. Main components of CLINIC
online access to medical history examinations, lab results,
clinic visit notes, etc. Clinicians can electronically access
medical records of patients by simply entering the patients
national ID number. While Hakeem facilitates the process
of healthcare, it lacks patients’ involvement and access to
their records. Altibbi [3] is a website that focuses on medical
consultancy. This website has more than 10000 registered
clinicians, who respond to patients queries in short time. It also
shows recent medical articles and news. However, consultancy
is not for free. OpenClinic GA [4] is an open-source Hospital
management Information System (HIS) that has been used
in more than 500 hospitals and clinics in many countries.
OpenClinic provides many healthcare modules that include
patient administration, ﬁnancial management, medical records
and imaging, among others. E-HAS [5] is an online-ofﬂine HIS
for Healthcare organizations. It provides various paid features
and modules. Medical Digital-Ray (MDR) free system [6] is a
healthcare system created to enhance the efﬁciency of medical
and administrative processes of small hospitals and clinics.
AMD [7] is an eye-specialized program that offers sim-
ulation of Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD), which
captures both the detailed operation of an eye clinic and the
broader social care of AMD sufferers.
There are other light-weight systems [8]–[11] that can be
used to maintain the records of patients in small clinics.
In contrast with the aforementioned apps, our application
is a free-access system that allows patients to get involved
in the healthcare process, while offering various beneﬁcial
management, administrative and communication features.
In terms of mobile applications, there are many apps, which
can be installed on both IOS and Android systems. Epocrates
[12] is being used by doctors to search for drug info, ﬁnd other
providers for consults and calculate beneﬁcial measurements.
Doximity [13] is the largest medical professional network in
the U.S used for communication, reading medical news, and
career management. Medscape [14] is another app that can be
used to look up medications and drugs, check medical news,
and more. As can be ﬁgured out, mobile apps are not designed
for clinic systems. However, they are beneﬁcial in terms of
measurements and medical news.
There are other applications that have been developed and
used in the context of clinic systems. However, we tried to
focus on the most recent and relevant ones.
III.
METHODOLOGY AND IMPLEMENTATION
As design is so important in any Web application, we
tried to develop an attractive graphical interface that provides
convenient way of interaction for clinicians/patients. In other
words, user can easily register in our application and choose
the required action depending on his/her permissions. Our
system responds by displaying the wanted information in a
user-friendly manner. Figure 1 shows the main components of
our proposed system.
In our application, we used Hyper Text Markup Language
(HTML), Cascade Style Sheet (CSS) and Java-script to design
the front-end environment, while using Personal Home Page
(PHP) for implementing the back-end functions and methods.
We also used MySQL to create our database, which consists
of 13 tables while taking into account the cardinality and
relationships among them.
A. User Interface
The home page of our application, shown in Figure 2,
contains four tabs reachable easily by the user. By clicking on
the “Doctors” tab, all registered clinicians will be displayed.
By clicking on the “Join us” tab, Figure 3 will be displayed.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

This ﬁgure contains two clickable images; one for clinicians
and the other for patients. Once the clinician clicks on his
image, he will be transferred to the page shown in Figure 4.
Figure 2. Home page
Figure 3. Join us page
Figure 4. Signup page with captcha
The clinician needs then to enter his doctor’s syndicate ID,
password and captcha letters and click on the Signup button.
A request will be sent to the admin page shown in Figure
5. The admin must verify the identity of the clinician by
contacting the doctor’s syndicate. Once the veriﬁcation process
is done, the admin allows the clinician to use the application
with all its features. The front-desk staff of any clinician can
help any patient to register in the application via his/her SSN.
Once the patient registers, his credentials will be saved in the
system to be used for any future visits. The last tab in the
home page is “Careers”, where any clinician can attach his
information and resume without the need for registration for
future consideration. The career page is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 5. Admin main page
Figure 6. Career request page
The clinician page, shown in Figure 7, has different activ-
ities. The clinician can add a medical record to any patient
upon treatment completion, as shown in Figure 8. The Orders
textbox can be one or more of pharmacy medications, labs
(e.g., Complete Blood Count CBS, Blood group, Kidney Func-
tion Test, etc), radiology (e.g., X-Ray or Ultrasound), and/or
Nursing (e.g., injections, nebulizer, wound change, etc). The
clinician can also add an article, view his/her patient(s) medical
history as shown in Figure 7, and check any online consultation
requested from him. A clinician can display his/her patients
records only. The clinician can view either all his/her patients’
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Figure 7. Clinician main page
Figure 8. Add patient’s record page
records, a speciﬁc patient’s record based on a speciﬁc SSN, or
patients’ records in a speciﬁc date.
Patient’s page is shown in Figure 9. Patient can check
his/her medical history by entering SSN. Each visit to any
clinician registered in CLINIC will be displayed with all the
details including date, orders, clinician name and address,
disease, and any comments from the corresponding clinician.
Patient can also check some updated medical articles, as shown
in Figure 10, and view some useful ﬁrst aid tips. Last but not
least, patient can request an online chatting consultation, as
shown in Figure 11. This online chatting is based on instant
messages sent from patients to available clinicians and vice
versa.
New healthcare features and activities can easily be added
to our application. The appointment scheduling module should
be added soon to make the application even more powerful and
reliable.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a Web-based application called
CLINIC. CLINIC was designed as an open-source clinic
Figure 9. Patient main page
Figure 10. Medical articles page
Figure 11. Request consultation page
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

system that can be used by patients/clinicians to facilitate
the process of healthcare management and administration.
CLINIC provides a free-access interactive environment and
meets the high-quality requirements of security, technology
and functionality. CLINIC comprises different modules that
cover many useful features and activities for both clinicians
and patients. CLINIC allows clinicians to manage and access
the records of their patients conveniently. It also authorizes
patients to check the status of their cases, get information about
clinicians, request online instant consultation, and check the
orders of their pharmacy medications and labs while saving
cost, time and effort. Last but not least, CLINIC demonstrated
promising results and hence it has the capability to be used on
a larger scale.
Path forward, we plan to integrate more modules such
as appointment scheduling into CLINIC. We also think that
making this app available on mobile phones should positively
affect its popularity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Hashemite University
for providing the required resources.
V.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. B. Ferlie and S. M. Shortell, “Improving the quality of health care
in the united kingdom and the united states: A framework for change,”
The Milbank Quarterly, vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 281–315, 2001.
[2]
Sprintive, EHS Electronic Health Solutions Technology for better
healthcare in Jordan, https://ehs.com.jo/hakeem-program, Accessed:
10-09-2018, 2018.
[3]
Altibbi, altibbi, https://www.altibbi.com/, Accessed: 10-09-2018, 2016.
[4]
frankverbeke, OpenClinic GA, https://sourceforge.net/projects/open-
clinic/, Accessed: 10-09-2018, 2018.
[5]
techdynamics, Hospital Management System Enterprise, https : / /
sourceforge.net/projects/enterrpise- hospital- system/, Accessed: 10-
09-2018, 2018.
[6]
digitalray, MDR Clinics - polyclinic system, https://sourceforge.net/
projects/medical-digital-ray/, Accessed: 10-09-2018, 2018.
[7]
sprossiter, AMD-HealthSocialCareSim, https://sourceforge.net/projects/
amdhealthsocialcaresim/, Accessed: 10-09-2018, 2018.
[8]
nasir031, Homeo Medica, https : / / sourceforge . net / projects /
homeomedica/, Accessed: 08-09-2018, 2018.
[9]
abolkog, zClinic, https://sourceforge.net/projects/zclinic/, Accessed:
09-09-2018, 2018.
[10]
macdonaldgeek, OpenPatientOS, https : / / sourceforge . net / projects /
patientosremade/, Accessed: 07-09-2018, 2018.
[11]
congvan, Patient Management System, https://sourceforge.net/projects/
patientms/, Accessed: 07-09-2018, 2018.
[12]
Epocrates, Epocrates, https : / / itunes . apple . com / us / app / epocrates /
id281935788?mt=8, Accessed: 06-09-2018, 2018.
[13]
Doximity Inc, Doximity - Medical Network, https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=com.doximity.doximitydroid&hl=en, Accessed:
06-09-2018, 2018.
[14]
WebMD, Medscape, https : / / itunes . apple . com / us / app / medscape /
id321367289?mt=8, Accessed: 06-09-2018, 2018.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-677-4
ADVCOMP 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

