Building Virtual Private Clouds with Network-aware Cloud 
J. Soares1,2, J. Carapinha1, M. Melo1,2, R. 
Monteiro1,2 
1Department of Exploratory Innovation 
Portugal Telecom Inovação 
Aveiro, Portugal 
{ joao-m-soares, jorgec, marcio-m-melo, romeu-r-
monteiro}@ptinovacao.pt 
Susana Sargento2 
2Instituto de Telecomunicações 
University of Aveiro 
Aveiro, Portugal 
susana@ua.pt
 
 
Abstract— Cloud computing presupposes on-demand network 
access to pool of computing resources. However, network 
access through the WAN is usually not compliant with any 
kind of service guarantees, including reliability, security and 
performance. In this work, two types of network services able 
to fulfill cloud requirements are presented. In addition, an 
extension of the Virtual Private Cloud concept is proposed by 
integrating these network services. Managing cloud and 
network resources in an integrated way is a need and an 
obvious challenge, thus resource management in such 
environment is a major focus. We identify the main inherent 
challenges in resource management and how they can be 
overcome. Further, an experimental platform is presented, 
along with a preliminary analysis of results. 
Keywords-cloud computing; cloud networking; virtual 
private cloud; network-as-a-service; connectivity-as-a-service.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today, the proliferation of broadband access gives users 
the possibility to use services available directly through the 
Internet, which represents a change of the paradigm for using 
applications and communicating, thus popularizing the so-
called Cloud Computing (CC). 
CC brings with it requirements at two different levels: at 
the cloud level, i.e. data centers; and at the network level, 
where required levels of performance, reliability and security 
must be guaranteed.  
So far, the cloud and the network have been seen as two 
separate entities in this picture, with the network playing a 
relatively minor role, mostly as provider of connectivity 
between the cloud resources and the user premises. We argue 
that, to provide assured levels of performance to cloud 
services, cloud and network resources need to be 
provisioned, managed, controlled and monitored in an 
integrated way.  
There are several reasons for the integration of network 
and cloud. First, the establishment of Service Level 
Agreements (SLA) is essential to encourage customers, 
particularly enterprises, to adopt cloud services. Today, the 
lack of reliability and performance guarantees is one of the 
main obstacles against the widespread use of cloud services. 
It is clear that these SLAs can only be implemented through 
network integration. Just like the Wide Area Network 
(WAN) component of enterprise networks is usually based 
on reliable managed network services such as Virtual Private 
Networks (VPNs), rather than the public Internet, there is no 
reason to believe that future enterprise cloud services will 
require a lesser degree of reliability and performance 
guarantees from the network. 
Secondly, it is essential that cloud properties such as 
elasticity and self-provisioning be also extended to network 
resources. Quite often, expanding or reducing cloud resource 
capacity, or provisioning new cloud resources, requires a 
corresponding reconfiguration of network resources, e.g. 
bandwidth admitted into the network. Today, by contrast, 
reconfiguration of network services is supposed to be 
relatively infrequent and usually involves a significant 
amount of manual effort. 
Thirdly, the dynamism of the cloud will often require live 
migration of resources (e.g. from a local enterprise data 
center to the cloud, or between two different sites of the 
cloud service provider) without interrupting the operating 
system and any noticeable impact on the running application. 
This requires IP addressing to remain unchanged after 
migration and all relevant QoS, security and traffic policies 
applied on network equipment (e.g. routers, switches, 
firewalls) to be adapted appropriately in real time.  
For the reasons stated above, it is clear that next 
generation of cloud services must handle network and cloud 
resources in an integrated way. This paper presents the 
concept of Cloud Networking (CN) to achieve this 
integration in the context of virtual private environments, 
and its resource management aspects to develop an 
integrated view and allocation of both network and cloud 
resources.  
 This paper is organized as follows. Section II 
summarizes relevant work in the area and how this work 
intends to progress, and section III presents how the concept 
of CN can be applied in the context of virtual private 
environments. Further, section IV provides an overview of 
the resource management challenges that arise in a CN 
environment. The experimental platform that embraces this 
approach is described in section V. Section VI describes how 
a Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) request is instantiated and 
also presents the prototyping results achieved so far to 
demonstrate the concept of CN. Finally, section VII provides 
general conclusions and indicates directions for future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Based on recent trends and evolvements, it is clear that 
the network will play a key role in the provisioning of cloud 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

computing services, by giving the necessary guarantees to 
access the cloud. The importance of this role will be 
increasingly evident. In this area, some research works have 
been presented in the literature, such as [2] where the critical 
impact of network performance on the applications is shown 
and an extension of [3] is presented based on a platform for 
provisioning of virtual infrastructures, to extend the 
traditional cloud paradigm to network provisioning. [4] 
presents a software-based network resource management 
system for VPCs, able to handle heterogeneous network 
equipment and proposes a virtual network point for 
multipoint network provisioning. 
The European Commission, through the Seventh 
Framework Programme (FP7), has also been supporting 
research in this area, FP7 Projects SAIL (Scalable & 
Adaptive 
Internet 
soLutions) 
[5] 
and 
GEYSERS 
(Generalised Architecture for Dynamic Infrastructure 
Services) [6] are two relevant examples.  
From the industry side, both standardization bodies and 
enterprise efforts have highlighted the need for cloud and 
network resources to be handled together. Verizon has been 
working on the extension of VPNs for Private Clouds and an 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Internet-Draft has 
been released on this matter [7]. Meanwhile, IBM already 
offers enterprises a cloud data backup supported by 
Verizon‟s VPN services. 
Although there are works on management addressing 
VPCs and others addressing virtual networks, there are few 
addressing the management of both in an integrated way. 
This paper addresses this subject and proposes an extension 
of the VPC concept to also provide WAN guarantees. A 
platform able to provide this VPC model is also presented in 
the paper. 
III. 
CLOUD NETWORKING FOR VIRTUAL PRIVATE 
CLOUDS 
Virtualization has been the key enabler of agility in data 
centers, which in turn led to the emergence of CC. The 
fundamental breakthrough offered by virtualization is the 
separation of operating systems (OSs) and applications from 
the underlying physical infrastructure.  
Applying the same concept to networks has been often 
advocated – by decoupling networks from infrastructure 
through virtualization, it should be possible to establish and 
reconfigure (virtual) networks with great flexibility, nearly 
on-demand. Network virtualization has been explored by 
different research initiatives in multiple contexts and 
application scenarios. The idea of on-demand provisioning 
of network services has been demonstrated in practice [9].  
Providing the network infrastructure with the ability to 
match the dynamism of the cloud would be required to 
overcome the problems and limitations identified in the 
previous section. From this point of view, network 
virtualization would be the perfect companion for 
virtualization in the data center, in order to build seamless 
end-to-end elastic and agile offer of cloud services. 
A virtual network (VN) is supposed to fully replicate the 
behavior of a physical network, from all points of view. 
While this replication may be useful in some cases (e.g. 
when the customer is itself a service provider), in most cases 
the effort of managing a VN is a burden that customers 
would prefer to avoid. 
Thus, just like the CC service model defines three basic 
services - Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS) and Software as a Service (SaaS) - we 
propose a similar approach for networks. From this 
perspective, we define two types of network services (Figure 
1): Network as a Service (NaaS) and Connectivity as a 
Service (CaaS). NaaS allows the user to request a network by 
specifying precisely the network topology, link bandwidths, 
routers‟ computing capacities, routing protocols, as well as 
possibly other features (e.g. physical location, security 
properties). As for CaaS, the user is provided with the ability 
to define, just like in VPNs, a set of customer edge 
equipments (CEs) (e.g. enterprise sites and possibility the 
cloud CE, however this latter does not necessarily needs to 
be defined) and certain characteristics such as bandwidth at 
ingress/egress points and routing protocols between the CE 
and the provider edge equipment (PE). Everything that runs 
inside the service provider network domain is not visible to 
the customer. 
 
Figure 1. Network layering model. 
Both network service options can be materialized in 
multiple ways. A fully virtualized network is the “natural” 
way to materialize NaaS, whereas managed VPNs (e.g.  
BGP/MPLS VPNs) are a typical example of CaaS. 
In this paper, we propose a solution that is able to 
embrace both types of network service. 
At this point it is useful to define the concept of VPC. In 
[8] a VPC is defined as “a combination of cloud computing 
resources with a VPN infrastructure to give users the 
abstraction of a private set of cloud resources that are 
transparently and securely connected to their own 
infrastructure”. In the context of this paper, we propose to 
generalize this concept, in order to embrace any kind of 
private network service, either materialized as a VPN, or as 
more advanced service types, including those based on fully 
virtualized networks. Moreover, a network service should 
allow the handling of network resources (e.g. bandwidth, 
add/remove a costumer site) with a certain level of freedom 
in order for it to keep up with the cloud. 
In order to address the coupling of both cloud and 
network services, the concept of CN was put forward. 
Similarly to CC, CN has no standard definition, but we can 
say that it goes beyond classical networks, encompassing on-
demand 
provisioning 
i.e. 
scalability, 
guaranteed 
performance, self-healing and extensible management. So 
CaaS
Connectivity as a Service
NaaS
Network as a Service
Site A
Site B
Site A
Site B
Cloud
Cloud
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

far, no real attempt to merge networking and cloud resources 
in a common framework has actually taken place. 
We pursue the concept of CN by envisioning a unified 
management framework for computing and communication, 
where the network operator can provide simultaneously the 
network and cloud resources (IaaS), in an integrated 
approach, optimizing overall resource allocations by 
considering network and computing resources as a unified 
whole. In this work, network services are materialized in 
VNs, however we do not exclude the possibility of other 
network approaches (e.g. VPN, OpenFlow). 
In the following section we identify what we consider to 
be the most important challenges to CN that resources 
management raises. 
IV. 
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD NETWORKING 
Bringing together network and CC resources so that users 
can access services in the cloud with guaranteed performance 
and reliability raises several challenges. The discovery, 
allocation, adaptation and re-optimization of resources, 
addressing simultaneously both network and cloud resources, 
are the main inherent challenges of resource management in 
CN. The management of these resources lays upon concepts 
of virtual resource mapping in the physical infrastructure 
with self-organized reconfiguration of resources, devices and 
associated network, according to the services and user 
requirements, policies (with respect to e.g. location) and 
changes in the infrastructure.  
 
Figure 2. Cloud Networking Management diagram. 
In Figure 2 we present a management block diagram 
composed by three main blocks: the Resource Management 
block (RM); the Fault Management block (FM); and an 
underlying block entitled Integrated view of resources 
(IVR). This work is focused on the RM and IVR. The former 
is composed by three sub-blocks: the Resource Discovery 
block (RD); Resource Allocation block (RA); and the 
Resource Adaptation & Optimization block (RAO). These 
sub-blocks will be detailed ahead. As for the latter, the IVR, 
it has the purpose of providing the upper blocks with the 
domain agnostic ability to view and interact with resources, 
whether they are cloud or network resources. Regarding the 
FM, it is illustrated in the picture to facilitate the 
interpretation of the management system, mainly regarding 
its interaction with the RAO sub-block. 
A. Resource Discovery (and Monitoring) 
A fundamental requirement in virtualized environments 
is the integrated view of the existing physical and virtual 
topologies, the resources‟ characteristics, as well as the status 
of all network elements and links. This knowledge can be 
provided either by a centralized or by a distributed approach 
[10]. 
Today the cloud, i.e. data centers, and the operator‟s 
network are two distinct domains which CN aims at 
integrating. However, there are boundaries that cannot be 
crossed as these domains will not be willing to share full 
information about their domain. In this approach, we assume 
to have access to network information such as topology and 
physical resources, as well as the ability to retrieve 
information on the virtual resources that the physical 
resources may host. On the data center side, we do not 
expect to have such detailed information, we rather expect to 
see a data center as a single node in the network with 
unlimited capacity and a set of associated information 
elements (similar to today‟s cloud services, e.g., instance 
types, available OSs, pricing, plus location).  
B. Resource Allocation 
Virtual resources should be provisioned and placed in an 
optimal location according to the available resources at the 
time of the request, based on a number of possible criteria 
from both cloud and network, e.g.: type of VMs and possible 
restriction on location of these VMs; latency, bandwidth 
topology, geographical places where users will access the 
service, and other possible restrictions. 
In order to map resources, a combined mechanism, able 
to perform balanced decisions taking into account the 
abovementioned requirements of both network and cloud 
resources, is needed. This mechanism must be able to 
determine a possible solution, i.e., physical hosts able to 
allocate the cloud resources which, at the same time, can 
have an associated network service able to fulfill the 
requirements in the access to the cloud. 
C. Resource Adaptation and Optimization 
With the dynamism of the cloud, reconfigurations and re-
optimizations become common operations, whether to cater 
for possible side effects of new virtual resources being 
instantiated and existing virtual resources being resized, 
released or migrated, business policies, or triggered by 
unexpected events (e.g. node or link failure). These 
unexpected events are triggered by the FM which is 
responsible for monitoring the resources, detecting faults and 
collecting performance metrics. 
Depending on the specific environment, actions can be 
taken at different levels: in the cloud, in the network, or in 
both. Thus, mechanisms are required for extending or 
moving cloud resources to other data centers, creating new 
network paths and reconfiguring existing ones (need for 
more bandwidth, less latency, failure, load balancing 
network resources). Those algorithms must decide on (1) 
when to reconfigure and (2) how to reconfigure. These 
decisions must be done based on information provided by the 
FM, or by an explicit request from the user. 
Resource Management
Fault management
Integrated view of resources
Resource 
Discovery
Resource
Allocation
Resource
Adaptation & 
Optimization
Request
Cloud resources
Network resources
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Towards this aim, the Network Virtualization System 
Suite (NVSS) presented in [9] was extended with the control 
and management of the Suite enabling now cloud (IaaS) and 
network services (NaaS and CaaS) to be provisioned 
together to meet the user‟s requirements, apart from its 
original feature, the deployment of VNs. The implementation 
work presented in this paper specifically targets the 
challenge of resource discovery (and monitoring) of cloud 
resources and resource allocation of both cloud and network. 
The next section gives an overview on the evolved NVSS. 
V. 
NETWORK-AWARE CLOUD SYSTEM SUITE 
The Network-aware Cloud System Suite (NCSS) is a 
platform 
that 
provides 
integrated 
deployment 
and 
management of cloud and network resources in a single tool. 
This platform is an evolution of NVSS [7], an experimental 
platform that provides VN design, embedding, creation, 
discovery, monitoring, and management. NCSS extends 
NVSS in two fundamental ways: it handles cloud resources 
(rather than just network resources) and CaaS (rather than 
just NaaS).  
 
Figure 3. NCSS Architecture 
NCSS is composed of 3 software modules: the Agent 
module, the Manager module and the Control Centre 
module. Their hierarchical decomposition can be analyzed 
on Figure 3. The Agent module is designed to run on 
network nodes („Net Agent‟), as well as on those acting as 
computing nodes („IT Agent‟), in order to act upon them and 
periodically gather data from them. The two types of Agents, 
besides interacting with each other, receive and send requests 
to the Manager, which is a centralized entity in charge of 
aggregating all Agents‟ knowledge and sending them 
commands. Additionally, the Manager also communicates 
with the Control Centre, which is the user‟s front-end, and 
provides him with graphical and simple to use VN creation, 
management, and monitoring functionalities.   
A. Functionalities 
The NCSS platform provides a set of main functionalities: 
distributed network and cloud resource discovery, network 
and cloud mapping and creation, network and computing 
monitoring, and network and cloud resource management. 
These functionalities are described below. 
1) Distributed Network and Cloud Discovery. 
Network and cloud resource discovery is not only an 
administrator‟s utility that provides a fast and easy way of 
viewing how the cloud resources and the network resources 
are been used and where they are been consumed, but it is 
also fundamental when embedding new cloud and network 
resources, since the embedding process requires an accurate 
and up-to-date view of the substrate and currently running 
cloud and network resources. 
 
Figure 4. Control Centre– VPC Requirement Example 
2) Network and Cloud Mapping and Creation 
The Control Centre module provides the user with means 
to create and embed new cloud and network resources in 
runtime. By selecting and placing either cloud or network 
resources, i.e. servers or routers, on the platform GUI and by 
connecting them with links, as depicted in Figure 4. The user 
can specify both cloud and network resource capabilities, 
CPU, RAM amount, location, number of interfaces and also 
perform network addressing configurations. 
The final step in creating a new set of cloud and network 
elements is to commit it to the Manager, which will then 
map it in the physical infrastructure. 
The embedding problem of cloud and network elements 
is a complex one, which requires a trade-off between 
computation time and embedding optimization. In order to 
lower the computational requirements, a heuristic mapping 
algorithm was developed, which aims to embed both types of 
elements taking into consideration both the load of physical 
links and load of network and computing nodes. 
3) Cloud and Network Monitoring 
Dynamic resource monitoring is fundamental to provide 
an accurate view of the state of both types of resources and 
to quickly react to failures or configuration problems. The 
implemented monitoring functions periodically update the 
information on resources; therefore it is possible to quickly 
identify diverse situations, such as failures and high resource 
usage. 
4) Cloud and Network Management.  
The management feature provides functionalities like the 
change of the resource state (i.e., reboot, shutdown, suspend 
or power up), the change of the assigned RAM memory in 
runtime and the deletion of either a single resource or a 
complete set of resources, which greatly simplifies the 
administrator work. 
The following section describes the process of 
establishing a VPC using the NCSS. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

VI. 
VIRTUAL PRIVATE CLOUD ESTABLISHMENT & 
EVALUATION 
The establishment of a VPC using the NCSS can be 
supported by a NaaS or CaaS. The process of establishing a 
VPC, from the moment a user requests a VPC until the 
moment it is ready to be enforced in the physical 
infrastructure, will be detailed in this section. Two VPC 
requests will be considered, one for NaaS and another for 
CaaS. In addition, results on the request‟s processing time 
are presented. Note that these results do not intend to 
perform any comparison between a VPC with NaaS and 
CaaS since they are two different services.  
The process of establishing a VPC supported by a NaaS 
service is divided in 6 main phases, as Figure 5 shows: 
request formulation; request conversion; resource discovery; 
node mapping; link mapping; node and link embedding. 
Phase 1 encompasses the formulation of a request, in which 
the user defines all resources: virtual servers (CPU, RAM 
and HDD); network topology and the characteristics of all 
nodes and links. The request is then sent to the Manager 
which first performs the conversion of the request from 
XML to a structured topology (phase 2). Moreover it is 
performed the resource discovery (phase 3), and the nodes 
and links are mapped (phase 4 and 5) using a mapping 
algorithm which considers both the occupation of physical 
nodes and links. Finally, the VPC is enforced (phase 6). 
Based on the tools already available in the NCSS, which 
already supported NaaS, we developed the necessary 
mechanisms to support CaaS. The request of a CaaS service 
was done taking into consideration some aspects of the 
widespread VPN concept as example - PE, CE, fully mesh 
topology. 
 
Figure 5. Virtual Private Cloud mapping process with NaaS. 
The user is able to define CEs as if he was requesting a 
VPN, specify ingress and egress bandwidth requirements for 
each network endpoint (hose model), rather than specifying 
the requirements between all pairs of endpoints, as in NaaS. 
The user can drag and drop graphical depictions of routers 
and servers, which represent the sites and cloud resources of 
the network, and then connect them to a central graphical 
element representing an abstraction of the network (Figure 
4). These connections contain information about the 
bandwidth from each element to and from the network. In 
the end the user just has to press the commit button and the 
CaaS information is processed and the request enforced.  In 
the end, the user gets a VN which connects the customer 
sites and cloud resources, according to the user‟s 
configuration parameters. 
A VPC supported by CaaS releases the user from the 
NaaS complexity, but adds an intermediate process step. 
Nevertheless this does not imply an increase of time from 
the 
request 
to 
the 
enforcement 
moment.
 
Figure 6. Virtual Private Cloud mapping process with CaaS. 
As depicted in Figure 6, the process has 7 phases: request 
formulation; request conversion (includes the creation of 
the virtual topology which is not entirely defined); 
resource discovery; node mapping; virtual topology 
reconfiguration; link mapping; node and link embedding. 
First, the user configures the CaaS requirements on the 
GUI (phase 1). Once the Manager has received the 
request, it converts it to a topology structure, where a 
virtual PE router is connected to each site and cloud 
resource, with the PE routers connected in full mesh 
(phase 2). The bandwidth of the links is set to the 
minimum necessary to fulfill the worst case hose-model 
requirements. Then resources are discovered (phase3), 
and virtual PE routers and cloud resources are mapped to 
physical PEs and datacenters according to the temporary 
topology (phase 4). Note that the set of candidate PE 
routers for a CE encompasses those located near that CE, 
which eases the mapping process. Phase 5 comprises the 
Site1
Site2
CE
CE
Phase 1: 
Request formulation
Phase 3: 
Resource Discovery
Phase 5: 
Link mapping
NaaS
PhysicalInfrastructure
DC
Site1
Site2
CE
CE
Virtual Environment
DC
Phase 2: 
Request conversion
Phase 4: 
Node Mapping
Phase 6: 
Request enforcement
Site1
Site2
CE
CE
PE
PE
PE
PE
Site1
Site2
CaaS
CE
CE
Phase 1: 
Request formulation
Phase 2: 
Request conversion & virtual topology design
PhysicalInfrastructure
DC
Site1
Site2
CE
CE
PE
PE
PE
PE
PE
Virtual Environment
DC
PhysicalInfrastructure
DC
Site1
Site2
CE
CE
PE
PE
PE
PE
PE
PE
PE
Virtual Environment
DC
PE
PE
PE
Phase 3: 
Resource Discovery
Phase 4: 
Node Mapping
Phase 5: 
Virtual topology redesign
Phase6: 
Link mapping
Phase 7:
Request enforcement
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

virtual topology reconfiguration, so that virtual PEs 
mapped to the same physical PEs are joined together in 
one virtual PE. The resulting links are mapped onto the 
physical substrate in phase 6. In the end, all elements are 
enforced, phase 7. 
To finalize, Figure 7 presents the time that the 
Manager takes to process a VPC request. The presented 
values are an average of 5 requests. 
 
(a) Computing times for mapping 
NaaS&Cloud 
(b) Computing times for mapping 
CaaS&Cloud 
Figure 7. Virtual Private Cloud mapping process with NaaS. 
Figure 7 (a) shows the results for NaaS. The time to 
convert from the XML message to a structure increases 
with the number of nodes (0-1ms), but is still a small 
value when compared to the time to map the nodes (4.5-
11.5ms). 
As for the mapping with CaaS, Figure 7 (b), we can see 
an extra time stage, topology reconfiguration, which is not 
visible because it is at a 0ms value in both cases, and thus 
is below the red line. The conversion process takes a little 
longer with CaaS, 3-14ms, since there is the need to 
create the full topology. Node mapping values for CaaS 
are higher, 9-13ms. This might be explained by the fact 
that the node mapping process in CaaS is made using the 
temporary topology, which includes 1 PE router per site 
or server + 1 server element per virtual server. Times for 
topology reconfiguration in the CaaS are very small, 
which might be explained by the simple nature of this 
action, which mainly consist in removing some virtual 
nodes and links. Link mapping on both cases is always 
close to 0 (not perceptible since the out time unit while 
measuring was ms). This might be due to the small 
number of nodes in both VNs and substrate. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A major limitation of CC is the lack of coordination 
between CC resource control and network resource 
control. To overcome this limitation, elasticity and agility 
of the cloud must be extended to the network 
infrastructure. In this sense we have associated the 
concept of VPC with network virtualization, allowing 
cloud and network resources to be handled as a single set 
in a dynamic and flexible way.  
Two network service models are proposed, CaaS and 
NaaS. The former roughly corresponds to the traditional 
managed network-based VPN paradigm. The latter 
provides a service which is functionally identical to a 
network. Both models should have a role to play in future 
networks. Moreover, we present a platform able to handle 
NaaS and CaaS services along with cloud resources. 
One of the tasks that is still open for future work is the 
integration of BGP/MPLS VPNs in the platform as a 
CaaS, since VPNs are today in the market and represent 
the strongest short-time deployment possibility. The 
integration with the cloud using standardized application 
programming interfaces (e.g. Open Grid Forum Open 
Cloud Computing Interface) is also in the evolution 
roadmap. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are thankful to the members of the SAIL 
project, particularly those involved in Work Package D, 
for the collaboration and fruitful discussions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P.Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing (Draft)”, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, January 2011. 
[2] T. T. Huu, G. Koslovski, F. Anhalt, P. Vicat-Blanc Primet, 
and J. Montagnat. “Joint elastic cloud and virtual network 
framework for application performance optimization and 
cost reduction”. Journal of Grid Computing (JoGC), pp. 27-
47, 2010. 
[3] F. Anhalt, G. Koslovski, and P. Vicat-Blanc Primet. 
“Specifying and provisioning virtual infrastructures with 
HIPerNET”. Int. J. Netw. Manag., pp. 129-148 May 2010.  
[4] T. Miyamoto, M. Hayashi, and K. Nishimura, , 
"Sustainable Network Resource Management System for 
Virtual Private Clouds," Cloud Computing Technology and 
Science (CloudCom), 2010 IEEE Second International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.512-520, Nov. 30 2010-Dec. 3 
2010. 
[5] FP7 Project SAIL, http://www.sail-project.eu/. 
[6] FP7 Project GEYSERS, http://www.geysers.eu/. 
[7] So et al, “VPN Extensions for Private Clouds” IETF 
Internet Draft, February 2011. 
[8] T. Wood, A. Gerber, K. Ramakrishnan, P. Shenoy, J. Van 
der Merwe,  “The Case for Enterprise-Ready Virtual 
Private Clouds”, HotCloud‟ 09, 2009. 
[9] J. Nogueira, M. Melo, J. Carapinha, and S. Sargento, 
“Network Virtualization System Suite: Experimental 
Network Virtualization Platform”, in TridentCom 2011, 7th 
International ICST Conference on Testbeds and Research 
Infrastructures for the Development of Networks and 
Communities, April 2011 
[10] J. Nogueira, M. Melo, J. Carapinha, and S. Sargento, "A 
distributed approach for virtual network discovery," 
GLOBECOM Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2010 IEEE , vol., 
no., pp.277-282, 6-10 Dec. 2010 
[11] J. Nogueira, M. Melo, J. Carapinha, S. Sargento, “Virtual 
Mapping 
into 
Heterogeneous 
Susbtrate 
Networks”, 
Computers 
and 
Communications 
(ISCC), 
IEEE 
Symposium, pp.438-444, 2011. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

