 
Physical and Computer Modeling of Extra-High Temperature Processes: 
Problems and Challenges 
 
Nguyen Thi Thu Trang 
AGH - University of Science and Technology 
al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krakow, Poland 
e-mail: nguyen@agh.edu.pl 
Marcin Hojny 
AGH - University of Science and Technology 
al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krakow, Poland 
e-mail: mhojny@agh.edu.pl 
  
Tomasz Dębiński 
AGH - University of Science and Technology 
al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krakow, Poland 
e-mail: debinski@agh.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract—The paper describes the methodology of 
integrated modeling of extra-high temperature steel 
processing in supporting the design of new technologies 
(e.g. soft-reduction and direct strip casting processes). The 
work is supplemented with examples of the practical use of 
the 
proposed 
methodology 
in 
supporting 
physical 
simulations. The problems and challenges of the proposed 
solution are briefly described. 
Keywords - Finite Element Method; Monte Carlo 
method; 
physical 
simulation; 
computer 
simulation; 
mushyzone; Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The contemporary approach to the issues of 
engineering new processes involves the extensive 
application of computer technologies and methods. 
Then, the development of electronics, including 
computers and implementation of numerical simulation 
methods, has led to the construction of equipment 
allowing complex technological processes to be tested 
in the laboratory scale. As the tests are conducted on 
actual materials, the term “physical simulation” has 
been adopted as opposed to the numerical simulation. 
The physical simulation is directly related to a new type 
of computer controlled tensile testing machines, able to 
change the experiment conditions automatically during 
the experiment according to the programme adopted by 
the engineer. The evaluation of mechanical properties of 
samples subjected to various simulation variants is the 
basis for developing a special “process map”, which 
enables the optimal parameters of the continuous 
casting machine to be determined when casting a 
specific steel grade [1]. It allows the casting process 
parameters (e.g. casting speed, cooling rate in the 
primary and secondary zones) to be adjusted so as to 
avoid the potential threat of cracks. As may be 
concluded from the above description, each steel grade 
requires separate tests. The main problem concerning 
the experimental work is the sample heterogenous 
temperature. Keeping temperature constant during the 
whole experimental procedure is difficult [2]. There are 
also 
some 
problems 
and 
challenges 
with 
the 
experimental and numerical simulation procedure: 
- prediction of extra-high temperature strain-stress 
relationships, 
- prediction macro/microstructure (grain size), 
- prediction of heat transfer coefficients (necessary for 
numerical simulations), 
- extremely high distortions of the mesh during 
simulation of deformation at temperatures close to the 
solidus line, 
- deformation experiments at temperatures close to the 
solidus line (semi-solid state). 
A lack of good methods for semi-solid steel 
simulation and significant inhomogeneity in strain 
distribution lead to a weak accuracy of the resulting 
stress field.  In order to solve the above problems, the 
methodology integrating the areas of physical and 
computer simulation was proposed. A schematic 
diagram of the integrated modeling methodology 
combining the advantages of physical and computer 
simulation is presented in Figure 1. It consists of three 
main layers: physical simulation, computer simulation 
and supporting equipment. The proposed solution uses a 
methodological research capability of modern Gleeble 
3800 
thermo-mechanical 
simulators 
to 
simulate 
physical processes [1] (first layer), and the benefits of 
numerical 
modeling 
(second 
layer, 
DEFFEM3D 
software [1][2]). Mathematical models are the original 
solutions of the developed DEFFEM 3D software, such 
as the thermo-mechanical model of steel deformation in 
the semi-solid state with variable density, and the multi-
scale model of resistance heating coupled with grain 
growth modelling in the micro scale. More details about 
mathematical models can be found in monograph [1].  
Supporting 
equipment 
(third 
layer) 
includes 
scanning microscope, Zwick Z250 testing machine, 
thermal imaging camera, 3D system scanning and 
tomograph. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-887-7
ADVCOMP 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

 
 
Figure 1. The scheme of the methodology (coupled modeling - physical and computer simulation) with examples application. 
 
II. 
APPLICATION EXAMPLES 
     The developed methodology was used in the course 
of research and development works on the interest rate 
of new technologies for the aircraft industry: 
- 
application of the methodology in computer-
aided design of casting critical parts of aircraft 
engines. Simulations of casting in ceramic 
molds obtained using the lost wax method.  
Figure 2(a) presents an example temperature 
distribution during cooling of the blade of jet 
engine. 
- 
support in the design of hot forming 
technology for the strengthening of the 
intermediate hull directing airflow in a jet 
engine. Simulation of the resistance heating of 
the sheet before the forming process. Figure 
2(b) 
presents 
an 
example 
temperature 
distribution during resistance heating of the 
blank. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Application examples (aicraft industry). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The developed numerical tool (DEFFEM 3D 
software), combined with the capabilities of modern 
thermo-mechanical simulators of the Gleeble series, 
allows theoretical support for the design of new 
technologies. This allows for restricting the number of 
expensive experimental tests to the minimum, e.g. by 
selecting a suitable heating schedule to achieve the 
desired temperature at the sample section, or getting 
additional information about the process, eg. estimating 
zones with diversified grain growth dynamics, or 
information on local cooling rates at any point within 
the volume of the sample tested. Further research will 
focus on developing numerical tools based on particle 
methods, 
such 
as 
SPH 
(smoothed 
particle 
hydrodynamics). This approach will allow to solve 
some of the problems related to the modeling of steel 
deformation in the semi-solid state using the finite 
element method. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work was realized as a part of fundamental 
research financed by the Ministry of Science and Higher 
Education, grant no.  16.16.110.663. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
M. Hojny, Modeling steel deformation in the semi-solid 
state. Advanced Structured Materials, vol.47, Springer, 
Switzerland, 2018. 
[2]  
M. Hojny, T. Dębiński, M. Głowacki and Trang Thi 
Thu Nguyen, “Spatial Thermo-Mechanical Model of 
Mushy Steel Deformation Based on the Finite Element 
Method,” Archives of Foundry Engineering, vol. 21, 
pp.17-28, 2021. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-887-7
ADVCOMP 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

