Identification of Critical Nodes and Links in a Supply Chain by Robust Optimization
Tim vor der Br¨uck
School of Computer Science and Information Technology
Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Lucerne, Switzerland
email: tim.vorderbrueck@hslu.ch
Ren´e Meier
School of Computer Science and Information Technology
Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Lucerne, Switzerland
email: rene.meier@hslu.ch
Abstract—The impact of a supplier or transportation link
breakdown in a supply chain can strongly differ depending on
which nodes/links are affected. While the breakdown of produc-
ers of rarely needed products or backup suppliers might result
in no or only minor repercussions, the breakdown of central
suppliers or transportation links, also called critical nodes/links,
can be fatal and may cause a severe delivery delay or even a
complete production failure of certain product lines. Therefore,
it is of high importance for a company to identify its critical
nodes/links in the supply chain and take precautionary actions
such as organizing additional backup suppliers or alternative
ways of transportation. In this paper, we describe a novel method
to identify critical nodes and links in a supply chain based
on robust optimization, which has the advantage that supply
chain risks are considered, and also precise risk cost estimates
regarding the possible breakdown of each supplier node are
provided. Finally, we demonstrate this method on an example
supply chain and discuss its distribution of critical nodes and
links.
Keywords—supply chain management; critical nodes; critical
links; robust optimization; supply chain risks.
I. INTRODUCTION
According to Craighead et al.[1], node criticality is defined
as the relative importance of a given node or set of nodes
within a supply chain (see Figure 1). A breakdown of a critical
node has typically severe implications, such as serious delay or
even a complete collapse of the production process for certain
product lines, which can result in non-fulfillment of customer
demand. Consequently, the affected company suffers lost
revenue and faces a potential non-delivery contract penalty.
Thus, it is of great importance to identify the critical nodes in
the supply chain and mitigate their possible breakdown risks
by implementing precautionary measures such as identifying
backup suppliers.
The concept of critical nodes can also be transferred to
important transportation links. A link in a supply chain de-
notes a certain transport mode (e.g., airplane, truck, or ship
transportation) and a route between two suppliers or between
a supplier and a customer. Analog to the definition of critical
nodes, a critical link denotes a link that is of high importance
for the total supply chain. Critical links should therefore be
secured by identifying alternative means of transportation.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Related work
is given in the upcoming section (Section II). The employed
optimization model is given in Section III. In Section IV, we
describe how the node criticality is assessed and discuss the
obtained results. Finally, we conclude the paper with Section V
where we summarize our contribution and give potential future
work.
II. RELATED WORK
Zhang and Han [3] propose to use network centrality
(especially degree and betweenness centrality) as indicators
for the criticality of a node in a supply chain.
Gaura et al. [4] assess the criticality of a certain network
node by determining the decrease in network efficiency when
this node is removed from the network. The network efficiency
is measured by the normalized sum of the reciprocal of graph
distances between any two nodes in the network. Prior to
applying their approach, nodes with low clustering indices are
removed from the network, wherefore the authors termed their
approach clustering-based.
The approaches described so far assess a node criticality
alone by topological network measures. In contrast, Falasca
et al. [2] propose to also consider throughput through the
network, but fail to suggest a concrete measure. Sebouhi et al.
[5] consider a node as critical, if the throughput through this
node as determined by solving a linear optimization problem,
exceeds a certain predefined threshold. However, this measure
does not take into account the use of backup suppliers as we do
here, which can de facto reduce node criticality of alternative
suppliers.
There are also some existing approaches to identify critical
links. Scott et al. [6] introduce the so-called Network Robust-
ness Index (NRI), “for evaluating the critical importance of
a given highway segment (i.e., network link) to the overall
system as the change in travel-time cost associated with
rerouting all traffic in the system should that segment become
unusable.” Note that the NRI only takes into account costs that
are directly transportation-related but disregards repercussions
of item non-delivery for downstream production processes as
we considered in our proposed method.
III. EMPLOYED OPTIMIZATION MODEL
Our approach is based on robust optimization, which itself
is based on stochastic optimization, which again is based on
a deterministic optimization model.
We describe each of these three models subsequently in the
following sections starting with the most basic one.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Fig. 1. Supply chain with (right) and without a critical node (left) [2].
A. Deterministic optimization model
The deterministic model disregards any potential risk for
the supply chain and determines the minimum costs of the
so-called “happy flow”, which denotes the best-case situation
that no supply chain disruption occurs. Since such a model
contains no stochastic part, it can be computed very efficiently.
Note that we use due to the computational complexity of the
stochastic and robust model, for all of our 3 optimization
models a single period of 12 months, over which we aggregate
the total customer demand.
The following constants must be specified beforehand:
• djz: demand at node j for product z
• cij: cost to move one kg over one km from i to j
• pciz: cost to produce one item of product z at supplier i
• axz: number of items of product x to produce one amount
of product z
• capiz: production capacity of product z on node i
• iniz: initial number of items of product z contained in
the inventory of supplier i
• iciz: inventory cost for storing z at location i
• distij: geographical distance between node i and j
• weightz: weight of product z
The following decision variables are to be determined by the
optimizer:
• Tijz: number of items z that are moved from location i
to j
• IT il: internal transfer of item l from inventory at location
i
• Piz: number of items z produced at supplier i
• WT iz: number of items z removed from the warehouse
of supplier i
Model constraints:
• djz ≤ P
i Tijz: demand of item z at location j is met
• P
z alzPiz = Pil + IT il + P
k Tkil: number of items l
required to build items z at location i
• Piz ≤ capiz: supplier at node i can at most produce capiz
items for product z
• Piz + WT iz ≥ P
j Tijz: produced + removed from the
inventory of supplier i ≥ number of items transported
from supplier i
• IT iz + WT iz ≤ iniz for each item z and supplier i:
inventory contents cannot become negative
The following objective is used:
Minimize coststotal with:
coststotal : =
X
ijz
Tijzcijzdistijweightz
+
X
iz
(Pizpciz + iniziciz)
(1)
B. Stochastic optimization model
The stochastic model takes supply chain risks into ac-
count and computes the expected value of the supply chain
costs (E(C)) determined over all generated risk scenarios.
In a stochastic optimization setting, the set of risk scenarios
describes the potential hazards for the whole supply chain.
Hence, the nine scenarios from our case company’s supply
network are used as input for the stochastic optimization
approach, which are given in Table I.
The stochastic optimization model determines the minimal
supply chain costs under these risks and estimates the supply
network resilience of the entire supply chain. Note that certain
inventory costs as well as production surges are currently still
disregarded in our model but may be considered for future
work. We have expanded our initial deterministic optimization
model as follows. First, each decision variable is assigned
an additional index denoting the associated risk scenario. For
instance: Pizs denotes the number of item z produced at loca-
tion i in risk scenario s. Furthermore, an additional decision
variable named Missedjzs has been included to denote the
shortfall of a produced item z at location j for risk scenario s
with respect to the actual demand. To represent the effect of a
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

TABLE I
SUPPLY CHAIN DISRUPTION RISK SCENARIOS FOR OUR EXAMPLE SUPPLY
CHAIN.
Number
Risk Scenario
1
Product line simplification of supplier 1 - supplier no
longer delivers the component due to strategy change
2
Product line simplification of supplier 2 - supplier no
longer delivers the component due to strategy change
3
Covid19 pandamic
4
Cyber attack
5
Transport disruption
6
Supplier disruption due to export restrictions
7
Delivery problems of a certain part from supplier 3
8
Delivery problems of a certain part from supplier 4
9
Happy Flow - no disruptions
missed demand, we define a variable (per item) non-delivery
penalty term penjz. The penalty is invoked when the demand
for item j and location z cannot be met (Missedjzs > 0). The
non-delivery penalty comprises lost revenue and a possible
contract penalty. As a result, the demand constraint changes
as follows: djz ≤ Missedjzs+P
i PizsTijzs for every scenario
s and the objective function becomes:
Minimize E(C) +
X
jzs
penjzMissedjzs
( Missed demand is penalized.)
E(C) :=
X
s
psCs =
X
ijzs
psTijzscijzdistijweightz
+
X
izs
ps(Pizspciz + iniziciz)
(2)
where Cs denotes the total supply chain cost and ps specifies
the probability of occurrence of risk scenario s. We use this
cost estimate as objective in the optimization problem.
C. Robust optimization model
The robust model introduces an additional constant σ that
specifies the risk affinity of the decision-maker [7] [8]. Large
values of σ cause a considerable increase in risk costs account-
ing for the unsureness about the actual costs. Thus, a risk-
averse decision-maker would select a rather high σ, whereas
a risk-tolerant decision-maker would select a small value or
drop this term altogether. Thus, the objective function changes
to:
Minimize E(C) + σV(C) +
X
jzs
(penjzMissedjzs)
(3)
Since the computation of the variance requires quadratic
programming, we decided to approximate it by the absolute
variance [7] [9]:
Vabs(C) :=
X
s
ps|Cs − E(C)|
(4)
The absolute variance can be modeled by linear programming
as follows. First, we introduce additional non-negative decision
variables : ϕ(s)+ und ϕ(s)− with the following two constraints
ϕ+
s ≥ ps(Cs − E(C))
ϕ−
s ≥ ps(E(C) − Cs)
(5)
The objective function is then given by:
Min. E(C) +
X
s
σ(ϕ+
s + ϕ−
s ) +
X
jzs
(penjzMissedjzs) (6)
ϕ+
s captures the part of the variance, where the costs exceed
their expected value, whereas ϕ+
s captures the remaining part,
where the costs fall below their expected value. It can be
shown that for the absolute variance, both parts must coincide.
Thus:
ϕs := ϕ+
s = ϕ−
s
(7)
With this, the constraints in (5) simplify to [9]:
ϕs ≥ ps(Cs − E(C))
(8)
and the objective function changes to
Minimize E(C) +
X
s
σ · 2ϕs +
X
jzs
(penjzMissedjzs) (9)
IV. ASSESSING NODE CRITICALITY
Thus far, we have explained our robust optimization model,
which is the basis for our proposed node criticality assessment.
In particular, the robust optimization method as described
above estimates the supply chain‘s risk costs that are com-
posed of the expected total supply chain costs considering
several disruption risk scenarios and their variance. A large
variance implies that the supply chain costs can vary strongly
depending on the occurred risk scenarios. In this case, there
is high uncertainty about the incurring costs and therefore
the overall supply chain risk is quite high. In contrast, low
variance means that the supply chain costs do not deviate much
across the scenarios. In this case, the overall supply chain risk
remains small. The risk costs are leveraged in our approach
for identifying the critical nodes of the supply chain.
By using risk costs instead of ordinary deterministic costs,
we obtain more accurate criticality assessments of the nodes.
Consider for example the case, that an important supplier S
is backed up by a second supplier, which is threatened by
probable bankruptcy. In a deterministic setup, the supplier S
would be assigned a low criticality because of the provided
backup supplier. However, in case supply chain risks are
considered, the criticality of supplier S remains high due to
the foreseeable default of the backup supplier.
In our approach, a supplier node is considered critical,
if its complete breakdown causes a high increase in risk
costs of the supply chain, which can be estimated by our
robust optimization approach. In contrast, a node is considered
uncritical, if the total risk costs of the supply chain do not
change in case the associated supplier breaks down and can no
longer produce or deliver any goods. Therefore, we consider
the criticality of a node being proportional to the overall risk
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

Fig. 2. Part of our example supply chain, where supplier nodes and transportation links are colored according to their criticality.
costs increase of the supply chain when the node in question
is removed.
A node in the supply chain network can represent either a
supplier or a customer, while the edges represent transportation
links either between two suppliers or between a supplier and
a customer. We consider in the following an example supply
chain with 40 customers, 80 suppliers, 200 components and
products, 200 transportation links, and 400 product demands.
Due to its size, we only depict a part of the total supply
chain in Figure 2, which has similar characteristics in terms
of critical links and nodes as the total supply chain.
Each supplier node in this network is colorized according to
its criticality. Suppliers are colored green if the risk costs of the
supply chain are not increased by its potential breakdown, they
are colored yellow if the supply chain risk costs are increased
by a certain threshold factor f1 (we use 30%), and red if the
costs were increased by a second larger threshold factor f2
(we use 60%) or more. Note that the exact values of factors
f1 and f2 can vary depending on the corporate branch and the
degree of competition. For costs increases between 0 and f1,
we interpolate the RGB color values linearly between green
(red=0, green=255, blue=0) and yellow (red=255, green=255,
blue=0), for costs increased between f1 and f2, we interpolate
the color values between yellow and red (red=255, green=0,
blue=0). Customers are not associated with any production
risks and therefore their associated graph nodes are not colored
and instead visualized by unfilled circles. The entire process
is illustrated in the form of pseudocode in Figure 3.
Like critical nodes, we also visualize critical links in the
supply chain. Analog to the node case, they are colored in
green if uncritical, in yellow if somewhat critical, and in red
if critical. Again, mixtures of the colors red and yellow as
well as green and red are possible. In case there are several
transportation modes available between two connected nodes,
we consider only the most critical mode for the visualization.
Note that a link originating from an uncritical supplier node
must also be uncritical. However, the opposite does not hold.
A link originating from a critical supplier node, can be con-
sidered uncritical, if alternative (backup) transportation modes
are available.
The most critical node in our example supply chain would
increase the risk costs by 50% in case of failure. Furthermore,
by far the largest part of the suppliers is considered rather
1: procedure GET RISK COSTS COLOR(nodes,costshf )
2:
Input nodes: list of total supply chain nodes
3:
Input costshf : “happy flow” costs
4:
red := (255, 0, 0)
5:
green := (0, 255, 0)
6:
yellow := (255, 255, 0)
7:
hm := {} # associated risk costs of a node
8:
hm color := {} # associated RGB values for a node
9:
for n ∈ nodes do
10:
if type(n)==Supplier then
11:
costs := obj value(opt(nodes\{n}))
12:
hm[n] := costs
13:
if costs < (1 + f1)costshf then
14:
w := (costs − costshf)/(f1 · costshf )
15:
hm color[n] := w·yellow +(1−w)·green
16:
else if costs < (1 + f2)costshf then
17:
df := f2 − f1
18:
dcosts := costs − (1 + f1)costshf
19:
w := dcosts/(df · costshf )
20:
hm color[n] := w · red + (1 − w) · yellow
21:
else hm color[n] := red
22:
end if
23:
end if
24:
end for
25:
return hm, hm color
26: end procedure
Fig. 3. Identification of risk costs and node criticality for all suppliers.
critical by our chosen definition of f2, which is caused by
the fact that backup suppliers are missing in most cases.
The remaining suppliers are to the same part either non-
critical (visualized in green) or somewhat critical (visualized
in yellow). In contrast, the distribution of links is much
more balanced. Almost 56% of the links are regarded as
critical, the rest is either somewhat critical or uncritical. In
particular, transportation links leading to a customer are all
considered uncritical due to existing alternative transportation
modes, while most of the inter-supplier links are critical.
Optimally, the decision-maker should supply backup suppliers
/ transportation modes for all critical nodes and links so that all
critical nodes / links become somewhat critical or uncritical.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

V. CONCLUSION
We described a method for identifying critical nodes in
a supply chain based on robust optimization. In contrast to
other state-of-the-art methods, our method is very precise,
since it not only considers network topology but also network
throughput as well as possible supply chain disruption risks.
Furthermore, our method provides a concrete risk costs esti-
mate for the breakdown of each supplier and transportation
link. For future work, we are planning to identify critical
supplier groups, i.e., collections of suppliers being located
in geographical or political neighborhoods (and therefore
vulnerable to similar supply chain risks) that are causing
major disruptions to the supply chain if they are failing
simultaneously.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Hereby we thank all who supported us in this work, espe-
cially Gunter Krell for a lot of fruitful discussions and Uta
J¨uttner who provided us with fitting risk scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. W. Craighead, J. Blackhurst, M. J. Runtusanatham, and R. B.
Handfield, “The severity of supply chain disruptions: Design
characteristics and mitigation capabilities,” Decision Sciences,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 131–156, 2007.
[2]
M. Falasca and C. W. Zobel, “A decision support framework
to assess supply chain resilience,” in Proceedings of the 5th
International ISCRAM Conference, 2008, pp. 596–605.
[3]
X. Zhang and J. Han, “Analysis of the importance of nodes in
supply chain network,” in Proceedings of the 2011 International
Conference on Business Computing and Global informatiza-
tion, Shanghai, China, 2011, pp. 387–388.
[4]
V. Gaura, O. Yadavb, G. Sonia, and A. Rathorea, “Identification
of critical nodes and edges in a network based on clustering,”
in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Flex-
ible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing (FAIM2021),
Athens, Greece, 2021, pp. 1298–1304.
[5]
F. Sabouhi and M. S. Jabalameli, “A stochastic bi-objective
multi-product programming model to supply chain network de-
sign under disruption risks,” Journal of Industrial and Systems
Engineering, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 196–209, 2019.
[6]
D. M.Scotta, D. C. Nova, L. Aultman-Hall, and F. Guo,
“Network robustness index: A new method for identifying
critical links and evaluating the performance of transporta-
tion networks,” Journal of Transportation Geography, vol. 14,
pp. 215–227, 2006.
[7]
R. Babazadeh and J. Razmi, “A robust stochastic programming
approach for agile and responsive logistics under operational
and disruption risks,” International Journal of Logistics Systems
and Management, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 458–482, 2012.
[8]
J. M. Mulvey, R. J. Vanderbei, and S. A. Zenios, Operations
Research, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 264–281,
[9]
C.-S. Yu and H.-L. Li, “A robust optimization model for
stochastic logistic problems,” International Journal of Produc-
tion Ecnonomics, vol. 64, pp. 385–397, 2000.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-990-4
ADVCOMP 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

