e-RL: The Internet of Things Supported Reverse Logistics for Remanufacture-to-
Order 
Bo Xing, Wen-Jing Gao, Kimberly Battle, Fulufhelo Vincent Nelwamondo, and Tshilidzi Marwala 
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment (FEBE) 
University of Johannesburg 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
bxing2009@gmail.com, wgao2011@gmail.com, kbattle@uj.ac.za, vnelwamondo@gmail.com, tmarwala@uj.ac.za  
 
 
Abstract—With the increasing globalization, there are many 
sources of uncertainty across the entire reverse logistics for 
end-of-life product recovery. Information sharing is a key 
ingredient in this respect because it helps to eradicate 
potential 
uncertainties 
related 
to 
various 
corporate 
behaviors, especially in remanufacture-to-order aspect. 
However traditional reverse logistics does not fully address 
itself to this issue. As a result, the progressive loss of product 
information as it moves through its lifecycle becomes 
inevitable which leads to a difficulty in implementing 
remanufacture-to-order strategy. Motivated by this fact, this 
study presents an ongoing design of novel reverse logistics 
(i.e., e-reverse logistics). The Internet of things technology is 
introduced into this framework for the purpose of keeping 
product life cycle information integrity. Furthermore, the 
cooperation and collaboration between actors involved in 
proposed architecture are treated in multi-agent system 
philosophy. 
The 
design 
characteristics and 
working 
principles of e-reverse logistics are detailed in this paper and 
it serves as a start point for further implementation.  
Keywords-RL (Reverse Logistic); IoT (Internet of Things); 
MAS (Multi-Agent System) 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The focus of this study will be on issues pertaining to 
IoT (Internet of Things) and RL (Reverse Logistics). Both 
fields are intended to be joined into research which will 
investigate the following key research question: 
How IoT facilitated e-RL (e-Reverse Logistics) can 
reduce the blind spots during the EoL (End-of-Life) 
product recovery process? 
End users, collectors, remanufacturers, redistributors 
and retailers are typically interconnected within networks 
and it is for this reason that the relationships among all of 
them are represented as reverse logistic networks. Having 
enough information about EoL products in which they are 
involved can be useful in RMTO (Remanufacture-to-Order) 
planning strategies or in assuring EoL products quality.  
Built on intelligent products, the IoT, as a stimulating 
idea, is fast emerging in the wireless scenario. One of the 
main challenges faced in this area was the integrity of data 
as well as using a standard data format for sharing 
information among different RL participants. Nowadays, 
several approaches are used to implement information 
management systems architectures, such as the EPCglobal 
Network [1] developed by the Auto-ID consortium, the 
Dialog System [2] developed at the Helsinki University of 
Technology, the WWAI (World Wide Article Information) 
system proposed by Trackway, and the ID@URI approach 
[3]. The EPCglobal Network stands out among the rest 
because in 2003 it was authorized as a GS1 (Global 
Standards I) [4]. The GS1 system of standards is the most 
widely-used supply-network standards system in the world.  
Motivated by these facts, in this research, e-RL is 
introduced, standing for the traditional RL plan with the 
addition of “e” element. It aims at improving the bridge 
between information networks and EoL product flows to 
form a seamless, synchronous network functioning, so that 
to support RL process.   
Briefly, the rest of this article is structured as follows: 
In Section II, the fundamental of RMTO is briefly 
introduced; the background of the study is outlined in 
Section III; Section IV identifies several key backbone of 
e-RL proposal; Section V details the proposed e-RL 
strategy; research expectations are concluded in Section 
VI; finally, the conclusion and future work are drawn in 
Section VII. 
II. 
REMANUFACTURE-TO-ORDER 
The RL/remanufacture has many similarities to its 
traditional forward logistics/manufacturing counterpart. At 
the most basic level, both involve supply, production and 
distribution. The major difference between the two 
involves the supply side [5], especially in used products 
(refer to as core) acquisition process [6]. 
To avoid the uncontrolled accumulation of core 
inventory, the issue for the RMTO strategy would put 
remanufacturing industry in the spotlight. This strategy 
provides an interface of high variety products in relatively 
low volumes. Often the volumes are low even at the 
component production stage as there is little scope for 
common components because cores are remanufactured to 
customer design and specification. Meanwhile, basis on 
RMTO strategy can reduce lead time achieved when 
implementing new manufacturing principles such as lean 
production [7]. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

III. 
 BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY 
A. Traditional Reverse Logistics 
There are many aspects covered by TRL (Traditional 
Reverse Logistics) research such as network design, 
vehicle routing problem, and inventory management. 
Interested readers please refer to [8][9][10] (a three parts 
comprehensive survey dedicated to TRL) for more details. 
However, Rogers, et al. [11] argued that in practice the 
lack of information systems infrastructure was one of the 
largest barriers confronting the RL executives. For 
example, Ranasinghe, et al. [12] reported that it was 
evident that acceptability and widespread use of product 
unique identity (such as electronic product code) was 
visible in many aspects of RL in general and in the field of 
remanufacture in particular. In the TRL literatures, little 
research work has been carried out in the context of 
information technology and more studies are needed to 
conduct in this direction so that sharing information can 
become a possible during RL process. Thus a major 
contribution of this paper lies in that introducing advanced 
IoT technology into RL area. 
B. Remanufacture-to-Order 
One of the challenge associated with RMTO is the EoL 
product information to which the remanufacturer has 
embraced core acquisition appears equivocal. In a 
remanufacture 
system, 
core 
acquisition 
is 
largely 
exogenous, and the timing, quantity, and quality of core 
are much more uncertain than in traditional production 
distribution systems. Parlikad, et al. [13] argue that a 
fundamental obstacle in achieving more acceptable cores 
acquisition levels lies in that information related to the 
cores is often irrecoverably lost after the point of sale.  
Moreover, a great variety in offered products and the 
complexities involved in RMTO environment makes it a 
difficult task to collect a wide range of information. Thus 
the information sharing, collaboration, and coordination in 
an effort to improve channel efficiency is a necessity in 
RMTO area [14][15]. Therefore, by introducing a novel 
RL structure, this research can be treated as an initial 
attempt to solve these issues.  
IV. 
BACKBONE OF E-REVERSE LOGISTICS PROPOSAL 
e-RL is concerned with the applications of the IoT in 
RL area. Triggered by advanced computing techniques, 
one can witness that IoT has far-reaching impacts on 
citizens, businesses, and society as a whole. Therefore the 
purpose of this section is to give reader a quick overview 
of this disruptive idea.  
A. What is Internet of Things? 
In general, the IoT can be defined as: “A global 
network infrastructure, linking physical and virtual objects 
through 
the 
exploitation 
of 
data 
capture 
and 
communication capabilities. This infrastructure includes 
existing and evolving Internet and network developments. 
It will offer specific object-identification, sensor, actuator 
and connection capability as the basis for the development 
of independent federated services and applications. These 
will be characterized by a high degree of autonomous data 
capture, event 
transfer, 
network 
connectivity and 
interoperability [15].”  
Under the term of “IoT”, electronic systems can be, in 
principle, integrated into all conceivable objects around us. 
This ubiquity of information technology can thus be 
applied in many fields ranging from industrial production 
up to individual, daily life. In a word, no human endeavor 
or thought would be unchanged by IoT.  
B. Enabling Technologies 
Currently many techniques are driving the progress of 
IoT at different levels and they can be classified into the 
following categories.  
1) Context Information Identification Techniques: The 
context information identification is the essence of IoT. 
Currently the technique like PEID (Produt Embeded 
Information Device) [16] is a potential way of providing 
real-world entities with certain degree of “intelligence” so 
that the required level of context awareness can be 
achieved.  
2) Context Information Resolution Techniques: Apart 
from the representation object identification technology, 
spontaneous interoperation is also a necessary which 
means after obtaining the complex context information of 
a physical object provided by a PEID, a database-like 
infrastructure is required to solve any potential queries. 
The most important use of context information resolution 
is to find an information service associated with objects. 
In practice, EPCglobal network [1] is an industry driven, 
product centric data management architecture to provide 
product’s traceability based on PEID technology.  
V. 
DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED E-REVERSE LOGISTICS 
STRATEGY 
A. Key Players of e-Reverse Logistics Strategy 
Several actors are involved in proposed e-RL strategy 
and their characteristics are laid out as follows: 
1) End User: The roles of end user are twofold: on 
one hand, anyone who owns an EoL product can be 
referred to as an end user; on the other hand, end user also 
means a customer who purchases a remanufactured 
product directly from remanufacturer’s online ordering 
system. Both groups of end users are coexisted in the 
marketplace and keep switching roles with each other. 
2) EoL Product Collector: In the proposed framework, 
an EoL product collector refers to any business entity that 
has been authorized for participating EoL product 
collection activities.  
3) RMTO 
Firm: 
A 
RMTO 
firm 
means 
a 
remanufacturer who actually carries out EoL product 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

remanufacture activities and in the meantime employs 
RMTO policy. There are several types of RMTO firms in 
practice such as OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturer) 
and independent remanufacturers. But in this research 
they are treated as same since e-RL strategy is engineered 
to fit them all. 
B. Brief Summary of e-Reverse Logistics Strategy 
Working Principles 
The working principles of e-RL strategy is summarized 
and mapped in Figure 1. The red dashed lines represent the 
interacting information flows between different players, 
while the green solid lines show the physical product 
transportation process. 
 
Figure 1.  Processes mapping of e-RL strategy. 
Normally, in each round of iteration, the e-RL strategy 
will perform as follows:  
• 
First, the sales department receives an order from 
a customer through the company’s online ordering 
system.  
• 
In order to perform an evaluation of whether the 
company should make a bid or not for such order, 
decision makers must take into account various 
factors. Among them, the existence of cores is the 
most influential 
one. 
Therefore, the sales 
department will immediately forward the core 
existence enquiry to the supply department. 
• 
After receiving such enquiry from the sales 
department, the supply department will at once set 
out to search cores through the EPCglobal network. 
• 
The outcome of this lookup stage will be the 
required cores cannot or can be found. If the 
answer is no, the supply department will notify the 
sales department and the latter will reject this 
particular customer’s order; otherwise if the 
answer is yes, the supply department will receive a 
list of candidate cores’ specifications (i.e., EPC 
information, it is required to send a query to the 
EPC information system of all sites until a whole 
lifecycle data is located.) and such information 
will be promptly forwarded to production 
department. 
• 
When candidate cores’ EPC information reach the 
production department, several sub-departments 
within it (e.g., disassembly, remanufacturing, and 
inventory departments) will be further consulted to 
help with the issues like remanufacturability 
evaluation, remanufacturing cost pre-calculation, 
and lead time estimation.  
• 
After this stage, the sales department will finally 
receive a report-like feedback from production 
department in which all the useful results are 
outlined. Based on this feedback, the sales 
department will negotiate with the customer about 
the price, due date, payment methods, and so on.  
• 
Once a purchasing order has been actually made, 
the sales department will send a copy to supply 
department and the latter will start buying cores 
from collectors.  
• 
As soon as the production department receives 
physical cores, a designated remanufacturing 
process will be carried out. 
• 
When a remanufactured product passes the 
prescribed testing procedure at the production 
department, it will be finally delivered to the 
corresponding customer. 
• 
The product will stay in the marketplace until it 
reaches the end of its current life cycle. By that 
time, the end user will send a disposal request to 
EoL product collectors via his mobile device 
which 
embedded 
the 
NFC 
(Near 
Field 
Communication) tags and later on the allocated 
collector will sort out the collection issue.  
Both the upstream and downstream flows (and the 
interactions between them) are considered within the 
concept of e-RL. 
VI. 
RESEARCH EXPECTATIONS 
A. Expected Outcomes 
• 
Establishing an architecture of e-RL, which is built 
on MAS (Multi-Agent System).  
• 
e-RL strategy provides RL participants with a self-
developed EPCglobal network to support EoL 
products’ lifecycle information sharing and more 
effective communication amongst the e-RL 
participants. 
With 
such 
feature, 
each 
RL 
participant can track and trace the EoL products 
anywhere and anytime in a timely manner.  
• 
Modeling and simulation of the proposed idea in 
NetLogo [17] and open source environment.  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

B. Expected Contributions  
• 
Improving 
the 
collaborative 
efficiency 
and 
effectiveness in RL. 
• 
Obtaining a better understanding of the value of 
information in the field of 
EoL product 
remanufacture. 
• 
With improved visibility of the e-RL process, 
companies can respond to customer demand more 
promptly and efficiently by identifying the 
scattered cores in the marketplace that need to be 
acquired for RMTO purpose. 
• 
It should be noted that the system is not limited to 
RMTO process, it can also integrate such 
information with other applications to support 
decision making and communication. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper presented an idea of e-RL, which is built on 
IoT and MAS approaches. Main features and working 
principles were discussed as well. This architecture design 
of e-RL is the first step towards a successful RMTO policy 
employment.    
As a future work, validating the feasibility and 
effectiveness of proposed e-RL will be the focus. On one 
hand, the following work will be carried out to prove the 
new idea’s feasibility: (1) open source solution for RFID 
event generation and searching and (2) agent-based 
modeling and simulation. On the other hand, in order to 
demonstrate the e-RL’s effectiveness, the comparison with 
TRL will be made from the following perspectives: (1) 
customer’s willingness-to-return; (2) processing speed of 
EoL products collection and (3) robustness of RMTO 
practitioners responding to market demand.  
This position paper treats RL in the context of RMTO 
from a novel viewpoint. Its architecture characteristics and 
design features are different with TRL from many aspects. 
It is expected, by completing the future work plan, the e-
RL would serve as a solid basis for employing RMTO 
strategy in practice which, on a higher level, will make the 
sustainable development become possible. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially supported by National Research 
Foundation (NRF), South Africa and Dean’s Office, 
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment, 
University of Johannesburg, South Africa. The authors 
also gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and 
suggestions of the reviewers, which have improved the 
presentation. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. S. Leong, M. L. Ng, and D. W. Engels, “EPC network 
architecture,” Auto-ID Center, Institue for Manufacturing, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
Report: 
AUTOIDLABS-WP-SWNET-012, 
September 
2005, unpublished. 
[2] K. Främling, T. Ala-Risku, M. Kärkkäinen, and J. 
Holmström, “Agent-based model for managing composite 
product information,” Computers in Industry, vol. 57, 2006, 
pp. 72-81. 
[3] D. Kiritsis, A. Bufardi, and P. Xirouchakis, “Research 
issues on product lifecycle management and information 
tracking using smart embedded systems,” Advanced 
Engineering Informatics, vol. 17, 2003, pp. 189-202. 
[4] Global Standards I, <http://www.gs1.org> 25.09.2011 
[5] M. Fleischmann, et al., “Quantitative models for reverse 
logistics: a review,” European Journal of Operational 
Research, vol. 103, 1997, pp. 1-17. 
[6] V. D. R. Guide and V. Jayaraman, “Product acquisition 
management: current industry practice and a proposed 
framework,” International Journal of Production Research, 
vol. 38, 2000, pp. 3779-3800. 
[7] L. C. Hendry, “Applying world class manufacturing to 
make-to-order 
companies,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Operations & Production Management, vol. 18, 1998, pp. 
1086-1100. 
[8] P. Sasikumar and G. Kannan, “Issues in reverse supply 
chains, part I: end-of-life product recovery and inventory 
management – an overview,” International Journal of 
Sustainable Engineering, vol. 1, Sep. 2008, pp. 154-172. 
[9] P. Sasikumar and G. Kannan, “Issues in reverse supply 
chains, part II: reverse distribution issues – an overview,” 
International Journal of Sustainable Engineering, vol. 1, 
Dec. 2008, pp. 234-249.  
[10] P. Sasikumar and G. Kannan, “Issues in reverse supply 
chain, part III: classification and simple analysis,” 
International Journal of Sustainable Engineering, vol. 2, 
Mar. 2009, pp. 2-27.  
[11] D. S. Rogers and R. S. Tibben-Lembke, Going backwards: 
reverse logistics trends and practices. Pittsburgh, PA: 
Reverse Logistics Executive Council, 1999. 
[12] D. C. Ranasinghe, M. Harrison, K. Främling, and D. 
McFarlane, 
“Enabling 
through 
life 
product-instance 
management: solutions and challenges,” Journal of 
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 34, 2011, pp. 
1015-1031. 
[13] A. K. Parlikad, D. McFarlane, E. Fleisch, and Sandra 
Gross, “The role of product identity in end-of-life decision 
making,” Auto-ID Center, Institue for Manufacturing, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
Report: CAM-AUTOID-WH-017, Jun. 2003, unpublished. 
[14] F. Sahin and E. P. Robinson, “Flow coordination and 
information sharing in supply chains: review, implications 
and directions for future research,” Decision Sciences, vol. 
33, 2002, pp. 505-536. 
[15] M. A. Moisescu, I. Ş. Sacală, and A. M. Stănescu, 
“Towards the development of Internet of things oriented 
intelligent systems,” U.P.B. Science Bulletin, Series C, vol. 
72, 2010, pp. 115-124. 
[16] D. Kiritsis, “Closed-loop PLM for intelligent products in 
the era of the Internet of things,” Computer-Aided Design, 
vol. 43, 2011, pp. 479-501. 
[17] U. Wilensky, “NetLogo (4.1 ed),” Center for Connected 
Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern 
University, 
Evanston, 
IL., 
<http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/> 25.09.2011 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-172-4
ADVCOMP 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in Sciences

