Smart Power Switch for Smart Homes 
 
Khalid Tarmissi 
College of Computers and Information System 
Umm Al Qura University 
Makkah, Saudi Arabia 
kstarmissi@uqu.edu.sa 
Mudasser F. Wyne 
School of Engineering and Computing 
National University 
San Diego, USA 
mwyne@nu.edu
 
 
Abstract— The main focus of this paper is to analyze and design 
a Proof-Of-Concept (POC) Smart Power Switch (SPS) that will 
give users the ability to conveniently turn their home into a 
Smart Home. This Smart Power Switch allows the user to 
control any of the home appliances from anywhere. A standard 
switch/power outlet in a home can be replaced with a SPS that 
can be controlled remotely with any smartphone or Personal 
Computer (PC). Smart Homes can also reduce energy usage by 
up to 30% for typical residential users. Our research can be 
considered as an application of Internet of Things (IoT) for 
Smart Homes. A common definition of Smart Home is an 
“electronic networking technology to integrate devices, 
appliances and security so that the entire home can be 
monitored and controlled centrally as a single machine. 
Keywords- Proof-Of-Concept (POC), Smart Home, Internet of 
Things (IoT), Information Technology (IT).  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Since its beginnings, the Internet has evolved 
significantly, and, in recent years, it has influenced every 
aspect of our lives. In line with this Internet explosion, it 
appears we are about to connect everything in our physical 
world to the Internet. One of the areas that will be affected by 
this change is our homes, the place where we spend most of 
our time. Although some electronic devices are already 
connected to the Internet, in the future, all the objects in our 
home may get connected to the Internet, thus transforming 
our homes into Smart Homes. The idea of a Smart Home has 
existed for a long time, but actual Smart Homes were not 
designed and built until the early 2000s [12]. However, since 
this idea is relatively new and the related technology is still 
under development, it has been referred to by many names 
such as Smart Homes, Home Automation, Digital Home, etc. 
A common definition of Smart Home is an “electronic 
networking technology to integrate devices, appliances and 
security so that the entire home can be monitored and 
controlled centrally as a single machine” [2]. Any device in 
our home that uses electricity can be put on our home network 
and on a single command. Whether the command is given by 
voice, remote control, tablet or smartphone, the home reacts. 
Most applications of Smart Home ideas are related to 
lighting, home security, home theater and entertainment, and 
thermostat regulation. Today's smart homes are also focusing 
on living green, and thus, trying to conserve energy, in 
addition to controlling homes remotely using smartphones, 
automating home lights and thermostats, and scheduling 
appliances [2]. What we expect to see in the near future is the 
real evolution of Smart Homes; we may be living in such 
homes. 
 
The technology used in a Smart Home may employ all 
of the following elements: intelligent control, home 
automation and internal networks [1]. Following are some of 
the main aspects of Smart Home: 
 
• 
The intelligent control is a control system that is 
composed of two parts: sensors, which will monitor and 
report the status, and a controller (human or software 
based) which will process the information given by the 
sensors, and complete the requested operation.  
• 
The home automation function is achieved by electrical 
or electronic devices that will make changes to the 
existing environment by completing the required tasks.  
• 
The required home automation commands are often sent 
over a cloud system or smartphone application. 
• 
The home network will be the medium for all other parts 
of the system to communicate and send information.  
 
The system may get multiple repetitive tasks over time, 
such as turning the light on after the sunset, and may require 
the whole cycle to repeat itself every day. 
 
In section II we will present the state of the art on Smart 
Homes; section III covers market research about Smart 
Switch; section IV talks about securing Smart Home; section 
V outlines the development of the Smart Power Switch; 
section VI details the testing results; and finally we conclude 
in section VII. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Authors in [5] report that lot of research is being done by 
Information Technology (IT) developers on Smart Homes, in 
the context of in-home services. Research articles on Smart 
Homes and their users are on the rise; authors in [6] present 
a methodical analysis of research themes as well as the 
linkages and disconnects among them. However, clarity on 
the use of Smart Home technologies is still missing. 
Information Technology designers and inventers are always 
striving for better energy management and improved 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

functionality to meet the needs and requirements of homes 
called Smart Homes. A state-of-the-art Decision Support and 
Energy Management System (DSEMS) for residential energy 
users is proposed in [7]. The DSEMS is represented as a finite 
state machine and consists of a series of situations that are 
chosen based on user preferences. The paper also presents 
various designing and testing approaches and their results to 
show savings in energy usage and continuity of electricity 
supply. A new decision support tool for residential 
consumers is proposed in [8]. The tool can be used to 
optimize electrical energy services thus exploiting benefits to 
scheduling of energy services. A load promise framework 
that automatically changes electrical loads in order to 
minimize household use of energy resources and payment is 
proposed in [9]. 
 
III. 
SMART POWER SWITCH 
 
Trends in the development of communication and 
electronic industry indicate that hundreds of smart 
communicating 
devices 
in 
future 
may 
stretch 
the 
functionalities of current devices. This may lead to creating 
the potential to change the way we work, learn, entertain, 
live, and innovate. Some researchers stated that by the year 
2032 we could individually be in contact with 3000 to 5000 
smart devices in our everyday life, and that would be truly 
transformative. In the following sections we will provide 
market research about smart switches and will attempt to give 
a comparison between a few similar products currently in the 
market. 
 
A. WeMo® Light Switch 
 
WeMo Light Switch [10] replaces a standard light switch 
in your home and can be controlled remotely with an Android 
Smartphone or Tablet, iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch. It can 
work with any existing Wi-Fi® network and anywhere your 
smartphone or tablet has an Internet connection (3G or 4G 
LTE). Table 1 lists Pros and Cons of WeMo Light Switch. 
 
TABLE 1: PROS AND CONS OF WEMO LIGHT SWITCH 
 
Pros 
Cons 
Remote Control 
Doesn’t Support 2/4 way 
Switches 
Wall Wired Light 
Control 
Only Compatible with 
120vAC 
Android/IOS 
Applications 
Bad Performance Applications 
Sunrise/Sunset Rules 
No Power Monitoring 
Compatible with 
IFTTT 
No Web Application 
 
No Lights Dimming 
B. ZULI 
 
The Zuli Smartplug [11] communicates with a 
smartphone using Bluetooth Low Energy, giving users 
unmatched control, monitoring and automation at an 
affordable price. Table 2 summerizes Pros and Cons of Zuli 
Smartplug. 
 
Table 2: PROS AND CONS OF ZULI SMARTPLUG 
 
Pros 
Cons 
Location Based 
Automation using BLE 
Cannot Control Wall Wired 
Lights/Appliances 
Energy Monitoring 
Cannot Control it Form 
Outside the House 
Lights Dimming 
IOS only app 
Scheduling 
Require Phone that support 
Bluetooth 4.0 
Reusability 
Compatible with USA plugs 
 
Only Compatible with 
120vAC 
 
IV. 
SECURING OUR SMART HOME 
One of the main components for creating and managing 
a Smart Home is the control system that can be an embedded 
device. Embedded devices and systems have wide-ranging 
applications in residential consumer, commercial, industrial, 
automotive, health-care, and many other industries. 
Generally, embedded device are designed for a specific 
application; thus it has operating system or firmware for only 
designed applications. These devices are very small with low 
power consumption and little computing power. For 
example, a heart rate monitor embedded within a wristwatch 
can be connected to a smart phone for displaying the heart’s 
status in real time; Point of Sale (POS) and Automatic Teller 
Machines (ATM) are also examples of embedded devices or 
systems. Many factors impact the process of choosing the 
best control system including cost and complexity of 
installation in addition to the best technologies available [2].  
 
Cyber Security is one of the serious concerns in 
reference to Smart Homes, since information and control is 
wireless and over the internet. Our proposed system will be 
using wireless communication protocols to give devices and 
users the ability to send and receive information between 
each other as well as control home appliances. This may 
make the whole system very vulnerable to hackers’ attacks. 
Thus the devices should be installed in the home in a secure 
way, ensuring that these are not visible to any intruder. 
Therefore, we implemented the Near Field Communication 
(NFC) protocol that allows these devices to establish peer-to-
peer communication, thus enabling them to transfer data 
among each other by either touching them or placing them in 
very close proximity to each other. The device will not reveal 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

its id and pair with any smartphone until the user gets their 
phone and passes it on the switch; then the switch will reveal 
its id address and pair with the user’s phone. Access to this 
device through any phone is not possible if the device is not 
registered by the owner of the device, thus preventing 
intruders from communicating with the device. However, as 
soon as the user establishes communication with the system, 
the device id of the user is exposed to the hackers or intruders 
thus raising security concerns. This problem is tackled by 
encrypting data at the sender device and then decrypting it at 
the destination device and vice versa. The encrypting 
technique we use depends on the machine-to-machine 
communication protocol (M2M).  
 
V. 
SMART POWER SWITCH SYSTEM 
 
This section outlines the development of the Smart 
Power Switch system, one of the important components of 
the smart system. We attempt to identify the user profile and 
requirements, for the Smart Power Switch system, by 
considering the findings outlined in a survey reported in [4]. 
In general, a typical family household may have children, are 
technologically savvy, as well as have a smartphone or 
computer and an Internet connection. These stated user 
profiles are not a must for every household; these are the 
more likely users that may be interested in living in a Smart 
Home. While this system is generally meant to be used in 
family households, it can also be used in various other 
environments. For example, companies, schools, and any 
other facility may want to turn their buildings into smart 
buildings. The stakeholders will be the same, but may be 
under different names, as there will be administrators, and 
users who will likely be using some parts of the system. The 
aim of this paper is to present a Proof of Concept (POC) 
Smart Power Switch system that gives users the ability to turn 
their home into a smart, internet-connected home by 
replacing the standard home switches and outlets with the 
smart ones. Moreover, by using the system we can control 
home lights/appliances remotely, schedule tasks for devices, 
and monitor the power consumption.  
 
The Smart Power Switch system is divided into three 
main parts, The Application, The Cloud, and The Smart 
Switch, as shown in Fig. 1 [12]. There are two ways to 
communicate between the application and the switch. The 
application layer will be able to communicate with the smart 
switch through internet. In the case of controlling the switch 
remotely, a request submitted by the application over the 
internet to the cloud; the cloud in turn will send the command 
to the switch. The second scenario is the exact opposite: the 
energy consumption sensor located inside the smart switch 
will calculate the consumed energy and submit data to the 
cloud; that data will be processed in the cloud; and the 
analysis of the data collected will be sent back to the 
application when the user requests it [12]. In the second case, 
the user must be in the same local area network to which the 
smart switch is connected, and then the user will be able to 
control the switch locally without the need of the internet 
connection. The controlling events will be saved locally in 
the smart device, and later when there is an internet 
connection it will be sent to the cloud for processing. 
 
 
Figure 1: Components of Smart Power Switch System 
 
VI. 
TESTING 
In this section, we are going to report the testing carried 
out with the Smart Power Switch system. It provides details 
of the test plan, running the system and a summary of the 
results and the outcomes of the test. Testing plans for the 
system include: operating it around the clock, controlling it 
by a mobile app, and then connecting one TV to a standard 
power outlet, while the TV under test is connected to a smart 
sensor. The system will switch off the device once it is in 
standby mode, and the system reports all data to the cloud. 
After programming the cloud side of the system, an account 
is created on IBM Bluemix Platform, and services such as 
Node-RED Service, Cloudant Service, Internet of Things 
Foundation Service, or Node.js Application Service are set 
up. For testing with only one device, the processing power 
required is not great: The requirement for a system under 
consideration is 512MB per Instance per day, up to 20GB 
data storage and up to 500,000 API calls per month. 
 
Programming the android application was accomplished 
with Android Studio, which allows a memory monitoring 
thread to run that keeps monitoring the memory and, in turn, 
reporting the results in a separate window. There are three 
possible 
authentication 
protocols 
to 
verify 
the 
communications 
between 
the 
app 
and 
the 
server: 
authenticating requests using Cloudant account credential, 
authenticating requests using auto-generated API keys, and 
authenticating requests from a users database. Authentication 
using users’ database is the best security, because there are 
different access authorizations for different users. However, 
this has security which is a high priority requirement for our 
system.  
 
Through the testing process, there were a few problems. 
One problem was that the fuse inside the smart switch was 
capable of handling currents under 5 Amps whereas our 
system was able to handle current up to 10 Amps. In one of 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

the testing processes, the fuse blew because the current was 
greater than 5 Amps. Therefore the fuse was replaced with a 
10 Amp fuse. In Tables 3 and 4, we have provided the 
summary of the testing process, each with its rating out of 3, 
PASS/FAIL, and some notes. 
 
TABLE 3: DEVICE SUMMARY 
 
P/F 
Rating 
Notes 
P 
1 
The devices was power by the current 
coming from the AC/DC converter 
successfully 
P 
1 
The devices was controllable form the 
mobile app 
P 
2 
The device calculated the current with 
80% accuracy 
P 
1 
The device published data to event 
topic successfully 
P 
3 
The scheduled commands runs but 
with some delays 
 
TABLE 4: CLOUD SUMMARY 
 
Name 
P/F 
Rating 
Notes 
Running the 
System 
P 
1 
The cloud system runs 
perfectly during the 
testing process period  
Provisioning 
the Devices  
F 
- 
Provisioning devices 
require more complex 
communication 
between the app and 
the device. So we 
hardcoded the device 
data 
in 
the 
cloud 
system.  
Handling 
Requests  
P 
1 
The system received 
all request via the 
MQTT broker.  
Fast Data 
Querying  
P 
1 
The 
Mapreduce 
function 
works 
efficiently 
and 
responded with the 
correct data.  
Security  
P 
3 
The 
cloud 
rejects 
requests coming from 
unauthorized 
users 
and securely transmits 
data in and out.  
 
The testing process proved that the system is reliable and 
works efficiently. The results show, in Fig. 2, how 
implementing the smart power saving feature reduced the 
power consumed up to 20% per Wh. 
 
 
Figure 2: Comparison between a smart connected screen and a 
normal screen 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this research, we defined the main proposes and 
objectives of our work and provided research about Smart 
Homes, we realize that the number of devices used in a 
household is increasing, and in the next few years we may 
have hundreds of devices accessible per person. We 
discussed how hard it is today to transform our life into a 
smart, internet-connected life. After implementing and 
testing the system for a few days in real life situations and 
comparing the devices to other Smart Homes systems, the 
most important finding is that it is possible to transform a 
normal home into a Smart Home by only changing the house 
power plugs and switches, as compared to complicated 
approaches presented by other researchers. Using our system 
to create Smart Homes provides a much lower cost solution 
than implementing traditional Smart Homes systems that 
may require in-wall wiring, and changing appliances to smart 
appliances. Transforming a home into Smart Home can 
benefit us in many different ways. Smart Homes can reduce 
energy usage up to 30% percent for normal users and can be 
a nice and comfortable place for elderly and disabled people. 
The system can also be scaled for huge buildings without 
compromising the same fast performance. This system 
worked as required for the proof-of-concept stage, however, 
for mass production the system requires more research in 
many areas including AI. In our project, we implemented a 
small set of AI code into the system, which resulted in a large 
benefit and reduced energy consumption. Additional work 
needs to be done to further improve the smartness of the 
system, and to enable it to make smart decisions securely and 
correctly. The hardware part of the prototype device also 
needs additional work leading to Design for Manufacturing 
(DFM). 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The work reported in this paper is based on the graduate 
project report by Mr. Firas AlMannna [12]. The authors 
would like to thank him for his hard work. We would also 
like to thank reviewers for their comments that helped us 
improve the manuscript.   
REFERENCES 
[1] Jiang, L., Liu, D. and Yang, B., “Smart Home research, 
Machine Learning and Cybernetics,” Proceedings of 2004 
International Conference, vol.2, pp. 659-663, 26-29 Aug. 2004 
[2] Gann, D., Barlow,J. and Venables, T. “Making Homes 
Smarter” Chartered Institute of Housing, 1999. 
[3] Pragnell, M., Spence L., Moore R. (2000) “The market 
potential for Smart Homes”, Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 
York, 
UK, 
http://www.jrf.org.uk/sites/files/jrf/1859353789.pdf, 
July 
2017. 
[4] Poll, H., “Survey Reported on behalf of Lowe's Companies, 
Inc.” 
Jun, 
2014, 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-
releases/cost-confidence-and-convenience-lowes-survey-
reveals-americans-attitudes-on-the-smart-home-
272853581.html, July 2017. 
[5] Vimarlund, V. and Wass, S. “Big Data, Smart Homes and 
Ambient Assisted Living”, IMIA Yearbook of Medical 
Informatics, pp. 143-149, 2014. 
[6] Wilson, C., Hargreaves, T. and Hauxwell-Baldwin, R., “Smart 
Homes and their users: a systematic analysis and key 
challenges”, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, Vol 19(2), 
pp. 463-476, February 2015. 
[7] Siano, P., Graditi, G., Atrigna, M., Piccolo, A., “Designing and 
testing decision support and energy management systems for 
Smart Homes”, Vol. 4, pp. 651-661, 2013 
[8] Pedrasa, M., Spooner, T. and MacGill, I., “Coordinated 
scheduling of residential distributed energy resources to 
optimize Smart Home energy services”, IEEE Transactions on 
Smart Grid, Vol. 1(2), pp. 134–143, September 2010. 
[9] Rastegar, M., Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M. and Aminifar, F., “Load 
commitment in a Smart Home”, Elsevier Applied Energy, Vol., 
pp. 45–54, Augist2012. 
[10] WeMo 
Light 
Switch, 
Thunderbolt 
Technology, 
http://www.belkin.com/us/p/P-F7C030/ , July 2017. 
[11] ZULI Smartplug, https://zuli.io/smartplug/, Zuli Inc., July 
2017. 
[12] AlManna, F., “Smart Power Switch”, Graduate Project Report, 
Umm Al-Qura University, Saudi Arabia, November, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

