Cross-Layer Solutions for Enhancing Multimedia Communication QoS over 
Vehicular Ad hoc Networks
Ali Hassoune Mustafa, Mekkakia Zoulikha and Bendella Fatima 
Department of Computer Engineering,  
University of Sciences and Technology of Oran 
Oran, Algeria 
{mustafa.alihassoune; zoulikha.mekkakia; fatima.bendella}@univ-usto.dz 
Abstract—Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANET) are a 
new emergent technology based on wireless ad hoc networks. 
They are characterized by their high speed nodes, which 
affect on network topology. This can affect network services, 
especially those having big packet size and need high 
bandwidth, such as Multimedia services. Many solutions 
have been proposed in the literature in order to serve a 
better multimedia communication over VANET. In this 
paper, we will focus on cross-layer solutions because of their 
high performance in term of Quality of Service (QoS). We 
present a survey of existing cross-layer solutions, which try 
to enhance multimedia services over VANETs. Works will be 
classified depending on the nature of information exchanged 
and their belonging to OSI Layers. 
Keywords- Cross-Layer; QoS; Multimedia; VANET. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANET) are the main 
interesting instantiation of mobile Ad hoc networks, 
which could have an important role in future services. 
They are characterized by their high mobility due to high 
speed nodes, which affect on network topology. They are 
composed of vehicles equipped with On-Board Units 
(OBUs), and Gateways installed in the streets, which are 
called Road Side Units (RSUs). VANETs can be deployed 
in different kind of roads, such as “Highways” where 
nodes move with high speed (80-120 km/h) and have 
generally low density. Also, VANETs can be deployed in 
“Urban roads” where nodes move with less speed (20-60 
km/h), which affects network density. The urban roads are 
also characterized by the existence of buildings, which act 
as obstacles for VANET communications. 
VANETs use a special MAC protocol called 802.11p, 
which is an enhancement of 802.11, using two types of 
channels: Control Channel (CCH) and Service Channels 
(SCH). The CCH is used for the periodical dissemination 
of control information and for the dissemination of traffic 
safety messages. The SCH is used to disseminate non-
critical information for infotainment applications, such as 
the Video Streaming. In addition, VANET applications 
can be classified into Safety and Non-Safety applications 
(like downloading files or accessing the internet). Safety 
applications can help to prevent accidents and road 
congestions, while the non Safety applications may be 
used for user’s convenience like video streaming or Video 
on Demand (VoD) applications, such as TV Broadcasting. 
Sending these kinds of data in such networks is very 
challenging because of large data size, link breaks, and 
sensibility to losses. These features are rare in such 
networks where nodes move with high speed and where 
topology changes rapidly. Therefore, robust multimedia 
applications encounter many challenges that oblige 
applications to be able to tolerate link failures and packet 
losses in order to have a high quality video at the receiver 
side.  Hence, many solutions have been proposed in the 
literature in order to enhance Multimedia QoS to serve 
better video services in VANET. We shall focus in this 
paper on cross-layer solutions where information is 
exchanged between different layers in order to have a 
better multimedia service. These techniques will be 
classified depending on data exchanging nature.  
This paper is organized into three sections. In Section 
I, we survey existing cross-layer solutions and techniques, 
which enhance multimedia Qos. Section II is reserved for 
discussing the solutions and presenting open issues. In 
Section III, we conclude our work and present future 
works. 
II. CROSS-LAYER SOLUTIONS FOR ENHANCING 
MULTIMEDIA QOS OVER VANET 
Cross-layer approach is an ‘escape’ from the Open 
Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, which applies 
virtually strict boundaries between the layers, data are 
kept within a given layer. Protocol architectures follow 
strict layering principles, which ensure interoperability, 
fast deployment, and efficient implementations. However, 
lack 
of 
coordination 
between 
layers 
limits 
the 
performance of such architectures due to the specific 
challenges posed by wireless nature of the transmission 
links. Cross-layer solutions remove such strict boundaries 
to allow communication between layers. Its core idea is to 
maintain the functionalities associated to the original 
layers but to allow coordination, interaction and joint 
optimization of protocols crossing different layers. 
In this paper, it is notable that all studied mechanisms 
are cross-layer solutions, which serve a high quality video 
on the receiver’s end. We can distinguish between the 
aforementioned techniques based on exchange nature, as 
shown in Table 1. 
TABLE 1.  STUDIED CROSS-LAYER TECHNIQUES 
Works 
APP 
NET 
MAC 
PHY 
[1;2;3;4;6;7;8] 
√ 
 
 
√ 
[9;10;11;12] 
√ 
 
√ 
 
[13;14;15;16;17;18;19; 
20;21] 
√ 
√ 
 
 
[22;23;24;25;26;27;28] 
 
 
√ 
√ 
[29;30;31] 
 
√ 
√ 
 
[32;33;34] 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
We classified these works into six categories shown 
above. The next paragraphs, we present the different 
works found in the literature. 
 
A. Physical-Application exchange solutions  
Physical-Application (PHY-APP) exchange solutions 
adapt physical layer parameters like vertical handoff 
periods in function of application layer information. They 
are presented in this section. 
The vertical handoff was proposed by Yan et al. [1]. 
They presented an algorithm based on the prediction of 
the traveling distance of a vehicle within a wireless cell. 
These try to minimize the probability of unnecessary 
handovers. This probability was constructed by using a 
speed ratio, which is the ratio between instantaneous 
speed of a vehicle and maximum speed, function of the 
technologies radius cell coverage, and of the average 
handover latency.  
Another algorithm, based on physical layer parameters 
as handover latency and the received signal strength, 
presented by Kwak, et al. [2], had an objective of reducing 
the loss of throughput. Their valid ideas are limited to 
horizontal handovers in Wireless Local Area Networks 
(WLAN) though with homogeneous topologies.  
Chen et al. [3] presented an approach in which a novel 
network mobility protocol for VANETs was presented. It 
was a solution that limits vertical handover drawbacks and 
reduces both packet loss rate and handoff latency.  
Another critical issue in any system is the handoff 
decision policy. Zhu et al. [4] proposed a work for train-
ground communication, which can be applied in VANETs. 
They suggested that video distortion is the most direct 
QoS performance metric from the perspective of end 
users, which can be estimated by packet loss rate and 
encoding parameters. It is formulated as a Semi-Markov 
Decision Process (SMDP), which is a generalization of a 
Markov Decision Process (MDP) [5]. The optimal handoff 
decision and application layer parameters adaption 
policies can be obtained from the value iteration algorithm 
of SMDP.  
In addition, a new strategy was presented which 
analyses users’ interactive viewing behavior by estimating 
video segment playback order. That employed pre-
fetching of the expected segments, by smoothening the 
video playback. A cellular network had relatively high 
stable connectivity merits, but it was more expensive. So, 
by using VANET, vehicles can forward data to other 
nodes or RSUs at low costs. However, VANETs easily 
become disconnected in situations with low vehicle 
density and high mobility, which needs to switch to 
another technology. Four novel mechanisms were 
introduced: distributed grouping-based video segments 
storage scheme, video segment seeking scheme, multipath 
data delivery mechanism, and Speculation-based pre-
fetching strategy.  
Alternatively, Changqiao et al. [6] proposed a Quality 
of Experience (QoE)-driven solution for VoD services in 
urban vehicular network environments. Vehicles create a 
low VANET layer with Wireless Access In Vehicular 
Environments (WAVE) interfaces and create an upper 
layer Peer-To-Peer (P2P) Chord overlay on top of a 
cellular network via 4G interfaces. A novel storage 
strategy was proposed that distributes the video segments 
along the Chord overlay, reducing segment seeking traffic 
and achieving a high success rate and very good video 
data delivery efficiency. 
Sadiq et al. [7] proposed an Intelligent Network 
Selection (INS) scheme, which ranks available wireless 
network candidates using three input parameters: Faded 
Signal-to-Noise Ratio, Residual Channel Capacity, and 
Connection Life Time. In this proposed scheme, when a 
vehicle is in busy-mode, its wireless channel can execute 
various real time and non-real time applications. In order 
to identify and select the most qualified network candidate 
as the next wireless access point, each vehicle executes 
the INS algorithm in the network access area. This avoids 
any unnecessary handover decisions during real-time 
sessions. Results showed that INS is more efficient at 
decreasing handover delays, end-to-end delays for VoIP 
and video applications, and packet loss ratios. 
An adaptive QoS handoff priority scheme was 
proposed by Zhuang et al. [8] for wireless networks, 
which reduces the probability of call handoff failures in a 
mobile multimedia network with cellular architecture. 
This approach used the ability of most multimedia traffic 
types to adapt some QoS at the packet level to achieve a 
smaller probability of dropping at handoff, which has an 
impact on the multimedia received QoS. So, calls with 
adaptive traffic can opt to use lower amounts of 
bandwidth and handoff successfully. Also, it proposed the 
Adaptive Quality of Service (AQoS) scheme proved more 
flexibly and efficiently in guaranteeing QoS and 
proposing a modification, called the Modified Adaptive 
QoS (MAQoS), which can admit new calls even when the 
system is in the congestion state, e.g., emergency calls. In 
addition to the flexibility inherited from the AQoS 
scheme, MAQoS is even more flexible in decoupling the 
different 
components 
(dropping, 
and 
blocking 
probabilities) of the grade of service metric. The adaptive 
QoS handoff priority scheme and its modification are 
studied analytically and compared to those of the non 
priority handoff and the guard-channel handoff schemes, 
and have shown better results. 
B. MAC-Application Exchange solutions  
MAC-Application (MAC-APP) exchange solutions 
adjust MAC parameters like retransmissions or frame rate 
in terms of Multimedia QoS like latency or loss rate 
received from the application layer.  
First, 
an 
adaptive 
MAC 
retransmission 
limits 
adaptation scheme proposed by Asefi et al. [9], in which 
the adaptation was based on an optimization of video 
streaming quality. It adjusts MAC retransmission limit 
using channel information and periodically feeds to RSU. 
It is used to calculate the probability of media access 
between the RSU and the vehicle. In the Enhanced 
Distributed Channel Access (EDCA) of 802.11p, Video 
packets are associated with lower priority compared to 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

safety messages. To solve this problem, this scheme 
applies a multi-objective optimization framework at the 
RSU, which tunes the MAC retransmission limit with 
respect to channel statistics (packet error rate and packet 
transmission rate) in order to minimize the probability of 
playback freezes and start-up delay of the streaming. 
To address the problem of adaptive QoS, Mercado and 
Liu [10] proposed a solution, which choosing the Signal-
to-Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR) of each user’s 
channel as the QoS index depending on the nature of 
multimedia. They tried to solve two problems. The first by 
increasing the SINR levels for multimedia users. Different 
users have distinct desired SINR levels according to their 
requested service types; their algorithm uses an iterative 
method to drive the SINR levels as close as possible to 
those desired levels. The SINR levels are improved 
without deteriorating quality for other types of users. It 
showed a significant increase in the average SINR levels 
for multimedia users. The second problem is how to 
initiate new users into the network by using lower 
complexity algorithms. The proposed algorithm also 
included a fast activation scheme that reduces the 
computational complexity involved in some parts of call 
initiation, by using a coarser and faster method for finding 
feasible SINR.  
Another solution, presented by Venkataraman et al. 
[11], is a hybrid IEEE 802.11p-based multihop network 
communication solution (QOAS). This delivered quality-
oriented real-time multimedia data to high-speed vehicles 
by using both infrastructure and ad hoc modes. A client-
server feedback was used in order to support high 
multimedia quality. QOAS estimates how a user perceives 
quality and sends feedback to the server, which adjusts 
video transmission rate. They are based on the fact that 
random losses have a greater impact on the perceived 
quality than a controlled reduction. It was specially used 
to send video stream with high quality to moving vehicles 
at high speed, and where there was a quick handover 
between different relay nodes and the sender. 
The last MAC-Application solution studied was the 
work proposed by Bonuccelli et al. [12], which focused 
on situations of traffic congestion. The transmitter reduces 
the transmission rate by 50%, when two consecutive 
frames are not received. The application layer reduces the 
rate when congestion is detected in MAC level. The 
transmitter decides whether a packet will reach the 
receiver in time. If not, the transmitter either drops it or 
sends it, which may be useful for decoding the next 
packet.  
C. Network-Application exchange solutions 
In this section, we present Network-Application (NET-
APP) exchange solutions, which adjust parameters of 
routing or clustering in function of feedback received 
from the application layer. 
A novel user-oriented cluster-based solution for 
multimedia delivery over VANETs proposed by Irina et al. 
[13], which is able to personalize multimedia content and 
its delivery based on the preferences of the passengers and 
their profiles. It includes two algorithms. The first one 
focuses on cluster head selection, which makes sure that 
cluster head function is efficiently distributed among 
vehicles. The second one is the cluster formation 
algorithm, which aims to group vehicles based on vehicle 
characteristics and user interest in content.  
Both algorithms take into account the velocity of the 
mobiles, direction of travel and position of the vehicles. 
The proposed solution used a client-server architecture 
based on a hybrid vehicular communication network 
model. The vehicles are organized in clusters based on the 
user interest in multimedia content, location, direction of 
travel and velocity.  
Another new application-centric solution is proposed 
as a routing protocol for streaming video in multihop for 
VANET. It is based on exchanging information between 
the application layer and the network layer aiming to 
select the path. This minimizes the application layer’s 
frame distortion rate, which is the average distortion of 
the video frames at the destination vehicle. It was 
proposed by Asefi et al. [14]. A subset of candidates is 
selected by the node carrying data and is transmitted with 
video frames of high quality applying application centric 
optimization.  
Another solution, proposed by Asefi et al. [15], 
focused on routing, which had shown the enhancement of 
video quality. This was achieved by minimizing 
distortion, the startup delay and streaming freezes. A 
virtual link is created between the destination vehicle and 
the access router and not RSU. They proposed a new 
protocol, Quality-Driven Routing Protocol. The proposed 
data delivery model had two modes of operation. The first 
one is the “straight way” where the vehicle carrying the 
packet to be forwarded selects N neighboring vehicles that 
are in its transmission range and are geographically closer 
to the destination vehicle. It then selects the next hop that 
minimizes the frame distortion. The second mode is 
“Intersection” where the vehicle selects the next straight 
path to forward the packet.  
Sajimon and Sojan [16] applied a spatio-temporal 
similarity measure using Points of Interest (POI) and Time 
of Interest (TOI). The similarity formed will be used by 
the remote database to broadcast trigger-based messages 
to participating vehicles in a neighborhood for a future 
route. A large quantity of collected trajectories were 
published and shared across users on many websites. 
Additionally, it demonstrated a binary encoding scheme in 
managing road network data, and proposed a structural 
and sequence similarity measure between travel locations 
in finding a spatial similarity. 
An 
application 
layer 
forwarding 
algorithm 
incorporating 
VANET 
routing, 
called 
Intelligent 
Adjustment Forwarding (IAF), proposed by Jung-Shian et 
al. [17], in which a segment-to-segment transmission 
paradigm was used to enhance the video data delivery. 
IAF started by performing an intelligent routing discovery 
process to establish a transmission path to the destination, 
where the source obtains the position information of all 
the nodes along the transmission path and then determines 
which of these nodes should be nominated as 
Intermittently Connected Points (ICPs). Then, data is 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

transmitted to the destination by the ICPs using a store-
and-forward paradigm. If the source node is unable to 
locate the destination, the data is transmitted to the 
segment endpoint, which performs a store-carry-and-
forward function in order to deliver the data to the 
destination.  
Also, Asefi et al. [18] proposed a cross-layer protocol 
whose routing decision was based on application layer 
objective function. It discussed the encoded transmissions, 
decoding reception and error prone channels. The 
appropriate route is chosen to achieve an optimized Peak 
Signal-to Noise Ratio (PSNR) in different densities 
networks. In that proposed Cross-Layer Path Selection 
Scheme, the video streaming was sent from RSU to a 
vehicle using multi-hop communication. An encoding rate 
was allocated to each video session at the RSU side. This 
scheme selects the path with lowest end-to-end distortion 
for each video packet and for the entire video stream 
where the total distortion is the summation of all the 
packet distortions of a video stream.  
IBCAV, abbreviation of Intelligent Based Clustering 
Algorithm in VANETs, was proposed by Mottahedi et al. 
[19]. Their proposal seeked to improve routing algorithms 
in VANETs by employing inter-layered methods, where 
cluster size, speed and density of nodes are the factors, 
which have been taken into account. Results show that the 
IBCAV performs better than other routing protocols in 
terms of packet delivery ratio, end-to-end delays and 
throughput. 
A cooperative overtaking assistance systems based on 
VANETs is another network-application solution proposed 
by Vinel et al. [20]. A video stream, captured by a camera 
installed at the vehicle, is compressed and broadcast to 
any vehicles driving behind it. They demonstrate that the 
performance of their scheme can be significantly 
improved if codec channel adaptation is undertaken by 
exploiting information from the beacons about any 
forthcoming increase in the load of the multiple access 
channel used. Their proposal results give the guarantee of 
low latency and acceptable visual quality by making use 
of the additional information obtained from the 
beaconing. 
Finally, DVAC was proposed by Yung-Cheng and 
Nen-Fu [21]. Distributed Vehicles Adaptive Clustering is 
an application layer solution for delivering live video 
streams by forming clusters. This algorithm was designed 
to form and maintain clusters. They create clusters with 
vehicles moving in the same direction.  The vehicles 
decide whether they are cluster head, tail or member. It 
also suggested Vehicles-Adaptive PEer-to-Peer relay 
(VAPER) method, which was responsible for avoiding 
duplicates in streaming in the cluster.  Both the head and 
tail act as redirectors in communications between vehicles 
in the same cluster, and they act as peers in 
communication between clusters.  It showed that even if 
the signal is lost, there is a continuous play of live video 
streaming for a considerable time. 
D. Physical-MAC exchange solutions 
The cross-layer solutions in this section are mainly 
based on the information flow between MAC layer and 
PHY layer (PHY-MAC). For example, transmission rate 
adaptation is the ability to adjust the modulation rate at 
which packets are transmitted according to the observed 
channel qualities, such as SNR and packet loss rate. 
Camp and Knightly [22] investigated cross-layer 
designs for modulation rate adaptation in vehicular 
networks targeted at urban and downtown environments. 
Their work involved high-level interaction between the 
MAC and physical layers. They studied two protocols for 
rate adaptation, which are Loss-triggered and SNR-
triggered. The transmitters determine the packet loss rate 
by monitoring the frame receptions of the packet 
transmission in MAC layer. If an Acknowledgement 
(ACK) is received before the timeout event then the 
transmission is considered to be successful. This type of 
information is shared between MAC and PHY layers. The 
transmitter 
increases 
the 
transmission 
rate 
after 
consecutive successful transmissions and decreases the 
rate after observing consecutive failures.  
SoftRate is a bit rate adaptation protocol proposed by 
Vutukuru et al. [23]. The receivers used physical layer 
calculated information that was exported to higher layers 
via an interface called the SoftPHY interface. SoftPHY 
estimates the channel Bit-Error Rate (BER) upon 
receiving packet frame.  
Also, Chen [24] developed a novel IEEE 802.21 
Media Independent Handover (MIH) mechanism for next 
generation vehicular multimedia network, and they 
proposed also an adaptive QoS management mechanism. 
The proposed MIH framework can determine the best 
available network by obtaining received signal strength 
parameters. Results showed that using this mechanism can 
increase overall throughput, which is satisfactory 
compensation for increased handover time. 
Another cross-layer solution, proposed by Rawat et al. 
[25], is a joint adaptation between MAC and physical 
layer that mainly focuses on adaptation of transmission 
power and QoS message prioritization based on node 
density and contention window size. Network calculates 
the node density by gathering the neighbors’ information 
within. By adopting a traffic flow model as proposed by 
Artimy et al. [26], using length of road segment, estimated 
vehicle density, and traffic flow constant parameters, it 
calculates the new transmission range. The transmission 
power is a function of transmission range. To support QoS 
applications, authors proposed two distinct functionalities 
to adjust the priority of the packets – transmission power 
level in physical layer and MAC channel access 
parameters, such as minimum contention window 
(CWmin), maximum contention window (CWmax), and 
arbitration interframe space (AIFs).  
Similarly, Caizzone et al. [27] proposed a mechanism 
that adjusts the transmission power adaptively based on 
number of neighbors. Each vehicle starts with initial 
transmission power and incrementally increases the 
transmission power as long as the number of neighbors is 
within a minimum threshold, or it reaches maximum 
transmission power. The transmission power is decreased 
if the number of neighbors is greater than maximum 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

threshold.  
Finally, Rawat, et al. [28] presented a new scheme for 
dynamic adaptation of transmission power and Contention 
Window 
(CW) 
size 
to enhance 
performance 
of 
information dissemination in VANETs. That was achieved 
by incorporating the EDCA mechanism of 802.11e and 
using a joint approach to adapt transmission power at the 
physical layer and QoS parameters at the MAC layer. The 
transmission power adapted was based on the estimated 
local vehicle density to change the transmission range 
dynamically, while the CW size was adapted according to 
the instantaneous collision rate to enable service 
differentiation. In the interest of promoting timely 
propagation of information, VANET advisories were 
prioritized according to their urgency and the EDCA 
mechanism is employed for their dissemination. Results 
show that this scheme brings better throughput and lower 
average end-to-end delay compared with other similar 
schemes. 
E. Network-MAC exchange solutions  
The cross-layer solutions in this section are mainly 
based on the information flow between MAC layer and 
Network layer (NET-MAC). 
First, Zhang et al. [29] proposed the "in network 
aggregation" mechanism by employing a cross-layer 
design. Because the communication traffic statistical data 
of MAC layer affects the traffic density and the data 
arrival, they determine the aggregation period on the basis 
of traffic statistics of MAC layer. Its objective in-network 
aggregation was to reduce the amount of data to be 
transmitted as much as possible. They intended to apply 
SMDP to optimize the aggregation period and gave an 
approximate solution by exploiting a real-time Q-learning 
algorithm.  
Another NET-MAC approach was the route selection 
through link prediction. Menouar et al. [30] proposed 
Movement Prediction-based Routing (MOPR), which was 
an approach proposing a movement prediction based 
routing 
protocol 
for 
Vehicle 
to 
Vehicle 
(V2V) 
communication in VANETs. It takes vehicle movement 
information available in MAC layer, such as position, 
direction, speed, and network topology into consideration, 
in order to improve the routing process. MOPR predicts 
the future location of intermediate relay nodes, which help 
in selecting the most stable routes containing stable nodes 
that are traveling in the same direction or with the similar 
speed or on the same road as of the destination/source 
nodes.  
Similar to MOPR, Chen et al. [31] proposed a multi-
path routing protocol to reduce the frequency of route 
rediscovery. They proposed a cRoss-layer Ad hoc On-
demand 
Multipath 
Distance 
Vector 
(R-AOMDV) 
protocol. This method made use of a routing metric that 
combines hop count and transmission counts at MAC 
layer by taking into consideration the quality of 
intermediate links and delay reduction. It relied on two 
control packets: Route REQuest (RREQ) and Route 
REPly (RREP). The intermediate first hop nodes in RREQ 
and RREP packets were used to distinguish between 
multiple paths from source to destination. To measure the 
quality of the entire path, we add two additional fields to 
RREP packets: the Maximum Retransmission Count 
(MRC) that is measured in MAC layer and the total hop 
count that is measured in network layer. 
F. Physical-MAC-Network exchange Solutions  
Solutions in this section are based on the information 
flow between PHY, MAC and NET layer (PHY-MAC-
NET). 
A novel CAC algorithm was proposed by Bejaoui 
[32]. It provides the desired throughput guarantees on the 
basis of the vehicle density and the nodes’ transmission 
range in 802.11p VANETs. They considered vehicle-to-
roadside communications as essential to manage traffic 
situations.  In order to enhance the performance of 
vehicular communications, this scheme adapts the 
transmission power physical layer and optimizes the 
contention window size (in MAC layer) depending on 
information coming from NET Layer as the vehicle 
density estimation. Results have shown that this solution 
improves 
the 
performance 
of 
the 
vehicular 
communication. 
Also, Sofra et al. [33] proposed an approach using a 
Link Residual Time (LRT), which was calculated by using 
the received power from the physical layer. This value can 
be used by other layers to make better decisions for 
handover, scheduling time, and routing decisions. Each 
vehicle monitors parameters like the arrival time and the 
received power level for each packet that was received on 
the link.  The estimation of LRT starts by removing the 
noise from the data, and checks if the link quality is 
deteriorating, then, it estimates the model parameters 
required for calculating LRT. Finally, renewing LRT is 
estimated.  
Finally, Singh et al. [34] presented the use of link 
connectivity information among neighbors to help in 
addressing the challenges in designing routing protocols 
for VANET environments. They proposed a cross-layer 
protocol called Signal Strength Assessment Based Route 
Selection for OLSR (SBRS-OLSR). In this framework, 
the link connectivity was based on SNR measurement, 
and the routing protocol was based on existing Optimized 
Link State Routing (OLSR). By capturing SNR 
information from the physical layer, the network layer can 
provide a better route that improves throughput and delay 
performance.  
III. DISCUSSION AND OPEN ISSUES 
In section II, we surveyed the existing cross-layer 
techniques and solutions for enhancing multimedia QoS. 
Cross-layer solutions are efficient in serving a better video 
service by adjusting layers’ parameters in regard of other 
layers’ information. Cross-layer approaches try to 
overcome the lack of coordination between layers that 
limits the performance of wireless networks. These 
solutions allow coordination, interaction and joint 
optimization of protocols crossing different layers.  
For example, PHY-APP exchange solutions, which 
adjust physical layer parameters in terms of application 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

layer information, can increase Multimedia QoS using 
efficient handoff solutions. Additionally, MAC-APP 
solutions significantly help in offering a reliable video 
communication in VANET by adjusting contention 
windows and frame rate depending on QoS information 
received from the application layer. Furthermore, NET-
APP solutions help in finding the best route in terms of 
QoS to disseminate packets, or choosing the optimal 
cluster head, which will act as a broadcaster of 
Multimedia data. This in turn results in order to have a 
better multimedia service.  
According to the literature, PHY-APP and MAC-APP 
are the most effective solutions, which adapt Physical and 
MAC parameters in terms of interaction with Application 
layer. Since Physical and MAC layers are the closest to 
nodes, their impact can be higher than other solutions.  
However, there are several issues that need further 
attention. Below; we will try to evaluate these studies and 
describe open research problems, which will need to be 
studied, in addition. 
A. Evaluation metrics and tools 
The evaluation of existing techniques is one of the 
most relevant open issues, as it is not easy to measure 
Multimedia communication QoS and it is more subjective 
rather than objective. The aforementioned works did not 
necessarily use the same common metrics. Some of 
studied works simulations use packet loss rate, and/or end 
to end delay, and/or throughput which are not necessarily 
significant for Multimedia QoS. Some papers use other 
metrics like PSNR, Mean Opinion Score (MOS), Video 
distortion, or other video metrics [35]. In addition, they do 
not necessarily use the same simulation tools. There are 
several network simulators, such as NS2, NS3, 
OMNET++, OPNET, etc.[36]. This makes it more 
difficult to compare between the results of different 
solutions. So thus, finding a common tool and metrics 
function can significantly help in evaluating and 
comparing different solutions. 
B. Global solution 
As evident from existing research described in the last 
section, many protocol designs focus on a specific 
problem in multimedia communication Qos. Some of 
them try to solve end to end delay problem; others try to 
reduce packet loss rate. Other works by trying to stop or 
minimize freezes and video play drawbacks. However, 
most of these protocols ignore to design a complete 
solution for Multimedia over VANET, which can take into 
consideration most of the problems encountered in 
Multimedia communication QoS in VANET. This kind of 
solution, to the best of our knowledge, has not been 
alluded to or studied in the literature. Such solutions can 
be presented as a global solution working on different ISO 
layers at the same time (data are exchanged between 
multiple layers). Therefore, it is still an open research 
issue to develop a global solution, which takes into 
account many other factors at time. Our paper may help in 
developing such complete solutions. 
C. Mobility models 
Another important issue is “the mobility models” 
which represent the movement of mobile vehicles in 
changing their positions, speeds and accelerations all the 
time. Therefore:   
• It is very important to use realistic mobility models 
that reflect reality. This can be very important in 
analyzing the performance of the different proposed 
solutions.  
• Also, as everyone knows, there are many mobility 
scenarios types: highway scenarios, intersection 
scenarios, rural scenarios, etc. Most of works focus 
their proposed solution on a specific mobility scenario 
type (even if it is realistic). So it is very important to 
design a solution which can be compatible with all 
existing mobility scenarios types. 
D. Existence of other applications in the network 
Most of the mentioned solutions focus on a specific 
problematic, which is “Multimedia QoS”. They try to 
provide a better video service. However, this may 
negatively affect on other applications behavior, because 
the channel is shared by many devices, so it is difficult to 
fulfill QoS guarantees. Also, most of these studies realize 
their simulations without taking into account existence of 
other applications in the network which may distort their 
results, such as file transfer, video applications or any 
other launched application. Therefore, it is still an open 
research issue to study and develop solutions for. This 
might take into account existing of other applications in 
the network. 
E. QoS support in a multicast streaming 
It is an area which requires attention and studies in 
cross-layer solutions in VANET.  
F. Cross-Layer design and instability 
Additionally, any Cross-Layer design should take 
attention as undesirable effect on the system performance 
can occur due to Cross-Layer exchanges. Frantic and 
extensive Cross-Layer exchanges may lead to a complex 
mixture design and may lack standardization and 
compatibility and portability features. So, it is important 
to have a deep analysis and design of the Cross-Layer 
solution because it may lead to a state of instability [37], 
which is very important, especially in VANET, because of 
large number of nodes (vehicles and RSUs), and multiple 
sources and destinations. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we focused on the problem of video 
communication between vehicles in VANET. Many 
solutions have been proposed in the literature in order to 
enhance multimedia QoS and provide better video 
services between vehicles or between RSUs and vehicles. 
Cross-layer adaptations are essential for guaranteeing 
QoS in Multimedia Communications over VANET. We 
surveyed existing cross-layer techniques and solutions 
that enhance multimedia QoS. A classification is provided 
depending on data exchange type (belonging to ISO 
layers).  We present many types of techniques and 
systems: PHY-APP, MAC-APP, NET-APP, PHY-MAC, 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

NET-MAC and NET-MAC-PHY, where each layer 
changes its parameters in function of other layer 
information. As a future work, a comparison between 
different classes is needed, in order to deduct the most 
effective class and technique of mentioned Cross-Layer 
solutions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Z. Yan, H. Zhou, H. Zhang, and S. Zhang. “Speed-Based 
Probability-Driven Seamless Handover Scheme between WLAN 
and UMTS”, 4th International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and 
Sensor Networks, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2008, pp. 110–115. 
[2] 
D. Kwak, J. Mo, and M. Kang. “Investigation of handoffs for IEEE 
802.11 networks in vehicular environment”, ICUFN 2009, Hong 
Kong, June 7-9, 2009, pp. 89–94. 
[3] 
Y. S. Chen, C. H. Cheng, C. S. Hsu, and G. M. Chiu. “Network 
Mobility Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc Network”, IEEE WCNC 
2009, Budapest, Hungary, April 5-8, 2009, pp. 1–6. 
[4] 
L. Zhu , F.R. Yu, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Cross-Layer Design for 
Video Transmissions in Metro Passenger Information Systems”, 
IEEE Transactions on  Vehicular Technology, vol. 60, iss.  3, 
March 2011, pp. 1171 - 1181. 
[5] 
R. S. Sutton, D. Precup, and S. Singh, ”Between MDPs and Semi-
MDPs: A Framework for Temporal Abstraction in Reinforcement 
Learning », Journal of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 112, 1999, pp. 
181–211. 
[6] 
X. Changqiao et al. , “QoE-driven User-centric VoD Services in 
UrbanMulti-homed 
P2P-based 
Vehicular 
Networks”, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 62 , iss. 5, June 2013, 
pp. 2273 – 2289. 
[7] 
A. S. Sadiq et al., “An Intelligent Vertical Handover Scheme for 
Audio and Video Streaming in Heterogeneous Vehicular 
Networks”, Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 18, iss. 6, 
December 2013, pp. 879-895. 
[8] 
W. Zhuang, B. Bensaou, and K. C. Chua ,”Adaptive Quality of 
Service Handoff Priority Scheme for Mobile Multimedia 
Networks”, IEEE Transactions On Vehicular Technology, vol. 49, 
no. 2, March 2000, pp. 494 – 505. 
[9] 
M. Asefi, W. Jon, and Xuemin Shen, “A Mobility-Aware and 
Quality-Driven Retransmission Limit Adaptation Scheme for 
Video Streaming over VANETs”, IEEE Transactions on Wireless 
Communications, vol. 11, iss.  5, May 2012, pp. 1817 – 1827. 
[10] A. Mercado and K. Liu, "Adaptive QoS for Wireless Multimedia 
Networks Using Power Control and Smart Antennas",IEEE 
Transactions On Vehicular Technology, vol. 51, no. 5, September 
2002, pp. 1223 - 1233. 
[11] H. Venkataraman, et al., “Performance Analysis of Real-Time 
Multimedia Transmission in 802.11p based Multihop Hybrid 
Vehicular Networks”, 6th International Wireless Communications 
and Mobile Computing Conference, 2010, pp. 1151-1155. 
[12] M.A. Bonuccelli, G. Giunta, F. Lonetti, and F. Martelli, “Real-time 
video transmission in vehicular networks”, Mobile Networking for 
Vehicular Environments, May 2007, pp. 115-120. 
[13] Irina et al., "User-oriented Cluster-based Solution for Multimedia 
Content Delivery over VANETs", IEEE Computer Society, 2012, 
pp. 1-5. 
[14] M. Asefi, W. Jon, and  Xuemin Shen., “An Application-Centric 
Inter-Vehicle Routing Protocol for Video Streaming over Multi-
Hop Urban VANETs”, IEEE International Conference on 
Communications, June 2011, pp. 1-5. 
[15] M. Asefi, S. Cespedes, Xuemin Shen, and W. Jon,”A Seamless 
Quality-Driven Multi-Hop Data Delivery Scheme for Video 
Streaming in Urban VANET Scenarios”, IEEE International 
Conference on Communications (ICC), June 2011, pp. 1-5. 
[16] S. Abraham and P. Sojan Lal, “Spatio-temporal similarity of 
network-constrained moving object trajectories using sequence 
alignment of travel locations”, Data Management in Vehicular 
Networks, vol. 23, August 2012, pp. 109–123. 
[17] L. Jung-Shian , L. I-Hsien Liu, K. Chuan-Kai, and T. Chao-Ming, 
“Intelligent Adjustment Forwarding: A compromise between end-
to-end and hop-by-hop transmissions in VANET environments”, 
Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 59, iss. 10, November 2013, 
pp. 1319-1333. 
[18] M. Asefi, W. Jon, and X. Shen, “A Cross-Layer Path Selection 
Scheme for Video Streaming over Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks”, 
VTC 2010-Fall, September 2010, pp. 1-5. 
[19] Mottahedi, et al., "IBCAV: Intelligent Based Clustering Algorithm 
in VANET", IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science 
Issues, vol. 10, iss. 1, no 2, January 2013,pp. 538. 
[20] A. Vinel, , E. Belyaev, K. Egiazarian, and Y. Koucheryavy, “An 
Overtaking Assistance System Based on Joint Beaconing and Real-
Time Video Transmission”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, vol. 61, iss. 5, June 2012, pp. 2319 – 2329. 
[21] C. Yung-Cheng and H. Nen-Fu, “Delivering of Live Video 
Streaming for Vehicular Communication Using Peer-to-Peer 
Approach”, Mobile Networking for Vehicular Environments, May 
2007, pp. 1-6. 
[22] J. Camp and E. Knightly, “Modulation rate adaptation in urban and 
vehicular 
environments: 
cross-layer 
implementation 
and 
experimental evaluation”, 14th ACM International Conference on 
Mobile Computing and Networking, 2008, pp. 315–326. 
[23] M. Vutukuru, H. Balakrishnan, and K. Jamieson, “Cross-layer 
wireless bit rate adaptation”, ACM SIGCOMM Computer 
Communication Review, vol. 39, no 4, 2009, pp. 3–14. 
[24] C. Jiann-Liang, "An Adaptive QoS mechanism for multimedia 
applications over next generation vehicular network", 5th 
International ICST , CHINACOM, August 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[25] D.B. Rawat, G. Yan, D. Popescu, M. Weigle, and S. Olariu, 
“Dynamic Adaptation of Joint Transmission Power and Contention 
Window in VANET”, 2009, pp. 1–5. 
[26] M. Artimy, W. Robertson, and W. Phillips, “Assignment of 
dynamic transmission range based on estimation of vehicle 
density”, 2nd ACM International Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc 
Networks, 2005, pp. 48. 
[27] G. Caizzone, P. Giacomazzi, L. Musumeci, and G. Verticale, “A 
power control algorithm with high channel availability for 
vehicular ad hoc networks”, IEEE International Journal on 
Communications, 2005, pp. 3171–3176. 
[28] D.B. Rawat, et al., "Enhancing VANET Performance by Joint 
Adaptation of Transmission Power and Contention Window Size", 
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 22, 
no. 9, September 2011, pp. 1528-1535. 
[29] L. Zhang et al., "QoS-Oriented Data Dissemination in VANETs", 
IEEE 26th International Parallel and Distributed Processing 
Symposium Workshops & PhD Forum, 2012, pp. 2518 – 2521. 
[30] M. Menouar, M. Lenardi, and F. Filali, “A movement prediction 
based routing protocol for vehicle-to-vehicle communications”, 
66th Vehicular Technology Conference, 2007, pp. 2101 - 2105. 
[31] Y. Chen, Z. Xiang, W. Jian, and W. Jiang, “A Cross-layer 
AOMDV Routing Protocol for V2V Communication in Urban 
VANET”, 2009, pp. 353– 359. 
[32] T. Bejaoui, “QoS-Oriented High Dynamic Resource Allocation in 
Vehicular Communication Networks”,The Scientific World 
Journal, 2014, pp. 1-9. 
[33] N. Sofra, A. Gkelias, and K. Leung, “Link residual-time estimation 
for VANET cross-layer design”, 2009, pp. 1–5. 
[34] J. Singh, N. Bambos, B. Srinivasan, and D. Clawin, “Cross-layer 
multi-hop wireless routing for inter-vehicle communication”, 
TRIDENTCOM, 2006, pp. 92–101. 
[35] A. Chan, K. Zeng, P. Mohapatra, S. Lee and S. Banerjee, "Metrics 
for Evaluating Video Streaming Quality in Lossy IEEE 802.11 
Wireless Networks", INFOCOM, March 2010, pp. 1-9. 
[36] S. Siraj, A. K. Gupta, and R. Badgujar, "Network Simulation Tools 
Survey", IJARCCE, vol. 1, iss. 4, June 2012, pp. 201-210. 
[37] B. Jarupan, E. Ekici, « A survey of cross-layer design for 
VANETs », Ad Hoc Networks journal, vol. 9, iss. 5, July 2011, pp. 
1-18. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

