Designing Improved Traffic Control in Network-based 
Seamless Mobility Management for Wireless LAN 
Takeshi Usui 
Network Research Headquarters, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology,  
,Koganei City, Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: ta-usui@nict.go.jp 
 
Abstract—Seamless mobility management which prevents 
packet loss when mobile terminals (MTs) move is an 
indispensable feature for future mobile networks. Proxy 
Fast Mobile IPv6 (PFMIPv6) has been standardized to reduce 
packet loss of 
user 
data 
in 
network-based 
mobility 
management. By predicting the movement of MTs, it can 
minimize packet loss by forwarding user data from the 
previous mobile access gateway (MAG) to the new MAG where 
MT makes a handoff, and by buffering the forwarded data at 
the new MAG until the MT is attached to it. When shared 
wireless access technology (e.g., wireless LAN) is employed as a 
wireless access network, the released packets from the buffer 
in the new MAG degrade the communication quality of the 
other (resident) MTs already attached to the wireless access 
network. In this paper, we propose a MAG design treating the 
buffered packets to prevent degradation of the communication 
quality of all MTs (resident MTs and MTs making handoffs). 
Using 
a 
packet-based 
simulation, 
we 
investigate 
the 
communication quality and show the proposed method’s 
validity. 
Keywords-
 
Network-based 
seamless 
mobility 
management; Wireless LAN;  QoS; VoIP 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless access technologies have greatly advanced in the 
past few years. Among these advances IEEE 802.11-based 
wireless LAN plays an important role in offering convenient 
network connectivity and high-speed access at affordable 
costs. With these wireless access technologies, wireless 
networks are evolving toward all-IP systems. IP (network-
layer) mobility needs to support transparency with 
applications and independence within mobile networks. 
Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [1], a mobility protocol within the IP 
layer, provides mobility management for mobile terminals 
(MTs), but only MTs with the host implementation of MIPv6 
can acquire the function of the mobility management. Proxy 
Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) [2], network-based mobility 
management without MTs participating in related signaling, 
has now been standardized. When PMIPv6 is adopted in 
mobile networks, all MTs with IPv6 functions can acquire 
mobility management service. MTs adopting PMIPv6 cannot 
communicate while the MT makes a handoff, that is, the MT 
changes mobile access gateways (MAGs), and in many cases 
some packet loss occurs in this period.  
To minimize this packet loss, Proxy Fast Mobile IPv6 
(PFMIPv6) [3] has been standardized as network-based 
seamless mobility management. When the MT makes a 
handoff, PFMIPv6 can prevent packet loss by buffering the 
MT’s user data forwarded from the previous MAG (PMAG) 
to the new MAG (NMAG), to which the MT is attached 
before and after the MT's handoff. PFMIPv6 will be utilized 
in future mobile networks to provide seamless mobility 
management for numerous MTs 
When multiple MTs in PFMIPv6 simultaneously make 
handoffs into the same NMAG, a multiple set of buffered 
user data is concurrently released in a bursty manner, as 
described in Section II-A. This leads to degraded 
communication quality for the other MTs (“resident MTs” 
hereinafter) already attached to the NMAG. Even if IEEE 
802.11e [4] is applied to guarantee QoS, the buffered packets 
in the MAG lead to degraded communication quality of the 
resident MTs when they are categorized as high-priority 
traffic that the resident MTs are also using. 
 For seamless mobility management, the one-way delay of 
the traffic into the MTs making handoffs (“handoff MTs” 
hereafter) should also be a concern. Real-time applications 
have acceptable values for a one-way delay. Some have the 
standardization [5] defining requirements of one-way delays 
as a QoS requirement. Packets with a large one-way delay 
exceeding the acceptable value are treated as actual losses by 
these applications, even if they are ultimately delivered to the 
applications. If the traffic of the resident MTs is prioritized 
and the delay of the traffic into the handoff MTs is prolonged, 
seamless 
mobility 
management 
sometimes 
becomes 
meaningless. A traffic control method that does not degrade 
the communication quality of resident MTs and handoff MTs 
should also be considered for cooperating with seamless 
mobility management. 
Considering these issues, we propose a MAG design that 
treats the traffic of the resident MTs and the handoff MTs 
separately along with a buffered-packet releasing traffic 
control method to prevent degraded communication quality 
for all the MTs. This paper evaluates the effects of the 
proposed traffic control method. Section 2 addresses issues 
of wireless LAN in seamless mobility management. Section 
3 introduces the design of MAG and the proposed traffic 
control method. Section 4 discusses an experiment with 
packet-based simulation. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
 
96
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

II. 
WIRELESS LAN ISSUE IN NETWORK-BASED 
SEAMLESS MOBILITY MANAGEMENT 
This section explains the handoff procedure used in 
PFMIPv6 and shows that PFMIPv6 potentially causes 
bursty traffic in the wireless LAN. 
A. Handoff Procedures of Network-based Seamless 
Mobility Management Protocol 
LMA
Handoff
PMAG
MT
4.Detach
5.Attach
2.Establish
data‐forwarding 
tunnel
1. Report
3.Packet buffering
NMAG
AP
6.Release 
buffered packets
7.Switch bidirectional
tunnel to NMAG
 
 Figureure. 1. PFMIPv6 handoff procedure 
 
Figure 1 shows the PFMIPv6 handoff procedure. It begins 
after an MT connects to a PMAG that has a bi-directional 
tunnel with a localized mobility anchor (LMA) for the MT’s 
traffic. In this procedure, the MT makes a handoff to the 
NMAG. The following procedures take place: 
  
1. Before the MT makes a handoff, the PMAG is notified 
which MAG the MT will make a handoff into. 
2. The NMAG begins preparation for the MT’s handoff, and 
the PMAG and NAMG establish a data-forwarding tunnel to 
transfer the traffic. 
3. The PMAG begins to transfer the downlink user data to 
the NMAG through the data-forwarding tunnel, and the 
NMAG begins to buffer the user data arriving through the 
tunnel. 
4. The MT is notified that the preparation for the seamless 
mobility procedures is finished, and starts to be detached 
from the PMAG. 
5. The MT is attached to the NMAG. Layer 2 authentication 
optionally takes some time for the MT to connect the new 
wireless access network. 
6.  The NMAG begins to release the buffered user data. 
7. The LMA switches the bidirectional tunnel from the 
PMAG to the NMAG. 
 
A method to adjust the timing in releasing the buffered 
packets has been proposed [6]. For mobile networks that 
accommodate many MTs, it is not feasible for the MAGs to 
adjust the timing adaptively for each MT in consideration of 
the characteristics of the application each MT is using. When 
the MAG adjusts the timing for each packet in releasing it, it 
needs a great deal of buffer space (e.g., the resources to 
buffer user data and compute until buffered packets are 
released). When multiple MTs execute step 6, we assume 
that the buffered data is released one after the other from the 
MAG and that some amount of buffered packets is released 
simultaneously. There has been no research into how the 
MAG should manage the buffer space for each MT and 
executes the traffic control method for the buffered packets 
when MT makes a handoff.  
In many cases, buffered-packet releasing must cooperate 
with the packet delivery scheduler realized (or implemented) 
in the wireless access network when the wireless access 
technology has QoS control capabilities. Studies on the 
control of buffered packets of TCP traffic [7, 8, 9] have 
improved the throughput of TCP traffic by discarding some 
packets beforehand, before the wireless LAN becomes 
congested. Because the real-time application of UDP traffic 
is sensitive to packet loss, the method of these studies 
treating TCP traffic cannot be applicable. The proposed 
design can cooperate with the design of the existing research 
concerning TCP traffic. 
 
B. Wireless LAN Issue in Releasing Buffered Packets 
The 
IEEE 
802.11e 
EDCF 
(enhanced 
distributed 
coordination function) classifies the traffic into four access 
categories (ACi, i=0, 1, 2, 3) according to QoS requirements 
for access points (APs). EDCF is a typical example of 
decentralized controlled mechanisms that do not require a 
centralized 
controlled 
coordinator. 
Because 
the 
decentralized controlled mechanism is used in most cases 
for wireless access network, we assume that APs adopt the 
IEEE 802.11e EDCF in this paper. 
Each access category in the IEEE802.11e EDCF treats the 
traffic class that the network operators defined and follows 
carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance 
(CSMA/CA). The IEEE 802.11e assigns different parameter 
values to different access categories in order to differentiate 
the flows based on the defined traffic class. Each traffic 
class is shared by the same multiple users. As a result, a 
bundle of flow transferred from an access category in an AP 
into the resident MTs and the handoff MTs is treated in the 
same way as the same flow transferred from the same access 
category. 
APs that support IEEE 802.11e EDCF do not mitigate the 
influence of bursty traffic released from the MAG. Bursty 
traffic degrades the communication quality of the traffic 
categorized in the same access category. In this case, delay 
fluctuation is still very large, owing to the burst feature of 
the back off mechanism in the 802.11e EDCF. The traffic 
transferred to the resident MTs and the handoff MTs is 
delayed longer because of the burst traffic. It degrades the 
communication quality of the resident MTs and handoff 
MTs because of the congestion in the wireless LAN. 
A great deal of research has focused on developing QoS 
capabilities of the MAC protocol for real-time applications 
[10] [11]. These researches accommodate real-time traffic 
by differentiating real-time traffic from non-real-time in 
order that real-time traffic achieves relatively small delay. 
97
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

However, these researches do not address the case where the 
MAG treats bursty traffic in releasing the buffered packets 
when multiple MTs make handoffs. In this case, even if the 
wireless LAN supports IEEE 802.11e, the bursty traffic 
released from the buffer space of the MAG is stacked 
altogether in an access category used for the traffic class. 
We adopt IEEE 802.11e as the wireless access technology 
and propose a novel traffic control method for the case in 
which multiple MTs make handoffs. 
Mobile service providers are now considering data 
offloading in the wireless LAN in order to achieve cost 
reduction of data service and availability of higher 
bandwidth compared to cellular networks. If the data 
offloading technology is adopted, most traffic that flowed 
into the cellular networks will be transferred into the 
wireless LAN, and the chance of MTs making handoffs into 
the wireless LAN will increase. QoS capability of seamless 
mobility management into wireless LAN is important for  
the future mobile networks. 
 
III. 
PROPOSED DESIGN FOR SEAMLESS MOBILITY 
MANAGEMENT 
This section explains the proposed MAG structure and 
two-phase traffic control in consideration of handoffs of 
numerous MTs in the wireless LAN. 
A. Requirements of MT, AP, and MAG 
To have novel traffic control in consideration of the 
handoff of multiple MTs, we assume the following 
properties are included in the MT, AP, and MAG. 
 
1. MAG establishes point-to-point links when MTs are 
attached. 
2. MAG has output queue management for the traffic and 
AP has the QoS capability specified in IEEE 802.11e EDCF. 
3. MT, AP, and MAG support Layer 2 Handoff (L2 HO) 
signaling and prediction of which MAG the MT will be 
attached to, in order to inform the MT’s decision beforehand. 
4. MAG can identify whether resident MTs or handoff MTs 
the traffic will be transferred into. 
 
The PMIPv6 standard defines that the logical connections 
between the MAG and MT are point-to-point links and 
unique network prefix is assigned for each MT. To assign 
the network prefix for each MT, the MAG needs to establish 
the logical connections with each MT by using the IP tunnel 
in the network segment of the wireless LAN. 
To reduce packet loss during the handoff, it is important to 
exploit the timing of the MT’s handoff, and which AP the 
MT will be attached to, as early as possible. L2 HO 
signaling has been used to detect the MT’s handoff decision 
in advance [12]. This signaling contains the information 
about an MT identifier and new MAG identifier. For IEEE 
802.16e, MOB_HO_IND messages play the L2 HO 
signaling role for the handoff. The current IEEE802.11 
product does not usually support such signaling, but some 
research [13] [14] is addressing this. In this paper we 
assume that MAGs, APs, and MTs support such signaling 
and functions. 
In order to report to the NMAG that the traffic will be 
transferred the handoff MTs, the PMAG executes packet 
marking for the traffic of the data-forwarding tunnel. As the 
NMAG knows the rule of the packet marking beforehand, 
NMAG can identify whether the resident MTs or the 
handoff MTs the traffic will be transferred into based on the 
rule of the packet marking. 
We propose a MAG structure that controls the buffered 
packets into the handoff MTs and the traffic which are 
transferred directly into the resident MTs separately. The 
current mobility protocol and MAC protocol in wireless 
LAN do not consider how the MAG should perform the 
traffic control for the traffic which will be transferred into 
the wireless LAN when many MTs make handoffs. The 
detail of the proposed traffic control is described in III-C. 
Note that the proposed method requires no modification to 
the MAC protocol in the wireless LAN and extends the 
function of the MAG.  
 
B. Proposed MAG Structure for Seamless Mobility 
Management 
Classifier
1st MT’s 
buffer space
2nd MT’s 
buffer space
3rdMT’s 
buffer space
AP(802.11e)
AC0
AC1
AC2
AC3
R‐
queue
1
R‐
queue
2
R‐
queue
0
H‐
queue
0
H‐
queue
1
H‐
queue
2
R‐
queue
3
H‐
queue
3
traffic
Resident MTs
Handoff
MTs
Traffic controller
MAG
Mqueue0
Mqueue1
Mqueue2
Mqueue3
 
Figure. 2. Proposed MAG structure in the consideration of 
handoffs of multiple MTs 
 
98
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Figure 2 shows the proposed MAG structure, which adopts 
IEEE 802.11e as the wireless access technology. To control 
the traffic which is transferred into the handoff MTs and 
resident MTs separately, we propose that the MAG has 
queues dedicated for both types of MT. The queues labeled 
H-queue are dedicated for the handoff MTs, and those 
labeled R-queue are for the resident MTs in Figure 2. In 
Figure 2, the traffic of H-queue[0-3] and R-queue[0-3] are 
transferred into Mqueue [0-3] and AC [0-3] in AP. Mqueue 
corresponds to the IP  queue of the interface in MAG. We 
assume the number of the queues that the MAG needs to 
prepare is not large because IEEE 802.11e defines a 
maximum of just four types of access category and the AP 
cannot support so many queues. 
Classifier in Figure 2 distinguishes whether the traffic is 
transferred into the handoff MTs or the resident MTs based 
on the rule of the packet marking which the PMAG 
executed. When Classifier recognizes the traffic of the 
handoff MT, the traffic is transferred into the dedicated 
buffer space for the MT. When it recognizes the traffic of 
the resident MT, the traffic is transferred into the R-queue 
based on the traffic class when the packets is released from 
the buffer space. Traffic Controller transfers the traffic from 
each R-queue and H-queue into each Mqueue in the first 
phase of the proposed traffic control method based on the 
defined traffic class, as described in the next subsection. 
 
C. Proposed Traffic Control Method in MAG 
We propose that the MAG executes two-phase traffic 
control for the traffic into all the MTs in the wireless LAN. 
In the proposed method, first the MAG transfers the traffic 
from each R-queue and H-queue, which treats the same 
traffic class in a round-robin manner.  Second the MAG 
executes the priority queueing (PQ) for the traffic from each 
Mqueue following the policy of the traffic control in AP. 
We assume it is not suitable for the communication quality 
of either type of MT to be significantly degraded. Whether 
the traffic of the resident MTs or the MTs making handoffs 
is prioritized actually depends on the network operator’s 
policy. However, if the delay characteristics of the traffic 
which is transferred into the handoff MTs are too large, the 
procedures 
of 
the 
seamless 
mobility 
management 
themselves become meaningless. We aim here to prevent 
degraded communication quality of all the MTs when 
multiple MTs make handoffs in the wireless LAN. Thus, we 
propose the traffic of resident MT and handoff MT in a 
round-robin manner in the first part of the two-phase traffic 
control method. And then we aim not to generate the bursty 
traffic into the wireless LAN in a round-robin manner. In 
the second part, the MAG prioritizes the traffic following 
the priority that IEEE 802.11e defined for each access 
category. In the second-phase, the MAG executes the PQ 
discipline in a normal way. 
 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
This section shows the experiment environment of the 
simulation for the proposed traffic control and the result of 
the simulation. 
A. Experiment Environment 
802.11e
LMA
PMAG
Packet buffering
NMAG
Buffer 
for MT1
Buffer 
for MT2
Handoff
MT1,MT2
CN
MT1,MT2
 
Figure. 3 Overview of experiment environment 
 
Table 1 IEEE 802.11a default parameter values 
Parameter 
Value 
SIFS
10 (usec) 
SlotTime
20 (usec) 
BasicRate
54 (Mbps) 
DataRate 
54 (Mbps) 
LongRetry
4 
ShortRetryLimit 
7 
 
Table 2 IEEE802.11e EDCF default parameter 
values for the 802.11a physical layer 
Parameter
Value 
CWmin
7 
CWmax
15 
AIFSN
2 
TXOP
3.264 
 
We evaluated the degree to which our proposed design 
would affect the one-way delay values of the high priority 
traffic after handoff in a simulated environment where 
certain MTs make handoffs by adopting PFMPv6 as the 
seamless mobility protocol. This simulation was performed 
with the QualNet software package [15]. We implemented 
the two-phase traffic control by extending the queueing 
discipline of the Qualnet. We employ an IEEE 802.11a-
based wireless LAN in AP with an RTS/CTS mechanism 
and adopt the default IEEE 802.11a configuration, as shown 
in Table 1. For VoIP traffic, the AP followed the IEEE 
802.11e EDCF, which the parameters of the configuration 
are shown in Table 2.  
99
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Twenty MTs communicated with the corresponding node 
(CN) through the LMA, as shown in Figure 3. The 
bandwidth of the physical link was 1Gbps. We focused on 
the downlink traffic buffered from the NMAG when certain 
MTs make handoffs. We adopt VoIP traffic as the high 
priority traffic during the seamless mobility. The CN and 
MTs sent CBR traffic (UDP packet, 200-byte packet, and 
20-millisecond inter-packet gap). We considered a case in 
which only VoIP traffic exists in the wireless LAN. 
We evaluated the delay characteristics of VoIP traffic from 
CN to MTs by changing the number of MTs making 
handoffs (1, 2, 4, and 6). In the simulation, we assumed 
multiple MTs concurrently making handoffs. We compared 
the delay characteristics in two cases of traffic control. In 
the first case, the MAG does not execute traffic control for 
the buffered packets in the first of the two-phase traffic 
control. In the second case, the MAG executes traffic 
control for the buffered packets in the first of the two-phase 
traffic control in a round-robin manner (which is the 
proposed traffic control).  
 
B. Experiment Result 
We simulated four cases, in which one, two, four, and six 
MTs make handoffs concurrently. One-way delay values are 
shown spanning the time when the MAG buffered the 
packets to 50 ms after when the last buffered packets were 
released from the MAG (we term this period “handoff 
affection period”). To investigate the affect of the buffered 
packets into the communication quality of nineteen, 
eighteen, sixteen and fourteen resident MTs, we get the one-
way delay values in the cases where MTs do not make 
handoffs.   Seeing those delay characteristic values in the 
cases which no MTs make handoffs, we show how much 
the traffic of the resident MTs is delayed.     
The delay values of the handoff MTs in the case that the 
MAG executes traffic control in the first of the two-phase 
traffic control in a round-robin manner are termed “RR 
Handoff” and those of the resident MTs are “RR Resident”. 
In the same way, we define “No Control Handoff” and “No 
Control Resident” respectively as the delay characteristics 
of handoff MTs and resident MTs when the MAG does not 
execute traffic control in the first of the two-phase traffic 
control. The delay values of the MTs in the case that no 
MTs make handoffs are termed “No Handoff”. 
The parameters of CSMA/CA were randomized by the 
seed in QualNet.  We executed simulations 10 times for 
each case by changing the value of the seed in order to get 
the affection of the proposed traffic control. Figure 4 shows 
the average delay values of all the handoff MTs and all the 
resident MTs over the ten times. Figure 5 shows the 
maximum delay values during the handoff affection periods 
over the ten times. The X-axis shows the number of the 
handoff MTs in Figures 4 and 5. Y-axis in Figure 4 shows 
the average delay values (milliseconds). Y-axis in Figure 5 
shows the maximum delay values (milliseconds).  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
1
2
4
6
No Control Handoff
No Control Resident
RR Handoff
RR Resident
No Handoff
Number of  Handoff MT 
Average delay values (ms)
 
Figure 4. Average delay values of the traffic during handoff 
affection period 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
1
2
4
6
No Control Handoff
No Control Resident
RR Handoff
RR Resident
No Handoff
Number of  Handoff MT 
Maximum delay values (ms)
 
Figure. 5. Maximum delay values of the traffic during 
handoff affection period 
 
The average and maximum delay values of “No Handoff 
“ in Figures 4 and 5 decrease as the number of handoff MT 
increases. It is because the number of MTs which receive 
the traffic through the wireless LAN decreases. Compared 
with the delay values of the handoff MTs and those of the 
resident MTs, the values of handoff MTs become much 
larger because some periods are required for the seamless 
handoff procedures of PFMIPv6. Figure 4 shows that the 
released packets from the MAG give large impact on the 
communication quality of the resident MT. The value of 
“No Control Resident” becomes much larger than one of 
“No handoff”. When only one MT makes a handoff, the 
differences between “No Control Handoff” and “RR 
handoff”, and between “No Control Resident” and “RR 
Resident” is little. 
However, applying the proposed traffic control method 
(“RR Control”) when two, four or six MTs make handoffs, 
the average delay values of both resident MTs and handoff 
MTs become 0.5-0.6 times smaller than those of “No 
Control”.  The bursty traffic in the case of “No Control” 
delays the traffic which is transferred into both resident MTs 
and handoff MTs in AP because the backoff mechanism of 
EDCF makes transferring the bursty traffic into the wireless 
access networks wait for a few times. When the traffic is 
transferred in a round-robin manner by preparing the 
dedicated queue for resident MTs and handoff MTs, the 
ratio of the bursty traffic is reduced and the backoff 
100
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

mechanism does not make the traffic of each MT wait for 
being transferred from AP. The proposed traffic control 
method improves one-way delay for both resident MTs and 
handoff MTs when multiple MTs make handoffs.  
Figure 5 shows that the maximum delay values in all the 
cases are almost same. This shows that the maximum time 
during that the traffic is made to wait for a few times is not 
changed even if the traffic is transferred into the wireless 
LAN in a round-robin manner. 
 
I. 
CONCLUSION 
Much existing research has tackled the prevention of 
packet loss and effective signaling for the mobility 
management protocol. Assuming that the MAG can predict 
the movement of the MT, packet buffering in the MAG is a 
key technique for the seamless mobility management 
because it can prevent packet loss during the handoff.  
However, such buffered packets give large impact on the 
one-way delay of the resident MTs in the wireless LAN. 
The current researches do not treat the communication 
quality of the resident MTs. 
This paper focuses on the management of the buffered 
packets in the MAG in consideration of the communication 
quality of resident MTs and handoff MTs. We proposed a 
MAG structure which prepares the dedicate queue for 
resident MTs and handoff MTs and two-phase traffic 
control method using a round-robin manner in the first 
phase. We used packed-based simulation to evaluate the 
proposed traffic control method. When only one MT makes 
a handoff, the effect of the proposed traffic control method 
was not large. However, when multiple MTs make handoffs, 
the proposed traffic control method always improved on the 
delay values of the resident MTs and the handoff MTs 
because it prevent the generation of the bursty traffic in the 
wireless LAN which adopts the IEEE802.11e EDCF. As the 
future work, we need to execute the evaluation in the 
environment where MTs use the various applications with 
multiple priorities beside the VoIP.  
The proposed traffic control method does not need to 
modify the AP’s functions and is easy to deploy in the 
commercial mobile networks. The proposed traffic control 
method is applicable for the cases e.g., passengers in a car 
are always located in the same network and move in the 
same direction. In addition, family members and friends 
tend to spend a significant amount of time together. These 
cases will more often appear in the future mobile networks. 
In this paper, we adopt PFMIPv6 as the seamless mobility 
protocol. However, the proposed traffic control method and 
design of the MAG is applicable for the other mobility 
management protocol (e.g., [16] [17]) besides PFMIPv6. It 
is because our proposal does not require the change of the 
protocol and focuses on the function of access gateway. Our 
proposal can devote the traffic management of the future 
mobile networks. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Johnson, et al., “Mobility Support in IPv6,” IETF RFC 
3775, June 2004 
[2] S. Gundavelli, et al., “Proxy Mobile IPv6,” IETF RFC 5213, 
Aug. 2008 
[3] H. Yokota, K.Chowdhury, R.Koodli, B.Patil F.Xia., “Fast 
Handoff for Proxy Mobile IPv6,” IETF RFC5949, Sept. 2010 
[4] “Wireless LAN medium access control (MAC) and physical 
layer (PHY) specifications amendment 8: MAC quality of 
service enhancements,” IEEE Standard 802.11e 2005 
[5] “Telecommunications and Internet Protocol Harmonization 
over networks release3: End to end quality of service in 
TIPHON systems Technical Report”  ETSI TR 101 329-7 
V2.1.1, Feb. 2002 
[6] Y. Onoe, Y.Miyazaki, H.Komaki, T.Murao, N.Yamanouchi., 
“Mobility Extended Multimedia Session Controls for Mobile 
Seamless Communication Environments”, IEICE Trans, 
Commun, vol.J86-B, no. 8, Aug. 2003. 
[7] D. 
S. 
Eom, 
M.Murata, 
H.Miyahara., 
“Performance 
Improvement by Packet Buffering in Mobile IP Based 
Networks,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E83-B, no. 11, Nov. 
2000 
[8] S. B. Lee, K.Hur, J.Kim, D.Eum, “A handoff Packet Marker 
for Diffserv in Mobile IP-based Networks with Packet 
Buffering,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 
55, no. 2, May 2009 
[9] C. Chou, K.G.Shin, "Smooth handoff with enhanced packet 
buffering-and-forwarding in wireless/mobile networks", 
Journal Wireless Networks archive, Volume 13 Issue 3, June 
2007 
[10] Y. Kwon, “A New Priority-Based QoS Supporting MAC 
protocol,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E87-B, no. 10, Oct. 
2004 
[11] B. A. Hirantha, T.Matsuda, T.Takine., “Dynamic Contention 
Window Control Scheme in IEEE 802.11e EDCA-Based 
Wireless LANs,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E93-B, no. 1, 
Jan. 2010 
[12] F. Xia, B. Sarikaya, “Mobile node agnostic fast handoffs for 
proxy mobile IPv6,” draft-xia-netlmm-fmip-mnagno-02.txt, 
IETF internet-draft 2007 
[13] N. Saxena, A. Roy, “Experimental framework of proactive 
handoff with QoS over WLANs,” Electronics Letters, vol. 45 
25, Dec. 2009 
[14] H. Duong, A. Dadej, S.Gordon, “Proactive context transfer in 
WLAN-based access networks,” WMASH 2004 
[15] QualNet 
simulator 
software 
http://www.scalable-
networks.com/products/qualnet/ 
[16] K.Ved P, Masugi Inoue, “HIMLIS: Heterogeneity Inclusion 
and Mobility Adaptation through Locator ID Separation in 
New Generation Network”, IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. 
E93-B, no.3 2010 
[17] R.Inayat, R.Aibara, K.Nishimura, T.Fujita, Y.Nomura, 
K.Maeda, “MAT: An End-to-End Mobile Communication 
Architecture with  Seamless IP Handoff Support for the Next 
Generation Internet”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Vol. 2713 2003 
 
101
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

