Reduction of Electricity Consumption and Electricity Demand Peak in Home
Environments
Ana Rossell´o-Busquet, Jos´e Soler and Lars Dittmann
Networks Technology & Service Platforms group, DTU Fotonik,
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
{aros, joss, ladit}@fotonik.dtu.dk
Abstract—There is an increase need to become more energy
efﬁcient and to reduce peak electricity demands to move towards
the so called Smart Grid. In order to succeed, Home Energy
Management Systems need to be developed to seamlessly provide
the users with the tools to control the household electricity
consumption. The Home Energy Management System developed
includes a Home Gateway that provides rules to reduce the
household consumption and a scheduling algorithm to reduce
the peak demands. In addition, web services are used to provide
remote access, communicate with the Smart Meter and the
Energy Rules Server. Users will be able to donwload/update rules
to reduce the electricity consumption and conﬁgure their Home
Energy Management System remotely by using the JAVA based
pilot-application developed. In this article the Home Energy
Management System and its components are presented. The
results show that the energy management system based on
rules reduces the total househapld consumption. The scheduling
algorithm results show that it is possible to distribute the
consumption with some delays on the appliances tasks.
Index Terms—Smart Grid, Home Energy Management, Home
Gateway, Demand Response (DR), Demand Peaks
I. INTRODUCTION
A Home Energy Management System (HEMS) is a system
from which the user can control the devices in the home
network through an Graphical User Interface (GUI) and apply
energy management strategies to reduce and optimize their
consumption. This article presents a HEMS, which helps
reduce the household electricity consumption, and which in-
cludes a scheduling algorithm that spreads electricity con-
sumption over time reducing demand peaks. Demand peaks are
high points on power consumption caused by customers using
electricity concurrently during the same period of time. From
the utilities and electricity production perspective, demand
peaks should be reduced or avoided as it is more efﬁcient
to have the power consumption distributed over time. Utility
companies are forced to develop costly methods to generate
enough power to meet the demand peaks. If the utilities cannot
meet this demand, this could result in electricity shortages or
even blackouts in certain areas.
The appliances found in users premises are usually manu-
factured by different producers and may use different com-
munication technologies which can lead to interoperability
issues between devices. Therefore, the main challenge in home
networks is the variety of technologies, providing different
communication methods, as well as the diversity of producers,
providing different types of devices and services. The herein
proposed Home Gateway is technology and device type in-
dependent, in order to offer a common pluggable platform
to different devices in the home network, which makes them
interoperable at the service level.
The HEMS main elements is the Home Gateway. The
system can be accessed remotely and communicate with other
components using web services:
• Remote access: users can connect to their Home Gate-
way, change the home appliances status and the energy
management system settings among others.
• Communicate with other components of the HEMS: the
HEMS can include other components beside the Home
Gateway, such as the Smart Meter and bridges to com-
municate with other devices. Web services are used to
handle this communication.
• Energy Rules Server: the Energy Rules Server will con-
tain rules for reducing the electricity consumption. The
user can donwload/update the energy rules in their HEMS
through web services.
The Home Gateway presented in [1], [2], [3] has been ex-
tended to include a scheduling algorithm and the performance
on terms of energy savings and energy reduction has been
tested in this article. The scheduling algorithm which will
distribute the electricity consumption over time. Different ap-
pliances are scheduled to consume based on their priority type,
which can be changed by using the remote access. The overall
goal of this method is to guarantee that a deﬁned electricity
consumption limit, provided by the utility and approved by
the user, will not be exceeded. This technique could result in a
more distributed consumption and lower demand peaks, which
can lead to a reduction of greenhouse gasses. Additionally,
the system presented can also ease the task of forecasting
consumption as the customers will guarantee that they will
not consume more than a determined amount of power.
In the past years, research has centered in home gateways
for home automation and home energy management. An exam-
ple of a home gateway using OSGi and ontologies is Domotic
OSGi Gateway (DOG) [4] by Politecnico di Torino. The
main difference between DOG and the home gateway herein
presented is the fact that DOG is focused on domotics, while
the home gateway herein is mainly concerned with energy
management. The user can use it to deﬁne their own energy
management system by creating, modifying and deleting rules,
which may reduce the total electricity consumption. In [5], a
HEMS has been implemented to reduce stand-by consumption
by setting a power line network. Similarly, in [6], a HEMS
implementation using ZigBee and infrared communication
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

to reduce stand-by consumption of power outlets and lights
is presented. The HEMS proposed in article paper has two
main advantages over [5] and [6]: 1-the energy management
strategy can help reduce the consumption and not only stand-
by consumption; 2-the HEMS may communicate using dif-
ferent technologies and not only power line communication
or ZigBee. SESAME-S [7] has developed a Home Gateway
very similar to the one presented here. They have also used
OSGi and have developed their own ontology for energy
management. However, SESAME-S does not produce any
results on the home gateway related to energy management.
Their focus is in the user’s acceptance of their system.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: in
Section II, an overview of developed HEMS is provided.
Section III describes the rules used to reduce the household
consumption and the electricity savings results are provided.
The scheduling system and the results obtained are presented
in Section IV. Finally, the conclusions are found in Section
V.
II. HOME ENERGY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The aim of the HEMS developed is to reduce and schedule
electricity consumption of the household. The Home Gateway
developed offers the user a variety of basic functionalities:
• Monitor: The user can obtain the current status of any
device connected to the home network through the user
interface, locally or remotely.
• Control: The user can send basic commands, such as
On/Off and parametric commands, such as Start Program
3 to any home appliance, locally or remotely.
• Data Validation: The systems checks that the commands
to be send to a device are actually valid for that device.
For instance, if Start Program 3 is send to a lamp the
Home Gateway will detect the error and notify the user.
To build a HEMS and not only a home automation system
more advanced and energy related functionalities are provided:
• Power Consumption History: in order to reduce electricity
consumption it is important to know how much electricity
each appliance consumes. The HEMS herein presented
gathers this information.
• Energy Management System: the developed Home Gate-
way uses energy rules to help reduce the electricity
consumption. The rules can be edited, deleted or created
at any time and will be effective immediately without
having to restart the system. The rules can be introduced
into the system by the user. However, this requires that the
user has advanced knowledge about the system, which is,
in many case, unrealistic. Therefore, the Home Gateway
communicates with a Energy Rules Server through web
services. The user can connect to this server to browse
the rules and an obtain a brief description of each rule so
the most suitable rules, according to user’s preferences,
can be downloaded.
• Scheduling Algorithm: besides reducing the consump-
tion, in order to be more energy efﬁcient the electricity
consumption should be distributed over time instead of
Home subnetwork A
Home subnetwork B
Home 
Gateway
Router
Bridge
Smart 
Meter
Internet
Remote 
Access
Energy Rules 
Server
User 
Interface
Fig. 1. System Architecture
creating demand peaks. This algorithm guarantees that
the total electricity consumption in the household does
not exceed a certain limit.
The following subsections provide more details about the
above functionalities and an overview of the system architec-
ture and its implementation.
A. System Architecture
In the HEMS herein designed, the central element is the
Home Gateway which can directly communicate with all the
home devices or can use a bridge to interconnect with them.
Besides being able to communicate with the home devices the
Home Gateway can also communicate with the Smart Meter
and will enable remote access through the internet. All the
elements of this HEMS are depicted in Fig. 1.
B. Implementation
A Home Gateway that manages the home appliances to
fulﬁll the reduction of overall consumption and reduction
of peak demands has been developed using OSGi Equinox
Framework [8]. The OSGi Framework is an open service
platform for the delivery and control of different JAVA-
based applications, called bundles. Each bundle has a spe-
ciﬁc functionality and can interact with other bundles in the
same component of with other bundles in another component
through web services. Web services are incorporated into the
Home Gateway developed to offer modularity as some of
the HEMS functionalities are external to the Home Gateway,
such as Smart Meter or Energy Rules Server. To incorporate
web services into the Home Gateway developed, Apache CXF
Distributed OSGi [9] is used. This distribution enables an easy
integration of web services into OSGi platform. Furthermore,
CXF-DOSGi will auto-generate the Web Services Description
Language (WSDL) from the java interface, at the deployment
time. Further information of this implementation can be found
in [3].
The Home Gateway accesses a knowledge base data reposi-
tory from where the capabilities of the devices can be obtained.
This knowledge base data repository is implemented by an
ontology, where the home devices are classiﬁed according to
their functionalities and capabilities. Using this knowledge
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

BRIDGE
ENERGY RULES SERVER  
REMOTE ACCESS
HOME GATEWAY
Manager 
Bundle
Administrator
GUI
Bundle
subnetwork 1
subnetwork 2
subnetwork N
.
.
.
.
Network 
Emulator 
Bundle
Network 1
Bundle
Networks 
Manager 
Bundle
Network 2
Bundle
Network n
Bundle
.
.
.
.
Home Network
User GUI
Bundle
Scheduling
Bundle
Web Services 
Interface 
Bundle
Web Services 
Interface 
Bundle
Rule Server 
Implementation
Bundle
Web Services 
Interface 
Bundle
Web Services 
Interface 
Bundle
Knowledge Base 
Bundle
Network 
Emulator 
Bundle
OSGi Framework
JAVA Interface
Web Services  
SMART METER
Smart Meter 
Emulator
Web Services 
Interface 
Bundle
Fig. 2. OSGi Implementation
base data repository, energy management strategies can be
performed by applying a set of rules, which are based on the
energy consumption of the home devices, information from the
electrical grid and users’ preferences. The ontology has been
included into the JAVA implementation by using Prot´eg´e-OWL
API 3.4.4 [10]. The rules in this system have been written in
SWRL which can be used to reason about the home devices
in ontology terms. In order to run this rules from the JAVA
platform Jess Rule Engine are used.
The components and its bundles are depicted in Fig. 2. In
order to test the Home Gateway, some of the components, such
as the Smart Meter, Energy Rules Server, bridges and home
appliances have been emulated to test the Home Gateway
capabilities.
A brief description of the Home Gateway bundles is pro-
vided below:
• Scheduling Bundle This bundle implements the schedul-
ing algorithm and ensures that the maximum consumption
is not pass a certain limit set by the user.
• Knowledge Base Bundle This bundle handles the in-
teractions with the knowledge base data repository and
rule engine. To implement the Home Gateway knowledge
base data repository DogOnt [11] ontology is used. In
addition, this bundle contains the means to apply energy
management strategies by using rules.
• User Interface Bundle The Home Gateway developed
provides a GUI which is contained in this bundle. This
interface is used to communicate to the devices, obtain
information about them and manage the energy manage-
ment rules and the scheduling algorithm.
• Network n Bundle The home network found in the users’
premises can contain devices using different communi-
cation technology, for example power line or wireless.
Each of these Network n bundles will handle the com-
munication with the devices in the subnetwork n in the
home network which use different communication tech-
nologies. These bundles will send messages and forward
notiﬁcation messages to/from the devices contained in the
n subnetwork.
• Network Emulator Bundle The focus of this article is
not on the enabling technologies in the physical layer
and their interoperation, but on the software mechanisms
that allow use of the different elements, regardless of
the connectivity mechanisms towards the Home Gateway.
The home network is therefore emulated and an interface
is provided to emulate changes in the devices status.
• Networks Manager Bundle Due to the fact that various
Network n Bundles may exist, inside the Home Gateway
and also in bridges, this bundle is created to handle the
communication with these Network n bundles.
• Manager Bundle This is the central bundle which handles
the interaction between the different bundles and contains
the web services implementation and therefore acts as the
server. It uses web services to communicate with bundles
found outside the Home Gateway, such as the Smart
Meter or the Energy Rules Server and OSGi framework
to communicate within the Home Gateway.
• Web Services Interface Bundle It provides the JAVA
interface needed to implement the web services.
In addition to the Home Gateway, other components have
been developed to test the energy management system and the
scheduling algorithm: a Remote Access, a Bridge, the Energy
Rules Server and the Smart Meter. In order to emulate the
remote access, a User Interface has been deployed in another
computer, which communicates with the Home Gateway using
web services.
The Home Gateway may not provide all the communication
technologies found in the home network and the possibility of
using bridges to communicate to some of the home appliances
is a probable scenario. For this reason and to test the developed
Home Gateway, a bridge has been implemented.
Energy Rules Server is used as a rules provider for the en-
ergy management system of the implemented Home Gateway.
This bundle emulates a rules server that can be found in the
internet.
A Smart Meter has been implemented to emulate the possi-
ble communication with the Home Gateway. This communi-
cation may involve electricity information, such as kWh price
and a request to limit consumption, and user information, such
us current electricity consumption and acceptance/rejection of
requests.
III. REDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION
To test the electricity savings the HEMS can provide,
a set of basic rules, which aim to have no effect on the
users’ comfort, are implemented into the Home Gateway. All
rules will be evaluated every time the knowledge base data
repository is changed. For instance, if the Home Gateway
receives a statues update, the status of the devices will be
change in the knowledge base data repository, and then Jess
rule engine will evaluate and trigger the necessary rules. When
a rule is triggered and a device in a home network has to
change status a message is send to the target device by suing
the Manager bundle service and the corresponding Network
bundle.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

The energy management strategy for this test is based
on a few basic rules in terms of occupancy and irradiance.
Therefore, it has been assumed that the home network contains
a presence system, which by using sensors can indicate the
presence of users in the home premises. Light sensors are
also used to detect the solar irradiance. The rules used are
summarized below:
• Lights and irradiance threshold: If the irradiance detected
by the light sensors in a room is higher than the threshold,
the lights in that room are turned off. The threshold can
be modiﬁed according to user preferences through the
user interface.
• Lights and no presence: If the sensors detect that there is
no one present, all the lights are turned off.
• Standby: Standby power consumption is one of the major
energy savings areas as the appliances are consuming
without performing any task. Therefore, this rules makes
sure that appliances are either turned off or on, but never
in standby mode.
• Appliance and no presence: some of the appliances at
home can be turned off while the user is away, for
instance the printer and Wiﬁ router. A rule for each
appliance that the user wants to turn off while away
from home has been implemented. This rules can be
extended to more or less appliances according to users’
preferences.
• Appliance and presence: in the similar way some appli-
ances only have to be turned on when the user is away
from the premises, for instance the answering machine
or alarm system.
More rules can be added to the HEMS, for instance rules
regarding heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
systems. However, in other to implement these rules and em-
ulate their consumption, detailed information about the HVAC
systems, home architecture and home isolation is necessary.
As this information is speciﬁc for each home environment
and depends on a few factors it has not been included in the
simulations presented in the next section.
A. Evaluation
In order to test the HEMS herein described, information
about how users interact with the appliances is needed. Most
models simulating power consumption in home environments
provide time-correlated power consumption for the entire
dwelling. However, in order to test the HEMS detail infor-
mation about, when, for how long, and the instantaneous
consumption of each device found in the home environment
is needed. The model presented in [12] by Richardson et al.
is used. This power consumption model is based on occupant
time-use data, where occupant activity is mapped to appliance
use. In the same way, detail information about light devices
and its usage is also needed. To calculate the light usage,
Richardson et al. take into consideration the solar irradiance.
This model under-represents the demand during night, as it
does not consider users leaving the lights on by mistake. In
addition, this models provides time-correlated occupancy data,
TABLE I
HEMS INPUT PARAMETERS AND RESULTS
Cons.
Cons. w/
Savings
Estimated
Savings
28 days
HEMS 28 days
28 days
Yearly Savings
Percentage
216 kWh
178 kWh
38 kWh
500 kWh
17,72%
referred as active occupancy. Active occupancy is deﬁned as
the number of people who are at home and awake, this data
input is used to model the presence system, which will have
status present when active occupancy equals one or more.
Richardson et al. provide an Excel Workbook [13] con-
taining a high-resolution model of domestic whole house
electricity demand. This implementation is used to calculate
the use of home devices within a single UK dwelling over
a 24-hour period at a one-minute time resolution. The sim-
ulator incorporates models to calculate the active occupancy
and lighting usage. This implementation offers the option to
conﬁgure the day and month of the year, the total number of
users that live in the dwelling and whether a week day or a
weekend day is simulated.
To test the work herein described an occupancy of 4 people
has been considered. 28 days have been simulated to obtain
samples to reproduce the consumption. This 28 days are
divided into four weeks (5 week days and 2 weekend days)
of each season (Summer, Autumn, Winter and Spring). These
data has been used as input into the developed HEMS. A
summary of the input parameters used and the results obtained
can be found in Table I.
The herein developed HEMS using the rules presented in
the previous section can successfully reduce the electricity
consumption. Extrapolating the consumption of the 28 days
simulated into a yearly electricity consumption, the electricity
is reduced from 28.195 kWh to 23.198 kWh. This energy
savings represent a decrease of 17,7%. The users could further
reduce the electricity consumption by incorporating more rules
to the HEMS. The new rules incorporated to the HEMS depend
on the users’ preferences and the home devices.
IV. SCHEDULING ALGORITHM
The aim of the implemented scheduling algorithm is to
spread the electricity consumption and to keep the consump-
tion under certain limit to reduced or even avoid electricity de-
mand peaks. The scheduling bundle contains the scheduling al-
gorithm and communicates with the Manager Bundle to handle
the interaction with the rest of the bundles. The main concept
behind this approach is the aggregation of home appliances
into priority classes and the deﬁnition of a maximum power
consumption limit, which is not allowed to be exceeded. If the
user sets a maximum consumption, every time an appliance
is turned on, a requests to consume is send to this bundle.
This bundle will reply accepting or declining the request. This
bundle is also capable of sending pause and resume commands
to the household appliances. The pause command is used to
force the appliance to go to into stand-by mode. The resume
command is used to switch the appliance from stand-by mode
to on, where the appliance will then continue its task. The
Scheduling Bundle will decide which appliances can be paused
and when they should continue their task by following the
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

event driven scheduling algorithm illustrated in Fig. 3 and
explained in detail in the next subsection.
A. Event Driven Scheduling Algorithm
The event driven scheduling algorithm showed in Fig. 3 is
used to keep the total consumption of the household under the
determined limit. The algorithm is triggered by two events:
request to consume and end of consumption. An end of
consumption event is send from Manager bundle when an
appliance has been turned off.
The Manager bundle sends a request to consume to the
Scheduling bundle when the users switch the appliance on. The
Scheduling Bundle then calculates if there is enough power
to switch on that appliance without exceeding the maximum
consumption. If the consumption of the appliances already
switched on, plus the consumption of the new appliance does
not exceed the maximum consumption, then the appliance
requesting to consume electricity is switched on. On the other
hand, if switching on the new appliance would exceed the
maximum consumption, the algorithm proceeds to examine
the priorities of the appliances already switched on. The
bundle tries to ﬁnd a subset of the appliance(s) switched
on, which have lower priority than the appliance requesting
to consume. This subset of appliances should free enough
electricity consumption so the new appliance can be switched
on without exceeding the limit. If a subset fulﬁlling this
condition is found, the appliances in the subset is paused and
added to the paused appliances list. The bundle grants access
to the new appliance without exceeding the maximum power
consumption. In the case, a subset of appliances could not be
found, the new appliance is added to the paused appliances
list.
When an appliance is switched off, an end of consumption
event is send to this bundle. The bundle then checks the
paused appliances list. If one or more paused appliances can be
switched on without exceeding the maximum power consump-
tion, a resume command is send to the paused appliance(s).
In order to get users to accept that the users’ low priority
appliances will be paused and therefore take longer for them
to ﬁnish their task, utilities could offer them a reduction in the
electricity bill. This can be used as a commercial strategy by
utilities to face a more homogeneous consumption by using
attractive pricing schemes. It has to be taken into consideration
that electricity bills are increasing along with the number of
electrical appliances and users are interested in reducing their
electricity bill. In particular, during the winter of 2007/08, 20%
Request 
to consume
End of
consumption
No
Yes
Start/Resume 
appliance
Pause and queue low 
priority appliance and 
start new appliance
Yes
Yes
Queue 
appliance
No
Yes
No
Start 
appliance
No
Next 
event?
Higher 
priority than running 
appliances?
Enough 
power?
Waiting 
appliances?
Enough 
power?
Other 
appliances 
waiting?
Yes
No
Fig. 3. Event Driven Scheduling Algorithm
TABLE III
RESULTS
Scenario A
Scenario B
Max Consumption
1000 W
750 W
Mean waiting time
19,3 min
69,6 min
of Americans could not pay on time their electricity bill and
8.7 million American consumers were disconnected from their
electricity utility services [14].
B. Evaluation
The delay suffered by the low priority appliances due to
the fact that there is a limit on the maximum consumption
and therefore, in some occasions, these appliances will have
to wait before they can consume power is evaluated in this
section. This delay is referred as waiting time.
As the priorities of appliances can considerably vary from
user to user a simpliﬁed scenario that contains a television
set, a computer, a washing machine, a dryer and a dishwasher
has been considered. In addition, the appliances have been
septated into these two priorities: high priority appliances
(television set, computer) and low priority appliances (washing
machine, dryer and dishwasher). The high priority appliances
are considered to need electricity as soon as they are turned on,
they cannot be denied power and cannot be paused or delayed
in any way. On the other hand, the low priority appliances can
be paused and/or delayed as it has been considered that their
task duration could be prolonged without affecting the users’
comfort. This scenario has been evaluated separately from
the energy management system as it does not affect the total
consumption, it only limits the instant power consumption.
The household appliances considered in this scenario are
presented in Table II. This table also includes the consumption
of each appliance, the average usage of the appliance and the
duration of this usage. The average usage of the appliance
has been taken from [15]. This data attempts to model the
appliances usage of a typical day of a family (4-6 persons)
between 17:00-00:00, when most of electrical consumption
takes place.
100 test cases of one day have been done for each two
different maximum consumption 750W and 1000W. The mean
waiting time of the low priority appliance for both scenarios
is summarized in Table III. The waiting time is the time the
low priority appliances have been in pause mode, which can
happen before the appliance even starts its task or during the
task. The waiting can be seen as some extra time the low
priority appliances will take to ﬁnish their task. For instance,
for Scenario A, the washing machine will take in average 149,3
min minutes instead of 130 minutes, which means an increase
of 14,8%. For Scenario B, the waiting time is considerably
higher, 69,6 minutes.
V. CONCLUSION
The main motivation was to create a simple Home Gateway
which would be easily scalable and that had the necessary
capabilities to create a HEMS. The HEMS developed will
not only offer control of devices through a GUI and run
rules to reduce energy consumption, but it will also use web
services to communicate with their components and also to
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

TABLE II
HOME APPLIANCES CHARACTERISTICS
Appliances
Model
Power Consumption
Average Usage [15]
Usage Duration
Television: 42LE4900 LG [16]
Television Set
DVD player: DVX550 LG [17]
239 Watt
4,3 hours/day
120 min
Home theater: S-HS111US Pioneer [18]
Computer
PC: HP Pavilion Slimline s5670t [19]
242 Watt
3,5 hours/day
100 min
Monitor: BX2340 Samsung [20]
Washing machine
WM12S32XEE Siemens [21]
733 Watt
3,1 times/week
131 min
Dryer machine
WTW8658XEE Bosch [22]
609 Watt
4,4 times/week
134 min
Dish washer
SMS69T25EU Bosch [23]
720 Watt
4,1 times/week
100 min
communicated with other components and offer remote access.
The HEMS also includes an event driven scheduling algorithm
for regulating electricity demand peak. The developed Home
Gateway uses web services to offer communication with
external devices, such as the Smart Meter and Energy Rules
Server, in addition to remote access to the system. Using
this remote access the user can change the settings of the
energy management system and the scheduling algorithm. The
user can modify, delete, or download new rules from the
Energy Rules Server to reduce the electricity consumption
using the GUI of this HEMS. Basic rules obtained from the
Energy Rules Server are downloaded to the HEMS to test
if the household electricity consumption is reduced. In the
considered scenario, the electricity consumption for a 4 people
household consuming 28.195 kWh/year is reduced a 17,7%.
The scheduling algorithm to reduce demand peaks is also
tested. In this case, two scenarios are considered, one with a
maximum power consumption of 750 W and the other with
1000 W. This scenario will happen when the Home Gateway
receives a request to limit the household consumption from
the Smart Meter through web services. Using the scheduling
algorithm will ensure that the maximum consumption is not
exceed, and demand peaks intensity can be reduced. This,
however, comes with a cost for the customer, which will
have to accept that the low priority appliances take longer
to ﬁnish. This waiting time depends on the allowed maximum
power consumption. The lower the maximum consumption is
the longer the low appliances will take to ﬁnish their task.
For the ﬁrst scenario, where the limit was set to 750 W, the
waiting time of low priority appliances is of 69,6 minutes,
which is considerably high, an increase of 53,5%. However,
when the limit is set to 1000 W, this waiting time is reduced
considerably, 19,3 minutes. This represents an increase of
14,8%, which is a more feasible scenario.
This article has proved that the HEMS developed suc-
cessfully carry out its two main objectives: reduction the
electricity consumption and reduce electricity demand peak
in home environments without signiﬁcatively disturbing the
users’ comfort.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Rossell´o-Busquet, J. Soler, and L. Dittmann, “A Novel Home Energy
Management System Architecture,” in 13th International Conference on
Computer Modelling and Simulation (UKSim), April 2011.
[2] A. Rossell´o-Busquet, L. J. Brewka, J. Soler, and L. Dittmann, “OWL
Ontologies and SWRL Rules Applied to Energy Management,” in
13th International Conference on Computer Modelling and Simulation
(UKSim), April 2011.
[3] Ana Rossello Busquet and Jos Soler, “A Novel Web Service Based
Home Energy Management System,” in Proceedings of the Third Inter-
national Conference on Advances in Future Internet AFIN, 2011.
[4] D. Bonino, E. Castellina, and F. Corno, “The DOG gateway: enabling
ontology-based intelligent domotic environments,” Consumer Electron-
ics, IEEE Transactions on, November 2008.
[5] S. H. Ju, Y. H. Lim, M. S. Choi, J.-M. Baek, and S.-Y. Lee, “An efﬁcient
home energy management system based on automatic meter reading,” in
Power Line Communications and Its Applications (ISPLC), 2011 IEEE
International Symposium on, April 2011.
[6] J. Han, C.-S. Choi, and I. Lee, “More efﬁcient home energy management
system based on zigbee communication and infrared remote controls,”
Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, February 2011.
[7] A. Fensel, S. Tomic, V. Kumar, M. Stefanovic, S. V. Aleshin, and
D. O. Novikov, “Sesame-s: Semantic smart home system for energy
efﬁciency,” Informatik-Spektrum, vol. 36, pp. 46–57, 2013. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00287-012-0665-9
[8] OSGi Alliance, “OSGi Service Platform Core Speciﬁcation Release 4,”
Accessed Dec. 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.osgi.org
[9] “Apache CXF Distributed OSGi,” Accessed April 2011. [Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-gloss/
[10] H. Knublauch, “Protege-OWL API Programmer’s Guide,” Accessed
Dec. 2010. [Online]. Available: http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/
ProtegeOWL API Programmers Guide
[11] D. Bonino and F. Corno, “DogOnt - Ontology Modeling for Intelligent
Domotic Environments,” The Semantic Web - ISWC 2008, 2008.
[12] I. Richardson, M. Thomson, D. Inﬁeld, and C. Clifford, “Domestic
electricity use: a high-resolution energy demand model,” Accessed
April 2013. [Online]. Available: https://dspace.lboro.ac.uk/2134/5786
[13] I. Richardson and M. Thomson, “Domestic electricity demand model
- simulation example,” Accessed April 2013. [Online]. Available:
https://dspace.lboro.ac.uk/2134/5786
[14] “The Smart Grid: An Introduction,” U.S Department of Energy (DOE),
Tech. Rep., 2008.
[15] “Residential Energy Consumption Survey Data,” U.S. Energy Informa-
tion Administration, Independent Statistics Analysis, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[16] “Model
32LE4900,
Speciﬁcations,
ECO,”
Accessed:
20/03/2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.lg.com/uk/tv-audio-video/televisions/
LG-led-tv-42LE4900.jsp
[17] “Model DVX550, Speciﬁcations, POWER,” Accessed: 20/03/2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.lg.com/uk/tv-audio-video/video/
LG-dvd-player-DVX550.jsp
[18] “Model
S-HS111US,
Speciﬁcations,”
Accessed:
20/03/2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.pioneerelectronics.com/PUSA/Home/
Home-Theater-Systems/S-HS111US
[19] “Model: Pavilion Slimline s5670t series, Speciﬁcations,” Accessed:
20/03/2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.shopping.hp.com/webapp/
shopping/store access.do?template type=series detail&category=
desktops&series name=s5670t series&jumpid=in R329 prodexp/
hhoslp/psg/desktops/promo tile/3/dt promo tile3 s5670t 113
[20] “Model BX2340, Speciﬁcations,” Accessed: 20/03/2012. [Online].
Available:
http://www.samsung.com/uk/consumer/pcperipherals/
monitors/professio-nal/LS23CBUMBV/EN/index.idx?pagetype=prd
detail&tab=speciﬁcation
[21] “Model WM12S32XEE, Ficha tecnica,” Accessed July 2012. [Online].
Available: http://www.siemens-home.es/WM12S32XEE.html
[22] “Model
WTW8658XEE,
Ficha
tecnica,”
Accessed:
20/03/2012.
[Online]. Available: http://www.bosch-home.es/WTW8658XEE.html
[23] “Model SMS69T25EU, Ficha tecnica,” Accessed: 20/03/2012. [Online].
Available: http://www.bosch-home.es/SMS69T25EU.html
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

