Towards Standardization of Ontologies in Research and Industry 
Frank-Walter Jaekel 
Institute for Production Systems and Design Technology,
Fraunhofer IPK 
D-10587 Berlin, Germany 
email; frank-walter.jaekel@ipk.fraunhofer.de
Robert I. M. Young 
School of Mechanical, Electrical and Manufacturing 
Engineering 
Loughborough University 
 Loughborough, UK 
 email; r.i.young@lboro.ac.uk
Martin Zelm 
Standardization Coordinator  
INTEROP-Virtual Laboratory 
B-1000 Brussels, Belgium 
 email: martin.zelm@t-online.de
Abstract Whilst many ontologies have been developed in 
research projects over recent decades, we are still a long way 
short of providing an effective level of interoperability between 
the systems used, both within and between organisations. It is 
generally accepted that ontologies and the use of standards are 
fundamental to achieving interoperability, but effective 
solutions are proving hard to find. This paper analyses the 
state of the art in ontological research and standardisation for 
industry. It highlights the demands of industry and considers 
the approaches to meeting their needs, providing a perspective 
on the issues that need to be addressed to provide a step 
change in interoperability solutions 
Keywords: 
master 
data 
definition; 
Integration; 
interoperability; enterprise modelling and ontologies; 
reference solutions ; international standards.
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Interoperability is a goal for industry that should provide 
very substantial benefits in cost saving and improved 
response times leading to significant commercial value. 
Without 
interoperability, 
communication 
becomes 
misleading and the benefits of digitization are lost due to 
translation errors. This leads to cost and time losses, since, 
for 
example, 
without 
smooth 
and 
interoperable 
communication between supply chain systems, enterprise 
resource planning systems and production processing, many 
manual interventions and lots of interfaces are necessary. 
This has been known for many years and it has been 
recognised that both ontologies and standards should play a 
significant part in achieving interoperability.  
While ontologies have been recognised as playing an 
important part in achieving interoperability, their value to 
date has been limited. Statements appear such as “it is too 
complex” or “it is too restrictive” or “how to select the right 
ontologies or standards for a given question or task”. The 
problem with using ontologies to date has been that current 
ontologies have mainly been developed independently. This 
means that incompatibilities are effectively built-in as 
definitions of terms are produced independently with no real 
thought to ensuring compatibility. To do this requires a 
major effort towards providing an ontological infrastructure 
which can then be exploited by domain specific ontology 
builders. Tool chains are also required to orchestrate 
existing tools and allow cooperative work between the 
stakeholders i.e the domain experts, data designer, IT 
system providers and process designers, to support 
collaborative work, consistency, and usability of any 
developed ontology. 
Industrial data standards are fundamentally important if 
interoperability is to be achieved when required. However, 
many industrial data standards fail, from an interoperability 
perspective, because each specific standard is produced with 
text-based definitions. This means that the definitions are 
easy to misinterpret when developing other related 
standards, leading to incompatibility problems. The use of 
formal ontologies should overcome this problem by 
automatically identifying incompatibilities between the 
definitions of terms, thereby enabling these issues to be 
resolved. However, new standardised methods towards 
finding common agreement on formal definitions of terms 
are also required as building consensus is extremely 
difficult. Without such methods, acceptance of common 
definitions will not be possible and any routes to effective 
mapping between alternative definitions will be difficult.    
To date, ontological standards, methods and tools fall far 
short of meeting the demands of industry. This paper 
analyses the state of the art and elaborates the needs for 
ontology development approaches in Section 1, whereas 
Sections II and III address new tool requirements and 
standardization 
to 
support 
industrial 
interoperability. 
Section IV provides the conclusion.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

II.
EVALUATION AND STATE OF THE ART
The state of the art with regard to ontologies and the 
related work in the field of international standardization are 
outlined below. 
A. Ontologies 
There is still much confusion in industry as to what an 
ontology is and why it is important. This is compounded by 
the large number of definitions that exist in academic 
publications. The early definition being “a specification of a 
conceptualisation” where “to specify a conceptualisation 
one needs to state the axioms that constrain the possible 
interpretations for the defined terms” (Gruber [1], Noran 
[2]). This by itself is not easy for a lay person to understand. 
One which is easier to understand but offers a more open 
interpretation that comes from an international standard 
(ISO 18629-1:2004). This defines three terms: ontology as 
“a lexicon of specialised terminology along with some 
specification of the meaning of terms in the lexicon”; 
Lexicon as “a set of symbols and terms”; Axiom as “well-
formed formula in a formal language that provides 
constraints on the interpretation of symbols in the lexicon of 
a language”.  This allows for ontologies be defined in 
simple textual form, as per many standards, or even as 
dictionaries. However, if the terms are defined using axioms 
then you have ontologies as they are typically intended 
today i.e. formal ontologies defined using logic where the 
terminology is computer interpretable.  
The importance of ontologies is reflected in the large 
number of research projects that have been undertaken since 
that initial definition in 1993. However, it is clear from 
industrial experience that domain ontology projects 
typically do not meet the complex knowledge sharing 
requirements of manufacturing businesses, where all the key 
aspects of the business must interact. Although reference 
ontology projects have shown promise in resolving this 
issue, these too fall short of fully meeting industry 
requirements (Palmer et al. [3]). Current, large-scale 
projects, such as the Industry Ontology Foundry and 
OntoCommons, that aim to provide a standardised 
ontological infrastructure that can be exploited and used by 
domain ontology developers, offer new possibilities towards 
achieving more effective interoperable solutions (Karray et 
al [5]).  These approaches still have many pitfalls to avoid 
or to overcome before they can be proven useful to industry, 
not least the balance of cost / benefit that needs to be shown 
through effective implementation methods and tools. 
However, most importantly, they do offer the possibility of 
a 
standardised 
infrastructure 
which 
companies 
can 
specialise to suit their needs and on which systems 
developers can build their tools and services.  
B. Standards 
      There are a great many standardisation bodies and 
organisations involved in developing standards, at national, 
regional, and international levels. The necessary support for 
business interoperability must, in time, come from 
international efforts given the largely global nature of 
businesses and business interactions. However, more local 
ad-hoc solutions may provide some benefit to smaller 
businesses 
focused 
purely 
on 
their 
own 
internal 
interoperability problems. 
      Some international standards organisations are run as 
collaborations between national standards bodies such as 
ISO and ISO/IEC with specific technical committees 
involved in interoperability related standards, while others 
operate as a collaboration between interested business 
organisations such as the World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C), the Open Applications Group Inc (OAGi) and the 
Open Platform Communications (OPC) Foundation. 
From experience in ISO and joint ISO/IEC Technical 
Committees, 
the 
following 
major 
bottlenecks 
in 
standardization have been identified (Kareron  [6]): 
1.
Lack 
of 
strong 
theoretical 
foundation 
and 
sometimes 
poor 
knowledge 
of 
fundamental 
academic works, which would be very helpful to 
edit more sustainable and agile standards for a 
digital environment, 
2.
Standards are sometimes developed in an abstract 
way with insufficient concrete testing of their 
implementation in industry, 
3.
Some standards are not simple enough for a 
handover and adoption by industry 
4.
The foundations, either scientific, methodological, 
or ethical are not discussed enough and not shared 
by the community of experts and targeted 
practitioners, which conducts to longstanding 
misunderstandings in the process of development 
of a standard, 
5.
The process of developing of standards is very 
long; experts are often volunteers; there are issues 
regarding the necessary competencies; at the end 
the standards are too complex and present data 
quality issues, which jeopardizes their use in 
industry. 
From an ontology language perspective, the Web 
Ontology Language (OWL) is developed and supported 
through W3C while the Common Logic approach is 
captured in ISO/IEC 24707. Top level ontologies are 
standardised in ISO/IEC 21838, while industrial data related 
ontology standards that have been developed through ISO 
TC184 SC4 include: ISO 18629 [7], Process Specification 
Language; ISO 20534, Formal Semantic Models for the 
Configuration of Production Networks; and ISO 15926-2 
[8], Integration of life-cycle data for process plants 
including oil and gas production facilities. ISO15926  is 
an interoperability standard for the process industry and 
includes the Work In Progress (WIP) database. WIP is 
available online and includes technical class descriptions of 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

all the main equipment items, pipe, instruments, buildings, 
activities 
and 
anything 
else 
used 
in 
engineering, 
constructing, procuring, operating and maintaining process 
facilities.  
ISO 15926-2 is perhaps the only one being exploited by 
industry. However, this uses a 4-dimensional approach 
which is well suited to the flow of fluids through time but 
not well suited to typical industrial manufacturing processes 
which operate on a 3-dimensional paradigm. To our 
knowledge there are no other international standards to date 
that define ontologies to support effective industrial 
interoperability. 
OPC-UA [10] is an industrial standard which provides an 
approach as to how to create information models through 
the use of a unified architecture. These information models 
call companion specifications and describes the data 
structures and their relationships. Standardisation bodies can 
develop a common layer across multiple different separately 
developed specifications. OPC-UA illustrates the effect of 
advertising and motivation about standards that are directly 
usable by industry and can solve pain-points for industry in 
terms of interoperability
III.
INDUSTRIAL DEAMANDS AND APPROACHES
The industry's demands and potential approaches for a 
common reference for data management and flexible 
information exchange between the companies' IT systems 
are outlined in the following sections.    
A. Demands 
Digitalisation within an organization requires horizontal 
and 
vertical 
interoperability 
to 
manage 
enterprise 
applications, IT services and related business processes[4]. 
Initially it may sound simple to have a common master data 
structure across an organization. In reality however, each 
enterprise application has its own master data approach and 
each system, such as a Programmable Logic Controller 
(PLC), requires specific realisations of at least IDs for real 
world objects and data. The challenge is to develop a data 
management approach which provides flexibility in 
exchanging IT systems as well as supporting a fast and 
effective interoperability between the IT systems, including 
the business processes. This leads to requirements such as 
•
Common reference for data management which 
could be provided by a company-wide formal 
ontology, 
•
Flexible exchange of IT system by conformity 
to the common reference instead of a high 
number of unmanageable interfaces between 
systems, 
•
Common understanding of the data acquisition 
and usage across the company, 
•
Willingness  to exchange information with 
other organisations through an internal common 
understanding of terms and data structures. 
From industry experience on master data management, 
the challenge is then to find the appropriate way to develop 
the overall master data management in terms of an ontology 
and then how to use this. The problem in industry might be 
just to have common tools to work on a company ontology 
between consultants, IT vendors, domain experts and 
research; but which tools should be used? In a current 
project the consultant creating the ontology framework just 
used PowerPoint to identify terms. The company proposed 
Enterprise Architect [11] or, for distributed work, 
Conceptboard [12]. In addition, Arrow.app [13] was 
considered. Protégé was found not to be sufficiently easy to 
use. A common standardized way to support such 
cooperative working requirements has been identified by 
modular approaches to develop the ontology. But the 
modular approach also needs a tool chain for the initial 
development and the management of changes. 
It would be good to have some standard proposal for a 
tool chain which is well understood. This does not target the 
tools themselves, but types of tools for ontology developers, 
ontology data management, etc. In this industry research 
project, we used arrows.app for modelling and neo4j [13] 
for data management, before we started with Protégé. 
Currently we are not sure if this way will be sufficient for 
the further use of the ontology.  
While research is expected to explore alternative 
solutions, this is not suitable for industry which requires 
more stringent and standardized approaches. This problem 
is under consideration within ISO/TC 184/SC 4/TF 2 "SC 4 
reference model for industrial data" [9].  
B. Approaches 
In general, a high number of ontologies exists as well as 
some frameworks aimed at organising ontologies. This 
leaves the question of how to navigate these and what is the 
benefits of using these ontologies in industry. This relates to 
the problem of providing easy to apply ontology building 
procedures and identifying the related toolchain. To provide 
short term solutions for industry, we do not focus on a 
general overall ontology due to the clear long-term issues 
involved in defining a generic solution. Therefore, to 
support industry, we anticipate providing mechanisms to 
develop for independent ontologies within the factory scope 
as well as an opportunity to federate them across factories, if 
needed. This would hopefully lead to a “best practices” 
approach to do factory ontology development along with the 
use 
of 
“reference ontologies” to interact between 
organizations 
through 
an ontological 
infrastructure. Approaches such as the Industrial Ontology 
Foundry [Karray et al 2020] start to establish such a 
structure across different ontologies.
Alongside ongoing research for solutions, the demand to 
implement solutions now increases from industry to provide 
a common information base capturing all their data assets. 
In fact, this is a prerequisite to providing effective 
digitalization. An example is the definition of idents (IDs) 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

which represents the relation between a real-world object 
and its representation in the digital world. It can be used as a 
handle to get the data from the object and to get the data to 
the object. Such IDs are used in different enterprise 
applications SCM, ERP, MES, PLC programs etc. The 
challenge is that each application defines the ID differently 
while in the physical world a fixed identification has to be 
linked to a part, but which ID should be used? We can use 
serial numbers, but this would require mappings from the 
serial number into each of the enterprise applications and 
especially into each new system.
This example illustrates the issue on just one data 
element but in real systems hundreds of data elements are 
exchanged. This calls for a kind of reference structure and in 
a first step at least the enterprise master data might be 
considered. An ontology approach for such master data can 
provide clear semantics of terms as well as clear data 
structures and interrelations across enterprise applications.  
Figure 1: Vision idea influenced by semantic web and experiences from industry 
-
Also, the maintenance of the data can be in one place. This 
would provide a reference data structure for the 
organization. 
Project experiences illustrate that, currently, large 
companies start to work in this direction. 
These industrial demands can be fulfilled independently 
by each company, but a common approach and 
consideration of existing standards would be desirable. 
Therefore, an easy route to identify suitable standards and 
their use would be helpful. A further challenge is how to 
support the interoperability between companies as well as 
with other organizations like government and finance to 
simplify supply and value chains as well as business 
networks in general.  
C. Vision 
The increase demand for digitalisation and a lack of 
standardised IT solutions that are interoperable by default 
requires an action to create a common structure of 
terminologies and relationships. It should ideally be done in 
a federated way because the necessary definitions for each 
business depends on company specifics like region, culture, 
business targets etc. So, in principle each enterprise might 
create their own common ontology and data structure but 
would need support in terms of specific approaches and 
tools to be effective with their definitions. This would give 
freedom and flexibility to a company in terms of the time 
horizon because it is not bounded by longer term 
standardisation processes. 
        However, in a second step a mapping to a reference 
framework such as a harmonised set of standards and 
ontologies 
could 
provide 
a 
cross 
organisational 
interoperability capability [4].  To meet factory scope 
specific requirements this may not require a generic overall 
ontology but might be possible with existing industrial 
standards and sets of ontologies. The federated approach 
would also allow an independent evolution of the ontologies 
as well as a different level of maturity in each company. A 
related vision is illustrated in Figure 1. It incorporates the 
following parts: 
Standards 
Standardized ontologies
Ontology framework
Cross organizational interoperability
Horizontal and vertical interoperability within each company
Industrial 
Standards 
Ontologies 
and tools 
Enterprise 
system data 
structures 
Correlation / 
mapping
Available assets
Standardized 
Tool chains / 
best practices
Approaches
Ontological infrastructure
1
2
3
4
5
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

1.
Independent company ontologies to achieve 
improved internal interoperability e.g. enable 
company-wide consistent digitalization; provide 
common master data across the company’s IT 
systems; simplify replacements of IT components. 
This structure is likely to be private and not public. 
2.
Separate mappings between the company specific 
ontology and the required area of the reference 
structure related to specific scopes. This approach 
would 
deliver 
independence 
from 
the 
standardization time horizon for the companies.
3.
Ontological infrastructure and a reference structure 
for 
agreed 
interoperability 
across 
companies/enterprises.  
4.
Available standards, ontologies, information design 
tools and enterprise data 
5.
Approaches for the achievement of a company 
ontology with related methods, tools and best 
practises as well as mechanism to extend the 
ontological infrastructure
IV DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The building of a formal ontology as a pre-requirement 
for standardization of ontologies derived from the 
collaboration projects seems to include the following issues:  
1. Definition of Ontology domains 2. Multi-ontology 
compatibility 3. Tools and methods to support the 
development of reference ontologies and exploitation. 
The paper identifies the needs and benefits of ontologies 
from the industry users’ point of view, identifying short 
term focused needs of individual companies versus the more 
generic longer-term approach of standardisation initiatives.  
Further, the paper presents a high-level vision of the 
interaction between ontologies and standardisation.  
At present, there exists a number of individual ontologies 
within a given data space or scope such as a factory or 
company. As a short-term interim solution to cope with the 
above issues, a best practice approach would be appropriate 
through the federation of existing ontologies. Once an 
ontology exists, the formal definitions of terms within it also 
exist. When a conflict of compatibility is identified, a cyclic 
revision process to align the given ontologies will be 
required. This raises further issues related to the ease or 
even the possibility of alignment. However, over time, such 
progressive alignment should be more easily achieved with 
the development of reference ontology infrastructures 
which, in turn, should pave the way for new standards to 
enhance data exchange and interoperability.  
Further work of collecting, structuring and harmonization 
ontology research work results as well as new research is 
required to elaborate an overall reference infrastructure. 
REFERENCES
[1]
T. R. Gruber: A translation approach to portable ontology 
specification. Knowledge Acquisition. 5(2), pp. 199-220 
(1993) 
[2]
O. Noran: Towards a Sustainable Interoperability of 
Standards. Information Control Problems in Manufacturing, 
14(1), pp. 1272-1277 (2012) 
[3]
C. Palmer; Z. Usman; O. Canciglieri Junior and A. Malucelli 
and R. M. Young: Interoperable manufacturing knowledge 
systems, International Journal of Production Research, DOI: 
10.1080/00207543.2017.1391416 (2017) 
[4]
M. Born; U. Greiner; S. Lippe; R. Ruggaber; T. Kahl and J. 
Ziemann and F.-W. Jaekel: ATHENA Framework for Cross- 
Organizational Business Processes from an EU Perspective, 
MIT Press, (2009) 
[5]
M. H. Karray; N. Otte; D. Kiritsis; A. Farhad; K. Boonserm; 
C. Willf and R. Aristag and R. Raih and B. Smith:  The 
Industrial 
Ontologies 
Foundry 
(IOF) 
perspectives, 
Proceedings of the I-ESA 2020 Workshops, CEUR-W S Vol 
2900 (2020) 
[6]
Y. 
Keraron 
and 
K. 
Hribernik: 
Interoperability 
for 
Maintenance, Proceedings of the I-ESA 2020 Workshops, 
CEUR-WS Vol 2900, (2020) 
[7]
ISO 18629-1:2004; Industrial automation system and 
integration -- Process specification language:  Part 1: 
Overview and basic principles 
[8]
ISO 15926-2:2003: Industrial automation systems and 
integration — Integration of life-cycle data for process plants 
including oil and gas production facilities 
[9]
ISO/TC 184/SC 4/TF 2: Technical Report, titled "SC 4 
reference model for industrial data", ISO  (2022) 
[10] OPC-UA, https://opcfoundation.org/, viewed on August 30th 
2021. Accessed June 20, 2022 
[11] Enterprise 
Architect, 
https://www.sparxsystems.com/.
Accessed June 20,  2022 
[12] Conceptboard, https://conceptboard.com/de/. Accessed June 
20, 2022 
[13] Arrows and neo4j, https://neo4j.com/labs/arrows/. Accessed 
June 20, 2022  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

