Podcast for Radio Studio of Zilina University 
 
Juraj Fabus, Viktoria Fabusova, Peter Kolarovszki, Jiri Tengler 
Department of Communication, University of Zilina 
Zilina, Slovak republic 
e-mail:  {juraj.fabus, viktoria.fabusova, peter.kolarovszki, jiri.tengler}@fpedas.uniza.sk 
 
 
Abstract— The paper deals with podcasting, which is an 
appropriate form of distribution of radio programs of 
University of Zilina Radio. In this paper, we explain and define 
several terms related to podcasting, its creation and 
downloading. Our work is presented in the context of Slovak 
and Czech Republic. We wanted to find out which programs 
would be welcomed by the listeners as podcasts on the website 
of the Rapeš Internet radio.  In the last part, the design of 
podcast for radio studio of Zilina University is described.  
Keywords-podcasting; RSS feed; radio; listener; podest. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Podcasting got into the user awareness during 2004. It 
was a year after the Apple Computer company introduced 
the iPod media player for audio files. IPod gave name to this 
phenomenon, although it is not needed for playing podcasts. 
Podcasting is a strength for communication between 
different individuals. Nowadays, anyone has the opportunity 
to become visible on the Internet. Podcasters, even with first 
podcasts, can reach a geographically diverse audience; 
everything, without transmitters, satellites, regulations. The 
whole world can really listen [1].  
Basically, Podcasting is an audio content available on the 
Internet, which can be delivered to the computer or portable 
player. 
University of Žilina does not use in its radio station any 
technology to make their archive available online. In our 
paper, we describe how this problem can be solved through 
the podcast technology. 
Section 2 describes the history of podcasting. Software 
for receiving podcasts and for creating and editing records is 
introduced in Section 3. Sections 4, 5 and 6 analyse the 
current state of research in the area of using podcasts. The 
procedure to design podcast for the student radio of 
University of Zilina is described in Section 7.  
 
II. 
HISTORY OF PODCASTING 
Adam Curry, who is an MTV presenter of radio station 
MTV and interactive creator, tried for several years to find 
ways to use broadcast video and audio streams on the 
Internet. In 2000, Curry met with respected programmer 
Dave Winer, who was an expert in the development of 
hundreds of Internet applications, as well as the creator of 
Rich Site Summary (RSS) format for reading articles and 
reports on the Internet. Together, Curry and Winer, theorized 
about the possible way to use RSS for sending not only 
headlines but also audio and video files as such. As a result 
of their theories, Winer created the <enclosure> tag through 
the RSS specifications, enabling applications to transfer files 
from the Internet by following the simple URLs through the 
source pointing to the file. 
Curry began working. He tried to find ways to use RSS 
with the audio track, but not to download to the computer, 
but move a step ahead and keep it in sync with the iPod. 
Curry needed an application that would control the various 
RSS feeds, withdrawing them and moved into his iPod [2]. 
After Adam Curry has published the source code of his 
application on the Internet, the programmers found many 
enthusiasts improved and publicized it. Curry´s session in 
August 2004 is regarded as the emergence of podcasting. Of 
course, at that time an appropriate name for use of audio with 
the RSS was not selected, most people called it audio 
blogging. 
Later, the name Podcasting emerged, combining two 
words "iPod" - digital music player from Apple in which 
audio files were played and "broadcasting" - (radio) 
broadcasts. The word Podcasting is derived from the words 
"pod” and "broadcast", where “pod” comes from iPod [3]. 
Despite the etymology, the content can be accessed using 
any computer that can play media files and not just portable 
music players. Use of the term "podcast" predates the 
addition of native support for Podcasting to the iPod, or to 
Apple's iTunes software.  
III. PODCASTING TOOLS 
To upload and record a podcast it requires a microphone 
and freely available software applications. These are the 
basics enough to create a simple podcast. If a podcaster 
would like to create a complexed podcast, a mixing desk that 
allows 
the 
podcaster 
to 
record 
several 
sounds and combine them is also needed. [4]. 
A. Software for creating and editing records 
There are several programs for creating and editing 
podcasts. Some are difficult, in view of their operation, some 
are simpler. It is up to the user which program to choose. 
Among the most common tools for creating and editing 
audio are:  
• 
Sound forge [5]; 
• 
Audio Hijack Pro [6]; 
• 
BIAS Peak [7], and 
• 
CastBlaster [8]. 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-491-6
AFIN 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

B. Software for receiving podcasts 
Apple has integrated Podcasting into the operating 
system. To register to a podcast and the subsequent 
management of its editions, the program iTunes is 
sufficient, which is available as standard in each installation. 
Receiving podcasts in Windows is not native, but it can be 
easily reached. Receiving podcasts under this operating 
system can be divided into two categories [9]: 
• 
Programs that are installed on your computer 
download podcasts to a hard drive and as a 
subsidiary function typically include the possibility 
to transfer downloaded songs to a portable player. 
• 
Programs that are installed directly on the player. 
They starts automatically when connected to a PC, 
make use of the Internet and check sources of 
podcasts. If they find a new session, they download 
it directly to user’s player. 
Most of the most common players support this 
technology. Thanks to these programs, the files are 
automatically downloaded to the PC or a mobile player. 
Automation of this process distinguishes Podcasting from the 
common manual downloading of files from the Internet. This 
are the examples of these players [10]: 
• 
iTunes; 
• 
iPodderX; 
• 
Juice; 
• 
NewsFire; 
• 
Winamp; 
• 
myPodder, and 
• 
Cloud Caster. 
 
IV. PODCASTING AT STUDENT RADIO STATIONS ABROAD 
The essential part of the analysis of the current state is to 
describe the ways how this problem can be solved abroad. 
For the needs of our work we looked for the best student 
radio stations rank in the USA. The list of the 20 best 
American student radio stations can be found at this website 
[11]. We have examined the individual websites of the 
university radio stations to find out how they podcast the 
programs [12]. 
Podcasting is used by the majority of these radio stations, 
because it is very common in the USA. The vast majority of 
US student radio stations distribute their 
podcasts 
exclusively through their Web portals without the use of 
external services. Their audio files - podcasts are streamed 
directly from their Web servers. Then we meet with another 
group of student radio stations, which share their programs 
on the Web portals for sharing audio files as Mixcloud or 
SoundCloud, and they can also stream podcasts on iTune, the 
use of which is also very common in the USA. 
Since 2005, the annual awards for podcasts are awarded 
on the initiative of Todd Cochran from the Podcast Connect 
Inc. The fans themselves can appreciate their favourite 
podcasters by nominating them into this competition. 
Nominated podcasts are divided into different categories, 
which arise from the most common nominations and belong 
to the most listened types of podcasts. More than 600 
podcasts have been nominated for the year 2016 already 
[13]. 
 
V. THE SITUATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC 
Compared with Slovak podcasts in the Czech Republic, 
this service uses more radio stations. Among the first was the 
Czech Radio, which offers to its listeners so called Radio on 
Demand. It also offers a trailer for the podcasts in the form 
of video advertising. Besides Czech Radio podcasts offer 
also other radio stations: Radio Impuls, Express radio, Radio 
Frequency1 and radio Europe 2. 
On the Czech websites, listeners can meet with other 
podcasts, which do not offer radio stations, but independent 
filmmakers. Examples include: 
 
• 
brouzdej.cz - website where bloggers publish their 
blogs. It allows to set up voice output support. A 
blogger can choose if the notes will be read by male 
or female voice. When the blogger writes the 
contribution, after he/she send it online, it is 
converted into Waveform Audio File Format and 
saved to webhosted disk. 
• 
respekt.cz - Respect Magazine offers users to 
download podcasts on their website. It offers storage 
space for audio recordings to each user. In case the 
user is interested to place a podcast in the magazine 
Respect, it is necessary to send the record to the 
editor by email. 
• 
podcasting.rogner.cz - a website dedicated to 
podcasting. The user can find information about 
podcasting, information about the software, about 
systems etc. The author of the website, Roman 
Rogner, does not provide his own podcasts. 
VI. THE SITUATION IN THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC  
The first Slovak media which noticed Podcasting 
technology was FM Radio [14]. This third circuit of the 
public radio started podcasts on its website from 2006. Also 
Slovak Radio provides podcasts and shows all its circuits in 
the form of podcasts. 
There are not so many podcasts which create an 
independent Slovak podcasters as in other countries. 
Websites with podcasts include: 
• 
niemand.sk - the first Slovak podcast, whose author 
is Thomas Ulej. It was established in 2005 and 
listeners can find on this website particular recording 
of literature. One of the attractions is the use of the 
voice of P. O. Hviezdoslav. The used format of 
podcasts is MP3. Update of recordings is not regular, 
as the recording is mainly occasional. 
• 
radioarwie.szm.sk - Internet radio, which was 
created in December 2005 with an irregular 
broadcast. Broadcasting in the form of podcast 
began at the end of March 2006. The listeners will 
also find on the website information about 
podcasting, programs, user manual for location RSS 
feed to iTunes and so on. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-491-6
AFIN 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

• 
gpkava.sk – podcast about coffee. Podcast dedicated 
to the forthcoming championship of Slovakia in the 
preparation of coffee in Aeropress. 
VII. PODCASTING AND RADIO STUDIO OF ZILINA 
UNIVERSITY 
Radio studio of Zilina University is a non-profit 
organization, where students of the University of Zilina are 
also involved in the operational process. They can acquire 
knowledge and develop their skills during broadcasting in 
three possible areas: moderation, broadcasting technology, or 
music area. These can also help them in their future career 
after graduating from university. 
“RAPEŠ” radio studio, the only college radio studio in 
Slovakia, broadcasts 24 hours a day. During the term, 
listeners can listen to moderated broadcast from Monday to 
Thursday, from 18:00 to midnight. Except for NONSTOP, 
which is broadcast once a term for one week. Rapeš radio 
studio broadcasts universal programs from the world of 
music, music genres, Slovakia and Czech productions, 
through programs on current topics of everyday life as well 
as events at University, to programs in which listeners can 
win valuable prizes. 
The main aim of this paper was to design and present the 
podcasts for radio station of the University of Žilina. The 
significant part of this work was to determine the students' 
interest and the usage of podcasts on the website of the radio. 
To clarify the main aim, we selected a number of partial 
objectives. The first partial objective was to analyse the need 
for the creation of this service among students. We were 
trying to find out the attitude of students, their interests and 
the views on the creation of podcasts.  
Since Rapeš broadcasts many programs, we wanted to 
find out which of them would be welcomed by the listeners 
as podcasts on the website of Rapeš. On this basis, we 
developed a questionnaire, through which we also wanted to 
find out whether respondents are familiar with with the 
Podcasting service and what the conditions to use it are. 
A 
questionnaire 
was 
used. 
We 
contacted 
100 
respondents, both men and women studying at different 
faculties of the University of Zilina aged 19-30 years. 
Response rate was 100%; all questionnaires were useful for 
our research. In the research component, the proportion of 
men and women was 59% and 41%. 
From the respondents 45% are familiar with the 
Podcasting.  Conversely, 55% of respondents do not know or 
are not familiar with this concept. It shows us that 
Podcasting has not yet got into the consciousness of the 
wider public. 
Although a number of respondents are familiar with 
podcasting, it is used by only 21%, which shows us that they 
were not impressed by this service or are not familiar with 
such content that would interest them enough to download it 
through podcasts. 
Technical equipment of people is sufficient, since 98% of 
respondents own a certain type of MP3 player. 39% own a 
portable music player, iPod. Probably for this reason, most of 
the respondents use iTunes, 48%. Only 5% use iPodder, 
despite the fact that it was the first program which could 
download podcasts. 33% of respondents use Winamp, and it 
is also the most commonly used music player on the PC. 
14% use other programs to download podcasts. 
Although 62% of respondents do not know which 
program they would welcome as a podcast or podcasts on the 
website Rapeš (Figure 1), 38% of respondents could imagine 
podcasts of some programs. 12% wished “Album of the 
week”, because they are interested in which artist released a 
new album. 9% would like to download “Cinema life” 
because they are interested in movie news and reviews. 8% 
are interested in competition and therefore would like to 
download the program “Not to drown”. 
Based on the received information about Podcasting 
service, we drew up a service proposal for radio studio 
Rapeš. The selection of programs was affected by the 
evaluation of questionnaire survey. The greatest interest had 
“Album of the week” and programs “Cinemalife”, and “Not 
to drown”. 
Characteristics of Podcasting programs:  
• 
Album of the week - a regular program in which the 
moderator presents the current album, which he/she 
considers as interesting, or special. 
• 
Cinemalife - Movie news, reviews and highlights 
from the show business. Listeners will learn current 
information from the world of film and can enter the 
competition to win free tickets to the cinema. 
• 
Not to drown - entertainment program in which two 
guests compete. Moderator prepares for them three 
competition rounds, and competitors try not to 
"drown" in the questions. 
After the selection of the program, the moderators were 
acquainted with the fact that their program will be recorded 
and subsequently placed on the website. There was also 
indispensable cooperation of technicians who are in charge 
of the recording of such programs. Programs were saved in 
MP3 format, which is the most commonly used format of 
audio files placed on the Internet. 
After obtaining the recorded program we contacted the 
webmaster who placed this program on the website. 
Webmaster realized the proposal and created a Podcasting 
service on the Radio Rapeš website. He created the username 
and password for us in the CMS, from where the website is 
administrated.  On this basis, we can add a recorded program 
on a page. 
Programs will be updated each week during the 
moderated broadcast of the radio station Rapeš. At the time 
the program is not broadcast, the last programs remain 
available as podcasts. Gradually, we will develop podcasts of 
other programs. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
There is a number of quality radio stations that could use 
Podcasting and enable their programs to be listened also after 
live broadcasting. At the same time, by provision of this 
service they could increase visits of their websites, as it was 
confirmed by FM radio after releasing the Podcasting 
service. From the survey, conducted on the potential users of 
the Podcasting service, came out that users have good 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-491-6
AFIN 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

assumptions to use this service because they are technically 
skilled and open to new ideas. 
We were able to meet the aim of the research upon the 
analysis of existing technologies and used tools, and upon 
the survey among target customers – students, we designed a 
podcast for the radio station of the University of Žilina. 
As the next step, it will be necessary to examine the 
benefits and failings of our proposed solutions, the impact on 
the mentioned programs, and to propose any corrections, if 
necessary. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Colombo, “Absolute Beginner’s Guide to Podcasting.”,  Que 
Publishing, Toronto 2006.  
[2] J. Farkas, G. Bart, “Secrets of Podcasting: Audio Blogging for the 
Masses”, Peachpit Press, Berkeley 2005.  
[3] "Oxford Dictionaries Online — podcast", oxforddictionaries.com, 
[retrieved: 
May, 
2016]. 
Avaliable 
from: 
http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/podcast. 
[4] W. Geoghegan, D. Klass, “Podcast solution – The Complete Guide of 
Podcasting”, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 2005.  
[5] Sound Forge softvare page, [retrieved: May, 2016].  Avaliable from: 
http://www.sonycreativesoftware.com/soundforgesoftware. 
[6] Audio Hijack Pro page, [retrieved: May, 2016]. Avaliable from: 
https://rogueamoeba.com/audiohijackpro/. 
[7] Bias 
softvare, 
[retrieved: 
May, 
2016]. 
Avaliable 
from: 
http://www.bias-inc.com/downloads/updates/. 
[8] CastBlaster softvare page, [retrieved: May, 2016]. Avaliable from: 
http://www.castblaster.com/. 
[9] R. Williams, “Podcasting and Blogging with GarageBand and iWeb”, 
Peachpit Press, Berkeley 2006. 
[10] A. Jelemensky, “Podcast – new digital medium or just a fun?” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.zive.sk/default.aspx?article=262982, 
[retrieved: May, 2016]. 
[11] Best college reviews, [retrieved: May, 2016]. Avaliable from: 
http://www.bestcollegereviews.org/. 
[12] “These 20 College Radio Stations Rock”, Avaliable from: 
http://www.bestcollegereviews.org/these-20-college-radio-stations-
rock/, [retrieved: May, 2016]. 
[13] 11th Podcast Awards Winner Announcement, [retrieved: May, 2016]. 
Avaliable from: http://www.podcastawards.com/.   
[14] L. Kocisek, “Slow fenomen – podcasting”, Etrend, may 2006, 
Avaliable 
from: 
http://medialne.etrend.sk/radia/ 
clanok.php?clanok=1579, [retrieved: May, 2016]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Program that respondents would welcome as a podcast 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-491-6
AFIN 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

