 
 
 Internet of Vehicles Functional Architectures - Comparative Critical Study  
Eugen Borcoci, Serban Obreja, Marius Vochin  
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest - UPB 
Bucharest, Romania 
Emails: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro, serban@radio.pub.ro,  mvochin@elcom.pub.ro
Abstract — The continuous growth of the vehicles number, 
together 
with 
associated 
problems 
encountered 
in 
transportation systems have driven significant developments in 
the framework of Intelligent Transport System (ITS). 
Recently, an advanced solution - Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is 
proposed, seen as a part of Future Internet and specifically of 
Internet of Things (IoT), aiming to offer novel advanced 
commercial and technical capabilities. IoV will integrate the 
previous Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET) and also 
functionalities already developed in ITS.  However, the 
architectural aspects of the IoV are still open research issues. 
This paper attempts a comparative critical study of several 
functional architectures proposed for IoV, including recent 
ones based on Cloud/Fog computing and Software defined 
networking (SDN) - control.  
Keywords 
— 
Internet 
of 
Vehicles, 
VANET; 
Cloud 
computing; Fog computing; Software Defined Networking; 
Network Function Virtualization. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The vehicular communications have been intensively   
studied, designed, standardized and implemented in the last 
two decades. The umbrella and framework for such 
developments is the Intelligent Transport System (ITS) 
[1][2]. Associated technologies are Dedicated Short-Range 
Communications (DSRC) and Wireless Access in Vehicular 
Environments (WAVE) [2]. IEEE 802.11p and IEEE 1609 
represent a set of standards for DSRC/WAVE networks.  
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET) [1] have been 
defined to support basic vehicular communications: vehicle 
to vehicle (V2V), vehicle to road (V2R), or vehicle to 
Infrastructure (V2I). The initial VANET components are the 
On-Board-Unit (OBU) placed in the vehicles and Road-
Side–Unit (RSU) placed on the roads. The RSUs can inter-
communicate and also could be linked to external networks 
like Internet. The main applications of VANET have been 
oriented to safety and traffic management applications. 
The VANETs have several limitations  related to their 
pure ad hoc network architecture (in V2V case), unreliable 
Internet service, incompatibility with personal devices, non-
cooperation with cloud computing, low accuracy of the 
services, operational network dependency and restricted 
areas of applications and services.  Therefore, extending the 
VANET architecture is considered today as a strong need. 
Recently, Internet of Vehicles (IoV) has been proposed as 
a significant enhancement in vehicular communication area. 
It could be seen as a global span of a vehicle network [3][4]. 
The IoV is considered as a special case of Internet of Things 
[5][6], where the “things” are either vehicles or their 
subsystems. The IoV will connect the vehicles and RSUs 
through different Wireless/Radio Access Technologies 
(WAT/RAT), 
while 
traditional 
Internet 
and 
other 
heterogeneous networks will be used for wide area. The IoV 
objectives can include the traditional VANET services but 
also novel ones, e.g., vehicle traffic management in urban or 
country areas, automobile production, repair and vehicle 
insurance, road infrastructure construction and repair, 
logistics and transportation, etc. The IoV can be supported 
by recent technologies like centralized Cloud Computing 
(CC) combined with Fog or Edge Computing [7]; the latter 
can offer a better time response, more flexibility and degree 
of functional distribution, which are more appropriate for 
vehicular world. 
In terms of management and control, Software-defined 
networking (SDN) [8] can offer to IoV its centralized up-to-
date logical view upon the network, programmability, 
facilitating a flexible network management and on-the-fly 
modification of the network elements behavior. Network 
Function Virtualization (NFV) [9] can add flexibility by 
virtualizing many network functions and deploying them 
into software packages. Dedicated Virtualized Network 
Functions (VNF) can be defined, then dynamically 
created/destroyed, assembled and chained to implement 
legacy or novel services. NFV can cooperate with SDN to 
realize  new flexible and powerful IoV architectures.  
The large communities of users/terminal devices in  IoV 
need powerful and scalable Radio Access Technologies 
(RAT). The 4G and the emergent 5G, based on cloud 
computing architectures (Cloud Radio Access Network- 
CRAN) are significant candidates for constructing the IoV 
access infrastructure [10]. 
Despite IoV promises high capabilities, there still exist 
many challenges, both in conceptual and architectural 
aspects and also from implementation and deployment point 
of view. Many IoV advanced features and integration with 
the above technologies (CC, Fog, SDN, NFV) are still open 
research issues.  
This paper attempts a comparative critical study of 
several functional architectures proposed for IoV, including 
recent ones based on Cloud/Fog computing and Software 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
defined networking (SDN) - control. An enriched functional 
architecture with Fog computing and SDN control is 
proposed. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II is an 
overview of related work with a critical presentation of 
some IoV generic architectures. Section III revisits the 
SDN-based architectures of IoV. Section IV proposes an 
enriched integrated architecture, Fog-SDN oriented. Section 
V presents conclusions and future work. 
II. 
IOV GENERIC LAYERED ARCHITECTURES EXAMPLES 
IoV is usually seen as a part of the more general Internet 
of Things (IoT), so it is of interest to evaluate how the 
proposed IoV architectures are generally consistent with IoT 
architecture.  
Al-Fuqaha et al. [5] present an overview of IoT, 
identifying the Iot elements, i.e., identification, sensing, 
communication, computation, services and semantics. 
Several variants of IoT layered architectures are presented, 
where the most comprehensive has 5-layers: Objects 
(perception) (OL), Object Abstraction (OAL), Service 
Management (SML), Application (AL) and Business (BL)  
layer. These layers are different from those of the classical 
TCP/IP architectures, but the layering principles are still 
preserved.  
The Object layer represents IoT physical sensors and 
actuators, performing functionalities such as querying 
location, 
temperature, 
weight, 
motion, 
vibration, 
acceleration, humidity, etc. The digitized data are 
transferred to the OAL through secure channels. 
 The Object Abstraction layer transfers data to the SML 
through secure channels. Layer 2 networking transfer 
functions are included here, based on technologies like 
RFID, GSM, 3G, 4G, UMTS, WiFi, Bluetooth Low Energy, 
infrared, ZigBee, etc. Additionally, cloud computing 
functions and data management processes are handled at 
this layer. The Service Management layer plays a 
middleware role, by pairing a service with its requester 
based on addresses and names. The SML supports IoT 
application 
programmers 
to 
work 
with 
abstracted 
heterogeneous objects. It also processes received data, takes 
decisions, and delivers the required services over the 
network wire protocols. The Application layer provides to 
the customers the requested services (with appropriate 
quality). The AL covers different vertical markets (e.g., 
smart home, smart building, transportation, industrial 
automation and health care, etc.). The Business Layer 
manages all IoT system activities and services. Using data 
provided by AL, it creates a business model, graphs, 
flowcharts, etc.; it is related to design, analysis, 
implementation, evaluation, monitoring and management 
(of the lower layers), and developing IoT system related 
elements. Decisions can be taken following Big Data 
analysis. Security features are included. Note that the 
architecture described above is a high level view only; 
further structuring can be made and mapping on various 
existing protocols [5]. 
For IoV, several architectures are recently proposed and 
discussed.  A short critical overview and comparison is 
exposed below. 
Bonomi et al. [6] proposed a four - layered architecture 
for connected vehicles and transportation. The layers are 
also called “IoT key verticals”, suggesting that a given layer 
includes not only classical layer functions (i.e., L1, L2,…) 
but rather groups of functions, which could be mapped on 
several classical layers. Also, the four layers are rather 
corresponding to different geo-locations of the subsystems 
(vehicles, networking infrastructure, cloud data centers, etc.) 
The bottom layer (end points) represents the vehicles, plus 
their 
communication 
protocols 
(basically 
for 
V2V 
communication, using the IEEE 802.11p). The layer two 
(infrastructure), represents   communication technologies to 
interconnect the IoV actors (via WiFi, 802.11p, 3G/4G, etc.). 
The third layer (operation) performs management actions; it 
verifies and ensures compliance with all applicable policies, 
to regulate the information management and flow. The 
fourth layer is called cloud (public, private or enterprise) 
based on a defined profile coupled with the possibility of 
receiving services (voice, enterprise video and data) on 
demand. Note that this architectural view is a mixed one, 
and does not clearly separate the sets of functions of 
different levels. 
 Kayvartya et al. [4] have proposed an IoV five layer 
architecture, to support an enriched set of vehicular 
communications, in addition to traditional V2V, V2R/V2I, 
i.e., Vehicle-to-Personal devices (V2P) and Vehicle-to-
Sensors (V2S). Each particular IoV communication type can 
be enabled using a different WAT, e.g., IEEE WAVE for 
V2V and V2R, Wi-Fi and 4G/LTE for V2I, CarPlay/NCF 
(Near Field Communications) for V2P and WiFi for V2S. 
The system includes vehicles and Road Side Units (RSU), 
but also other communication devices. Embedding such a 
large range of devices makes IoV more complex, (compared 
to VANET), but more powerful and market oriented.  
Three architectural planes are defined:  management, 
operation and security.  The network model is composed of 
three functional entities: client, connection and cloud. The 
layers are (see Figure 1): perception, coordination, artificial 
intelligence, application and business.  
The 
perception 
layer 
(PL) 
functions 
generally   
correspond to those of the traditional physical layer. The PL 
is instantiated by sensors and actuators attached to vehicles, 
RSUs, smart-phones and other personal devices. Its main 
task is to gather information on vehicle, traffic environment 
and devices (including movement –related parameters). 
The coordination layer (CL) represents a virtual universal 
network coordination entity for heterogeneous network 
technologies (WAVE, Wi-Fi, 4G/LTE, satellites). While the 
basic job is transportation, some other processing tasks are 
added, of information received from heterogeneous 
networks with aim to create a unified structure with 
identification capabilities for each type of network. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
   
       
   
 
Business : Graphs, Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts 
Application : Applications for vehicles and vehicular dynamics 
Artificial Intelligence:  Cloud computing, big data analysis, expert systems 
Coordination:  Heterogeneous networks-WAVE, WiFi, LTE, etc. 
Perception:  Sensors and actuators of vehicles, RSU, personal devices 
 Figure 1. Five layer IoV architecture [4]. 
 
The artificial intelligence layer (AIL) is represented by a 
generic virtual cloud infrastructure, working as an 
information management centre. It stores, processes and 
analyzes the information received from the lower layer and 
then takes decisions. Its major components are: Vehicular 
Cloud Computing (VCC), Big Data Analysis (BDA) and  
Expert System. The AIL should meet the requirement of 
applications and services working on top of it. 
The application layer (AL) contains smart applications 
(e.g., for traffic safety and efficiency, multimedia-based 
infotainment and web based utility). The AL include safety 
and efficiency applications (VANET legacy) and provides 
smart services to End Users (EU) based on intelligent 
analysis done by AIL. The AL efficiently discovers the 
services provided by AIL and manage their combinations. It 
also provides EU application usage data to the business 
layer. Currently, it is recognized that these smart 
applications constitute a major driving force to further 
develop IoV. 
The business layer (BL) includes IoV operational 
management functions, basically related to business aspects: 
to foresight strategies for the development of business 
models based on the application usage data and statistical 
analysis of the data; analysis tools including graphs, 
flowcharts, comparison tables, use case diagrams, etc.; 
decision making - related to economic investment and usage 
of resources; pricing, overall budget preparation for 
operation and management;  aggregate data management. 
The architecture is split in three parallel planes:  
operation, management and security. The work [4] also 
proposed a possible mapping between the five layers and 
different 
protocols 
already 
developed 
in 
vehicular 
communications by ITS, VANET, IEEE, etc. The operation 
plane contains actually traditional data plane functions but 
still has some control and management role.   
At perception layer, current technologies can be used for 
access in ITS and VANET (see Figure 2). However, the CL 
includes not only TCP/IP transport and network protocols 
but also different solutions (with no IP usage). Examples 
are: IEEE 1609.4 along with a Global Handoff Manager 
(GHM-open research) and other protocols proposed at 
network layer in projects like CALM, WAVE. For instance, 
in the stack there exist WSMP - Short Message Protocol and 
FAST -Fast Application and Communication Enabler.  
In AIL, cloud capabilities are seen as major contributors, 
working on top of lower sub-layer: CALM Service Layer 
(CALM-SL) and WAVE-1609.6 service related protocols. 
The upper sub-layer consists in Vehicular Cloud Computing 
(VCC) and Big Data Analysis (BDA) related protocols. 
They can offer cloud services of type “X as a Service”: 
Storage (STaaS), Infrastructure (INaaS), Network (NaaS); 
Cooperation (CaaS), Entertainment (ENaaS), Gateway 
(GaaS); Picture (PICaaS) and  Computing (COMaaS). 
Still further research work is necessary, given the current 
unavailability of enough suitable protocols for VCC and 
BDA. Another open issue is that VANETs projects, 
generally, do not have clear definitions of the upper sub-
layer, while some IoT projects are recently working towards 
these. 
The Application Layer (AL) includes two sets of 
applications: Smart Safety and Efficiency (SSE) and Smart 
Business Oriented (SBO). The current WAVE resource 
handler protocol 1609.1 can be used on the top of these 
applications, to manage the resources among smart 
applications. The Business Layer (BL) in [4] proposes 
various business models like Insurance (INS), Sale (SAL), 
Service (SER) and Advertisement (ADV). The set of these 
functionalities could be further enriched in the future. 
The architecture has the merit that integrates in the 
management and security planes some existing functional 
blocks and protocols (see Figure 2), already developed in 
WAVE (P1609.x), CALM and C2C projects. 
However the mentioned 5-layer architecture does not 
touch some important and recent aspects in developing IoV 
architecture, e.g., how to distribute computation intelligence 
between a central cloud and fog units (which are placed at 
the network edge) while cloud-fog combination seem to be 
an efficient and attractive solution for a distributed system 
like IoV. Also, SDN-like control possibilities are not 
discussed in this architecture. 
Contreras-Castillo et al. [11] propose a seven layer  
architecture, supporting the functionalities, interactions, 
representations and information exchanges among all the 
devices inside a IoV ecosystem. The authors claim that this 
architecture (having more than five layers) has as objective 
to reduce the complexity of each layer and better 
standardize the interfaces and protocols used in each layer. 
The interaction model considers the following entities which 
can communicate to each other: vehicle (V), person (P), 
personal device (P), network infrastructure (I), sensors (S), 
any device (D) and roadside device (R). Consequently, the 
communications might be of type   V2V, V2R, V2I, V2D, 
V2P, V2S, D2D. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
   
 
   
 
AL 
 
 
BL 
 
Vehicular Cloud Computing, Big Data Analysis 
WAVE 1609.6 
(Facilities) 
CALM Service Layer 
FAST 
PL 
IEEE 802.11p, 802.11a/b/g, WiMAX, Eth, 4G/LTE .. 
G-HoM 
MAC- 802.11p, 802.11, 1609.4 
Logical Link Control 
 
WAVE Layer 
Manager 
1609.5 (Comm. 
Mgmt) 
CALM App. 
Manager 
C2C Info 
Connector 
Channel 
coordinator 
 
Management  
Plane 
WAVE 
Security 
1609.2 
C2C 
S-IC 
Interface 
Manager 
AIL 
CALM 
 
Smart Safety and 
Efficiency 
Resource Handler/Manager 1609.1 
Smart Business 
Oriented 
TCP 
UDP 
IP 
CL 
WSMP 
IPv6 
C2Cnet 
Network 
Manager 
INS Insurance; SAL Sale ; SER Service ; ADV Advertisement 
S-MIB 
HSM 
Operation 
Plane 
Security 
Plane 
 
 
Figure 2. Five layer IoV architecture mapped on particular protocols [4] 
 
PL Perception layer; CL Coordination layer; AIL Artificial Intelligence layer; AL Application layer;  BL Business layer;  C2C Car to Car; CALM 
Communication Architecture for Land Mobile; DSRC Dedicated Short Range Communication; WAVE Wireless Access in Vehicular Environment; FAST 
Fast Application and Communication Enabler; LLC Logical Link Control;  G-HoM Global Handoff Manager; WSMP WAVE Short Messages Protocol;  
BDA Big Data Analysis; VCC Vehicular Cloud Computing;  SSE Smart Safety and Efficiency;  SBO Smart Business Oriented;  INS Insurance; SAL Sale ; 
SER Service ; ADV Advertisement; HSM Hardware Security Manager;  S-IC Security Information Connector;   
S-MIB Security Management Information Base 
 
The network model should support collaboration between 
multi-users, 
multi-vehicles, 
multi-devices 
(sensors, 
actuators, 
mobile 
devices, 
access 
points), 
multi-
communication models (point to point, multi-point, 
broadcast, geo-cast) and  multi-networks (wireless or wire 
networks with various technologies like WiFi, Bluetooth, 
WiMAX, 3G, 4G/LTE, etc.). 
The layers defined in [11] are (bottom-up list): User 
interaction, Data acquisition, Data filtering and pre-
processing, Communication, Control and management, 
Business and Security.   
Note that this “layered” architecture actually does not 
follow the principles of a layered stack architecture (where 
each layer traditionally offers some services to the above 
one). For instance, the Control and management layer and 
Security layer seem to be rather architectural “planes “and 
not traditional layers; they have to interact with all other 
five layers. No notion of an architectural “plane” is 
explicitly defined in [11]. 
The 
User 
interaction 
layer 
contains 
in-vehicle 
computing systems including: a.   information-based 
systems to provide  information (e.g., on routes, traffic 
conditions, car parking availability and warning/advice 
regarding risks) to components of the driving environment, 
the vehicle or the driver;  b. control-based systems to 
monitor changes in driving habits and experiences and  
operational elements of the driving task (e.g.,  adaptive 
cruise control, speed control, lane keeping and collision 
avoidance). It is stated in [11] that designing user interfaces 
for in-vehicle systems is still posing many new research 
challenges. Note that this “layer” actually contains functions 
of several layers defined in other architectures (e.g., some 
structured in a similar way as classic TCP/IP stack). 
The Data acquisition layer has tasks covering all three 
traditional 
planes 
(data, 
control 
and 
management). 
Apparently it overlaps functions of “networking” Layer 2. It 
gathers data (for safety, traffic information, infotainment), 
from a given area of interest, from all the sources (vehicle’s 
internal 
sensors, 
GPS, 
inter-vehicle 
communication, 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), or devices such as 
cellular phones, sensors and actuators, traffic lights and road 
signals  located on streets and highways. Intra- and inter 
vehicular interactions are within the scope of this layer. 
Various access technologies and associated protocols are 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
supposed 
to 
perform 
the 
tasks. 
For 
intra-vehicle 
communication, the proposals are:  Bluetooth (2.4 GHz) , 
ZigBee(868 MHz, 915 MHz and 2.4 GHz) Wi-Fi HaLow 
(900 MHz) Ultra-wideband ( 3.1–10.6 GHz), with data rates 
up to 480 Mbps and coverage distances up 1000m. For 
inter-vehicles communication technologies can be: IEEE 
WAVE/DSRC with IEEE 802.11p for PHY and MAC 
layers and the IEEE 1609 family for upper layers; 4G/LTE 
(1700 and 2100 MHz). 
The Data filtering and pre-processing layer is necessary, 
given that IoV, may generate huge amounts of data, not all 
being relevant for all entities. This layer analyses and filters 
the collected information, to avoid the dissemination of 
irrelevant information and reduce the network traffic. 
Examples of protocols to be used in this layer are: Xtensible 
Messaging and Presentation Protocol (XMPP), Constrain 
Application Protocol (CoAP), HTTP Representational State 
Transfer (HTTP REST), Message Queuing Telematic 
Transport (MQTT), Lightweight Local Automation Protocol 
(LLAP). Several data filtering approaches are referenced in 
[11], but novel intelligent and efficient data mining 
techniques are considered to be necessary. 
The Communication layer actually performs both data 
and control function at networking level, given the set of 
protocols suggested as: 6LoWPAN, IPv4, IPv6, Routing 
Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks (RPL), etc. 
This layer should select the best network to send the 
information, based on several selection parameters.  
The Control and management layer is the global 
coordinator for managing different network service 
providers within the IoV environment. Its functions are: to 
manage the data exchange among the various services; to 
manage the information generated by devices: in-vehicle or 
around sensors, roadside infrastructure and user devices in 
the environment; apply different suitable policies (e.g., 
traffic management and engineering, packet inspection, etc.)  
The Business layer processes information using various 
types of cloud computing infrastructures locally and 
remotely. Typical functions are:  storing, processing and 
analysing info received from the other layers; making 
decisions based on data statistical analysis and identifying 
strategies that help in applying business models based on the 
usage of data in applications and the statistical analysis. 
(tools such as graphs, flowchart, critical analysis, etc.). The 
protocols proposed for this layer are:  CALM Service Layer, 
WAVW 1609.6, TR-069, Open Mobile Alliance Device 
Management (OMA-DM).  
The Security layer (despite of its naming of “layer”) is 
actually an architectural plane which communicates directly 
with the rest of the layers. It implements security functions 
(data 
authentication, 
integrity, 
non-repudiation 
and 
confidentiality, access control, availability, etc.) to exchange 
data among sensors, actuators, user’s devices through secure 
networks and service providers. The protocols envisaged are 
similar to those presented in Figure 2. 
The seven layer architecture of [11] does not touch the 
integration of SDN/NFV approach. The cloud services are 
located at business level (as vehicular cloud computing) 
while we believe that a more natural placement could be as 
in Figure 2, i.e., under application layer. Some mixture of 
“layers” and “plane” notions is apparent; there is a lack of 
enough orthogonality of different “layers”.  
III. 
SDN CONTROLLED IOV ARCHITECTURES 
This section shortly presents related work dedicated to 
VANET/IoV with SDN control. 
Y.Lu et al. [12] applies SDN control to VANET, to get 
more flexibility, programmability and support for new 
services. The architectural components are:  SDN controller, 
SDN wireless nodes and SDN- enabled RSUs. The SDN 
controller is a single entity performing the overall control of 
the system. The SDN wireless nodes are vehicles, seen as 
data plane elements (SDN - forwarders). The SDN RSUs 
are also treated as data plane elements, but hey are 
stationary.  The benefits of the approach are proved by 
simulation, while considering some specific use cases (e.g., 
routing). However, a complete layered functional IoV 
architecture is not discussed. 
K.Zeng et al. [13] propose an IoV architecture called 
software-defined 
heterogeneous 
vehicular 
network 
(SERVICE), based on Cloud-RAN technology, able to 
support the dynamic nature of heterogeneous VANET 
functions and various applications. A multi-layer Cloud-
RAN multi-domain is introduced, where resources can be 
exploited as needed for vehicle users. The system is 
hierarchically organized (there are defined: remote, local 
and micro clouds) and virtualization (for flexibility) is 
considered for implementation. The high-level design of the 
soft-defined HetVNET is presented. The SDN control is 
organized on two levels (one primary controller and several 
secondary controllers; each one of the latter controls a given 
service 
area). 
A 
complete 
layered 
functional 
IoV 
architecture is not in the paper scope. 
A Fog-SDN architecture called FSDN is proposed for 
advanced VANET by Truong et al. [7], for V2V, V2I and 
Vehicle-to-Base 
Station 
communications. 
The 
Fog 
computing brings more capabilities for delay-sensitive and 
location-aware services. The SDN components are:  SDN 
Controller (it controls the overall network behavior via  
OpenFlow –interfaces; it also plays as Orchestration and 
Resource Management for the Fog); SDN Wireless Nodes 
(vehicles acting as end-users and forwarding elements, 
equipped with OBU); SDN RSU (it is also a Fog device); 
SDN RSU Controller (RSUC) (controlled by the central 
SDN controller; each RSUC controls a cluster of  RSUs  
connected to it through broadband connections. The RSUC 
can forward data, and store local road system information or 
perform emergency services. From Fog perspective RSUCs 
are fog devices); Cellular Base Station (BS) performing 
traditional functions (they are SDN-controlled  via 
OpenFlow and can also offer Fog services). This study does 
not discuss a full functional layered IoV architecture. 
Kai et al. [14] present an overview of Fog–SDN solution 
for VANET and discuss several scenarios and issues. It is 
shown that a mixed architecture Fog-SDN (similar to that 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
proposed in [7]) can be powerful and flexible enough, to 
serve future needs of IoV. Again, we note that  this study 
does not discuss a full functional layered IoV architecture. 
Chen et al. [15] discusses an IoV architecture and 
solutions based on SDN control. However, a full functional 
layered architecture is not discussed. 
IV. 
SDN-FOG ENABLED IOV FUNCTIONAL 
ARCHITECTURE 
 This section proposes a layered functional IoV 
architecture of a heterogeneous network including SDN 
control and Fog capabilities. We propose a possible 
infrastructure (Figure 3), which could be a horizontal 
extension of that proposed in [7]. The Data plane includes: 
mobile units (vehicles) equipped with OBUs; advanced 
RSUs, which could have enough resources (computing, 
storage) as to play also Fog role (F-RSU), or could be  
regular RSU like in traditional VANETs; base stations (BS)  
of type WiMAX/3G/4G-LTE. A fixed network (partial 
mesh) can interconnect the RSUs. The SDN Data plane 
contains the forwarding nodes and can be geographically 
organized in several service areas. The SDN Control plane 
is organized on two levels: primary SDN controller (P-
SDNC) controlling the overall behavior of the network and 
secondary controllers (S-SDNC), one for each service area. 
The S-SDNC can also contain the resource management 
functions of the Fog infrastructure. The P-SDNC is logically 
connected to each S-SDNC via the Control plane overlay or 
physical links. The SDN south interfaces between the 
controllers and the lower level can be supported by 
OpenFlow protocol or similar. This infrastructure is enough 
general as to be considered as a candidate or IoV.  
 
Figure 4 shows a proposal to enrich the layered 
functional architecture introduced in [4], by adding SDN 
and Fog functionalities, supposing that the infrastructure is 
that of Figure 3. The second layer is renamed in Network 
and Transport Layer (NTL), showing in a more explicit way 
the role of this layer. The Operation Plane is renamed in 
Control and Data Plane. 
The functionalities of the P-SDNC can be embedded in 
the management plane, given that its role is to govern the 
overall network behavior (e.g some overall policies can be 
coordinated by this module). The regional SDN control is 
placed naturally at NTL level as to control the SDN 
forwarders and also the functions of Fog nodes located in 
the access area. Additionally S-SDNC functions can be 
included in the AIL, to serve this layer needs in terms of 
Fog AI resource control. The cloud services should be split 
between centralized Cloud computing and Fog nodes but 
this is out of scope of this study (it is for further work). 
 
 
  
       
 
V2V 
Cloud/Internet 
V2I 
F-RSU 
V2R 
V2V- e.g. Wave(802.11p)/LTE(D2D) 
F-BS 
Service 
area  
V2R- e.g. Wave(802.11p) 
V2I- e.g. WiMAX/3G/4G-LTE 
V2V 
F-RSU 
SDN Control Plane 
Broadband 
communication 
RSU 
Service 
area  
Service 
area  
Service 
area  
Service 
area  
P-SDNC 
Gateway 
S-SDNC 
 
Figure 3. Generic IoV system architecture  
F-BS - Fog-capable  Base Station; F-RSU Fog-capable  Remote Side Unit; P-SDNC- Primary SDN Controller;   
S-SDNC Secondary-SDN Controller; D2D- device to device communication 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
   
 
   
 
AL 
 
 
BL 
 
Vehicular Cloud Computing, Big Data Analysis, Fog Computing 
WAVE 1609.6 
(Facilities) 
CALM Service Layer 
FAST 
PL 
IEEE 802.11p, 802.11a/b/g, WiMAX, Eth, 4G/LTE .. 
( SDN Data plane forwarders) 
G-HoM 
MAC- 802.11p, 802.11, 1609.4 
Logical Link Control 
 
WAVE Layer 
Manager 
1609.5 (Comm. 
Mgmt) 
CALM App. 
Manager 
C2C Info 
Connector 
Channel 
coordinator 
 
Management  
Plane 
WAVE 
Security 
1609.2 
C2C 
S-IC 
Interface 
Manager 
AIL 
CALM 
 
Smart Safety and 
Efficiency 
Resource Handler/Manager 1609.1 
Smart Business 
Oriented 
TCP 
UDP 
IP 
NTL 
WSMP 
IPv6 
C2Cnet 
Network 
Manager 
 
 
INS Insurance; SAL Sale ; SER Service ; ADV Advertisement 
S-MIB 
HSM 
Control and Data 
Plane 
Security 
Plane 
P-SDNC 
(policies
) 
S-SDNC 
(regional 
control) 
S-SDNC 
(Fog control) 
 
 
Figure 4. Functional  IoV 5-layer architecture enriched with SDN control and Fog computing 
 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a comparative critical view of 
several IoV architectures proposed in the literature, focused 
on functional layering aspects. Among several proposals, we 
selected a five layer multiple-plane architecture, considering 
this model as a good and orthogonal approach which 
consistently include the major IoV functionalities and is 
giving the possibility to clearly define interfaces between 
layers and planes. The architecture is consistent with IoT 
architectural vision. In Section IV, a modified Fog-SDN 
based IoV infrastructure is proposed, where the associated 
layered architecture is enriched by considering the 
additional Fog-based approach and SDN distributed control. 
This work could be a contribution toward an IoV reference 
architecture.  
Future work should be done to allocate and map 
different functions of the general functional layered 
architecture to specific entities of a complete IoV system. 
This should be done based on their different roles and 
placement: terminals (vehicles), RSUs, Fog Nodes, BS, core 
network, cloud data centers, etc. The virtualization aspects 
and their impact on the architecture are not discussed in this 
study. This is also a subject for further work. 
 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been partially funded by University 
Politehnica of Bucharest, through the “Excellence Research 
Grants” 
Program, 
UPB – 
GEX. 
Identifier: 
UPB–
EXCELENȚĂ–2016 
Research 
project 
Intelligent 
Navigation 
Assistance 
System, 
Contract 
number 
101/26.09.2016 (acronym: SIAN). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Sultan, M. Moath Al-Doori, A.H. Al-Bayatti, and  H.Zedan 
“A comprehensive survey on vehicular Ad Hoc Network”, 
J.of Network and Computer Applications, Jan. 2014, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259520963, 
[Retrieved: December, 2016]. 
[2] Y. Li, “An Overview of the DSRC/WAVE Technology”, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/288643779, 
2012, 
[Retrieved: May, 2017]. 
[3] Y. Fangchun, W.Shangguang, L. Jinglin,  L. Zhihan, and 
S.Qibo, “An overview of Internet of Vehicles”, China 
Commun., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 115, October 2014. 
[4] O. Kaiwartya, A.H. Abdullah, Y. Cao, A. Altameem, and M. 
Prasad, 
“Internet 
of 
Vehicles: 
Motivation, 
Layered 
Architecture, Network Model, Challenges, and Future 
Aspects”  IEEE Access, Special Section on Future Networks, 
Architectures, Protocols and Applications, Vol. 4, pp.5536-
5372, September 2016. 
[5] A. Al-Fuqaha,  M.Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, and 
M.Ayyash,   "Internet of Things: A Survey on Enabling  
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
Technologies, 
Protocols, 
and 
Applications”, 
 
IEEE 
Communications Surveys &Tutorials Vol. 17, No. 4, pp.2347-
2376, 2015. 
[6] F.Bonomi, R.Milito, J.Zhu, and Sateesh Addepalli, “Fog 
Computing and Its Role in the Internet of Things”, August  
2012, 
http://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2012/paper/mcc/p1
3.pdf, [Retrieved: January, 2017]. 
[7] N.N.Truong, G.M.Lee, and Y.Ghamri-Doudane, “Software 
defined networking-based vehicular ad hoc network with fog 
Computing”, 
 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2015 
IFIP/IEEE 
International Symposium on Integrated Network Management 
(IM’15), May 2015, Ottawa, Canada. Piscataway, NJ, USA: 
IEEE, , pp. 1202−1207, 2015. 
[8] B. N. Astuto, M. Mendonca, X. N. Nguyen, K. Obraczka, and 
T. Turletti, “A Survey of Software-Defined Networking: Past, 
Present, 
and 
Future 
of 
Programmable 
Networks”, 
Communications 
Surveys 
and 
Tutorials, 
IEEE 
Communications Society, (IEEE), 16 (3), pp. 1617 – 1634, 
2014.  
[9] B.Han, V. Gopalakrishnan, L. Ji, and S. Lee,  “Network 
Function Virtualisation: Challenges and Opportunities for 
Innovations”. IEEE Communications Magazine,  pp. 90-97, 
February 2015.  
[10] M. Peng, Y. Li, J. Jiang, J. Li,  and C.Wang,  “Heterogeneous 
cloud radio access networks: a new perspective for enhancing 
spectral 
and 
energy 
efficiencies”, 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications, pp.126-135, December 2014.    
[11] J.C. Contreras-Castillo, et al., “A seven-layered model 
architecture for Internet of Vehicles”,Journal of Information 
and Telecommunications , Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 4–22, 2017. 
[12] Y.Lu, M.Gerla, R. Gomes, and E. Cerqueira,  “Towards 
software-defined 
VANET: 
Architecture 
and 
services”,  
MedHocNet.2014.6849111, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/271472780, 
[Retrieved:April, 2017]. 
[13] K. Zeng, L. Hou, H. Meng, Q. Zheng, and N. Lu,   “Soft-
Defined Heterogeneous Vehicular Network: Architecture and 
Challenges”, IEEE Network, vol. 30,  pp.72-79, July/August 
2016.  
[14] K.Kai, W.Cong, and L.Tao, "Fog computing for vehicular 
Ad-hoc networks:paradigms, scenarios, and issues", The 
Journal 
of 
China 
Universities 
of 
Posts 
and 
Telecommunications, 
www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10058885, 
http://jcupt.bupt.edu.cn, 
23(2), 
pp.56–65, 
April 
2016, 
[Retrieved: January, 2017]. 
[15] J.Chen, H. Zhou, N. Zhang, P. Yang, L.Gui, and X. 
Shen, ”Software defined Internet of vehicles: architecture, 
challenges and solutions”, Journal of Communications and 
Information Networks Vol. 1, Issue (1): pp.14-26,    2016, 
DOI: 10.11959/j.issn.2096-1081.2016.002. 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

