A Framework for the Effective Deployment of
Wireless Dynamic Sensor Networks
Maurizio D’Arienzo
Dipartimento di Studi Politici Jean Monnet
Universit`a della Campania
e-mail: maurizio.darienzo@unicampania.it
Simon Pietro Romano
DIETI - Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica
e delle Tecnologie dell’Informazione
Universit`a degli Studi di Napoli ”Federico II”
e-mail: spromano@unina.it
Abstract—Deployment of wireless sensor networks is a key
activity for the enhancement of the state-of-the-art wireless net-
working systems. In this paper, we present an architecture scheme
capable to integrate several heterogeneous modules in a complete
and inexpensive wireless dynamic sensor network system. The
system can manage a high rate of data gathered from mobile
units and can provide precise information in both real time
and through a back end service. A real-world implementation of
this system is proposed together with some in ﬁeld performance
measurements.
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Network; ZigBee; Performance mea-
surements.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) do represent a growing
technology that ﬁnds application in different ﬁelds like en-
vironmental control, interaction among people or computers,
remote activation of systems. Such networks can be composed
of several units like sensor nodes, actuator nodes, gateways
possibly connected to a wide area network like the Internet,
and one or more clients. A particular application of WSN
is composed of mobile elements, thus introducing a more
dynamic scenario that can be deﬁned as Wireless Dynamic
Sensor Network (WDSN). The mobility of sensing devices
requires a rapid network reorganization and the search of
alternative route paths to keep a constant association of single
elements to the network. Speciﬁc protocols for WDSN help
the process of creation, self-organization, route discovery and
management of this type of networks [1][2].
The implementation of new services dedicated to WDSN
require the integration of several components and technologies
to collect, transmit and elaborate data. The data generated or
used by units like sensors or actuators are often exchanged
through a variety of basic transmission systems mainly based
on serial protocols. This data bundle is usually not complex,
thus the data preparation preceding the transmission can
rely on the resources provided by compact units like micro
controllers. As far as the creation of a distributed network,
the ZigBee protocol [3] is an international multi hop standard
protocol designed with the aim of allowing a straightforward
setup and management of a WDSN. The ZigBee protocol
allows the creation of different network conﬁgurations, from
single sink topologies up to a full mesh disposition, and several
dedicated devices are nowadays available on the market to
develop tailored systems. Although the interconnection among
modules is provided by standard protocols, a speciﬁc design
for the actual implementation of a WDSN system is always
required.
There are several emerging applications of WDSN exploit-
ing the integration of modules useful in smart cities [4],
smart health [5][6][7], and smart home [8] environments.
Among the other proposals, we cite the implementation of
an intelligent trafﬁc control system to avoid trafﬁc jams,
an infrastructure to manage a bike sharing service, and a
framework for the supervision of agricultural cultivation or
animal farms. Some of these examples are further analyzed in
the Section VI. In the next section II, we focus the attention on
our proposal for a framework for the deployment of a complete
WDSN capable to integrate in a single transmission system
heterogeneous sensors having different characteristics. Section
III introduces the proposed architecture scheme, while Section
IV provides some details about the current implementation.
Section V reports the results of ﬁrst experiments, before the
ﬁnal considerations presented in Section VII.
II. WDSN TECHNOLOGIES AND PROTOCOLS
The composition of electronic devices in an integrated
system requires a shared method to exchange data among the
involved units. Simple yet effective communication between
two electronic devices can happen by means of Universal
Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter (UART) protocol. Trans-
missions are asynchronous, that means an external clock signal
is not required and the number of wires or I/O pins is
minimized. The lack of a clock entails a shared conﬁguration
between the pairing devices. As a ﬁrst rule to be shared,
the baud rate speciﬁes the data communication speed, that
is anyway limited to 115200 bits per second. Data are then
transmitted in frames and a basic parity bit check mechanism
increases the communication reliability. Although simple, the
protocol is so common that many electronic components
always offer a pair of UART Tx and Rx pins.
Although the UART is a simple and useful protocol, it
is not conceived to address multiple communications on a
single channel. In the years between 1980 and 1990, Philips
developed the I2C (Inter Integrated Circuit) protocol to man-
age several units by using a single pair of input and output
lines, named SCL for Signal clock and SDA for signal data
[9]. The data exchange is still serial and happens on this
single bus at predeﬁned baud rate ranging from 100 kbit/s
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Fig. 1: The architecture scheme
up to 3.4 Mbit/s in the more recent components. All the
I2C units are identiﬁed by a unique address, thus connection
of multiple units to a single collector is allowed. Despite
the possibility to manage even more complex conﬁgurations,
the usual setup is composed of a single master and multiple
slaves. As a basic assumption, both SCL and SDA lines are
kept to the high logic level thanks to pull up resistors. The
master is responsible for managing the SCL clock line and for
starting the communication by lowering the SDA line. Both
read and write operations are allowed on the bus. Following
a master write of the slave address, the involved slave can
eventually take control of the SDA line if a read operation is
required. SDA transitions are allowed only when the SCL is
low, while SDA data are considered valid when the SCL is
high. The ninth bit of each sequence is always considered as
an acknowledgement. At the end of each procedure, the master
raises up the SDA lines to stop the communication.
Among the available technologies to exchange data on
an average distance range, ZigBee is gaining momentum as
the leading solution providing multiple conﬁgurations, with
tens of cheap devices available on the market. ZigBee is a
registered trademark managed by an alliance of companies
that produce both components and systems. Physical and
MAC layers are compliant with the IEEE 802.15.4 standard
protocol. Transmission among the devices happens worldwide
in the 2.4GHz frequency band, as well as the 868MHz band
available, mainly in Europe, for scientiﬁc and medical ex-
perimentations. Depending upon the unit power, transmission
can range from about 10 meters up to several kilometers in
the open space. In a ZigBee network a speciﬁc device can
be conﬁgured as either coordinator, or router, or end-device.
For each network there is only one coordinator responsible
for the initialization and the setup of operational parameters.
One or more routers act as intermediate nodes and rely on
the Ad Hoc Distance Vector (AODV) protocol to relay data
from other nodes towards the coordinator. Finally the end-
devices have limited functionality and are usually battery-
powered. They limit themselves to sending collected data to
the routers or the coordinator, but they cannot relay any data.
To better manage the limited amount of energy available, a
particular beacon can be either enabled or disabled. In the
most simple situations the routers are not power constrained,
so the beacon is not enabled and they can be always active
to wait for data from end-devices. When the routers have to
limit their energy consumption, they can alternate between a
sleep and an active state. In this case, a beacon is generated to
alert the adjacent devices. According to the 802.15.4 standard,
3 topologies can be set up with zigBee, as it will be explained
in the following. In the star topology, several end devices are
connected to a single coordinator, with no need for ZigBee
routers. Although this represents the simplest solution, the
coordinator can become a bottleneck for the network as it
represents a single trafﬁc sink, so this kind of conﬁguration can
be adopted when the number of end devices is restrained, or
when the transmissions are infrequent. In the tree topology the
network can be extended with the introduction of the ZigBee
routers. The end devices are called children and can connect
either to ZigBee routers or to the coordinator, that act as parent
nodes in the hierarchy. The coordinator can be connected
to both ZigBee routers and end devices. This conﬁguration
allows for a wider network extension, but it does not offer
redundancy in case of node failure. Notice also that albeit
considered in the standard 802.15.4 protocol, zigBee does not
support the cluster tree conﬁguration. The last solution is the
mesh topology. In this conﬁguration, one coordinator, several
routers and end devices build up a multi hop network. The
range of the network can be extended, and alternative paths
may be available in case of node failure. On the downside, the
conﬁguration and the management of this topology are more
complex and introduce overhead with respect to the previous
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

solutions.
The most recent update to version 3.0 is an effort to unify
the various ZigBee proposals in a single standard.
III. ARCHITECTURE SCHEME
The architecture we propose is sketched in Figure 1. It
is composed of multiple sensing units, at least one receiver
capable to collect data, monitor units and one base station
potentially connected to the Internet.
Sensing units are identiﬁed by their unique code number so
that data can be differentiated. The update frequency can be
conﬁgured according to the particular application. All data are
collected at the receiver station and the wireless technology
is responsible to manage the correct synchronization among
the units for an effective radio transmission. Sensor modules
are composed of a dedicated control unit, one or more active
sensors, and a transmitter. The control unit relies on a micro
controller and is in charge of synchronizing the data collection
and to send the bundle of data to the receiver. Sensor mod-
ules can be heterogeneous and usually provide data through
different protocols.
The receiver collects wireless data and makes them ready
for presentation and further computations. It is equipped with
a powerful aerial to guarantee the reception of data coming
from even remote sensor units. The receiver station can also
be provided with additional wireless modules for short or long
range data forwarding. A short connection can be useful to
provide a real time visualization of data, whereas a long range
connection offers the chance to reach a more powerful base
station capable to store the data, make off line computations
or share data on a wide area network.
Monitor units are mainly intended to be real time devices
that can provide a quick view of the current situation. They
connect to the receiver station and can visualize all sensed
data at a glance. To ensure the widest level of interoperability,
the receiver station should make available legacy technologies
for a straightforward network connection. Speciﬁc applications
can be developed to enhance the presentation of data.
Finally, the receiver unit can send data to a distant base
station for more complex applications. As the receiver unit
and the base station can often rely on a greater availability of
energy resources, they can be equipped with more powerful
radio devices capable to cover longer distances. The base
station should be close to an Internet access point to widen the
number of applications that can make use of collected data.
We now present some implementation details related to the
introduced architecture modules.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
We made a complete implementation prototype of a system
based on the architecture described above. In order to verify
the architecture feasibility, most of the modules are designed
starting from inexpensive components and conﬁgured to be
interfaced with electronic devices available on the market.
A. Sensing unit
The sensing unit prototype is pictured in Figure 2. It is
based on the PIC16F87-I/P micro controller acting as a control
unit. This Peripheral Interface Controllers (PIC) provides
an internal clock up to 8MHz, and supports both UART
digital communication and I2C peripherals. Two different
sensor modules are connected to the control unit: a) a Global
Position System (GPS) UART sensor that includes the PIC
receiver serial line; b) a 3D accelerometer and magnetometer
LSM303DLHC sensor based on the I2C protocol, linked to
the speciﬁc PIC input line. The magnetometer provides raw
data that can be used to calculate the sensing unit position as
well as the pitch, roll and heading. The PIC serial line output is
instead connected to a wireless module supporting the ZigBee
protocol. To provide a high rate of samples, all sensor modules
are set to a refresh rate of 5Hz. The control unit executes a
Fig. 2: The sensing unit prototype
routine coded in low level programming language. The routine
enters a loop starting from the data read from the sensing units.
Data read from each sensor module are composed of 5 samples
that get stored in the local PIC memory. A unique code number
is appended to all the samples to let the sensing unit be
identiﬁed; the composed data bundle is eventually sent across
the serial output to be processed by the transmitting unit. To
ensure the correct management of the data processing phase,
all units are set to a baud rate of 38400. Frame composition
Fig. 3: Sensing unit frame composition
is depicted in Figure 3 as a plain text sentence of 156 bytes.
Every set of data ends with a one byte separator. As the current
conﬁguration sends 5 sentences per second, the load is of 6240
bits/sec for each sensor.
The radio communication is ensured by a ZigBee module.
In order to provide a wide range coverage, a powerful Xbee
Pro S2B international module from Digi is installed on the
sensing unit. Although this international version limits the
power consumption to 10mW, a good aerial allows for a broad
radio coverage, as reported by the comparative experiments
presented in the following section.
B. Receiver
The receiver is implemented on a Raspberry Pi mini com-
puter running a dedicated image that initializes the USB port
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

for the interconnection with the radio receiving module and
to enable an access point service through a Wi-Fi dongle. The
data collection from sensors is ensured by a high gain ZigBee
receiver module connected to the main unit through one of the
available USB ports. As a result, data are received on the serial
line and they are processed by a dedicated daemon that makes
the necessary calculations to obtain the instant position, pitch,
roll and heading of each sensing unit. A special script arranges
such data in a XML ﬁle, with a single element for each sensing
unit. These data can be immediately accessed in real time from
nearby devices like tablets or smartphones via a dynamic web
page always accessible from the receiver. Data on the web
page are refreshed at the same rate of the data provisioning,
that is 5 samples per second in the current conﬁguration.
Furthermore, a 4G internet key can send the data bundle
to a distant base station for data storage, elaboration and
presentation on a wide area network.
V. PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT
We have developed a complete system to test the appli-
cation. Two different conﬁgurations for sensing modules are
available: the former with an external 5dB gain, 2.4GHz omni-
directional aerial, capable of long distance coverage, the latter
with a more compact and simpler wire aerial. Power on sensing
modules is ensured by 6V 2500mAh batteries. The receiver
beneﬁts from a high gain omni-directional external aerial and
exploits the power of a battery connected to a recharging
system. We tested the coverage of both these conﬁgurations, as
well as the batteries duration on the sensing units. The actual
measures are presented in table I. The ﬁrst row reports the
maximum distance before packet loss occurs. The radio cover-
age of sensing units equipped with external aerial is far greater
than that ensured by internal wire aerial. As far as the battery
consumption, the difference between the two conﬁgurations
is neglectable. We then estimate the energy consumption to
send a single bit through the ratio
MaxP ower
(lifetime)×frameL, with the
lifetime expressed in seconds. Considering a bit rate of 6240
bits/s in our current conﬁguration, we calculate a 3.51e − 5
mA consumption per bit sent.
TABLE I: PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENTS
EXT. AERIAL
INT. AERIAL
DISTANCE
¯
[m]
3076
412
LIFETIME
¯
[hh:ss]
3:10
ENERGY/BIT
¯
[mA]
3.51e − 5
A mobile monitor can exploit the web based system active
on the receiver sensor to show the real time measurements,
with a refresh rate of 200ms. A screenshot is shown in
Figure 4.
We ﬁnally evaluated the precision of the compass. The
accelerometer and magnetometer provide the data that can be
used to calculate the pitch, roll, and to compensate the tilt of
the compass calculation. We then compared the measurements
of the tilt compensated compass with the compass reading
received from GPS. We derive such data from a reading batch
of 300 samples. A routine active in the receiver unit executes
Fig. 4: A screenshot of real time web-based measurements
the required trigonometric computation to get pitch, roll, and
tilt compensated compass. We then make an ofﬂine difference
between the tilt compensated compass and the analog reading
from the GPS. We did expect a difference in the precision
of these units. The average and the standard deviation of this
difference is reported in Table II.
TABLE II: TILT COMPENSATED COMPASS MEASUREMENTS
AVERAGE
STD DEVIATION
CMP-GPS CMP
¯
65.52
2450.48
VI. RELATED WORK
Many related works have studied and applied the concept
of WDSN. In [10] the authors evaluate the beneﬁts and
drawbacks of the ZigBee technology when applied to the
situation of moving nodes. Among the other features, they
highlight the presence of a single ZC (ZigBee coordinator),
the limited concurrent associations among nodes (120 in total),
the maximum time that a child node can remain without com-
munication with its parent node according to a conﬁgurable
sleep time set on the end node to limit power consumption.
Furthermore, it is reminded that routing tables in ZigBee nodes
are refreshed every 10 seconds. A real test composed of several
ﬁxed end devices and one moving coordinator is presented as
a proof of concept to check the re-association feature.
A similar composition of technologies like Radio Frequency
IDentiﬁcation (RFID), Global System for Mobile communica-
tion (GSM), ZigBee and PIC micro controller is presented
in [11] with the purpose of enabling a system capable to
control the car trafﬁc in congested cities. Special sensors are
positioned at street junctions to catch the number of passing
vehicles and estimate the congestion so that the red lights
duration can be tuned accordingly. Also, the system allows
for the interception and monitoring of stolen cars, while the
approaching of emergency vehicles can activate the green light
at the next junction by exploiting ZigBee radio signaling.
ZigBee is still used to ensure the communication in a
proposal for green street lights system [12]. Both sensors
and actuators are mounted on street lights: sensors estimate
the required level of light; data are then sent to a premise
energy and management station that can ﬁnally send the most
appropriate conﬁguration towards the LEDs dimmer on the
lamppost.
A complete system that collects data from moving sensing
units is presented in [13]. Several sensors mounted on bicycles
and worn by cyclists constitute an example of a wireless
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

BAN (body area network). Rich information concerning the
travelled distance, the air pollution, the trafﬁc intensity, ﬁtness
parameters like hearth rate, are conveyed to a back end server
either through opportunistically encountered wireless access
points, or by exploiting the cellular channel of mobile phones.
Sensing units are based on the capabilities of Tmote Invent
units. Some metrics are introduced to estimate things like
pollution level or safety of paths. A localization system based
on distance and magnetometric direction travelled is also
compared to the information provided by GPS.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The major contribution of this paper is the implementation
of a framework for the deployment of a mobile sensor network
that can provide high precision data at high rate. In the
proposed architecture, a single controller manages the ﬂow
of measurements gathered from two different sensors making
use, respectively, of UART-based communication and of the
I2C protocol. Data are then shared in a distributed system
through the capability provided by a ZigBee network. A
complete framework has been implemented to test both the
functionality and the basic performance of such a system.
Current implemented sensors provide high rate and precise
information about the location of units, so they can ﬁnd
application in many ﬁelds. We are planning to increment the
number of implemented nodes to create a multi hop network
and to verify the impact that dense node coexistence may have
on the overall system performance.
REFERENCES
[1] Priyanka Rawat, Kamal Deep Singh, Jean-Marie Bonnin, and Hakima
Chaouchi, ”Wireless sensor networks: a survey on recent developments
and potential synergies”, Journal of Supercomputing, Springer Verlag,
2013. doi: 10.1007/s11227-013-1021-9
[2] X. Mao, S. Tang, X. Xu, X. Y. Li, and H. Ma, ”Energy-Efﬁcient Oppor-
tunistic Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks”, in IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 1934-1942, Nov.
2011. doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2011.70
[3] Ata Elahi, and Adam Gschwender, ”ZigBee Wireless Sensor and Control
Network (1st ed.)”, Prentice Hall Press, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA,
2009.
[4] Muhammad Saqib Jamil, Muhammad Atif Jamil, Anam Mazhar, Ah-
san Ikram, Abdullah Ahmed, and Usman Munawar,
”Smart En-
vironment Monitoring System by Employing Wireless Sensor Net-
works on Vehicles for Pollution Free Smart Cities”,
Procedia
Engineering, Volume 107, 2015, Pages 480-484, ISSN 1877-7058,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2015.06.106
[5] Mahesh Kumar,
”Healthcare monitorng system using wireless sensor
network”, Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications 1497 Volume:04
Issue:01 Pages:1497-1500 (2012) ISSN : 0975-0290
[6] B. Vijayalakshmi, and C. Ram kumar, ”Patient monitoring system using
Wireless Sensor based Mesh Network” Computing Communication and
Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 2012 Third International Confer-
ence on, Coimbatore, 2012, pp. 1-6. doi: 10.1109/ICCCNT.2012.6396102
[7] R. Sharma, S. K. Gupta, K. K. Suhas, and G. S. Kashyap, ”Performance
Analysis of ZigBee Based Wireless Sensor Network for Remote Patient
Monitoring”, 2014 Fourth International Conference on Communication
Systems and Network Technologies, Bhopal, 2014, pp. 58-62. doi:
10.1109/CSNT.2014.21
[8] Chunlong Zhang, Min Zhang, Yongsheng Su, and Weilian Wang, ”Smart
home design based on ZigBee wireless sensor network”, 7th International
Conference on Communications and Networking in China, Kun Ming,
2012, pp. 463-466. doi: 10.1109/ChinaCom.2012.6417527
[9] Philips Semiconductor,
”I2C Bus Speciﬁcation” version 2.1, January
2000.
[10] T. de Almeida Oliveira, and E. P. Godoy, ”ZigBee Wireless Dynamic
Sensor Networks: Feasibility Analysis and Implementation Guide”, in
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 4614-4621, June1, 2016. doi:
10.1109/JSEN.2016.2542063
[11] R. Sundar, S. Hebbar, and V. Golla, ”Implementing Intelligent Trafﬁc
Control System for Congestion Control, Ambulance Clearance, and Stolen
Vehicle Detection”, in IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1109-
1113, Feb. 2015. doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2014.2360288
[12] G. Shahzad, H. Yang, A. W. Ahmad and C. Lee
”Energy-Efﬁcient
Intelligent Street Lighting System Using Trafﬁc-Adaptive Control”
in
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 13, pp. 5397-5405, July1, 2016. doi:
10.1109/JSEN.2016.2557345
[13] S. B. Eisenman, E. Miluzzo, N. D. Lane, R. A. Peterson, G-S. Ahn,
and A. T. Campbell, ”The BikeNet mobile sensing system for cyclist
experience mapping”, In Proceedings of the 5th international conference
on Embedded networked sensor systems (SenSys ’07). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 87-101. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1322263.1322273
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-583-8
AFIN 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

