Context-Oriented Knowledge Management for Intelligent Museum Visitors Support 
Ontological approach 
 
Alexander Smirnov, Nikolay Shilov, Alexey Kashevnik 
Laboratory of Computer Aided Integrated Systems 
St.Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation of RAS (SPIIRAS) 
39, 14 Line, St.Petersburg, Russia 
smir@iias.spb.su, nick@iias.spb.su, alexey@iias.spb.su 
 
 
Abstract—The paper presents an approach to context-oriented 
knowledge management for supporting visitors in museum 
smart environment. Museum smart environment is a private 
network consisting of museum rooms equipped with devices 
that allow identifying visitor location, his/her movement and 
providing information about exhibits. Visitor has a mobile 
device, which stores visitor’s preferences and communicates 
with the museum smart environment. The mobile device 
calculates museum visiting plan for the visitor based on the 
visitor’s preferences, amount of visitors in each museum room 
at the current time and other context information (closed 
exhibits, reconstructions, seasonal exhibitions and other) 
acquired from Internet and intranet services. 
Keywords-knowledge management; ontologies; Internet 
services; user profiles; smart environment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the tourist business has become more and more 
popular. People travel around the world and visit museums 
and other places of interests. This fact increases popularity of 
the museums. But overwhelming majority of museums has 
limited space for visitors causing accumulation of visitors 
and increasing waiting time for them. 
In this regard an approach is needed, which allows 
assisting visitors (using their mobile device), planning their 
excursion plans depending of the context information about 
the current situation in the museum (amount of visitors 
around exhibits, closed exhibits, reconstructions and other) 
and visitor’s preferences. 
Smart environment is an aggregation of mobile and 
stationary devices, which can interact with each other and 
use pertinent services regardless of their physical location. 
Such technology allows seamless integration with other 
system, services, and program modules. 
Research efforts in the area of the smart environment 
have become very popular recently. Such topics of research 
as smart home, smart car, etc. are widely discussed in the 
modern computer science. In such systems all elements have 
to interact and coordinate their behavior without any user 
intervention. 
Modern 
tendencies 
of 
information 
and 
telecommunication technologies require development of 
stable and reliable infrastructures to extract and keep 
different kinds of information and knowledge from various 
members of the smart environment. The smart environment 
assumes more than one device that uses common resources 
and services. One of the most appropriate approaches to 
implement such infrastructure is applying knowledge 
management systems. 
A museum can be considered as a smart environment 
(Figure 1) where each exhibit or a group of exhibits is 
represented by a stationary device of the smart environment. 
Each device can interact with other stationary devices 
representing exhibits and with visitors’ mobile devices. 
Visitor’s mobile device interacts with other smart 
environment devices and provides for the visitor an 
acceptable excursion plans inside the museum based on the 
museum context (amount of visitors around exhibits, closed 
exhibits, reconstructions and other) and visitor preferences. 
Visitor’s mobile device also can provide textual, 
graphical, video and audio information for the user in his/her 
language. 
The following scenario can be considered. A tourist 
arrives in Paris. He/she is going to attend Louvre Museum 
and he/she has the intelligent museum visitors support 
system on his/her mobile device. The tourist adds his/her 
interests to his/her user profile within the intelligent museum 
visitors support system, for example it can be Leonardo da 
Vinci paintings. When the visitor enters the Louvre the 
mobile device guides him/her based on interests defined 
him/her earlier and museum context. For example, if at the 
moment there are no too much people in the room where the 
Mona Lisa painting is shown the mobile device proposes to 
start from this exposition because usually this room is 
overcrowded. After that he/she can see Madonna of the 
Rocks, Lady with an Ermine, Benois Madonna and other. 
When the tourist approaches the painting or another 
exhibition he/she gets audio, textual and video information 
about it from appropriate service through the Internet or 
intranet. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents an overview of mobile museum guides systems. 
Section III introduces developed approach to knowledge 
management in museum smart environment. The museum 
ontology is shown in Section IV. Information model of 
museum visitor profile is given in Section V. The case study 
can be found in Section VI. Main results and drawings are 
summarized in Conclusion. 
120
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

II. 
MOBILE MUSEUM GUIDES SYSTEMS OVERVIEW 
The main research activities of HIPS project [1] are 
development of approach for navigating artistic physical
 
Figure 1. Museum smart environment infrastructure 
spaces (i.e., museums, art exhibitions). The system is meant 
to provide the visitor with personalized information about the 
relevant artworks nearby. The information is mainly audio in 
order to let the user enjoy the artworks rather than interacting 
with the tool. 
Bohnert et al. [2] describes a system for providing a 
visitor with the challenge of selecting the interesting exhibits 
to view within the available time. It includes the 
recommendation and personalization process, i.e., the 
prediction of a visitor’s interests and locations in a museum 
on the basis of observed behavior. 
Kuflik et al. [3] describes an approach for supporting 
users in their ongoing museum experience, by modeling the 
visitors, “remembering” their history and recommending a 
plan for future visits. This approach identifies some of the 
technical challenges for such personalization, in terms of the 
user modeling, ontologies, infrastructure and generation of 
personalized content. 
Project CRUMPET [4] has realized a personalized, 
location-aware tourism service, implemented as a multi-
agent system with a concept of service mediation and 
interaction facilitation. It has had two main objectives: to 
implement and trial tourism-related value-added  services for 
nomadic users across mobile and fixed networks, and to 
evaluate agent technology in terms of user-acceptability, 
performance and best-practice as a suitable approach for fast 
creation of robust, scalable, seamlessly accessible nomadic 
services. 
These systems don’t take into account information about 
current situation. Proposed approach allows monitoring the 
current situation in the museum and uses it for visitor 
assistance. 
III. 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT IN MUSEUM SMART 
ENVIRONMENT 
The approach presented in the paper relies on the 
ontological knowledge representation. The conceptual model 
of the proposed ontology-based knowledge management is 
based on the earlier developed ideas of knowledge logistics 
[5]. In this work the ontology is used to describe knowledge 
in the smart environment. 
The architecture of the approach is presented in Figure 3. 
Mobile and stationary devices interact through the smart 
environment. When the visitor registers in the system, his/her 
mobile device creates the visitor profile that allows 
specifying and complement visitor requirements in the smart 
environment 
and 
personifying 
the 
information 
and 
knowledge flow from the system to the user. Every time the 
visitor appears in the smart environment the mobile device 
shares information from the visitor profile with other 
devices. 
The proposed ontological approach to context-oriented 
knowledge management in the museum smart environment 
is presented in Figure 2. 
The following scenario for mobile and stationary device 
interaction support in the smart environment is considered. 
A visitor enters a museum. His/her mobile device finds 
the museum smart environment using Wi-Fi connection. 
 
Figure 2. Ontological approach to context-oriented knowledge management in the museum smart environment 
Smart Envinroment 
Visitor 
Mobile device 
Visitor Profile 
Ontology 
Services 
Requirements 
GUI 
Stationary device 
Exhibit Profile 
Ontology 
Services 
Requirements 
 
Context 
Knowledge 
exchange 
  
Internet services 
Ontology 
Services 
Exhibits information 
Museum 
121
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

 
Figure 3. Architecture of the proposed approach 
The mobile device informs the visitor that the smart 
environment has been found and based on the visitor’s 
preferences and the current situation in the museum (the 
context) an acceptable path for visiting museum rooms is 
built. The context is formed based on the interaction process 
between the visitor’s mobile device and other mobile and 
stationary devices through the smart environment. The 
context is the description of the visitor’s task in terms of the 
ontology taking into consideration the current situation in the 
museum. The ontology in the knowledge management 
system describes the main terms used for the museum smart 
environment description and relationships between them. 
The mobile device of the visitor provides services for 
sharing information with other devices of the smart 
environment. For example, it shares the visitor’s location, 
visitor’s personal information, preferences and preferred 
exhibits to see. 
For these purposes, the visitor profile has to contain 
personal information about the visitor, domain specific 
information (e.g., preferred exhibits to see), information that 
describes user preferences, feedback information and history 
that contains previous user activities in the system. 
IV. 
MUSEUM ONTOLOGY 
There are several different ontologies of intelligent 
museum visitors support systems has been analyzed 
[3][7][8]. The upper-level museum ontology based on these 
ontologies is presented in Figure 4. 
It consists of Device entity divided into Infrastructure 
Device, Mobile Device, and Stationary Device entities. 
Infrastructure Devices provide infrastructure for the Smart 
Environment (e.g., Wi-Fi, hot spots). 
 
Figure 4. Upper level of the museum ontology 
 
Figure 5. Device entity of the museum ontology 
Mobile Devices are used by museum visitors and allow 
visitors to connect to Smart Environment, to get assistance, 
and information about exhibits. Stationary Devices represent 
exhibits 
in 
Smart 
Environment 
(provide 
to 
Smart 
Environment all necessary information about exhibits). 
A more detailed description of Device entity is presented 
in Figure 5. Every Device has location information 
(associative relationship to Location entity). Infrastructure 
devices have attribute Type (e.g., Wi-Fi or Bluetooth). 
Mobile devices have attributes which characterize hardware 
and software information and rights in the museum smart 
environment. Every Mobile Device entity has associative 
relationship to Visitor entity, which means that this visitor 
uses that mobile device. Stationary device has associative 
relationship with Exhibition, which means that this 
exhibition is represented by this stationary device in smart 
environment. 
A more detailed description of Excursion entity is 
presented in Figure 6. Every excursion is described by the 
following attributes: description, duration, name, and start 
time. Excursion entity has associative relationships to 
Exhibition, Visitor, and Museum entities. 
Visitor 
Visitor Profile 
Mobile Device 
Stationary Device 
Exhibit Profile 
Exhibit 
Smart 
Environment 
Context 
122
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

 
Figure 6. Excursion entity of the museum ontology 
Description of Location entity is presented in Figure 7. It 
includes the following attributes: Accessibility for Disabled 
Visitors which means that this location is equipped to assist 
disabled visitors, and Description which describes the 
location. Class compatibility relation with Disabled Visitor 
entity determines if this Location is compatible or 
incompatible with the Disabled Visitor, based on Type of 
Disability (see Figure 12). 
 
Figure 7. Location entity of the museum ontology 
Figure 8 represents different roles for a museum visitor. 
Role entity has associative relation to Visitor entity. The 
following roles can be mentioned: researcher, school teacher, 
regular visitor, tourist, and other. Additional information for 
the every role can be used by the system. E.g., researcher 
will stay in museum for a long time, school teacher attend 
the museum with children, etc. 
 
Figure 8. Role entity of the museum ontology 
More detailed description of Museum entity is presented 
in Figure 9. This entity has attribute Name (the name of the 
museum), associative relations to Excursion and Smart 
Environment entities, and hierarchical (part-of) relations to 
Exhibition entity. 
Description of Exhibition entity is presented in Figure 10. 
It is characterized by the following attributes: capacity, 
description, name, style, type. 
 
Figure 9. Museum entity of the museum ontology 
 
Figure 10. Exhibition entity of the museum ontology 
Associative relation to Stationary Device entity means that 
this exhibition is represented by this stationary device in the 
smart space. Relation to the Excursion entity means that this 
exhibition is included into the excursion. Hierarchical 
relation to Museum entity means that this exhibition is part-
of the Museum. Temporary exhibitions have additional 
attributes Start Date and End Date, which determine start and 
end date of exhibition. 
Figure 11 represents Smart Environment entity. It has 
associative relation to Museum entity and hierarchical 
relation to Device entity. 
Description of the Visitor entity is presented in Figure 
12. The following attributes describe the visitor: name, 
gender, date of birth, e-mail, list of languages for 
communication, phone number, and position. Associative 
relation to Role entity means that the visitor has a role. 
Relation to Excursion entity determines that the visitor is 
connected to the excursion. Relation to Mobile Device entity 
determines that the visitor uses the mobile device to 
communicate with museum smart environment. 
123
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

 
Figure 11. Smart Environment entity of the museum ontology 
 
Figure 12. Visitor entity of the museum ontology 
V. 
VISITOR PROFILE 
Most of user profile models include such information as: 
first name, last name, gender, date of birth, languages, and 
contact information and user position. This information is 
also important for intelligent museum visitor’s support. It is 
stored in the “Personal Information” module (Figure 13). 
Museums visitors can have different roles (e.g., 
individual visitor, family, group of schoolchildren and other). 
Intelligent museum visitor’s support system can take into 
account this information for building the plan of the 
excursion. Some parts of the visitor profile can be hidden 
from other visitors (for example if the user would like to 
attend museum anonymously). For this purpose the visitor 
has to choose which information can be accessible to other 
devices. It is needed to provide the knowledge management 
system with information about visitor’s hardware and 
software capabilities, because based on this information the 
system suggests the visitor which types of exhibit 
descriptions (audio, video, textual) he/she can use. This 
information is stored in the “System Information” module 
(Figure 13). 
Since the knowledge management system is context-
oriented, it is necessary to determine the location of the 
visitor in time. For this purpose the module “Context 
Information” is proposed. 
 
Figure 13. Model of museum visitor profile in intelligent museum visitor’s 
support system 
For building an acceptable plan of excursion the system 
needs information about exhibits preferred by the visitor: 
types of exhibits (paintings, ancient items and other), styles 
of exhibits (modern, impressionism and other), and 
mandatory exhibits which visitor have to see (e.g., Venus de 
Milo, Mona Lisa in the Louvre Museum). Also visitor profile 
has to keep the information about preferable types of exhibit 
description (audio, video or/and textual), excursion duration 
(how much time the visitor can spend at this museum), 
exhibit occupancies (in case of high occupancy of an exhibit 
the visitor might prefer to skip this exhibit or to try to see it 
later). 
For the purpose of keeping the history of interaction 
between the visitor’s device and the museum smart 
environment, and its further analysis all excursions of this 
visitor, including the museum name, date, plan of the 
excursion, visitor’s feedback about the excursion, and user 
context at the moment of excursion are stored in visitor 
profile. Based on this information, the visitor’s preferences 
and preferred exhibits can be semi-automatically identified 
using ontology-based clustering mechanisms described in 
[6]. 
VI. 
CASE STUDY 
The intelligent museum visitor’s support system has been 
implemented based on proposed approach and ontology. 
Maemo 5 OS – based device (Nokia N900) and Python 
language are used for implementation. 
An open source software platform [9] that aims to 
provide a "Semantic Web" information sharing infrastructure 
between software entities and devices is used for system 
implementation. In this platform the ontology is represented 
via RDF triples. Communication between software entities is 
developed via Smart Space Access Protocol (SSAP) [9]. 
Excursions History 
 
Excursion i 
Museum 
Date 
Plan of the Excursion 
Visitor Feedback 
Visitor Context 
Personal Information 
ID 
First and Last Name 
Gender 
Date of Birth 
Languages 
Phone 
E-Mail 
Position 
System Information 
Role 
Access Rights 
Hardware & Software 
Preferred Exhibits 
Types of Exhibits 
Style of Exhibits 
Mandatory Exhibits 
Preferences 
Exhibit Descriptions 
Excursion Durations 
Exhibit Occupancies 
Context Information 
Location 
124
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Different entities of the system are interacting with each 
other through the smart environment using proposed in 
Section IV ontology. Every device has a part of this ontology 
and after connecting to smart environment it shares own 
ontology part to the smart environment. 
The system has been partly implemented in Gymnasium 
of Karl May History Museum [10] which located in the same 
building with St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and 
Automation RAS. 
When the visitor enters the museum he/she can connect 
to the museum intranet network and download appropriate 
software for getting intelligent museum visitors support. 
Installation of this software takes few minutes depending on 
operating system of mobile device (at the moment only 
Maemo 5 OS is supported). When the visitor runs the system 
first time the profile has to be completed. This procedure 
takes not more than 10 minutes. The visitor can fill the 
profile or can use a default profile. In case of default profile 
the system can not propose preferred exhibitions to the 
visitor. 
Response time of the Internet services depends on the 
Internet connection speed in the museum, number of people 
connected to the network, and workload of the services. 
Average response time should not exceed a one second. 
On the three top screenshots (Figure 14) the visitor 
profile is presented. According to the model of museum 
visitor profile in intelligent museum visitor’s support system 
it consists of personal information, system information, 
visitor preferences (preferred exhibits and other preferences). 
The fourth screenshot shows an exhibit description acquired 
from an external Internet service (e.g., Wikipedia). 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The paper presents an innovative approach to context-
oriented knowledge management for supporting visitors in 
museum smart environment. This approach allows different 
devices in the museum smart environment to interact with 
each other for the purpose of guide visitor in the area of 
museum. User profiles allow keeping important information 
about the user and using it in the smart environment. 
Since there is no the centralized server in the proposed 
system, the performance is affected by the number of visitors 
indirectly. If there are many visitors using the system, the 
bottleneck of the system performance will be network 
capacity and Internet services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The paper is a part of the research carried out within the 
project funded by grants # 09-07-00436-a, 11-07-00045-a, 
and 10-07-00368-а of the Russian Foundation for Basic 
Research; project # 213 of the research program “Intelligent 
information technologies, mathematical modeling, system 
analysis and automation” of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences; and contract # 14.740.11.0357 of the Russian 
program “Research and Research-Human Resources for 
Innovating Russia in 2009-2013”. 
 
Figure 14. demonstrates some screenshots of the prototype. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Bianchi and M. Zancanaro, “Tracking Users' Movements 
in an Artistic Physical Space,” Proc. of the i3 Annual 
Conference. 1999, pp. 103–106. 
[2] F. Bohnert, I. Zukerman, S. Berkovsky, T. Baldwin, and L. 
Sonenberg, “Using Interest and Transition Models to Predict 
Visitor Locations in Museums,” AI Communications, vol. 
21(2-3), Apr. 2008, pp. 195–202. 
[3] T. Kuflik, J. Kay, and B. Kummerfeld, “Lifelong Personalized 
Museum Experiences,” Proc. Pervasive User Modeling and 
Personalization (PUMP'10), June 2010, pp. 9–16. 
[4] B. Schmidt-Belz, A. Zipf, H. Laamanen, and S. Poslad, 
“Location-based 
Mobile 
Tourist 
Services: 
First 
User 
Experiences,” International Conference for Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism, 2003, pp. 115–123. 
[5] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, N. Chilov, T. Levashova, and A. 
Krizhanovsky, “Knowledge Logistics as an Intelligent Service 
for Healthcare,” Methods of Information in Medicine, vol. 44, 
no 2, 2005, pp. 262–264. 
[6] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, T. Levashova, A. Kashevnik, and N. 
Shilov, “Context-Driven Decision Mining,” Encyclopedia of 
Data 
Warehousing 
and 
Mining, 
Information 
Science 
Preference, Second Edition, vol. 1, 2008, pp. 320–327. 
[7] D. 
Signore, 
“Ontology 
Driven 
Access 
to 
Museum 
Information, “Annual Conference of the International 
Committee for Documentation of the International Council of 
Museums, May 2005. 
[8] H. Mareka and W. Ron, “Ontology-based user modeling, in 
an augmented audio reality system for museums, “ User 
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 15(3-4), 2005, 
pp. 339–380. 
[9] J. Honkola, H. Laine, R. Brown, and O. Tyrkko, “Smart-M3 
information sharing platform,” The 1st Int’l Workshop on 
Semantic Interoperability for Smart Spaces (SISS 2010), June 
2010. 
[10] Gymnasium of Karl May History Museum web page: 
http://www.spiiras.nw.ru/modules.php?name=Content&pa=sh
showpa&pid=8 (In Russian, last access date: 03.06.2011). 
125
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

