A Survey on Security in Future Internet and Cloud
Fabio Sanvido, Daniel D´ıaz S´anchez, Florina Almen´arez Mendoza, Andr´es Mar´ın L´opez
Telematic Engineering Department, Carlos III University of Madrid, Spain
Email: {fsanvido, dds, ﬂorina, amarin}@it.uc3m.es
Abstract—The Internet was designed in the 1970s with limited
scope and applications. It has been evolving during the last
decades applying speciﬁc and ad-hoc solutions around the IP
protocol to cover growing needs about security, mobility, inter-
connection, etc. Recent research has been increasingly focusing on
the problem of Future Internet evolution; while one research line
argues that a clean-slate approach is necessary to cover all future
requirements, others maintain that Internet could continue to
evolve adaptively, adopting new technologies as real requirements
emerge. Increasing adoption of Cloud Computing paradigms
could support the evolutionary approach. Beyond what would be
the most valuable theory, security is one of the core issues future
technologies must face. This paper gives an overview of Cloud
Computing and Future Internet research issues and initiatives,
oriented to security aspects. We analyze the common points
regarding Trust and Identity Management, as well as identifying
guidelines for future research.
Index Terms—Future Internet, Cloud Computing, Security,
Trust, Identity Management
I. INTRODUCTION
Internet was designed in the 70’s as a communication
system between end-to-end machines targeting a community
of users that could be considered experts. Thanks to the
transparency of the design it has been quite easy to join
new networks to the Internet’s network-of-networks model. It
permitted also the deployment of new services and applications
leading to the well know hourglass model around the IP
protocol.
Today’s Internet scope is far from the original design. It
has developed as a critical infrastructure for our society and
economy and plays an active role in the daily life of millions
of people. Internet has evolved from a limited academic scope
to a mass phenomenon [1]. It has been taking more and more
relevance in business and e-commerce since all processes have
been signiﬁcantly automated and improved through the usage
of Internet technology. Concerning the user experience, Inter-
net has inﬂuenced the evolution of computing paradigms from
the mainframe to grid computing being the popularization of
Personal Computers (PCs) an important milestone. Moreover,
in the recent years we faced the popularization of service-
oriented paradigms that have ﬁnally lead to the Cloud Comput-
ing approach that is envisaged to satisfy the constant demand
of computing resource, data storage or software functionality
[2]. Cloud computing brings to the Internet-of-services a high
degree of ﬂexibility and scalability.
This work was partially founded by the Spanish Ministry of Science
and Innovation within the framework of the project TEC2010-20572-C02-01
CONSEQUENCE”
However, many aspects ave been traditionally deferred for
later deﬁnition. Security is one of those aspects that were
procrastinated. In fact, many early network protocols that are
part of the Internet were designed without explicit security
considerations [3], such as deﬁning the security policies,
managing and protecting identities, securing the interactions
between heterogeneous systems, managing trust relationships
between different administrative domains, monitoring and evo-
lution of changing contexts, among others.
Thus it has become to agreement that a global re-design of
the architecture may be needed pointing to the abstract concept
of “Future Internet”. The purpose of this paper is to summarize
the most promising efforts concerning the deﬁnition of a
reliable security framework for future Internet, since security is
one of the tasks that are usually deferred during the deﬁnition
of new architectures. Thus, we aim at bringing the reader a
guide on security for the Future Internet that would help to
bring robustness to the future network-of-networks.
The article is structured as follows. Some introducing notes
on Future Internet evolution are given in Section III after
the Section II, in which we deﬁne the basics of the cloud
computing. In Section IV, we sketch out some proposals for
Future Internet architecture. General security considerations
and requirements are described in Section V. Finally, conclu-
sions are given in Section VI.
II. CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud Computing can be considered the prelude of Future
Internet. Cloud computing is a new paradigm that offers
scalability, reliability, availability when accessing resources
across Internet. It is expected to abstract the details of the
underlying infrastructure even when they are complex. Despite
there is a lack of an accepted deﬁnition for this computing
paradigm, Cloud Computing could be seen as the use of
Internet-based technologies for the provision of services [2].
The term “Cloud” was originated from the way Internet is
represented in diagrams. In general, the core concept behind
Cloud Computing is Software as a Service (SaaS). Cloud
Computing, and its complexity, born from squeezing or gen-
eralizing the SaaS concept to exhaustion. According to this,
if in SaaS an application can be a service, also does the
environment over which the application is executed, and even
the hardware that executes the entire software. Following this
reasoning, Cloud Computing is a resource aggregation of
applications, components, frameworks that can be conﬁgured
for serving several purposes.
35
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

When it comes to the user role, the interaction with Cloud
Computing systems might be similar to already existing
paradigms, in fact, Cloud computing can be seen as an
evolution of the academia-oriented Grid Computing [4] or
the next step in data center paradigm [2]. In a typical cloud
infrastructure, a unique node, a huge “black-box” connection
point, stays in the center of the conﬁguration while a number
of users connect with it to consume the services it offers. What
really differentiates the cloud computing from traditional web
service architecture is the type of services it provides. Three
general types of services can be distinguished in the cloud:
a) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): At the basic level
of abstraction there are providers who provide instantiation of
virtual machines to their customers. These virtual machines
are static conﬁgured and therefore have to be re-instantiated
by the operator when the customer reach its limits.
b) Platform as a Service (PaaS): Moving up in the
abstraction level, a provider can offer to its customers an entire
environment, composed of virtual machines instantiated in the
data center but invisible for the developer customers, where
the programs are executed.
c) Software as a Service (SaaS): At the upper abstraction
level, the providers offer entire applications to its customers.
Those applications can be typically used as a desktop appli-
cations and offer storage and resources to the end user.
The combination of these services converge in three key
factors for the success of the model: the illusion of inﬁnite
computing resources available on demand, eliminating the
need for Cloud Computing users to plan far ahead for pro-
visioning [5]; the possibility for companies to start small and
increase hardware resources only when there is an increase in
their needs; the ability to pay for use of computing resources
when needed and release them when they are no longer useful.
III. WHAT IS FUTURE INTERNET?
Besides Cloud Computing popularization could be consid-
ered the trigger for the deﬁnition of the Future Internet, the
more Cloud Computing grows as operative technology, the
more it disassociates from the deﬁnition of Future Internet
becoming, as much, a component of it.
Nevertheless, at the time of writing this article, there is no
“uniform” deﬁnition of what the Internet of the future will be.
There exist several attempts all around the word that try to
deﬁne it. The European Commission focused on research on
Future Network in the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7)
[6] while the US National Science Foundation launched the
program Future InterNet Design (FIND) [7]. The National
Institute of Information and Communications Technology of
Japan launched in 2006 the AKARI project that aims to
implement a new generation network by 2015.
Within a plethora of efforts and deﬁnitions, it is possible
to recognize two different trends on Future Internet develop.
On one hand we can ﬁnd the EVOLUTIONARY approach.
Followers of this trend found its view on the assumption that
Internet is now a full commercial network and that the inertia
introduced by operator investment and the lack of immediate
gain for early adopters make the incremental enhance the only
way of evolution. Some followers also point that most of the
common problems, such as security, are not a problem of
architecture.
On the other hand a more revolutionary idea can be found.
In what is called the CLEAN-SLATE approach [8] the objective
is to forget about the structural and commercial limitation im-
posed by the current Internet architecture in order to redeﬁne
network requirements and principles. Over them it would be
designed a new architecture that would avoid known problems
of IP in ﬁelds like QoS, security and mobility while provide
best support for future applications.
IV. PROMINENT PROPOSALS
One of the key issues in the current Internet architecture has
been identiﬁed in the use of IP addresses for both physically
locate and identify hosts. Some proposals have been advanced
to separate these concepts.
The Host Identity Protocol (HIP), deﬁned in RFC4423, and
the Accountable Internet Protocol (AIP) [9] use one pub-
lic/private key pair to identify each host, where public key is
used as public identiﬁer or part of it while location is achieved
through standard IP for HIP or, for AIP, through a hierarchical
construction of Accountable Domains, which AIP addresses
are concatenated with host address for routing purpose. Both
rely on DNS services for address discovering. The Hierarchical
Internet Mapping Architecture (HiiMap) [10] steps forward to
redeﬁne the DNS architecture for location. It divides Internet
space in several regions, which was proposed to be real
countries, and creates one mapping authority per region and
one global authority to map region ones. Whit regard to the
distribution of public keys HIP, AIP and HiiMap don’t rely
on a PKI infrastructure separated from the backbone Internet
architecture but face the problem of the key distribution in
different way. While AIP and HIP aim to integrate public
keys in its address space through the use of self-certifying
addresses, HiiMap integrates a PKI in its location system
infrastructure [11], so that keys do not identify host but legal
entities and solving the problem of key ﬂexibility.
RNA project [12] proposes a “single, ﬂexible architecture
based on the reuse of a metaprotocol over different regions”,
the stack of network protocols is thus dynamically com-
posed by a particular instantiation of this protocol for each
layer to avoid reimplementation. The metaprotocol composes
capabilities currently dispersed in different layers providing
services such as state management, congestion control and
security association. The resulting service is thus conﬁgurable
to mach the needs of the lower or the upper layer. The goal
of RNA’s metaprotocol is basically create a way to avoid the
need of an ad-hoc service created adding a new ad-hoc layer
between existing ones or virtualizing it over the current stack
just to ﬁt a particular context. RNA’s metaprotocol provides
security on the entire stack by reusing security features of
existing protocols in different layers and coordinating them
via a common metaprotocol module interface. Despite this
is a very efﬁcient solution, it does not specify any type of
36
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

recommendation or requisites for security. A release of the
RNA’s metaprotocol is available in [13] as a patch to Click
Modular Router software.
4WARD project [14] covers several areas of interest such
as: Business Innovation and Regulation, New Architecture
Principles and Concepts, Network Virtualization, In-Network
Management and Forwarding and Multiplexing. It proposes
an architecture framework that make possible to derive and
deploy families of interoperable networks. It uses the notion
of virtualization and particularly network nodes, the netlets
[15], which can be seen as containers that hide protocol
details but provide a number of properties via interfaces. A
speciﬁc network is build assembling or multiplexing different
netlets, which accomplish runtime requirements. It archives to
run multiply different networks architectures in parallel and
select the more appropriated one on runtime [16]. Based on
the concept of network selection, the security provided by a
network typology is just a parameter of the network selection
process. Moreover in a virtual multi-network environment, a
single node can be part of several virtual networks at the
same time, each one with a different predominant paradigm,
for example high bandwidth instead of security. In [16] the
security is reduced to the selection of the appropriate security
protocol by using a selection algorithm that evaluates the
effects of adding such a protocol on a TCP/IP stack.
SELF-NET project [17] aims to design a self-managed
network, where the concept is enhanced to cover distinct
self-management methods deﬁned as: self-optimization, self-
conﬁguration, self-healing, self-protection, self-awareness and
self-organization. The object is achieved by deﬁning a three-
part closed cycle process (Monitoring - Decision Making -
Execution) composing a Cognitive cycle that each element of
the network would implement. In this context an element is
intend to be either a network element (e.g., router, base station,
and mobile device), a network manager, or any software ele-
ment that lies at the service layer [18]. Such a system will be
able to recognize its operational context (Monitoring phase),
analyze it to extract a set of possible action and select the
most appropriated one in each case (Decision Making phase).
The selected solution will be applied to the system in the
Execution phase through processes like self-reconﬁguration or
replacement of software components. An important aspect of
these architecture elements is the ability to learn from past
decisions discerning if they target the desired objective and
use this experience in future decisions. Thus Decision Making,
Monitoring processes and algorithms are strictly correlated.
SELF-NET proposes an implementation of the system it
designed adding new autonomic network elements that should
be aware of their internal and environment state and also have
the ability of planning, deciding and adapting their operation in
a way that best ﬁts the operator’s goals and objectives. Because
of its autonomy property and distributed nature, multi-agent
system (MAS) paradigm is used to support the Self-NET
requirements; thanks to its decentralized approach MAS would
be able to solve difﬁcult problems in complex environments.
Slightly less centered on deﬁning new speciﬁc network
architecture, other projects focuses more on security aspects.
ECRYPTII project [19] centers on the cryptology fun-
damentals in networking. Divided in tree virtual labs, the
project aims to address issues in symmetric and asymmet-
ric encryption primitives and protocols as well as efﬁcient
implementation techniques in hardware and software. Those
techniques might be useful for Future Internet. The WOMBAT
project [20] focus on monitoring and identifying malicious
code and attacks in order to generate new security practice
and tools against emerging security threats.
INTERSECTION project [21] aims to build a security
framework for interoperable networks by dividing the frame-
work in two different layers, in-network and off-network
layer. The project focuses on monitoring and identifying new
security threats and vulnerabilities, as well as good counter-
measures, at the in-network layer, and on providing a decision
support system in the off-network one. The framework uses
knowledge-based approach, in the off-network layer, to efﬁ-
ciently cross-relate monitoring results from different networks
through the VIO (Vulnerability Intersection Ontology [22]).
Several more projects in FP7, center on the analysis of
security in well-deﬁned ﬁelds such as emergency (PACE [23]),
ﬁnancial frameworks (COMIFIN [24], PARSIFAL [25]) or
industrial control systems (VIKING [26]).
The core concept that is perceived as fundamental for the
success of any architecture is trust. Trust between network
entities or end users, either to allow a distributed management
of the network or to dynamically ensure end to end trans-
actions. COMIFIN “wants to deliver a composable software
system for large scale infrastructures that meets non-functional
properties, such as responsiveness, predictability, security and
trust by design”. As authors in [25] state: “A lack of trust
between entities where information is being exchanged goes
to the heart of many of the challenges facing the domain of
critical infrastructure protection”.
Trust comes with the inseparable concept of Identity. For
humans, both concepts can be reduced to one following
the paradigm: “If I know you, I trust you”. In the digital
environment this model can not be applied. For example, even
if the network can securely authenticate the user who wants
to connect his equipment to it, this does not mean that his
equipment is free of third-party malware and therefore safe to
connect. Moreover either in the human or in the digital context
we have to take into account the level of the trust that has to
be assigned to a speciﬁc user identity and how to handle them.
Several FP7 projects take into account Identity Manage-
ment. The SWIFT project [27] is designing an overlay infras-
tructure where the identity of the user is managed through
an element called Identity broker. In the SWIFT context user
owns several different virtual identities all of them related to a
single real identity. Each virtual identity represents a “face” of
the user, maintained to separate roles or for privacy reasons.
In parallel the PrimeLife project, whitch focuses on pro-
viding a life-long protection to the user privacy in emerg-
ing Internet applications, has deﬁned interesting requirements
for ensuring users’ privacy in [28]. The documents focus
37
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

on the analysis of social network sites and collaborative
workspaces identifying several requirements for these kind of
environments that can be easily dovetailed in a more general
framework. The PrimeLife’s work point out that: users should
have control over contexts and be able to create different kinds
of context relating to distinctions; A Management System
(MS) should offer models for relationships, policies, etc., that
mimic everyday’s human social interactions; the MS should
provide users with tools to inspect (and correct) the automated
inferences made on the basis of their behavior in the network;
the MS should offer users the option to terminate their identity
which should result in deletion of all data pertaining to this
user; the MS should provide a certain level of anonymity to its
users and should provide features for creating, managing and
deleting different partial identities in order to reduce linkability
of all actions of the same user.
V. SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
In this section, we analyze the efforts made in order to
deﬁne high level indispensable requirements for research in
Cloud and FI under the view of security, trust and identity.
A. Secure Cloud
Security aspects in cloud computing cover a large number of
topics. To deal with that, the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA)
was created as a non-proﬁt organization to promote the use
of best security practices. Within the CSA domains of work
it is possible to ﬁnd: application security, encryption and key
management, identity and access management.
Identity and access management are among the most out-
standing topics when deﬁning a secure cloud. This is the
domain of the Trusted Cloud Initiative (TCI). TCI published in
2009 the 2nd version of the research baseline for the CSA in
order to deﬁne its certiﬁcation criteria [29]. The same group
is now working on version 3. The documents analyze what
requirements have to be addressed in the ﬁelds of Identity
Management (IdM), authentication and identity federation. In
March 2010, CSA identiﬁed in [30] seven major security
threats and proposed some directives for solving them. The
threats described in the document can be summarized has
follows:
a) Abuse and Nefarious Use of Cloud Computing: To
overcome the problem, the CSA recommends to increase
accountability degree, of services as PaaS or IaaS through
stricter registration and monitoring processes.
b) Insecure Interfaces and Application Programming Inter-
faces (APIs): The inappropriate and unauthorized use of those
programming primitives should be avoided, for instance, en-
forcing cryptography in authentication and using ﬁne grained
access control models.
c) Malicious Insiders: The lack for provider of transparency
in managing security over the entire service chain let malicious
insiders to manipulate users’ data. To overcome this, the CSA
recommends active participation of the user in the entire
security process.
d) Shared Technology Issues: a strong compartmentalization
must be used together with the enforcement of Service Level
Agreements (SLA) in order to overcome problems derived
from sharing infrastructure among users and Cloud provider.
e) Data Loss or Leakage: As long as the number of
iterations increase so does the risk of information leakage in
a cloud environment. For that reason, the usage of strong en-
cryption mechanisms and access control should be mandatory.
f) Account or Service Hijacking: If attackers gain access
to users credentials, current and future activities, transactions
and exchanged data will be compromised. To overcome this
problem, besides implement stronger authentication methods,
monitoring credentials is key for noticing hijacking.
g) Unknown Risk Proﬁle: The risk of losing track of the
security ramiﬁcations is a drawback of cloud deployments.
Partial or full disclosure of provider’s infrastructure details as
well as security logs could overcome or mitigate the problem.
After analyzing the threats, stronger authentication and
monitoring practices seems to be essential to solve cloud
security threats. Nowadays the adoption of Cloud Computing
solutions by real world industry is clearly driven by the size
of the organization. In fact, while a small organization could
ﬁnd in public cloud computing services a perfect solution
for a cheap start-up, medium to large organizations need to
deﬁne more complex environments, with restrictively security
constrains, in order to accomplish their business project in
a secure way. Hybrid solution, mixing public and private
clouds, are used to merge high level protection, enabled by
private clouds, with the greater ﬂexibility offered by public
cloud services. Those trends could be eventually changed
in the near future with the outcome of several efforts from
organization as DARPA [31] and IARPA [32]. These efforts
rely on homomorphic cryptography techniques that allow
operating directly over encrypted data sets, producing an
encrypted output without knowing data itself. Due to the
complexity of the problem the ﬁrst system using homomorphic
encryption is quite recent. It was developed in 2009 by
Craig Gentry [33]. Other prominent effort is [34], where a
conceptual simpliﬁcation using Integer based scheme instead
of Ideal Lattices scheme was presented. Recently an important
improvement to Gentry’s fully homomorphic scheme based on
ideal lattices has been presented by Stehle at al. in [35]. In this
work, they describe a system that reduces the complexity of
binary operations of Gentry’s system form 2λ to quasi − λ3.5
where λ is the security parameter. If research on homomorphic
encryption continues reducing the complexity while maintains
the security, in a near future, public clouds might be no longer
considered as dangerous as today.
B. Secure FI
Despite several projects aim at designing and deﬁning
Future Internet architecture, not all of them tackle security
aspects.
In the scope of design a global trusted architecture one
project takes particular relevance. The THINK-TRUST project
38
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

[36] wants to provide guidance on policy and research chal-
lenges in the ﬁeld of security and trust in the Information
Society. The project aims to model and deﬁne new intelligent
and user-friendly ICT security environments that ﬁt the re-
quirements of the Information Society. THINK-TRUST ﬁnal
report [37] identiﬁes challenges in different areas that depict a
set of requirements that should be followed in order to provide
trustworthy hardware and software:
a) Trust engineering: Trust is not absolute and will be
quantiﬁed by the preferences and intuitive policies of users.
Thus the need of a trust framework appears where trust
relationships between entities are established and managed to
encompass trust preferences, trust policy and trust weighting.
Alternative approaches such as reputation, recommendation
and frequentation should also be explored.
b) Architecture: Architectural support must be provided ﬁrst
with regard to transparency - security monitoring, observability
and measurability - for data logging and log access and
secondly, with regard to the ability to function across multiple
layers and domain. The requirements for accountability illus-
trate that the user can be fully accountable in the local context
but his privacy has to be protected by that local domain.
c) Cyber-security: Techniques and mechanisms to provide
protection, assurance and integrity are required. These have
to be platform-independent to allow interoperability of trusted
entities and have to consider the growing in complexity, size,
capacity, speed of the digital environment. At the same time
both scarce resource devices, such as sensor networks, and
self-awareness ubiquitous systems have to be considerate.
d) Accountability: Faced to anonymity, represents a sup-
posed dichotomy between security and privacy. Accountability
is view as a priority if we consider that it allows trace-
ability/identifability, making possible to establish responsi-
bilities and liabilities. Two options are recommended: base
the demand for traceability and accountability on global
accountancy-type principles, which can encompass the whole
network or reintroduce, on an intermediary network layer, a
“territorialisation” of facts and participating parties. In both of
them a certain degree of privacy have to be ensure and it is
reﬂected in requirements for anonymous/pseudonymous charg-
ing and payment systems and requirements for anonymiza-
tion or impersonation of heuristics to produce untraceable,
but trustworthy, valid sources/channels for information; for
example, for economic, social or health-related statistics.
e) Privacy: With nowadays data-recollection systems abso-
lute anonymity may be neither possible nor applicable. [37]
points out the need of a ﬁne granularity access control to
identity-related information, of tools and concepts for deleting
data in the Internet (in order for it to “forget”) and the need
for standardized techniques to assure privacy across the various
Internet layers, throughout to network level and maintaining
consistent privacy across different environments. Common
points can be easily recognized in the recommendations found
in PrimeLife documentation [28] depicted in sec V.
f) Protection: The protection of data processing, storage and
transmission, as well as the shielding of resources and assets
(information, services, devices, communications) require the
following: domains, partitioning, compartmentalization, lead-
ing to trusted zones (and therefore, intermediate, semi-trusted
zones), and to the localization of damage; ﬁne granularity
access control based on multiple bases for authentication and
authorization; mutual authentication, with multiple devices;
new cryptographic techniques which are low cost but high
performing, in preparation for the quantum/post-quantum age.
g) Usability: FI and generally new generation network
trends focus the attention on the end user but two opposite
viewpoint emerge: one where the user is surrounded by a
system that monitors him and automatically conﬁgure itself in
order to suit user’s needs and requirements and one where the
user actively inﬂuence and set his own environment. While
in the second is the user who decides what and how much
personal information provide to the system, in the ﬁrst case
the system “spy” the user in order to discover all kind of
useful information. The trust of the user in both systems is a
key factor in the analysis. The challenge consist in offer both
possibilities to the user, solving trust issues in both scenario.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The concepts of Cloud Computing and Future Internet have
been presented in this paper. Cloud, as an almost fully de-
ployed infrastructure, has been introduced as the last paradigm
before the Internet of the future, Sec. II. Future Internet is not a
well-deﬁned concept, instead several proposals have been used
in order to give an overview of the ﬁelds concerned by the
change, Sec. IV. Regarding security, several aspects for both
Cloud Computing and Future Internet are still an open issue
and Sec. V has been dedicated to summarize results of major
efforts in deﬁning guidelines for research and development
of secure infrastructures. Analyzing threats pointed out in this
section, an high degree of overlap can be found, in fact beyond
the requirement for stronger authentication and cryptographic
techniques, useful in every kind of environment, a transverse
need of new trust and identity management frameworks arise
from almost every Cloud threat, keeping included in the
more extended vision presented by FI requirements. Assuming
stronger authentication and encryption will be available, most
Cloud security issues could be solved through ﬁne monitoring
techniques and a complete users accountability, ignoring users’
privacy. Moreover FI requirements of Architecture and Trust
engineering depict a scenario where multiple providers, of
Cloud or new types of composable services, are required to
interoperate ensuring trustworthy, dynamic and private trans-
actions while Cloud security threats does not take into account
interoperability.
Besides, some of the initiatives depicted in Sec. IV focus
on aspects that can be directly mapped to requirements for
a secure Future Internet: SWIFT and PrimeLife center on
privacy and protection of users’ identity, INTERSECTION
on cyber security, HIP and AIP on user accountability but
architectural aspects such as monitoring and observability are
a common issue present in most of them. The lack of a uniform
view for architectural reform of Internet infrastructure could
39
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

spread efforts in to many directions. At the same time, Cloud
providers, whose infrastructures have already been deployed
and are evolving to face security and privacy threats, could take
advantage form research implementing solutions that fulﬁll
the requirements for a secure Cloud. Being secure Cloud and
secure FI somehow overlapped, this brings Cloud closer to the
deﬁnition of FI strengthening the vision of the evolutionary
approach at the expenses of the clean-slate one.
Cloud providers might thus be identiﬁed as those early
adopters which could lead the Future Internet implantation.
REFERENCES
[1] D. I. T. F. on the Future Internet Content, “Draft report of the task force
on interdisciplinary research activities applicable to the future internet,”
July 2009, external Technical Experts: G. Camarillo, S. Dustdar, J.
Magen, S. Paulus. [Online]. Available: http://www.future-internet.eu
Accessed: Jun 2011
[2] T. R. Micro Focus, “Enterprise cloud services: Deriving business
value from cloud computing,” 2009, white Paper. [Online]. Available:
http://cloudservices.microfocus.com, Accessed: Jun. 2011
[3] E.
F.
I.
Assembly,
“Security,
privacy
and
trust
in
the
future
internet-issues for discussion.” [Online]. Available: http://www.future-
internet.eu/ﬁleadmin/documents/bled documents/
Issues TSD Future Internet - 08 03 02.pdf Accessed: Jun 2011
[4] I. Foster, Y. Zhao, I. Raicu, and S. Lu, “Cloud computing and grid
computing 360-degree compared,” in Grid Computing Environments
Workshop, 2008. GCE ’08, 12-16 2008, pp. 1 –10.
[5] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. H. Katz,
A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. A. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica,
and
M.
Zaharia,
“Above
the
clouds:
A
berkeley
view
of
cloud
computing,”
EECS
Department,
University
of
California,
Berkeley, Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2009-28, Feb 2009. [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2009/EECS-2009-
28.html Accessed: Jun 2011
[6] P. Stuckmann and R. Zimmermann, “Accepted from open call - toward
ubiquitous and unlimited-capacity communication networks: European
research in framework programme 7,” Communications Magazine, IEEE,
vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 148 –157, may 2007.
[7] “Future
internet
design,”
National
Science
of
Foundation,
the
FIND
Program
is
now
part
of
the
new
NSF
NetSE
program
(http://www.nets-ﬁnd.net/netse.php).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.nets-ﬁnd.net/index.php Accessed: Jun 2011
[8] J. Roberts, “The clean-slate approach to future internet design: a survey
of research initiatives,” Annals of Telecommunications, vol. 64, pp. 271–
276, 2009, 10.1007/s12243-009-0109-y.
[9] D. G. Andersen, H. Balakrishnan, N. Feamster, T. Koponen, D. Moon,
and S. Shenker, “Accountable internet protocol (aip),” SIGCOMM Com-
put. Commun. Rev., vol. 38, pp. 339–350, August 2008.
[10] O. Hanka, G. Kunzmann, C. Spleiss, J. Eberspacher, and A. Bauer,
“Hiimap: Hierarchical internet mapping architecture,” in Future Infor-
mation Networks, 2009. ICFIN 2009. First International Conference on,
oct. 2009, pp. 17 –24.
[11] O.
Hanka,
M.
Eichhorn,
M.
Pfannenstein,
J.
Eberspcher,
and
E. Steinbach, “A distributed public key infrastructure based on
threshold
cryptography
for
the
hiimap
next
generation
internet
architecture,” Future Internet, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 14–30, 2011. [Online].
Available: http://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/3/1/14/ Accessed: Jun 2011
[12] “Rna: A recursive network architecture,” National Science Fundation,
nSF NeTS FIND Initiative. [Online]. Available: http://www.isi.edu/rna
Accessed: Jun 2011
[13] J. Touch and V. Pingali, “The rna metaprotocol,” in Computer Com-
munications and Networks, 2008. ICCCN ’08. Proceedings of 17th
International Conference on, 3-7 2008, pp. 1 –6.
[14] “4ward
architecture and design for the future internet,” European
Commission, FP7. [Online]. Available: http://www.4ward-project.eu
Accessed: Jun 2011
[15] L. Volker, D. Martin, I. El Khayaut, C. Werle, and M. Zitterbart, “A node
architecture for 1000 future networks,” in Communications Workshops,
2009. ICC Workshops 2009. IEEE International Conference on, 14-18
2009, pp. 1 –5.
[16] L. Volker, D. Martin, C. Werle, M. Zitterbart, and I. El Khayat, “Select-
ing concurrent network architectures at runtime,” in Communications,
2009. ICC ’09. IEEE International Conference on, 14-18 2009, pp. 1
–5.
[17] “Self-management
of
cognitive
future
internet
elements
-
self-net,”
European
Commission,
FP7.
[Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/ Accessed: Jun 2011
[18] T. Raptis, C. Polychronopoulos, A. Kousaridas, P. Spapis, V. Gazis,
N. Alonistioti, and I. Chochliouros, “Technological enablers for self-
manageable future internet elements,” in Future Computing, Service
Computation, Cognitive, Adaptive, Content, Patterns, 2009. COMPU-
TATIONWORLD ’09. Computation World:, 15-20 2009, pp. 499 –504.
[19] “European network of excellence for cryptology ii - ecryptii,” European
Commission,
FP7.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ecrypt.eu.org
Accessed: Jun 2011
[20] “Worldwide observatory of malicious behaviors and attack threats
-
wombat,”
European
Commission,
FP7.
[Online].
Available:
http://wombat-project.eu Accessed: Jun 2011
[21] “Intersection
(infrastructure
for
heterogeneous,
resilient,
secure,
complex, tightly inter-operating networks),” European Commission,
FP7. [Online]. Available: http://www.intersection-project.eu Accessed:
Jun 2011
[22] M. Chora´s, R. Kozik, A. Flizikowski, R. Renk, and W. Holubowicz,
“Ontology-based decision support for security management in hetero-
geneous networks,” ser. ICIC’09.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag,
2009, pp. 920–927.
[23] “Ip-based emergency application and services for next generation
networks - pace,” European Commission, FP7. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ict-peace.eu Accessed: Jun 2011
[24] “Communication
middleware
for
monitoring
ﬁnancial
critical
infrastructure
-
comiﬁn,”
European
Commission,
FP7.
[Online].
Available: http://www.comiﬁn.eu/ Accessed: Jun 2011
[25] “Presentation on identity management and protection in critical ﬁnancial
infrastructures topics,” PARSIFAL project, deliverable D2.2. [Online].
Available: http://www.parsifal-project.eu Accessed: Jun 2011
[26] “Vital
infrastructure,
networks,
information
and
control
systems
management -viking,” European Commission, FP7. [Online]. Available:
http://www.vikingproject.eu Accessed: Jun 2011
[27] “Secure widespread identities for federated telecommunications -
swift,” European Commission, FP7. [Online]. Available: http://www.ist-
swift.org Accessed: Jun 2011
[28] M.
Pek´arek
and
S.
Potzsch,
“Requirements
and
concepts
for
privacy-enhancing access control in social networks and collaborative
workspaces,” PrimeLife - UE FP7, heartbeat. [Online]. Available:
http://www.primelife.eu Accessed: Jun 2011
[29] C. S. Alliance, “Domain 12: Guidance for identity & access management
v2.1,”
April
2010,
trusted
Cloud
Initiative.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.cloudsecurityalliance.org/guidance/csaguide-dom12.pdf Ac-
cessed: Jun 2011
[30] CSA,
“Top
threats
to
cloud
computing
v1.0,”
March
2010,
top
Threats
Research
Working
Group.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.cloudsecurityalliance.org/topthreats/csathreats.v1.0.pdf
Ac-
cessed: Jun 2011
[31] O. of Naval Research, “Catalyzing research initiatives in program-
ming computation on encrypted data(proceed),” solicitation Number:
DARPABAA10-81.
[32] O. of the Director of National Intelligencet, “Security and privacy
assurance research (spar),” solicitation Number: IARPA-BAA-11-01.
[33] C. Gentry, “A fully homomorphic encryption scheme,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Stanford University, 2009, crypto.stanford.edu/craig.
[34] M. van Dijk, C. Gentry, S. Halevi, and V. Vaikuntanathan, “Fully
homomorphic encryption over the integers,” in Advances in Cryptology
EUROCRYPT 2010, H. Gilbert, Ed. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2010,
vol. 6110, pp. 24–43.
[35] D. Stehl and R. Steinfeld, “Faster fully homomorphic encryption,” in
Advances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2010, M. Abe, Ed.
Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2010, vol. 6477, pp. 377–394.
[36] “Think tank for converging technical and non-technical consumer needs
in ict trust, security and dependability - think-trust,” European
Commission,
FP7.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.think-trust.eu
Accessed: Jun 2011
[37] THINK-TRUST,
“D1.7
project
ﬁnal
report,”
FP7.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.think-trust.eu/public-documentation/think-trust-
documents.html Accessed: Jun 2011
40
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

