Advertising in Social Networks: Business-oriented Check-ins
A new business model and mobile service 
Dmitry Namiot 
Lomonosov Moscow State University
Faculty of Computational Mathematics and Cybernetics
 Moscow, Russia
e-mail: dnamiot@gmail.com
Manfred Sneps-Sneppe
Ventspils University College
Ventspils International Radioastronomy Centre
Ventspils, Latvia
e-mail: manfreds.sneps@gmail.com 
Abstract  — This paper describes a new model for check-in 
process:  customized  (or  business-oriented)  check-ins.  This 
approach  introduces  a  new  mobile  service  that  lets  any 
business  publish  customized  records  (statuses)  in  social 
networks (Facebook in the current release) in exchange for 
some  benefits  (discounts,  gifts,  coupons)  provided  for  the 
customers.  For the business, this service introduces a new way 
for advertising in the social networks. For the consumers, this 
service introduces a way for exchanging access to the own 
social graph for some benefits (e.g., gifts, discounts, coupons). 
Keywords — check-in; social network; mobile; HTML5; QR-
code;  coupon; Facebook 
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
Social networking has become very popular in nowadays’ 
society. People will sign up for multiple social networking 
websites like Facebook, Foursquare, Twitter, etc. 
At  this  moment,  one  of  the  popular  models  for  the 
modern internet services (especially – for geo services) is 
“check-in”.  Check-in  is  a  record  with  presence  status, 
associated with some particular location. For example, in 
Foursquare  users  "check-in"  at  venues  using  a  mobile 
website, text messaging or a device-specific application by 
running the application and selecting from a list of venues 
that the application locates nearby [1]. Each check-in awards 
the user points and sometimes "badges". This special status 
message is published in user’s timeline (e.g., on the wall in 
Facebook).
Points are awarded for "checking in" at venues. Users 
can choose to have their check-ins posted on their accounts 
on Foursquare (communication service), Facebook (social 
network)  or  both.  The  common  practice  is  to  duplicate 
(translate) records in communication services to the social 
networks. Users can also earn badges  by checking in at 
locations with certain tags, for check-in frequency or for 
other  patterns  such  as  time  of  check-in.  Foursquare 
(communication service) was created with a core set of 16 
badges, designed to reward and motivate all of users. The 
company has stated that users will be able to add their own 
custom badges to the site in the future.
So, earned points (badges) are finally the things users can 
exchange with some benefits at venue (e.g., discount, free 
offering, gift, etc.). Of course, it is true only if/when business 
that owns this venue participates in Foursquare’s programs. 
In other words – venue owner participates in the program, 
developed by the communication service. It is very important 
for our future development. Let us just highlight again an 
important note for our future discussion – badges are being 
developed  by  the  communication  service,  not  by  the 
business.   And  any  customization  here  is  actually  an 
agreement  between  the  business  and  communication 
services. The business (the source for rewards) is actually not 
free in the forms these rewards will be presented for business 
users. The format for the conversations is dictated by the 
communication service. 
Figure1. Check-in record
      The rest of this paper is structured as follows. We 
present  the background  to our  QRpon mobile service  in 
Section 2. In Sections 3 and 4 we present QRpon model and 
algorithm. We discuss the future work in Section 5 and 
conclude the paper in Section 6.
II.
RELATED WORKS
The similar model is actually reproduced by the various 
implementations  of  “Places”  services:  Twitter  places, 
Facebook  places,  etc.  For example,  as per official  page, 
Facebook places let you easily share where you are, what 
you're doing and the friends you're with right from your 
mobile.  You can check-in and your updates will appear on 
the Place page, your friends' News Feed and your Wall [2]. 
The business model is similar. You  can  check-in to get 
individual  discounts,  share  savings  with  friends,  earn 
rewards for repeated visits, secure donations for good causes, 
etc.  Figure  1  shows  a  typical  example  for  the  check-in 
record:
20
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

But here is at least one serious remark that remains true 
for all these services. All they are communication services at 
the first hand. And any check-in at the first hand solves 
communication tasks: how to let my friends/followers know 
where I am. The biggest question that remains is very simple 
and natural. Why do we ask business to deliver benefits via 
advertising some 3-rd party service? It looks very natural to 
let  business  define  the  format  that  should  be  used 
(exchanged) for benefits. It is actually the main idea our 
QRpon mobile service [3] was born from.  
In this paper, we present QRpon– a new mobile service 
aimed to help connect sales with social networks. We are 
going  to  replace  generic  check-ins  with  the  customized 
analogues. We are talking here about the check-ins used for 
the  benefits  delivery.  That  is  why  we  have  the  words 
“business-oriented” check-ins in the title. We are not going 
to replace (dismiss, etc.) existing check-ins, this service also 
does not touch locations, etc. We are talking below about the 
special (user generated actually) forms for check-ins, that 
could be used in exchanges for benefits.
     What are the advantages of suggested approach, what is 
missing the current models and why do we think it is a new 
model.  Currently  all  the  monetization  efforts  in  LBS 
applications [4] like Foursquare, Facebook Places, etc. are 
based on the attaching (connecting, linking) some deals to 
the locations. Each deal (badge) is a position at the first 
hand. It is simply due to originality of the above mentioned 
systems.  They  are  LBS  (location  based  systems) 
applications originally. But it is very easy to conclude, that 
in the real case any business could offer several deals within 
the same location simultaneously. So, actually we should 
check-in in the deals (products) rather then in the places. On 
the other hand, the ability for the businesses to create any 
“deal” (discount, advertising) by themselves is obviously a 
big advantage too. They do not need to wait for any external 
development, deals could be created on the fly, etc. The 
open API for QRpon system lets create mobile sites (deals) 
automatically,  getting  data  right  from  corporate  ERP 
system.
    The ability to collect stats directly from social network 
related to QRpons is the next big advantage. And we can 
note again as a big advantage the fact that statistical data is 
related to the products rather than to the places.
    QRpon does not introduce any new social network, does 
not introduce any new authorization system, etc. Having a 
Facebook account is fully enough for using  QRpon.
   Lastly,  QR-codes [5] simplify check-in process.
III.
THE QRPON MODEL
Let us start from the business side. Here QRpon offers a 
specialized CMS (content management system) that lets any 
business create a special mobile web site. This web site lets 
users automatically, just after confirming the identity, post 
business-defined information on the Facebook’s wall. In the 
exchange for this posting (action) mobile web site will show 
a  confirmation  for  the  benefits.  For  example,  coupon, 
discount info, etc. In other words – anything that could be 
presented to the staff on the business side for claiming the 
benefits. All elements in this approach are user-defined: the 
offer,  check-in info  (what  should be posted  to the net), 
confirmation  (badge)  and  even  the  rules  for  presenting 
badges.
How to present this mobile site for the potential users? It 
is  where  QR-codes  help  us.  CMS  lets  businesses  create 
mobile web site and an appropriate QR-code. Because it is 
mobile  web  (HTML5)  application  there  is  no  need  for 
downloading. Just scan QR-code and get URL opened. 
Let us recall that HTML5 represents the cornerstone for 
modern Web [6]. There are several APIs for complex web 
applications. For example, we can easily add location info 
to our check-in process. 
Automatically,  this  approach  supports  also  physical 
check-ins. There is no way to mark you “at this location” 
being actually nearby (based on GPS location) or even far 
away (via API). QR-code should be scanned, and it is a 
physical action that could be performed on-site only. 
So, for the business, this approach offered a mobile web 
site (sites – business can create more than one site, update 
them often, etc.), presented on-site with QR-code sticker, 
that lets visitors exchange posting in the social network (e.g., 
Facebook’s wall) for some benefits.  And all site’s aspects 
(what is presented on the site, what should be posted to the 
social network, what should be presented as a confirmation) 
are defined by the businesses themselves. Another possible 
explanation from the business point of view – try to think 
about the current check-in system (e.g., Foursquare) and just 
replace the standard posting (notice) from Foursquare with 
your own text. Obviously your potential users do not need to 
download (install) mobile application and do not need to 
register  in  some  new  service  (beyond  their  Facebook 
accounts).  And  another  important  difference  from 
Foursquare (Facebook, Twitter, etc.) check-ins is the need 
for the physical presence.
The  mobile  CMS  mentioned  here  is  really  simple. 
Practically, the business just needs to provide 3 pieces of 
text: the description (text for the first page of future mobile 
site – our offer and place for Facebook Connect button), the 
text that should be posted to social network and the text that 
should be displayed on the mobile site after the posting. So, 
the mobile site itself has got just two pages: the offer and the 
result (coupon, gift/discount info, etc.).  And the transition 
from the first page to the second pages posts data to social 
network.
CMS creates a mobile site as well as the QR-code for the 
link to that site. This QR-code could be placed anywhere on 
the business side (Fig. 2). So, for access to the benefits 
(coupons, discounts) potential users need scan it with own 
mobile phone.  QR code usage is very natural here. As per 
Google, the mobile phone acts as a cursor to connect the 
digital and physical worlds [7].
21
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Figure 2. QR-code for mobile site
This QR-code points to the generated mobile web site. 
As soon as QR-code is scanned it is just one click deal to 
open an appropriate mobile URL. The user will see the first 
page, created by QRpon CMS (offer).  After that user can 
confirm  (accept)  this  offer,  using  his/her  Facebook  ID. 
Mobile site uses Facebook Connect [8] here. 
So,  our  initial  screen  (offer)  is  user-defined  text 
(probably  images)  plus  automatically  added  Facebook 
Connect button. Actually it is some like Figure 3 shows (a 
screen shot from the service test page):
Figure 3. First screen
As soon user’s identity is confirmed, the status text (also 
defined previously in our mobile CMS) is posted to the 
user’s wall. And as a confirmation for that, mobile web site 
shows its second (final) page. It is a confirmation for getting 
benefits (coupon, discount info, etc). It could be presented to 
the staff at the business side, etc. Figure 4 illustrates this (the 
same text is already posted to user’s wall in Facebook).
Figure 4. Confirmation screen
So, all the steps in this process are: 
a) completely defined by the business 
b) do not use any intermediate site / service beyond the 
social network itself
It is a fully customized check-in process (or completely 
customized,  user  defined  badges  in  the terms  of exiting 
communication services).
IV.
QRPON ALGORITHM
QRpon service lets business completely customize check-
in  procedures:  define  an  offer,  check-in  text  (post) and 
badge (confirmation). It lets business ask clients check-in 
through  the  customized  mobile  web  application  and  get 
reward for that. Lets consumers post links (data) in social 
network and get bonus for that. 
Get coupons (bonuses, prizes, etc.) right on your mobile 
just  for  telling  your  friends  about  it.  Deliver  coupons 
(bonuses)  right  to  mobile  users  shared  info  about  your 
business. 
Thus  we  have:  bonus  for  link, on-site  check-in  for 
coupons, links building in the real world. Ask visitors to 
endorse your business in the social networks and deliver 
bonuses  (coupons,  discounts)  for  them.  Just  a  simple 
sequence of steps: create mobile web site with your offer, 
prepare QR code for it, put QR code on your desks, walls, 
product wrap, etc. Ask users to scan QR code (check-in) in 
order to get confirmation for the reward. All the software 
you need is here. 
Algorithm for business:
1. Create  a  mobile  web  site  with  your  offer  (coupon, 
discount info, prize, etc.). All the software you need is here. 
Just fill a simple form
22
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

2. Basically you need the following things for creating your 
mobile site:
•
your offer 
•
text for publishing in the social network 
•
response  (confirmation)  for  the  endorsement 
(coupon info, discount, prize, etc.) 
3. Create a site (web page) and QR code for it
4. Test this QR code and the whole process right from your 
desktop and/or mobile
5. Print QR code and use it on-site. Place it on the table, 
wall, product's wrap, etc.
6. That is all. Ask your visitors/clients to scan this code for 
the reward. As soon as he/she scans your QR code and login 
to the network, your text is getting published in user’s social 
circle (wall, timeline). And as a confirmation for that our 
service  provides  the  above-mentioned  response  (badge). 
This response (data on the mobile screen, mobile web page) 
could be presented to staff at business location and used for 
claiming benefits.
7. Create a new site (a new check-in procedure) for new 
product (offer, etc.). See step 1 above. 
Algorithm for consumer. 
1. Make sure you have QR-code reading application on your 
phone (it is free). 
2. Scan QR code from your iPhone, Android, etc on-site. 
3. Open suggested mobile web page.
4. Login with your Facebook ID (check-in)
5. See bonus (discount, prize, gift, etc.) info right on your 
mobile
6. Show this info to the staff on-site and claim your benefits
Thus, we have win-win case: business get social networks 
marketing, consumers get rewards.
V.
DISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
What could be added here in the future versions (or as 
some  premium  service)?  This  service  at  the  moment  of 
posting data to the social network has got access to the user’s 
social graph. And it is very important moment. It means, 
particularly, that we can program output (our confirmation 
page) depending on the social graph size for example.  For 
example,  the  more  friends  our  customer  has,  the  more 
potential readers will see our posting.  So, the benefits could 
be increased for example, etc. Actually we can make our 
final screen (confirmation) depending on the social graph 
data. 
In other words, the confirmation screen generation might 
be actually some production (rule based) system. It could be 
a set of rules (productions) like this:
 IF (some condition) THEN (some conclusion) 
where conditional part includes a set of logical operations 
against user’s social graph data and conclusion is our output 
(coupon, gift confirmation, etc.). So, we are going to say 
here, that our system could be actually some sort of expert 
systems  (production  based)  that  generates  conclusions 
(badges) by the social graph defined conditions.  And our 
store  for  rules  will  present  if  the  future  versions  some 
implementation of well known Rete algorithm [9-12]. 
The  Rete  algorithm is  an  efficient  pattern  matching 
algorithm for implementing production rule systems. The 
Rete algorithm provides a generalized logical description of 
an implementation of functionality responsible for matching 
data  tuples ("facts")  against  productions  ("rules")  in  a 
pattern-matching  production  system  (a  category  of  rule 
engine). A production consists of one or more conditions 
and a set of actions which may be undertaken for each 
complete set of facts that match the conditions. Conditions 
test fact attributes, including fact type specifiers/identifiers.
Also,  because  the  output  (badge)  is  actually 
programmatically controlled, it is very easy to add some 
randomness.  So,  our  output  (badge)  could  be  randomly 
varied.
Another interesting stuff for the future development is 
open API for this QRpon service. It lets any business prepare 
custom check-in sites right from ERP system for example. 
Collect some stuff (items) from ERP database for rewards 
and  create  mobile  web  sites  (check-ins)  for  them 
programmatically.
The next important thing here is the statistics. Obviously, 
that can collect the traditional web statistics for our mobile 
sites. For two pages site the most important value is the 
bounce rate – how many visitors do not accept the offer. But 
it  is  also  obvious,  that  the  proposed  approach  lets  us 
accumulate an interesting statistics for the business from the 
social networks point of view. Facebook API has got a TOS 
(terms of services), we can not simply log raw data, but even 
the accumulated info could be very interesting. Just because 
our application gets access to the basic social graph data at 
the moment our user accepts an offer we can accumulate for 
example sex-age histogram for our buyers, etc.
In the same time, TOS for social networks API let us 
keep ID’s for users. Just for keeping that info (without any 
data) we can easily discover new and returning user and 
easily implement such feature as “Majors” -  users with the 
most visits, or users with the most visits within the given 
interval. In other words all the functionality (related to the 
business delivery) check-ins in the modern communication 
services could be provided directly. We simply do not need 
any intermediate communication service (e.g., Foursquare) 
for that.
And of course, the above-mentioned statistics could be 
processed programmatically too and could be used in the 
badges-generation expert systems. For example, the output 
(badges) could depend on the current (past) performance too.
23
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

VI.
CONCLUSION
We presented a new service model for customized check-
ins.  This  model  lets  businesses  provide  own  forms  for 
badges exchangeable for some benefits (e.g., discounts, gifts, 
coupons) without the external communication services as 
well as own rules for badges generation. It provides actually 
a new approach for advertising in the social networks. In this 
approach  check-in  records  posted  as  exchange  for  some 
benefits (e.g., discounts, coupons, gifts) playing the role of 
ad messages. Finally, QRpon model presents mobile service 
that lets any business exchange some benefits for the clients 
with posting (advertising) in the social networks. 
This  service  does  not  require  downloadable  mobile 
applications  and  based  completely  on  the  mobile  web 
(HTML5). Via extensively used QR-codes this service builds 
a bridge between the virtual world of social networks and 
traditional retailing.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many thanks to  Petre Dini and the  anonymous AFIN-
2011 reviewers for reading and suggesting improvements to 
the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Washington Post (2009, March 18): "SXSW: Foursquare 
Scores Despite Its Flaws" http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/ 
content/article/2009/03/18/AR2009031802819.html
[2] Facebook Places (2011, May, 1): 
http://www.facebook.com/places/.
[3] Qrpon (2011, February 1): http://qrpon.linkstore.ru.
[4] A.C. de Paiva, E.F. Monteiro, J. J. Leal Rocha, C. de Souza 
Baptista, and A.C. Silva, “Location Information Management in 
LBS Applications”, Encyclopedia of Information Science and 
Technology, Second Edition, pp. 2450-2455, 2009
[5] BS ISO/IEC 18004:2006. Information technology. Automatic 
identification and data capture techniques. QR Code 2005 bar
code symbology specification. London: BSI., pp. 126, 2007 
[6] Geolocation API Specification (2010, September 7) 
http://www.w3.org/TR/geolocation-API/ 
[7] Google Will Connect the Digital & Physical Worlds Through
Mobile (2011, March 11) http://mashable.com/2011/03/11/mayer-
sxsw-talk/.
[8] Facebook Connect (2011, May 1):
http://developers.facebook.com/docs/guides/web/
[9] Rete Algorithm (2007, Dec 14):
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Expert_Systems/Rete_Algorithm
[10] C. Forgy, "Rete: A Fast Algorithm for the Many Pattern/Many 
Object Pattern Match Problem", Artificial Intelligence, 19, pp. 17-
37, 1982
[11] D.  Liu,  T.  Gu,  and  J.-Pi.  Xue,  “Rule  Engine  based  on 
improvement  Rete  algorithm” Apperceiving  Computing  and 
Intelligence  Analysis  (ICACIA),  2010 International  Conference, 
2010, pp. 346-349, 2010  
[12]  M.  Palomo,  F.J.  Martin-Mateos,  and  J.A.  Alonso,  “Rete 
Algorithm Applied to Robotic Soccer” R. Moreno Diaz et al. (Eds.): 
EUROCAST 2005, LNCS 3643, pp. 571–576, 2005
24
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

