WrEx - Wrist Exercise Trainer a System for Monitoring Physical Therapy Exercises
Daniel Silva
Department of Computer Science
NOVA School of Science and Technology
Lisbon, Portugal
email: dp.silva@campus.fct.unl.pt
Carmen Morgado
Department of Computer Science
NOVA School of Science and Technology
Lisbon, Portugal
email: cpm@fct.unl.pt
Fernanda Barbosa
Department of Computer Science
NOVA School of Science and Technology
Lisbon, Portugal
email: fb@fct.unl.pt
Abstract—Repetitive movements can be enough to cause joint
damage. This is a problem that often arises, in particular on
the hands and wrists, due to the intensive use of smartphones
and computers. That is why it is important to have tools and
apps that can help in some way, first in prevention and then in
possible injury recovery exercises. It is very interesting to have
the possibility to perform some types of prevention/treatment
exercises continuously over time, and not only when in a clinic
and in the presence of a healthcare professional. In this paper we
present a physiotherapy exercise monitoring system for the wrist
that can be used autonomously by patients. The system consists
of an interactive mobile application and a set of devices that will
be placed on the wrist and hand. The devices are able to detect
movements made by the wrist joint and send this information to
a mobile application. Through the application, the patient can
access a set of exercises, previously defined by a physiotherapist,
and have access to information collected in real time about the
exercises and also if they are being done correctly. Our system
also provides an application for physiotherapists where they can
monitor and manage the exercises performed by their patients.
Index Terms—Wrist Movements; Motion Sensors; Wearable
sensors; Mobile Computing; Interactive Mobile Application.
I. INTRODUCTION
Technological innovation has allowed the rise of new com-
munication and information technologies which are increas-
ingly replacing or extending in-person services with remote
services, since these are powerful tools capable of breaking
the barriers of time and space [1]. Telehealth services take
advantage of communication technologies, allowing patient
diagnosis to be made anywhere in the world and information
to be accessed, evaluated, and delivered through wireless
communication services.
Thus, the opportunity arises to explore new tools that aim to
contribute to this area, in order to promote greater convenience
and quality of health services. Through the integration of
devices that use simple and easy-to-use sensors, it is possi-
ble to perform measurements automatically and outside the
clinical environment, thus reducing the need for intervention
by specialised personnel.
The system presented in this paper aims to develop an
interactive mobile application that connects to a wearable
motion-sensing prototype to monitor physiotherapy exercises,
in particular musculoskeletal rehabilitation of the wrist. In
order to assess wrist mobility, four physiotherapy exercises are
evaluated: flexion and extension, as well as radial and ulnar
deviation, which can be performed with or without load, and
with the left or right hand. In these movements, the forearm
is fixed on a surface, and only the wrist joint is rotated, as
shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Measurement of physiotherapy movements of the wrist [3]. (a)
Flexion. (b) Extension. (c) Radial deviation. (d) Ulnar deviation
The wrist flexion and extension movements occur in the
sagittal plane at the radiocarpal and intercapal joints [2]. In
these exercises, the arm should be in pronation and the elbow
flexed to about 90° with the axis on the medial side of the
wrist. The wrist flexion consists of moving the hand downward
in a joint range between 0º-90º, the α angle illustrated in
Figure 1(a). Alternatively, wrist extension is the opposite
movement, in a joint amplitude between 0º-70º [3], angle β
shown in Figure 1(b).
The movements of radial deviation (abduction) and ulnar
deviation (adduction) of the wrist occur in the frontal plane.
The elbow must be flexed and the forearm in neutral position,
i.e., between supination and pronation with axis at the radio-
carpal joint, where forearm supination consists of rotating it
upwards, while pronation is the opposite movement, rotating
the forearm downwards. The radial deviation occurs when the
hand is moved upward, in a range of motion between 0º-
20º, angle γ shown in Figure 1(c) while ulnar deviation is
the opposite motion, with a range of motion between 0º and
45º [3], angle δ illustrated in Figure 1(d).
This paper presents the objectives and motivation that
inspired its development in Section 1, while Section 2 covers
an investigation of different projects and applications with
the aim of particularly improving the condition of the wrist
through physiotherapy exercises. Sections 3 and 4 describe the
system and the evaluations conducted to validate the system’s
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-093-3
AFIN 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

effectiveness and usefulness. Finally, Section 5 concludes and
describes future work.
II. RELATED WORK
The number of applications aimed at joint rehabilitation has
been increasing, with the goal of encouraging the practice
of physiotherapeutic movements in order to improve and
make the rehabilitation process more effective and attractive.
Sometimes these applications are only informative and for
communication between the physiotherapist and the patient,
with only a small percentage of these applications incorpo-
rating a sensor component that theoretically allows a more
effective treatment [4]. Through monitored exercises, or even
interactive games to capture the user’s attention and interest
over long periods of time, it is possible to enhance the patient’s
prevention and rehabilitation process.
The system presented in [5] integrates an Inertial Measure-
ment Unit (IMU) sensor to evaluate the amplitude of various
wrist movements, such as flexion, extension, ulnar and radial
deviation, as well as pronation and supination. The system
incorporates a micro-controller and an Android application to
process and visualise, respectively, the data obtained by the
sensors through Bluetooth communication. This work analysed
different ways to perform the measurements of the different
wrist movements, varying the positioning of the device on
the back of the hand, with the best results being obtained
when the device was placed at the central and end point of
the back of the hand. The results obtained in [5] indicate that
this device collected quite reasonable and acceptable data on
the amplitude of wrist movements.
In the work [6], the focus is on finger rehabilitation. In this
work, resistance-based sensors are used and compared with
inertial measurement unit sensors. The device presented in
this work was a glove consisting of three 6-axis IMU sensors
and two 2.2-inch flex sensors to detect the movement of the
finger joints. This system includes a graphical interface with
a 3D visualisation of a rectangle that moves according to
the movement made by the finger, which is very useful for
the patient to better understand how the movement is being
performed. In this study, they concluded that the IMU sensor
is the most suitable due to its higher accuracy and efficiency
in readings, as well as having a lower percentage of error
compared to resistance-based sensors.
Another interesting study is the use of a combination of
tele-rehabilitation technologies with advanced robotic tech-
nologies, allowing the development of semi-autonomous phys-
iotherapy training with greater control and complicity between
the professional and the patient [7]. The presented system
motivates the patient to perform certain wrist movements
through a rehabilitation robot controlled by a web application
via Internet protocol. The therapist can modify the parameters,
such as the limit of the angles of each movement, the speed
and the number of repetitions, and can supervise the exercise
in real time while the rehabilitation robot performs the desired
movement.
In general, there are many interesting and well accomplished
works for the intended purposes using different sensors, such
as inertial measurement units, flexible sensors, and tactile
sensors. The comparisons observed in these works regarding
the efficiency of the different types of sensors are useful to un-
derstand and study the best options to implement our system.
Some of the solutions presented have limitations due to not
using enough or adequate sensors, or sometimes the system
itself is not easy and convenient to be used autonomously
by the patient, as well as does not present graphical and
interactive interfaces in real time about the exercise that is
being performed. Thus, the system presented in this paper
intends to combine these features and present simple and
intuitive interfaces for both patients and physiotherapists in
order to promote better rehabilitation of the wrist joint. The
system uses two 9-axis IMU sensors that work together to
validate and correct the movement being performed.
III. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
WrEx trainer system consists of an interactive mobile ap-
plication capable of measuring and monitoring wrist phys-
iotherapy exercises through the use of a simple device with
sensors. The exercises considered are: flexion, extension, ulnar
deviation and radial deviation movements. The system can
be used with the assistance of a physiotherapist, as well as
autonomously and independently. In other words, this system
can be used in everyday life and outside of a clinical setting.
Supported exercises can be performed by both the right and
left wrist, with or without load.
A. System Architecture
The system consists of three main components, which
are: the wearable motion-sensing prototype component, the
application component, and the server and database component
(see Figure 2).
Figure 2. System architecture overview
The code that runs on the wearable prototype was devel-
oped in the Arduino IDE [8], the server in Spring Boot [9]
and the database is a MongoDB [10] instance. The mobile
application was developed in React Native [11], a framework
that allows hybrid application development. Since a Bluetooth
Low Energy (BLE) communication support is needed for
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-093-3
AFIN 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

the mobile device to communicate with the micro-controller,
and a 3D animation support for the physiotherapy movement
is also needed, the application was developed following a
simple workflow. This way, it was possible to install the Expo
animation libraries, as well as other native libraries, such as
the React Native BLE library Manager [12], which supports
BLE communication, that is essential for this application.
In general, the application communicates with the wearable
motion-sensing prototype component via BLE, as well as with
the server and database component using the Wi-Fi commu-
nication protocol to establish bi-directional connections.
B. Wearable Motion-Sensing Prototype
The component device with sensors consists of two boxes
and a powerbank, which supplies power to the system, as
illustrated in Figure 3. Box number 1 contains an ESP32
micro-controller and an IMU MPU9250 sensor that has as
the main function to assess whether there is movement of the
forearm during physiotherapy exercises, and box number 2
contains an IMU MPU9250 sensor that will measure the wrist
angles during all exercises.
Figure 3. Schematic of the wearable motion-sensing prototype
The placement of the device must be as follows: the box
number 1 should be in the area between the wrist and the
forearm and the box number 2 on the back of the hand, by
using elastic bands with velcro. This way the x-axis of the
sensor in the box with the number 2 goes along the arm, the
y-axis is perpendicular to the forearm, and the z-axis points
upwards. The angles that are measured relative to the wrist
movements correspond to the rotation about the y-axis. For
the sensor in the box with the number 1, all the axes are
considered, since it is necessary to detect when there is any
movement of the forearm.
1) Communication Between the Micro-controller and the
IMUs:
Communication between the ESP32 and the two
MPU9250 sensors is performed using a simple serial com-
munication protocol called I2C, which is composed of serial
data and serial clock signals [13]. In order to allow separate
communications with the sensors, each MPU9250 has its own
I2C address.
It is important to perform data fusion to get more reli-
able information after collecting the sensor values. This pre-
processing of the data is done in the micro-controller, so there
is no need for a connection between the prototype and the
server application or component to read and process the data
collected by the sensors. The library chosen to support the
communication between the IMU MPU9250 sensors and the
ESP32 micro-controller, as well as the processing of the data
obtained when collecting and filtering the sensor signals to
improve data quality, was created by hideakitai [14]. This
library also allows to apply the Madgwick filter [15], which
uses a quaternion representation of the orientation to describe
the orientation estimates [16].
2) Communication
Between
the
Micro-controller
and
the Application:
The communication between the micro-
controller of the wearable motion-sensing prototype and the
mobile application is done through the BLE communication
protocol. This communication protocol is widely used in the
IoT world and in systems integrating sensors, as it transmits
and receives small amounts of data, with low power consump-
tion, so it can easily work for long periods of time [17]. In
this communication, the ESP32 micro-controller acts as the
server and the client is implemented in the mobile device
application [18].
The composition of the data transmitted between the micro-
controller and the mobile device consists of a quaternion value
that is an average of about 63 readings performed by the sen-
sors during a time interval of approximately 508ms, followed
by the respective conversion to Euler angles. Therefore, the
size of the data sent to the application is around 40 bytes.
This data is used to visualize in the application the different
angles performed in real time, but only the values collected
during the validation time of the angle to be reached during
the exercise are sent to the server and stored persistently in
the database to be accessed by the physiotherapist, since the
purpose of the system is to evaluate and verify that the exercise
was well performed.
In this communication it was necessary to define an increase
in the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU). The method used
to increase the MTU limit was through packet length extension
(DLE) [19], introduced in Bluetooth 4.2.
The calibration of the accelerometer and gyroscope sensors
that are part of the two IMUs is performed after the commu-
nication is established.
C. Mobile Patient Application
The patient application provides a set of core functionalities
for the patient: (1) consult and begin a training plan and (2)
perform the physiotherapy exercise.
1) Training Plans and Physiotherapy Exercises: The pa-
tient has access to the training plans and respective exercises
proposed by the physiotherapist, as well as the interface to
perform each exercise. A plan is a set of exercises, where for
each exercise the type is defined, the angle to be reached, the
number of repetitions and sets, the time intervals to perform
each repetition and validate the objective angle, and also
in which of the wrists the patient must equip the sensor
component to perform the exercise. In the plan list interface,
it is possible to see which plans are available, unavailable,
completed and in progress, which means that a training plan
has been started and can be resumed. A plan is unavailable
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-093-3
AFIN 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

when the date set by the physiotherapist for its completion
has not yet arrived. On the other hand, plans are available and
can be performed when they have not yet been completed and
the date set for their completion is the current or previous
day. A completed plan cannot be repeated, which means
that the patient has completed the proposed physiotherapy
exercises and finished the plan. The physiotherapist can define
different training plans according to the patient’s physical
condition and based on the evaluations of previous plans, i.e.
whether the exercises previously performed by the patient were
successfully completed or whether problems or disabilities
occurred during their execution.
When a patient decides to perform a physiotherapy exercise,
an interface is presented to establish the connection between
the mobile device and the micro-controller, as well as to
perform the calibration of the sensors. After a successful cal-
ibration, the patient’s mobile app presents an interface where
the 3D model of the wrist or an interactive graph showing
the angle being performed is displayed, as well as all the
information needed to perform the exercise (see Figure 4). In
the interactive graphical interface, a circular graph is presented
and filled according to the angle performed by the wrist. The
colour of the graph changes from red, orange, yellow to green
as the value of the angle performed with the wrist approaches
the objective angle value. There is also other information, such
as progress bars for repetitions and sets, the time required
to perform each repetition, as well as coloured borders to
indicate correct and incorrect movements. In addition, there
are temporary messages that indicate the progress stages of
the exercise, such as whether a repetition has been started
or completed, or whether a movement is being validated or
is incorrect, with these messages being followed by different
sound effects that help alert the patient to these situations.
There is also a button to enable or disable the sound effects.
Figure 4. Patient’s mobile application interface and performance of exercises
with and without load. (a) Interactive graphic display while performing the
first repetition. (b) Exercise with load. (c) Exercise without load
2) Perform a Physiotherapy Exercise: Every repetition of
an exercise is started with the patient placing the hand that is
wearing the wearable motion detection prototype in a position
where the angle of inclination is 0° for a time interval of
three seconds. Then the repetition is started, the patient must
perform the exercise for a time interval determined by the
physiotherapist until the objective angle is reached. For the
repetition to be validated and successfully completed, when the
proposed objective angle of the exercise is reached, the patient
must hold the angle during a given time interval, defined by
physiotherapist. During the angle validation time, an average
of the angles performed with the wrist is calculated, which end
up being minimally different from each other, since the patient
has to keep the angle equal or very close to the objective angle,
with a 3º deviation.
The correct position of the forearm position is defined at
the beginning of each repetition, using the sensor placed on
the forearm. Thus, if the forearm rotates up to 10° on either
axis of the sensor, the movement is considered incorrect, so
the repetition is stopped until the posture is corrected. The
number of times the patient has been in an incorrect position
is counted during the execution of the exercise.
D. Mobile Physiotherapist Application
The purpose of the physiotherapist application is to allow
a more complete diagnosis of the patient’s condition, so it
provides a number of essential features for the physiothera-
pist: (1) search and view patient information (2) manage the
patient’s training plan and physiotherapy exercises (3) observe
the patient’s evolution.
The physiotherapist can check and evaluate the data and
statistics of the exercises performed by patients during a ses-
sion in the clinic, or afterwards, by accessing the management
area in the mobile app. It is possible to view the specific
angle values for each type of exercise, which means that it is
possible to identify which angle values are reached during the
movements and therefore check whether the target angle has
been achieved. The execution times and the number of failures
for each repetition of a given set performed by the patient are
also displayed. Thus, the physiotherapist can carefully monitor
patients, adapting new physiotherapy plans and exercises based
on an analysis of the exercises already performed.
Each physiotherapist can access and observe any physiother-
apy plans and exercises, but can only create, edit and delete
physiotherapy exercises from plans created by themselves, as
well as edit and delete plans of their own authorship.
The interface to observe a patient’s progress during the
physiotherapy exercises includes a bar graph with the different
angles achieved during the various repetitions that can be
filtered by a certain set to allow a more focused evaluation
of the progress in that set, general statistics, and a list with
detailed information about each repetition, such as the time
used to complete the repetition, the angle reached, and the
number of faults. The general statistics has information about
the number of successfully completed repetitions, the total
number of faults during the movements, the average of the
angles performed in the repetitions, and also the average time
interval for the execution of the movement.
The physiotherapist can also observe the movements made
by the patient during the physiotherapy exercises through the
animation of a 3D model of the wrist (see Figure 5). This
model was provided by Hugo Colauto through the Sketchfab
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-093-3
AFIN 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Figure 5. Wrist 3D model. (a) Interface when all repetitions and sets have
been completed. (b) Wireframe and material preview
platform licensed under CC BY 4.0, which is imported into
the Blender software to add a skeleton, which consists of two
interconnected bones, where one bone is associated with all
vertices of the hand region of the model, and the other bone
to the remaining vertices of the model in order to deform the
mesh.
IV. EVALUATION
Several tests were performed to find the best way to use and
position the wearable motion-sensing prototype component
on the wrist in order to obtain more accurate readings, as
well as provide more comfort and less interference during
physiotherapy movements. Also, an evaluation of the patient
and physiotherapist mobile applications was performed to
ensure that each component of the system was performing
well, such as integration testing and usability testing.
1) Sensor Placement: The placement of the sensor located
in the box with the number 2 (see Figure 3), which was used to
measure the wrist angle values, was tested in 3 locations on the
back of the hand: the central area, an area closer to the fingers,
and another area closer to the wrist. The central region of the
hand proved to be the most suitable for measuring the angles
of the four physiotherapy exercises within their respective
limits, which are the maximum angles that can be achieved
in each exercise, without introducing significant errors. Some
complications occurred during the flexion movement when the
sensor was placed closer to the fingers, due to the fact that the
sensor hardly made readings of angles above 70º. On the other
hand, there were some problems during the ulnar deviation
movement when the sensor was placed closer to the wrist,
with the problem again being related to the sensor’s inability to
take readings from certain angles, in this case reaching angles
above 30º. The sensor in box number 1, was placed between
the wrist and forearm area, and proved to be able to perform
its function of detecting any movement of the forearm.
A. Measurement Evaluation and Correction
Some experiments were conducted to determine if the
wearable motion-sensing prototype component is collecting
and processing the motion orientation data correctly. Three
different angles were chosen for each physiotherapy exercise
and ten repetitions were performed for each angle. The goal
of these measurements is to evaluate whether the proposed
angles were achieved correctly, that is, whether the values of
the angles measured by the sensors correspond to the actual
angle made by the wrist.
In general, the system proved to be both suitable and correct
in reading the different values of the angles defined for each
physiotherapy exercise, and the angles obtained oscillated very
close to the objective angle and within the defined limit of 3º.
B. Usability Testing of Mobile Application
In order to evaluate the patient and physiotherapist appli-
cation and obtain feedback from users, a set of user stories
were described, consisting of descriptions of tasks with the
information needed to accomplish them. An examiner was
present during the test to note any difficulties or problems that
the user might encounter. A questionnaire was conducted and
the System Usability Scale (SUS) [20] was used, which is a
reliable tool for measuring usability and provides an overview
of subjective usability.
1) Patients: The tests were performed on twelve patients,
aged between 21 and 60, and the results were positive.
Navigation and interaction with the different interfaces
of the application were positive and all patients were able
to easily access their plans and exercises, as well as start
a physiotherapy plan and exercise without any difficulty.
Overall, the wearable motion-sensing prototype was found
to be comfortable and easy to use. The interactive graphical
component was very well received and the sound effects were
considered useful, as the patient did not have to be fully aware
of the visual interface of the application to understand the
status of the exercise while performing the movement.
Some questions were asked about the experience of us-
ing the system. The questions asked were as follows: (1)
whether it was intuitive and easy to access the plan page
and begin a physiotherapy exercise; (2) whether the wearable
motion-sensing prototype was comfortable and easy to use;
(3) whether the process of connecting the prototype wearable
motion sensor to the mobile device and calibrating the sensors
was easy; and (4) whether the exercise performance interface
was useful and intuitive for completing the exercise success-
fully. Overall, as shown in the Figure 6, the responses ranged
from 4 to 5 on a scale of 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 5 (Strongly
Agree), with only the opinion on the usefulness and intuition
of the interface for performing one of the exercises having
some responses with a less good rating (3 out of 5). This way,
the evaluation was positive and most of the comments and
observations were related to the design of the interface and
the way the information is presented in the interface, and not
to the performance of the functionalities of the system. Based
on the feedback, some changes were made to the system to
improve the user experience.
Regarding the System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire
given to the patients, the score was 83.3%, which on that scale
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-093-3
AFIN 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Figure 6. Patient evaluation graph
is equivalent to a good rating, being very close to excellent,
which would be above 85.5%.
2) Physiotherapist: The tests were performed with a spe-
cialist at a clinic that provides specialised, individual and
personalised physical therapy treatments.
The physiotherapist was able to easily access and manage
the physiotherapy plans and exercises for a given patient, as
well as identify and access the page showing the patient’s
progress throughout a given exercise. The creation of both the
plans and exercises was successfully performed, and there was
no difficulty in filling out the fields on the forms. Overall, the
results were positive.
The physiotherapist suggested that it would be interesting
to extend the system to also work with closed kinetic chain
exercises, since currently the system only supports open chain
exercises for the wrist, which consist of moving the distal part
of the body, such as the hands.
Finally, the physiotherapist was also asked to answer the
questionnaire presented by SUS, and the result was 75%,
which on the scale is equivalent to a good.
V. CONCLUSION
The system allows a patient to perform physiotherapy
exercises in a more controlled and correct way, using the
application together with the sensor prototype at any time,
autonomously and without any restriction. On the other hand,
the physiotherapist can evaluate and follow the evolution of
the patients during the rehabilitation process.
The sensor component is affordable so that it can be acces-
sible and used by any physiotherapist and patient, and overall
it is easy to use, with reduced volume and weight, in order
to not limit or constrain any of the physiotherapy movements.
The system performed well during the testing phase, being
able to correctly reach and measure the angle values during
physiotherapy exercises, and the results obtained in the tests
performed with patients and physiotherapist were positive.
The patient has all the information needed to complete the
exercises, and the physiotherapist has access to an interface
that provides the results of the patient’s progress immediately
upon its completion.
In the future, it would be interesting to include new physio-
therapy exercises for the wrist and integrate new sensor devices
to detect bad postures while performing movements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by NOVA LINCS through
the FC&T grant UIDB/04516/2020.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Tachakra , X.H. Wang, R.S. Istepanian, and Y.H. Song, ”Mobile
e-Health: The Unwired Evolution of Telemedicine,” In: Telemedicine
Journal and e-Health 9.3 (2004), pp. 247–257, doi: 10.1089/15305620
3322502632 (cit. on p. 1).
[2] J. Eschweiler et al, ”Anatomy, Biomechanics, and Loads of the
Wrist Joint,” In: Life 12.2 (Jan. 2022), p. 188, issn: 2075-1729. doi:
10.3390/life12020188 (cit. on p. 2).
[3] A. G. de Sa´ude LTDA, ”Goniometry Manual Measurement of Joint
Angles,” 2016, retrieved August 30, 2023, from https://acegs.com.br/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/MANUAL-DE-GONIOMETRIA-FINAL.pdf.
[4] R. Nussbaum, C. Kelly, E. Quinby, A. Mac, B. Parmanto, and B.E.
Dicianno, “Systematic Review of Mobile Health Applications in Reha-
bilitation,” In: Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 100.1
(2019), pp. 115– 127, issn: 0003-9993, doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2018.07.439.
[5] F.J. Hiung and I.M. Sahat, “Development of wrist monitoring device
to measure wrist range of motion,” In: IOP Conference Series: Ma-
terials Science and Engineering 788.1 (Apr. 2020), p. 012033, doi:
10.1088/1757- 899X/788/1/012033 (cit. on pp. 3, 42).
[6] M. Hazman et al, “IMU sensor-based data glove for finger joint
measurement,” In: Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science 20 (Oct. 2020), pp. 82–88, issn: 2502-4752,
doi:10.11591/ijeecs.v20.i1.pp82-88 (cit. on p. 4).
[7] I.B. Abdallah, Y. Bouteraa, and C. Rekik, “Web-based robot control
for wrist telerehabilitation,” In: 2016 4th International Conference on
Control Engineering & Information Technology (CEIT), Dec. 2016, pp.
1–6, doi: 10.1109/CEIT.2016.792 9100 (cit. on p. 4).
[8] M. Banzi et al, ”Arduino IDE,” retrieved August 30, 2023, from
https://www.arduino.cc/.
[9] VMware,
”Spring
Boot,”
retrieved
August
30,
2023,
from
https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot.
[10] MongoDB
Inc,
”MongoDB,”
retrieved
August
30,
2023,
from
https://www.mongodb.com/.
[11] Facebook,
”React
Native,”
retrieved
August
30,
2023,
from
https://reactnative.dev/.
[12] M. Sinigaglia, M. Munaretto, ”react-native-ble-manager,” retrieved
August
30,
2023,
from
https://github.com/innoveit/react-native-ble-
manager.
[13] N. Semiconductors, “I2C-bus specification and user manual,” In: NXP
Semiconductors 4 (2014) (cit. on p. 53).
[14] H. Tai, 2018, Arduino library for MPU9250 Nine-Axis (Gyro +
Accelerometer + Compass) MEMS MotionTracking Device, retrieved
August 30, 2023, from https://github.com/hideakitai/MPU9250.
[15] S. Madgwick, “An efficient orientation filter for inertial and iner-
tial/magnetic sensor arrays,” In: Report x-io and University of Bristol
(UK) 25 (2010), pp. 113–118 (cit. on p. 27).
[16] C. Gordon, “Quaternion Representation of 3D Orientation and Rotation
for Sensor Fusion Applications,” In: 2021 (cit. on p. 52).
[17] S. Al-Sarawi, M. Anbar, K. Alieyan and M. Alzubaidi, ”Internet of
Things (IoT) communication protocols: Review,” 2017 8th International
Conference on Information Technology (ICIT), Amman, Jordan, 2017,
pp. 685-690, doi: 10.1109/ICITECH.2017.8079928.
[18] F. J. Dian, A. Yousefi and S. Lim, ”A practical study on Bluetooth
Low Energy (BLE) throughput,” 2018 IEEE 9th Annual Information
Technology, Electronics and Mobile Communication Conference (IEM-
CON), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2018, pp. 768-771, doi: 10.1109/IEM-
CON.2018.8614763.
[19] K. T’Jonck, B. Pang, H. Hallez, and J. Boydens, “Optimizing the
Bluetooth Low Energy Service Discovery Process,” In: Sensors 21.11
(2021), p. 3812. issn: 1424-8220, doi: 10.3390/s21113812.
[20] J. Brooke, ”SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale,” 1995, Usability
Eval. Ind, 189.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-093-3
AFIN 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

