Borel Cayley Graph-based Topology Control for
Power Efﬁcient Operation in Ad Hoc Networks
Abdellatif Serhani
RAI2S, INPT
University of Mohammed V
Rabat, Morocco
abdollatiif@gmail.com
Najib Naja
RAI2S, INPT
University of Mohammed V
Rabat, Morocco
naja@inpt.ac.ma
Abdellah Jamali
RI2M, ENSA
University of Hassan I
Settat, Morocco
abdellah.jamali@uhp.ac.ma
Abstract—In this paper, we focus on the design of network
topology control algorithm in wireless ad hoc networks. We
approach topology control with the well known Borel Cayley
Graphs (BCGs), a family of pseudo-random graphs. BCGs have
been shown to be an efﬁcient candidate topology in interconnec-
tion networks due to their small diameter, short path length and
low degree. We consider the problem of adjusting the transmit
powers of nodes before assigning IDs of Borel Cayley Graphs
as logical topologies in wireless ad hoc networks. We compare
the performance of our algorithm with other existing topology
control algorithms. Our simulation indicates that the proposed
ID assignment has a better performance compared with other
assignment methods.
Index Terms—Distributed algorithms, power management,
Borel Cayley Graph, Topology Control
I. INTRODUCTION
A multihop wireless networks, such as radio networks, ad
hoc networks, and sensor networks, are networks where a
packet may have to traverse multiple consecutive wireless links
in order to reach its destination. Mobile Ad hoc NETwork
(MANET) is a mobile, multihop wireless network which is ca-
pable of autonomous operation. It is characterized by energy-
constrained nodes, bandwidth-constrained, variable-capacity
wireless links and dynamic topology, leading to frequent and
unpredictable connectivity changes.
The absence of a central infrastructure implies that an
ad hoc network does not have an associated ﬁxed topology.
Indeed, topology control, deﬁned by how to determine an
appropriate topology over which high-level routing protocols
are implemented, has emerged to be one of the most important
issues in wireless multi-hop networks [1]. Topology control
is important in wireless ad hoc networks for at least two
reasons: (i) It affects networks spatial reuse and hence the
trafﬁc carrying capacity, and (ii) It impacts on contention for
the medium and hence mitigates MAC-level interference.
The topology depends on ”uncontrollable” factors, such
as node mobility, weather, interference, noise, as well as on
”controllable” parameters, such as transmit power and antenna
direction [2]. Then, several topology control algorithms lie in
the fact that each node can potentially change the network
topology by changing the transmit powers to control its set
of neighbors [2] [4] [5]. Whereas, other techniques react on
routing mechanisms, based on predeﬁned metrics, that efﬁ-
ciently deal with changes in the topology due to uncontrollable
factors.
According to [3], topology control algorithms can be clas-
siﬁed as location-based, direction-based, or neighbor-based
approaches. In each of these approaches, a resulting topology
is returned by the topology control algorithm in an ad hoc
manner. However, since these approaches do not generate a
predeﬁned graph, there is no guarantee on the topology’s
overall properties, such as a bounded diameter and average
path length.
In this paper, we approach topology control with predeﬁned
structured graphs. We react on adjusting transmission power
to reduce interference and hence expanding the network’s
lifespan. Thus, we achieve higher throughput as compared
to schemes that use ﬁxed transmission power [6]. Structured
graphs have been studied for a long time and are good
candidates for interconnection networks [7]. Various graph-
based interconnection networks have been studied and used
as good physical topologies for wavelength routing lightwave
networks [7]. In peer-to-peer overlay network schemes, various
predeﬁned structured graphs are used to form a P2P overlay.
The proposed systems utilize the properties of the graph to
form the overlay network and develop a routing algorithm.
Examples of P2P overlay networks include Arrangement-
Graph Overlay (AGO) to reduce system overhead and bind
routing hops [8], k ring lattices with Chords [9], and PeerStar
by utilizing the star interconnection network as a peer to
peer topology [10]. Graph-based wireless sensor networks
have also been explored by other researches [11] [12]. In
general, a predeﬁned graph topology with its deterministic
connection rule facilitates performance analysis. In addition,
some offer symmetry, hierarchy, and hamiltonicity, and can
have a constant low degree and existing distributed routing
protocol, all preferable properties for ad hoc networks.
This paper features three major contributions.
Fistly, we focus on Borel Cayley graphs (BCG), a member
of Cayley graph family [13], and we are interested in the
problem of imposing and overlying the physical topology,
deﬁned by the transmission range of each node, by the logical
topology dictated by our BCGs. We focus on this theoretic
structure graphs because of their relatively small diameter
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-920-1
AFIN 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

and low constant degree. Furthermore, these graphs also have
a small average hop count between nodes and a simple
distributed routing algorithm [14]. Let V denote the collection
of nodes and let G denote the physical graph on V in which
there is an edge from node u to node v if and only if u can
directly reach v. when running our topology control algorithm,
each node in V can be assigned an ID of the entire BCGs, and
in result returning an undirected subgraph TBCG, such that (i)
TBCG consists of all the nodes in G but has fewer edges,
(ii) if u and v are connected in G, they are still connected in
TBCG, and (iii) a node u can transmit to all its neighbors
in TBCG using less power than is required to transmit to
all its neighbors in G. Secondly, in our topology control
algorithm, each node u in the network constructs its neighbor
set N(u) = {v|(u, v) ∈ T} in a distributed fashion. Finally,
if TBCG changes to TBCG’ due to node failures or mobility,
our topology control algorithm reconstructs automatically a
connected TBCG’ without global coordination.
The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the
deﬁnition and properties of BCGs and gives preliminaries on
outdoor radio propagation and the power consumption model.
In Section 3, we present our distributed topology control
algorithm. Section 4 describes network simulation results that
show the effectiveness of the algorithm. Finally, Section 5
summarizes our contributions and conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
Topology Control (TC) is deﬁned as communication nodes
having the ability to modify or select their neighbors or
connections (i.e. active links) at their will. This allows each
node to be part of the network, based on its own judgment of
constraints and resources for optimum operation. A network
topology is formed in an ad hoc manner based on nodes’ lo-
cation, direction, or some sort of neighbor ordering. Topology
control also aims at achieving speciﬁc design goals such as en-
ergy efﬁciency and interference mitigation by selecting logical
neighbors and adjusting the transmission power accordingly.
In [15], Blough et al provided a K-Neigh topology con-
trol algorithm in which a node chooses k closest physical
neighbors as logical neighbors. K-Neigh is a basic neighbor-
based topology control protocol based on the construction
of k-neighbor graph as logical communication graph that
guarantees an interference bounded topology connected with
high probability, provided the maximum power topology (i.e.,
the graph obtained when all the nodes transmit at maximum
power) is connected. K-Neigh is a simple, fully distributed,
asynchronous, and localized protocol. The overall number of
messages exchanged by K-Neigh is exactly two times of the
number of nodes and the execution time is strictly bounded.
In [16], Wattenhofer et al. described the XTC topology
control algorithm which is one of the few topology control
protocols which are location-free. XTC is based on ranking
information between nodes. Their algorithm try to remove
long links while preserving network connectivity to force
nodes to use multiple short hops, which saves energy and
prolongs network lifetime. Their technique does not assume
location information, neither does it require the network to
be a Euclidean graph. The XTC algorithm consists of three
steps. In the ﬁrst step, each node broadcasts once at the
maximum power and then ranks all its neighbors according
to its link quality to them (from high to low). Each node
transmits its ranking results to neighboring nodes during the
second step. In the ﬁnal step, each node locally examines all of
its neighbors in the order of their ranking and decides which
one needs to be directly linked. The XTC algorithm features
the basic properties of topology control such as symmetry
and connectivity while running faster than most previous
algorithms.
Ning Li et al. [17] presented a Minimum Spanning Tree
(MST) based topology control algorithm, called Local Min-
imum Spanning Tree (LMST). Nodes in LMST topology
control algorithm construct a local minimal spanning tree with
a bounded logical node degree and establish bidirectional link
with a guaranteed connectivity. Each node builds its local
MST independently and only keeps on-tree one-hop nodes as
its neighbors. Their approach tries to minimize the overhead
to maintain a connected topology in a dynamic wireless ad
hoc network which the degree of any node in the resulting
topology can be bounded by 6. The bounded degree on each
node is desirable because a small degree reduces the MAC
level contention and interference.
Ramanathan et al. [2] proposed to adjust incrementally node
transmit powers in response to topological changes so as to
maintain a connected topology using minimum power. Using
(bi)connectivity as their objective, They described optimal
centralized algorithms and distributed heuristics for transmit
power control. In a mobile ad hoc network, they proposed a
two distributed heuristics for topology control, namely Local
Information No Topology (LINT) and Local Information
Link-State Topology (LILT). In the the former, each node
checks periodically the number of active number of neighbors
(degree) in its neighbor table (built by the routing mechanism)
and adjust the transmit powers based on the formula 1 to
reduce the power.
pd = pc − 5.E.log(dd
dc
)
(1)
where dd, dc, pc and pd denote, respectively, the desired
degree, the current degree, the current transmit power of a
node, and the targeted power. The propagation loss function
varies as some E power of distance.
In these techniques and in many other TC techniques,
such as Common power (COMPOW) protocol [19], cone
based topology control (CBTC) [4], extended topology con-
trol (XTC) [16], K-Neigh topology control and adaptive
neighbor-based topology control (ANTC) [18], a network
topology is formed in ah hoc manner to retain a minimum
number of interconnections among the nodes that can com-
municate by expending very little energy. However, since
these approaches do not generate a predeﬁned graph, there
is no guarantee on the topology’s overall properties such as
a bounded diameter and average path length. Furthermore,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-920-1
AFIN 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

producing a degree bounded network topology that preserves
connectivity in the worst-case is a challenge [15]. In other
words, the goals of preserving worst-case connectivity and
having a nontrivial upper bound on the physical node degree
inherently conﬂict with each other.
Motivated by this observation, we tackle the TC problem
with the goal of generating a network topology by imposing a
predeﬁned well-known BCGs graph topology with a constant
low-degree dBCG. More precisely, we produce a network
topology in which the physical node degree as well as the
logical node degree are upper bounded by exactly the same
BCG degree dBCG by adjusting the transmit power for each
node and its d-neighborhoods.
III. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we provide a brief summary of the deﬁnition
and important properties of Cayley graphs, and Borel Cayley
graphs [13].
A. Cayley Graph
A Cayley graph is a special family of pseudo-random
graphs constructed from a ﬁnite group of elements which
correspond to the nodes of the graph [14]. Connections
between nodes of Cayley graphs are deﬁned by the group
operation and a set of generators. The formal deﬁnition of
Cayley graphs is as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 (Cayley graph [14]). A graph C = C(V, G) is
a Cayley Graph with vertex set V if two nodes v1, v2 ∈ V
are adjacent ⇔ v1 = v2 ∗ g for some g ∈ G, where (V, ∗) is
a ﬁnite group and G ⊂ V \{I}. G is called the generator set
of the graph and I is the identity element of the ﬁnite group
(V, ∗).
The deﬁnition of Cayley graph requires vertices to be
elements of a group but does not specify a particular group.
Thus, a Cayley graph can be generated over an arbitrary ﬁnite
group, and there are many varieties of Cayley graphs.
B. Borel Cayley Graph
The Borel Cayley graphs (BCGs) are Cayley graphs
constructed from Borel subgroups. The BCGs are regular,
vertex
transitive,
and
pseudo-random
graphs
[14].
The
deﬁnition of a Borel subgroup is given below.
Deﬁnition 2 (Borel subgroup [14]). Let V
be a Borel
subgroup, BL2(Zp), of the nonsingular upper triangular
2 × 2 matrices GL2(Zp) with a parameter a such that
a ∈ Zp\{0, 1}, then
V =
 x
y
0
1

: x ≡ at(mod p), y ∈ Zp, t ∈ Zk

(2)
where p is prime, and k is the smallest positive integer
such that ak ≡ 1(mod p).
Deﬁnition 3 (Borel Cayley graph (BCG) [14]). Let V
be a Borel subgroup, and let G be a generator set such that
G ⊆ V \{I}; then B = B(V, G) is a Borel Cayley graph with
vertices for the 2 × 2 matrix elements of V and with directed
edge from v to u if u = v ∗ g, where u ̸= v ∈ V, g ∈ G, and
∗ is a modulo-p multiplication chosen as a group operation.
Note that n =| V |= p × k, where k is a factor of p − 1.
C. Node representation
Generalized Chordal Rings (GCR) [20] and the more
specialized Chordal Rings (CR) [21], on the other hand, are
two existing topologies that are deﬁned in the integer domain
and have a systematic and regular structure.
Deﬁnition 4 (Generalized chordal ring (GCR) [20]). A
graph is a generalized chordal ring if its nodes can be labeled
with integers mod n, the number of nodes, and there is a
divisor q of n such that node i is connected to node j iff
node i + q is connected to node j + q (mod n).
According to this deﬁnition, nodes of GCR are classiﬁed
into q classes, each class with n/q elements. The classiﬁcation
is based on modulo q arithmetic. Two node having the same
residue (mod q) are considered to be in the same class. Since
i connects to j implies i+q connects to j +q (mod n), nodes
in the same class have the same connection rules deﬁned by
the connection constants or GCR constants. When the GCR
constants for the different classes are known, connections of
the entire graph are deﬁned.
A chordal ring (CR) is a special case of GCR, in which
every node has +1 and −1 modulo n connections. In other
words, all nodes on the circumference of the ring are connected
to form a Hamiltonian cycle. A Hamiltonian cycle is a graph
cycle through a graph that visit each node exactly once.
This GCR representation is useful for routing because nodes
are deﬁned in the integer domain and there is a systematic
description
of
connections.
An
interesting
proposition,
given in [14], provided an explicit algorithm to transform any
Cayley graph into GCR. We restate this proposition as follows:
Proposition
1
For
any
ﬁnite
Cayley
graph,
C,
with
vertex set V , and any T ∈ V such that T m = I, there exists
a GCR representation of C with divisor q = n/m where
n =| V |.
The element T is refereed to as the transform element and
it can be any element in the vertex set V . The elements of the
group are then partitioned into q classes by premultiplying the
transform element with the representing element of each class
ai.
Any vertex v ∈ V is represented with T and ai as follows
[13]:
v = T j ∗ ai
(3)
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-920-1
AFIN 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

0
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Fig. 1. Borel Cayley Graph with p = 7, a = 2,, and k = 3
Thus, there is a function that maps the Borel subgroup onto
integer domain of GCR numbered between 0 and n−1, where
n is the number of elements in the Borel subgroup:
f :
V
→
N
T j ∗ ai → q ∗ j + i
(4)
D. Example (BCG with p = 7, a = 2,, and k = 3)
Figure
1 shows an example of Cayley graphs over
BL2(Zp) with a = 2 and p = 7. for degree-4 graphs,
there are four generators: A, B, A−1 and B−1. Let
A =
 1
1
0
1

and B =
 2
1
0
1

. Note that in this case,
we have k = 3, p = 7, n = p×k = 21 and the diameters is 3.
We arbitrarily choose the transform element T =
 1
1
0
1

with T7 = I (mod p) to produce a GCR representation.
Furthermore, we choose the representing element of class i
to be ai =
 ai
0
0
1

, i = 0, ..., q − 1. Since m = 7, the
divisor q = n/m = 3. Let V = {0, 1, ..., 20}. For any i ∈ V,
if i mod 3 =:
”0”: i is connected to i + 3, i − 3, i + 4, i − 10 (mod 21);
”1”: i is connected to i + 6, i − 6, i + 7, i − 4 (mod 21);
”2”: i is connected to i + 9, i − 9, i + 10, i − 7 (mod 21);
E. The power consumption model
Transmit power control has been recently proposed as a
technique to increase network capacity and to reduce energy
consumption in ad hoc network. Decreasing the nodes’ trans-
mission power with respect to the minimum level potentially
has two positive effects: (i) increasing the nodes’ energy
consumption, and (ii) increasing the spatial reuse, with a
positive overall effect on network capacity.
Although, the current literature on topology control has
focused attention on energy consumption, trying to adjusting
the transmit powers of nodes or to minimizing the energy cost
in order to create a desired topology [2] [5]. In these works, the
general idea is that increasing spatial reuse by providing upper
bounds on the node degree in the ﬁnal network topology. The
rationale for considering node degree is that, if a node has rela-
tively small degree, it will experience relatively low contention
when accessing the wireless channel. Thus, the spatial reuse is
increased, as well as network capacity. However, since these
approaches do not generate a predeﬁned graph, there is no
guarantee on the ﬁnal topologys bounded degree. Furthermore,
producing a degree bounded network topology that preserves
connectivity in the worst-case is impossible [15]. In other
words, the goals of preserving worst-case connectivity and
having a nontrivial upper bound on the physical node degree
inherently conﬂict with each other.
Ramanathan and Rosales-Hain [2] propose an ingenious dis-
tributed topology control algorithm for transmit power control.
For mobile networks, they present two distributed heuristics
that adaptively adjust node transmit powers in response to
topological changes and attempt to maintain a connected
topology using minimum power. The idea in [2] inspires us to
let each node adjusting their transmit powers before running
our TC algorithm, and thus assuring a minimum network
lifetime.
As in [2], each node is conﬁgured with two parameters,
the ’desired” node degree that is the BCG’ degree dBCG, and
the current degree dc that is the number of active neighbors
in its neighbor table (built by the routing mechanism). The
node in the network attempts to adjust its operational power
periodically. If the current degree is greater than dBCG, the
node reduces its operational power. If the degree is less than
dBCG, the node increases its operational power. If neither is
true, no action is taken.
Based on the well-known generic model for propagation
[22], by which the propagation loss function varies as some E
power of distance, Ramanathan et al. [2] derive the formula
to reduce the power. Speciﬁcally, if dd, dc, pc and pd denote,
respectively, the desired degree, the current degree, the current
transmit power of a node, and the targeted power. Equation 1
computes transmit power pd so that the node has the desired
degree dd.
In our system, we use E = 4 and dd = dBCG. Equation
1 can thus be used to calculate the new power periodically.
We note that the formula applies for both power increase and
decrease to bring the degree close to dBCG.
IV. DISTRIBUTED NETWORK PROTOCOL
Mobility is a prominent characteristic of MANETs, and
is the main factor affecting topology changes and route in-
validation. Thus, node ID assignment becomes an important
issue. An effective assignment allows most connections to be
imposed and hence having most of the communication links of
the original theoretic graph while preserving a small diameter
and average path lengths.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-920-1
AFIN 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

A. Terminologies
We denote the logical node ID of node u in BCG by uid
and deﬁne the following.
1) N(u): Set of physical neighbors of node u.
2) D(uid): Set of logical neighbors of node uid in BCG
graph.
3) T (uid): Set of logical neighbors of node uid in BCG
graph that aren’t yet assigned to u’s physical neighbors.
4) L(u): Set of logical IDs of node u’s physical neighbors.
5) F(v, uid) = |D(uid) ∩ L(v)|: the number of logical
neighbors of uid that are also logical IDs of node v’s
physical neighbors.
We deﬁne three different packet types.
1) Token Assignment packet: forwarded by nodes and
used to initiate the distributed node ID assignment
algorithm. the node that starts the operation sets an as-
signment counter ACnt to N. As the Token Assignment
reach node v, ACnt decreased by one before forwarding
the token to the next node, and assignment algorithm
ends once ACnt reaches 0.
2) Request Info packet: Used by the node u holding the
Token Assignment to broadcast T (uid) to its physical
neighbors so as to identify those who do not yet have
their ID.
3) Reply Info packet: if a physical neighbor node v,
without any ID assigned yet, receiving a Request Info
packet from node u, it sends a Reply Info packet to node
u. The Request Info packet contains a list of F(v, xid)
for each xid proposed by u.
B. Algorithm
The distributed node ID assignment involves the following
algorithm:
(i) Periodically, each node checks the number of active
neighbors (degree) in its neighbor table built by routing
mechanism. Equation 1 can thus be used to adjust transmit
power to bring the degree close to dBCG.
(ii) Assignment operation after node u received a Token
Assignment packet.
Step 1: Node u received a Token Assignment packet.
1) If any ID uid not yet assigned to u it takes randomly
an uid ranging from 0 to N − 1.
2) Send a Request Info packet to all its physical neighbors
so as to identify those who do not yet have their IDs.
Step 2: Node u collects the Reply Info packets.
1) If there is no Reply Info packet received, forward the
Token packet randomly to one of its physical neighbors.
2) Having received a list of F(v, xid), v ∈ N(u) and xid ∈
T (uid), from their physical neighbors. Node u grouped
them for each proposed xid ∈ T (uid) and sort each
group in descending order. and assign to node v the ID
xid that have a larger number of F(v, xid) among all
F(w, xid), v ̸= w ∈ N(u).
3) Node u send to those neighbors their respective new
xid ∈ T (uid) values.
Step 3: Node u sends Token Assignment packet randomly
to one of the node newly assigned.
(iii) The operation after node v receives a Request Info
packet.
Step 1: A node v receives a Request Info packet.
Step 2: Node v calculates F(v, xid), xid ∈ T (uid) that rep-
resent, for each proposed xid, the number of logical neighbors
of xid that are also IDs of node v’s physical neighbors.
1) if node v already has its ID vid, the Request Info packet
is ignored.
2) Otherwise, A node v send those calculated numbers
piggybacked in Reply Info packet.
V. SIMULATION
In this section, we describe the setup for our considered
scenario. Then, we present our estimation results.
A. Setup
Our method was designed to monitor wireless ad hoc mobile
network, thus, we evaluated our topology control algorithm
through a discrete-event network simulator (ns-3). The eval-
uation was done in terms of the following topological and
spectral metrics:
• Diameter: The longest distance between any pair of
nodes of a graph. A shorter diameter is a desirable
property for large network.
• Average path length: The average of the shortest paths
between all pairs of nodes in a graph.
• Rc: The percentage of the number of edges of the
resultant graph over that of the original BCG. That is,
Rc = Number of edges in resultant graph
Number of edges in original BCG
(5)
In the simulation, we used 506, 1081 and 2265 nodes
networks for BCGs. Table I summarizes the parameters values
used for simulations. Parameter p and a determine N (the
number of nodes) and BCG parameter k. Parameters t1 and
y1 were used to deﬁne the ﬁrst generator. Parameters t2 and
y2 were used to deﬁne the second generator. For each network
size, 100 distinct samples were collected. Nodes of network
models were uniformly and randomly distributed in an area of
100 × 100 m2. For each radio range from 5m to 150m.
We compared our topology control algorithms with existing
topology controls: K-Neigh [15] , which the number of neigh-
bors of node bounded by a giver value k, with k = 6, Max
topology which all nodes within the maximum radio range
are logical neighbors, and Dist-swap topology control based
on BCGs [23] with a distributed node ID assignment algorithm
(Dist-swap). in this section we name our assignment method:
Assignment ID (Assign-ID).
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-920-1
AFIN 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF BOREL CAYLEY GRAPHS
N
p
k
a
t1
t2
y1
y2
506
23
22
7
1
7
1
1
1081
47
23
2
1
7
1
1
2265
151
15
2
1
7
1
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
20
40
60
80
100
Radio range (m)
Rc (%)
Assign-ID with 506
Assign-ID with 1081
Assign-ID with 2265
Dist-swap with 506
Dist-swap with 1081
Dist-swap with 2265
Fig. 2. Edge construction percentage with distributed node ID assignment.
We compute the energy consumed for all the nodes in the
network during the multi-hop packet routing environments. We
only consider the energy consumptions from data transmission
(Etx) and reception (Erx).
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
100
101
102
103
Radio range (m)
Diameter
Dist-swap
Max
K-Neigh
Assign-ID
Fig. 3. Comparison of diameters
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
100
101
102
Radio range (m)
Average path length
Dist-swap
Max
K-Neigh
Assign-ID
Fig. 4. Comparison of average path lengths
B. Simulation Results
Figure 2 shows Rc of Assign-ID and Dist-swap assignment
methods. The Assign-ID shows that Rc is a slightly better
than that of the Dist-swap assignment algorithm when the
radio range is less than 80m. For Rc = 95%, the Dist-swap
and Assign-ID needed 55m and 70m respectively. Overall, he
Assign-ID showed better performance of Rc.
Figures 3 and 4 show the diameter and average path length
versus the transmission range, respectively. We only compared
the cases where the resultant graph is a connected graph. Thus,
Dist-swap and Assign-ID both require 45m radio range to
produce a connected network. From these ﬁgures, we conﬁrm
again that the Assign-ID have the smallest diameter and the
shortest average path length for a given radio range except
Max topology. This is because as a radio range increases,
BCGs have a constant number of logical neighbors, while Max
topology has much more logical neighbors than others.
In Figure 5, an interesting observation is that the energy
consumed at each node is determined by the average path
length and the diameter of the network topologies. Another
observation is that the nodal energy consumption for Assign-
ID is consistently smaller that that of the k-Neigh with k = 6.
Even though Max topology has the smallest diameter and
the shorter average path length for a given radio range, due to
its large number of logical neighbors, it consumed 60 times
more nodal power than Assign-ID in Figure 5.
Max topology has a larger number of logical neighbors and
hence larger power is consumed at the receiver modules.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed the BCG-based topology control
algorithm to impose the predeﬁned BCG topology on wireless
ad hoc networks. We proposed a new ID assignment method
to overly our host network and have in return a new topology
with a number of logical connections following predeﬁned
graph connection rules in a distributed manner.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-920-1
AFIN 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
Radio range (m)
Power consumption (J)
Dist-swap
Max
K-Neigh
Assign-ID
Fig. 5. Comparison of power consumption
Before assigning logical IDs to physical nodes in the
network, our algorithm adjust node transmit powers in order
to maintain a connected topology using minimum power and
produce a topology with physical node degrees that are upper
bounded by dBCG. Our simulation results over a range of
network sizes 500 and 2300 nodes showed that our node
ID assignment method requires a small radio range 45m to
produce a connected network with a small diameter and a
small average path length.
In the future, we plan to expand our investigation to more
realistic network environments involving topology control
and routing protocol. we will also investigate the effects of
interference on BCG-based networks.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Rajaraman, “Topology control and routing in ad hoc networks: a
survey,” SIGACT News 33, 2, pp. 6073, June 2002.
[2] R. Ramanathan, and R. Rosales-Hain, “Topology control of multihop
wireless networks using transmit power adjustment,” Proceedings IEEE
INFOCOM 2000, Tel Aviv, Israel, pp. 404-413 vol.2, March 2000.
[3] P. Santi, “Topology control in wireless ad hoc and sensor networks,”
ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 164-194, 2005
[4] Li Li, J. Y. Halpern, P. Bahl, Yi-Min Wang, and R. Wattenhofer, “A
cone-based distributed topology-control algorithm for wireless multi-
hop networks,” in IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 13, no.
1, pp. 147-159, Feb. 2005
[5] S. Narayanaswamy , V. Kawadia , R. S. Sreenivas , and P. R. Kumar,
“Power Control in Ad-Hoc Networks: Theory, Architecture, Algorithm
and Implementation of the COMPOW Protocol,” in Proc. of European
Wireless 2002, Next Generation Wireless Networks: Technologies, Pro-
tocols, Services and Applications, Florence, Italy, pp. 156-162, February
2002.
[6] V. Rodoplu, and T. H. Meng, “Minimum energy mobile wireless
networks,” IEEE J. Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 17, no. 8,
pp. 1333-1344, August 1999.
[7] K. N. Sivarajan, and R. Ramaswami, “Lightwave networks based on de
Bruijn graphs,” in IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 2, no.
1, pp. 70-79, Feb. 1994.
[8] SH. Lu, KC. Li, KC. Lai, and YC. Chung “A scalable P2P overlay
based on arrangement graph with minimized overhead,” Peer-to-Peer
Netw. Appl. 7, pp. 497510, 2014.
[9] I. Stoica, R. Morris, D. Karger, M. Kaashoek, and H. Balakrishnan,
“Chord: A Scalable Peer-to-Peer Lookup Service for Internet Applica-
tions,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 31,
no. 4, pp 149160, 2001.
[10] H. Shaﬁei, Z. Aghazadeh, A. Khonsari, and M. Ould-Khaoua, “PeerStar:
An attractive alternative to existing peer-to-peer topologies,” 2009 IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications, pp. 128-134, 2009.
[11] A. Abu Taleb, J. Mathew, and D. K. Pradhan, “Fault diagnosis in multi
layered De Bruijn based architectures for sensor networks,” 2010 8th
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communi-
cations Workshops (PERCOM Workshops), pp. 456-461, 2010.
[12] A. A. Al-Mamou, and H. Labiod, “ScatterPastry: An Overlay Routing
Using a DHT over Wireless Sensor Networks,” The 2007 International
Conference on Intelligent Pervasive Computing (IPC 2007), pp. 274-
279, 2007.
[13] K. Tang, and B. Arden, “Representations of Borel Cayley graphs,” in The
Fourth Symposium on the Frontiers of Massively Parallel Computation,
McLean, VA, USA, pp. 194-201, 1992.
[14] B.W. Arden, and K.W. Tang, “Representations and routing for Cayley
graphs,” (computer networks), IEEE Trans. Commun. 39 (1991), pp.
15331537.
[15] D. M. Blough, M. Leoncini, G. Resta, and P. Santi, “The k-Neighbors
Approach to Interference Bounded and Symmetric Topology Control in
Ad Hoc Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol.
5, no. 9, pp. 1267-1282, Sept. 2006.
[16] R. Wattenhofer, and A. Zollinger, XTC: a practical topology control
algorithm for ad-hoc net-works, in 18th International Parallel and Dis-
tributed Processing Symposium, 2004. Proceedings, 2004, pp. 216223.
[17] N. Li, J. Hou, and L. Sha, Design and analysis of an mst-based topology
control algorithm,IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol.
4, no. 3, pp. 11951206, 2005.
[18] Z. H. Mir, and Y. Ko, Adaptive neighbor-based topology control protocol
for wireless multi-hopnetworks,EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 2012, p. 97, 2012.
[19] S. Narayanaswamy, V. Kawadia, R. Sreenivas, and P. Kumar, Power
control in ad-hoc networks:Theory, architecture, algorithm and imple-
mentation of the compow protocol,Proc. of theEuropean Wireless Conf.,
01 2002.
[20] J.-C. Bermond, C. Delorme, and J.-J. Quisquater, “Strategies for in-
terconnection networks: Some methods from graph theory,” Journal of
Parallel and Distributed Computing, Vol. 3, no. 4, 1986, pp. 433-449.
[21] Arden, and Hikyu Lee, “Analysis of Chordal Ring Network,” in IEEE
Transactions on Computers, vol. C-30, no. 4, pp. 291-295, April 1981.
[22] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications, Principles and Practice,
Prentice-Hall, 1996.
[23] R. Junghun, Y. Jaewook, N. Eric, and K. W. Tang, “Borel Cayley Graph-
Based Topology Control for Consensus Protocol in Wireless Sensor
Networks,” ISRN Sensor Networks, vol. 2013, pp. 1-15, 2013.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-920-1
AFIN 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

