 
 
An Inter-channel and Intra-channel Dynamic Wavelength/Bandwidth Allocation 
Algorithm for Integrated Hybrid PON with Wireless Technologies for Next Generation 
Broadband Access Networks 
N. Moradpoor 
School of Engineering, Computing and Applied Mathematics  
University of Abertay Dundee 
Dundee, UK 
e-mail: n.moradpoor@abertay.ac.uk 
 
 
G. Parr, S. McClean, and B. Scotney 
School of Computing and Information Engineering 
University of Ulster 
Coleraine, UK 
e-mails: gp.parr@ulster.ac.uk  
      si.mcclean@ulster.ac.uk 
                     bw.scotney@ulster.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—Optical and wireless technology integration schemes 
merge the high-speed and high-capacity of the optical networks 
with the low-cost, wide-coverage and mobility features of 
wireless counterparts for Subscriber Stations (SSs). It is also 
financially viable for the telecommunication service providers 
particularly in rural areas. In order to successfully integrate the 
two technologies, there are some technical concerns in terms of 
Architectural aspects, Physical Layer features and Media Access 
Control (MAC) related issues. This paper is mainly focused on 
the analysis of the key topics in MAC-related issues over the 
converged scenario and proposes an Inter-channel and Intra-
channel Dynamic Wavelength/Bandwidth Allocation (IIDWBA) 
algorithm where the hybrid Passive Optical Network (PON) acts 
as a backhaul technology for the wireless counterpart. 
Performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated through 
conducted simulation scenarios in terms of different Quality of 
Service (QoS) metrics where the IIDWBA algorithm shows a 
better performance when it is compared with the scenario in 
which it has not been employed. 
   Keywords: optical and wireless technology integration, Media 
Access Control (MAC), resource allocations  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
PON [11], [12], and [27] is the most promising candidate 
among optical access solutions in terms of maintainability and 
robustness. There have been various efforts on PON 
multiplexing techniques such as Time Division Multiplexing 
(TDM), Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) and Code 
Division Multiplexing (CDM). TDM-PON reduces the cost 
per subscriber and has inexpensive network components as it 
requires only one transmitter in the Optical Line Terminal 
(OLT), as well as only one type of transmitter in Optical 
Network Units (ONUs) [23]. However, TDM-PON sacrifices 
the maximum available bandwidth per subscriber and limits 
the number of supported subscribers up to 32 [21]. On the 
other hand, WDM-PON provides multiple wavelength 
channels with a good security and protocol transparency 
which offers higher bandwidth and supports more subscribers 
[6]. In WDM-PON, a WDM transmitter, particularly in a 
subscriber side, is the most critical component where the 
associated transmitter should be precisely aligned with the 
allocated channel [21]. Unlike TDM-PON, in WDM-PON, 
the OLT needs to have an array of transmitters with one 
transmitter for each ONU. Every ONU also needs to have a 
wavelength-specific laser. Generally speaking, although PON 
has been viewed as an attractive solution for the “first/last 
mile” bandwidth bottleneck problem, extending fibre-based 
infrastructures of PON to the rural area is either too costly or 
inaccessible. Moreover, PON is unable to provide wireless 
access services.  
World Wide Interoperability for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX, IEEE 802.16 [10]) standard comes into play as a 
wireless matching part for PON technology. WiMAX aims to 
reduce the equipment, operation and maintenance costs and 
capable of providing the low-cost, wide coverage, fixed and 
mobile broadband access connections with the QoS 
provisioning scheme [5]. It also provides wireless access 
services for rural areas where the development of copper-
based technologies or fibre-based broadband is too expensive 
or inaccessible. However, WiMAX copper-based backhaul 
technology is still a controversial issue. This is the point 
where optical and wireless technology integrations come into 
play. PON can be used as a scalable, cost-aware and potential 
solution for WiMAX backhaul problem whereas WiMAX can 
extend PON infrastructure to rural areas with relatively lower 
cost. In order to successfully integrate the optical and wireless 
technologies, there are some challenging issues that need to 
be addressed efficiently and effectively in order to provide the 
smooth End-To-End (ETE) technology integrations.  
To the best of our knowledge, the traditional single 
channel TDM-PON has been addressed in most of the 
existing work related to the optical and wireless integration 
scenarios. Therefore, we are motivated to combine the 
wavelength routing and high-capacity of WDM-PON, the 
power-splitting and lower-cost of TDM-PON with high 
coverage and mobility features of the wireless counterpart for 
the integrated scenario. In order to provide the full dynamic 
wavelength/bandwidth 
allocations 
across 
hybrid 
PON 
integration with wireless technology, an IIDWBA algorithm 
is proposed. The remainder of this paper is prepared as 
follow. In Section II, the existing work related to the optical 
and wireless technology integrations is briefly discussed. The 
proposed IIDWBA algorithm is discussed fully in Section III. 
Sections IV and V include the simulation model and the 
captured results, respectively followed by the conclusions in 
Sections VI and references. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
To date, a wide range of research has been carried out on 
the successful integration of the optical and wireless 
technologies. The integrated scenario has been considered in 
three categories: Architectural, Physical layer and MAC layer 
issues. The Architectural aspects [1], [3], [7], [13], [16], [17], 
[24], and [25] include the way two technologies connect to 
each other. In Physical layer issues, most of the works were 
focused on providing the cost-effective and reliable Radio 
over Fibre (RoF) systems [19]. As the research in this paper is 
related to the MAC-related issues of the converged scenario, 
the previous works related to this aspect are selected and 
discussed as follow. The MAC-related issues for the 
integrated scenario were discussed for the first time in [7]. 
The authors raised several issues for the bandwidth 
allocations, packet scheduling and QoS support. Ou et. al [29] 
investigated the scheduling techniques aimed at improving the 
performance and guaranteeing the QoS for different class of 
services. Ou et. al [3] proposed a slotted Dynamic Bandwidth 
Allocation (S-DBA) algorithm which aimed to increase the 
bandwidth utilizations by reducing the signaling overhead 
caused by the cascading bandwidth requests and grants. Ou et. 
al [22] proposed an intra ONU-Base Station (BS) scheduling 
algorithm termed Hybrid Priority Weighted Fair Scheduling 
(HPWFS) to progress the QoS performance without 
bandwidth starvations for the lower priority class of services. 
Ou et. al [13] proposed a DBA algorithm for the suggested 
Optical-Optical-Wireless (OOW) architecture which was 
executed in three levels. Ou et. al [20] investigated the 
possible challenging issues for the integrated structures of the 
TDM-PON and WDM-PON with WiMAX and Wireless 
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) networks. Performance evaluations of the 
existing scheduling techniques for three popular service 
classes were studied which showed the strong impact of using 
an efficient up-link scheduler in converged scenario. Please 
refer to [4], [8], [15], [18], and [25] for more work related to 
the MAC-layer aspects of the converged scenario. To the best 
of our knowledge, TDM-PON has been addressed in most of 
the existing work related to the integration scenario. Using the 
traditional single channel TDM-PON, where a group of 
ONUs (typically 16) sharing a single channel as a backhaul 
for 802.16 BS, provides each BS with ~ 62.5 Mb/s capacity 
which is almost matched the 802.16 channel capacity (~ 70 
Mb/s over a 20 MHz channel). However, 62.5 Mb/s does not 
seem to be enough when a given ONU is employed as a 
backhaul for more than a single BS. This is the point where 
WDM-PON comes into play where multiple wavelengths will 
be available over a same fibre channel. Thus higher 
bandwidth can be provided by the OLT for a given ONU, 
more BSs and, finally, more number of SSs can be supported.  
In terms of MAC-related issues, an IIDWBA algorithm is 
proposed in this paper to provide the full distributed and 
dynamic wavelength/bandwidth allocations across OLT - 
ONUs as well as ONU - BSs. While a given DBA algorithm 
deals with bandwidth allocations inside a given channel, the 
IIDWBA algorithm works on top of a given DBA algorithm 
inside the OLT and ONU in association with multiple 
channels.  
III. 
IIDWBA ALGORITHM  
In order to save space, a given Server Station is termed 
SST, which can be the OLT or ONU, and a given Client 
Station is termed CS, which can be the ONU or BS. An SST 
is an element that provides resources for a given CS 
periodically and a given CS is an element that asks for 
resources from a given SST regularly. A given SST can be a 
CS and vice versa at any time. In this paper, a given ONU is a 
CS when it asks for resources from the OLT and is a SST 
when it provides resources for a given BS. Moreover, a given 
BS is a CS when it asks for resources from the associated 
ONU and an SST when it provides resources for the 
associated SSs. However, the OLT and the SSs are the 
ultimate SST and CSs, respectively. The IIDWBA algorithm 
works in three phases as follow.         
A. Phase one: Initialisation phase 
Phase one includes the auto-discovery and registration 
processes during which the CSs join the converged network 
and a wavelength will be assigned to each of them. In this 
phase, the IIDWBA algorithm first identifies the total number 
of the supported channels as well as the total number of the 
CSs associated per SST. The average number of the CSs per 
channel will be calculated next. Then it starts randomly 
allocating the channel identifiers (IDs) to all the CSs in such 
way that the number of the CSs per channel will be the same. 
Finally, the allocated channel IDs will be acknowledged to all 
the CSs associated with a given SST. In phase one, the 
objectives are as follow:  
1) Identifying the average number of the CSs per channel 
per SST. 
2) Assigning a default channel ID to all the CSs associated 
with a given SST. 
3) Finishing the registration process for each CS and 
receiving the first associated queue status.   
B. Phase two: Intra-channel bandwidth allocations phase 
Phase two will be executed immediately after phase one 
and will be accomplished once per service cycle inside all the 
channels per SST. This phase is responsible for allocating 
bandwidth inside a given channel by considering the actual 
bandwidth requests and minimum guaranteed bandwidth per 
CS per service cycle. At the end of a given bandwidth 
allocation cycle, the local information such as the total 
number of the heavily loaded CSs and associated MAC 
addresses, the total excess bandwidth, the total excess 
requested bandwidth and the generated service cycle will be 
delivered to the phase three. In order to distinguish how the 
bandwidth is granted from a given SST to the associated CSs 
during a given service cycle, the Limited Bandwidth 
Allocation Scheme [14] and [50], is discussed first as follows. 
In Limited Bandwidth Allocation Scheme, if the requested 
bandwidth from a given CS is less than the minimum 
guaranteed bandwidth, the requested bandwidth will be 
granted; otherwise the minimum guaranteed bandwidth will 
be granted. This approach provides excess bandwidth 
remaining from the CSs which requested bandwidth less than 
the minimum guaranteed bandwidth (lightly loaded CSs). 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
One solution to employ the excess bandwidth is to 
distribute it fairly among those CSs, which requested 
bandwidth more than the minimum guaranteed one (heavily 
loaded CSs), as proposed in [8]. However, the difference 
between the work in this paper and the work in [8] is that, in 
this paper, the excess amount of bandwidth, which is 
remaining from a given channel, will be used globally if it is 
not employed by the local CSs associated with it. In phase 
two, the objectives are as follow:   
1) Allocating bandwidth to local CSs on a given channel.   
2) Scheduling the local service cycle.    
3) Capturing the total number of the heavily loaded CSs and 
their MAC addresses, total local excess bandwidth and 
total local excess requested bandwidth.  
4) Sending objective two and three to the Global scheduler. 
C. Phase three: Inter-channel bandwidth allocations phase  
Phase three will be executed immediately after the phase 
two and includes three real-time stages of Collect, Schedule 
and Distribute.  
During the Collect stage, the IIDWBA algorithm collects 
the local information from each channel including the number 
or the local heavily loaded CSs with associated MAC 
addresses, total excess bandwidth, total excess requested 
bandwidth and the latest scheduled service cycle.  During the 
Schedule stage, based on the number of the total heavily 
loaded CSs on all the channels (globally heavily loaded CSs), 
global excess requested bandwidth, and the global excess 
available bandwidth, the IIDWBA algorithm schedules the 
global excess bandwidth among all the globally heavily 
loaded CSs. During the Distribute stage, the globally 
scheduled excess bandwidth will be distributed among the 
globally heavily loaded CSs inside the associated service 
cycle and be immediately broadcast to all the channels. In 
phase three, the objectives are as follow:  
1) Receiving the total number of the heavily loaded CSs and 
their MAC addresses, total local excess bandwidth, and 
total local excess requested bandwidth from all the 
channels on a given SST. 
2) Receiving the latest scheduled service cycle from all the 
channels. 
3) Identifying the lightly/heavily loaded channels.  
4) Calculating the total number of the heavily loaded CSs 
across all the heavily loaded channels.  
5) Calculating the total excess bandwidth across all the 
lightly loaded channels. 
6) Calculating the average granted excess bandwidth from 
each lightly loaded channel to a given globally heavily 
loaded CS.   
7) Allocating the global excess bandwidth to the globally 
heavily loaded CSs according to the actual need.   
8) Scheduling and embedding the global allocated excess 
bandwidth inside associated service cycle. 
9) Sending all the service cycles for all the channels to 
broadcaster.  
 
Figure. 1 Specific tasks for each phase of the IIDWBA algorithm 
The specific tasks for each phase of the IIDWBA are 
specified in Fig. 1 per channel per SST.  
The next Section evaluates the performance of the 
IIDWBA algorithm through simulated scenarios. 
IV. 
SIMULATION MODEL 
The performance of the proposed IIDWBA algorithm is 
evaluated by conducting a simulated scenario using OPNET 
Modeler [9]. The simulation scenario, Fig. 2, includes: a 
single OLT in Central Office (CO), which supports four 
channels (
,…,
) and is related to 16 ONUs, a 1:4 sized 
Arrayed Waveguide Grating (AWG) with a co-located 
amplifier and four 1:16 sized TDM Splitters. AWG and TDM 
Splitters are seated between the OLT and ONUs, respectively. 
A given ONU is also assigned to 16 BSs and supports the 
same four channels (
,…,
). A 1:4 sized AWG with a co-
located amplifier and four 1:16 sized TDM Splitters are also 
located between a given ONU and BSs, respectively. Each BS 
is also associated with 10 wireless SSs which will be 
increased to 100 SSs in stage by 10 to evaluate the 
performance of the IIDWBA algorithm under the different 
load values. A given BS also supports the same four channels 
(
,…,
). Simulation parameters, see Table I, are employed 
for the experiments. Moreover, the simulation scenarios ran 
for three seed values of 128, 166 and 90. However, we 
depicted the average plots from three runs in this paper. Based 
on widely used configurations for the converged scenario and 
traditional TDM-based PON [1] and [14], the simulated 
scenario is carried out as follow. The buffer sizes inside the 
ONUs and BSs are set to finite 10 Mbytes and the maximum 
cycle time is considered as 2 ms. A fixed 192µs is considered 
as the Round Trip Time (RTT) delay for each CS in every 
service cycle. Moreover, 100 Mb/s and 1Gb/s are the 
upstream data rates between a given BS and the associated 
ONU as well as a given ONU and the OLT. A fixed guard 
time of 5µs is considered for the light sources on ONUs and 
BSs. Moreover, the MPCP Extension protocol [2] is 
employed to support all the communications among the 
components. 
An 
uneven    
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
 
Figure. 2 Network topology for evaluating the proposed IIDWBA algorithm 
 
traffic pattern is considered across all the channels on a given 
SST where lightly loaded and heavily loaded CSs are always 
available during the simulation run time. Two traffic patterns 
termed first traffic pattern and second traffic pattern are 
considered for the experiments. In the first traffic pattern, the 
load on 
is gradually increased from 10 SSs to 100 SSs per 
BS (total of 160 to 1600 SSs per ONU) while the number of 
the SSs on other channels are fixed, up to 10 SSs (total of 160 
SSs per ONU), in order to distinguish how CSs on 
 benefit 
from the available free bandwidth on the other channels when 
the traffic builds up. In the second traffic pattern, the load on 
all channels is increased by gradually raising the number of 
the SSs per BS from 10 to 100 (total of 160 to 1600 SSs per 
ONU) to distinguish the performance of the CSs associated 
with 
from the results captured in the first traffic pattern.    
            TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Traffic pattern 
Burst (uneven across SSs)  
ON and OFF state time (sec)  
20% and 80% of simulation time  
Traffic start time 
even across all SSs 
Traffic stop time, Packet size 
Never, 500 bytes (constant) 
Number of SSs per BS  
10 to 100 BY 10 
Traffic class 
Best Effort (BE) 
Simulation time, Seed 
30 sec, 99, 128, 166 
value per static, update interval 
1600, 300000 
V. 
   CAPTURED RESULTS  
After employing the first traffic pattern, as Fig. 3 reveals 
the proposed IIDWBA algorithm is successful in decreasing 
the average queuing delay to almost 14% for the ONUs 
associated with 
, when it is compared with the scenario 
without applying the IIDWBA algorithm [8]. It is because, 
when the load starts increasing on channel one,
, the 
IIDWBA algorithm starts looking for the excess bandwidth on 
neighbouring channels (
,
,
) which will be collected 
and distributed among the ONUs associated with 
. The 
average queuing delay for the ONUs associated with 
,
,
 is also captured with and without applying the 
IIDWBA algorithm, Fig. 4, in which the first traffic pattern is 
employed. As it reveals, the IIDWBA algorithm has almost 
zero negative affect on the performance of the ONUs 
associated with 
,
,
. It is because the allocated 
bandwidth from 
,
,
 channels is the unutilised local 
excess bandwidth. The average extra requested bandwidth 
from the ONUs associated with 
 is presented in Fig. 5, 
with and without employing the IIDWBA algorithm in which 
the first traffic pattern is utilised. As it reveals, the IIDWBA 
algorithm is capable of keeping the average extra requested 
bits from the ONUs associated with 
 under the minimum 
guaranteed bandwidth by allocating the available excess 
bandwidth from the other channels (
,
,
) to them 
during each service cycle. In the second traffic pattern, the 
load on all channels is gradually increased by raising the total 
number of the SSs connected per BS from 10 to 100 to 
distinguish 
how 
the 
increased 
load 
on 
three 
channel
,
,
) will affect the performance of the ONUs 
over 
.  
 
Figure. 3 Average queuing delay for the ONUs on channel one, 
employing first traffic pattern 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
 
Figure. 4 Average queuing delay for the ONUs associated with channel 
two to four, employing first traffic pattern 
 
Figure. 5 Average extra requested bandwidth from the ONUs associated 
with channel one, employing first traffic pattern 
 
Figure. 6 Average queuing delay for the ONUs associated with channel 
one employing the first and second traffic patterns 
 
Figure. 7 Average extra requested bandwidth from the ONUs associated with 
channel one employing the first and second traffic pattern  
When the number of the SSs connected per BS on all the 
channels reaches to 60, Fig. 6, the average queuing delay 
inside the ONUs associated with 
 starts increasing 
constantly and reaches to almost 0.03 sec when it gets to 100 
SSs per BS. The reason behind this degradation is that when 
the load on three channels (
,
,
) is increased gradually, 
the IIDWBA algorithm cannot find as much excess bandwidth 
for the ONUs associated with 
 when it is compared to the 
first traffic pattern, where the loads on three channels is 
almost fixed. However, as it reveals in Fig. 6, the queuing 
delay for the ONUs over 
, under the second traffic pattern, 
is still much lower than the scenario when the IIDWBA is not 
employed.  
The average extra requested bandwidth (bits) over 
 is 
also displayed in Fig. 7, in which the second traffic pattern is 
employed, and then compared with the captured results from 
the first traffic pattern. As it reveals, when the number of the 
SSs connected per BS is gradually increased from 50 to 100 
SSs on all channels, the average extra requested bits over 
 
starts increasing to almost twice more than the first traffic 
pattern scenario. It is because, when the second traffic pattern 
is employed, the load on all the channels starts building up 
gradually. Therefore the IIDWBA algorithm cannot find as 
much as excess bandwidth for the ONUs associated with 
 
over 
,
,
, when compared to the first traffic pattern. 
This behaviour results in accumulating more packets in the 
queues associated with the ONUs over 
. Thus longer 
queuing delay and larger average extra requested bits will be 
produced.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, the IIDWBA is proposed for the multi-
channel PON integration with wireless technologies where the 
extra bandwidth from all the available channels associated 
with a given SST will be identified, collected, scheduled and 
allocated to the heavily loaded CSs, which may be scattered 
over the different channels in the same service cycle. Through 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
conducted simulation experiments, it is demonstrated that the 
proposed algorithm is capable of collecting the excess 
bandwidth from the lightly loaded channels and spreading 
them across the heavily loaded CSs, which may be scattered 
over different channels. The proposed algorithm shows a 
better performance in terms of average queuing delays, 
utilisations and throughput when compared with the same 
simulation scenario not employing the IIDWBA algorithm.   
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would wish to acknowledge the support of the 
University of Ulster and University of Abertay Dundee for 
funding this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Jung, J.Y. Choi, Y. T. Han, M.  G. Kim, and M. Kang, 
“Centralized Scheduling Mechanism for Enhanced End-to-End 
Delay and QoS Support in Integrated Architecture of EPON and 
WiMAX,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 28, no. 16, 
August. 2010, pp. 2277-2288. 
[2] M. P. McGarry, M. Reisslein, and M. Maier, “WDM Ethernet 
Passive Optical Networks,” IEEE Optical Communications, 
vo1.44, no. 2, February. 2006, pp. 15-22. 
[3] S. Ou, K. Yang, and H. H. Chen, “Integrated Dynamic 
Bandwidth Allocation in Converged Passive Optical Networks 
and IEEE 802.16 Networks,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 4, no. 
4, December. 2010, pp. 467- 476. 
[4] I. S. Hwang, J. Y. Lee, C. W. Huang, and Z. D. S, “Advanced 
Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation and Scheduling Scheme for the 
Integrated Architecture of EPON and WiMAX,” Tenth 
International Conference on Mobile Data Management Systems 
Services and Middleware, 2009, pp. 655-660. 
[5] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 
16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access 
Systems, 2004. 
[6] A. Banerjee, Y. Park, F. Clarke, H. Song, S. Yang, G. Kramer, 
K. Kim, and B. Mukherjee, “Wavelength-division multiplexed 
passive optical network (WDM-PON) technologies for 
broadband access—A review [Invited],” OSA Journal of Optical 
Networking - Special Issue Optical Access Networks, vol. 4, no. 
11, November. 2005, pp. 737–758.  
[7] G. Shen, R. Tucker, and C. J. Chae, “Fixed mobile convergence 
architectures for broadband access: Integration of EPON and 
WiMAX,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 45, no. 8, 
2007, pp. 44–50. 
[8] A. R. Dhaini and P. H. Ho, “MC-FiWiBAN an Emergency-
Aware Mission-Critical Fiber-Wireless Broadband Access 
Network,” IEEE Communications Magazine, January. 2011, pp. 
134-142. 
[9] OPNET Modeler 16.0, available at: www.opnet.com [retrieved: 
June, 2013] 
[10] C. Eklund, R. B. Marks, K. L. Stanwood, and S. Wang, “IEEE 
Standard 802.16: A Technical Overview of the Wireless MAN 
Air Interface 
for Broadband Wireless 
Access,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 40, no.6, 2002, pp. 98-107. 
[11] ITU-T G.9S4.x (GPON), at: http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G/e 
[retrieved: June, 2013]  
[12] ITU-T G.983.1 (BPON), at: http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-
G.983.1-200501-I/en [retrieved: June, 2013] 
[13] A. Ahmed, and A. Shami, “A New Bandwidth Allocation 
Algorithm for EPON-WiMAX Hybrid Access Networks,” IEEE 
Global Communication Conference (Globecom), December. 
2010, pp. 1-6.  
[14] G. Kramer, B. Mukherjee, S. Dixit,  Y. Ye, and R. Hirth, “On 
Supporting Differentiated Classes of Service in Ethernet Passive 
Optical Networks,” Journal of Optical Networking, vol. 1, no. 8, 
2002, pp. 280–298. 
[15] T. Tang, G. Shou, Y. Hu, and Zh. Guo “Performance Analysis 
of Bandwidth Allocation of Convergence of WiMAX and 
EPON,” International Conference on Networks Security, 
Wireless Communications and Trusted Computing, April. 2009, 
pp. 662-665. 
[16] Y. Luo, T. Wang, S. Weinstein, M. Cvijetic, and S. Nakamura, 
“Integrating Optical and Wireless Services in the Access 
Network,” Optical Fibre Communication (OFC) Conference, 
2006. 
[17] S. Sarkar, S. Dixit, and B. Mukherjee, “Hybrid Wireless-Optical 
Broadband-Access Network (WOBAN) A Review of Relevant 
Challenges,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 25, no. 11, 
November. 2007, pp. 3329-3340. 
[18] K. Yang, S. Ou, K. Guild, and H. H. Chen, “Convergence of 
Ethernet PON and IEEE 802.16 Broadband Access Networks 
and its QoS-aware Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Scheme,” 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications (JSAC), 
vol. 27, no. 2, February. 2009, pp. 101–116. 
[19] Z. Jia, J. Yu, A. Chowdhury, G. Ellinas, and G K. Chang, 
“Simultaneous Generation of Independent Wired and Wireless 
Services Using a Single Modulator in Millimetre-Wave-Band 
Radio-Over-Fibre Systems,” IEEE Photonics Technology 
Letters, vol. 19, no. 20, October. 2007, pp. 1691-1693. 
[20] N. Moradpoor, G. Parr, S. McClean, B. Scotney, and G. Owusu, 
“Hybrid Optical and Wireless Technology Integrations for Next 
Generation Broadband Access Networks,” 6th IFIP/IEEE 
International Workshop on Broadband Convergence Networks, 
BCN 2011.   
[21] D. J. Shin,  D. K. Jung, H. S. Shin, J. W. Kwon, S. Hwang, Y. 
Oh, and C. Shim, “Hybrid WDM/TDM-PON with Wavelength-
Selection-Free 
Transmitters,” 
Journal 
of 
Lightwave 
Technology, vol. 23, no. 1, January. 2005, pp. 187-194.  
[22] C. Ranaweera, E. Wong, C. Lim, and A. Nirmalathas, “Quality 
of Service Assurance in EPON-WiMAX Converged Network,” 
International Topical Meeting on Microwave Photonics 
Conference, 2011, pp. 369-372. 
[23] G. Kramer, B. Mukherjee, and G. Perawnto, “Ethernet PON 
(ePON): Design and Analysis of an Optical Access Network,” 
Photonic Network Communications, vol. 3, no. 3, July. 2001, 
pp. 307–19. 
[24] W. T. Shaw, S. W. Wong, N. Cheng, K. Balasubramanian, X. 
Zhu, M. Maier, and L. G. Kazovsky,  “Hybrid Architecture and 
Integrated Routing in a Scalable Optical–Wireless Access 
Network,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 25, no. 11, 
November. 2007, pp. 3443-3451. 
[25] K. Yang, S. Ou, K. Guild, and H. H. Chen, “Convergence of 
Ethernet PON and IEEE 802.16 Broadband Access Networks 
and its QoS-aware Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Scheme,” 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications (JSAC), 
vol. 27, no. 2, February. 2009, pp. 101–116. 
[26] G. Kramer, “Ethernet Passive Optical Networks,” New York, 
McGraw- Hill, 2005. 
[27] IEEE 
802.3ah 
(EPON)at: 
http://www.ieee802.org/3/ah/index.html [retrieved: June, 2013] 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

