Towards Personalized Context-Aware
Recommendation Agent in Mobile Social Networks
Santipong Thaiprayoon
Chair of Communication Networks
FernUniversit¨at in Hagen
Hagen, Germany
santipong.thaiprayoon@fernuni-hagen.de
Herwig Unger
Chair of Communication Networks
FernUniversit¨at in Hagen
Hagen, Germany
herwig.unger@fernuni-hagen.de
Abstract—This paper proposes a personalized context-aware
recommendation towards the development of an autonomous
intelligent agent for an individual user on online social networks.
The goal is to automatically provide personalized and context-
dependent recommendations of a list of relevant items, including
friends, points of interest, and advertisements, to a user in a
current situation. The proposed agent is a mobile application
that incorporates user contexts gathered by various mobile device
sensors, including implicit and explicit data, to adapt suggestions
to a user by understanding the semantic meaning of personal and
location data. Web 3.0 technologies are also used to improve the
production of intelligent recommendations through the power
of AI techniques and decentralization. Users can communicate
directly without relying on central authorities, which is beneficial
for data protection and security.
Keywords—friend recommendation; POI recommendation; in-
telligent personal agent; social network; Web 3.0.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the advancement of the Web 2.0 era, almost all
websites advance toward the growth of user-generated content
while also improving interoperability and usability for end
users [1]. It enables people to communicate, interact, and
collaborate with each other through two-way communication
in online virtual communities. Internet users can contribute
information, such as text posts or comments, documents,
videos, and photos, via various social media platforms using
computer desktops, laptops, and mobile devices [2]. As a
result, any user can be both a content producer and a content
consumer. Meta (formerly Facebook), Twitter, and a variety of
blogs are examples of Web 2.0 platforms that enable users to
share personal information, locations, interests, and activities
on the Internet at any time and from any location.
Currently, the massive growth of wireless and mobile tech-
nologies enables users to access various Internet services,
mainly social media platforms, through their smart devices [3].
Smart devices, such as smartphones, tablets, and smartwatches,
have become an essential part of modern life, allowing people
to contribute content, share information, and interact more
easily and interactively through the Internet. One of the most
critical applications that takes advantage of the widespread
adoption of smartphones is Location-Based Social Networks
(LBSNs), which allow mobile users to record locations, geo-
tagged photos, and geographical information [4]. Friend and
Points-of-Interest (POIs) recommendations are the important
components of individual services in LBSN applications [5],
which have recently attracted much attention from researchers.
These services aim to assist users by suggesting similar friends
and exploring exciting places according to user information,
such as profiles, preferences, interests, and historical locations.
This keeps raw contextual data, such as weather conditions,
traffic conditions, seasons, and locations on a daily basis.
However, such services lack user privacy, identity, and the
ability to detect and recognize contextual data in the current
situation to deliver appropriate information to users. Therefore,
there is a growing demand for a personalized and context-
dependent intelligent assistant capable of interpreting user
behavior and making relevant suggestions for users.
The emerging Web 3.0 aims to make the Web more context-
aware and intelligent in decentralized infrastructures, also
referred to as decentralized intelligent Web [6]. It has the
ability to understand meaning through data analysis in order
to automatically provide the user with highly personalized and
appropriate suggestions of items by incorporating innovative
technologies, such as semantic web, Artificial Intelligence
(AI), Natural Language Processing (NLP), data mining, Ma-
chine Learning (ML), recommendation agents, Augmented
Reality (AR), and Virtual Reality (VR) into ubiquitous net-
works [7]. This will be accomplished by empowering each
user to become the owner of their data and providing a
richer overall experience due to the numerous innovations
implemented. In addition, Web 3.0 enables participants to
interact freely, publicly, and privately with others without the
need for central authorities or permission, avoiding scalability
and single point of failure issues. In other words, each user
regains full control over their data and privacy.
To fulfill the innovative functionalities, this paper proposes
a personalized context-aware recommendation referred to as
an autonomous intelligent agent for an individual user. The
goal is to automatically provide personalized and context-
dependent recommendations of a list of relevant items, in-
cluding friends, POIs, and advertisements, to a user within a
current situation by analyzing and understanding contextual
data. The proposed agent is developed as a mobile applica-
tion to assist users who want to meet new friends, discover
interesting POIs, and receive helpful information within their
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

surrounding area using swipe and tap gestures. It is also an
autonomous assistant with Peer-to-Peer (P2P) communication,
which means users can freely and anonymously login and
logout into the application without authentication methods,
making the application continuously and highly dynamic. A
mobile device can automatically record historical data of a user
as the timeline of events in the current environment, such as
real-time weather conditions, locations, time of day, seasons,
and temperatures, using a variety of sensor technologies, such
as Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and Global Positioning System (GPS).
These raw historical data are stored in a local database on
a mobile device to preserve personal data privacy. Moreover,
it supports users to privately communicate and transfer data
with each other within a local network, which provides a way
for secure and robust wireless communications with protecting
data.
The proposed agent is designed to quickly provide new
friends, POIs, and advertisements to users by understanding
the contextual meaning under the basic use of NLP and
ML techniques without requiring high processing power on
mobile devices. These techniques also assist in avoiding the
problem of information overload by recommending the most
relevant information to users while improving its suggestions,
adaptability, and social media user experience. To explain the
importance of the research work, the main contributions are
divided into four aspects.
• A new conceptual framework for a personalized context-
aware recommendation agent is proposed. The goal of
this agent is to automatically interpret contextual data
and provide users with recommendations for a variety of
items, including friends, POIs, and advertisements, that
better match their expectations.
• A novel method for personalized POI recommendation
is introduced. The method utilizes user preferences and
location histories to generate recommendations for a list
of candidate POIs within a geospatial range around a
user’s current location, making it easier for users to find
matches for POIs.
• A novel method for the semantic matchmaking engine
of friend recommendation is introduced. The method
determines how similar two pieces of user information
are in terms of lexical and semantic similarity.
• The proposed agent also enables mobile users to receive
excellent services, such as private messages, games or
puzzles, local recommendations, and advertising cam-
paigns, such as promotions or discounts from local venues
via Wi-Fi networks. This task is intended to entertain and
engage users through various services while also assisting
businesses in maximizing profits.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section
2 examines research on social networking sites, Web 3.0,
friend recommendations, and POI recommendations. Section
3 illustrates the research methodology. The use cases of the
proposed agent are explained in Section 4. Finally, Section 5
concludes and gives directions for further research.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, the fundamental concepts for implement-
ing the proposed agent are introduced in detail, including
social networking sites, Web 3.0, friend recommendations,
and POI recommendations. Then, the related research work
is discussed.
A. Social Networking Sites
A social networking site, a subcategory of social media
[19], is defined as a website that allows people to create
or share content, ideas, activities, backgrounds, and interests
through online virtual communities and networks [8]. These
websites offer a highly interactive medium for creating and
communicating digital content among individuals or groups,
resulting in valuable knowledge sharing. On a more personal
level, social networking sites enable users to communicate
with friends and family and learn new things. At the business
level, social networking sites enable users to have a conver-
sation with audiences, gain customer feedback, and evaluate
digital marketing campaigns.
B. Web 3.0
The first generation of the Web is Web 1.0, which provides
only static information for users without the ability to create
and interact with web pages. The lack of active interaction
between users and the Web resulted in Web 2.0, the second
generation of the Internet. Web 2.0 facilitates interaction
between users and sites. Users can interact with one another
and create profiles for themselves on social networking sites.
However, Web 2.0 does not respect the privacy of its user’s
personal information. That is, users do not have ownership
or control over their data. Personal information is stored on
a server managed by technology companies and used for
targeted advertisements and marketing campaigns. Web 3.0
is a concept for a new iteration of the World Wide Web. It is
also referred to as the evolution of a semantically intelligent
web by leveraging emerging technologies that heavily rely on
blockchain technology, AI, semantic web, data mining, ML,
NLP, VR/AR, Internet of Things (IoT), and edge computing
[9]. Users retain control over their data and content. Algo-
rithms will now use all that data to improve the user experience
and make the Web more personalized and familiar.
C. Friend Recommendation
The number of new users on social networking sites has
been rising rapidly. Friend recommendation plays a critical
role in assisting users in finding potential friends, making new
friends, and expanding their social circle. As a result, the func-
tion of recommending friends to users has appeared in various
applications, which is becoming increasingly popular [10]. The
goal of friend recommendation systems is to automatically
suggest a list of similar friends with similar interests or rele-
vant characteristics. Most friend recommendation applications
utilize personal user profiles or behaviors to discover potential
friends that a target user might be interested in. Zhang and Xu
[11] designed a framework for friend recommendations that
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

can characterize user interest in context and content as well
as combine domain knowledge to improve recommendation
quality. Lam and Riedl [20] used latent feature mining to cal-
culate user similarity and proposed a random walking model
for getting friend recommendations. Guo et al. [12] proposed a
semantic-based friend recommendation method to find friends
based on their lifestyles rather than their social activities.
However, the lack of a description of semantic information
about user activity preferences makes the recommendation
quality unsatisfactory.
D. POI Recommendation
POI recommendations play an important role in LBSNs that
aim to provide personalized recommendations of POIs, such as
restaurants, tourist spots, cinemas, and stores. Recommending
suitable POIs for mobile users by analyzing their historical
check-in records and other multimodal data has become a
research hotspot. Wang et al. [13] proposed a probabilistic
trust-based recommendation model for social networks. Ye et
al. [14] created a power-law distribution model to describe ge-
ographical influence on user check-in behaviors and improved
the POI recommendation quality by incorporating geographi-
cal influence into the CF method. Lian et al. [15] proposed a
combinative recommendation framework that incorporates the
physical check-in characters and social influence of users into
the recommendation model. In addition to check-in activities,
context information can be used to improve recommendation
quality [16]. Gao et al. [17] investigated the content infor-
mation in the POI recommendation system, including user
preferences, location characteristics, and emotion distinctions.
From previous research, most of the existing recommen-
dations on social networking systems ignore user preferences
and contextual data. Moreover, the current recommendation
systems are designed to be the centralization of control, where
all data is stored and controlled by central servers. These
systems will regain full control of the data, resulting in security
and privacy concerns regarding public and private personal
information. This paper differs from traditional research in
that the proposed agent incorporates both explicit and implicit
feedback from a user, which provides excellent sources of
feedback data that the proposed agent can understand and
recognize about the current situation of the user and improve
the quality of recommendations. The proposed agent is de-
signed to protect the data privacy of all mobile users and
make them more permissionless. This means that users can
have equal access to data while maintaining their privacy and
communicating privately with others. In addition, Web 3.0
technologies are used to improve the production of intelligent
recommendation agents and decision-making processes by
leveraging ML and NLP.
III. METHODOLOGY
This section describes a new conceptualized framework of
the proposed agent to provide relevant recommendations con-
sidering privacy protection for an individual user depending on
the situation. The main idea behind this framework is based
on contextual data investigation and Web 3.0 technologies
with a decentralized approach, which leads to significant im-
provements in autonomous intelligence, privacy, user control
data, and interactive experience. The framework overview is
explained and illustrated in Figure 1.
This framework is proposed in mobile situations to provide
personalized and context-dependent adaptive recommenda-
tions to a user based on the environmental factors of a given
user situation, consisting of three different sources: implicit
data (e.g., locations, time of day, and weather conditions);
explicit data (e.g., user profile, preference, expertise, and
biography); and textual data, i.e., the ability to access infor-
mation from a variety of online sources, such as documents,
webpages, and publications. The environmental and physical
data derived from mobile device sensors, such as Bluetooth,
GPS, and Wi-Fi technologies, are considered as contextual
data. The contextual data is locally stored in a secure database
on a mobile device to preserve the privacy of the user. The
proposed agent automatically interprets the contextual data and
accurately adapts suggestions for a list of relevant items, such
as friends, POIs, and advertisements. It operates continuously
and autonomously within an environment that is aware of
its environment through various mobile device sensors. The
proposed agent consists of three main components: (1) friend
recommendation; (2) POI recommendation; and (3) advertise-
ment recommendation. Each of the components is explained
below.
A. The Component of Friend Recommendation
The main goal of this component is to present a new
friendship method based on their personal information through
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) technology inspired by COVID-
19 contact tracing apps [21] [22]. This component generates
a list of potential friends with similar interests, ranked by a
similarity score. The overview of the proposed component is
explained and illustrated in Figure 2.
The component aims to provide a perfect match in the
vicinity of people based on user profiles and preferences.
Personal data will be stored locally on each device, preventing
access and control over data by authorities or anyone else.
Users have complete control over their data, which means
they can change how their data is used or shared at any
time in the application settings. The Bluetooth connection
module uses BLE to regularly broadcast a message within
a signal range in a decentralized manner to find active users
and anonymously collect a user profile from the active user to
measure user similarity. When paired with all currently active
users, the module will return a list of potential friends with
similar interests, ranked by a similarity score. If a user is
close enough (within 2 meters) to people who have common
interests, the user will get a notification with new friends.
Users can use a mobile phone to make new friends and send
direct messages to them without relying on a central server.
The proposed component consists of three main modules: (1)
personal information management; (2) semantic matchmaking
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Figure 1. The framework of personalized context-aware recommendation agent
Figure 2. The overview of friend recommendation component
engine; and (3) Bluetooth connection, where each step is given
in detail below.
1) Personal information management: This module is the
management of information that allows users to control
their personal data and manage their online identity
by enabling individuals to gather, store, update, and
share personal data. This module contains three basic
operations. The first operation is a process of controlling
which users can update their profile information. The
second operation is the process of directly sending a
notification to a user’s mobile device. A push notification
is a personalized notification asking to make a friend.
It serves as a quick communication channel, enabling
users to convey messages to interesting users. The third
operation is a process that allows users to communicate
privately with friends without Internet access or cellular
data. A user profile consists of four factors, including
user interests, personalities, areas of expertise, and short
texts from the biography.
a) User interest: This is manually entered by choosing
interests from a list of controlled vocabularies, such
as cooking, soccer, and shopping.
b) User personality: Personalities, such as age, gen-
der, weight, height, and education, are used for
search filtering to narrow and customize search
results that a user manually enters into text fields.
c) User expertise: This automatically generates ex-
pertise areas and knowledge of an individual user
from documents and academic databases using
crawlers or APIs to harvest user bibliographies on
the Internet and represent an expertise profile to the
user. The construction of expertise areas utilizes a
keyword extraction approach based on a statistical
and linguistic features-based technique that auto-
matically extracts the most important words from
text profiles.
d) User bio: This is manually filled out by a user in
the form of free text.
2) Semantic matchmaking engine: This is an important
module for estimating semantic similarity between the
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

source and target text pieces based on their meaning by
focusing on text profiles. The semantic matching engine
compares the user profile with other profiles using a
text similarity technique and suggests a suitable list of
similar users. User interests, expertise, and biographies
are combined to improve the accuracy of recommending
similar users. The text similarity technique measures
the similarity score between two pieces of personal
information based on lexical and semantic similarity,
covering both word level and context level using NLP
techniques, word embeddings, and cosine similarity.
Each user profile is cleaned up and transformed from
unstructured textual data into an appreciable format. A
word embedding technique encodes and converts textual
data into a numeric format as a vector representation.
Two vectors are compared using cosine similarity to
extract semantically similar text from user profiles and
return a similarity score. This engine consists of three
functions as follows: (1) text preprocessing; (2) match-
ing; and (3) ranking.
a) Text preprocessing: The personal data is cleaned
up to extract meaningful features using a prepro-
cessing function, including removing non-ASCII
values, special characters, HTML tags, stop words,
and raw format conversion.
b) Matching: This is due to a text profile written in
natural language formats by a user, which leads to
the complexity of the text. This function aims to
measure the semantic similarity of two user profiles
at a word and context level using word embed-
dings, which can handle synonyms or words with
similar meanings in the computation of similarity.
Lastly, two similarity scores derived from term-
based and context-based similarity are combined
and calculated as the average score. This function
can be divided into three tasks as follows: (1) term-
based similarity; (2) context-based similarity; and
(3) average similarity score calculation.
• Term-based similarity: This task aims to deter-
mine how similar two texts are at the word level.
It measures the similarity score between two sets
of words based on the Jaccard coefficient. The
Jaccard coefficient is defined as the intersection
and union of these two sets of words that refer
to the number of common words over a total
number of words, which provides a similarity
score ranging from 0 to 1. The Jaccard similarity
score is 1, indicating that the two-word sets are
identical. The similarity score of a word can be
defined by equation (1) as follows:
J (W1, W2) = |W1∩W2|
|W1∪W2|
(1)
where W1 and W2 are the sets of words edited
by a source user and a target user, respectively.
• Context-based similarity: This task aims to mea-
sure the semantic similarity of two texts at the
context level. The average pairwise similarity
(APS) is proposed to calculate the similarity
score between two short bios of users based
on word embeddings with the assumption that
similar words should have similar vectors. The
similarity score between a word in the source bio
and every word in the target bio is calculated as
the maximum similarity score from a pre-trained
word embedding model. The similarity score can
be defined by equation (2) as follows:
APS (S1, S2) =
P
w∈s1 Max(simv∈s2(w,v))
|S1|
(2)
where
S1
and
S2
are
short
bios
of
a
source user and a target user, respectively.
Max(simv∈s2(w, v))
returns
the
maximum
similarity score. The function simv∈s2(w, v)
denotes the similarity score between w and v
based on a word embedding model. |S1| is the
number of words in S1.
• Average similarity score calculation: This task
calculates the average similarity score by adding
all scores and dividing the total by the number
of values. The semantic similarity score ranges
from 0 to 1, indicating how similar two texts are
semantic. A score close to 0 indicates a weak
similarity, while a score of 1 indicates a perfect
similarity. The average similarity score (AVG) is
defined by equation (3) as follows:
AV G = J(I1,I2)+J(E1,E2)+AP S(S1,S2)
3
(3)
where I1 and I2 are user interests of a source
user and a target user. E1 and E2 are expert
profiles of a source user and a target user. S1
and S2 are user bios of a source user and a target
user, respectively.
c) Ranking: The function can re-rank a list of can-
didate friends to consider probability, additional
criteria, or constraints to filter some candidates
and return the top-ranked friends according to the
similarity score to the user.
3) Bluetooth connection: This module uses Bluetooth Low
Energy technology, a form of wireless communication
designed for short-range communication and low-energy
consumption. Applications can run on a small battery for
a longer time while maintaining signal strength. It allows
mobile applications to communicate and exchange data
with each other within the range of the Bluetooth signal,
using radio waves to communicate wirelessly. The infor-
mation exchanged between devices through a network is
governed by rules and conventions that can be defined
in communication protocol specifications. The proposed
network topology supported in Bluetooth comes with
point-to-point and broadcast connectivity. It allows users
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

to send or receive data between mobile devices or
all neighboring active devices within a close range.
Mobile devices must always be paired and connected,
with each of the two devices trusting the other and
securely exchanging data using encryption to ensure data
confidentiality against attackers.
Generally, the component enables users to manually enter
and update their profiles and preferences at any time in the
application settings. The similarity score is calculated using
user interests, expertise, and biographies. The search results
are filtered by personal information. Finally, this component
suggests matching friends with a similarity score to users
whose profiles are highly similar.
B. The Component of POI Recommendation
This component aims to automatically recommend places of
interest with detailed information based on matching a user’s
personal preferences and historical location records within a
predefined range from the current location. The overview of
the POI recommendation is illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3. The overview of POI recommendation
A smartphone allows a mobile user to explore interesting
POIs within a predefined range around the current location.
When candidate POIs match the user preferences, the mobile
user will receive an automatic push notification with a list of
top-K POIs. The matching POIs are expressed as a percentage,
with a higher number indicating how likely a user is to
be interested in a given context. Consequently, the matches
against user preferences are based on visited locations. The
match percentage indicates how closely user preferences cor-
respond to POIs. The process framework overview of the POI
recommendation is explained and illustrated in Figure 4.
The main concept of this framework suggests interesting
POIs by matching the personal preferences of a user against
categories of POIs. A hierarchical taxonomy of venue cate-
gories from Foursquare [18] is leveraged to map a location
context into categories. The user preferences are created by
mining a large amount of historical check-in data to extract
locations and converting these locations into categories rep-
resented as a user preference feature vector. Each of the
candidate POIs around the current location of a user is also
Figure 4. The framework overview of POI recommendation
mapped into categories represented as a feature vector of the
POI. The category weighting model is presented to assign
weights to important categories based on the level of location
categories. The similarity score between a vector of user
preferences and each POI vector is calculated using cosine
similarity, while the decision tree algorithm with a given
context, including weather conditions and time of day, is used
to improve the ranking process and return effective results for
POIs. This framework consists of four modules as follows: (1)
location history acquisition; (2) user preference representation;
(3) POI representation; and (4) recommendation generation.
1) Location history acquisition: Mobile users can provide
rich contextual information to mobile devices equipped
with GPS and communication sensors. These mobile
devices use signals through the combination of GPS,
Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi to determine location data. This
module incorporates contextual data based on a user’s
current situation, such as location, weather, time, user
activity, and geotagged location, which are extremely
useful for making appropriate recommendations. The
location history of a user is a record of previously
visited places, including check-in data and trajectories.
A mobile device automatically records the locations a
user visits daily, as well as the time and duration. A
large amount of location history data also provides an
opportunity to understand better and model the user
preferences.
2) User preference representation: The location histories
of a user can be implied as interests. This module thus
learns the user preferences from the history data to rec-
ommend appropriate POIs. All of the POIs in historical
data are mapped into sequential groups of categories as
a document to model the personal preferences of a user
using the location category hierarchy method, describing
the characteristics of a location by transforming a POI
in a low-level location space into a high-level location
space, carrying meaningful information better than the
POI name. This module is divided into four tasks as
follows: (1) word cleaning; (2) vocabulary building; (3)
binary vector representation; and (4) category weighting,
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

which is explained below.
a) Word cleaning: This is the most important step in
removing noise from raw data and making raw
data more valuable for building models. As a
result, this task is usually preceded by significant
preprocessing, including word cleaning, stop word
removal, stemming, and lemmatization to reduce
the dimensionality problem.
b) Vocabulary building: The historical data of a user
is considered as a document, and all location
categories in the history data are treated as words.
It then builds a vocabulary in the sequential group
of categories as a list of unique words. The list of
unique words is represented as a numerical feature
vector of the user preferences.
c) Binary vector representation: This is the process of
converting the historical data to a numerical vector
of numbers 0 and 1 without semantic information.
d) Category weighting: The task applies the funda-
mental concepts of Vector Space Model (VSM)
and Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency
(TF-IDF) for the vector representation of words.
The category weighting (CW) model is a represen-
tation that describes the occurrence of categories
within the location history data of a user. This
model assigns a weight to the significance of a par-
ticular category on the basis of the raw frequency
of the categories (CF) and the weighted category
level (WCL) over a whole collection of categories.
The category weighting is defined by equation (4)
as follows:
CW(c) = cf(c) · wcl(c)
(4)
where c is the name of the location category. cf
is the number of times that a category occurs in
a category collection with the assumption that a
user frequently visiting the same place has more
importance. wcl is the weighted category level,
which ranges from 0.1 to 0.4. The top level of
the Foursquare category hierarchy is defined as a
score of 0.1. The bottom level has a score of 0.4,
assuming that the bottom level can indicate the
specific information of venues more informative
than the top level.
3) POI representation: The candidate POIs around a cur-
rent location of a user are represented as a numerical
feature vector. The location category hierarchy method
converts a POI into a category sequence. The process
of converting a POI into a feature vector encoded in the
numerical form is similar to the component of the user
preference representation.
4) Recommendation generation: This module computes the
similarity score of two vectors to generate a list of POIs
for a target user. The vectors of the user preferences and
each POI are used to determine the relevant POIs. This
module is divided into two tasks as follows: (1) user-
POI similarity score calculation; and (2) ranking, which
is explained below.
a) User-POI similarity score calculation: Cosine sim-
ilarity is used to measure the similarity score
between the user preferences u and each POI p,
which evaluates the angle between two normalized
vectors. Therefore, the high cosine similarity score
indicates that the two vectors are similar. The
similarity score is defined by equation (5).
sim (−→u , −→p ) =
−
→
u ·−
→
p
∥−
→
u ∥∥−
→
p ∥ =
Pn
i=1 uipi
√Pn
i=1 u2
i
√Pn
i=1 p2
i
(5)
where −→u and −→p are the n-dimensional vectors of
a user preference and a POI, respectively.
b) Ranking: The decision tree algorithm is used to
assign a priority ranking to existing results based
on the specific interests of a user, which consists
of two factors: weather conditions and time of day.
The priority ranking categorizes existing results by
assigning a priority of low, medium, or high.
C. The Component of Advertisement Recommendation
This component aims to deliver a personalized greeting or
excellent services, allowing mobile users to connect to a local
server via Wi-Fi networks. It automatically offers friendly
services, such as private messages, games or puzzles, local
recommendations, and advertising campaigns, such as promo-
tions or discounts. Furthermore, it enables users to meet people
who share their interests based on criteria and proximity. The
process overview of the component is explained and illustrated
in Figure 5.
Figure 5. The process overview of advertisement recommendation
The proposed advertisement recommendation application
deployed on a mobile device sends an HTTP request with
the personal data of a user to a local application server to
offer useful resources and services. The resources and services
matched with the user are delivered to the application in
several formats via HTTP, including JSON, HTML, or plain
text. The user then receives push notifications on smartphones
according to their locations while the user is active on the
application. The wireless infrastructure of a venue allows
mobile users to connect to a local server. Wi-Fi technology is
used to create a virtual boundary around a specific area with
IP addresses to detect and locate the position of a connected
device based on the signal from a Wi-Fi router. The router
assigns local IP addresses to connected devices, allowing
them to communicate and share data on the local network
behind the router. This component is intended to entertain and
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

engage users by providing excellent services, such as games
and related content. It can help businesses boost operational
efficiencies and generate higher revenues. It has also become
critical for improving audience experiences in large venues,
such as airports, shopping malls, corporate campuses, and
conferences, filled with visitors interacting with their locations.
IV. USE CASES
The proposed agent is a mobile application designed to
assist users who want to meet new friends, find interest-
ing POIs, and receive useful information via GPS, Wi-Fi,
and Bluetooth technologies within a surrounding area. The
proposed agent could be used in various use cases. For
example, audiences who enter an academic conference and
open an application connected to a local Wi-Fi network will
receive push notifications about available scheduled programs
during the academic conference. In another case, the proposed
advertisement recommendation could benefit both customers
and stores. Customers walk around a store and open an
application connected to the free Internet access in a venue.
The personalized advertisements can be delivered directly
to the mobile devices of consumers with notifications about
promotions and menu items related to that store.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper introduces a personalized context-aware recom-
mendation agent, a new concept in development on online
social networks for assisting a user with context-dependent
recommendations and personal data protection. The proposed
agent consists of three challenging components: (1) friend
recommendation; (2) POI recommendation; and (3) advertise-
ment recommendation. These components analyze the behav-
ior of a user depending on the current situation by using
location history and contextual data to recommend friends,
POIs, and advertisements based on machine learning, natural
language processing, and decentralization. It also allows users
to communicate with each other within a specified circle of
their current geographical positions. In addition, this agent is
expected to improve user experiences and make appropriate
recommendations for users in different environments.
The future work will continue to assist people in various
aspects of their lives and become more intelligent, similar to
popular personal assistants, such as Alexa (Amazon), Siri (Ap-
ple), and Google Assistant (Google). The future agent should
have the ability to recognize more contextual data, understand
the behavior of an individual, and provide intelligent services
to a user via voice commands using natural language. It should
also assist in answering and responding to questions related
to the current environment based on the combination of user
input and context awareness captured via a smart device.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Kaletka, R. Kopp, and B. Pelka, “Social Media Revisited. User
Generated Content as a Social Innovation for eInclusion“, ICWSM, vol.
5, no. 2, pp. 17-19, Aug. 2021.
[2] J. P. Yoon, C. M. Frenz, Z. Chen and D. Wang, ”Privacy-Preserving
Mobile Accesses for Virtual Private Social Media,” 2012 IEEE Eighth
World Congress on Services, 2012.
[3] G. Fortino and C. E. Palau, ”An Agent-based Mobile Social network,”
2012 International Conference on Multimedia Computing and Systems,
2012, pp. 961-967.
[4] C. Comito, ”Learning Sequential Mobility and User Preference for
new Location Recommendation in Online Social Networks,” 2020
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks
Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 2020, pp. 702-709.
[5] J. Kim, J. Lee, H. Lee and E. Paik, ”Design and Implementation of
the Location-Based Personalized Social Media Service,” 2010 Fifth
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services,
2010, pp. 116-121.
[6] M. S. A. -F. Shaltout and A. I. B. Salamah, ”The Impact of Web 3.0
on E-Learning,” 2013 Fourth International Conference on e-Learning
”Best Practices in Management, Design and Development of e-Courses:
Standards of Excellence and Creativity”, 2013, pp. 227-232.
[7] T. Demir and ¨O. Deperlio˘glu, ”Contribution of improvements to E-
learning systems while going from web 3.0 to web 4.0: Programming
education example,” 2017 International Conference on Computer Sci-
ence and Engineering (UBMK), 2017, pp. 917-922.
[8] A. Maturi, ”The impact of social networking sites on employees’
performance,” 2018 15th Learning and Technology Conference (L&T),
2018, pp. 14-19.
[9] F. A. Alabdulwahhab, ”Web 3.0: The Decentralized Web Blockchain
networks and Protocol Innovation,” 2018 1st International Conference
on Computer Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS), 2018, pp.
1-4.
[10] M. Rahim, A. Ejaz, Q. Rajput and S. A. Khoja, ”A Comparative Study of
Similarity and Centrality Measures for Friends Recommendation,” 2019
International Conference on Information Science and Communication
Technology (ICISCT), 2019.
[11] J. Zhu, C. Wang, X. Guo, Q. Ming, J. Li, and Y. Liu, “Friend and
POI recommendation based on social trust cluster in location-based
social networks,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and
Networking, vol. 2019, no. 1. Springer Science and Business Media
LLC, Apr. 05, 2019.
[12] G. Guo, “Integrating trust and similarity to ameliorate the data sparsity
and cold start for recommender systems,” Proceedings of the 7th ACM
conference on Recommender systems. ACM, Oct. 12, 2013.
[13] Y. Wang, G. Yin, Z. Cai, Y. Dong, and H. Dong, “A trust-based
probabilistic recommendation model for social networks,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 55. Elsevier BV, pp. 59–67,
Sep. 2015.
[14] M. Ye, P. Yin, W.-C. Lee, and D.-L. Lee, “Exploiting geographical
influence for collaborative point-of-interest recommendation,” Proceed-
ings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in Information - SIGIR ’11. ACM Press, 2011.
[15] D. Lian, C. Zhao, X. Xie, G. Sun, E. Chen, and Y. Rui, “GeoMF,”
Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, Aug. 24, 2014.
[16] Y. Liang, Z. Cai, J. Yu, Q. Han, and Y. Li, “Deep Learning Based
Inference of Private Information Using Embedded Sensors in Smart
Devices,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 4. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE), pp. 8–14, Jul. 2018.
[17] Gao, H., Tang, J., Hu, X. and Liu, H, ”Content-Aware Point of Interest
Recommendation on Location-Based Social Networks,” 2015.
[18] X. Long, L. Jin and J. Joshi, ”Understanding venue popularity in
Foursquare,” 9th IEEE International Conference on Collaborative Com-
puting: Networking, Applications and Worksharing, 2013, pp. 409-418.
[19] A. Anandhan, L. Shuib, M. A. Ismail and G. Mujtaba, ”Social Media
Recommender Systems: Review and Open Research Issues,” in IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 15608-15628, 2018.
[20] S. K. Lam and J. Riedl, “Shilling recommender systems for fun and
profit,” Proceedings of the 13th conference on World Wide Web - WWW
’04. ACM Press, 2004.
[21] F. Beierle, U. Dhakal, C. Cohrdes, S. Eicher and R. Pryss, ”Public
Perception of the German COVID-19 Contact-Tracing App Corona-
Warn-App,” 2021 IEEE 34th International Symposium on Computer-
Based Medical Systems (CBMS), 2021, pp. 342-347.
[22] A. Behne, N. Kr¨uger, J. H. Beinke, and F. Teuteberg, “Learnings from
the design and acceptance of the German COVID-19 tracing app for
IS-driven crisis management: a design science research,” BMC Medical
Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 21, no. 1. Springer Science and
Business Media LLC, Aug. 09, 2021.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-008-7
AFIN 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

