Embodying Latent Requirements with Unexperienced Attractions
through Selection of Travel Point Photographs
Momoko Kato
Graduate School of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
Email: momochii@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Kenjo Yasui, Hiromitsu Shimakawa
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
Email: {kenjo, simakawa}@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—People who want to travel search for travel points
satisfying their travel requirements. They search for travel points
such that they feel attractions to fulﬁll the requirements. They
want to search for them easily and quickly. In recent years, there
are many people who use the Internet to collect information on
travel points. They use the Internet because they can collect the
information on the travel point anytime and anywhere. On the
other hand, there are various kinds of information on a lot of
travel points on the Internet. Users have to embody conditions
to specify the travel point they want to visit. True pleasures
of travels are to experience what they have never experienced.
Requirements for travel points to seem to be attractive are quite
unclear. For the recommendation of travel points, people want
a tool to embody easily and quickly the conditions specifying
the travel point they want to visit. Current search engines for
travel points on the Internet utilize the user based collaborative
ﬁltering from travel histories of travelers. However, they cannot
grasp what latent requirements travelers have and what kinds of
attraction they expect, because they analyze travel histories. The
paper proposes a recommendation method which enables users to
embody each potential requirement for their travel beforehand.
The method utilizes photographs of travel points to infer what
latent travel requirement users have and what kinds of attractions
they expect to fulﬁll the latent requirements. An experiment has
proved that almost two thirds of subjects are satisﬁed with travel
points recommended using this method. Furthermore, the method
allows all of the subjects to decide on travel points they want to
visit in a shorter time than the method they usually use.
Keywords–Travel; Trip; searching keyword; recommendation;
preference;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Some people go on a trip to relax their body and mind
worn out in real life, while others aim to change their moods.
They decide on vacation places based on events which incline
them to trips. After they decide on vacation places, they
would search for details of what they can experience there.
For example, they would check foods speciﬁc to the places,
famous sightseeing areas, accommodation facilities, and so on.
The information collection continues until they are satisﬁed as
long as their time allows. In these years, many people gather
the vacation information with Internet, because they can search
for the travel information anytime and anywhere with it. On
the other hand, there is too much travel information on the
Internet. A user must select appropriate travel information to
decide on a vacation place. It is required for all users to ﬁnd out
the travel information useful to decide on vacation places, in a
short time and with little effort. Specifying keywords relating
to vacation places to search engines on the Internet, people
planning trips browse the vacation information to decide on
a vacation place with Internet. The information collection
does not need much effort, if users of search engines have
embodied keywords which enable them to narrow candidate
vacation places meeting with their requirements. However, the
information collection is not easy in many cases, because users
are likely to have only unclear requirements in the beginning
of planning of their trips. To make the best use of the tools to
collect travel information, we should support them to embody
keywords representing their vacation requirements in their
minds.
The pleasure of planning trips is the process of chooseing
vacation places, imaging themselves enjoying the places they
search with the Internet. Some users ﬁnd new vacation goals
or their latent preference for trips, when they attain unknown
vacation information which excites them in the planning. The
new goals or latent preference for trips make it more difﬁcult
to embody keywords. Users with little knowledge on vacation
cannot precisely embody keywords to represent vacation places
meeting their goals and preference. They have little chance
to ﬁnd suitable vacation places matching their images. On
the other hand, users with a lot of vacation experiences have
often ﬁxed their preference. They are likely to specify same
keywords in all cases. They are disappointed with stereotyped
trip images brought by search results. They fail to expand
their expectation for a trip. Several travel recommendation
systems have been developed with the user-based collaborative
ﬁltering from the travel histories [8] [9] [10]. But, it is the real
pleasure of trips to visit places which provide entertainments
users have never experienced. Users often have new goals
and latent preference for trips. For new goals, the users
have no knowledge to achieve them. For latent preference,
the users often ﬁnd them in places they visit by chance.
Any existing system using travel histories cannot recommend
vacation places matching with new goals and latent preference,
becuase they are not attained from places they have visited in
their past trips. It is likely to recommend users vacation places
similar to what the users have been to. Users cannot be excited
when the system recommends those vacation places.
This paper proposes a method to embody user requirements
for a trip, which are ambiguous in the beginning of trip
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

planning. The method estimates goals and preference of user
for trips, using photographs showing what users can experience
in speciﬁc vacation places. In the process of searching for
vacation places using photographs, it is easy for users to
image themselves there. Suppose a user is pleased with a
photograph of a speciﬁc vacation place, after imaging herself
there. It is assumed that the photograph implies her goals
and preference for trips, including not only apparent ones
but also the latent ones. The proposed method has collected
various goals and preference from many people, beforehand.
Each photograph matches with some of them. The method
associates terms representing them with the photograph in
advance. It regards associated terms as keywords to embody
her requirements for trips. The method lets the user specify the
keywords in the search bar of existing Internet search engines
for vacation places. It presents vacation places recommended
in high ranking, which enable the user to decide on the
vacation places matching with her goal and preference of trip.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 describes the present state and problems of the searching
for vacation places with the Internet. The method and the
usability of the photograph are presented in Section 3. Section
4 illustrates experiments to verify the usefulness of the method.
The paper discusses the experiment result in Section 5. Section
6 gives the conclusions and future works.
II.
HOW USERS SEARCH TRIP PLACES
A. Requirements in search of trip places
This paper deﬁnes a trip goal as what a user wants to
experience in a vacation place. For example, a user wants to
relax her body and mind with a hot-spring or refresh her in
nature. In addition to that, the paper deﬁnes a trip preference as
what the user wants to experience in the trip to achieve her trip
goal. For example, she prefers outdoor hot springs to others,
or wants to view a deep-blue sea from a height to refresh in
nature. Before the trip, the user would enjoy imaging the way
she would experience when she visits a speciﬁc vacation place
to achieve her trip goal with her trip preference. The paper
refers to a trip image as what she envisions for experience
she would take in the trip. Suppose a user desires to relax her
mind and body, or to refresh her viewing deep-blue sea from
a height. She would search for a vacation place, imaging her
experience of them. Before a trip, a user would mostly plans
for the trip. She plans a trip according to conditions in the
trip such as trip goals, partners, their preference, and so on.
Imaging concrete situations in the trip under the conditions,
the user chooses a speciﬁc vacation place. Let us consider a
trip with intimate friends for a long time. The trip planner
comprehends well common preference between her and the
intimate friends. She would make a trip plan, choosing vacation
places which make both of her and the friends enjoy. When she
thinks those vacation places, she images herself and her friends
enjoying scenes and their conversation at those vacation places.
When she thinks that one of those vacation places is suitable
in this trip, she decides to go on a trip in that place. In this
way, the user enjoys the process of deciding a vacation place
imaging situations in the trip, as well as the trip itself. It is due
to the increase of her expectation for their trip by the imaging.
She gets excited, while she is making concrete trip images
along with the trip goals and trip preference. Sometimes, she
ﬁnds new trip goals or trip preferences which excite her,
because she attains unknown vacation information. It enhances
options in the trip, which makes the trip plan more pleasant
for her. On the other hand, if she fails to make her trip goals
and trip preference clear, she can never proceed to the step to
decide on an exciting vacation place, because she imagines no
concrete situation. Travel agencies would recommend vacation
places, interviewing travelers. In the interviews, they would
make unclear trip goals and trip preference to clear ones to
excite the travelers, in order to ﬁnd good vacation places. One
of roles of travel agencies is to provide unknown vacation
information for customers, increasing their expectation for
their trip.
B. Searching for vacation places with Internet
We have conducted a questionnaire to survey user re-
quirement for time used for the search of vacation places, in
advance. In the questionnaire, users are asked whether they
prefer search in a short time if they can ﬁnd suitable vacation
places. About 92% people respond “ yes ” in this question.
It reveals people want methods with which they can ﬁnd
information to decide on vacation places in a short time and
without efforts. As one of those methods, a lot of people use
the Internet. According to the investigation in 2012 [1], 45.2%
people gather the vacation information using Internet, which
means the Internet is more frequently used than any other
major medias such as TVs, radios, and newspapers. One of
reasons which make the Internet the most popular tool is that
we can search for the travel information anytime and anywhere
with it. For example, if users ask travel agencies to make travel
plans, they must visit the agencies during their business hours.
In other words, they cannot make plans for trips if they have
no time in the business hours. Using the Internet, they can
search for travel information even in the midnight. On the other
hand, there is too much travel information on the Internet. A
user must select appropriate travel information so as to decide
on a vacation place she wants to visit. Keywords on vacation
places must be speciﬁed in the existing search engines, such
as Google [2] and major support sites for travel planning [3].
Suppose a user desires to visit hot springs she can visit within
3 hour driving from her home town. She speciﬁes the keywords
such as the province names around her home town and ”hot
spring” in the search bar of Google. It provides many web
pages including the province names and keyword ”hot spring”
in their titles and contents. She looks for useful information
in order to plan her trip from the Web pages.
C. Problems in Internet search
In the Internet search with keywords, a user must embody
her trip goals and preference in advance, so that she can specify
them in the search bar. It means that she can search for suitable
vacation place using the Internet only if she has embodied
her trip goals and trip preference. The constraint brings about
harmful inﬂuences. Users with little knowledge on trips would
have difﬁculties to embody their goals and preference for trips.
The lack of embodied goals and preference prevents them
from expanding trip images. Without expanded trip images,
they cannot conceive good keywords to be speciﬁed in search
with the Internet. Consequently, they have little chance to ﬁnd
suitable vacation places matching their trip images. On the
other hand, users with a lot of trip experiences have often ﬁxed
their trip preference. When they search for vacation places
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

in the Internet, they are likely to specify same keywords in
all cases. They are disappointed with stereotyped trip images
brought by search results. They would not be excited in
conventional events which they experienced in different places.
They experience nothing novel. They fall into a condition that
there is no places which they want to visit although they want
to go on trips. There is a common issue in both of users lacking
trip experiences and ones abundant in trip experiences. They
cannot ﬁgure out clear trip goals and preference enough to
make them exited, when they make trip plans. In order to
make search of vacation places with the Internet beneﬁcial to
them, it is inevitable for them to embody their trip goals and
preference.
D. Related works
There are existing studies to recommend vacation places
to users using the Internet [4][5][6][7]. As it is described
in the previous section, users have to embody their goals
and preference of trips so as to express them as keywords.
In order to solve this problem, the works in [8], [9] and
[10] address to recommend suitable vacation places matching
their trip goals and preference. These works use location
information of pictures the users have taken in vacation places
as their travel histories. The works recommend vacation places
through the user-based collaborative ﬁltering from the travel
histories. However, they leave 2 issues unsolved. First, they
cannot provide any vacation places matching new trip goals
or preference, because they use travel histories. Users cannot
be excited when they recommend the users vacation places
similar to what the users have been to. Second, users get
excited when they are going to experience something matching
their latent trip goals and preference. However, it is not easy
to embody latent trip goals and preference so that they can
express them as keywords. In order to solve these issues, we
need to let users get aware of their unknown trip goals and
preference they have never experienced. In addition, we need
to reﬂect their unknown trip goals or preference to the result
of recommendation. Furthermore, according to Section II-A,
it is important for all users to identify their trip goals and trip
preference, in a short time and with little effort.
III.
METHOD TO EMBODY TRIP GOAL AND PREFERENCE
A. Categories and tags
The paper proposes a method to embody trip goals and
preference of users from their browsing logs of trip place
photographs on a web site. When the users see photographs
of vacation places, users can momentarily judge whether they
want to visit or not there, because photographs give users
more intuitive impressions than texts. In addition, photographs
represent vacation places as they are. Users can expand easily
their trip images through photographs of vacation places.
Photographs express moods, which are difﬁcult for texts to
convey. Consequently, users can expand their trip image from
photographs more concretely than text. The paper assumes
that a photograph presented to users on a web site has one
big object and background, as depicted in Figure 1. When
users looking for vacation places see photographs of speciﬁc
sightseeing points, they immediately judge whether vacation
places in the photographs match with their trip goal or not. If
they match, the method assumes they want to enjoy the mood
big objects and backgrounds in the photographs bring. This
Fig. 1. Photograph using proposed method
paper refers to the mood as a category. It is expressed with
a phrase such as ”hot springs” and ”landscape”. The category
is used to estimate a trip goal of an user. In addition to that,
this paper refers to the object shown in the photograph as its
core as a tag. The tag is also expressed with a phrase such as
”outdoor bath” and ”sunset”. The tag plays an important role to
estimate trip preference of the user. When a user searches for
vacation places using photographs, it is easy for her to image
herself in the vacation place. Imagining herself in the vacation
place, she considers whether the background and the object
in the photograph suit her trip preference. In this process, she
embodies her unclear trip preference, seeing the object in the
photograph.
Photographs used in this study have more than one category
and tag. For example, the photograph in Figure 1 has the
categories, ”nature” and ”Buddhist temple”, and the tags,
”tinted autumnal leaves” and ”temple”. Various categories and
tags are chosen to represent trip goals and preference common
to many users. We prepare so many photographs that they
should cover all common trip goals and preference without
loss. We make correspondence of each photograph to some of
trip goals and preference. Users can embody their unknown
trip goal and preference when they see the photograph in the
process of imagining their trips.
B. Embodying trip goal and preference from photographs
The method makes trip goals and preference of users clear
so that vacation places can be easily searched with exciting
search engines on the Internet. It lets users embody their trip
goals and preference, which would be used as keywords for
search engines. Users are supposed to specify the keywords for
search engines to ﬁnd vacation places suitable for the users.
Figure 2 illustrates the overview of the method. In the method,
users increase points of photographs which contain her favorite
combination of objects and backgrounds. The increment is
referred to as“evaluation ”by users. The points are provided
for categories and tags associated with the photographs. In
the screen where many trip photographs arranged in a random
order, the method lets users evaluate her favorite ones. The trip
photographs are arranged on the screen, according to the order
calculated with Equation (1). pm is the probability category m
is selected. Et is the entropy of time point t.
Et = −
∑
m
pm log2 pm
(1)
Through the user evaluation of photographs, the method
estimates their trip goals and preference. As Equation (1)
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Fig. 2. Overview of method
shows, trip photographs on one screen are arranged so that the
entropy in the screen is maximized in terms of trip goal and
preference. When users choose speciﬁc ones from randomly
arranged photographs, they are biased against the particular
trip goal and preference represented with the photographs.
Suppose a speciﬁc category or tag reach is evaluated more than
a predeﬁned threshold times by a user. The user is estimated to
have interests in a trip goal or preference corresponding to the
category or the tag. At that time, a new screen appears. The
screen is ﬁlled up with new photographs corresponding to the
category or the tag chosen in the previous screen. The method
lets the user evaluate photographs in the new screen, again. It
aims at estimating other trip goals or preference, assuming
the uses have the chosen trip goals and preference. When
the number of estimated trip goals and preference reach to
predeﬁned one, the method ﬁnishes evaluation of photographs
by user, considering it has already gather trip goals and
preference sufﬁciently. After that, it passes estimated trip goals
and preference as keywords of search engines to recommend
vacation place.
C. Evaluation with enlargement and selection
The method estimates trip goals and preference of a user
by evaluating photographs. Figure 3 shows the screen for eval-
uation with photographs. From the screen, a user is assumed
to enlarge or select photographs which suit her trip goals and
preference.
A photograph is enlarged when its main object pleases her,
as depicted in ﬁgure 3. Since the size of photographs for the
evaluation is 64 pixels in both of the length and width, the
user would desire to make their image clearer with a simple
way, when they focus on them. A user can enlarge photographs
when the mouse pointer hovers over them more than 1 second.
When the user enlarges the photograph, the method adds a
point to the categories the photograph corresponds to, because
the method regards she likes the mood it presents.
The photograph is selected when the enlarged photograph
is clicked. When the user judges the photograph suits her trip
preference after her enlargement, she selects it to conﬁrm its
detail. The method considers the user takes the selection action,
because she has strong interests in the photograph after the
enlargement. The method regards she tries to conﬁrm its detail
Fig. 3. Screen of evaluation
with the selection, when she has judged its object suits her trip
image well.
Suppose a user enlarges and selects the photograph having
a hot-spring category and an outdoor bath tag. The method
estimates that she is pleased with the mood the photograph
presents. It adds a point to the hot-spring category. At the same
time, the selection makes the method estimate that photograph
suits her trip preference. The Outdoor bath tag gains a point.
D. Recommendation of vacation places
The trip goals and preference of the user are extracted as
categories and tags represented with phrases. Using extracted
phrases as keyword, the method searches for vacation places
with a major travel support site [3] for travel planning. The
site provides vacation places associated with the keywords in
their information and reviews from other travelers. The method
recommends the top 5 vacation places in the recommendation
ranking. It recommends more than one vacation places because
the user can choose geographically suitable places for her trip.
Suppose the categories and tags ﬁnally estimated as trip goals
and preference of the user are “hot spring”, “outdoor bath”,
“sunset” and “sea” through the evaluation of photographs. The
method searches for vacation places, presenting the estimating
phrases as keywords. As a result of the search based on the
keywords, some hot spring resorts are presented such as ones
allowing traveler to enjoy sunset from the outdoor bath.
IV.
USABILITY OF RECOMMENDATION USING
PHOTOGRAPHS
A. Threshold for evaluation times
We have developed a Web based system to evaluate
the usability of the method. The system presents numerous
photographs using several screens. When a user evaluates
a speciﬁc category or a speciﬁc tag more than predeﬁned
times, another screen appears, ﬁlled with new photographs.
The thresholds for the evaluation times for categories and tags
are θc and θt, respectively. We have conducted a preliminary
experiment in order to decide on the thresholds. The prelim-
inary experiment examines the combination of the 2 kinds
of thresholds which brings the largest satisfaction of users
for vacation places. Let us refer to the number of enlarging
or selecting photographs associated with a speciﬁc category
or a speciﬁc tag as the number of evaluation times. Table I
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

TABLE I. COMBINATION OF THE NUMBER OF EVALUATION
A
B
C
D
Number of evaluation for category
8
10
12
14
Number of evaluation for tag
4
5
6
7
TABLE II. LIST OF CATEGORIES AND TAGS (1)
landscape
nature
hot springs
seaside
tinted autumnal leaves
outdoor bath
native province
cherry blossoms
indoor bath
prospect
bamboo forest
hot spring district
river
pine-covered area
public bath
star sky
valley
night view
forest
shows 4 kinds of combinations of the number of evaluation
times for categories and tags examined in the preliminary
experiment. 100 Vietnamese university students from 19 years
old to 20 years old have joined to the experiment as test
subjects. The 100 test subjects are divided into 4 groups, each
of them consists of 25 people. Let us refer to them such
as “A”, “B”, “C” and “D”. In the preliminary experiment,
subjects use the web site, imaging the place which they want
to visit in Japan. They choose their favorite vacation places
among recommended ones. They express their satisfaction
degrees for each vacation place recommended as a ﬁnal result
in a questionnaire. Since combination C brings the highest
satisfaction, the thresholds for the evaluation times to present
a new screen are θc = 12，θt = 6.
B. Experiment to verify usability of photographs
We have conducted a main experiment to verify the us-
ability of this method, under the following condition. When
the number of estimated trip goals and preference reach to
predeﬁned thresholds for trip goal, θp, and for trip preference,
θo, the method ﬁnishes evaluation by a speciﬁc subject. In the
main experiment, θp = 3 and θo = 2. Furthermore, the method
ﬁnishes the evaluation in case a subject evaluates photographs
more than the predeﬁned maximum number. In the main
experiment, the maximum number of the evaluation is 50.
Table II and Table III show the categories and tags used in this
experiment. The categories and tags are determined referring
to the items of trip genre in a travel support site for travel
planning [3] so that any prejudice affects the arbitrariness
of the experiment. To prepare trip photographs used in the
experiment, the names of categories and tags in the Table
II and III are speciﬁed as keywords in Google visual search
[11]. From photographs the site presents, we manually select
photographs suitable for trip photographs from viewpoints of
comprehensibleness.
There are 4 points to be veriﬁed in this experiment. The
ﬁrst point is the ability of trip photographs to allow users
embody their trip goals and preference. The second one is the
satisfaction degree of users for vacation places recommended
based on the embodiment of their trip goals and preference.
Third, we have examined whether users can search for vacation
places matching their trip goals and preference in a short time.
Finally, we verify the method enables users to search for more
easily vacation places, compared with the major support sites
TABLE III. LIST OF CATEGORIES AND TAGS (2)
event
sport
Buddhist temple
carnival
camp
temple
illuminations
water sports
shrine
the Star Festival
mountain climbing
tradition
ski slope
sea bathing
TABLE IV. LIST OF CATEGORIES AND TAGS (3)
leisure spots
vehicle
history
Japanese-style hotel
amusement park
sightseeing boat
Japanese castle
seafood
aquarium
ropeway
historic spot
food of the mountain
zoo
truck
historic building
tea lunch
botanical gardens
old highway
atmosphere
shopping
garden
European
art gallery
pasture
for travel planning. The test subjects are 18 male students and
7 female students of universities in Japan. Their ages range
from 18 years old to 26 years old. The experiment compares
the proposed method with the way with which people generally
search for vacation places with search engines through the
Internet. The paper refers it to as the conventional way. This
experiment supposes 2 situations. The ﬁrst one supposes a user
searches a spring trip in a place where she and her friends have
never been. In the second one, a user searches for vacation
places which please her close friend or her boyfriend in their
winter vacation. In this experiment, 25 test subjects are divided
into 2 groups: A and B. The grouping aims to reduce the
inﬂuence of test subjects which have variance in their ability
to image the speciﬁed situation easily. The experiment lets one
group apply the proposed method to the spring situation and
the conventional method to the winter situation, while the other
searches for vacation places for the spring situation with the
conventional method and for winter situation with the proposed
method. This experiment lets each of test subjects search for
a single vacation place which best suits for an image the test
subject has for each situation.
In the experiment, ﬁrst, a user searches for one vacation
place which satisﬁes her best for the speciﬁed situation, using
the conventional method. Second, using the proposed method,
the user chooses one vacation place which best suits for the
other situation. Finally, in regard to the vacation places they
ﬁnd out in the process above, we have asked several questions
to the user. After the proposed method estimates the trip
goals and preference of the user, we have prepared 3 sets
of keywords; the ﬁrst one consists of only the trip goals,
the second includes only the trip preference, and the last is
composed of both of the trip goals and the trip preference. For
each of 3 keyword sets, we have collected 5 vacation places
at most. Since the number of collected vacation places varies
with keyword sets, the total number of recommended vacation
places ranges from 5 to 15. Each test subject determines a
single vacation place he or she wants to visit most.
C. Embodiment of trip goals and preference
We examined whether users can embody their trip goals
and preference with trip photographs. In the questionnaire
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Fig. 4. User satisfaction
TABLE V. Average and dispersion of working time
Conventional method
Proposed method
Average
35.32
7.045
Dispersion
387.25
12.39
asking “Can you embody your trip image with the trip pho-
tographs?”, about 92% users said “yes”. It showed users were
able to embody their trip image. It seemed that users enlarged
or selected trip photographs to see the details of what were
presented in the photographs. They examined the details to
see whether the photographs met their goals and preference.
Operations of enlarging or selecting photographs implied trip
goals and preference of users. Furthermore, in interviews after
the experiment, some users uttered that the photographs made
them aware trip preference they had never found. As a result,
users were able to ﬁnd out their latent trip preference from the
photographs.
D. Satisfaction for vacation places
Let us see whether users were satisﬁed with vacation
places recommended based on their trip goals and preference.
According to the results of the experiment, about 64% of
users were satisﬁed with recommended vacation places. Figure
4 compares the number of users satisﬁed with the proposed
method with that of users satisﬁed with the conventional
method for the same situations. The comparison of the 2 results
indicates the proposed method recommended vacation places
with the same level of satisfaction as the conventional method.
E. Time for searching
Since most users need a recommendation method which
presents vacation places with few operations, it is important
whether users can search for vacation places corresponding
to their trips goals and preference in a short time. Table V
compares the proposed method with the conventional method
in terms of the working time, and its mean along with the
deviation, respectively. Users took 7 minutes in average to ﬁnd
out favorite vacation places with the proposed one, while 35
minutes in average with the conventional one. Moreover, all of
users were able to ﬁnd out the vacation places in shorter time
with the proposed one than the conventional one. Together
with the result of the previous section, the proposed method
contributes to ﬁnding as much satisfying vacation places as the
conventional method in a shorter time.
F. Effort for searching
It makes no sense if users need lots of effort to search
for vacation places using this method. There are the results
of the questionnaire asking the following 2 points. The ﬁrst
question is “which method makes you go into deep thought,
the conventional method or the proposed method?” The second
is “which do you think impose more bothersome operations,
the conventional method or the proposed method?” In the ﬁrst
question, about 72% users said “the conventional method”.
In the second question, about 76% users said “the conven-
tional method”. In regard to the result, we have tested any
difference of this method from the conventional method with
the chi-square test. The null hypothesis was that there was no
difference between the conventional method and the proposed
method, while the alternative hypothesis was that there was
a difference between them. Table VI and VII show the test
results. Regarding to the ﬁrst question, there was a difference
at the signiﬁcant level of 5%. There was a signiﬁcant difference
in at the 1% level as for the second question. From both
viewpoints, the proposed method allowed users to search for
easily vacation places than the conventional method.
TABLE VI. RESLUT OF FIRST QUESTION
Answer
Chi-square
4.84
Flexibility
1
p-value
0.0278069
TABLE VII. RESULT OF SECOND QUESTION
Answer
Chi-square
6.76
Flexibility
1
p-value
0.009322376
V.
DISCUSSION
A. Improving precision of estimation
Let us consider to improve the precision for the estimation
of trip goals and preference of users. In the questionnaire to
be answered in 5 grades, about 36 percent of users answered
“ normal ”or“ a weak dissatisfaction ”with vacation places
the proposed method recommends. As reasons of the dissatis-
faction, some users mentioned the followings.
1)
“It does not seem photographs I have chosen are not
reﬂected to determine vacation place candidates. ”
2)
“ Though I have chosen many food photographs, the
method mainly presents photographs of ruins or red
leaves of autumn in the next screen. ”
The dissatisfaction may attribute to low quality in estimating
trip goals and preference of users using categories and tags
associated with photographs.
Reason 1 implies a problem on the way to select new
photographs to be presented for users from their operations
on previous photographs. New photographs are selected using
categories and tags attached to previous ones. It is suspected
categories and tags are determined based on the arbitrariness
of the implementers of the proposed method. Suppose a user
prefers a photograph because she likes the sky presented in
it, while tags indicating a temple and red leaves are attached
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

to it. Though the method values tags indicating a temple and
red leaves, it never picks up the trip preference of the user
directing the sky. In this experiment, the implementers have
determined manually categories and tags, which allows the
arbitrariness of the implementers to be reﬂected strongly on
them. Consequently, it is conceivable trip goals and preference
are estimated using photographs whose categories and tags
are biased. It prevents the method from estimating proper trip
goals and preference users have. We need an objective way to
determine relevant categories and tags.
Reason 2 notiﬁes us of unfairness in the evaluation of
photographs. The method evaluates all categories and tags
with a constant weight, when a user enlarges or selects a
photograph. Objects on photographs have large variety in their
size. Depending on the size, they provide different impressions.
For example, if a user looks at a photograph with cherry blos-
soms expanding, she necessarily focus on the cherry blossoms.
However, if a photograph shows cherry blossoms in small size
in front of big Mt.Fuji, a user may not always focus on cherry
blossoms. The evaluation with constant weights is unfair for
photographs containing objects of various size. One way for
the improvement is to reﬂect the size ratio of objects to weight
to evaluate photographs.
Solutions on these problems would improve the precision
in the estimation of trip goals and preference of users.
B. Improving satisfaction for vacation places
Some users show dissatisfaction for recommended vacation
places, because the method presents only places they have
already visited, or the method recommends vacation places
they cannot visit. A main reason for the dissatisfaction is lack
of consideration of travel histories and hometowns of users.
Without the consideration, the method may recommend vaca-
tion places users have been to, or cannot visit geographically.
The method can avoid the problems, taking travel histories
and hometowns of users into consideration in advance. It
needs to construct a data base reﬂecting travel histories and
hometowns of users. The data base should classify vacation
places associated with categories and tags into geographical
areas to calculate the accessibility of users. It should also
register vacation place each user has been to in advance. Rec-
ommendation of vacation places using the data base satisﬁes
more users.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper has proposed a method to embody user require-
ments for trips. The method estimates trip goals and preference
of users who enlarge and select trip photographs during they
are making trip plans. After the estimation of the trip goals
and preference, the method speciﬁes them as keywords in a
major support site for travel planning, to get recommends on
vacation places which suit for trip goal and preference of each
user. An experiment has proved about 64% users are satisﬁed
with vacation places recommend using this method, which is as
reliable as conventional methods. All of users can materially
shorten the time to decide on their vacation places with the
proposed method than with the conventional one. Users can
decide on trip plans suitable for them in a short time with
the method. We have also discussed objective categories and
tags, as well as construction of a data base to enhance user
satisfaction as our future works.
REFERENCES
[1]
Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecom-
munications (2012) White paper Information and Communications in
Japan: http://www.soumu.go.jp/johotsusintokei/whitepaper/ja/h24/html/
nc123340.html [retrieved: 12, 2014]
[2]
Google: http://www.google.co.jp/ [retrieved: 12, 2014]
[3]
Jaran saported by Recruit: http://www.jalan.net/ [retrived: 12, 2014]
[4]
Vincent. W. Zheng, et al. ”Towards mobile intelligence: Learning
from GPS history data for collaborative recommendation.” Artiﬁcial
Intelligence 184 2012, pp. 17-37.
[5]
Ye. Mao, et al. ”Exploiting geographical inﬂuence for collaborative
point-of-interest recommendation.” Proceedings of the 34th interna-
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in In-
formation Retrieval. ACM, 2011, pp. 325-334.
[6]
Michele. A. Burton, et al. ”Crowdsourcing subjective fashion advice
using VizWiz: challenges and opportunities.” Proceedings of the 14th
international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and acces-
sibility. ACM, 2012, pp. 135-142.
[7]
Joan. Borrs, et al. ”Intelligent tourism recommender systems: A survey.”
Expert Systems with Applications 41.16 2014, pp. 7370-7389.
[8]
Marco. Mamei, et al. ”Automatic Analysis of Geotagged Photos for
Intelligent Tourist Services.” Intelligent Environments. 2010, pp. 146-
151.
[9]
Maarten. Clements, et al. ”Using ﬂickr geotags to predict user travel be-
haviour.” Proceedings of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM, 2010, pp.
851-852.
[10]
Adrian. Popescu. and Gregory. Grefenstette. ”Mining social media to
create personalized recommendations for tourist visits.” Proceedings of
the 2nd International Conference on Computing for Geospatial Research
& Applications. ACM, 2011, pp. 37.
[11]
Google visual search: https://www.google.co.jp/imghp?hl=ja&tab=wi
[retrived: 12, 2014]
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

