VoIP Systems Management using Internet Protocol Detail Records 
Luis H. Gibeli, Gean D. Breda, Bruno B. Zarpelão, Rodrigo S. Miani, Liniquer K. Vieira, Leonardo de S. Mendes  
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Campinas (UNICAMP) 
Campinas – SP - Brazil 
{ l044877, gean, bzarpe, rsmiani, liniquer, lmendes} @decom.fee.unicamp.br 
 
Abstract—The increasing demand for latency sensitive services 
through the Internet imposes the development of networks 
capable of delivering quality of service. These networks 
require the use of enhanced traffic management tools. This 
paper performs an analysis of IP telephony or VoIP traffic 
considering Internet Protocol Detail Record (IPDRs). When a 
VoIP call occurs upon the Internet, a ticket (a file record) is 
generated to produce information regarding that specific call. 
These files are called Internet Protocol Detail Record. The 
IPDR, which is generated for every VoIP call, contains 
information related to the history of the call. The full set of 
information in the IPDRs carries a very comprehensive 
description of what happened to the call and can provide 
valuable information about the state of the network during the 
history of the call. Therefore, IPDRs can be used to establish 
network traffic baselines. This paper presents the development 
of a baseline that supports VoIP traffic management in Open 
Access MANs. Our main conclusion is that this method can be 
used to manage VoIP networks. 
 
Keywords-Voice 
Over 
Internet 
Protocol; 
Network 
Management; Open Access Metropolitan Area Networks; IPDR. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As of the mid 90’s, with the steady evolution of 
technologies, the telecommunications networks have become 
more and more complex, being capable of bearing multiple 
services. These services a 
re part of a heterogeneous set of pieces of information 
which can be sent through the Internet, for instance, the 
telephone calls. In telephony companies, the voice 
transmission has been migrating from the classic telephony 
model to the IP networks, thanks to the development of VoIP 
technology [1][2].  
In the beginning of its utilization, the VoIP technology 
lacked service quality and raised interest only from a specific 
group of users. Among VoIP technology qualities are its low 
cost, mobility and multiple functionalities. It, therefore, has 
become a challenge [3][4] to assure quality to the service 
within acceptable standards. 
A solution which has demonstrated good results 
regarding to the QoS guarantee is the Open Access 
Metropolitan Area Networks which operate on broad bands 
[5]. Nevertheless, the quality of service (QoS) during the 
calls must be as good as possible, once, nowadays, the users 
have been becoming more and more impatient with the 
instability and unavailability of the network. 
The Open Access Metropolitan Area Networks [6] are 
examples of high speed networks that can be utilized to 
transmit multimedia services, such as: voice, video and data. 
The Open Access MANs are models for IP network 
architecture whose one of the main objectives is to 
interconnect public buildings to the people of the 
municipality through a convergent multimedia network. 
A solution to improve the behavior of the service in the 
systems is to create automation in the functions on 
management, aiming, mainly, to mitigate the interruption of 
services, to optimize the allocation of resources, to reduce 
costs and to, proactively, detect failures. A way to enhance 
and upgrade the VoIP traffic management is the utilization of 
tickets named IP Detail Record (IPDR) [7]. The IPDRs are 
tickets generated in the voice  PABX(Private Automatic 
Branch Exchange)/gateways during the event of a VoIP call, 
similar to the CDRS (Call Detail Records) which are 
generated in the conventional telephony [8]. The IPDR 
function is to supply detailed information of the whole 
history of a call. The IPDR standard was defined by the 
IPDR Organization and the Telemanagement Forum [9]. 
Our objective in this article is to propose a new 
management methodology for the VoIP system through the 
construction of baselines based on the IPDRs analyses. In 
other words, we seek to offer a new approach/methodology 
that may contribute to increase quality of service through the 
characterization of the VoIP traffic. Another component is to 
study the feasibility of using this model in the process of 
detecting failures and anomalous behavior. An important 
factor for this study progress was the lack of an efficient 
monitoring/management model of the IP telephony system 
based on the characteristics of phone calls. We do believe in 
the potential of new methods that approach to the analysis of 
the VoIP technology behavior and see this behavior from the 
point of view of the events that happen in the traditional 
telephony: completed call, call congestion, no answer, wrong 
dialing, busy lines, and technical failure. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  
Section II  presents the IPDR and the Pedreira´s Open 
Access MAN. Section III describes the IPDR classification. 
Section IV presents the concepts of Baselines. Section V 
describes the case study conducted in Pedreira’s Open 
Access MAN. Section VI concludes the paper and discusses 
future works. 
II. 
INTERNET PROTOCOL DETAIL RECORD 
As previously stated, the IPDR provides detailed 
information about the call. These tickets are essentially 
utilized in the generation of telephone accounts, that is, in the 
billing of calls made. There is a limited number of works 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

which focus on IPDRs. Tartarelli, et al. [10], has addressed 
the ticket analysis to manage the conventional telephone 
traffic by identifying problems and observing the utilization 
profile. He has analyzed a large amount of he logs and 
recorded all their background to help other operators with 
similar difficulties. A fraud management system (FMS) was 
developed based on the analysis of IPDRs carried out by 
Ruiz-Agundez and Bihina Bella [11][12]. They have 
proposed this system in NGN (Next Generation Network). In 
Proença, et al. [13], a baseline is proposed regarding to 
reliability and safety metrics in order to help network 
administrators with the system management. In Tartarelli, et 
al. [10], an approach is suggested in which the logs of 
gathered data were analyzed by a self-organized mapping 
system made up of neural networks capable of detecting 
frauds. 
Another possibility is to employ the CDRs and IPDRs to 
run an analysis in relation to the social aspects of the users. 
In Dasgupta, et al. [14], the authors analyze the CDRs to 
model the behavior of calls made by people who used to 
change operators very often. The objective of the authors in 
that case was to investigate the possibility of a person 
arbitrates to change operator led by influence of friends who 
had done that before. Besides, they propose an approach 
which aims to identify people who show bigger potential for 
changing operator based on their contact network. In 
addition to that, IPDRs and CDRs can be utilized to develop 
failure detection systems in communication. In Breda’s and 
Mendes’ [9] works, the performance of the algorithms was 
analyzed to detect failures through the CDRs analysis.   
 
A. Creation of IPDRs 
As we have already mentioned, the IPDRs are tickets 
generated in each call trial, no matter the call has been 
completed or not. Table 1 shows an example of IPDR in 
which some fields are shown. The most common use of the 
IPDR is in the pricing of subscriptions. Nevertheless, the 
IPDRs can also be utilized in the consumption management, 
traffic analysis, user profile definition, system dimensioning, 
among other applications. 
 
TABLE 1. IPDR EXAMPLE 
 
Type
Switch
Start Time
End Time A Phone Number ... B Phone Number
00
35
17:17:25
17:19:58
22221056
22221089
00
35
17:17:28
17:17:35
22221087
38932221
00
2
17:17:30
17:28:01
22221045
22221007
00
35
17:17:31
17:18:33
22221009
97435330
00
35
17:17:31
17:21:04
22221033
22221029
 
 
To subsidize our research along the six-month period, 
from January to June/2009, the IPDRs generated inside the 
Open 
Access 
Metropolitan 
Area 
Networks 
in 
the 
municipality of Pedreira were collected. This network was 
designed and, in part, managed by the Communications 
Laboratory of  School of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering at University of Campinas (UNICAMP). The 
objective was to gather a real base of IPDRs, within an 
acceptable time interval so that the baselines developed were 
according to reality. One of the main reasons to take those 
IPDRs in consideration to generate the baselines was that 
such IPDR database had been already set up in the MANs 
PABX/gateways. It is surely a reliable source of information 
which portraits a real full-functioning environment.  
 
B. Open Access Metropolitan Area Networks & VoIP 
The Open Access MANs can be characterized as being 
an infrastructure that allows the convergence of applications 
and multimedia services in municipal scope [15]. Such 
network calls attention for its high transmission capacity and 
for the gathering of different kinds of information. One can 
say the Open Access MANs stand for the public highways of 
information . 
A difference between the existing communication 
networks and the metropolitan networks is that the Open 
Access MAN have a universalizing character, and because 
they are multi-service ones, they can enable the distribution 
of various contents such as voice, video and data in a simple 
and unified way, what is currently taken in a separate way by 
the traditional operators. 
Figure 1 shows the physical structure of the Open Access 
MAN of the city of Pedreira [16]. The network interconnects 
various public buildings, such as: city hall, board of 
educational, police station, hospital, municipal schools, 
daycare 
institutions, 
secretaries, 
houses, 
etc. 
The 
interconnection makes use of two technologies: optical 
enlacements and radio links. The lines in red stand for the 
optical fiber backbone of 1 Gigabit (1000BaseLX) 
connections. 
 
 
Figure 1. Open Access MAN physical structure – City of Pedreira. 
 
The yellow dotted lines show the radio enlacements 
(IEEE 802.11a), where the light green circles are the wireless 
coverage areas for connecting the citizens to the 
Internet/network (IEEE802.11 b/g/n). The network is based 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

on the Ethernet standard, and the communication protocol 
employed is the TCP/IP. 
The main objective on implementing the VoIP systems in 
the Open MANs is the cost reduction of calls once the voice 
traffic happens on the pre-existing data network. The IP 
connections (VoIP to VoIP) are free of charge. VoIP calls to 
conventional telephones will have a decrease in the billing 
charge. The IP telephony in the Open Access MANs can 
offer a residential extension through which the citizens can 
talk to one another at no cost. 
Based on the statistics framed in [17], the utilization of 
VoIP extensions for intra-communication of buildings linked 
to public administration has generated a 76% savings in the 
city hall telephone bills, when compared to traditional 
telephony. 
City Hall of Pedreira has adopted the VoIP technology to 
interlink all the public facilities. The configuration of the IP 
Telephony network follows the structure as displayed in the 
Figure 2. 
III. 
IPDR CLASSIFICATION 
The entire set of IPDR gathered needs to be classified. 
Categorizing an IPDR is basically to say what happened to it 
as the call went on. It is to create a taxonomy (from the 
Greek tassein = classify and nomos = rule, law). The 
taxonomy varies from system to system, that is, for mobile 
telephony there are events, which are different from fixed 
telephony and from VoIP. For instance: for a system based 
on VoIP it is not possible to single problems out in a given 
station ahead, once in an IP network the traffic may follow 
distinctive paths to reach their destinations. In the fixed 
telephony there will not be Radio Stations Bases, RF 
blackout, common events that usually happens in Cellular 
Systems. Besides all that, there are always common events 
among different systems, such as: completed calls, trunk 
congestion, busy lines, no answer, and wrong dialing. 
 
 
Figure 2. Basic configuration of VoIP in the Open Access MAN of Pedreira. 
  
Every IPDR is submitted to classification which is done 
according to the pieces of information contained in the fields 
of the tickets. One of the contributions in this work was the 
categorization, which led to the taxonomy of IPDR tickets. 
As previously mentioned, to classify a call is like 
attaching a label to each ticket with information about the 
call destination. It is possible to create a large number of 
events to classify the tickets. Each one can be divided into 
sub-events, that is, sub-divisions which reflect the 
peculiarities of each event. An IPDR field of outstanding 
relevance in the creation of taxonomy is the field related to 
“call status”. This field reveals typically four situations: 
OK: for calls successfully accomplished. 
NOT OK: when the destination could not be found. 
TO: when the remote terminal was busy at that time. 
FAILED: when some kind of failure happened during the 
generation of the call. 
The “call status” field is known in the conventional 
telephony as “ending of selection” and indicates what may 
have occurred to the calls as they left the PABX and were 
forwarded, or also, events related to the ones coming in to 
the PABX. This piece of information is of utmost importance 
in the classification of tickets. Of course, the “ending of 
selection” field is not the only one to be considered at the 
moment taxonomy is created. Most of the fields owns 
relevant information and must be taken in consideration as 
events and sub-events relative to IPDRs are developed.  
Table 2 presents the taxonomy created to describe 
possible call records. 
 
TABLE 2. CLASSIFICATION FOR IPDRS 
 
Event 
Description 
CELE 
Indicates established calls Local => External 
CELI-A 
Indicates established call Local => Internal (context of 
A call) 
CELI-
A1 
Indicates local established calls on extensions. 
CELI-
A1.1 
Indicates local established calls which were terminated 
suddenly 
CELI-
A1.2 
Indicates local established calls with use of waiting 
music  
CELI-
A1.3 
Indicates local established calls with extension 
transference  
CELI-
A1.4 
Indicates local established calls with generation of 
voice message 
CNEE 
Indicates external non-established calls 
CNEI-A 
Indicates internal non-established calls (context of A 
call) 
CNEI-
A1 
Indicates internal non-established calls, once there was 
no answer from destination 
CNEI-
A2 
Indicates internal non-established calls due to 
junction/circuit overflow.  
TO 
Indicates calls whose  destination telephone is busy 
FCE-A 
Failure occurrence when executing external call (A call 
context) 
FCE-A1 
FCE-A due to incorrect dialing 
FCE-A2 
FCE-A due to channel overflow without feedback of 
signal/message  
FCE-A3 
FCE-A due to channel overflow with feedback 
message  
FCE-A4 
FCE-A due to channel overflow without feedback 
signal 
FCE-A5 
FCE-A during IPDR generation 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

The classified tickes will be used to create the baselines. 
It is possible to create baselines for each type of event or 
classification. Therefore, there will be a baseline for the 
number of calls successfully established to an external 
number per hour, another baseline for the number of calls 
established successfully internally per hour and so on. 
Table 3 contains an example of classified tickets. 
Comparing both Table 1 and 3 it is possible to see that the 
unique difference between them resides in the fact that the 
latter displays a new field where the classification is. 
 
TABLE 3. CLASSIFIED  IPDRS 
 
Type
Switch
Start Time
End Time A Phone Number ... B Phone Number Classification
00
35
17:17:25
17:19:58
22221056
22221089
CELE-A
00
35
17:17:28
17:17:35
22221087
38932221
FCE-A2
00
2
17:17:30
17:28:01
22221045
22221007
CELE-A
00
35
17:17:31
17:18:33
22221009
97435330
CELE-A
00
35
17:17:31
17:21:04
22221033
22221029
CELE-A
 
IV. 
BASELINES 
With 
the 
continuous 
increase 
in 
demand 
for 
telecommunication services, more and more necessary is to 
automate the management of networks in order to optimize 
the 
resources, 
reduce 
costs, 
prevent 
from 
service 
unavailability, detect failures and avoid bottlenecks. Besides 
that, it is necessary to have a reliable network for providing 
latency sensitive services, as it is the case of VoIP 
technology. We do believe a far-reaching component for the 
automation of networks is the establishment of baselines. 
They stand for the natural behavior profile of the network. 
The baseline supplies subsidies for the administrator to make 
more accurate decision on management abnormalities or any 
other troubles that might be going on. 
This work, as previously mentioned, proposes the 
building of baselines relative to VoIP calls by making use of 
the IPDRs. The process of generating the baselines begins 
when a user makes a VoIP call. This call is processed and 
after that an IPDR is generated. The IPDR, then, is stored in 
a database. Next, the tickets are classified according to this 
taxonomy created. Once the tickets are classified, they can 
be used to build the baselines. 
Baselines have three dimensions: event x element x time. 
The baselines can reveal the various behaviors (events) of 
the network, such as overflowing, completed calls, 
transferences, busy lines, wrong dialing, etc. Beyond 
reflecting all these network behaviors, the baseline can be 
developed on the basis of all components of the network, for 
instance: telephone number, telephone prefixes, area codes, 
physical resources (extensions, junctions, PABX stations, 
and gateways). It is also possible to work with temporal 
representations like hourly, daily, weekly, monthly and 
annual periods. 
It is meaningful to emphasize the IPDR utilization 
potential, for any of these three combinations can be taken to 
build a baseline. This leads to a very substantial flexibility 
which results in versatility/efficiency to manage the system.   
 
V. 
CREATION OF BASELINES 
This section shows some examples of baselines that were 
created. To create the baselines we have used IPDRs relative 
to the commercial time, considering that,  at that time, the 
city hall staff was on duty and, therefore, making the large 
number of calls.  
The Figure 3 shows the baseline created to estimate the 
amount of calls made throughout the day. This Figure shows 
the profile of telephone usage. As it can be seen, the results 
demonstrate a good adjustment between the baseline and the 
real data, which are data related to the subsequent day, at the 
end of the sample taken to develop the baseline. The sample 
to create the baseline took a four commercial-week time, that 
is, from Monday to Friday from 8 am to 5 pm. Also, 
regarding to this Figure, it is possible to see that the biggest 
concentration of calls occurs between 11 am and 2 pm.  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
10
11
14
15
16
17
Number of Calls
Time (Hours)
BASELINE
REAL DATA
 
Figure 3. Amount of calls in one day. 
 
Figure 4 shows a comparison between the baseline of 
local established calls, internal network (CELI-A) and its 
real traffic. Around 2:00 pm, there was a peak of internal 
calls successfully established, and not predicted by the 
baseline. Once they are successfully established calls, this 
behavior deviation is somehow beneficial to the network. It 
is not a problem since there was an increase in the volume of 
completed calls. Anyway, it is a behavior to be investigated. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
11
14
15
10
11
4
Number of Calls - CELI-A
Time (Hours)
BASELINE
REAL DATA
 
Figure 4. Baseline of established internal calls. 
 
Figure 5 shows the baseline created to demonstrate the 
behavior of established calls addressed to PSTN(Public 
Switch Telephone Network). This type of baseline can 
supply interesting pieces of information relative to calls, 
because in any PSTN problem it will have a decline in the 
amount of established calls. This helps detect problems in 
the network operators so that it can take pro-active action in 
order to reestablish the service. It is important to evidence 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

that the baselines can give the possibilities to find out the 
problems in interconnected networks to ours, even if we do 
not have any management power on those networks. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
10
11
14
15
16
17
Number of calls 
Time(Hours)
BASELINE
REAL DATA
 
Figure 5. Baseline of the amount of calls to PSTN. 
 
Another interesting approach to the construction of 
baselines is to analyze the internal telephonic traffic. In the 
Figure 6 the calls addressed to the Board of Educational  
phone extension lines were a source for the creation of this 
baseline. Looking at the curves it is possible to realize a good 
adjustment between the baseline and the curve that 
represents the real traffic. This baseline is shown to highlight 
the potential of this methodology. We can go from a specific 
extension to an area code (telephone number) of a 
municipality or state. It is possible to choose either physical 
elements or logical ones.  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
10
11
14
15
16
17
Number of calls 
Time(Hours)
BASELINE
REAL DATA
 
Figure 6. Baseline of the amount of calls to Board of Educational Extension 
lines. 
 
The baseline in Figure 7 stands for the mapping of 
internal calls not established because of troubles in the exit 
junction (CNEI-A2). According to comparison between the 
baseline and the real curve, it is possible to identify a big 
deviation after 3 pm in the day analyzed. Such deviation 
means a problem, as there was excessive degradation, that is, 
a remarkable increase of uncompleted calls due to 
malfunctions in the exit junctions. 
We are casting algorithms that can be used to detect 
possible flaws going on the network. In [9], Breda and 
Mendes, it was researched algorithms that were being 
employed in the detection of malfunctions based on the 
utilization of CDRs (Call Detail Records) as a source of 
information. As it was already explained, the CDR is for 
fixed/mobile telephony the same IPDR is for VoIP 
telephony. The advantage of using algorithms is the 
assurance that the indicated warnings are true. This 
guarantee is a probabilistic value established by the network 
administrator. It is reached by means of the adoption of a 
probabilistic model. In [9], Breda and Mendes, it is explored 
algorithms that make use of Binomial, Normal and Poisson 
distributions with guarantee of 99.99999% that the warnings 
generated are true, that is, they have a root cause. This 
guarantee means that for every million warnings generated, 
there is the likelihood of one false-positive warning. A false-
positive warning is defined as the one that, despite having 
been generated, it does not end to be a problem, as it does 
not have a root cause in the system.  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
10
11
14
15
16
17
Number of calls - CNEE
Time (Hours)
BASELINE
REAL DATA
 
Figure 7. Number of CNE-A2 calls. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Our main goal was the construction of a management 
model on the VoIP technology based on baselines which are 
put together from a database made up of IPDRs. The 
baselines feature the IP telephonic traffic, generating a kind 
of “signature” of the behavior of the system components. 
Such “signature” can be faced with the current behavior of 
the components, in a way that makes possible to infer the 
existence of problems affecting the network performance. 
Although we have taken data from a metropolitan network, 
this methodology can be applied to any kind of network, 
since it has IPDR tickets. Advancing a little bit more, we 
have got the conclusion that such methodology can be 
employed in any network, since it has logs, tickets, SNMP 
packs, that is, logs that portrait one or more events of the 
system elements. 
The classification of the IPDRs has provided a vast 
gamut of possibilities in the creation of baselines, for 
instance, the amount of interurban calls made in a given 
sector, or the amount of international calls originated from a 
specific extension. This example can be employed to help 
with the detection of frauds in the network and also with the 
definition of consumption profile of users. 
Another result that can be considered relevant is that the 
proposed model deals with VoIP systems management from 
the point of view of conventional telephony events. The 
VoIP technology is an application that runs with the TCP/IP 
protocol, that is, with a network of packs. The management 
on this network model is structured on SNMP objects and 
copes with some types of behavior related to those packs. 
The management we are proposing deals with the VoIP 
technology from the point of view of a regular telephonic 
call, that is, with all the outcomes a phone call may have. 
This is highly relevant as it is a change in the way of  looking 
into the VoIP management. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

This new approach has demonstrated to be very useful 
and promising, as it allowed the characterization of the 
traffic based on information coming from the IPDRs. The 
creation and analysis of the baselines complemented the 
network management by attributing optimization and agility 
to the process. The baselines generated from the IPDRs were 
able to demonstrate that such methodology adds efficiency in 
the management of the network and can be employed to 
detect malfunctions. 
As a future work in this area, we intend to use our VoIP 
baseline to apply algorithms for detection of abnormal 
behavior and failures.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work herein presented was developed under the 
shield of “Infovia Municipal – Uma Rede Metropolitana de 
Acesso Aberto”, specially the Open Access MAN of  City of 
Pedreira. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N.M. Markovich, and U. R. Krieger, “Statistical analysis and 
modeling of Skype VoIP flows,” Computer Communications, vol. 33, 
pp. S11-S21, 2010. 
[2] B. Xi, H. Chen, W.S. Cleveland, and T. Telkamp, “Statistical analysis 
and modeling of Internet VoIP traffic for network engineering,” 
Electronic Journal of Statistics, vol. 4, pp. 58-116, 2010. 
[3] S. Karapantazis, and F. Pavlidou, “VoIP: A comprehensive survey on 
a promising technology,” Computer Networks, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 
2050-2090, 2009. 
[4] N. Blefari-Melazzi, J.N. Daigle, and M. Feminella, “Efficient and 
stateless deployment of VoIP services,” Computer Networks, vol. 53, 
no. 5, pp. 706-726, 2009. 
[5] O. Dabbebi, R. Badonnel, and O. Festor, “Automated runtime risk 
management for voice over IP networks and services,” Network 
Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), 2010 IEEE , 
pp.57-64, 2010. 
[6] L.S. Mendes, M.L. Bottoli,  and G.D. Breda, “Digital Cities and Open 
MANs: A new communications paradigm,” Latin America 
Transactions, IEEE (Revista IEEE America Latina), vol.8, no. 4, 
pp.394-402, 2010. 
[7] TM Forum – IPDR norms, http://www.tmforum.org/ipdr, November 
2009. 
[8] G.D. Breda and L.S. Mendes, “Failures Detection in Voice 
Communication Systems,” In: GLOBECOM 2006. December 2006. 
San Francisco/CA, USA. 
[9] TM 
Forum 
– 
TM 
Forum 
IPDR 
Program, 
http://www.tmforum.org/BestPracticesStandards/IPDR/4501/Home.ht
ml, 2011. 
[10] S. Tartarelli, N. Heureuse, and S. Niccolini, "Lessons learned on the 
usage of call logs for security and management in IP telephony," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE , vol.48, no.12, pp.76-82, 
December 2010 
[11] I. Ruiz-Agundez, Y. Penya, and P. Garcia-Bringas, “Fraud Detection 
for Voice over IP Services on Next-Generation Networks,” editors: P. 
Samarati, M. Tunstall, J. Posegga, K. Markantonakis, D. Sauveron, 
Information Security Theory and Practices: Security and Privacy of 
Pervasive Systems and Smart Devices, Lectures Notes on Computer 
Science, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, vol. 6033, pp. 199-212, 2010. 
[12] M.A.B. Bella, J.H.P. Eloff, and M.S. Olivier, “A fraud management 
system architecture for next-generation networks,” Forensic Science 
International, Vol. 185, Issues 1-3, 2009, pp. 51-58. 
[13] M.L. Proença Junior, C. Coppelmans, M. Botolli, and L. S. Mendes, 
“Security and reliability in information systems and networks: 
Baseline to help with network management,” Ascenso, J., Vasiu, L., 
Belo, C. and Saramago, M. (eds), e-Business and Telecommunication 
Networks, Springer, Netherlands, 2006. 
[14] K. Dasgupta, R. Singh, B. Viswanathan, D. Chakraborty,  S. 
Mukherjea, A.A. Nanavati, and A. Joshi, “Social ties and their 
relevance to churn in mobile telecom networks,” Proceedings of the 
11th International Conference on Extending Database Technology: 
Advances in Database Technology, pp. 668-677,  2008. 
[15] F. Marques and L.S. Mendes, "Proposta de uma Arquitetura Híbrida e 
Hierárquica de Rede de Sensores/Atuadores para Aplicação em 
Cenários Metropolitanos", 2010. 
[16] Pedreira´s 
Open 
Access 
Metropolitan 
Area 
Network,  
http://www.pedreira.sp.gov.br/ing/index.php, July 2006. 
[17] T. Porter, B. Baskin, L. Chaffin, M. Cross, J. Kanclirz Jr, A. Rosela, 
C. Shim, and A. Zmolek “Pratical VoIP Security”, Sygress 
Publishing, 2006.  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

