An Intelligence System Based on Social Web Mining and Its Application in Health 
Care in Hong Kong 
 
Kin Keung Lai1,2  
1 Management Sciences 
College of Business, City University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong. 
2 International Business School 
Shaanxi Normal University 
Xian, China 
mskklai@cityu.edu.hk 
Juan Shi1,2  
1 Management Sciences 
College of Business, City University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong. 
2 Management Science and Engineering 
Xi’an Jiaotong University 
Xian, China 
juanshi4-c@my.cityu.edu.hks 
Gang Chen  
The 705th Research Institute 
China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation 
Xi’an, China 
james.gang.chen@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—In China, two systems—Chinese Information system 
for disease control and prevention (CDC) and the National 
Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) Monitoring System--have been 
established for monitoring infectious diseases and for reporting 
ADR events. However, surveys have shown that nontrivial 
problems have affected the performance of these information 
systems adversely. Specifically, the absence of reasonable work 
and supervision systems, namely the systemic factors constitute 
the majority of the reasons for underperformance of these 
information systems. Also, not just some leaders but also quite 
a few doctors do not give sufficient importance to reports of 
infectious cases or ADR events, which is thought to be a waste 
of manpower and financial resources. Nowadays social media 
websites have attracted wide interest from both the academia 
and the industry, because of its very large user base, updating 
in real time, abundant incoming data and the fact that it offers 
prolific 
information 
about 
consumers’ 
behavioral 
characteristics. In this proposal, we plan to address the 
aforementioned issues by implementing an Intelligence System 
based on Social Web Mining (ISSWM). ISSWM can help 
detect ADR events, assess the trends of infectious diseases, 
probe people’s opinions towards some medical institutions or 
on healthcare related issues in real-time, at a cost that is 
extremely low compared with the existing systems. 
Keywords-big data; Web 2.0; social web mining; opinion 
mining; sentiment analysis; epidemics surveillance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Chinese Information system for disease control and 
prevention (CDC) was established in China for control and 
prevention of infectious diseases in 2005. Medical and health 
institutions at the grass roots level are required to report 
cases of infectious diseases to this system, which helps the 
concerned department(s) to keep abreast of the situation and 
make timely decisions. Besides that, the National Adverse 
Drug Reaction (ADR) Monitoring System has also been 
launched to improve surveillance of ADR events. However, 
there are some nontrivial problems in these information 
reporting systems. For example, a survey, which investigates 
the reports of infectious cases via CDC in 17 medical 
institutions, has found some salient reasons that seem to be 
responsible for underperformance of CDC. First, reports 
using CDC have not been given sufficient importance by 
staff of these medical institutions. Second, there is a lack of 
effective work and monitoring mechanisms. Third, medical 
staff involved in reporting via CDC change frequently and 
lack adequate knowledge about infectious diseases [1]. As a 
result, missing reports rate is estimated at 11.76% and the 
rate of consistency between infectious diseases report cards 
and information input into the system is only 78.25%. 
Another survey about ADR has reached similar conclusions: 
both information reliability and timeliness leave much to be 
improved. From the above, it can be concluded that 
management factor and human factor are two main reasons 
of unsatisfactory performance of these information reporting 
systems. There is a long way to go and a lot of efforts are 
needed to address the problems of these systems.  
Fortunately, we have entered the era of Web 2.0, which is 
characterized by high degree of public engagement and 
initiative. In China, the number of registered users of Sina 
Weibo, the biggest social platform, has reached 600 million 
and there are as many as 61.4 million daily active users [2]. 
It is worth noting that medical and health related data, 
generated on social media, constitute an important part of 
Big Data relevant to the medical area. Generated by users 
directly, they are constantly updated and reflect every aspect 
of people’s lives [3]-[4]. More importantly, data on the social 
media are much easier to access via API compared with 
databases owned by the government. The rapid growth of 
online social networking sites and the public availability of 
data have made analysis of social media data easy and 
convenient [5]-[6].  
This 
proposal 
envisages 
implementation 
of 
an 
intelligence system based on social web mining (ISSWM), 
which extracts insightful information from the unstructured 
or semi-structured data available on social media to answer 
questions related to people’s main concerns in healthcare 
area at a certain moment. How is an epidemic spreading in 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

the country or within a certain area? What are people’s 
specific 
expectations 
from 
some 
particular 
medical 
institutions? However, it needs to be pointed out that the 
purpose of ISSWM is not to substitute any existing 
authoritative information-gathering websites, such as CDC 
or the ADR monitoring system. Instead, ISSWM functions 
as an intelligence system complementary to the existing 
information systems. For example, it could serve as a plug-in 
for the existing systems. The advantages of ISSWM over 
existing information reporting systems, like CDC and ADR 
monitoring system, are as follows: 
1. Timeliness and low cost. ISSWM can automatically 
collect, process and analyze data from social media websites 
in real time, using computer algorithms. These features of 
the proposed ISSWM have several implications. First, 
manual effort is greatly reduced and the process virtually 
costs nothing. Second, real-time data collection and analysis 
helps decision-making department(s) stay up to date with the 
latest situation. Third, ISSWM can effectively mitigate 
problems resulting from lack of reasonable regulation in 
CDC or the national ADR monitoring system and problems 
which arise from medical staff’s lack of awareness regarding 
the importance of reporting infectious cases. 
2. Tremendous user base generated by integrating users 
from multiple social networking websites. Since data can be 
collected from numerous users of multiple social media 
websites, ISSWM can efficiently extract information related 
to infectious diseases, ADR events and other related issues in 
healthcare sector. The very large number of users provides 
the much needed credibility to results of ISSWM. 
3. Use of big data. During events of public interest, such 
as presidential debates, there are hundreds of thousands of 
tweets per minute [7]. Interactions on websites, such as 
Twitter and Sino Weibo, contain a huge amount of 
meaningful information and this presents some challenge to 
ISSWM, which is taken into account in design. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
2, we discuss prior work and their limitations on exploiting 
social media data in healthcare area. Section 3 presents the 
framework of ISSWM. Section 4 concludes the paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Recently, a considerable amount of work has been 
dedicated to exploiting data on Twitter, most of which has 
focused on forecasting epidemics based on interactions on 
Twitter [8]-[12]. For example, the public sentiment with 
respect to H1N1 was tracked and actual disease activity was 
measured on the basis of information embedded in the 
Twitter stream [9]. Furthermore, Twitter data, such as 
friendship relationships [3], the proximity of users’ 
geographical locations and users’ mobility, are used to 
estimate the likelihood of whether a specific person is likely 
to get infected [10]-[11]. Influenza-related messages are 
identified by leveraging a document classifier and these 
messages achieve a correlation of 0.78 with the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) statistics [12].  
A recently emerging research area is to explore online 
reviews to understand patients’ attitudes towards healthcare 
services. For example, it has been  revealed that there is 
more than 
80% 
agreement between patients’ 
own 
quantitative ratings of care and those derived using sentiment 
analysis, from online free-text comments on different aspects 
of healthcare [13]. Reference [14] analyzed a corpus 
consisting of nearly 60,000 reviews with a probabilistic 
model of text. The output of the model was found to 
significantly correlate with state-level measures of healthcare.  
After reviewing these literature, we find out that there are 
some limitations in the existing research. First, they focus on 
data collected from only one social media website, Twitter, 
as reported in [8]-[12], English National Health Service 
website in [13], and RageMDs in [14]. Due to a single source 
of data, it is doubtful whether the findings still hold in the 
context of the whole society; Twitter users are not 
necessarily representative of the wider population [15]. 
Second, existing research concentrates on solving one or two 
specific problems, such as detecting flu trend or tracking 
people’s sentiment regarding H1N1. An integrated system is 
required to provide comprehensive knowledge about the 
current status and sentiment related to healthcare issues in 
the society. Third, most of prior studies have adopted a 
methodology called post-collection analysis [8, 10-12]. That 
is to say, the analysis depends on pre-retrieved tweets or a 
well-prepared corpus [13-14], and there is a time delay that 
cannot be negligible in their analysis results. Thus a real-time 
system is in required to ensure online analytical processing 
in a streaming fashion. In this way, the breakout of 
emergency events can be detected almost instaneously and 
the latest situations are reported in real time, given people’s 
high engagement in social networking websites. Last but not 
the least, China has a much larger population compared with 
any other country, producing an unprecedented amount of 
social media data. However, healthcare related data on 
Chinese social networking websites are virtually untapped.  
To bridge the abovementioned gaps, we propose an 
intelligence system based on social web mining (ISSWM). It 
collects data from multiple social networking websites, 
operates incessantly (24 hours*7 days) and delivers valuable 
results in real time. The structure of ISSWM is illustrated in 
Figure 1. Extensive explanation about ISSWM is presented 
in Section 3. 
III. 
INTRODUCTION ABOUT ISSWM 
The proposed ISSWM shall employ crawling techniques 
and a variety of machine learning algorithms, such as 
clustering, feature selection, k-nearest neighbors, regression 
and so on, to obtain insightful knowledge from social media 
websites. ISSWM mainly comprises four modules shown in 
Figure 1. 
1. Data collecting and preprocessing module 
As mentioned above, ISSWM incessantly collects data 
from several Chinese social networking websites, such as 
Sina Weibo [16], Tencent Weibo  [17], Renren Net [18] and 
so on. Crawling technologies are also used as a 
complementary method to retrieve data, as there are a few 
limitations on obtaining tweets through API for some social 
networking websites [19]. Besides that, API access is not 
available for non-social networking websites [20]-[25]. It can 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

be expected that the raw tweets contain a lot of noisy data 
such as wrong spellings, punctuation, images, or tweets that 
have nothing to do with healthcare sector.  
It is proposed to preprocess the raw data in the following 
way. First, regular expressions are used to delete numbers, 
punctuations, 
and 
non-Chinese 
characters. 
Second, 
stopwords, which are meaningless words, are filtered out. 
Third, we crawl healthcare websites, such as 120ask.com 
[20], mingpaohealth.com [22], etc., in order to get a corpus 
of healthcare related words. Inversed Term Frequency (IDF) 
[26] is used to evaluate how important a given word is. 
Words with higher IDF value are thought to be more related 
with healthcare sector. To further improve the accuracy of 
this corpus, a priori knowledge is used to filter out words 
which get higher IDF values but seldom appear in healthcare 
sector. After the healthcare corpus is established, raw tweets 
obtained from social networking websites are examined 
using this corpus. A tweet that does not share any word with 
this corpus is treated as non-relevant and is screened out. 
Clean tweets are integrated, sorted and converted into a 
unified format, as illustrated in Table 1 and Table 2. 
Consistency needs to be checked as the tweets come from 
different data sources. Table 1 illustrates profile information 
about each user and Table 2 shows the format of information 
about each tweet. Relationship data such as each user’s 
followers and friends are also kept in this step. 
TABLE I.  
INFORMATION ABOUT USERS 
Field 
Description 
id 
ID of the user for whom to return results for table  
screen_name 
The screen name of the user for whom to return 
results for 
statuses_count 
The number of tweets issued by the user 
description 
Description about the user himself/herself 
friends_count 
The number of users this account is following 
followers_coun
t 
The number of followers this account currently has 
location 
The user-defined location for this account’s profile 
time_zone 
The time zone this user declares themselves within 
… 
… 
TABLE II.  
INFORMATION ABOUT TWEET 
Field 
Description 
id 
The integer representation of the unique identifier for 
this Tweet 
text 
The actual text of the status update 
created_at 
Time when this Tweet was created 
favorite_count 
Indicates approximately how many times this Tweet 
has been “favorited” by Twitter users 
retweet_count 
Number of times this Tweet has been retweeted 
place 
Indicates that the tweet is associated a place 
user 
The user who posted this Tweet 
2. Topic detection and classification module 
We know that when the topic changes, keywords change 
correspondingly, since frequently used terms differ greatly 
across different areas. Latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) 
algorithm, which can represent each tweet as a random 
mixture of latent topics [27], is employed in this module to 
detect hot topics in social networking websites.  
Suppose we would like to know what are the Top N 
topics attracting people’s attention at a given point of time.  
First, we will retrieve tweets in the past month. After the 
preprocessing procedure (Module 1), we obtain clean tweets 
that focus on issues related to healthcare area, all of which 
are used to develop a LDA model, with the parameter 
“number of topics” set as N. Different weights are assigned 
on different topics that a given tweet can possibly be related 
to. The topic category on which a given tweet gets the 
highest weight is used to classify this tweet. In this way, all 
clean tweets are divided into different topic categories. Next, 
the N topics are sorted in terms of the number of tweets 
which belong to a particular topic. Finally, we get the Top N 
hot topics in healthcare area. The topic with a higher rank 
attracts more attention on social networking websites. 
When a new unseen tweet arrives, it is transformed by 
using the established LDA model and is assigned to the topic 
category on which this tweet scores the highest. In this way, 
we identify which topic is acquiring more and more attention 
and, consequently, the trend of each of the Top N topics. 
Combing 
users’ 
profile 
information 
and 
auxiliary 
information of a tweet, we can gain an even deeper 
understanding about the hot topics. For example, by 
exploiting the geographic information, we get to know the 
particular location where a specific topic induces a strong 
response among the citizens. With users’ profile information, 
we may understand which group of people are involved in a 
particular topic. From time to time, we can check the content 
of the top N topics and get to know the change in the hot 
topics. 
Like other hot topics, infectious diseases have their own 
key words, which can be obtained by a priori knowledge or 
learned by tweets on the internet. With these keywords, 
relevant tweets are extracted from multiple social networking 
websites and used to estimate the trend of some infectious 
diseases. In order to detect ADR events, a specialized corpus 
of medical-related words needs to be developed at the very 
beginning and any tweet which contains a relevant medical 
word or the name of a medicine in this corpus should be 
given special attention. 
3. Module of opinion mining and sentiment analysis 
After preprocessing (Module 1) and topic detection 
(Module 2), tweets are assigned to different topic classes. In 
order to grasp people's opinions or sentiments on some given 
topic, we use features like opinion words or phrases, 
negations, emoticons, syntactic dependency and so on to 
judge the sentiment underlying a tweet. Tweets which do not 
have these features are treated as neutral tweets and are 
discarded. Support vector machine (SVM) algorithm is 
employed to classify opinions into negative or positive and 
regression is used to identify the intensities of sentiments. As 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

both are supervised algorithm, labelled data are required to 
develop the model. We produce labelled data by labelling the 
polarities and intensities of the training tweets manually.  
4. Opinion predicting module 
Apart from classification of sentiments into positive or 
negative, we are interested in predicting people’s opinions on 
new events. This problem has two dimensions. First, we 
want to forecast people’s opinions on an upcoming event. 
Second, an event has occurred, but not everyone has publicly 
expressed his or her opinion toward this event. Therefore we 
would like to estimate the opinions of this silent group. We 
claim that people with similar characteristics tend to hold 
similar opinions toward the same event. Besides, people tend 
to hold similar opinions toward events of the same nature. 
The first hypothesis is validated in the following way. 
First, we cluster people by characteristics, based on 
their profile information using clustering algorithms. Profile 
information generally includes age, occupation, gender and 
location and so on, as illustrated in Table 1, which can be 
extracted from tweets and people’s own descriptions about 
themselves [28]. And then, we compare the similarity of 
people’s attitudes towards a specified event, who are located 
in the same cluster with similarity of people’s attitudes 
towards the same event, who are randomly chosen from a 
larger population. If the former similarity is significantly 
larger than the latter similarity in a statistical sense, the first 
hypothesis is validated. Following the same line, the second 
hypothesis could also be tested. 
Based on the two validated hypotheses, we can use 
collaborative 
filtering 
which 
include 
memory-based 
collaborative filtering or model-based collaborative filtering 
to estimate people’s opinions on new events. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper envisages a new application of social web 
mining in medical and healthcare area. A system called 
ISSWM is proposed to exploit and analyze raw tweets from 
multiple social media websites. By ISSWM, we can predict 
the trends of infectious diseases, understand and estimate 
people’s attitudes towards healthcare related issues, detect 
ADR events and stay informed about other healthcare related 
hot topics. ISSWM makes the best of social media websites 
and can deliver analysis results very efficiently at an 
extremely low cost. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in the paper is financially supported 
by the Theme Based Research Grant, RGC of Hong Kong 
(TRS Project 8770001). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. He, Y. d. Liu, F. l. Ma, F. k. Xing, “Sample analysis in 17 
medical institutions on the reports of infectious cases using 
Chinese Information system for disease control and 
prevention ” Journal of Preventive Medicine of Chinese 
People's Liberation Army, no. 02, 2014, pp. 125-126. 
[2] Sina (2014) Sina Weibo is the best crowd funding platform, 
take 
Dark 
Horse 
Games 
as 
an 
example. 
http://tech.sina.com.cn/i/2014-02-26/11479193540.shtml. 
Accessed 10 June 2015 
[3] F. Griffiths, et,al, “Social networks–The future for health care 
delivery,” Social science & medicine, vol. 75, no. 12, pp. 
2233-2241, 2012. 
[4] S. Brennan, A. Sadilek, H. Kautz, "Towards understanding 
global spread of disease from everyday interpersonal 
interactions," 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Twenty-Third 
international joint conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2013, 
pp. 2783-2789.. 
[5] C. McNab, “What social media offers to health professionals 
and citizens,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 
87, no. 8, 2009, pp. 566-566. 
[6] R. N. Rimal, and M. K. Lapinski, “Why health 
communication is important in public health,” Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization, vol. 87, no. 4, 2009, pp. 247-247a. 
[7] M. A. Russell, Mining the Social Web: Data Mining 
Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+, GitHub, and More: " 
O'Reilly Media, Inc.", 2013.  
[8] R. Chunara, J. R. Andrews, J. S. Brownstein, “Social and 
news media enable estimation of epidemiological patterns 
early in the 2010 Haitian cholera outbreak,” The American 
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, vol. 86, no. 1, 
2012, pp. 39-45. 
[9]  A. Signorini, A. M. Segre, P. M. Polgreen, “The use of 
Twitter to track levels of disease activity and public concern 
in the US during the influenza A H1N1 pandemic,” PloS one, 
vol. 6, no. 5, 2011, pp. e19467. 
[10] Sadilek A, Kautz HA, Silenzio V, Modeling Spread of 
Disease from Social Interactions. In: ICWSM, 2012.  
[11] Sadilek A, Kautz HA, Silenzio V, Predicting Disease 
Transmission from Geo-Tagged Micro-Blog Data. In: AAAI, 
2012. 
[12] A. Culotta, "Towards detecting influenza epidemics by 
analyzing Twitter messages," in Proceedings of the first 
workshop on social media analytics, 2010, pp. 115-122.. 
[13] F. Greaves, D. Ramirez-Cano, C. Millett, A. Darzi, L. 
Donaldson, “Use of sentiment analysis for capturing patient 
experience from free-text comments posted online,” Journal 
of medical Internet research, vol. 15, no. 11, 2013. 
[14] B. C. Wallace, M. J. Paul, U. Sarkar, T. A. Trikalinos, M. 
Dredze, “A large-scale quantitative analysis of latent factors 
and sentiment in online doctor reviews,” Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 21, no. 6, 
2014, pp. 1098-1103. 
[15] D. King, D. Ramirez-Cano, F. Greaves, I. Vlaev, S. Beales, A. 
Darzi, “Twitter and the health reforms in the English National 
Health Service,” Health policy, vol. 110, no. 2, 2013, pp. 291-
297. 
[16] Sina 
Weibo. "Sina 
Weibo API," 
6th, 
July, 
2015; 
http://open.weibo.com/wiki/%E9%A6%96%E9%A1%B5. 
[17] Tencent. 
"Tencent 
Weibo 
API," 
6th, 
July, 
2015; 
http://dev.t.qq.com/. 
[18] Renren. 
"Renren 
API," 
6th, 
July, 
2015; 
http://wiki.dev.renren.com/wiki/API. 
[19] Sina Weibo. "Rate limiting on Sina Weibo API," 6th, July, 
2015; http://open.weibo.com/wiki/Rate-limiting. 
[20] 120ask. "120ask," 6th, July, 2015; http://www.120ask.com/. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

[21] haodf. "haodf," 6th, July, 2015; http://www.haodf.com/. 
[22] mingpaohealth. 
"mingpaohealth," 
6th, 
July, 
2015; 
http://www.mingpaohealth.com/cfm/Main.cfm. 
[23] xywy. "xywy," 6th, July, 2015; http://www.xywy.com/. 
[24] ewsos. "ewsos," 6th, July, 2015; http://www.ewsos.com/. 
[25] 39net. "39net," 6th, July, 2015; http://www.39.net/. 
[26] Wiki. 
"TF-IDF," 
6th, 
July, 
2015; 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tf%E2%80%93idf. 
[27] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet 
allocation,” the Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, 
2003, pp. 993-1022. 
[28] J. Li, A. Ritter, E. Hovy, “Weakly supervised user profile 
extraction from twitter,” ACL, Baltimore, 2014. 
 
Raw data
Topic Detection
Data Collecting
Opinion analysis
Opinion analysis
Opinion analysis
Opinion analysis
…… 
Data set 
about topic 1
Data set 
about topic 2
Data set 
about topic 3
Data set 
about topic n
…… 
Predit public opinion
User profile
Predicting 
result
Public opinion 
about topic 1
Public opinion 
about topic 2
Public opinion 
about topic 3
Public opinion 
about topic n
Module 1
Module 2
Module3
Module 4
 
Figure 1. ISSWM for health care. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

