Internet Portal of the SEMONT Information Network for the EM Field Monitoring  
 
Nikola Djuric 
Faculty of Technical Sciences, University of Novi Sad 
Trg D. Obradovica 6 
21000 Novi Sad, Serbia 
e-mail: ndjuric@uns.ac.rs 
Nikola Kavecan 
Falcon-Tech, IT Consulting, Development 
Dusana Danilovica 1,  
21000 Novi Sad, Serbia 
e-mail: nikola@kavecan.com
 
Abstract – Recently, the electromagnetic pollution of the envi-
ronment starts to be a highly important scientific and research 
concern. Growing number of the electromagnetic field sources 
have caused the increased interest of the public about poten-
tially harmful effects of the long-term exposure to the electro-
magnetic radiation. As support for the efforts to inform public 
about the real-time and the overall level of the electromagnetic 
field in the environment, our team proposed wireless informa-
tion network – SEMONT, intended for remote and continuous, 
24 hours a day based, monitoring. This paper briefly explains 
the work in progress related to development of SEMONT sys-
tem and dedicated Internet portal for the public presentation 
of the measuring results. Information network SEMONT is a 
unique project at national level and develops within the pro-
gram of technological development of the Republic of Serbia, 
for the period of 2011-2014 year. 
Keywords – electromagnetic field; radiation exposure; wire-
less network; monitoring 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The electromagnetic (EM) radiation starts to be ordinary 
phenomenon in the last few decades. It is considered in many 
scientific articles, since introduction of the any modern wire-
less transmission technology results with a variety of the EM 
field sources, particularly in range of the non-ionizing radia-
tion [1]. Their presence increases level of the EM field in the 
environment, since they are simultaneously present and most 
likely emits the EM field over the same area as sources that 
already exist in a power system and systems for the power 
transmission (transmission lines, distribution and substation 
equipment), together with sources from systems of radio and 
TV broadcasting.  
Diversity of the EM field sources characteristics enforces 
the problem of the safety of these devices both for the human 
health and the environment. In the same time it gives rise in 
numerous research studies focused on various aspects of EM 
field effects on the biological systems [2]. 
The inevitable EM exposure of the general population in 
their everyday lives resulted in a necessity to keep the public 
informed about the real-time level of the EM fields and their 
distribution in the areas that are related with human activi-
ties. The necessity encourages development and utilization of 
some modern technologies, such as wireless sensor networks 
(WSN), for sophisticated EM field monitoring [3]-[4]. Such 
systems are to be used to get the real-time information about 
the current in-situ EM field strength and in addition for the 
exposure assessment of population in the covered area. 
As a support for the Ministry of the Environment, Mining 
and Spatial Planning of the Republic of Serbia and the mu-
nicipal Agency for non-ionizing radiation protection [5]-[6], 
our research team is requested to develop the EM field moni-
toring network – SEMONT [7]-[9]. This system employs the 
existing WSN technology for the area, broadband, remote, 
automated and permanent monitoring of the EM field level. 
SEMONT performs measurements of the instantaneous and 
the overall level in the range of non-ionizing EM radiation. 
The feature of this system is that results of the measurements 
will be publically available in a real time over dedicated 
Internet portal [10]. 
The proposed SEMONT system has been recognized by 
the Government of the Republic of Serbia and Ministry of 
Education and Science of the Republic of Serbia [11], which 
has approved its development within the program of techno-
logical development of the Republic of Serbia, for period of 
2011–2014. 
In this paper, the basic description of the partially devel-
oped SEMONT system is given in Section II, while focus of 
this paper is concept and several technical details about de-
sign and realization of the Internet portal, presented in Sec-
tion III. The Section IV explains directions of the further 
development of the SEMONT Internet portal and Section V 
brings conclusion of this work in progress. 
II. 
BASIC IDEA OF SEMONT SYSTEM 
SEMONT is established on the well known technology 
of the WSN and represents implementation of the existing 
technology for new application. It is intended for the area 
supervision, introducing a new approach of the continual EM 
field monitoring.  
SEMONT is designed as a fully automated network, of-
fering the real-time monitoring. The utilization concept of 
this system is shown in Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1. SEMONT utilization over urban area.  
55
Copyright (c) The Government of Serbia, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

SEMONT system implements basic star network topol-
ogy of the WSN, with all benefits and weakness of such ap-
proach, especially in case of the EM field monitoring [12].  
The system is designed to consist of the following parts: 
 
number of autonomous and independent monitoring 
sensors [13]-[16], spatially distributed over the su-
pervised area, having the task of monitoring of the 
EM fields from the all active sources around and in 
designated frequency range, 
 
centralized control station (CCS) with Internet por-
tal which coordinates activities of the remote sen-
sors, collects data, processes and stores them in cen-
tralized database, 
 
communication network, which provides interaction 
between the remote sensors and the CCS, and 
 
management software that supports functionality of 
SEMONT information network. 
 
SEMONT is planed to implement commercially available 
sensors for the area EM field monitoring [13]-[16]. Those 
sensors have been developed in recent years and offer the 
long-term autonomy of the monitoring process [13]-[15]. 
The sensor nodes are equipped with solar panel and in-
ternal rechargeable battery, providing autonomous and con-
tinual monitoring for nearly 169 days [13]-[16], without to 
require the intervention of the technical personal.  
Such sensors are intended to be spatially distributed over 
the supervised area and have to be installed on remote loca-
tion without wiring to the CCS. In order to satisfy such de-
mands the remote sensor nodes communicate with the CSS, 
using the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) 
standard. Both the CCS and sensor nodes are equipped with 
a quad-band GSM/GPRS modems for remote control and for 
uploading/downloading the data [17]-[18].  
Moreover, the sensors are equipped with certain amount 
of the internal memory, storing the results of the performed 
measurements. Data are kept in sensor memory until the pro-
grammable time for the data download.  
The sensor nodes are isolated units that are deliberately 
left to perform the self-alone monitoring without intention to 
perturb the current distribution of the EM field. Their main 
and only purpose is monitoring, considering that their pres-
ence must have the smallest possible influence on the origi-
nal spatial distribution of the field. Thus, SEMONT system 
is designed so that remote sensors communicate only with 
CSS, without mutual communication. In addition, it is 
planned that once a day the data will be downloaded from 
sensors and stored in centralized database of the CCS. With 
such approach the energy of the sensors are more preserved.  
Several technical details about sensors have been already 
presented in some previous work [13]-[18]. Unfortunately, it 
is not possible to repeat all of them, since the focus of this 
paper are on some other part of SEMONT system, the Inter-
net portal [10]. 
Main idea behind SEMONT system is to employ the iso-
tropic broadband measurements in combination with perma-
nent daily monitoring of the EM field. Such a method pro-
vides information about the overall field level at any instant 
of time, without considering which of the sources are present 
in the observed area. Besides, the broadband measurements 
approach can, also, be much more convenient when it is nec-
essary to inform the general population. 
Moreover, the systems with continual monitoring provide 
history of the EM field changes, thus after some time we can 
have a so called register of the EM field, giving an overview 
of the daily fluctuations of the field level, as shown in Fig. 2.  
 
 
Figure 2. The long-term monitoring and history overview. 
 
Due to the broadband measurements, where contributions 
of the all active EM field sources are included, SEMONT 
system is designed to offer a history overview of the cumula-
tive EM field level, during the entire day [7]-[9].  
Moreover, SEMONT system compares the measurement 
results with the Serbian prescribed limits [19]-[21] and rec-
ommendations of International commission on non-ionizing 
radiation protection (ICNIRP) [22]. 
SEMONT system has been partially developed, with full 
functionality only of the Internet portal [10]. At the moment, 
development is work in progress, where communication part 
of the system and implementation of ten sensors are the pri-
ority. When they finished, those tasks will result with more 
technical analyses and performance studies of the system.  
Unfortunately, at this moment, SEMONT system can not 
present the real measurement results, but we expect that very 
soon the system will be operative.  
The present development will face several challenges that 
are intended to be in focus of some other presentation. This 
paper mainly presents some details about Internet portal re-
alization.  
III. 
INTERNET PORTAL OF SEMONT SYSTEM 
In order to transparently inform the general public about 
the real-time EM field level and the EM pollution of the en-
vironment, our research team developed dedicated Internet 
portal of SEMONT system [10].  
The Internet portal is a part of the CCS of SEMONT and 
mainly it is intended to present the measurement results ob-
tained from the sensor nodes, as well as related information 
about SEMONT system and its purpose. 
The Internet web portal is publically available and it is 
designed to present the results of the measurements for each 
sensor nodes separately. The location of each sensor nodes is 
displayed on the electronic map of the supervised territory, 
while the measurements results are presented over graphs, as 
shown in Fig. 3. 
56
Copyright (c) The Government of Serbia, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
Figure 3. Example of the measurements presentation. 
 
The electronic map will help users to analyze the cumula-
tive level of the EM field, particularly the data from the sen-
sor node that is closest to their location. 
The sensors are able to perform measurements every six 
minutes, permanently and 24 hours per day. Thus, the moni-
toring can be considered as a continual and in combination 
with the history overview can offer a clear picture about the 
EM field fluctuation on particular location. 
Comparing with the classical measurements that are per-
formed in one moment, SEMONT system and its Internet 
portal possess superiority and offer significantly more infor-
mation about surrounding EM fields. 
 
 
Figure 4. Access to the CCS and Internet portal. 
The Internet portal consists of two separated parts: public 
part – available for public access and protected part – which 
is restricted area available only for authorized personnel, as 
shown in Fig. 4. 
The public access is allowed only for the front-end of the 
portal, while for the authorized users the access is in addition 
granted for the back-end part, besides to the CSS.  
The back-side of the portal is responsible for information 
upload/download and for maintenance of the CSS and Inter-
net portal. 
A. The front-end and presentation of SEMONT system 
The front-end of the Internet portal presents some of the 
key facts about SEMONT, in addition to the results of the 
measurements. Portal is hierarchically organized, presenting 
information as shown in Fig. 5. 
 
 About project
 Technical specif.
 Application
 Legislation 
 Measuring results
 Contact
 Technical specif.:
 About sensors 
 About communication
 ...
 Application:
 Low frequency app. 
 High frequency app. 
 ...
 Legislation:
 Serbian legislation 
 EU legislation
 ...
 Measuring results:
 Locations 
 Measurements
 ...
 
Figure 5. Front-end of the Internet portal. 
 
The interested users can find basic information about 
SEMONT features, its technical specification, several exam-
ples of the application, some for low frequency and some for 
high frequency EM field monitoring, and finally, the meas-
urement results.  
Furthermore, SEMONT system is designed for monitor-
ing according to the Serbian legislation framework [19]-[21] 
and recommendations of the ICNIRP [22] and EU standards 
[23]. That information is also present on Internet portal and 
can be valuable, especially for accredited laboratory that 
deals with the EM investigation. 
B. Measurement results organization and presentation  
The measurements data obtained from sensor nodes will 
be on automated way remotely collected and stored in a cen-
tralized database of the CSS. The Internet portal is designed 
to present those results respecting the hierarchy of the data, 
as shown in Fig. 6. 
57
Copyright (c) The Government of Serbia, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

1:n
1:n
 Sensor 1
 Sensor 2
 ...
 Location 1
 Location 2
 ...
 Measurement 1
 Measurement 2
 ...
 Basic data for
 the particular
 sensor node
Internet
 
Figure 6. Hierarchy of the measurement results. 
 
The monitoring process is intended for particular location 
or area and it is possible that several independent measure-
ment campaigns can be performed during some period, using 
different sensor nodes.  
The Internet portal is planed to show for each location 
which measurements are to be performed and which sensor 
nodes are to be used for the specific measurement. As a re-
sult, relationship between Locations, Measurements and Sen-
sors are of the “1:n” type, which means that Location as a 
parent, can have several different Measurements, as children. 
Moreover, particular Measurement can have several associ-
ated Sensors and for each node several details are shown, as 
GPS coordinates, height on which sensor is installed, used 
field probe [13]-[16], etc. 
Internet portal is designed with several search functional-
ity allowing full history overview for a long-time period, as 
shown in Fig. 3. The search is available through the Loca-
tions and Measurements, over selected time period and ac-
tive/inactive measurement. 
C. Employed technology for realization of the portal 
The foundation of the Internet portal is the CCS central-
ized database, relaying on the MySQL server, which starts to 
be the standard in the open source programming. 
The most of the Internet portal is programmed using PHP 
programming language, and its special CakePHP application 
development framework. In addition, the Web Content Man-
agement System (WCMS) is implemented for the back-end 
side of the portal, providing website authoring, collaboration, 
and administration tools. 
The web form of the portal that presents measurement re-
sults also implements the Google maps technology. It can be 
expected that this page will be the most visited and in order 
to perform the smooth change of page content, the jQuery 
and AJAX web development techniques are employed.  
The AJAX enables that web applications can send data to 
and retrieve data from a server asynchronously (in the back-
ground) without interfering with the display and behavior of 
the existing page. 
Finally, the measurement results are displayed using the 
charts realized with open source JpGraph library for PHP. 
D. Directions of the further Internet portal development 
The shortly presented Internet portal represents the work 
in progress. At this phase the most planed features are real-
ized, but there are some that will be accomplished in the next 
phase. At the moment, Internet portal is able to present only 
results of the measurements of the existing and cumulative 
level of the EM filed. In next phase the portal functionality 
will be expanded so that it can perform the global exposure 
assessment, related to the increased risk of possible harmful 
effects of the EM radiation, according to the EN 50492:2008 
standard [24].  
The idea is to exploit the 24 hours a day monitoring and 
to calculate the daily limits of the global exposure, as shown 
in Fig. 7. 
 
Figure 7. Daily limits of the global exposure. 
 
SEMONT system is based on the broadband measure-
ment approach, resulting with the unknown frequency at 
which the source emits the EM fields. As a result, the lowest 
and the highest frequency of the sensor filed probe are con-
sidered, resulting with upper and lower exposure limits.  
Those daily limits can be quite valuable for the general 
public, because it can be unknown if some present source is 
active or not at the moment. Moreover, such method is a new 
approach that is able to inform the general public about the 
possible daily ranges of the exposure, something that is not 
possible with classical approach of the EM field measure-
ment in the moment. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
SEMONT system introduces an advanced approach of 
the wireless sensor networks implemented for a daily super-
vision of the overall and cumulative level of the various EM 
field sources, over the area of interest. 
The proposed SEMONT monitoring system is a unique 
idea at the national level and it is the most suitable solution 
for a constant supervision of the EM field strength, as well as 
for the global exposure assessment of the general population.  
58
Copyright (c) The Government of Serbia, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

The Internet portal of this system is a significant support 
for the local authorities in their efforts to take a systematic 
care of the potential unhealthy effects of the non-ionizing 
radiation.  
Moreover, the Internet portal and SEMONT system are a 
respectable answer to public concerns about the long-term 
exposure to the EM fields.  
The potential of the proposed SEMONT system has been 
recognized by the Ministry of Education and Sciences of the 
Republic of Serbia, endorsing its development. 
Currently, SEMONT system has been partially devel-
oped, but we expect that very soon this system will be opera-
tive and that will be able to offer the real-time results of the 
measurements. Moreover, the upcoming work will be based, 
also, on the Internet portal feature enhancement, especially 
for the global exposure assessment of the general population. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the Ministry of Education and 
Science of the Republic of Serbia, under the grant for project 
TR 32055. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
International commission on non-ionizing radiation protection (IC-
NIRP) – “Exposure to high frequency electromagnetic fields, biologi-
cal effects and health consequences (100 kHz-300 GHz)”, http://-
www.icnirp.de/documents/RFReview.pdf, accessed July, 2012. 
[2] 
EU Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health 
Risks (SCENIHR): Possible effects of Electromagnetic Fields (EMF) 
on Human Health, http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/04_-
scenihr/docs/scenihr_o_007.pdf, accessed July, 2012. 
[3] 
S. Fabbri, F. Frigo, S. Violanti, D. Andreuccetti, and M. Bini, “Elec-
tromagnetic Field Monitoring and Control Systems: State-of-the-Art 
and Work-in-Progress”, Radiation Protection Dosimetry, vol. 97, no. 
4, pp. 395-400, 2001. 
[4] 
A. Yalofas, A. Gotsis, C. Veranopoulos, P. Constantinou, G. Belesio-
tis, M. Petkaris, and N. Babalis, “A fully automated and geograp-
hically distributed network for the continuous measurement of the RF 
radiation-"Hermes" project”, 6th International Conference on Tele-
communications in Modern Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Ser-
vice, TELSIKS 2003, Nis, Serbia, October 1-3, vol. 2, pp. 443-448, 
2003. 
[5] 
Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning of the Republic of Ser-
bia – http://www.ekoplan.gov.rs, accessed July, 2012. 
[6] 
Municipal Agency for the Environmental Protection, City of Novi 
Sad – http://www.environovisad.org.rs, accessed July, 2012. 
[7] 
N. Djuric, M. Prsa, K. Kasas-Lazetic, “Serbian system for remote mo-
nitoring of electromagnetic fields”, 4th International Conference on 
modern Power Systems MPS 2011, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, May 17-
20, Acta Electrotehnica, Proceedings of papers, pp. 140-142, 2011. 
[8] 
N. Djuric, M. Prsa, K. Kasas-Lazetic, and V. Bajovic, “Serbian remo-
te monitoring system for electromagnetic environmental pollution”, 
10th International Conference on Telecommunications in Modern Sa-
tellite, Cable and Broadcasting Services, TELSIKS 2011, Nis, Serbia, 
October 5-8, vol. 2, pp. 701-704, 2011. 
[9] 
N. Djuric, M. Prsa, and K. Kasas-Lazetic, “Information network for 
continuous electromagnetic fields monitoring”, International Journal 
of Emerging Sciences, Special Issue, Selected Best Papers of the PES 
2011, December 2011, pp. 516-525, http://ijes.info/1/4/42541401.pdf, 
2011, accessed July, 2012. 
[10] SEMONT Internet portal – http://semont.ftn.uns.ac.rs, accessed July, 
2012. 
[11] Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Serbia – http://-
www.mpn.gov.rs, accessed July, 2012. 
[12] W. Dargie and C. Poellabauer, “Fundamentals of Wireless Sensor 
Networks: Theory and Practice”, John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[13] M. Milutinov, N. Djuric, D. Miskovic, and D. Knezevic, “Area moni-
tor sensor for broadband electromagnetic environmental pollution 
monitoring”, XLVI International Scientific Conference on Informa-
tion, Communication and Energy Systems and Technologies – ICEST 
2011, Nis, Serbia, June 29 - July 1, vol. 1, pp. 217-220, 2011. 
[14] M. Milutinov, N. Djuric, and B. Vukobratovic, “Multy-band area mo-
nitor sensor in information network for electromagnetic fields moni-
toring”, 10th International Conference on Applied Electromagnetics, 
PES 2011, Nis, Serbia, September 25-29, pp. 1-4, 2011. 
[15] M. Milutinov, N. Djuric, N. Pekaric-Nadj. D. Miskovic, and D. Kne-
zevic,, “Multiband Sensors for Wireless Electromagnetic Field Moni-
toring System – SEMONT”, submitted for the Turkish Journal of 
Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences, unpublished, 2012. 
[16] Narda Safety Test Solutions GmbH, AMB-8057 User’s Manual, 
Narda, 2007. 
[17] B. Vukobratovic, N. Djuric, D. Miskovic, and D. Knezevic, “Sensor 
communication in wireless electromagnetic field monitoring system”, 
XLVI International Scientific Conference on Information, Communi-
cation and Energy Systems and Technologies – ICEST 2011, Nis, 
Serbia, June 29 - July 1, vol. 1, pp. 221-224, 2011. 
[18] Narda Safety Test Solutions GmbH, AMB-8057 User’s Guide to the 
GPRS/FTP communication, 2010. 
[19] V. Bajovic, N. Djuric, and D. Herceg, “Serbian laws and regulations 
as foundation for electromagnetic field monitoring information net-
work”, 10th International Conference on Applied Electromagnetics, 
ПЕС 2011, Nis, Serbia, September 25-29, pp. 1-5, 2011. 
[20]  “Law on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection”, the law of Republic of 
Serbia, no. 36/09, 2009. 
[21]  “Regulation on the limits exposure of non-ionizing ra-diation”, the 
law of the Republic of Serbia, no. 104/09, 2009. 
[22] International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (IC-
NIRP) – http://www.icnirp.de, accessed July, 2012. 
[23] D. Markovic and N. Djuric, “An overview of the EN standards for the 
electromagnetic compatibility”, (Pregled EN standarda u domenu el-
ektromagnetske kompatibilnosti), Zbornik radova FTN, Univerziteta 
u Novom Sadu, year 26, no. 14/2011, 2011, pp. 3500-3503, ISSN: 
0350-428X, UDK: 621.37. 
[24] EN 50492:2008 – Basic standard for the in-situ measurement of elec-
tromagnetic field strength related to human exposure in the vicinity of 
base stations, 2008. 
59
Copyright (c) The Government of Serbia, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

