Usability Heuristics for Virtual Worlds 
 
Cristian Rusu1, Roberto Muñoz1,2, Silvana Roncagliolo1, Sebastian Rudloff1, Virginica Rusu3, Arturo Figueroa1 
 
1Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Valparaiso, 
Valparaiso, Chile 
e-mails: cristian.rusu@ucv.cl, roberto.munoz.s@mail.pucv.cl, silvana@ucv.cl, sebastian.rudloff.p@mail.pucv.cl, 
arturo.figueroa.r@mail.pucv.cl 
 
2Universidad de Valparaiso, 
Valparaiso, Chile 
e-mail: roberto.munoz.s@uv.cl 
 
3Universidad de Playa Ancha, 
Valparaiso, Chile 
e-mail: virginica.rusu@upla.cl 
 
 
Abstract— Usability evaluation for applications based on 
emerging information technology brings new challenges. 
Virtual Worlds (VWs) are computer-simulated virtual 
environments accessed by multiple users, through their 
avatars. VWs constitute a growing space for collaborative play, 
learning and work. When evaluating VWs’ usability, there is a 
need for new evaluation methods or at least for the use of 
traditional evaluations in novel ways. A set of heuristics is 
proposed, in order to help the usability evaluations of VWs 
applications. 
Keywords- usability; usability heuristics; virtual worlds 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Virtual worlds (VWs) are computer-based simulated 
persistent spatial environment that supports synchronous 
communication among users, who are represented by avatars 
[1]. Users have to choose or create theirs avatars, which will 
be able to interact with objects, the virtual environment and 
other avatars. Avatar’s identity frequently differs from user’s 
identity.  
VWs are a growing space for collaborative play, learning 
and work. Usually researches focus on the use of VWs and 
the phenomenon they represent; it is hard to find studies on 
VWs’ usability, especially on VWs’ usability evaluation 
methodology.  
The ISO/IEC 9241 standard defines the usability as the 
extent to which a product can be used by specified users to 
achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and 
satisfaction in a specified context of use [2]. Usability 
evaluation methods are commonly divided into inspection 
and testing methods. Inspection methods find usability 
problems based on the expertise of usability professionals. 
Testing methods find usability problems through the 
observation of the users while they use (and comment on) a 
system interface [3].  
Heuristic evaluation is a widely used inspection method 
[4] [5]. A group of evaluators (usually from three to five) 
inspect the interface design based on a set of usability 
heuristics. In order to ensure independent and unbiased 
evaluations, the inspection is performed individually. After 
all individual evaluations have been completed, the 
evaluators are allowed to communicate and have their 
findings aggregated in a single list of usability problems. 
Later on, each evaluator assigns scores to each problem’s 
severity and frequency (on a 0 to 4 scale, from minor/less 
frequent to major/more recurrent). Severity and frequency 
are summed in order to get problem’s criticality. Problems 
are ranked based on their average severity, frequency and 
criticality. The usability evaluation report includes usability 
problems, solution proposals, as well as positive findings.    
Heuristic evaluation is easy to perform, cheap and able to 
find many usability problems (both major and minor 
problems). However, it may miss domain specific problems. 
That is why the use of appropriate heuristics is highly 
significant. 
Usability evaluation for applications based on emerging 
information technology brings new challenges. Is it the 
classical concept of usability still valid? Which are the 
dimensions of the (new) usability? How can it be measured? 
How should we develop for (better) usability? There is a 
need for new evaluation methods or at least for the use of 
traditional evaluations in novel ways [6].  
The paper focuses on usability evaluation of VWs 
applications, by heuristic evaluations. A set of 16 specific 
usability heuristics is proposed. Section 2 presents the 
methodology that has been used in heuristics’ development. 
Section 3 highlights the main characteristics of VWs. The 
VWs usability heuristics proposal is presented in Section 4.  
Section 5 shows the proposal’s preliminary validation. 
Section 6 presents preliminary conclusions and future works. 
16
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

II. 
DEFINING VIRTUAL WORLDS USABILITY HEURISTICS 
In order to develop usability heuristics for VWs, a 
specific methodology was applied [7]. The methodology to 
establish new usability heuristics includes 6 stages: 
 
• 
STEP 
1: 
An 
exploratory 
stage, 
to 
collect 
bibliography related with the main topics of the 
research: specific applications, their characteristics, 
general and/or related (if there are some) usability 
heuristics.  
• 
STEP 2: A descriptive stage, to highlight the most 
important characteristics of the previously collected 
information, in order to formalize the main concepts 
associated with the research. 
• 
STEP 3: A correlational stage, to identify the 
characteristics that the usability heuristics for 
specific 
applications 
should 
have, 
based 
on 
traditional heuristics and case studies analysis. 
• 
STEP 4: An explicative stage, to formally specify the 
set of the proposed heuristics, using a standard 
template.  
• 
STEP 5: A validation (experimental) stage, to check 
new heuristics against traditional heuristics by 
experiments, 
through 
heuristic 
evaluations 
performed on selected case studies, complemented 
by user tests. 
• 
STEP 6: A refinement stage, based on the feedback 
from the validation stage. 
 
Based on the well-known and widely used Nielsen’s 10 
heuristics, and extensively analyzing several VWs case 
studies (Second Life, Club Penguin, Habbo Hotel, World of 
Warcraft, Ragnarok Online, ScienceSim), a set of 16 new 
usability heuristics was developed for heuristic evaluations 
of VWs applications.  
The methodology was applied iteratively; the set of new 
heuristics was refined in various steps. A specific usability 
checklist was also developed, detailing usability heuristics, 
in order to help the evaluation practice. 
Section 3 synthetizes the findings of STEP 1 and STEP 2. 
Section 4 presents the results of STEP 3 and STEP 4. It 
specifies the refined heuristics proposal (based on STEP 5 
and STEP 6). Section 5 presents the main results of STEP 5.  
III. 
VIRTUAL WORLDS CHARACTERISTICS 
Nowadays VWs have a wide range of applications almost 
everywhere: 
organizations, 
educations, 
entertainment, 
training, 
virtual 
communities, 
e-commerce, 
scientific 
research, etc. There is no unique, widely accepted VWs’ 
classification. Based on Porter’s proposal (2004), Messinger, 
Stroulia and Lyons (2008) proposed a set of criteria, in order 
to establish the VWs typology [8] [9]:    
 
• 
Purpose (content of interaction): The VW may be 
age focus, content focus, or open. 
• 
Place (location of interaction): Players may be 
collocated or geographically dispersed. 
• 
Platform (design of interaction): Communication 
may be synchronous, asynchronous, or both. 
• 
Population (pattern of interaction): Is defined by the 
group’s size, social ties, and characteristics of the 
target user market. 
• 
Profit model (return on interaction): The VW may 
support single purchase price/registration fee, fee per 
use, subscription – based, advertising – based, pay – 
as you – go  extras, and sale of ancillary products. 
 
Some common features of VWs may be identified: 
 
• 
Avatar: Each user is represented by its own (and 
only) avatar. 
• 
World’s rules: Each VW has its own unbreakable 
(physics) rules. 
• 
Shared environment: A VW is shared by many users.  
• 
Interaction and communication: User – user 
(through their avatars) and user – world interactions 
take place in real time.  
• 
Persistency: The VW is (partially) persistent, 
regardless if individual users are logged in or out.  
• 
Customization: VWs allow users to alter, develop, 
build, or submit customized content.  
• 
Graphic environment: VWs offer computer-based 
graphic 2D, 2.5D or 3D environments. 
  
Usability evaluations specifically focus on users, their 
needs and goals, and not on the inner part of the interactive 
software systems. Therefore, usability heuristics for VWs are 
meant to evaluate such products from the user perspective. 
As VWs are usually distributed systems, it is assumed that a 
set of basic (hardware, network, and platform related) 
requirements have to be accomplished. If not, the evaluation 
of applications’ usability will be very difficult or even 
impossible. 
IV. 
A VIRTUAL WORLD USABILITY HEURISTICS 
PROPOSAL 
VWs usability heuristics were specified using the 
following template: 
 
• 
ID, Name and Definition: Heuristic’s identifier, 
name and definition.   
• 
Explanation: 
Heuristic’s 
detailed 
explanation, 
including references to usability principles, typical 
usability problems, and related usability heuristics 
proposed by other authors. 
• 
Examples: Examples of heuristic’s violation and 
compliance. 
• 
Benefits: Expected usability benefits, when the 
heuristic is accomplished. 
• 
Problems: 
Anticipated 
problems 
of 
heuristic 
misunderstanding, 
when 
performing 
heuristic 
evaluations. 
 
The 16 proposed usability heuristics were grouped in 
three categories: (1) Design and Aesthetics, (2) Control and 
17
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Navigation and (3) Errors and Help. A summary of the 
proposed heuristics is presented below, including heuristic’s 
ID, name and definition. 
 
Design and Aesthetics Heuristics: 
 
(H1) Feedback: A VW interface should keep user 
informed on both avatar’s state, and the relevant facts and 
events that affect him. 
(H2) Clarity: A VW should offer an easy to understand 
user control panel, using clear graphic elements, text and 
language, grouping elements by their purposes, and offering 
easy access to the main functionality. 
(H3) Simplicity: A VW should provide easy and intuitive 
interaction with the environment’s virtual objects. Only 
relevant information should be given, in order to avoid the 
control panel’s overload. 
(H4) Consistency: A VW should be consistent in using 
language and concepts. Avatar’s actions and their effects on 
the VW’s environment should be coherent and consistent. 
User – avatar, as well as avatar – VW’s objects, should be 
consistent. 
 
Control and Navigation Heuristics: 
 
(H5) Low memory load: A VW should maintain main 
objects, options, elements and actions always available or 
easy to get to. It should provide ways to mark and remember 
places already visited and/or of user’s interest. 
(H6) Flexibility and efficiency of use: A VW should 
provide customizable shortcuts, abbreviations, accessibility 
keys or command lines. The user interface/control panel 
should be customizable. 
(H7) Camera control: A VW should give user control 
over camera, allowing a customizable user’s view. 
(H8) Visualization: A VW should give user control over 
the objects and visual effects that he/she will get visible. 
(H9) Avatar’s customization: A VW should allow fully 
avatars’ customization. 
(H10) Orientation and navigation: A VW should provide 
full (customizable) information on avatar’s position, paths to 
a desired destination, and passage ways from one position to 
another (according to VW’s rules). 
(H11) World interaction: A VW should clearly indicate 
the objects that user may interact with, as well as the actions 
that user may perform over the objects.  
(H12) World’s rules: A VW should clearly indicate its 
own rules and the rules that govern avatars, especially the 
actions that are impossible in the real (user’s) world, but are 
possible in the VW (and vice versa). 
(H13) Communication between avatars: A VW should 
allow easy communication among users, through their 
avatars. 
  
Errors and Help Heuristics: 
 
(H14) Error prevention: A VW should prevent users 
from performing actions that could lead to errors, and should 
avoid confusions that could lead to mistakes, during user – 
control panel interaction, as well as during (user’s) avatar – 
VW interaction.  
(H15) Recovering from errors: A VW should provide 
user appropriate mechanisms to recover from errors, and exit 
ways from unwanted situations. It should include clear 
messages, hopefully indicating causes and solutions for 
errors. 
(H16) Help and documentation: A VW should provide an 
easy to find, easy to understand, and complete online 
documentation, accessible from both inside and outside of 
the world itself.  
Table 1 presents the mapping between VWs 16 heuristics 
and Nielsen’s 10 heuristics [5]. 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING BETWEEN VIRTUAL WORLDS HEURISTICS AND 
NIELSEN’S HEURISTICS 
Virtual Worlds Heuristics 
Nielsen’s Heuristics 
ID 
Definition 
ID 
Definition 
H1 
Feedback  
N1 
Visibility of system status  
H2 
Clarity 
N2 
Match between system and 
the real world 
H3 
Simplicity 
N8 
Aesthetic and minimalist 
design 
H4 
Consistency 
N4 
Consistency and standards 
H5 
Low memory load 
N6 
Recognition rather than recall 
H6 
Flexibility and 
efficiency of use 
N7 
Flexibility and efficiency of 
use 
H7 
Camera control 
N3 
User control and freedom 
H8 
Visualization 
H9 
Avatar’s 
customization 
H10 
Orientation and 
navigation 
H11 
World interaction 
 
Various 
H12 
World’s rules 
H13 
Communication 
between avatars 
H14 
Error prevention 
N5 
Error prevention 
H15 
Recovering from 
errors 
N9 
Help users recognize, 
diagnose, and recover from 
errors 
H16 
Help and 
documentation 
N10 
Help and documentation 
 
VWs usability heuristics H1, H2, H3, H4, H5, and H6 
particularize Nielsen’s heuristics N1, N2, N8, N4, N6, and 
N7 (respectively), based on the VWs’ characteristics.  
Heuristics H7, H8, H9 and H10 are related to Nielsen’s 
N3 heuristics. “User control and freedom” was detailed, 
considering 
relevant 
VWs 
aspects: 
visualization 
18
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

customization 
and 
navigation 
through 
the 
virtual 
environment. 
Heuristics H11, H12 and H13 have no direct one – to – 
one relation to Nielsen’s heuristics. They may be related to 
various Nielsen’s heuristics (in different degrees of 
relevance). 
Finally, heuristics H14, H15 and H16 put Nielsen’s 
heuristics N5, N9 and N10 (respectively) into the context of 
VWs.      
 Based on the experiments made up to the date, the nature 
of the usability problems identified when applying VWs 
usability heuristics, and the problems that some evaluators 
had when applying such heuristics, a usability checklist was 
defined. It details the set of 16 heuristics and helps their use 
in heuristic evaluation practice. The checklist includes a total 
of 49 items (from 2 to 5 items per heuristic).  
V. 
VALIDATING THE PROPOSAL: EARLY EXPERIMENTS 
The 16 proposed VWs usability heuristic were checked 
against Nielsen’s 10 heuristics, using Club Penguin as case 
study.  
Club Penguin is a VW designed for 8-14 year olds 
children, a place where they can play games, have fun and 
interact with each other [10]. Users’ avatars are penguins. 
Each player chooses a penguin, gives it an identity, and 
explores Club Penguin, interacting with other penguins by 
chatting, playing games, sending greeting cards, or using 
emoticons and actions (i.e. wave, dance, sit, walk or throw a 
snowball). By playing games, players earn virtual coins 
which they can eventually use to buy clothing and 
accessories for their penguin or furniture for their igloo. 
Club Penguin was examined by two groups of 3 
evaluators each. All 6 evaluators had similar (medium) 
experience 
in 
heuristic 
evaluations 
(with 
Nielsen’s 
heuristics), but no experience in usability evaluation of VWs. 
The first group performed a heuristic evaluation of Club 
Penguin using only VWs usability heuristics, while the 
second group performed a similar heuristic evaluation, but 
using only Nielsen’s heuristic.  
A total of 52 problems were identified by the 6 
evaluators. More usability problems were captured using 
VWs usability heuristics than using Nielsen’s heuristics: 
• 
14 problems (26.9%) were identified by both groups 
of evaluators, 
• 
22 problems (46.2%) were identified only by the 
group which used VWs usability heuristics, 
• 
14 problems (26.9%) were identified only by the 
group which used Nielsen’s heuristics. 
The results seem to prove that VWs usability heuristics 
work better than Nielsen’s heuristics. However, these are 
preliminary results, and more experiments are necessary. The 
experiments provided an important feedback for VWs 
usability heuristics (and the associated checklist) refinement.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
VWs have nowadays a wide range of applications. 
Research usually focuses on VWs’ use and the phenomenon 
they represent. There is a need for new usability evaluation 
methods or at least usability evaluations should be 
particularized for VWs applications. 
A set of 16 specific usability heuristics and an associated 
(49 items) usability checklist were developed. Early 
validation proved their usefulness and potential. However, 
more experiments are necessary. 
A right balance between specificity and generality should 
be follow. If heuristics are too specific, they will probably 
become hard to understand and hard to apply. General 
heuristics, complemented by specific usability checklists, 
will probably work better, most of the time.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank to all the participants 
involved into the experiments that the present study required. 
The work was highly supported by the School of Informatics 
Engineering of the Pontifical Catholic University of 
Valparaiso – Chile, especially by the members of “UseCV” 
Research Group in Human – Computer Interaction. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Jung and H. Kang, “User goals in social virtual worlds: A 
means-end chain approach”, Computers in Human Behavior, 
vol. 26 (2010), pp. 218–225. 
[2] International Organisation for Standardisation, ISO 9241, 
“Software Ergonomics Requirements for office work with 
visual display terminal (VDT)”, Geneva, 1998. 
[3] R. Otaiza, C. Rusu, and S. Roncagliolo, “Evaluating the 
Usability of Transactional Web Sites”, Proc. 3rd International 
Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2010), IEEE Press, pp. 32-37, ISBN-13: 978-0-7695-
3957-7, 2010. 
[4] J. Nielsen, “Usability Engineering”, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 1993. 
[5] J. Nielsen, “Ten Usability Heuristics”, Available at 
www.useit.com/papers/heuristic/heuristic_list.html 
(last 
access 21/03/2011). 
[6] C. Wiberg, K. Jegers, and H. Desurvire, “How Applicable is 
Your Evaluation Methods – Really?”, Proc. 2nd International 
Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2009), IEEE Press, pp. 324-328, ISBN: 978-1-4244-
3351-3, 2009. 
[7] C. Rusu, S. Roncagliolo, V. Rusu, and C. Collazos, “A 
Methodology to establish usability heuristics”, Proc. 4th 
International Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions (ACHI 2011), IARIA, pp. 59-62, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-003-1, 2011. 
[8] C. Porter, “A Typology of Virtual Communities: A Multi-
Disciplinary Foundation for Future Research”, Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 10/1 (2004), DOI: 
10.1111/j.1083-6101.2004.tb00228.x. 
[9] P. Messinger, E. Stroulia, and K. Lyons, “A Typology of 
Virtual Worlds: Historical Overview and Future Directions”, 
Journal of Virtual Worlds, vol. 1/1 (2008), ISSN 1941-8477, 
Available at http://jvwresearch.org (last access 21/03/2011). 
[10] “What 
is 
Club 
Penguin?”, 
Available 
at 
www.clubpenguin.com (last access 21/03/2011). 
 
19
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

