The City Tour Service in Mobile Ad-hoc Group 
 
HyunKyung Yoo and Changsup Keum 
Communication Service Platform Research Section 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
(ETRI) 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
hkyoo@etri.re.kr, cskeum@etri.re.kr 
YoungMee Shin 
Energy IT Technology Research Section 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
(ETRI) 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
ymshin@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— With the recent explosive growth of mobile devices, 
the demand of high quality contents in mobile network is 
increasing. To ensure the low delay contents sharing in mobile 
network, there is a need to deploy service platform which 
provides the intelligent services in the localized ad-hoc group. 
The service platform can provide a common structure to create 
and support the direct services at user’s edge node. Mobile 
subscribers come together in same area, establish a temporal 
ad-hoc group and they connect to the same Wi-Fi access point. 
People who have common interest can communicate for 
sharing contents and information. For them, service platform 
can support the storing, caching, and management of contents, 
in order to share the high quality contents among proximity 
group in mobile network. The feature of proximity group 
services has instantly generated social relation. In this paper, 
we propose the architecture of service platform for providing a 
city tour service. Also, we provide the design and the 
development of the proximity services which is composed of a 
contents sharing service and a proximity chatting service. Our 
platform and service can be applied to the campuses and malls 
as well as tour group.  
Keywords-service platform; ad-hoc community; proximity 
service; city tour service; contents sharing 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The demand of mobile data services which create, store, 
make use of contents is increasing [1]. To deliver the high 
quality contents services in mobile network, it is necessary to 
deploy caching server in the edge node and provide the 
contents sharing service among the localized ad-hoc group. It 
is profitable to support the low delay contents through an 
edge node and reduce the traffic to core network [2-5]. 
Two major technologies that allow wireless connection 
between mobile devices are Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. Both are 
available on most modern mobile phones, tablets, laptops, 
and other electronic devices. Wi-Fi can achieve much higher 
transmission speed and wider range than Bluetooth. So Wi-
Fi technology has dominated for most high-bandwidth 
internet-based applications [6]. 
For the user-centric service, the service platform is 
essential to provide a common structure to create and 
provide the direct services at user’s edge node over Wi-Fi [7-
9]. Also, mobile subscribers come together in same area such 
as city tour, establish an ad-hoc group, and get a same 
interest. For them, the intelligent service platform can 
support the storing, caching, and management of contents, in 
order to share the high quality contents among proximity 
group in mobile network. 
In this paper, we propose the architecture of service 
platform for providing a city tour service in mobile ad-hoc 
group. And, we provide the design and the development of 
the proximity services which is composed of a contents 
sharing service and a proximity chatting service. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
architecture of service platform for providing a city tour 
proximity service. We explain the functions of social sharing 
unit, content sharing unit, chat server, content server, service 
discovery unit, and mobile device. And we describe the 
service activation sequence flow. 
 In Section III, we present the city tour proximity service 
which is composed of a contents sharing service and a 
proximity chatting service. And we show the proximity 
chatting service flow. Finally, Section IV summarizes and 
concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
SERVICE PLATFORM  FOR  MOBILE ADHOC 
SERVICE 
The city tour services are based on the localized ad-hoc 
group connected to Wi-Fi. These groups have instantly 
generated social relation, on the basis of interest rather than 
intimate relations. The proximity group members can share 
the information of same topics at the same place at the same 
time. Their shared contents are photo, audio, video, text, and 
file. Shared contents must be guaranteed user’s anonymity 
and considered a lifetime because of a member’s temporal 
relation. 
This proximity group service can be very useful in 
moving vehicle. For example, the tour guide and tourists can 
share the information of tour spot, restaurant, hotel, and 
shopping place, by making the dynamic proximity 
community. 
 
A. Service Platform Architecture 
For the mobile ad-hoc group services, we designed the 
service platform which supports the content management and 
the social sharing. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

The proposed service platform architecture is shown in 
Figure 1. There are two parts of the mobile device and the 
service platform. The service platform consists of Social 
Sharing Unit, Content Sharing Unit, Chat Server, Content 
Server, and Service Discovery Unit. And Mobile Device has 
Client App and Discovery Agent. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Service Platform Architecture 
 
Users receive a city tour service in mobile device. The 
Discovery Agent of a mobile device discovers the 
connection information of the mobile device in the network. 
It gets the Access Pointer IP address and the service 
connection URL (Uniform Resource Locator). Client App of 
mobile device performs the service request and response 
according to user interaction. 
Social Sharing Unit and Content Sharing Unit in service 
platform are web application for user interaction. They 
request the chat service or content service, and receive HTTP 
(Hypertext Transfer Protocol) based response from Chat 
Server or Content Server. They are composed of JavaScript, 
HTML5, and CSS (Cascading Style Sheets). JavaScript 
handles events, and HTML5 and CSS are the view part of 
web applications. 
Chat Server provides the chat member management 
function based on REST interface and the chat message 
management function based on TCP socket connection. The 
chat member management function manages the member 
nicknames to guarantee an anonymity among the proximity 
ad-hoc community. It is the unique member identifier and it 
cannot be duplicated in the same Wi-Fi.  The chat member 
management function performs the management to add and 
delete members. The chat message management function 
posts and stores the members’ chat messages. If a member 
leaves a Wi-Fi network, the member’s temporal relation 
disappears. 
Content Server provides the contents management to 
cache, store, and delete contents, and the contents 
consumption like download or streaming. Also it supports 
the keyword based search.  
Service Discovery Unit manages the service lists 
deployed to service platform and returns the service 
connection URL to mobile device. 
 
B. Service Activiation Sequence Flow 
For using the city tour service, user mobile device must 
be connected to Wi-Fi access point, and it gets a service 
connection URL. And then, mobile users are offered the city 
tour services from a client app deployed to mobile device.  
Figure 2 shows these service activation sequence flow 
between mobile device and service platform. The related 
functions of service activation are service discovery unit, 
social chat unit, discovery agent, and client app. 
The flows of connection to Wi-Fi network and the 
service activation are as follows. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Service Activation Sequence Flow 
 
- 
Discovery Agent of mobile device is on and waits to 
listen to signal. 
- 
Discovery Agent gets the IP address of access point. 
- 
Discovery Agent connects to Service Discovery Unit 
of service platform. 
- 
Service 
Discovery 
Unit 
returns 
the 
service 
connection URL to Discovery Agent. 
- 
Mobile user executes a Client App. 
- 
Discovery Agent transfers the service connection 
URL to client app. 
- 
Client App requests service connection URL. 
- 
User confirms service connection and uses the 
service. 
 
III. 
CITY TOUR SERVICE 
 
We have implemented a city tour service which shows 
the temporal social relation features of service platform. 
Service development device was done on the Samsung 
Galaxy Note 8.0, running Android version 4.3 (Jelly Bean). 
The demonstrated city tour service is composed of a 
contents sharing service and a proximity chatting service.  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

In contents sharing service, members can upload, list, and 
search the shared contents. The proximity chatting service 
provides the social sharing space to share information 
messages and contents among members who have same 
interest. 
Figure 3 shows the proximity chatting service UI of city 
tour service. We define the intelligent agent which manages 
the chat member presence. When members enter the social 
sharing space with nickname, they can see the member lists 
and post the information messages. They upload contents 
and view shared contents and contents information. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Proximity Chatting Service 
 
The detail flow of proximity chatting service is shown in 
Figure 4. It shows the relation among components of service 
platform. A member creates the unique nickname and starts 
the proximity chatting service. Social Sharing Unit requests 
to get chat member lists and content lists. The chat server 
returns member lists and the content server returns the 
content lists.  
When the members input the chat message for 
information sharing, the chat server transfers the messages to 
all members. While chatting, members can upload and share 
the related contents. 
The advantage of the city tour service provides the useful 
information based on the temporal ad-hoc relation. People 
connected to the same Wi-Fi form an ad-hoc community, 
and people who have common interest can communicate for 
information sharing. Even if they are moving, service 
platform maintains the proximity community services. 
Also, for privacy protection, when a person who 
uploaded content leaves a Wi-Fi network, the shared 
contents will be considered expired and disappear. It reflects 
the feature of ad-hoc services. Also, the shared contents 
among temporal members need to have an anonymity 
guaranteed. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Proximity Chatting Service Flow 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
 
In this paper, we presented the service platform for 
providing a city tour service in the mobile ad-hoc group. Our 
service platform supports the storing, caching, and 
management of contents, in order to share the high quality 
contents among the proximity ad-hoc group in mobile 
network. 
We developed the city tour service, which is composed 
of a content sharing service and a proximity chatting service. 
The advantage of the city tour service provides the useful 
information based on the temporal ad-hoc community.  
The lifetime of shared contents is not permanent because 
of a member’s temporal relation. The chatting service based 
on user nickname can guarantee anonymity among ad-hoc 
members. 
For further study, we have a plan to extend the service 
platform for the proximity intelligent advertisement and 
recommendation. It would be taken into account that 
platform provides the environment for advertisement and 
recommendation lifecycle management. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by ETRI R&D Program funded 
By the Government of Korea (15ZI1410, Development of 
Technologies for Proximity, Real-time, and Smart Service 
Recommendation Platform). 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cisco white paper, “Cisco Visual Networking Index:Global 
Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2014–2019,” tech. rep., 
http://www.cisco.com, accessed Feb. 27th, 2015. 
[2] Namiot, Dmitry, and Manfred Sneps-Sneppe. "Proximity as a 
service." Future Internet Communications (BCFIC), 2012 2nd 
Baltic Congress on. IEEE, 2012. 
[3] Heredia, Edwin, et al. "Contextual proactivity for media 
sharing scenarios in proximity networks." Consumer 
Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), 2014. 
[4] Wang, Yufeng, et al. "Survey on mobile social networking in 
proximity (MSNP): approaches, challenges and architecture." 
Wireless networks, pp. 1295-1311, 2014. 
[5] Salmon, Justin Lewis, and Rong Yang. “A Proximity-Based 
Framework for Mobile Services,” IEEE International 
Conference on Mobile Services, pp. 124-131, 2014. 
[6] Kooh, Thomasgeorgescyrille, Qin Lv, and Shivakant Mishra. 
"Attribute Based Content Sharing in Mobile Adhoc Networks 
of Smartphones over Wifi." Computer Communications and 
Networks (ICCCN), 2012. 
[7] Service Delivery Platform (SDP) definition in Wikipedia, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_delivery_platform 
[8] Pitkänen, Mikko, et al. "SCAMPI: service platform for social 
aware mobile and pervasive computing." ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Communication Review, pp. 503-508, 2012. 
[9] Rodriguez-Sanchez, M. C., et al. "GAT: Platform for 
automatic context-aware mobile services for m-tourism." 
Expert Systems with Applications, pp. 4154-4163, 2013. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

