Extended Labeling Method for Achieving Maximum
Data Message Flow in Wireless Multihop Networks
Yuki Tatsuno and Hiroaki Higaki
Department of Robotics and Mechatronics
Tokyo Denki University
Email: {tatsuno, hig}@higlab.net
Abstract—For multimedia data message transmissions in wire-
less multihop networks composed of wireless links with lower
throughput, transmission capacity is reserved in wireless links
included in one of wireless multihop transmission routes from
a source node N s to a destination node N d. For reservation
of transmission capacity required for applications, a method for
achieving the maximum data message ﬂow from N s to N d is
required. For wired multihop networks, the labeling method has
been proposed. However, in wireless multihop networks, since
message transmission between neighbor nodes is realized by
broadcast transmission of wireless signal, capacity of a wireless
link is effected by data message transmissions by neighbor nodes
due to the hidden-terminal and exposed-terminal problems. Thus,
this paper proposes an extended labeling method based on a novel
wireless network model for the maximum data message ﬂow in
wireless multihop networks and according to novel conditions for
a wireless multihop transmission route to increase the amount
of data message ﬂow from N s to N d.
Keywords- Ad Hoc Networks; Multimedia Communication;
Throughput; Resource Reservation; Labeling Method.
I. INTRODUCTION
In ad hoc networks, sensor networks and mesh networks,
data messages are transmitted from a source wireless node
to a destination one by wireless multihop transmission. In
case that the destination node is not included in a wireless
transmission range of the source one, intermediate wireless
nodes in a wireless multihop transmission route forward the
date messages. In order to realize multimedia communication
which requires realtime transmission of vast number of data
messages in such wireless multihop networks, reservation of
transmission capacity in wireless links in the route in advance
is required.
RSVP [1] is an internet-standard protocol for reservation
of capacities in communication links along a transmission
route from a source node to a destination one (Figure 1). In
RSVP, it is assumed that available capacities in communication
links are enough for requirements in network applications
and capacity in each communication link can be reserved
independently of the other communication links. That is, even
when a certain amount of capacity in a communication link is
reserved, available capacities in the other communication links
are never reduced. However, in wireless multihop networks,
available capacities in wireless links are not always enough
for requirements in network applications. In addition, capacity
reservation in a wireless link is not independent of available
capacities of wireless links issued from the neighbor wireless
nodes since wireless communication is intrinsically based on
broadcast communication and there may be hidden- and/or
exposed-terminals [4]. Therefore, it is difﬁcult for multimedia
network applications to be provided enough amount of data
message ﬂow by reservation of capacities in wireless links
along a single wireless multihop transmission route.


route each time it is detected until no other ﬂow increasing
routes are detected. Many research results show that the
labeling method is a better heuristic to achieve the pseudo
maximum data message throughput and the required capacities
to be reserved in the communication links in wired networks.
Figure 5 shows a naive example wired network NT ′ :=
⟨N ′, L′⟩ where N ′
:=
{N s, N1, N2, N d} and L′
:=
{|N sN1⟩, |N sN2⟩, |N1N2⟩, |N1N d⟩, |N2N d⟩}. Suppose that
available capacities are given as follows; c(|N sN1⟩) := 10,
c(|N sN2⟩) := 5, c(|N1N2⟩) := 8, c(|N1N d⟩) := 4 and
c(|N2N d⟩}) := 8.

As a result of examination of the above 2 examples, there
are 2 types of ﬂow increasing routes and the ﬁnally achieved
maximum amounts of data message ﬂows are the same though
reserved capacities in communication links are different.
[Flow Increasing Route in the Original Labeling Method]
A multihop transmission route R = ||N0 . . . Nn⟩⟩ satisfying
one of the following conditions is a ﬂow increasing route;
• c(|NiNi+1⟩) > 0 in all communication links |NiNi+1⟩ ∈
R (trivial ﬂow increasing route)
• c(|NiNi+1⟩) > 0 or r(|Ni+1Ni⟩) > 0 in all commu-
nication links |NiNi+1⟩ ∈ R (ﬂow increasing route with
reduction of already reserved capacities) 2
C. Multiple Route Wireless Multihop Transmissions
As a result of the labeling method, multiple multihop
transmission routes are detected which provide the maximum
throughput of data messages from a source node to a desti-
nation one. Until now, venous ad hoc routing protocols for
detection of multiple wireless multihop transmission routes
have been proposed [3,5,6]. However, most of them are
designed for continuous data message transmissions even with
wireless link breakages and node failures and detect link-
or node-disjoint routes. [8] and some papers propose that
data messages are transmitted along detected multiple routes
simultaneously for higher data message throughput. However,
these protocols do not intentionally detect multiple routes to
achieve higher throughput for multimedia data transmission.
Of course, they do not provide the maximum throughput of
data messages with consideration of the exposed and hidden
terminal problems.
III. PROPOSAL
A. Wireless Network Model
In the original labeling method, reservation of capacity in
a wired link |NiNj⟩ does not affect the available capacity
of wireless links other than |NiNj⟩ itself. That is, available
capacity and reserved capacity in a wired link is independent
of those of the other wired links. Thus, the maximum amount
of data message ﬂows are calculated based on the available
capacities in wired links in a wired network. On the other hand
in a wireless multihop network, since wireless communication
is intrinsically based on broadcast transmission, even if a
wireless node Ni transmits data messages to its neighbor
wireless node Nj, the data messages are also transmitted to
all its neighbor wireless nodes N ∈ Nei(Ni) in its wireless
transmission range. During transmission of the data messages,
N can neither transmit nor receive data messages. Hence,
data message transmission through |NiNj⟩ reduces available
capacities of not only ⟨NiNj⟩ but also all wireless links
⟨NiN⟩ (Figure 8). Therefore, in wireless multihop networks,
available capacity should be assigned not to wireless links but
to wireless nodes2.
Suppose wireless nodes Ni and Nj are neighbor, i.e., they
are included in their wireless transmission range each other.
2Capacities are reserved for wireless links to transmit data messages.

subsection discusses the conditions where a wireless multihop
transmission route R provides a capacity increasing ﬂow from
a source wireless node N s to a destination one N d.
At ﬁrst, we examine how capacities c(N) of wireless
nodes N are updated when an amount r of data message
ﬂow is reserved along a wireless multihop transmission route
R. The initial values of capacities c(Ni) of wireless nodes
Ni is determined by the speciﬁcation of wireless network
interfaces. The current available capacities c(Ni) that have not
yet reserved for any data message transmission ﬂow restricts
the amount of data message ﬂows including Ni and its 1-hop
and 2-hop neighbor wireless nodes due to exposed and hidden
nodes relation. Thus, we examine the following 3 cases where
N is included in R and a case where N is not included in R.
[N = N0 ∈ R or N = Nn ∈ R]
As shown in Figure 10(a), if N is a source wireless node
N0 = N s, since N1 ∈ Nei(N), the amount of reduction of
c(N) is totally reserved capacities in wireless links |NN1⟩ and
|N1N2⟩. In the same way, as shown in Figure 10(b), if N is
a destination wireless node Nn = nd, since Nn−1 ∈ Nei(N),
the amount of reduction of c(N) is totally reserved capacities
in wireless links |Nn−2Nn−1⟩ and |Nn−1Nn⟩. Therefore,
c(N) := c(N) − 2r.
[N = N1 ∈ R or Nn−1 ∈ R]
As shown in Figure 10(a), if N is a next-hop wireless node
N1 of N s, since N0 ∈ Nei(N) and N2 ∈ Nei(N), c(N)
is reduced the total of reserved capacities in wireless links
|N0N⟩, |NN2⟩ and |N2N3⟩ along R. In the same way, as
shown in Figure 10(b), if N is a previous-hop wireless node
Nn−1 of N d, since Nn−2 ∈ Nei(N) and Nn ∈ Nei(N),
c(N) is reduced the total of reserved capacities in wireless
links |Nn−3Nn−2⟩, |Nn−2N⟩ and |NNn⟩ along R. Therefore,
c(N) := c(N) − 3r.

those of its 1-hop neighbor wireless nodes are updated as usual
by reduction of 4r, i.e., c(Nj) := c(Nj) − 4r. On the other
hand, capacities c(Nj) of Nj (j = n − 1, n, n + 1, n + 2)
and those of 1-hop neighbor wireless nodes of Ni and Ni+1
reduces only 2r, i.e, c(Nj) := c(Nj) − 2r. Hence, in order
for R to be a ﬂow increasing route, c(Nj) > 0 is required in
all wireless nodes in R.
However, consider a wireless node N which is in a wireless
range of Ni and is out of wireless ranges of Nj (j ̸= i). In this
case, since reserved capacities r(|Ni−1Ni⟩) and r(|NiNi+1⟩)
increases and decreases r, respectively, capacity of N is
unchanged. Thus, even if c(N) = 0, R is a ﬂow increasing
route and r can be reserved along R. Same as this way, for
a wireless node N ′ in a wireless range of Ni+1 and out of
wireless ranges of Nj (j ̸= i+1), even if c(N ′) = 0, it does not
prohibit R to be a ﬂow increasing route. This is also because
r(|NiNi+1⟩) decreases r and r(|Ni+1Ni+2⟩) increases r.

value for evaluation of changes of available capacities, only
numbers of links which increase and decrease capacities of
neighbor wireless nodes are required. Therefore, the condition
for a ﬂow increasing route is summarized as follows:
[Condition for Flow Increasing Route]
A wireless multihop transmission route R from a source
wireless node N s to a destination one N d increases an amount
of data message ﬂow by capacity reservation if available
capacities c(N ′) > 0 where a wireless node N ′ is included in
R or 1-hop neighbor wireless nodes of them and the number
of wireless links which connect to N ′ or its 1-hop neighbor
wireless nodes and whose reserved capacity increases is larger
than the number of wireless links which also connect to N ′ or
its 1-hop neighbor wireless nodes and whose reserved capacity
decreases. 2

