A Core/Edge Separation Based Bridging Virtualization Approach Oriented to 
Convergent Network 
Tao Yu  
CS Department 
Tsinghua University,  
Beijing, P. R. China 
yutao@csnet1.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn  
Jun Bi 
Network Research Center 
Tsinghua University,  
Beijing, P. R. China 
junbi@tsinghua.edu.cn 
Jianping Wu 
CS Department 
Tsinghua University,  
Beijing, P. R. China 
jianping@cernet.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract—Internet has been developing for more than three 
decades ago. Considering its popularity, ubiquity and scale, it 
causes immense difficulty for other networks with different 
architectures to be deployed or even get adequately evaluated. 
This 
paper 
introduces 
a 
core/edge 
separation 
based 
architecture model, which allows core networks with various 
architectures to coexist, enables end users to choose whichever 
core network at will, and simplifies the design, deployment, 
operation and management of edge networks. In this model, 
Carrier Grade Ethernet, which is still on-going evolving, is 
selected as transport technology in the edge networks. A 
radically new approach called Bridging Virtualization is used 
to form a convergent access platform to these different core 
networks for end users. Besides the increasing flexibility for 
the edge transport carriers, this model also improves end 
users’ independence from the access provider. Moreover, it 
makes it possible the execution of network convergence step-
by-step and can be used to realize it in the edge first. Finally, 
we apply this architecture model to design the campus 
networks of Tsinghua University, analyze its pros and cons 
and make some conclusion.   
Keywords-Virtualization; network convergence; Carrier 
Grade Ethernet; transport; Future Internet 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Due to the research and development effort revolved 
around the concept of New Generation Networks (NGN), 
Carriers’ networks have been improved significantly. The 
access and aggregation networks especially, even the core 
networks, are undergoing architectural evolution. Although 
there are different approaches to NGN, convergence, 
ubiquity, mobility and security are the common goals for all 
of them. 
The concept of network convergence has twofold 
meanings, i.e., first and foremost it means that there is a 
uniform packet transport platform; second it means various 
kinds of applications can be built on a common network 
architecture such as CCN (Content Centric Network) or 
some other virtualization based future network. Here we 
distinguish them as two functions and locate them in 
different layers of the network system which is divided into 
edge part and core part. For the second meaning, it is 
mainly implemented in the core part; for the first meaning, 
it is implemented in both the core and the edge, and the 
architecture and technology of the implementations in both 
of them may be different depending on their individual 
characteristics 
and 
requirements. 
For 
us, 
network 
convergence not only facilitates the deployment and 
application of new network services, but also encourages 
the emergence, setup and evaluation of innovative network 
architectures. 
Currently, there are two main alternatives to achieve 
network convergence: IP/MPLS and Carrier Ethernet. In 
this paper we focus on the Carrier Ethernet proposal for the 
edge networks, especially the Carrier Grade Ethernet (CGE) 
solution aiming at a transport technology for carriers’ 
networks, since the former one is closely related to IP 
technology, whereas the latter does not care about whatever 
the upper layer architecture and protocol will be and fits in 
with future Internet initiatives much more likely.  
About Carrier Grade Ethernet, there are several 
technological components such as Provider Bridge (PB) 
[12], Provider Backbone Bridge (PBB) [13], Provider 
Backbone Bridge – Traffic Engineering (PBB-TE) [14] and 
Shortest Path Bridging (SPB) [15]. To date, all of them are 
IEEE standards except the SPB, of which PB and PBB 
address scalability and management issues, PBB-TE adds 
traffic engineering and SPB introduces a link-state protocol 
into Ethernet. In addition, there are other standards 
pertaining to Ethernet OAM. All of the above existing 
standards together with the future ones will finally make 
Ethernet an adoptable packet transport technology for 
carriers.  
In order to join different transport carriers’ edge 
network together and increase the ubiquity of NGN, 
virtualization technique is utilized to achieve a virtual 
connectivity platform, where different Carrier Grade 
Ethernet technologies coexist and cooperate closely to 
provide access to various core networks for end users. Each 
edge transport Carrier has its own geographical footprint, 
and it provides network connectivity for all the potential 
users without the discrimination of which core network 
clients they are (It can charge the core network providers 
for 
their 
customers’ 
usage 
of 
its 
transportation 
infrastructure). 
This 
way 
ensures 
the 
customer 
independence from the individual edge transport carriers, 
which not only brings flexibility for the edge transport 
networks but also increases the mobility for the core 
networks. Different edge transport carriers’ networks are 
interconnected through virtual bridging approach to form a 
74
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

complete platform to provide access to each kind of core 
networks, such as the current Internet, the next generation 
Internet based on IPv6 and some other totally different 
networks as the Future Internet (FI) candidates.  
By this way, we separate the whole network system into 
two parts, the edge part and the core part. The infrastructure 
in the edge just provides the convergent access platform for 
end users to different core networks, while at the core 
various networks with different architectures compete with 
each other to meet end users’ increasing service 
requirements. Users can switch to different protocol stack 
or utilize different virtual machines in their terminals to 
choose among services provided by these core networks, 
the final judgment and decision about what architecture the 
future network will be depend on the most people who 
approve its services, then other core networks will diminish 
gradually and the transition to the Future Internet can be 
realized smoothly. 
In this paper, we first present Carrier Grade Ethernet as 
a solid alternative to achieve convergent edge transport 
infrastructure in carrier’s domain. Second bridging 
virtualization approach is proposed to provide isolate 
transport platform for each core network, and then Click 
tool is used to apply this design to Tsinghua University 
campus network (THUNET). Finally, we analyze, evaluate 
this model and complete this article with some conclusions.  
II. NET CONVERGENCE AND RELATED WORK 
What we mean network convergence is that people can 
use various network services through just one type of 
network. Although it is universally agreed the future 
network will be a convergent network, to what degree that 
the convergence will reach still remains uncertain. In this 
paper, we adopt the strictest definition of it: convergence of 
various 
services 
and 
convergence 
of 
connectivity. 
Meanwhile we need to point out that this definition of 
network convergence will not affect its realization step by 
step.  
In the scenario of network convergence, the whole 
network will consist of three different parts; those are the 
users’ networks, networks of connectivity providers and 
networks of service providers. Just as we say in the 
introduction, this paper concentrates on the convergence of 
connectivity providers’ networks in the edge, and carrier 
grade Ethernet is chosen as the basis for this kind of 
convergence.   
There are three main options for transporting Ethernet 
frame: Ethernet over SONET/SDH, Ethernet over MPLS 
and Carrier Grade Ethernet. For the first solution, its 
drawback lies in that the SONET/SDH equipment is costly 
and it has severe problems for multipoint solutions. The 
second solution does allow both point-to-point and 
multipoint connections, but again it is complex and rather 
expensive because it needs a routable network and 
IP/MPLS solutions at the core. For Carrier Grade Ethernet, 
it is the most suitable technology to provide Ethernet 
services since almost all the Internet traffic originates and 
ends in Ethernet. What’s more, organizations for 
standardization including IEEE, IETF, ITU and MEF are 
still striving toward extending the scale and scope of 
Ethernet, especially aiming it at a suitable transport 
technology for carrier’s networks. In the following we 
briefly describe and analyze the evolving process of Carrier 
Grade Ethernet.    
Some requirements must be met for Ethernet if it can be 
considered as a transport alternative for carriers. First of all, 
it must provide standardized services without the need to 
change customer equipments. Besides this, it must support 
different types of quality of service in terms of bandwidth, 
packet loss, delay or jitter. Also, it must be scalable to be 
able to provide services for millions of customers accessing 
simultaneously to voice, video and data services. To 
guarantee reliability, resilience is an essential and a 
recovery time inferior of 50 ms (of SDH technology) is 
mandatory. Finally, standardized mechanisms for network 
monitoring, diagnosis and management are indispensable. 
To fulfill the above requirements, first traffic from 
different customers must be segregated. IEEE802.1q is 
available for this purpose, but because the VLAN tag in 
802.1q frame has only twelve bit length, at most 4094 
VLANs can be used, which is not enough for carriers. 
Moreover, many customers need to assign VLAN ID for 
their internal networks by themselves and want to maintain 
this VLAN designation across the carrier’s network, so 
there need much cooperation between carrier and customer 
which imposes great difficulty for carrier’s operation if it is 
not impossible.  
IEEE 802.1ad is developed to solve this problem, which 
uses a separate VLAN tag called S-tag for carrier’s network 
in the 802.1ad frame. Similarly, the length of S-tag is 
twelve bits too, which has the same scalability problem as 
802.1q. Besides, because the carrier’s network and the 
customer’s network share the same MAC address space in 
802.1ad, which make them seem to be in a same bigger 
network, any changes in customer’s network will have an 
impact on carrier’s one, which is not desired by the carrier. 
From the customer’s point of view, if their internal MAC 
addresses are exposed to the carrier’s network, it may cause 
security concern. The most important of all, the BPDUs 
from carrier’s network and customer’s network should not 
interact with each other, which otherwise may cause 
unpredicted serious consequence. But currently in 802.1ad, 
there is no efficient way to distinguish them.   
For all of the above reasons, IEEE802.1ah is proposed, 
whose frame format is as Figure 1 shows. 802.1ah uses a 
new carrier’s MAC header to encapsulate (decapsulate) 
incoming (outgoing) frame. In this header, instead of a 12-
bit S tag, a 24-bit field called I-SID (I-tag) is used to 
differentiate the service instances, which drastically resolve 
scalability problem. The forwarding is based on the new 
header’s fields (B-DA, B-SA and B-VID), totally isolated 
from customer’s addressing scheme. But 802.1ah still 
maintains flooding and STP mechanisms.  
75
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

 
Figure 1. Carrier Grade Ethernet frame format 
For carriers, traffic engineering capability of transport 
network is critical, but STP does not have such one and 
flooding wastes so much bandwidth that the carrier cannot 
bear. IEEE 802.1Qay aims to solve this problem. It is based 
on 802.1ah encapsulation, by disabling some well known 
mechanisms of Ethernet like STP, flooding, broadcasting or 
MAC learning, it eliminates the problems faced by the 
802.1ah but needs additional management plane/control 
plane to populate its forwarding table. The forwarding 
decision is based on the combination of destination MAC 
address and VLAN ID (60 bits), providing enough capacity 
to traffic engineering.  
IEEE 802.1aq [15] (Shortest Path Bridging) is another 
development that proposes an alternative to STP 
dependence. 802.1aq is a draft standard that uses 802.1ah 
data plane combined with the well-known link state 
protocol IS-IS [6]. This enhancement adds carrier-grade 
any-to-any infrastructure capabilities to the 802.1Qay point-
to-point model. This is done by changing from a 
management system to IS-IS associated states and protocols 
to rule forwarding behavior. 802.1aq technology enables 
Ethernet to use the shortest path from any source to any 
destination, thereby allowing full use of the entire mesh 
connectivity and eliminating the need for complex Multiple 
Spanning Tree Protocols. 
OAM (operation, administration and maintenance) is 
critical for Carrier-Class Ethernet. There are several 
standards regarding these fields: IEEE 802.1ag [7], it 
provides a mechanism for service fail proactive signaling; 
IEEE 802.3ah, it defines OAM capabilities for the first mile; 
IEEE 802.1AB, it allows topology discovery; ITU-T 
G.8031, it adds Ethernet protection mechanisms; and ITU-
T Y.1713 [8], it gives additional management capacities to 
802.1ag.  
With all of the above developments in Carrier Grade 
Ethernet, carrier’s network will converge to common 
transport platform based on native Ethernet and customers 
will be able to access the specified core networks via it. 
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND PROTOTYPE 
IMPLEMENTATION 
A. System Architecture 
Today telephone network, Internet and cable TV 
network are still separate networks through which people 
access voice service, data service and video service 
accordingly, and these networks each have their own 
architecture and underlying technology. Even if there are 
some telecommunication operators or cable TV operators 
who claim that they can provide all these three services by 
themselves, users still hope that the communication media, 
terminal equipment and even the connectivity technique for 
these services could be unified too. This object seems 
simple and clear at a sudden, but the technical factor 
supporting this uniformity are extremely complex and 
difficult, lots of work is still in process of revision, 
especially for deployment in large scale.  
As we mentioned before, the network convergence we 
think should include the service convergence and the 
connectivity convergence, and we separate the whole 
network into core and edge. In this scenario, there will be 
three different business roles that do not match those of 
today exactly. They are users, transport carriers and service 
providers.  
Because there are already Ethernets deployed in users’ 
premises, and Ethernet has the advantage of low cost, ease 
to use, maintain, upgrade, etc., we continue to use Ethernet 
as a convergent communication platform in user’s domain.  
In the domain of edge transport carrier lying between 
the user’s network and the core network, based on the 
analysis in the second section, we choose Carrier Grade 
Ethernet (CGE) to construct a convergent packet transport 
platform, in which various technical components of CGE 
are utilized depending on actual needs to aggregate users’ 
networks into the POPs of core networks. There users’ 
networks are connected to various types of core networks 
through different gateways. These gateways may be IPv4 
router, IPv6 router, CCN router, and so on.  
At the interface between user’s network and the edge 
transport network, a layer two device is used instead of a 
layer three router. The system architecture will look like as 
Figure 2 shows. 
 Figure 2. System architecture 
Due to the large number of users’ networks, heavy 
routing and processing burden will be imposed on the core 
network’s gateway, e.g., they are demanding for huge port 
number, link bandwidth and processing power, etc. About 
the problem of port number, port virtualization can be used 
to subdivide one physical port to lots of sub interfaces or 
virtual interfaces, and then the technique of “router on a 
stick” may be used to provide routing among huge number 
of networks in one device. The problems of link bandwidth 
and processing power of a single router will be resolved or 
improved by the distributed router technology. Furthermore, 
along with the advancement of router virtualization, some 
device which merges the IPv4 router, IPv6 router and CCN 
76
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

router will finally appear and get ready for the utmost 
realization of core network convergence.  
In the edge transport network between user’s network 
and core network, in order for end users to connect to 
different types of core network, network virtualization is 
utilized to partition the end users’ traffic for different core 
networks into different network instances.  Because the 
transport network embeds the users’ Ethernet frame into a 
new Ethernet frame when it reaches and de-encapsulates it 
when it leaves, which separates the transport carrier’s 
network from the user’s network hierarchically and 
processes the user’s traffic recursively, and all these actions 
happen in the layer two, we call it connectivity virtual 
bridging or bridging virtualization. Any Layer 3 protocol 
from the core networks can use this connectivity 
transparently. In addition, due to the limited footprint of 
every edge transport carrier’s network, similar virtual 
bridging technique among carriers can be used for 
expansion. Hence there are two layer bridging virtualization 
in our approach. The first layer virtualization is within each 
carrier’s domain, where there is an individual virtual 
transport platform per core network. The second layer 
virtualization is across carriers, which further virtualizes the 
virtual networks in the first layer in each carrier which are 
for the same core network.  
The second layer virtualization has two purposes. First 
it can be used to extend the geographical footprint of the 
Future Internet candidates with innovative architectures. 
For these networks, its initial deployment is in small scale 
and provided by few carriers, by this way, more carriers can 
provide access to it and lots of end users are able to try out 
it at its beginning. Second for extensively deployed IPv4 
and IPv6 Internet, this type of virtualization could provide 
reliability and performance guarantees for end users’ 
networks by multi-homing.   
The schematic diagram of bridging virtualization is 
demonstrated in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of bridging virtualization  
The advantage of this architecture model is that new 
network instance can be added easily and any solutions in 
control plane other than IEEE proposal can be used. This 
means that any new network architecture can be 
incorporated into a common transport platform by adding a 
new instance whose forwarding behavior can be customized 
for it.  
B. Prototype Implementation 
We use Click tool [9] to prove this network prototype 
for Tsinghua University Campus Network (THUNET). This 
tool was developed at MIT initially and it allows simulation 
networks to interact with real network nodes. It needs to be 
pointed out that because there is only one operator for 
THUNET, so we don’t consider virtual bridging across 
multiple carriers in our initial prototype implementation. If 
Tsinghua University or CERNET wants to expand the 
footprint of IPv6 Internet or the future FI, it can permit 
other telecommunication operators (such as China Mobile 
or China Unicom) to provide access to these networks for 
ambient social users through this virtual bridging platform 
of Tsinghua University, meanwhile keep them separate 
from  THUNET. 
The Click design for the component at the interface 
between user network and edge transport network is shown 
in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Click design for virtual bridging 
When a frame enters the bridge node, first it must go 
through a classification process to determine which network 
instance it belongs to, then it will be processed and 
encapsulated with new header, after that some specific 
component of CCE will determine and forward this frame 
to proper output port. Since all the network instances share 
each access port of the bridge node, there must be a 
scheduler for the frame forwarding among these network 
instances. 
In addition, in the Click design, the edge bridge and the 
core bridge are different. The edge bridge need encapsulate, 
process and forward frames, while the core bridge need 
only forward frame according to control protocol or 
management system. The edge bridge sets value of fields in 
the new header according to the type of packet, the 
destination gateway, the operator’s policies, and so on. 
Once the frame finishes encapsulation process and enters 
some specific network instance, many protocols such as 
STP, IS-IS, proprietary protocols and (or) management 
system can be applied in this network instance to direct its 
forwarding action.  
Trans. Carrier A 
Trans. Carrier C 
Trans. Carrier B 
End user 
 
End user 
End user 
IPv4 Internet 
Other FI candidates 
IPv6 network 
Virtual bridging network 
Core  
Edge 
77
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

IV. DISCUSSION  
This type of network architecture model has the 
following advantages: 
First, it eliminates the use of low-end branch routers 
completely and decreases the campus IP network’s burden 
of 
distributed 
network 
configuring, 
managing 
and 
troubleshooting.  
Second, by using core routers to complete the function 
of routing, security enforcement, user authentication, 
protocol and address translation, etc., it will improve the IP 
network’s reliability, stability, security, manageability and 
controllability, and increase the utilization rate of core 
router’s 
backplane, 
which 
makes 
campus 
network 
construction much more cost efficient.  
Third, since low-end branch routers or layer 3 switches 
do not support IPv6 and FI related protocols generally, 
elimination of them will make easy or possible for the 
deployment or expansion of IPv6 Internet and Future 
Internet, and the application based on them will spread, 
which allow these types of internets to get adequate usage 
and efficient evaluation.  
Fourth, in the edge transport network, it is easy to 
implement traffic engineering to maximize its usage and 
improve the average Internet bandwidth per user. 
Fifth, there is no need to make any change of the current 
IP routers and end hosts for this network architecture to 
work.  
Sixth, this type of network architecture is more likely to 
support 
multiple 
architecturally 
different 
networks 
including Future Internet, facilitating their deployment and 
coexistence.  
However, this architecture model has its drawbacks too: 
First, for big organizations with multiple VLANs, 
because the traffic across inner VLANs need to be 
transported to the POP for routing, their delay will increase, 
though this will not affect the routine applications with no 
strict requirement noticeably. Besides, this model will cause 
security concern for those who has some security 
requirement on the traffic across their inner VLANs. But 
there are solutions for all of the above problems, for 
example, they can be solved by the scalable enterprise 
Ethernet architecture, for more details, please refer to 
SEATTLE [18]. 
Second, to aggregate users’ networks and transport them 
to the operator’s PoP for routing, the number of VLANs 
accumulated there will be very high, so the VLAN ID 
should be carefully designed and the map of routers’ ports 
to VLAN IDs must be planned in detail to avoid confliction, 
which will be more demanding for the capability of network 
planning and management than the current IP solution.  
In summary, this network architecture does not intend to 
replace IP protocol of present Internet; instead, it still needs 
protocols including IP to interconnect with other networks. 
But it can free end users from tyranny of local ISP, 
simultaneously support internetworks with different IP 
versions, and much likely support Future Internet and its 
alternatives deployed in the core.  
The purport of this architecture is trying to expand the 
scope of edge networks, minimize the impact of IP protocol, 
which is mainly located or applied in the core in our model, 
and pave the way for the appearance and transition to post-
IP Internet paradigm conceptually and practically.   
Our contribution lies in the following three aspects: 
First, our model changes the architecture of edge 
networks. It corresponds to Cloud Computing trend in 
network field, uses virtualization-ready core routers with 
rich function, high performance and high reliability to route, 
enforce security, translate between protocols and addresses, 
etc.  
Second, this model design is oriented to the convergent 
new generation networks, it separates whole network into 
core and edge, and makes possible for the realization of 
network convergence step by step. Moreover, it realizes 
convergence in the edge firstly and preliminarily, which is 
helpful and promotive to convergence in the core.  
Third, the two-layer virtualization approach makes 
possible for coexistence of multiple core networks, 
lowering the barrier to entry for network innovation, and 
fulfills the function of multi-homing for user’s network in 
layer 2.  
V. CONCLUSION 
Until now, there is still confusion about which way to 
take for the future Internet design: incremental approach or 
clean-slate approach [17]. Unsettlement of this problem 
impedes the rapid development for Future Internet. The 
approach introduced in this paper can bring an end to this 
argument and allow two kinds of design to coexist and 
develop in parallel, while the final decision about what the 
future Internet will look like depends on the choice of most 
users.   
In this paper, based on the concept of network 
convergence, we propose to partition the whole network 
into two parts: the core and the edge. The different 
networks with various architectures, such as IPv4 Internet, 
the next generation Internet based on IPv6 and other future 
Internet candidates, lie in the core. While at the edge, a 
two-layer bridging virtualization approach is designed to 
form a uniform access platform for all the core networks, 
enabling end users choose among multiple core networks 
freely. This model lowers construction cost of campus 
networks with better security and manageability, makes 
them scalable for new network architectures, and improves 
user networks’ reliability and performance. 
With its advantages and advancement of Carrier Grade 
Ethernet, we are optimal the deployment and execution of 
this architecture model will become a reality. 
VI. FUTURE WORK 
In our architecture model, we define business roles as 
transport carriers and service providers, who cooperate to 
provide the network connectivity and network services. 
Considering how to setup the proper business relation 
between them to spur the development of this network 
78
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

architecture is valuable.  Moreover, when network faults or 
service interruption happen, how to settle responsibility 
among them or improve the accountability of this type of 
network is meaningful.  
The technique for scalable Ethernet architecture is very 
helpful to our architecture model, which not only facilitates 
its execution but also can be explored for its application in 
the edge transport networks. So the next step for us is to 
adapt this technique and apply it to CGE, proposing new 
Carrier Grade Ethernet draft and promoting it to be 
standardized.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This material is based upon work supported by the 
National Science Foundation of China under grant 
61073172, Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral 
Program of Higher Education of China under Grant 
200800030034, and Program for New Century Excellent 
Talents in University. Many thanks to Kilnam Chong and 
Yu Zhu for their useful feedback.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Y. Zhu, R. Zhang-Shen, S. Rangarajan, and J. Rexford, 
“Cabernet: connectivity architecture for better network 
services,” Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT 
Conference, pp. 1-6, December 09-12, 2008, Madrid, Spain 
[2] 
A. Kasim, Delivering Carrier Ethernet: Extending Ethernet 
Beyond the LAN, McGraw-Hill. 2008 
[3] 
A. Meddeb, “Why Ethernet WAN Transport?” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Nov 2005, pp. 136-141 
[4] 
D. Allan, N. Bragg, A. Mcguire, and A. Reid, “Ethernet as 
Carrier Transport Infrastructure” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Feb 2006, pp. 95-101 
[5] 
D. Fedyk and D. Allan, “Ethernet Data Plane Evolution for 
Provider Networks” IEEE Communications Magazine, 
March 2008, pp. 84-89 
[6] 
D. Allan, P. Ashwood-Smith, N. Bragg, and D. Fedyk, 
“Provider Link State Bridging” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Sept 2008, pp. 110-117 
[7] 
IEEE Std. 802.1ag, Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks – 
Connectivity Fault Management, 2007 
[8] 
ITU-T Y.1731, OAM functions and mechanisms for 
Ethernet based networks, 2006 
[9] 
Click Project, http://read.cs.ucla.edu/click/ [last access: June 
28, 2011] 
[10] MEF TS 6.1, “Ethernet Services Definitions – Phase 2”, 
Technical Specification, April 2008. 
[11] IEEE Std. 802.1Q, Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks, 
2005 
[12] IEEE Std. 802.1ad, Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks: 
Provider Bridges, 2006 
[13] IEEE Std. 802.1ah, Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks: 
Provider Backbone Bridges, 2008 
[14] IEEE 802.1Qay, Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks: 
Provider Backbone Bridge Traffic Engineering, 2009 
[15] IEEE 802.1aq/D0.4, Draft Standard, Shortest Path Bridging, 
2008 
[16] J. Matias, E. Jacob, M. Aguado, and J. Astorga, “Enhancing 
NGN’s Versatility for Multi-Service Support: the Bridging 
Virtualization Approach”, The 10th International Conf. on 
Telecommunications, ConTEL 2009, pp. 367-374. 
[17] Feldmann, “Internet clean-slate design: what and why?”, 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 37 (3) 
(2007), pp. 59–64. 
[18] C. Kim, M. Caesar, and J. Rexford, “Floodless in seattle: a 
scalable ethernet architecture for large enterprises”, 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2008 conference on 
Data communication, pp. 3-14, August 2008, Seattle, WA, 
USA
 
  
 
79
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

