Enterprise Networking with Secure Acess Service Edge 
New Role of the Internet amid COVID-19 Crisis 
Zhaobo Zhang 
Silicon Valley Network Technology Lab.  
Futurewei Technologies Inc. 
Santa Clara, CA, USA 
e-mail: zzhang1@futurewei.com 
 
 
Abstract—Since the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, people 
are forced to stay home worldwide to prevent the spread. The 
Internet has never been more essential to support people’s 
daily lives.  Organizations have been scrambling to establish 
large-scale access for remote workforce. The requirements of 
large numbers of secure and reliable connections from home 
and mobile devices bring new challenges to enterprise 
networking. The Secure Access Service Edge (SASE) 
architecture converges network and security into cloud-based 
services, which provides a fast, scalable and secure way for 
employees to connect remotely. This paper presents the 
evolution of Internet and enterprise networking with the rise of 
cloud computing, and the recent industry progress on the 
SASE-based solutions. Direct cloud access and converged 
secure edge are the future directions of enterprise networking.   
Keywords-Enterprise Networking; Enterprise Mobility; Secure 
Access Service Edge; Endpoint Security; Point-of-Presences; 
SD-WAN. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
outbreak first identified in December 2019 in China, about 
26 million cases have been confirmed from 188 countries in 
eight months [1]. This pandemic created unprecedented 
disruptions to human society. Social distancing and shelter-
in-place orders were announced to prevent the spread. With 
most people staying at home, the internet inevitably becomes 
the most important channel to connect people and deliver 
critical services, like telemedicine and videoconferencing.  
The average daily in-home data usage in the U.S. soared 
38 percent in mid-March as the coronavirus pandemic 
started, compared to the same time in March 2019 [2]. The 
monthly average of data consumption in the first quarter of 
2020 per subscriber has increased to 402.5 GB from 273.5 
GB during the same time last year, a 47 percent increase [3]. 
Increased data usage is mainly from social media platforms, 
streaming platforms, and online gaming. Under the strain 
of unprecedented usage, the European Union even urged 
streaming platforms, like Netflix and YouTube, to stop 
showing video in high definition to prevent the internet from 
breaking down. Fortunately, the Internet held up to the surge 
and continuously support the heavy in-home data usage. 
Increased disruptions across provider networks have been 
observed, but those are mainly caused by increased traffic 
engineering activity, rather than traffic congestion [4].  
Together with Internet Service Providers (ISPs), Cloud 
Providers (CPs) provide significant support in terms of 
Internet traffic delivery during the pandemic, especially for 
many ubiquitous digital services, making them effectively an 
extension of the Internet. For example, in order to support 
video conferencing, Oracle Cloud transferred 7 PB of data 
and supported 300 million meeting participants daily for 
Zoom, in April 2020 [5].  
Home
Enterprise
Traffic Shift
Internet
Internet
websites
Mobile
Local Internet breakout
SaaS
Applications
IaaS, PaaS
Resources
Home
Enterprise
Mobile
 
Figure 1.  Internet Traffic Shift in the Cloud Era. 
Before the pandemic, the Internet had been reshaped with 
the rise of cloud computing. Its role got enriched from 
delivering contents to delivering computing resources. Since 
Amazon first announced delivering computing and storage 
resource over Internet in 2006, the cloud-based technologies 
including Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS), Platform-as-a-
Service (PaaS) and Software-as-a-service (SaaS) have made 
great strides, and the Internet traffic has been shifted, 
illustrated in Figure 1. The global network infrastructure has 
been greatly improved as well, with the rapid growth of CPs 
private backbone.  
This paper aims to provide an overview of the changes of 
to the Internet and enterprise networks with the rise of cloud 
computing, particularly under the crisis of COVID-19. In 
Section II, the private backbone networks of CPs are first 
introduced. In Section III, the transformation of enterprise 
Wide Area Network (WAN) is discussed. In Section IV, 
SASE, a network and security converged solution is 
explained. Conclusions are presented at the end.  
II. 
CLOUD PROVIDERS GLOBAL BACKBONE 
With the wide adoption of cloud computing, Cloud 
providers expand their global backbone network at an 
incredible speed. Improving the availability and efficiency of 
WAN is central to their ability to provide services in a fast, 
reliable and cost-effective manner. In Figure 2, a simplified 
private backbone network is illustrated. Cloud providers 
build data centers and Point-of-Presences (PoPs) globally to 
increase accessibility, and connect them with optical fiber, 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-822-8
AFIN 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

subsea cables and super high bandwidth switches. Therefore, 
instead of using public Internet, customers at different 
locations can connect to the nearest PoPs, and then 
communicate within CPs’ private network to reduce latency.  
Point of Presence
Internet
London
Site
New York
Site
Unpredictive public Internet route 
Data Center
Cloud Provider Global Backbone
 
Figure 2.  Cloud Providers Global Backbone Networks. 
For example, Microsoft owns and runs one the largest 
WAN backbones in the world. By now, it has built more than 
60 regions (data centers), more than 170 global network 
PoPs, and 130,000 miles of optical fiber with elastic optical 
network [6][7]. Bandwidth between data centers is up to 1.6 
PB/s [6]. Using private subsea cable systems, network 
latency and performance predictability across continents 
have been greatly improved, compared to using public 
Internet [8]. Google Cloud and Amazon Web Services have 
taken similar strategies to expand their global reach. More 
details on cloud performance comparison can be found in 
[8]. 
As COVID-19 lockdowns went into effect, network 
traffic and the usage of cloud services significantly 
increased. According to Microsoft’s statistics, the Azure 
WAN usage immediately jumped by 60 percent after the US 
lockdown, and 94 percent growth was seen in connections to 
the Azure VPN service [9]. Traffic into Azure networks that 
connect data center regions to each other and to the outside 
world spiked by 40 times [9]. To meet the incredible surge in 
demand, workloads from the hot regions were shifted to 
regions that had more capacity. More gateways and front 
ends were added to scale out services. Duplicate and non-
essential features in the services were minimized to reduce 
the resource usage. Meanwhile, cloud providers rapidly 
increased network and data center capacity, opened new 
sites, signed new contracts with ISPs, and even leased extra 
subsea cables. Network bandwidth got greatly increased 
within a few months. Although some logistical issues were 
caused by the pandemic, the expansion of cloud 
infrastructure has not been slowing down. A total of 26 
hyperscale data centers opened in the first half of 2020, and 
176 new data centers are in the pipeline [10].   
III. 
ENTERPRISE WAN TRANSFORMATION  
For more than a decade, Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
(MPLS) was the standard approach for building a corporate 
WAN since 2000. However, due to its high costs and limited 
agility, a wave of transition to Software-Defined WAN (SD-
WAN) started around 2013. Early SD-WAN deployments 
reuse the MPLS networks and broadband Internet 
connections at enterprise branches. With dynamic path 
selection and application visibility, SD-WAN improves the 
network availability and manageability, and lower the costs. 
However, the unpredictability of the Internet limits the 
growth of early SD-WAN. 
With the mainstream adoption of cloud, more and more 
enterprise applications move to the SaaS model, e.g., Office 
365, Workday, Service Now. According to the Enterprise 
Strategy Group’s 2019 report, 60 percent of organizations 
will use SaaS applications for greater than half of their 
business needs over the next two years [11]. Therefore, the 
enterprise traffic to headquarters shifts to the public cloud. 
Direct cloud access drives the recent changes of enterprise 
WAN, which is considered as SD-WAN 2.0. To facilitate the 
changes, CPs directly connect their network with ISPs 
networks in the Internet Exchange Points (IXPs), or provide 
ISPs the connections to their nearest PoPs. Customers can 
purchase premium connections to public clouds from ISPs. 
For large enterprises, enterprise network appliances can even 
be placed at the same colocation center with CPs. A 
dedicated link up to 100 Gbps can be established directly 
between enterprise network and CPs network, and multiple 
links can be configured if needed.  
 
Figure 3.  Drivers of Enterprise WAN Transformation at Different Phases. 
As of today, with a large number of employees working 
from home in this pandemic, the changes of enterprise WAN 
are driven by mobility. Previously, remote employees used 
VPN technologies to securely connect to the headquarters. 
However, since enterprise applications and data are now 
located among various cloud platforms, it is not efficient to 
backhaul all the traffic to headquarters and then redirect to 
the Internet. In addition, the VPN technologies present 
security challenges in a cloud environment. With VPN 
connections, users are given broad access to an entire flat 
network, rather than to only the applications that are needed 
for their jobs. To respond to this challenge, industry moves 
from VPNs to Zero Trust (ZT). Zero Trust security includes 
two core concepts: 1) provide and continuously authorize 
access to resources based on identity, instead of location. 2) 
enforce the principle of least privilege, i.e., only grant users 
(or services) access to assets they specifically need, and 
nothing more [12]. ZT security now has been widely 
accepted by both users and vendors. 
Remote workforce
Branch
Internet
websites
SaaS
Applications
IaaS, PaaS
Resources
Edge applications/appliances
Cloud WAN PoPs
HQ Data Center
Cloud WAN
 
Figure 4.  A Cloud-native Indentity-based Enterprise WAN. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-822-8
AFIN 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Driven by direct cloud access and mobility, enterprise 
WAN architecture evolves to a cloud-native, identity-based, 
network and security converged architecture, illustrated in 
Figure 4. A global distributed architecture provides fast 
cloud access. ZT framework guarantees secure connections 
from any devices and anywhere. Cloud-native architecture 
provides dynamic service orchestration and centralized 
network and security management. Its key characteristics 
include: 
 
Zero trust framework 
 
Cloud-native architecture 
 
Globally distributed network 
 
Security-as-a-service at cloud edge 
There are many names for this unified architecture. One 
of them is SASE, the convergence of network services and 
security services, coined by Gartner in July 2019 [13]. The 
SASE architecture and SASE-centric solutions have been 
enriched by multiple vendors in the past year. The 
capabilities, benefits and main components of SASE-based 
enterprise WAN are elaborated in Section IV. 
IV. 
      SECURE ACCESS SERVICE EDGE 
Due to the uncertainties brought by the pandemic, 
business agility and scalability are crucial for enterprise 
networks, and the dynamic secure access requirements put 
significant pressure on existing networks. Therefore, a cloud-
native solution with converged security services becomes a 
necessity. SASE is such a distributed and cloud-native 
platform that connects all edges to one logic network and 
delivers network services and security services as needed. Its 
main four characteristics are shown in Figure 5.  
Identity-driven
All edges
Cloud-native
Globally distributed
SASE
 
Figure 5.  Four Characteristics of SASE. 
Compared to previous SD-WAN solutions, SASE 
emphasize a converged design to streamline and optimize 
security solutions, including Zero Trust Network Access 
(ZTNA), Firewall-as-a-service (FWaaS), Secure Web 
Gateway (SWG), Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB), 
Web Application and API Protection (WAAP), Remote 
Browser Isolation (RBI), Intrusion Prevention System (IPS), 
Data Loss Prevention (DLP), etc. It is not required to 
implement all these functions at once. Gartner categorized 
SASE capabilities to three levels, illustrated in Figure 6. 
Additionally, the capabilities are not achieved by a simple 
service function chaining. Parallel processing should be 
adopted to minimize processing latency. 
SD-WAN, SWG, CASB, ZTNA, FWaaS
 Identify sensitive data/malware
 Encrypt/Decrypt content at line speed, at scale
 Continuously monitor sessions for risk/trust levels
Core
Recommended Network sandbox, recursive DNS, RBI, WAAP 
Optional
VPN, Wi-fi hotspot protection, offline protection
 
Figure 6.  SASE capabilities by Gartner [13]. 
Some key benefits of SASE include greater business 
agility, dynamic access control for different user groups, 
fine-grained visibility of user activities, end-to-end traffic 
observability, reliable network performance, increased 
operational efficiency, reduced management complexity and 
total cost of ownership, etc. Those benefits are mainly from 
enterprise IT’s perspective. As for the employees, better user 
experience and network performance should be seen. In 
order to implement SASE-centric networks, three main 
components are listed as following. 
A. Edge Connector 
Edge connectors are responsible for securely driving 
traffic from edges to the cloud network for processing. 
Different edges may have different forms of connectors. For 
example, branches could have an IPsec-enabled plug-and-
play device to connect to the local Internet; personal 
computers and cellphones may use an identity-based security 
application or a web-based agentless terminal; data centers 
could adopt high performance routers to guarantee 
bandwidth.  
B. Point-of-Presences (PoPs) 
To provide low-latency access to users, devices and 
cloud services anywhere, enterprises need a worldwide 
fabric of PoPs and peering relationship [13]. The PoPs 
comprise a backbone network interconnecting multiple 
provider networks with SLA-backed IP connections, offering 
better performance and resiliency than the traditional 
unpredictive Internet. Converged network services and 
security services running on each PoP steer network traffic, 
inspect security, and monitor underlying networks, etc. 
Services are designed in a cloud-native way. Benefit from 
scalability and elasticity of the cloud, services can be easily 
deployed and scaled out among all PoPs. 
Since most processing is done on the PoPs, connecting 
any type of edges, e.g., branches, cloud resources, mobile 
devices, IoT devices, becomes simple and consistent. The 
only requirement is a simple connector to establish an 
encrypted tunnel across an Internet connection to the nearest 
PoP.  By co-locating PoPs and cloud IXPs in the same 
physical data centers, cloud resources are directly available 
in the enterprise networks. Minimal latency is achieved 
without deploying additional software or hardware. 
C. Cloud-based Orchestration and Management Center 
In contrast to previous point solutions, enterprise IT can 
manage their networks and security through one unified 
operation center, e.g., enabling connections to new branches, 
authorizing new users, prioritizing office applications, 
modifying firewall policies, and upgrading services. 
Granular access at both network level and application level 
can be programmed for each individual, and consistent 
network policies will be deployed to each PoP. In addition, 
standardized metrics, logs, and tracing are built into cloud-
native services, and end-to-end observability is available in 
the operation center for performance analysis and fast 
troubleshooting.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-822-8
AFIN 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Cloud providers have expanded global backbone 
networks rapidly, which play an important role in delivering 
Internet traffic. ISPs and CPs collaborate closely to improve 
the Internet performance and resiliency. The Internet and 
cloud are inseparable and synergize each other today.  
COVID-19 is a catalyst, accelerating the business 
transition to a more flexible model. As enterprise 
applications move to the cloud and employees move 
remotely, enterprise networks have no longer been in a 
constraint perimeter. A trend of SASE-based WAN 
composed of edge connectors and global PoPs emerges to 
better support the needs of direct cloud access and secure 
access from any devices anywhere. The SASE architecture 
provides good guidance, but the convergence design of 
network and security services at the cloud edge is still 
ongoing work. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, “An interactive web-based 
dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time,” in the Lancet 
Infectius Disease, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 533-534, May 2020. 
[2] Statista, “Coronavirus: impact on online usage in the U.S.”, 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1106863/COVID-19-daily-
in-home-data-usage-change-us-2020/, [retrieved Sept. 2020]. 
[3] OpenVault, “Boradband Insights Report of Q1 2020”, 
https://openvault.com/complimentary-report-Q120/, [retrieved 
Sept. 2020]. 
[4] ThousandEyes, 
“Internet 
Performance 
Report”, 
2020,  
https://www.thousandeyes.com/resources/internet-
performance-report-COVID-19-impact/, 
[retrieved 
Sept. 
2020]. 
[5] Oracle, “Facing unprecedented growth, Zoom turns to Oracle 
Cloud 
Infrastructure 
to 
support 
millions 
of 
users”, 
https://www.oracle.com/customers/zoom.html/, 
[retrieved 
Sept. 2020]. 
[6] Microsoft 
Azure, 
“Azure 
global 
network”, 
https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/global-
infrastructure/global-network/, [retrieved Sept. 2020]. 
[7] M. Filer, et al., "Elastic optical networking in the microsoft 
cloud," in IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and 
Networking, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. A45-A54, 2016. 
[8] ThousandEyes, “Cloud Performance Benchmark”, 2019, 
https://www.thousandeyes.com/resources/cloud-performance-
benchmark-report-november-2019/, [retrieved Sept. 2020]. 
[9] Microsoft Azure, “Azure responds to COVID-19” , 
https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/azure-responds-to-
covid19/ , [retrieved Oct. 2020]. 
[10] Synergy Research Group, “Hyperscale Data Center Count”, 
https://www.srgresearch.com/articles/hyperscale-data-center-
count-reaches-541-mid-2020-another-176-pipeline,  [retrieved 
Oct. 2020]. 
[11] Enterprise Strategy Group, “The Rise of Direct Internet 
Access”, 2019, https://security.umbrella.com/esg-report-rise-
of-dia/, [retrieved Sept. 2020]. 
[12] National Institue of Standards and Technology (NIST), “Zero 
Trust Architecture”, NIST Special Publication, 2020, 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.S
P.800-207-draft2.pdf/, [retrieved Sept. 2020]. 
[13] Gartner, “The Future of Network Security is in the Cloud”, 
https://www.valtix.com/uploads/secure-access-service-edge-
gartner.pdf/, [retrieved Oct. 2020]. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-822-8
AFIN 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

