On Security-Effective Mobility-QoS Management Scheme in Heterogeneous Mobile 
Networks 
 
Hyeungwoo Lee 
Network Development Group 
SAMSUNG SDS Co. Ltd. 
Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, 443-822, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: hw77.lee@samsung.com (zen016@naver.com) 
Jae-Young Choi and Jongpil Jeong 
College of Information & Communication Engineering 
Sungkyunkwan University 
Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, 440-746, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {jaeychoi, jpjeong}@skku.edu
 
 
Abstract—To support efficient mobility, host-based mobility 
management 
protocols 
have 
been 
developed. 
The 
Authentication, Authorization, Accounting, and Charging 
(AAAC) system is used in this paper to analyze the 
effectiveness of the existing Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) and 
Fast Handover for PMIPv6 (FPMIPv6) network security. 
Furthermore, the IPv6 Mobility Management Protocol (MMP) 
features, performance, and seamless transfer performance in 
terms of packet loss probability are also analyzed. Our scheme 
can be efficiently used to integrate Quality of Service (QoS) 
and mobility to manage and control resources using a QoS 
Broker (QoSB). The evaluation results show a better overall 
performance for the fast handover structure of mobility 
management techniques. PMIPv6 and FPMIPv6 are, in many 
respects, the most efficient structures possible. Specifically, the 
fast handover structure of the network-based mobility 
management schemes shows the best results. 
Keywords—Mobility-QoS; 
Security-Effective; 
Mobility 
Management Protocol;  PMIPv6. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The wireless mobile environment is rapidly growing in 
the digital environment that leads by human hands. The 
Mobility Management Protocol (MMP) is a core protocol of 
the wireless mobile environment. Mobile social networking, 
computing, shopping, and so on will be achieved using the 
mobility operating system. Various MMPs have been 
developed for various mobility services. Particularly at the 
network layer, mobility support techniques have been 
developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). 
The Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) specification was proposed, then 
the Fast Handovers for MIPv6 (FMIPv6) and Hierarchical 
MIPv6 (HMIPv6) specifications were developed as 
extensions. As MIPv6 was developed, analysis of IPv6 MMP 
was used to improve performance [1]. 
When host-based MMPs operated within the wireless 
mobile telecom infrastructure, the telecoms companies and 
technical developers became aware that it was not a suitable 
solution for mobile services, especially for service providers, 
as it was necessary to equip a Mobile Node (MN) with 
mobility support inside the network protocol stack. Therefore, 
MNs had to be upgraded or developed. This increased the 
construction costs and complexity of the MN. Host-based 
MMP has led to a lack of complex control operators. A new 
approach to mobility services was required. 
The extended protocol of Proxy MIPv6 (PMIPv6), Fast 
Handover for PMIPv6 (FPMIPv6), has improved the 
transmission rate by reducing transmission latency and 
packet loss. In contrast to host-based MMP, network-based 
MMPs (such as PMIPv6 or FPMIPv6) are in the early stages 
of development. Improving the security of personal 
authentication using the FPMIPv6 by applying the 
Authentication, Authorization and Accounting (AAA) 
mechanism has been studied. When moving between 
domains in management, AAA techniques for authenticating 
the MN are required [2]. The AAA scheme for the various 
wired and wireless services performs authentication, 
authorization, and billing. Today, many techniques in 
conjunction with the AAA protocol are being investigated to 
perform the functions of MN AAA, which is the 
authentication process between the MNs. For instance, Zhou, 
H et al. [3] proposed an FPMIPv6-based authentication 
technique. When the MN enters a new network, this 
technique protects the authenticating MN from security 
threats, such as Replay Attack or Key Exposure. 
In this paper, we propose a security-effective mobility 
management scheme for IPv6-based networks using a 
Quality of Service Broker (QoSB). This protocol can be 
efficiently used to integrate Quality of Service (QoS) and 
mobility to manage and control resources using a QoS 
Broker (QoSB). The time latency is not significantly affected 
because of the addition of the QoSB. In PMIPv6 and 
FPMIPv6, the new proposal performs better with respect to 
the handover latency, packet loss, and handover blocking 
rates than the traditional MIPv6 scheme. These results are 
shown for PMIPv6 and FPMIPv6 on a network security 
system that uses Authentication, Authorization, Accounting, 
and Charging (AAAC). Furthermore, in this paper, we 
propose a unified criterion to analyze both host-based and 
network-based MMPs. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses 
related work, and Section 3 describes the operating 
procedures of the proposed scheme. In Section 4, a 
performance evaluation of the proposed method is presented. 
Finally, Section 5 presents some conclusions regarding these 
results. 
II.  RELATED WORK 
The PMIPv6 domain structure is composed of a Local 
Mobility Anchor (LMA), Mobile Access Gateway (MAG), 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

and MN. An LMA is one kind of Home Agent (HA) that 
serves as an MN in PMIPv6. In detail, a Home Network 
Prefix (HNP) is allocated to the MN that maintains the 
address and location information of all the MNs within the 
domain and also ensures connection. The MAG is 
responsible for network connectivity and routing functions 
on behalf of the MN. It also performs MN mobility signaling 
by tunneling through the LMA [4]. FPMIPv6 is a mobility 
protocol that reduces the handover latency and packet loss 
found in PMIPv6. It may reduce the loss of buffered packets 
by creating a bi-directional tunnel between the previous 
MAG (pMAG) and new MAG (nMAG) before making the 
link-layer handover. And it consists of two modes: predictive 
and reactive [5] [6] [7].  
The QoS architecture is easily able to support end-to-end 
QoS in terms of the operator. When the MN is moving, it is 
guaranteed end-to-end connectivity and user maintenance. 
The architecture is designed to control the scalable 
deployment of resources in the access network. The core aim 
of the architecture is the simultaneous support of mobility 
and QoS. The QoS frameworks of various IETFs have 
considered both purposes before the final design of the QoS 
architecture. 
The 
advantages 
and 
disadvantages 
of 
Integration Services (Intserv) [8] and Differentiated Services 
(Diffserv) [9] have been discussed widely and are well 
known. However, they do not specifically support mobility 
and no hybrid solution integrates mobility and QoS. 
Therefore, the aim of user mobility suggests an innovative 
use of QoSB-related Fast HandOver (FHO) that includes a 
Diffserv system to efficiently control and manage the 
resources available [10]. This architecture is based on the 
concept that the user is authorized by the service provider of 
a contract. The QoSB, according to the user's agreement, is 
responsible for resource allocation in an individual 
subscription service. As proposed in [11], these services are 
generally fixed transmission services (for example, a 
“Guaranteed Rate of 64 KB/s,” or “Target Rate of 32 KB/s”) 
but are equipped with a potential mechanism for flexible 
service negotiation. The QoSB can manage the flow of 
resources in the core network. To reduce the signal overhead, 
the system is designed for a user/terminal so that it is not 
necessary to explicitly reserve or release resources. The 
services are requested by a simple Diffserv Code Point 
(DSCP) marking to the outgoing packet. If the MAG 
receives a packet from a particular user’s DSCP value, it 
sends the required QoSB configuration. The QoSB 
configures the MAG to fit the appropriate QoS policy based 
on the information about the user. Services are implicitly 
suspended by an inactivity timeout. This concept is 
explained in more detail in [11]. 
III. PROPOSED SCHEME 
The AAAC architecture is shown in Figure 1. It is based 
on the AAA architecture, which is optimized for IPv6 
enhanced auditing, metering, and charging. Considering that 
AAAC is used for QoS in a PMIPv6 environment, the 
architecture is designed to offer new functionality and 
optimize the performance of the overall system.  
 
Figure 1.  Enhanced Generic AAA Architecture That Supports QoS-
enabled Mobility Management. 
This architecture enables the subsequent auditing of 
AAAC using the AAAC audit trail and other factors. Hence, 
the policy repository is considered as a part of the policy-
based AAAC system. The AAAC system supports multiple 
interfaces. AAAC performers can be treated with MN and 
interfaces. Communication is performed by the User 
Registration Protocol (URP). The Application Specific 
Module (ASM) communicates with the QoSB. The 
advantage of ASMs is additional flexibility, as various 
service equipment can be easily processed using the same 
method from the point of view of the AAAC system. ASM 
uses the AAAC protocol to communicate with the AAAC 
system and equipment-specified protocol to communicate 
with service equipment. There are clear differences in the 
services provided to the user in this architecture (e.g., QoS is 
possible and the charging system follows the AAAC 
requirements). For users previously provided and connected 
via the ASM and extended AAAC protocol, on the other 
hand, it is possible, if necessary, to communicate directly 
with the AAAC system using dedicated communication. 
AAAC system communication may be enhanced through an 
appropriate expansion by the DIAMETER default protocol. 
A key element of QoS service and charging is the means to 
measure the service used. In an IP-based measurement 
framework of the IETF Working Group, a variable was 
defined for the IP flow that depends on the needs of the 
network administrator. In the IPv6 network, the usage is 
measured according to the type of service subscribed to by 
the user and is sent to the QoS [2]. 
 
Figure 2.  Registration Process. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

For network operation and control, three steps may be 
specifically identified. 1) Registration: in this architecture, an 
MN/user 
can 
start 
using 
network 
resources 
after 
authentication and authorization, just as in today's networks. 
2) Acceptance: users should be allowed to use a specific 
service prior to release by the network. 3) Handover: user 
mobility 
should 
preserve 
existing 
resources 
when 
transferring from one MAG to another.  
The registration process to support end-to-end QoS is 
shown in Figure 2. The registration process begins after the 
CoA obtains the MN through automatic configuration with 
the two-layer identifier. When a Duplicate Address 
Detection (DAD) is performed, the uniqueness of the 
registered address is checked. When obtaining a non-
authorized CoA, the user is authorized to consume only 
enough resources for the registration message. However, 
emergency calls can be made. However, as shown in Figure 
2, the MN must start the authentication procedure by sending 
user authentication information (message 1) to the MAG for 
network connection. The request for this MAG is transmitted 
to the controlled AAAC system (message 2). For more 
complicated roaming, domain A (the AAAC domain) sends 
a registration request to the home AAAC (message w) of the 
MN. Domain A plays the role of a foreign domain that must 
contact the home AAAC of the MN. The AAAC checks first 
if there is a formal contractual relationship between the 
management domain and its own management domain 
(corresponding to the roaming agreement) as per the request. 
If the result is affirmative, the home AAAC performs 
authentication by verifying the provided credentials. The 
home AAAC sends a request to the user’s LMA (message y). 
Finally, the home AAAC responds to the AAAC of domain 
A. A positive response consists of a user profile that contains 
the information necessary to provide the requested service in 
the foreign domain. The user profile contains the central 
management profile, including all relevant user-specific 
information related to the service provider. From a NVUP 
(network view of the user's profile), a part of the profile is 
sent from the AAAC server and it is necessary to provide the 
requested service in the foreign domain. The user profile 
contains the central management profile, including all 
relevant user-specific information related to the service 
provider. From a NVUP (network view of the user's profile), 
a part of the profile is sent from the AAAC server to the 
QoSB (message 3b) that also performs a DAD at this point. 
The other set of profiles is sent to the AAA Attendant in the 
MAG (message 3a). Along with the measurement and 
security information that is delivered to the AAA attendant, 
the NVUP includes all the required information related to 
network services. Further, the AAAC informs the MN that 
the registration is successful via the MAG (messages 3a and 
4). After that, the MAG starts a task for the user and informs 
the AAAC (message 4a). Accordingly, the authentication 
phase is finished, and a user can access the network. 
Figure 3 presents the process for granting authorization to 
each network service (messages 5–11). The MN sends a 
packet (message 5) with a DSCP code to request a specific 
subscription service (e.g., 256 KB/s for priority network 
access). One of the trailer packets, depending on the 
configuration of the MN, may be a dummy packet or a 
packet with real information. If the requested service does 
not comply with the policy that has already been set in the 
MAG, the MAG sends a request to QoSB via the QoS 
manager. According to the analysis, the user’s NVUP, and 
the availability of resources for the request, the QoSB 
determines whether a message (message 7) is sent to the 
MAG. The QoS manager of the MAG sets (message 7a) the 
appropriate policy for the MAG, user and MN services, or 
notifies the user of the service denial (message 7b). After 
message 7a, the packet is sent to the MN that matches the 
configured policy rules (message 8). Packets that have 
different DSCP codes are subjected again to authentication. 
When the packet reaches the final domain with other users, it 
starts another QoS authorization process (message 8a). The 
QoS manager of the MAG sends a policy question to the 
QoSB (messages 9 and 10). If the QoSB has the resources, 
the QoSB manager receives a positive response and is 
configured for the MAG and its policies (message 10a). If it 
does not have the resources, the MAG sends a reject message 
regarding the service (message 10b). After message 10a, the 
next packet to meet the policy is able to arrive at the other 
terminal (message 11). In this way, two kinds of access 
networks can provide the QoS level of an agreement. The 
core network is monitored for performance (the end-to-end 
QoS) as expected. 
 
Figure 3.  Authorization process. 
One of the most difficult problems of IP mobility is 
ensuring a constant level of QoS. As shown in Figure 4, for 
user mobility in the network, the handover and network 
messages are exchanged between QoSBs using the FHO 
technique. When the MN begins to receive a weakened 
signal from the current MAG (message 1), it sends and 
receives the AS (Attendant Solicit), AA (Attendant 
Advertisement), AReq (Authentication Request) messages, 
and the handover procedure from the old MAG to a 
neighboring “new MAG” is started. The MN builds its own 
CoA and starts the handover process by sending an IP-
handover request for the new MAG through the old MAG 
(message 4). The FHO module of the old MAG requests the 
FHO Module of the new MAG and submits it to the QoS 
manager module. The QoS manager immediately sends a 
request to the existing QoSB (message 5). The previous 
QoSB sends the handover request comprising the user’s 
NVUP and a list of current user services to the new QoSB 
(message 6). By default, this task is transferred to a new 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

QoSB in the context of the existing QoSB. The new QoSB 
uses this information to check the availability of resources. 
The MN sends the message to determine whether to perform 
a handover to the QoS manager of the new MAG (message 
7). This mechanism enables the QoSB to stop the handover 
because of QoS constraints (e.g., the loss of bandwidth 
resources). If the handover is possible, the QoS function 
manager sends this information to the FHO module (message 
7a) and configures the new MAG to accommodate the 
moving MN. The new MAG starts the accounting process in 
the user's AAAC system account (messages 8 and 11). To 
complete the handover, the MN sends the LMA binding 
update (messages 9 and 10) to the LMA. In addition, the 
FHO module sends a handover response to the FHO module 
of the old MAG (message 12). The new MAG begins bi-
casting. The MN handover to the new MAG is complete. If a 
handover is completed within a QoSB domain, the QoSB for 
controlling both MAGs is the same, and message 6 is not 
sent. The remaining messages are the same. Information-
related security is exchanged between QoSBs in a similar 
way. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Handover with QoS for End-to-End QoS Support. 
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
This section evaluates the performance of the proposed 
method and the existing mobility management protocols. 
A. Network Modeling 
Figure 5 is shown a generic network topology model. 
 
Figure 5.  Network Model. 
In Figure 5, the following hop count parameters are 
defined 
for 
describing 
particular 
paths 
between 
communication entities. 
 hC−H: It is the average number of hops between the 
correspondent node (CN) and the HA. 
 hC−G: It is the average number of hops between the CN 
and the gate. 
 hH−G: It is the average number of hops between the HA 
and the gate. 
 hG−A: It is the average number of hops between the gate 
and the MAG. 
 hA−A: It is the average number of hops between the 
neighbor MAGs. 
 hA−M: It is the average number of hops between the 
MAG and the MN. 
The latency of registration lasts from when the user turns 
on a device until it becomes available for use. There are two 
types of latency. “Low-layer” latency refers to the delay 
when connecting to a technology after the device is ready for 
use. “High-layer” latency refers to the delay between sending 
message 1 and the arrival of message 4 (Figure 2). 
Re
gistration _
Delay
LowLayerDelay
HigherLayerDelay



First, this technique does not depend on a particular 
network protocol or architecture. Second, it is dependent on 
the link speed. If the user is roaming, it is the “electronic 
distance” between the outside and home AAACs. The link 
latency that occurs between the MAG and AAAC system is 
small enough to be negligible, as it is normally the case that 
the management infrastructure overprovisions the link to the 
resource. The processing latency in the system occurs when 
there is an overload in the number of requests or a database 
is processing more requests that its capacity. However, in the 
actual production of the network, this is sufficiently possible 
to prevent using an appropriate computing or routing tool. 
Thus, if a user is roaming, the limiting factor is the distance 
between the external and home AAACs. In this case, the 
latency is determined by the registration time. 
Session setup latency is the time required for the user to 
access the network. In Figure 3, the session setup latency is 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

the delay between messages 5 to 11. This latency is 
composed of the processing time of the MAGs and QoSB, 
indicating the distance between the MAGs, and the link 
latency. 
Handover latency can be an important parameter, 
depending on a user's sensitivity. The handover method 
should be quick as possible to provide seamless service to 
users. The handover latency is composed of transmission 
latency, computational latency, and two-layer handover 
latency. 

_
_
_
2 _
Handover
Delay
Transmission
Delays
Computation
Delays
Layler
Handover








The transmission latency is the sum of the latency that 
occurs during MN-MAG, MAG-QoSB, QoSB-QoSB, and 
MAG-MAG communication. The global handover latency is 
the delay between messages 1 and 13, as shown in Figure 4. 
However, the time during no connectivity or when user 
terminal is not assigned resources is spent in the L2 handover. 
The handover operation is simulated to determine mobility 
seamlessness. After execution, measured values proving the 
architectural concept is obtained that showed reduced global 
handover latency, as well as low packet loss. The global 
handover latency affects the relationship between cell 
coverage of radio (range) and the speed at which the user can 
move, therefore affecting the cellular network plan. 
 
Figure 6.  Timing Diagram for PMIPv6 Handover. 
Figure 6 shows a timing diagram of a PMIPv6 handover. 
Here, 
(
PMIPv6)
LHO
 is defined to be the handover latency of 
PMIPv6 and is expressed as follows.  

(
6)
2
PMIPv
HO
L
LMA
L
T
T




Furthermore, 
TLMA
 refers to the time spent exchanging the 
PBU/PBAck messages between the MAG and LMA. During 
the time required to send the RS Message, the LMA receives 
the packet that is first sent. 

(
)
(
,
)
LMA
wl
RS
wd
PBU
G A
lma packet
T
d
L
d
L
h
d







Variable 
dlma packet

 denotes the time required for the first 
data packet to be sent from the LMA to the MN. Because it 
can be implemented by a static tunnel, a bi-directional tunnel 
between the LMA and MAG is not necessary. When the 
LMA receives a valid PBU message from the MAG, it sends 
a data packet and PBAck message to the MN. 

(
)
(
,
)
lma packet
wl
D
wd
D
T
G A
d
d
L
d
L
L h







Latency 
T
L  is contained in the 
dwd
 account because the 
data packet sent to the MN is tunneled between the LMA and 
MAG. This account is included in the total. The data packet 
is sent to the MN because of the tunnel between the LMA 
and MAG. This is different than in HMIPv6. Even if 
PMIPv6 and HMIPv6 send a similar message to the MN, the 
PMIPv6 reduces the packet transmission overhead of the 
wireless link. The FPMIPv6 has a concept similar to FMIPv6 
and is composed of predictive and reactive modes.  
Let 
( )
HO
L 
 be the handover latency in the mobility 
management protocol that was developed in the previous 
section. The () protocol is used as the indicator, 
[ ( )
HO ]
E L 
is the 
average value of 
( )
HO
L  , TR is the residence time on the 
network, and its probability density function is denoted by 
Rf ( )
t . Here, 
( )
HO
L   is assumed to be exponentially distributed 
by the accumulation function
FT( )( )
 t
. Hence, 
( )
HO
L 
 is the 
element blocking the handover, and the handover block 
potential 
b
  is expressed as follows. 

( )
( )
( )
( )
0
Pr(
)
[
]
(1
( ))
( )
1
[
]
b
HO
R
c
HO
T
R
u
c
HO
L
T
E L
F
u
f
u d
E L












 



where 
c
  is the percentage of networks passing through 
a boundary of the MN. If the MAG coverage area is circular, 
c
  is calculated as follows [12]. 

2
c
R


 


where   is the average speed of the MN and R is the 
radius of the MAG coverage area. 
B. Numerical Results 
Performance analysis is used with the following system 
parameter values: 
C H
h  =4, 
C H
h  =6, 
hH G
 =4, 
C
A
h  =4, 
A M
h  =1, E(S)=10, 
 =20ms, n=3, 
f
L =19bytes, 
wl
D =[10,40]ms, 
Dwired
=0.5ms, 
BWwired
=100Mbps, 
L2
T =45.33ms, 
TDAD
=1000ms. 
In this analysis, 
f
  ranges from 0 to 0.7 in increments of 
0.05. Figures 7 shows the comparison of the handover 
latency. The maximum value of 
f
  increases the probability 
of an error in a wireless link when a packet is transmitted. 
The number of retransmissions of the mobility signal 
increases and results in an increase of the handover latency. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

As shown in Figures 7, the handover latency of each 
mobility management protocol is proportional to 
f
 .  
 
Figure 7.  Handover Latency (
f
 ,
Dwl
=10ms). 
Figure 8 (left) shows the transmission failure probability 
for  . As   increases, the MN must change rapidly. This 
means that the MN is required to complete the transfer of a 
high value in a shorter time. Therefore, as   increases, the 
transfer failure rate of the mobility management protocol 
also increases. In this analysis environment, if   is as high as 
30 m, giving a handover probability of less than 0.05, only 
two predictive high-speed transport protocols, FMIPv6 and 
FPMIPv6, were able to function. Similar to the previous 
results, MIPv6 handover probability block performance was 
poor. This effect is notable as   increases. As seen in Figure 
8 (right), most of the mobility management protocols are 
influenced by R. However, the performance of predictive 
FMIPv6 and FPMIPv6 is not affected. As with the results 
shown in Figures 8, the handover latency for predictive 
FMIPv6 and FPMIPv6 is short enough to avoid problems 
caused by   or R.  
 
Figure 8.  Handover Blocking Probability versus  (left) and R (right). 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we integrate QoS and mobility to control 
and manage the available resources effectively. This scheme 
has the advantage that the time latency is very small because 
of the added QoSB node. As shown in the results, the 
existing mobility protocols and the proposed scheme are 
analyzed with respect to handover latency, packet loss, and 
handover blocking probability in networks based on PMIPv6 
and FPMIPv6. The evaluation results show a better overall 
performance for the FHO structure of mobility management 
schemes that is equally applicable in a network-based 
mobility management scheme. We can conclude that 
PMIPv6 and FPMIPv6 are the most efficient structures in 
many ways. In future, this approach will be applied to a 
variety of service platforms, such as Internet of Things (IoT) 
and verified in practical environments. We also plan to 
continue expanding its research scope. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Next-Generation 
Information Computing Development Program through the 
NRF funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future 
Planning (NRF-2014M3C4A7030503) and Basic Science 
Research Program through the NRF funded by the Ministry 
of Education (NRF-2010-0024695). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. H. Lee, J. M. Bonnin, and T. M. Chung, "Comparative Handover 
Performance Analysis of IPv6 Mobility Management Protocols." 
IEEE Tranaction on Industrical Electronics, Vol. 60, No. 3, 2013, pp. 
1077-1088. 
[2] 
V. Marques, X. P. Costa, and R. L. Aguiar, "Evaluation of a Mobile 
IPv6-Based Architecture Supporting User Mobility QoS and AAAC 
in Heterogeneous Networks," IEEE Journal on Selected Area in 
Communication, Vol. 23, No. 11, 2005, pp. 2138-2151. 
[3] 
Zhou, H., Zhang, H. and Qin, Y, "An authentication method for proxy 
mobile IPv6 and performance analysis," Security Comm. Networks, 
2009,  pp. 445–454. doi: 10.1002/sec.83. 
[4] 
H. W. Ko and J. P. Jeong, "dMMS: A Novel Distributed Dynamic 
Mobility Management Scheme for Minimizing Signaling Costs in 
Proxy Mobile IPv6 Networks," The Journal of The Institute of 
Webcasting, Internet and Telecommunication, Vol. 12, No. 4, 2012, 
pp. 65-80. 
[5] 
S. H. Han and J. P. Jeong, "Intelligent Hierarchical Mobility Support 
Scheme in F-PMIPv6 Networks," The Journal of the KICS, Vol. 38, 
No. 4C, 2013, pp. 337-349. 
[6] 
K. S. Go, U. S. Jung, and Y. S. Mun, "An Enhanced Fast Handover 
for Proxy MIPv6 Scheme for Efficient Mobile Environment of The 
Future Network," Journal of the institute of electronics engineerings 
of Korea, Vol. 48, No, 1, 2011, pp. 84-91. 
[7] 
H. Yokota, K. Chowdhury, and R. Koodli, "Fast Handovers for Proxy 
Mobile IPv6," IETF RFC 5949, September 2010. 
[8] 
R. Braden, D. Clark, and S. Shenker, "Integrated services in the 
Internet architecture: An overview," IETF, RFC 1633, June 1994. 
[9] 
D. Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, and W. Weiss, "An 
architecture for differentiated services," IETF RFC 2475, December 
1998 
[10] C. Beaujean, N. Chaher, V. Marques, R. L. Aguiar, C. García, J. I. 
Moreno, M. Wetterwald, and T. Ziegler, "Implementation and 
evaluation of an end-to-end IP QoS architecture for networks beyond 
3rd generation," in IST Mobile Summit, 2003, pp. 221–226. 
[11] V. Marques, A. C. Casado,  J. I. Moreno, and L. Rui, "A simple QoS 
service provision framework for beyond 3rd generation scenarios," in 
Proceeding of 10th International Conference on Telecommunications, 
2003, pp. 1475–1481. 
[12] R. Hsieh, Z.-G. Zhou, and A. Seneviratne, "S-MIP: A seamless 
handoff architecture for mobile IP," in Proceeding of INFOCOM, 
2003, pp. 1774-1784. 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

