Proposal of Functional Exchange Networking for Distributing Data Services across 
Multiple Network Generations 
Shuichi Okamoto, Michiaki Hayashi, Nobutaka Matsumoto and Kosuke Nishimura 
KDDI R&D Laboratories, Inc. 
Saitama, Japan 
e-mail: {okamoto, mc-hayashi, nb-matsumoto, nish}@kddilabs.jp 
 
Abstract—Continuous evolutions of network management and 
control technologies are producing a variety of different 
network functions such as network-oriented authentication, 
cross-layer operation, administration and management, and 
session-based quality of service control. The continuous growth 
is also producing a byproduct that blocks the global 
distribution of data services because the evolved network 
functions are effective only within a single network domain. In 
short, the global network will have the network generations of 
conventional IP-based network, the next generation network, 
and the emerging future network. In order to achieve 
advanced network services utilizing evolved network functions 
across multiple network domains and generations, this paper 
proposes a network function exchange architecture. The 
proposed network function exchange intermediates the various 
differences 
related 
to 
control 
protocols, 
management 
information, and data format. A service scenario using the 
network function exchange and detailed architecture is 
described. Functional requirements of the exchange, a design 
of the universal interface protocol, and an operational 
procedure based on the design are described. 
Keywords-NGN; 
Future 
Network; 
Network 
Function 
Exchange; Multiple Network Generations 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Penetration of the cloud computing services and the 
Internet accessibility are driving the global distributions of 
the information and communication technology (ICT) 
services. The recent growth of emerging countries is the 
economical 
background 
to 
ICT 
globalization, 
and 
accordingly, activities of enterprises tend to go across 
borders. Indeed, various Internet applications have already 
been provided globally across multiple network operators, 
but they are usually provided with the best-effort quality. On 
the other hand, mission critical or bandwidth-sensitive ICT 
services cannot be globally achieved by best-effort quality. 
Today, the standardization of the next generation network 
(NGN) is enabling session-based quality of service (QoS) 
control even over all Internet protocol (IP) networks [1]. 
However, the capabilities achieved by the NGN are effective 
within the NGN operator, and achieving the capabilities 
across multiple network operators is unlikely since the NGN 
has not been widely rolled out yet. To accelerate the global 
distribution of the enterprise cloud services, various network 
functions, such as QoS or authentication interworking not 
only between conventional IP network and NGN but also 
between NGNs are required. So far, an attempt for global 
distribution of session initiation protocol (SIP) based 
services (typically the voice over IP (VoIP) service) has been 
made [2], however the service exchange technique cannot 
apply to non-SIP services including the cloud. For the 
limited scale of inter-operator network interworking 
businesses, the open access networking has been also 
discussed, where a common access operator is the hub for 
network service distribution [3, 4]. In addition, there was 
past activity for  interworking among different types of 
networks [5], but the activity handled only single generation 
(i.e., IP network) and handled only single network function 
(i.e., QoS control). 
Recently, a standardization of the future network (FN) as 
the next of NGN has been initiated [6], and an advance 
evaluation of the FN testbeds are also underway [7, 8]. FN 
will have additional functional capabilities, such as the 
network virtualization that enables secure isolation of user 
networks [9].  In the future, the global service distribution 
must transcend architectural barriers at the network borders 
of conventional IP networks, extended conventional IP 
network having the bandwidth broker [10] mechanism, NGN, 
and FN [11]. Not only a simple connectivity but also 
additional functions (e.g., QoS, authentication, charging) are 
required to be interworked between those network 
generations. The attendant issue of the interwork will be 
filling gaps regarding available functions between the 
network generations. In addition, depending on countries and 
operators, exchanging functions may face policy differences 
regarding, for example, the regulation of the data allocation 
and the business process of authentication and charging. 
To achieve the network interworking, two typical models 
called the exchange model [12] and the private peering 
model [13] have been discussed. The exchange model has 
been employed for Internet exchange (IX) [12], and many 
networks 
are 
interconnected 
at 
the 
cost-effective 
concentrated exchange point. While the exchange model 
enables consolidation of interconnection points, the policy 
management (e.g., defining QoS class, authorization, and 
applied function itself) cannot be unified since each 
interconnecting provider has a different policy. On the other 
hand, in the private peering model, it is relatively easy to 
negotiate a universal policy and interworking functions at the 
interconnection point. But the private peering model is 
unlikely when the number of interconnected network 
increases, and thus the private peering model tends to require 
more interconnecting interfaces than the exchange model. 
Therefore, the exchange model is expected to be suitable for 
the 
service 
distribution 
in 
the 
large-scale 
global 
environments. However, there have not been discussions 
132
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

regarding 
the 
suitable 
functional 
architecture 
for 
interworking various network functions among multiple 
network generations.  
This paper proposes a network interworking architecture 
for the global-scale service environment across multiple 
network generations based on the network function exchange 
(NFE). This paper also proposes the functional design of the 
NFE and the design of the interworking interfaces. The 
structure of this paper is as follows. First, an example of the 
service scenario by utilizing proposed NFE is described in 
section 2. Section 3 describes the proposed functional 
architecture to achieve the exchange. Based on the functional 
design, technical issues that need to be resolved and the 
requirements to resolve the issues are identified in section 4. 
Next, detailed functions and interface design to fill the 
requirements are described in section 5. Finally, the proposed 
procedural design of the service distribution operations is 
described in section 6. 
II. 
SERVICE SCENARIO 
Network Function Exchange
country 
country 
IP
NGN2
FN
country 
NGN1
Data Center A
user A
user B
Data
Center B
QoS, ID/Auth
QoS, 
accounting
QoS, ID/Auth, 
data conversion
QoS
operator’s
domain
Network 
Function Exchange
Bandwidth-allocated cloud service from IP 
network (IP) 
Bandwidth-allocated cloud service with network-
based authentication from Future Network (FN)
operator’s
domain
 
Figure 1.  Example of advanced cloud service scenario by mediating 
functions among multiple network generations as well as multiple countries 
and operator’s domains. 
Fig. 1 shows an example scenario of a cloud computing 
service where the NFE intermediates the functions among 
multiple network generations owned by different countries 
and operators. The NFE is operated by an independent 
company dedicating NFE services, or operated by one of the 
network service operators providing FN, NGN or IP. The 
terms in Fig. 1 show examples of the major functional 
categories that are intermediated by the NFE. In this scenario, 
the intermediated functional categories are QoS control (e.g., 
bandwidth allocation, priority management, guarantee of 
latency and jitter), network-based identification and 
authentication (ID/Auth) (e.g., fixed-line or user-terminal 
based authorizations with the network operator-driven strict 
confirmation and proof of no-spoofing) and accounting. In 
addition, if the conversion of the data format or the control 
signal is necessary, the NFE makes the conversion. In this 
scenario, a data center A is connected to NGN1 which 
provides the QoS control and accounting functions. User A 
is connected to the FN that supports QoS control and 
ID/Auth functions. By intermediating the available functions 
of QoS control, ID/Auth and accounting between NGN1 and 
FN, the NFE provides a QoS-guaranteed cloud service with 
strict user authentication. The NFE knows the differences of 
protocols, data formats and functions between network 
generations, and has the translating/conversion functions. In 
this scenario for the cloud service between the data center A 
and the user A, when the NFE receives a request for 
network services across multiple network generations and 
domains from user A to data center A through the FN and 
NGN, the NFE identifies the detailed requested information 
such as the destination to be connected. The NFE 
intermediates the QoS control function with the translation of 
the control protocol to an understandable one in NGN1. The 
most important thing in this scenario is that the QoS control 
function is achieved across multiple network generations 
without any modifications to the current implementation of 
the control and management scheme on each network 
generation and domain.  
In addition, in order to prevent spoofing, the NGN1 may 
ask the FN to provide the network-based authentication for 
identifying user A before providing the service. It is 
important that network-based authentication (i.e., ID/Auth) 
function is asked not directly to the user A but to the FN. The 
FN checks the subscriber information of user A and informs 
the result to the NGN1 through the NFE. If necessary, the 
NFE translates the ID/Auth information in order for the 
NGN1 to be able to understand. The NGN1 also requires the 
accounting to the user A, and the NFE asks the FN by proxy 
for the NGN1’s request. This function is also translated in 
the NFE and then requested to the FN with the translation of 
the management protocol. In the same manner, the data 
center B connected by NGN2 which supports the QoS 
control function can also provide a QoS-guaranteed 
advanced cloud service with the user authentication for user 
B. Next, the user B connecting to conventional IP network 
that supports only the QoS control function can use the QoS-
guaranteed cloud service without strict network-based user 
authentication using the data centers A and B. In such a 
scenario, the NFE can provide advanced services over 
multiple network generations, network operators and the 
limitation of country by intermediation of the various 
network functions. 
133
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

III. 
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
A. Architectural Fundamentals 
NGN
IP
NGN
FN
IP    :     Conventional IP based network 
NGN:     Next Generation Network
FN   :     Future Network
:  Network - Exchange Interface (NEI)
:  Exchange - Exchange Interface (EEI)
Exchange
Point
IP
FN
Exchange
Point
Back-
bone
NGN
FN
Network Function
Exchange
Exchange
Point
Network Function
Exchange
IP
 
Figure 2.  Basic topology of the proposed NFE 
Fig. 2 shows the basic topology of the proposed NFE 
with 
two 
interconnection 
models 
bridging 
multiple 
generation networks. A NFE consists of more than one 
Exchange Point and a backbone link as optional. The 
backbone is required if one NFE needs to scale out by 
distributing the exchange point. If more than two exchange 
points are interconnected by the backbone link, the 
aggregated entity acts as an NFE for the distributed 
architecture. Various kinds of network generation (e.g., 
conventional IP network, NGN, and FN) are assumed to be 
interconnected to the exchange point through an interface 
called the network-exchange interface (NEI). All the data 
transition and the mediation of control information are 
transacted within the exchange point through the NEI. The 
most important characteristic of the exchange architecture is 
that the NEI is a unified single interface regardless of the 
network generation. The proposed design of the NEI is 
described in section 5. As indicated in section 2, the 
conversion of the data format and the control protocols 
between the different networks generations are carried out 
within the exchange point. Therefore, the exchange point 
provides not only simple data bridging, but also negotiating 
and brokering of network functions. If it is necessary to 
interwork between multiple NFEs, the exchange points are 
interconnected by the Exchange-Exchange Interface (EEI). 
The difference between the backbone link and the EEI is that 
the backbone link is a simple transport of control signals and 
data traffic, and EEI has a functional negotiation role but 
also a simple transport role. 
 
IP    :     Conventional IP based network 
NGN:     Next Generation Network
FN   :     Future Network
FN
NGN
IP
Control Plane:
Capability information exchange
Routing / Signaling / Provisioning
Information Management Plane:
Identification / Authentication
Accounting
Data Plane:
Data traffic / Data conversion
OAM data
Network
Function
Exchange
 
Figure 3.  Proposed  stratum model of the NFE architecture 
The proposed stratum model of the NFE is shown in Fig. 
3. The top of layer is the control plane where the supported 
functions of the network, routing, and reachability 
information are exchanged. In addition, the signaling 
information for establishing the QoS-managed path or for 
admission control is also exchanged in the control plane 
layer. The middle layer is the information management plane 
where information on authentication, accounting, network 
statistics, and operation and management (OAM) status is 
exchanged. The bottom layer is the data plane where all of 
the users’ data traffic and OAM signals are exchanged. If the 
data structure or address information of one network 
generation’s traffic must be converted into another 
generation’s format, it is done via the data plane. The 
detailed data link layer, network layer or transport layer of 
FN has not been defined yet. Therefore, if the definition of 
FN will be completely different from the conventional IP or 
NGN, the Exchange Point must absorb the differences 
utilizing the data plane. The backbone includes these triple 
layers within it as a simple link interconnecting multiple 
exchange points, and delivers the information and data to 
each exchange point. 
B. Architectural Comparison 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
Number of networks
Required total number of interfaces
Private peering model 
Exchange model
 
Figure 4.  Comparison chart of required number of interfaces for 
interconnection 
Fig. 4 shows a comparison of the required number of 
interconnection interfaces between the private peering model 
134
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

and the proposed exchange model in the case of fully 
meshed interconnection among networks that can be 
conventional IP, NGN or FN. In the private peering model, 
when the number of interconnecting networks is n, the total 
number of interfaces can be calculated by an equation of the 
number of 2-combinations from n elements, nC2. As the 
result, the total number of required interfaces increases at 
O(n2). Hence, when the number of interconnecting networks 
is 15, the total number of required interfaces is more than 
100. Considering service provision on a global scale, it is no 
longer scalable. On the other hand, in the proposed 
architecture, a network only has to have an interconnection 
interface connected to the NFE, regardless of the total 
number of other interconnecting networks. As a result, the 
total number of interfaces increases on a linear scale of O(n). 
In addition, considering the redundancy, many more 
interfaces are required for a full mesh model. However, the 
definition of the interface may be much more complicated 
than the full mesh model, and the NFE must play many 
advanced roles in order to achieve the proposed architecture. 
The detailed design is described in section 4. 
IV. 
TECHNICAL ISSUES AND REQUIREMENTS 
With the intermediation of network functions, a newly 
deployed function in one network must also be available to 
the other interconnecting networks. This means that any 
network of any generations must be indirectly but 
continuously upgraded based on functional demand or the 
plan of the network. In addition, interoperability issues must 
be partially resolved by emulating some of the functions 
implemented in the advanced network side. In order to 
achieve the above requirements in the control plane, each 
network must report the list of available functions exposed to 
the NFE. This concept is similar to the capability information 
exchange or discovery in the link-layer discovery protocol 
(LLDP) [14] and the link management protocol (LMP) [15], 
but those protocols can handle only link-layer capabilities. 
As for routing or signaling protocols, it is important for 
existing networks, such as the conventional IP and NGN, to 
reduce the impact on implementing additional interface 
protocols in order to ensure interoperability. Therefore, 
interface protocols used in the current networks should be 
continuously applicable for the NEI as much as possible. 
Absorbing protocol differences or converting the data format 
must be performed by the NFE. Even if the same interface 
protocols are used in interconnecting networks, the meanings 
or definitions of used parameters may be different and that 
results in failure of interworking routing or signaling 
operations. In order to prevent such failures, the introduction 
of common meanings and definitions within the same 
context parameters are required. Additionally, if conversion 
of the data format or addresses is necessary on the exchange 
point, additional latency and jitter caused by the exchanging 
operations are desirably required for consideration in the 
control plane. 
As for the protocols and handled information regarding 
ID/Auth, accounting, and OAM control exchanged using the 
information management plane, there are few discussions 
and standardization activities for the functional exchange. 
Especially for the ID/Auth function, contexts and 
granularities of the information, such as the identifier (e.g., 
user account) and the locator (e.g., IP address), should be 
coupled beyond the network generations. In order to bridge 
the different ID/Auth protocols, universal hi-level schemes to 
exchange information should be defined as applicable to 
multiple network generations. Standardizing the high-level 
scheme aims to reduce the implementation impacts on all of 
the network generations, while standardizing new ID/Auth 
protocols or choosing one existing protocol has huge impacts 
on existing networks to be interconnected. The proposed 
high-level scheme is described in section 5. The approach of 
the ID/Auth functional exchange is expected to be applicable 
for the accounting function, since the accounting operation is 
tightly coupled with the ID/Auth information. Regarding the 
regulation policy of data allocation, configuring the data 
cache has legal constraints depending on the situations of 
each country. To address this constraint, the capability of 
disclosing location information for each exchange point or 
caching area is effective within the functional exchange. If 
multiple NFEs are involved, the capability of determining 
NFE for the conversion is required on EEI in order to avoid 
duplicated capability allocation and to balance the functional 
load. 
V. 
DETAILED FUNCTIONS AND INTERFACES DESIGN  
A. Functions Provided by Each Network Generation and 
Applicable Protocols 
Table 1 shows the proposed list of typical network 
functions and shows the eligible protocols for each function. 
The category of Table.1 shows the major types of functions 
and the function name represents the specific function 
belonging to each category. These categories of network 
functions listed in Table I are already-available ones in 
current NGN or IP (i.e., QoS path control, ID/Authentication, 
Accounting, OAM, and Conversion) and a new function 
available in the FN (i.e., Virtualization/Separation). Eligible 
protocols for each function are shown in the applicable 
protocols field in Table 1 per the network generation. Fields 
represented as “New” in “Applicable Protocols” column 
means that the protocol needs to be newly defined. As for the 
“Conversion” row, there are needs for converting between 
different addressing such as IPv4 and IPv6, and for 
converting between different transports such as Ethernet and 
SONET/SDH. 
TABLE I.  
LIST OF PROPOSED FUNCTIONS AND APPLICABLE 
PROTOCOLS AT EACH NETWORK GENERATION 
Function 
Applicable Protocols 
Category 
(plane) 
Function Name 
FN 
NGN 
IP 
Bandwidth 
allocation 
New 
SIP, Ri, 
RSVP
RSVP, 
SIP 
Priority 
New 
RSVP
RSVP
Delay 
New 
New 
New 
QoS path 
(Control) 
Jitter 
New 
New 
New 
135
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Function 
Applicable Protocols 
Category 
(plane) 
Function Name 
FN 
NGN 
IP 
Identification 
New 
New 
New 
ID/Authenticati
on 
(Information 
management) 
Authentication 
New 
Radius
Radius
Establish 
of 
virtualized/separat
ed 
slice, 
participant 
management 
New 
New, 
L2TP, 
MPLS, 
GMPL
S, 
VLAN
New,L
2TP 
MPLS, 
GMPL
S, 
VLAN
Virtualization/S
eparation 
(Control) 
Address 
conversion 
New 
New 
New 
Accounting 
(Information 
management) 
Accounting 
New 
Radius
Radius
End to end quality 
Reachability 
New 
New 
New, 
LMP 
End to end delay 
New 
New 
New, 
LMP 
OAM  
(Control, 
Information 
management) 
End to end jitter 
New 
New 
New, 
LMP 
Conversion 
(Data) 
Data/format 
conversion 
(address, 
data, 
codec, IPv4-IPv6, 
etc) 
- 
6rd, 
DS-lite
6rd, 
DS-lite
B. Design of the Interface Protocols 
As a basis of the protocol, a design of the control 
commands required for each function is proposed. 
Commands for each interface protocol are assumed to be 
performed in the control plane or the information 
management plane, and the commands are designed so that 
the typical operations of each categorized function in Table 1 
can be covered as much as possible as well as the exchange 
of functional capability information described in section 4. In 
terms of the data conversion function in Table 1, it is a 
capability within the data plane, and thus specific commands 
are not introduced. 
First, four commands are proposed to cover the exchange 
of functional capability information described in section 4. 
• 
Functional capability data base (DB) creation 
• 
Functional capability DB update 
• 
Functional capability DB deletion 
• 
Functional capability DB ack 
The functional capability DB creation command is used 
when the new network is attached to the NFE so that a new 
functional capability database has to be created. The 
functional capability DB contains both the availability 
information 
of 
each 
network 
function 
and 
the 
routing/reachability information. The functional capability 
DB update command is used when current functional 
capability information is changed in supporting of new 
function. The functional capability DB deletion is used when 
a network is removed from the NFE. Functional capability 
DB ack is sent by NFE in order to notify that the NFE surely 
receives the command (the functional capability DB creation 
or update or deletion) to the FN, NGN and IP. The functional 
capability DB contains the area information where the 
required network function is available. 
Second, five commands are proposed to cover the typical 
QoS functions.  
• 
QoS path creation 
• 
QoS path deletion. 
• 
QoS path modification 
• 
QoS path confirm/provisioning 
• 
QoS path ack/nack 
The QoS path creation command is used when new QoS 
guaranteed (bandwidth allocation, priority control, delay 
control and jitter control) path wants to be setup, and it 
contains the parameters of the QoS (e.g., bandwidth in Mbits 
per second) and path information (e.g., ingress, egress and 
transit points) to be created. The QoS path deletion 
command is used when the already setup QoS guaranteed 
path wants to be deleted. The QoS path modification 
command is used when the already setup the QoS guaranteed 
path wants to be modified. The most important factor of this 
command is that the availability of target path must be kept 
without any disruption of data traffic. If the modification 
cannot be achieved without the data disruption by a 
technology such as the “make before break”, the network 
providers have to notify that they have no functional 
availability of the QoS path modification by using the 
functional capability DB messages. The QoS path 
confirm/provisioning command is used when the required 
commands (creation, deletion, modification) are really 
operated. In the QoS path ack/nack command, Ack is used to 
report that the sent command (QoS path creation or deletion 
or modification or confirm/provisioning) is received by the 
opposite network or NFE. Nack is used to show the refusal 
of the received command and the reason to the opposite 
network or NFE. 
Next, three commands are proposed to cover the typical 
ID/Auth functions. 
• 
ID/Auth request 
• 
ID/Auth reply 
• 
ID/Auth ack/nack 
The ID/Auth request command is used when ID/Auth 
information is required from one network or NFE to another 
NFE or network. The ID/Auth reply command is used when 
one network or the NFE reply with the ID/Auth information 
to another NFE or network. In the ID/Auth ack/nack 
command, Ack is used to report that the sent command 
(request or reply) is received by the opposite network or NFE. 
Nack is used to show the refusal of the received command 
and the reason to the opposite network or NFE. 
As for the accounting function, four commands are 
proposed to cover the typical operations. 
• 
Accounting request 
• 
Accounting reply 
• 
Accounting confirm/provisioning 
• 
Accounting ack/nack 
The accounting request command is used when charging 
is required from one network or NFE to another NFE or 
network. As the parameter, detailed information such as the 
cost is included in this command. The accounting reply 
command is used when replying with the received 
accounting request command, such as “accept” or “not 
136
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

accept.” The accounting confirm/provisioning command is 
used when the real charging transaction is done. In the 
accounting ack/nack command, Ack is used to report that the 
sent command (request or reply or confirm/provisioning) is 
received by the opposite network or NFE. Nack is used to 
show the refusal of received command the reason to the 
opposite network or NFE. 
To cover the OAM function, five commands are 
proposed. 
• 
OAM path creation 
• 
OAM path deletion 
• 
OAM path modification 
• 
OAM path confirm/provisioning 
• 
OAM path ack/nack 
The OAM path creation command is used when the 
OAM function is newly required. The OAM path deletion 
command is used when the coexisting OAM path is deleted. 
The OAM path modification command is used when the 
coexisting OAM path is modified. The OAM path 
confirm/provisioning command is used when the required 
commands (creation, deletion, modification) are really 
operated. In the OAM path ack/nack command, Ack is used 
to report that the sent command (creation or deletion or 
modification or confirm/provisioning) is received by the 
opposite network or NFE. Nack is used to show the refusal 
of received command and the reason to the opposite network 
or NFE. 
Finally, five commands are proposed to cover the typical 
virtualization functions. 
• 
Virtualized/separated slice creation 
• 
Virtualized/separated slice deletion 
• 
Virtualized/separated slice modification 
• 
Virtualized/separated slice confirm/provisioning 
• 
Virtualized/separated slice ack/nack 
The virtualized/separated slice creation command is used 
when the virtualized/separated slice or layer is newly 
required. The virtualized/separated slice deletion command 
is used when the coexisting slice or layer is deleted. The 
virtualized/separated slice modification command is used 
when the coexisting slice or layer is modified. The 
virtualized/separated slice confirm/provisioning command is 
used when the required commands (creation, deletion, 
modification) are really operated. In the virtualized/separated 
slice ack/nack command, Ack is used to report that the sent 
command (the virtualized/separated slice creation or deletion 
or modification or confirm/provisioning) is received by the 
opposite network or NFE. Nack is used to show the refusal 
of received command and the reason to the opposite network 
or NFE. 
VI. 
PROCEDURE FOR THE SERVICE DISTRIBUTION 
All of the services are achieved using the combination of 
the functions defined in Table 1 and the commands defined 
in section 5. For instance, the procedure for the global cloud 
service scenario of exchanging the secure bandwidth 
allocation functions is represented in Fig. 5. In this service 
example, following three functions are utilized. 
• 
QoS: bandwidth allocation (QoS path) 
• 
Identification/Authentication (ID/Auth) 
• 
Accounting 
Destination
(Data Center)
Source
(User)
(1)
(2): QoS path 
creation req.
(3): QoS path
creation req.
(4): ID/Auth req.
(5) : ID/Auth req.
(6) : ID/Auth rep.
(7) : ID/Auth rep.
(8)
(9)
(10): QoS path ack, 
Accounting req.
(11) : QoS path ack,
Accounting req.
(12)
(14): QoS path 
confirm,
AC confirm
(13)
Internal processing
(15): QoS path 
confirm,
Accounting confirm
FN
Network
Function
Exchange
NGN
 
Figure 5.  Example procedure of global cloud service scenario with 
exchanging the secure bandwidth allocation functions 
The step-by-step procedure in Fig. 5 is explained below. 
It is on the premise that user knows the destination 
information as IP address, domain name or a kind of aliases 
representing the service name.  
(1) The user sends a service request command for bandwidth 
allocation between the user and the data center to the NGN. 
(2) The NGN confirms the availability of the bandwidth 
resources between the user and the NFE, and then sends the 
QoS path creation command to the NFE. 
(3) The NFE confirms the functional capability of the FN 
belonging to the data center, and then sends the QoS path 
creation command to the FN. If the FN does not support the 
requested function, the NFE sends the QoS path nack 
command to the NGN and operation ends. 
(4) In order to authenticate the requesting user, the FN sends 
the ID/Auth request command to the NFE. 
(5) The NFE forwards the ID/Auth request command to the 
NGN. As the basic service policy using the network-based 
ID/Auth functions, the data center and the content provider 
must clearly specify the utilization to the user. Thus the 
confirmation process or privacy protection scheme must be 
prepared to the user. 
(6) The NGN checks the identity of the requested user and 
then sends the ID/Auth reply command to the NFE. 
(7) The NFE forwards the ID/Auth reply command with the 
requested user’s identity information to the FN. 
(8) The FN asks the data center’s approval to create a 
bandwidth-allocated path to the requested user. 
(9) The data center confirms and approves the user by the 
ID/Auth information. 
(10) The FN sends both the QoS ack command and the 
accounting request command to the NFE. 
(11) The NFE forwards both QoS ack command and the 
accounting request command to the NGN. 
(12) The NGN asks for approval from the user. 
137
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

(13) If the user agrees the details of service contents with 
accounting/charging information, he sends the final 
confirmation to the NGN. The final confirmation message is 
the trigger of actual service provisioning. 
(14) The NGN sends both the QoS path confirmation 
command and an accounting confirmation command to the 
NFE. In addition, the NGN provisions the bandwidth-
allocated path between the user and the NFE. 
(15) The NFE sends both the QoS path confirmation 
command and the accounting confirmation command to the 
FN. In addition, the FN and NFE provision the bandwidth-
allocated path between the NFE and the data center. Finally, 
the NFE bridges the bandwidth-allocated paths. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
The proposed architecture has advantages in reducing the 
number of interconnecting interfaces and also simplifying 
implementation of functional interworking scheme. However, 
those advantages are only effective for the network service 
providers which operate a single generation network and 
want to interconnect to different network generations for 
wider service distribution. However, there are some 
remaining issues regarding complicated implementation of 
functional interworking scheme especially for NFE provider. 
First, NFE has to know the detailed functional capability 
information of each network as well as the routing 
information, and to determine the availability of services 
from that information. For the further study, the scalability 
about the number of connecting networks should be done 
from this viewpoint. Second, the scalability of protocol and 
data conversion functions [16] in an NFE has to be 
considered.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In order to achieve global distribution of data services 
utilizing various network functions across multiple network 
generations and domains, a functional interworking 
architecture of NFE is proposed. The architectural 
fundamentals and design of the NFE with a triple layer 
structure of the control plane, the information management 
plane and the data plane are proposed. With the detailed 
functional description, the universal control commands 
between the NFE and each network generation is proposed to 
intermediate the various functions. Finally, the utilization of 
proposed commands is identified with a secure bandwidth-
reserved cloud service scenario.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Hideaki Tanaka, Yasuyuki 
Nakajima and Shigeyuki Akiba who gave us insightful 
comments and suggestions for this evaluation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] ITU-T Recommendation Y.2012, “Functional Requirements 
and Architecture of Next Generation Networks,” April, 2010. 
[2] GSM Association, “Inter-Service Provider IP Backbone 
Guidelines,” Official Document: IR.34, June, 2008. 
[3] M. Forzati, C. P. Larsen, and C. Mattsson, “Open Access 
Networks, the Swedish Experience,” in Proceedings of 
ICTON 2010, pp. 1-4, July, 2010. 
[4] M. Hayashi et al., “Design of Network Resource Federation 
towards Future Open Access Networking,” in Proceedings of 
The 
Seventh 
Advanced 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications (AICT), March, 2011. 
[5] G. Cortese et al., “Cadenus: creation and deployment of end-
user services in premium IP networks,” IEEE Communication 
Magazine, pp. 54-60, vol. 41, 2003. 
[6] D. Matsubara and M. K. Shin, “Draft Deliverable on Future 
Networks: Design Goals and Promising Technologies,” ITU-
T Focus Group on Future Network, December, 2010. 
[7] L. Peterson et al., “GENI Design Principles,” GDD-06-08, 
August, 2006. 
[8] S. Avéssta, “FIREworks,” D2.7 Draft Cooperation Concept, 
FIREworks consortium, 2009. 
[9] S. Meier et al. “Provisioning and Operation of Virtual 
Networks,” Electronic Communications of the EASST, 
Kommunikation in Verteilten Systemen 2011, 37, March, 
2011. 
[10] K. Nichols, V. Jacobson, and L. Zhang, “A Two-bit 
Differentiated Services Architecture for the Internet,” RFC 
2638, July, 1999. 
[11] R. Dutta et al, “The Silo architecture for services integration, 
control, and optimization for the future internet,” In 
Communications, 
2007. 
ICC 
'07. 
IEEE International 
Conference on, pp 1899-1904, June, 2007. 
[12] S. Moore, “Evolution of the Internet,” in Proceedings of 
Electro/94 International Conference, pp. 263-265, 1994. 
[13] R. Dewan, M. Freimer, and P. Gundepudi, “Interconnection 
Agreements between Competing Internet Service Providers,” 
in Proceedings of 33rd System Science, pp. 1-7, vol. 1, 
January, 2000. 
[14] Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP), IEEE 802.1AB. 
[15] J. Lang et al., “Link Management Protocol,” RFC4204, IETF, 
October, 2005. 
[16] R. Bless and C.Werle, “Network Virtualization From A 
Signaling Perspective,”Commnications Workshops, 2009. 
ICC Workshops 2009. IEEE International Conference on., pp. 
14-18, June, 2009. 
 
 
138
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

