Estimating Consumer Inclination for Agricultural Products
from Web Browsing History
Riki Tatsuta, Sunao Nakanishi
Graduate School of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan
email:{tatsuta, sunao}@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Yusuke Kajiwara, Hiromitsu Shimakawa
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan
email:{kajiwara, simakawa}@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, more and more e-commerce sites
sell agricultural products. It should be noted that users have
preference of taste. They also have intention on what kinds of
agricultural products they get. They consider them at the time
of purchase of agricultural products in recommendation on e-
commerce sites. There are a number of studies on the automatic
extraction of preference of taste that users have from contexts on
the web. However, there has been no study that tries automatic
extraction of user intentions to purchase agricultural products
on e-shopping sites. E-shopping sites without consideration of
user intentions are likely to recommend agricultural products
far from what users want to buy. Confused users will never visit
such e-shopping site, again. We propose a model which estimates
intention level of users from web contents of e-commerce sites
and web browsing history of users. The proposed method refers
to the degree of user interest about a topic calculated from LDA
as the topic attention level. Based on the multivariate logistic
regression model, the method constructs an intention level model
from the topic attention level. An experiment suggests the method
can calculate the safety intention level, focusing on price of
agricultural products on web pages.
Keywords–recommendation; inclination; intention; preference;
agriculture; e-commerce site; browsing history.
I.
INTRODUCTION
More and more e-commerce sites sell agricultural products.
Sale of agricultural products on the Internet has several good
effects. Farmers can increase their sales. They are also moti-
vated through direct communications with consumers. Supply
of high-quality agricultural products provides them with good
brand impression [1]. E-commerce brings convenience of
direct delivery of agricultural products to consumer houses.
The elderly households are too weak to go out shopping
food. Households who have small children have no time to
go out for shopping. They are eager to buy food with Internet
[2]. On the other hand, farmers need efforts to make more
consumers visit their own sites to make success in e-commerce
selling agricultural products. Their e-commerce sites present
information which motivates consumers to purchase their
products. In addition to reviews, prices, and quantity like
general e-commerce sites, they have information on varieties
and palatability of products. They also present cultivation
methods to explain their cultivation policy [3].
Information motivating consumers to buy agricultural prod-
ucts varies with preference of consumers. The preference
is determined by various factors. For example, preference
on cooking with agricultural products ranges from foodstuff,
menu, mouthfeel, taste, seasoning and flavor [4]. Apart from
these, consumers have intentions on their peculiar ideas such
as safety and costs [5]. Some consumers give a higher priority
to safety and palatability than to prices, while others mind
prices rather than appearance. A combination of preference
and intentions of each consumer forms speciﬁc inclination
which regulates purchase behavior of the consumer. Farmers
need marketing activities to target consumers whose inclination
meets their cultivation policy. However, Japanese farmers en-
gaging in highly intensive agriculture cannot afford to consider
marketing activities because they are busy with cultivating
many kinds of crops. One possible solution to support attract-
ing consumers is Search Engine Optimization (SEO), which
makes the site appear more frequently in result list of Internet
search engines. However, the solutions cannot support the site
builders should make consumers interested in the sites so that
the consumers can buy agricultural products buy according to
their inclination. From the viewpoints of consumers, they want
to buy agricultural products from farmers whose cultivation
policy meets their own inclination. For example, consumers
with safety intentions would read politely safety explanations
of products in the e-commerce sites, because they want to
purchase safe products as possible, as far as their price
permits. They want to get foods free from pesticides. Trading
on the current e-commerce never considers coincidence of
farmer cultivation policy with inclination of consumers, when
customers search farmers optimal to them. In fact, consumers
must manually look for agricultural products ﬁtting their needs
from a lot of e-commerce sites, struggling with search engines.
However, search engines disappoint them many times, intro-
ducing sites which handle mismatching agricultural products.
This paper proposes a method to estimate inclination of
consumers, in order to recommend appropriate e-commerce
sites to them when they search farmers. The method utilizes
Web contents on the e-commerce sites and browsing history
of customers. The method ﬁgures out the distribution of
topics on farmer cultivation policies from a speciﬁc Web page
using the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). The paper refers
the product of the topic distribution and the browsing time
of the web pages as the topic attention level. The method
constructs an inclination level model using the topic attention
level as predictor variables, based on the multivariate logistic
regression. An experiment result suggests the method can
calculate the safety inclination level.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the
detail of inclination. The related works are also explained in
Section II. Section III describes the outline of the proposed
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

considered recommendation system. The proposed method to
estimate inclination is also described in Section III. Section
IV presents the results of experiments and evaluation. Section
V presents the discussion on improvement of the proposed
method. Finally, Section VI concludes this papers.
II.
PRODUCT INFORMATION MATCHING INCLINATION
Consumers have preference on agricultural products, such
as taste, appearance, flavor and so on. The preference is said
to differ by age, generation, gender, regions and occupations
[6]. In addition, consumers would stick to their peculiar ideas
such as safety and costs, when they choose products to buy.
Consumers generally determine products to buy with their
preference and intentions. The paper refers the combination
of preference and intentions of each consumer as inclination.
It usually regulates purchase behavior of the consumer.
There are studies on the estimation of consumer inclination
[7][8]. For the estimation, the studies oblige consumers to ﬁll
up questionnaires and proﬁle in free description. They analyze
results with text mining technologies to ﬁnd user inclina-
tion for agricultural products. However, consumer inclination
changes depending on fashion and trend. For example, users
minding safety, which means products are free from harmful
substance to eat, have greatly increased in Japan because of
the Fukushima nuclear accident. It is necessary to successively
examine consumer inclination because the thinking ways of
consumers vary from day to day. It is an unendurable for
consumers to ﬁll up questionnaires and proﬁles many times. A
new method is required to extract current inclination of each
consumer without bothering the consumer.
III.
RECOMMENDING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
MATCHING INCLINATION
We aim at detecting user inclinations from Web browsing
log before they decide which farming products they buy. It
does not make any sense to analyze huge data obtained after
they decide to buy. The log of URLs in Web browsing of
users is also insufﬁcient to achieve the aim above. We need to
analyze the contents to see what topics in the pages stimulate
the users. The LDA on the contents of Web pages they are
interested in enables us to identify their topics.
A. Outline of recommendation with extracted inclination
To extract inclination of consumers at the time, we use their
browsing history while they look for their favorite agricultural
products. We extract consumer inclination from Web pages
the consumer visits while he chooses agricultural products
in e-commerce sites. E-commerce sites present a variety of
Web pages. In the web pages, there are contents which
provide stimuli to consumers, because the contents match their
inclination. Inclination of each consumer is likely to appear
when he selects products. It seems that Web pages vary with
consumers because of their inclination. For example, it may
be supposed consumers who put importance to safety purchase
domestic or organic tomatoes. In this case, they are supposed
to investigate description on agricultural chemicals or product
places. On the other hand, consumers preferring economy to
safety purchases foreign tomatoes, because of low price. In this
case, consumers would browse pages of agricultural products
after they sort the pages in the decreasing order of the price. It
may be suspected that browsing time of Web pages gets long if
Browses the web page
Recommendation
browsing pages and  time
Getting browsing
history
Estimating user’s 
intention level
Calculating 
intention model
browsing history
user’s intention level
intention model
safety
domestic
locality economy
gourmet
Figure 1. System conﬁguration diagram
they have stimulated consumers. In the proposed method, we
estimate consumer inclination from topics described in each
Web page and the browsing time to read the Web page. In this
work, we focus on inclinations: safety, domestic production,
locality, economy, and gourmet from the survey results of
inclinations on foods [6] and the studies of selection criterion
at purchase of agricultural products [9]. As Figure 1 shows, the
paper proposes a method to build a model to estimate consumer
inclination from browsing history of the consumer to provide
him with agricultural product information. At ﬁrst, the method
extracts browsing pages and browsing time from a browsing
history when the consumer chooses agricultural products on
e-commerce sites. Second, it calculates the degree of how
much the consumer has each inclination. It refers to the degree
as the inclination level. Finally, the method recommends the
agricultural product information which suits his inclination.
There are various agricultural products. For example, or-
ganic tomatoes, fruit tomatoes, cherry tomatoes are classiﬁed
into the category of tomatoes. These categories are referred
to as product categories in the paper. Though consumers
searching products visit various sites, the method values pages
for a speciﬁc product category as item pages, rather than pages
showing lists of item pages, which are referred to as search
pages. Pages irrelevant to e-commerce sites such as Google
search and Wikipedia are referred to as other pages in the
paper. Item pages are classiﬁed into product categories, based
on words on their titles and contents. From browsing history
of each consumer, item pages are extracted for each product
category. As Figure 2 shows, the proposed method builds a
model to estimate the inclination of each consumer as follows.
1)
The item pages are regarded as a set of words
according to the Bag-of-words method [10]. The
topic distribution of the item pages is ﬁgured out
with the LDA. The proposed method calculates the
topic attention level with the product of the topic
distribution and the browsing time of each item page.
2)
The method selects important variables to calculate
the inclination level of the consumer.
3)
Using the inclination level, the method constructs an
inclination model for each consumer.
B. Weighted topic distribution
Through a morphologically analysis, the proposed method
divides a set of sentences in item pages into words. It makes
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Browsing pages and time
LDA
Topic distribution
Topic attention level
Word group
Intention model
Multivariate logistic 
regression
Intention of user
safety
economy
gourmet
1
0
1
Object variable
Bag of words
Questionnaire
Extraction
Explanatory variables
Comparison
Weighting
Figure 2. Proposed method
bag-of-words from nouns, adjectives and verbs which seem
to be related to inclination. Using the LDA [11], the method
acquires combinations of topic distribution and its word group
for each page. Though words in the item page are relate to
various kinds of inclination, the LDA allows to get topics
classiﬁed according to each inclination.
The proposed method uses browsing time to determine
whether the item page is related to a speciﬁc inclination or
not. The previous work [12] has clariﬁed a relationship of the
browsing time of a Web page to the degree of user interest.
LDA is a model which assumes the document is approved from
two or more topics. The degree of the interest to a document
is that to the topic on the document. The degree of the interest
to the topic of the page are related with user’s browsing time.
The words which relate to several kinds of intention may be
included in the e-commerce sites selling agricultural products.
However, if each page is weighted by browsing time, user’s
focus point of words of the page is not considered.
Words which relate to the intention should be classiﬁed
in one page. This technique subdivides words by a topic
distribution of each item page, which enables the acquisition
of the degree of each of the user’s intentions. Equation (1)
shows topic distribution the vectors Tcp.
Tcp = [Tcp1
· · ·
Tcpk
· · ·
TcpK]T
(1)
(1 ≤ c ≤ C), (1 ≤ k ≤ K), (1 ≤ p ≤ Pc)
where k, c, and p represent a speciﬁc topic, a speciﬁc product
category, and a speciﬁc page, respectively. K and C are the
number of topics and product categories, respectively. Pc is the
number of item pages which are contained in the c-th product
category. Tcpk is the k-th component of topic distribution of
the p-th page of the c-th product category. Equation (2) shows
vector Ic. Each component of it is a sum of Tcp weighted by
the browsing time of each page in each product category.
Ic = [Ic1
· · ·
Ick
· · ·
IcK]T =
Pc
∑
p=1
(Tcp)dcp
(2)
Ick is the weighted vector component relating to the k-th topic
of the c-th product category. dcp is the browsing time of the
p-th page belonging to the c-th product category. The more
pages belonging to the same commodity category the consumer
browses, the more Ickgrows. It is necessary to normalize Ick,
because the browsing time and the browsing count vary with
consumers. Equation (3) shows
S(Ick) which is calculated
with normalized Ick.
S(Ick) = Ick
|Ic|
(3)
In this work, we refer to S(Ick), which is extracted from each
product category as the topic attention level.
C. Selection of important variables
In Section III-C, we account for the explanatory variables
of the making model as shown in Section III-D. The topic with
difference of topic attention by the presence of the intention
is extracted. Equation (4) shows G{nck}, the set of the topic
attention level of each consumer.
G{nck} := {S(Ick)1, · · · , S(Ick)u, · · · , S(Ick)U}
(4)
(1 ≤ u ≤ U)
Whole users are divided into 2 groups: one with a speciﬁc
inclination and the other without it. In Equation (5) and (6),
X{nck} and Y {nck} show consumers with the n-th inclination
and without it, respectively.
X{nck} := {G{nck}|P({Gck})}
(5)
Y {nck} := {G{nck}|Q({Gck})}
(6)
P is the condition that the consumer does not has the inclina-
tion. Q is the condition that the consumer has the intention. n
and N corresponds to the n-th inclination and the number of it.
nck is the k-th topic of the c-th product category to correspond
to the n-th inclination. The method aims to build a model
to estimate inclination of unknown consumers. It assumes
inclination of several consumers is acquired beforehand by
questionnaires or interviews. Though it obliges some efforts on
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

some consumers, there is no burden on unknown consumers.
The method calculates difference of the topic attention level of
the group with the inclination and that without the inclination.
Let us focus on the difference of the topic attention levels
of the two groups. A large difference in a topic indicates the
group with the inclination pays their attention on the topic,
while the other group pays no attention on it. To examine the
difference of the topic attention level, the method uses median
values resistant to noises. Equation (7) and (8) calculate the
median values of the group with the inclination and the group
without it.
MedianX(nck) =
{x(a+1)/2,
if a is odd.
1
2(xa/2 + xa/2+1,
if a is even. (7)
MedianY (nck) =
{y(a+1)/2,
if a is odd.
1
2(ya/2 + ya/2+1,
if a is even.
(8)
Equation (9) shows diff(nck) which is the difference of
MedianX(nck) from MedianY (nck).
diff(nck) = MedianX(nck) − MedianY (nck)
(9)
Equation (10) shows Diffn which is the set of the difference
of the median for the n-th inclination.
Diffn := {diff(n11), · · · , diff(nCK)}
(10)
It seems that the median with great difference is an important
value to characterize a group of users who do not have
intention and a group of users who have intention. This method
picks out top R of large median difference in a positive
direction as Highn and lowest R of large median difference in
a negative direction as Lown in Diffn. Topics corresponding
to Highn is focused by the group with the n-th inclination,
but neglected by the group without it. Topics corresponding to
Lown mean the opposite case.
D. Construction of inclination model
The proposed method builds a model to estimate the
consumer intention level. The explanatory variable necessary
for the model is a topic attention level which belongs to Highn
and Lown in III-C. The object variable is the inclination of
each consumer. The method refers to it as an inclination level
model. The method applies the multivariate logistic regression
model, to make a good inclination level model. To improve the
performance of the model, the method excludes explanatory
variables belonging to Highn and Lown in a stepwise way.
The intention model distinguishes presence of a speciﬁc
inclination of an unknown consumer from his topic attention
level. The topics on each Web page are obtainable beforehand,
applying the LDA to the contents on e-commerce sites in
advance. What is required for the on-line calculation for the
inclination level of the consumer is only his browsing time.
IV.
EXPERIMENT
We experimented to verify the utility of the proposed
method. The experiment aims at
•
validation of efﬁciency of difference that user browses
topic by presence of the intention of the user, and
•
veriﬁcation of validity of intention level model.
A. Experiment method
We experimented about the purchase of agricultural prod-
ucts using e-commerce sites. The research participants were
17. We acquired the browsing history of the research par-
ticipant from beginning to the end of the experiment. We
had to make the research participants unaware of the costs
because that would have inﬂuenced their selection. We laid
out a situation as follows “I want to celebrate grandmother’s
sixty-ﬁrst birthday with about 10 relatives. My mother said that
I should cook for the grandmother. You don’t need to think
about money, because I’ll pay. I thought that I will try to cook
in grandmother’s house, but there is no supermarket nearby.
So, I decided to prepare foodstuff using e-commerce sites.”.
In addition, the grandmother said “I want to eat home-made
dish because I dislike ready-made one. I want you to buy rice
you recommend.”. Below are the proposed dishes: salad, rice
cooked with matsutake mashroom, boiled dishes, and meat
dish. The material necessary for dish is shown as follows:
tomato, cucumber, matutake, rice, radish, taro, chicken, and
meat. We presented the amount of the foodstuff necessary for
the dish and the recipe of the dish to research participants. We
speciﬁed e-commerce sites to buy agricultural products. We
permitted them to use retrieval engines on Internet to gather
information. Each of the user’s intentions was acquired in the
questionnaire. We made a questionnaire, creating an associ-
ation between the information that the research participants
are interested in e-commerce site and each intention referring
to result investigation of intention [6]. It seems that the user
who has gourmet intention takes an interest in palatability. For
example, information is presented on e-commerce sites such
as ”sugar concentrations are higher and sweeter than another”,
”taste becomes better than another by the cultivation method of
original” and ”agricultural products harvesting in the morning
are very fresh”. The user who has a gourmet intention is
attracted by the deliciousness or the sugar concentrations. It is
seems that the user who has an economy intention is attracted
by low price or large quantity. For example, information
about price and quantity are presented on e-commerce sites.
Therefore, the user who has an economy intention will browse
a page that contains a price or quantity. However, we only
asked research participants about whether or not they are
attracted by price because of the quantity of agricultural
products that they should buy were speciﬁed. Questionnaire
items for the safety intention, the domestic intention and the
locality intention are clear. After buying agricultural products,
we send out questionnaires of Table I. in three grades (yes,
no, unknown).
TABLE I. QUESTIONNAIRE ITEM
Intention
Questionnaire item
Q1. Did you interest in deliciousness of the testis?
Gourmet intention
Q2. Did you interest in freshness?
Safety intention
Q3. Did you interest in level of safety?
Domestic intention
Q4. Did you interest in domestic production?
Locality intention
Q5. Did you interest in producing area?
Economy intention
Q6. Did you interest in value?
B. Evaluation
1) Discriminating existence or nonexistence of user’s in-
tention by an intention level: Data to acquire topic attention
level are documents of item pages which are browsed by
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

17 research participants. The number of commodity page is
503. We classiﬁed those pages in the commodity category. In
addition, because the result that research participants bought
food stuff of meat dish are divided into pork and beef, we
classiﬁed them as a same commodity category. Sometimes,
information not related to the retrieval intention of the user
has been presented in item page. For example, there are
information on recommended commodity and the commodity
ranking of peculiar to sites. The documents were excluded
since these documents are not relate to user’s intention. The
review which contain on the item page was also excluded.
2) Extraction of topic from the item page: We applied the
method explained in III-B to classiﬁed item pages. Among
words which appear frequently, the intention is not considered
from words and symbol of the commodity category which
does not relate to the intention. A bag-of-words was prepared,
excluding these words. LDA is applied to the bag-of-words
using collapsed Gibbs sampling [13]. The scalar value of the
Dirichlet hyperparameter for topic proportions is 0.1. The beta
hyperparameter for each entry of the block relations matrix is
0.1. The number of trials is 30000. Among the 5 patterns (2,
4, 6, 8, 16 topics), 4 topics presented the best performance.
The top 5 words were selected from each of topics.
3) Acquisition of the user’s intention: Research participants
were responded to a questionnaire of Table I. If user answered
YES to the questionnaire of palatability and freshness, the user
is regarded to have gourmet intention.
C. Result
The method explained in paragraph III-B was applied to
extract the topic. Words were labeled based on generality.
1) Extraction of topic attention level: The method ex-
plained in paragraph III-C was applied to extract the topic
attention level. Figure 3 shows the median of extracted topic
attention level. Table II shows the result of the questionnaire
about an intention. ○ is yes. X is no. △ is unknown.
TABLE II. RESULT OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE ABOUT AN INTENTION
User
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Q1.
○
○
○
○
○
○
○
X
○
○
○
○
△
○
△
○
X
Q2.
○
○
X
○
○
○
○
△
X
X
△
X
○
○
○
○
△
Q3.
△
X
○
○
○
○
△
△
○
X
X
X
X
○
○
○
○
Q4.
○
○
○
○
△
○
○
○
○
X
○
○
○
○
○
○
○
Q5.
○
○
X
○
○
○
○
△
○
X
X
○
X
X
○
○
○
Q6.
○
X
○
X
○
○
○
X
△
○
○
X
○
○
X
X
○
2) Discriminating existence or nonexistence of user’s in-
tention by an intention level: We have veriﬁed whether we
can discriminate user’s each intention existence from user’s
intention level by the intention model which is explained in
paragraph III-D. The Table III shows result of the multivariate
logistic regression model. The signiﬁcance level is less than
5%. The signiﬁcance level (0.042) of a topic intention relating
a value about a safety intention is extracted from result of the
multivariate logistic regression model. The signiﬁcance level
(0.042) is a signiﬁcant value. This result suggests that a safety
intention is connected with topics of price. The signiﬁcance
level of each intention except a safety intention has been low.
The signiﬁcant value to estimate user’s intention was not found
by an intention model.
TABLE III. RESULT OF THE MULTIVARIATE LOGISTIC REGRESSION
MODEL
Intention
Label
Estimate
Std.Error
z value
P r(> |z|)
agricultural chemical
cultivation method
44.99
20068.94
0.002
0.998
brand
-494.47
168178.07
-0.003
0.998
domestic
domestic, high quality
cook
1074.23
358333.88
0.003
0.998
deliciousness
-898.71
305721.58
-0.003
0.998
AIC
12.773
cook
30.8814
21.4463
1.44
0.1499
gourmet
AIC
18.025
agricultural chemical
cultivation method
-7001
741189
-0.009
0.992
economy
deliciousness
-23338
2467722
-0.009
0.992
locality, value
5922
626767
0.009
0.992
AIC
8
domestic
2.802
1.984
1.412
0.1579
safety
value
6.75
3.32
2.033
0.042
AIC
20.537
locality
-3.823
2.396
-1.596
0.111
locality
deliciousness
8.476
6.372
1.33
0.183
AIC
20.306
V.
DISCUSSION
A. Discussion of the intention model
The signiﬁcant value to estimate user’s intention has not
found by an intention model. In this work, it is assumed user’s
intention is relate to browsing pages of time and contents.
The longer users browse pages, the more they are interest
in the pages. However, the time changes, depending on how
to browse the page. The weighting is considered as one of
the causes which makes the signiﬁcance probability low. The
proposed method decides weight without considering how
to scan the page. It is investigated that the inspection time
changes depending on how to scan the page. The examination
method focuses on how to browse page using tab or click. The
Table IV shows the counts of how to browse page using tab
or click. If the frequency in which the page is opened with
TABLE IV. THE COUNTS OF HOW TO BROWSE PAGE USING TAB OR CLICK
User
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Click 59 1
0
1
42 18 13 1
18 0
13 21 0
1
16 20 18
Tab
9
19 21 66 1
0
3
39 0
24 0
1
53 36 1
2
0
a new tab is smaller than that with the current tab, we call
those users a “Click type”, otherwise “Tab type”. The click
type are 2, 3, 4, 8, 10, 13 and 14, while the Tab type is 5, 6,
7, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16 and 17. The Table V shows the difference
between the average of the browsing time from the average of
the browsing frequency. It can be said that browsing time and
counts of the tab type are larger than that of the click type.
The difference at the browsing time appears in how to scan the
page. It is necessary to consider the method of the scanning
of the individual when weighting to topics using browsing
time. It can be expected that the higher degree of ﬁt model
is constructed, considering the method of the scanning.
TABLE V. THE AVERAGE OF THE BROWSING TIME AND THE AVERAGE OF
THE BROWSING FREQUENCY
Tab type
Click type
Average of browsing time(second)
51.945
42.354
Average of browsing frequency(second)
1.935
1.457
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
deliciousness
plant varieties
organic farming, soil
deliciousness
locality, price
unknown
unknown
chemical, freshness
locality
foreign, amount
brand
domestic
chemical, organic
method, locality
chemical, inspection
locality, brand
method, chemical
method, chemical
locality
locality
locality, cook
brand
locality, price
reputation
method
brand, cook
locality
domestic
brand
cook
domestic, quality
price
median
label
Figure 3. Median of extracted topic attention level
B. Acquisition of Web browsing history
The proposed method needs access to the web history of
users. It might sound a rather demanding assumption. Users
agreeing to the method are assumed to install an application
to collect Web browsing histories. It is a trade-off between
their advantages and disadvantages. We should consider two
kinds of disadvantages: a burden to install the application, and
a risk to expose their privacy. On the other hand, the users
are released from stresses coming from recommendation of
irrelevant information. We thought the advantages are greater
than the disadvantages.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The present paper estimated an intention level to present the
information based on consumer intention on e-commerce sites.
In this method, we extracted item pages which are contained
each commodity using browsing history. We prepared a bag-
of-words from documents which are contained item pages. We
applied LDA to the bag-of-words to extract topic distribution.
We extracted topic attention level by weighting browsing time
and topic distribution. We constructed the intention model us-
ing the multivariate logistic regression model by an important
topic attention level and user’s intention. The user’s intention
is estimated from a topic attention level with the intention
model in an experiment. The signiﬁcance level is less than
5%. The signiﬁcance level (0.042) of a topic intention relating
a value about a safety intention was extracted from result
of the multivariate logistic regression model. To improve ﬁt
degree, we consider transition of the pages. In addition, the
questionnaire items do not necessarily correspond to separate
categorize item pages. We plan to review the questionnaire.
REFERENCES
[1]
Japan Finance Corporation: Survey of sixth sector industrialization
in agriculture, https://www.jfc.go.jp/n/ﬁndings/pdf/topics 111202 1.pdf
[retrieved: March, 2015] (in Japanese).
[2]
JC
general
research:
Survey
results
of
the
consumption
behavior
of
vegetables
and
fruits,
http://www.jc-so-
ken.or.jp/pdf/agri/investigate/141203 01.pdf [retrieved: March, 2015]
(in Japanese).
[3]
Agriculture,
forestry
and
ﬁsheries.
Information
Exchange
Network
Business:
Survey
results
of
awareness
and
intention
on
the
production
and
distribution
information
of
vegetables,
http://www.maff.go.jp/j/ﬁnding/mind/pdf/20040820cyosa.pdf
[retrieved: March, 2015] (in Japanese).
[4]
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries: Japanese preference and
taste, http://www.maff.go.jp/j/keikaku/syokubunka/culture/mikaku.html
[retrieved: March, 2015] (in Japanese).
[5]
Japan
Finance
Corporation:
Survey
of
food
intention:
https://www.jfc.go.jp/n/ﬁndings/pdf/topics 140911a.pdf
[retrieved:
March, 2015] (in Japanese).
[6]
Yamaguchi. K, and Takahashi. C, Studies on the Preference of Foods :
Part 2 : Relationship between the attribute and the preference of food,
Cookery Science 15.2, 1982, pp. 104-113.
[7]
Isojima. A, Analysis of Consumers Needs for Agricultural Products by
Using Text Mining, National Agriculture and Food Research Organiza-
tion Vol.16, No.4, 2010, pp. 38-42.
[8]
Isojima. A, Analysis of a Consumer Questionnaire Pertaining to Rice
by using Text Mining. Agricultural Information Research. Vol.15, No.1,
2006, pp. 49.
[9]
Isojima. A, Consumer Perceptions and Selection Standards Rice Pur-
chases : An Investigation into Consumer Considerations, Japanese
Journal of Farm Management Vol. 36, No. 3, 1999, pp. 22-32.
[10]
C. D. Manning, H. Schutze, “Foundations of statistical natural language
processing.” MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999, pp. 235-260.
[11]
D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation.” the
Journal of machine Learning research 3, 2003, pp. 993-1022.
[12]
Morita. M, and Yoichi. S, “Information ﬁltering based on user behavior
analysis and best match text retrieval.” Proceedings of the 17th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 1994, pp. 272-
281.
[13]
T. L. Grifﬁths, M. Steyvers, “Finding scientiﬁc topics.” Proceedings
of the National academy of Sciences of the United States of America
101.Suppl 1, 2004, pp. 5228-5235.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

