Ontology-based Mobile Smart Museums Service 
Approach for small & medium museums 
 
Alexander Smirnov, Nikolay Shilov, Alexey Kashevnik 
Laboratory of Computer Aided Integrated Systems 
St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation of Russian Academy Science 
39, 14 Line, St. Petersburg, Russia 
smir@iias.spb.su, nick@iias.spb.su, alexey@iias.spb.su 
 
 
Abstract—The proposed service suggest the visitor a museum 
which is currently better to attend, based on visitor preferences 
and current situation in the region. For this purpose, smart 
environments of region museums have to be organized. The 
smart environment is a decentralized infrastructure which 
allows different devices to share required information between 
them. Every user of the smart museum service has a mobile 
device connected to the smart environment. This mobile device 
communicates with other devices of the smart environment to 
suggest the best museum for attending at the moment, and 
prepares an excursion plan for this museum. Prepared 
excursion plan based on the visitor’s preferences, the current 
amount of visitors in each museum room and other context 
information 
(closed 
exhibits, 
reconstructions, 
seasonal 
exhibitions and other) acquired from Internet and intranet 
services. Proposed service increases popularity of small and 
medium museums in the world, reduces traffic jams in 
museum rooms, and allow museum visitor to plan his/her time 
more efficiency way. 
Keywords-knowledge management; ontologies; Internet 
services; user profiles; smart environment; decentralized 
architecture; indoor positioning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The paper extends the approach to context-oriented 
knowledge management for supporting visitors through their 
mobile device in museum smart environment (presented in 
AFIN 2011 conference [1]) to assist visitors in an area with 
several museums. 
Recently, the tourist business has become more and more 
popular. People travel around the world and visit museums 
and other places of interests. They have a restricted amount 
of time and usually would like to see many museums. 
Proposed service increases popularity of small and medium 
museums in the world. However, overwhelming majority of 
these museums has limited space for visitors causing 
accumulation of visitors and increasing waiting time for 
them. 
In this regard an approach is needed, which allows 
assisting visitors (using their mobile devices), in planning 
their museum attending time and excursion plans depending 
on the context information about the current situation in the 
museum (amount of visitors around exhibits, closed exhibits, 
reconstructions and other) and visitor’s preferences. 
Usually, smart and medium museums have a limited 
amount of money and often purchasing a set of expensive 
audio guides is not possible for them. 
The main benefit of the presented approach is assisting 
visitors in the museum smart environment using personal 
mobile devices. Such mobile devices should have Wi-Fi 
connection and possibility to show appropriate information 
to visitors. 
Main problems of the approach are: 
- 
To 
organize 
information 
sharing 
possibilities 
between different devices in museum; 
- 
To determine indoor position of the visitor; 
- 
Tto develop context driven ontology-based approach 
for assisting visitors in museum. 
The smart environment is an aggregation of devices, 
which can interact with each other and use pertinent services 
regardless of their physical location. Such technology has a 
decentralized architecture and allows seamless integration 
with other systems, services, and program modules. 
Decentralized smart environment in the proposed 
approach allows mobile device of every visitor acquire 
information from other visitor’s mobile devices and services 
(e.g., museum services or external services) and based on 
this context information make own decision about the best 
excursion plan for this visitor taking into account visitor’s 
preferences. 
Research efforts in the area of the smart environment 
have become very popular recently. Such topics of research 
as smart home, smart car, etc. are widely discussed on 
research conferences (e.g., Smart Homes [2], RuSMART 
[3]). In such systems all elements have to interact and 
coordinate their behavior without any user intervention. 
Modern tendencies of information & communication 
technologies require development of stable and reliable 
infrastructures to extract and keep different kinds of 
information and knowledge from various members of the 
smart environment. The smart environment assumes more 
than one device that uses common resources and services. 
One of the most appropriate approaches to implement such 
infrastructure is applying knowledge management systems. 
There is a large amount of research works in the area of 
indoor positioning, e.g., Google Indoor Maps [4], Qubulus 
indoor positioning [5], Walkbase indoor positioning platform 
[6], Ericsson Labs [7], Intel Place Lab [8]. Broadcom 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

introduces new GPS chip (BCM4752), offering a platform 
for development of indoor positioning applications [9]. 
Our experiments show that it is possible to determine 
visitor’s position in the museum using Wi-Fi with accuracy 
of 2-3 meters. For this purpose, a set of Wi-Fi hot spots 
should be placed in a certain way. 
Museums of a certain area can be considered as a smart 
environment where each exhibit, group of exhibits, or 
museum is represented by a service or a set of services. Each 
device can interact with these services and with other 
devices. The visitor’s mobile devices interacts with each 
other and with different services in museum smart 
environment and provides the visitor with an acceptable plan 
of museum attendance, excursions inside museums based on 
the museum context (amount of visitors at exhibits, closed 
exhibits, reconstructions and other) and visitor’s preferences.  
Visitor’s mobile device can also provide textual, 
graphical, video and audio information about the exhibition 
for the visitor in his/her language. 
The following scenario can be considered. A tourist 
arrives to St. Petersburg. He/she is going to attend the 
Hermitage, the Museum of Karl May Gymnasium History, 
Dostoevsky museum. The tourist adds his/her interests to the 
user profile within the intelligent museum visitor’s support 
system. The intelligent museum guide suggests the visitor to 
see the St. Isaac Cathedral and Kunstkamera too. It proposes 
the visitor to attend at first day the Hermitage, because it is 
Wednesday (usually on Wednesdays the Hermitage is less 
crowded). When the visitor’s mobile device connects to the 
museum smart environment, acquires current situation in 
preferable for the visitor museums and proposes to attend the 
Dostoevsky museum and Kunstkamera. When the visitor 
approaches the exhibit he/she gets audio, textual and video 
information about it from appropriate services through the 
Internet or intranet. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents an overview of mobile museum guides systems and 
indoor positioning systems. Section III introduces developed 
approach to knowledge management in museums smart 
environment. Information model of museum visitor’s profile 
is given in Section IV. The case study can be found in 
Section V. Main results are summarized in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are several research works and projects related to 
assisting visitor in museum and providing information about 
museum exhibition. The following ones are worth to be 
mentioned. 
Google Art Project [10] is a tool from Google that lets 
user visit world’s most important museums of art, via a 
virtual tour. The Art Project is available for more than a 
thousand works of art. 
The overall objective of the SMARTMUSEUM project 
[11] is to develop a platform for innovative services 
enhancing on-site personalized access to digital cultural 
heritage through adaptive and privacy preserving user 
profiling.  
The main research activity of HIPS project [12] is 
development of an approach for navigating artistic physical 
spaces (i.e., museums, art exhibitions). The system is meant 
to provide the visitor with personalized information about the 
relevant artworks nearby. The information is mainly audio in 
order to let the user enjoy the artworks rather than interacting 
with the tool. 
Bohnert et al. [13] describe a system for providing a 
visitor with a challenge of selecting the interesting exhibits 
to view within the available time. It includes the 
recommendation and personalization process, i.e., the 
prediction of the visitor’s interests and locations in a 
museum on the basis of observed behavior. 
Kuflik et al. [14] describe an approach for supporting 
users in their ongoing museum experience, by modeling the 
visitors, “remembering” their history and recommending a 
plan for future visits. This approach identifies some of the 
technical challenges for such personalization, in terms of the 
user modeling, ontologies, infrastructure and generation of 
personalized content. 
Project CRUMPET [15] has realized a personalized, 
location-aware tourism service, implemented as a multi-
agent system with a concept of service mediation and 
interaction facilitation. It has had two main objectives: to 
implement and trial tourism-related value-added  services for 
nomadic users across mobile and fixed networks, and to 
evaluate agent technology in terms of user-acceptability, 
performance and best-practice as a suitable approach for fast 
creation of robust, scalable, seamlessly accessible nomadic 
services. 
Existing systems don’t take into account information 
about the current situation in the museum, and they are 
oriented to assist user only in one museum whereas the 
proposed approach allows monitoring the current situation in 
several museums and its using for visitor assistance. Also, 
the approach presented in the paper allows using visitor’s 
mobile device for assisting the user. It is not needed to 
provide special equipment for museums. 
Therefore, the indoor positioning problem needs to be 
considered. 
F. Bohnert et al. [16] mentioned that there are two major 
schemes of indoor positioning: signal propagation and 
location fingerprinting. They have proposed several 
algorithms (based on both schemes) for indoor positioning 
and compared it. Each algorithm has advantages and 
drawbacks described in the paper in detail. 
In [17] T. Kuflik et al. present Wi-Fi-based indoor 
positioning technique with position accuracy of one to three 
meters. The technique was tested on the Nokia 770 Internet 
tablet. 
Place Lab [8] project’s aim is to determine user location 
indoor and outdoor. Technically, the system is based on 
radio beacons, which periodically sent radio signals by 
Wireless LAN access points, fixed Bluetooth stations, and 
GSM towers. Accuracy of the presented approach is 13-30 
meters. 
EZ Localization algorithm is presented in [18]. It is a 
configuration-free indoor localization scheme that uses 
existing Wi-Fi infrastructure to localize mobile devices. The 
accuracy of EZ approach is about 2 meters. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

The Horus [19] is a WLAN Location Determination 
system characterized by high accuracy: through a 
probabilistic location determination technique and low 
computational requirements: through the use of clustering 
techniques. 
RADAR [20] is a radio-frequency based system for 
locating and tracking users inside buildings. RADAR is 
based on empirical signal strength measurements as well as a 
simple yet effective signal propagation model. Accuracy of 
the RADAR is a few meters. 
In [21], an indoor localization application leveraging the 
sensing capabilities of the current state of the art smart 
phones is presented. Application is implemented for the 
using on smart phones and it integrates offline and online 
phases of fingerprinting. Accuracy of presented approach is 
up to 1.5 meters. 
There are many systems and services which solve the 
problem of indoor positioning. Some considered papers 
propose algorithms and some propose the complete services 
or applications which can be used for determining indoor 
position. 
III. 
ONTOLOGICAL APPROACH OF SMART MUSEUMS 
SERVICE 
The approach presented in the paper relies on the 
ontological knowledge representation. The conceptual model 
of the proposed ontological approach is based on the earlier 
developed ideas of knowledge logistics [22]. In this work, 
the ontology is used to describe knowledge and information 
in the smart environment. It allows providing interoperability 
between different devices in smart environment. 
The architecture of the approach is presented in Figure 1. 
Mobile devices interact with each other through the smart 
environment. Every visitor installs smart environment client 
to the mobile device. This client shares needed information 
with other mobile devices in the smart environment. So, each 
mobile device can acquire only shared information from 
other mobile devices. When the visitor registers in the 
service, his/her mobile device creates the visitor’s profile 
(which is stored in a cloud and contains long-term context 
information of the visitor). This profile allows specifying and 
complements visitor requirements in the smart environment 
and personifying the information and knowledge flow from 
the service to the visitor. Utilizing of clouds for keeping user 
profiles allows visitors to change their mobile devices 
without loosing any settings for using the system. As clouds 
keep only user profiles, which consist of small amount of 
data, it is not needed to think about performance of this 
access.  
 
Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed approach 
Each time when the visitor appears in the smart environment, 
the mobile device shares information from the visitor’s 
profile with other devices. 
Visitor 
context 
accumulates 
and 
stores 
current 
information about the visitor in the smart environment 
(current visitor context). It includes: 
- 
Visitor location; 
- 
Museum reaching times for the visitor; 
- 
Current weather (in case of rain it is better to attend 
indoor museums); 
- 
Visitor role (e.g., tourist, school teacher); 
- 
Information about closed at the moment museums or 
exhibits; 
For getting external information for different system 
modules, the services are used. Four types of services are 
proposed: 
- 
Positioning service (calculates current indoor and 
outdoor positions of the visitor based on raw data 
provided by visitor mobile device); 
- 
Information service (provides visitor mobile device 
with needed information about exhibits, e.g., 
Wikipedia, Google Art Project, other information 
services, museum internal information services); 
- 
Current situation service (provides information about 
the current situation in the region, e.g., weather, GIS 
information, traffic information); 
- 
Museum / exhibition (provides information related 
to the museum and exhibits, e.g., holidays, closed 
exhibits). 
The proposed ontological approach to Smart Museums 
Service is presented in Figure 2. 
Each visitor has a mobile device, which communicates 
with mobile devices of other visitors (shares own 
information to them and gets needed information), uses 
different services for getting and processing information, 
accesses and manages the visitor’s profile, and processes 
information and knowledge stored in visitor context. 
Visitor’s profile and context have stored in the cloud, 
which allows visitors to access them from any internet 
enabled devices (when the visitor changes his/her mobile 
device it is needed only to install the appropriate software to 
use the new device). Also, clouds allow transferring complex 
calculations from mobile devices to the clouds. 
The visitor context is formed based on the interaction 
process between the visitor’s mobile device and different 
services through the smart environment. The context is the 
description of the visitor’s task in terms of the ontology 
taking into consideration the current situation in the museum. 
Visitor’s task in the proposed approach is a list of museums 
the visitor would like to attend. 
Ontology in the smart environment is used for the 
interoperability support of different mobile devices and 
services. It describes the main terms used for the museum 
smart environment description and relationships between 
them. Mobile devices and services use the ontology for the 
information and knowledge exchange. 
The following scenario for using the proposed service is 
considered. 
Visitor 
Mobile Device 
 
Visitor’s Profile 
Visitor Context 
 
Smart 
Environment 
Cloud 
Services 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

  
 
Figure 2. Ontological Approach of Smart Museums Service 
A visitor arrives to a region. His/her mobile device finds 
the museums the visitor is going to attend in this region 
(stored in the visitor’s profile). The mobile device generates 
the context, which describes the current situation of this 
region. It connects to different services to extract information 
about interesting museums (working time, closed museums, 
closed exhibitions, statistical occupancy of interesting 
museums for the next few days) and propose to the visitor 
preliminary interested museums attending plan. 
When the visitor is going to attend the museum (next 
day), the mobile device updates the context by current 
situation in the region, e.g.: weather (in case of rain it is 
better to postpone attending outdoor museums), traffic 
situation on the roads, current museum occupancy, and 
expected museum occupancy (based on communicating with 
mobile devices of other visitors). Based on this information, 
the corrected museum attending plan can be proposed to the 
visitor. 
When the visitor enters the museum an acceptable path 
for visiting museum rooms is built based on the museum 
room occupancies at the moment. Using location service and 
Wi-Fi infrastructure the mobile device calculates the visitor’s 
location and shares it with other devices. Information about 
exhibits is acquired from the information service and 
displayed on the visitor’s mobile device. 
IV. 
VISITOR’S PROFILE 
Most of user profile models include such information as: 
first name, last name, gender, date of birth, languages, and 
contact information and user position. This information is 
also important for intelligent museum visitor’s support. 
Based on this information the service can update the 
excursion plan for the visitor. The visitor can hide his/her 
personal information from other visitors for privacy 
purposes. It is stored in the “Personal Information” module 
(Figure 3). 
Museum visitors can have different roles (e.g., individual 
visitor, family, group of schoolchildren and other). 
Intelligent museum visitor support system can take into 
account this information for building the plan of the 
excursion. Some parts of the visitor’s profile can be hidden 
from other visitors (for example, if the visitor would like to 
attend museum anonymously). For this purpose the visitor 
has to choose which information can be accessible to other 
devices. It is needed to provide the system with information 
about visitor’s hardware and software capabilities, because 
based on this information the system suggests the visitor 
which types of exhibit descriptions (audio, video, textual) 
he/she can use. This information is stored in the “System 
Information” module (Figure 3). 
 
Profile 
Context 
Mobile device 1 
Visitor 1 
Cloud 1 
Services 
Positioning 
Information 
Current situation 
Museum / Exhibition 
 
 
Cloud i 
Cloud n 
Visitor i 
Visitor n 
Mobile device n 
Mobile device i 
Smart Environment 
Ontology 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
Figure 3. Model of museum visitor’s profile in intelligent museum visitor’s support system 
Since the proposed service is context-oriented, it is 
necessary to determine the location of the visitor in time. For 
this purpose the module “Context Information” is proposed. 
For building an acceptable plan of the excursion the service 
needs information about exhibits preferred by the visitor: 
types of exhibits (paintings, ancient items and other), styles 
of exhibits (modern, impressionism and other), and 
mandatory exhibits the visitor has to see (e.g., Benois 
Madonna, the Hermitage). Also, the visitor’s profile has to 
keep the long-term context information about preferable 
types of exhibit description (audio, video or/and textual), 
excursion duration (how much time the visitor can spend at 
this museum), exhibit occupancies (in case of high 
occupancy of an exhibit the visitor might prefer to skip this 
exhibit or to try to see it later). 
To keep the history of interaction between the visitor’s 
device and the museum smart environment for its further 
analysis, all excursions of this visitor, including the museum 
name, date, plan of the excursion, visitor’s feedback about 
the excursion, and the visitor’s context at the moment of 
excursion are stored in the visitor’s profile. Based on this 
information, the visitor’s preferences and preferred exhibits 
can be semi-automatically identified using ontology-based 
clustering mechanisms described in [23]. 
V. 
CASE STUDY 
The intelligent museum visitor’s support system has been 
implemented based on the proposed approach. Maemo 5 OS 
– based devices (Nokia N900) and Python language are used 
for implementation. 
An open source software platform (Smart-M3) [26] that 
aims to provide a Semantic Web information sharing 
infrastructure between software entities and devices is used 
for system implementation. In this platform the ontology is 
represented via RDF triples. Communication between 
software entities is developed via Smart Space Access 
Protocol (SSAP) [26]. 
Different entities of the system are interacting with each 
other through the smart environment using the ontology. 
Each device has a part of this ontology and after connecting 
to smart environment it shares a part of the own ontology 
with the smart environment. 
The system has been partly implemented in the Museum 
of Karl May Gymnasium History [27] located in St. 
Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation Russian 
Academy of Science building. 
The visitor downloads software for getting intelligent 
museum visitors support. Installation of this software takes 
few minutes depending on operating system of mobile 
device (at the moment only Maemo 5 OS is supported). 
When the visitor runs the system for the first time the profile 
has to be completed. This procedure takes not more than 10 
minutes.The visitor can fill the profile or can use a default 
profile. In case of default profile the system can not propose 
preferred exhibitions to the visitor. 
Response time of the Internet services depends on the 
Internet connection speed in the museum, number of people 
connected to the network, and workload of the services. 
Average response time should not exceed one second. 
A museum attending plan is presented in Figure 4. It 
consists of five museums: the Hermitage, Kunstkamera, the 
Museum of Karl May Gymnasium History, St. Isaac 
Cathedral, Dostoevsky museum. 
Three top screenshots (Figure 5) present the visitor’s 
profile. According to the model of museum visitor’s profile 
in intelligent museum visitor’s support system it consists of 
personal information, system information and visitor 
preferences (preferred exhibits and other preferences). The 
fourth screenshot shows an exhibit description acquired from 
an external Internet service (e.g., Wikipedia). 
Excursions History 
 
Excursion i 
Museum 
Date 
Plan of the Excursion 
Visitor Feedback 
Visitor Context 
Personal Information 
ID 
First and Last Name 
Gender 
Date of Birth 
Languages 
Phone 
E-Mail 
Position 
System Information 
Role 
Access Rights 
Hardware & Software 
Preferred Exhibits 
Types of Exhibits 
Style of Exhibits 
Mandatory Exhibits 
Preferences 
Exhibit Descriptions 
Excursion Durations 
Exhibit Occupancies 
Context Information 
Location 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
Figure 4. A smaple of museum attending plan in a visitor mobile device in the center of St. Petersburg. 
 
Figure 5. A sample of visitor’s profile and exhibition description on the visitor mobile device. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The paper presents an innovative ontology-based 
approach to mobile smart museums service for supporting 
visitors in museum smart environment in a region using their 
mobile devices. This approach allows devices of different 
visitors to interact with each other for the purpose of 
generating personal museums attending plan and guiding 
visitor in the area of museum. User profiles allow keeping 
important information about the visitor and using it in the 
smart environment. 
Since there is no the centralized server in the proposed 
system, the performance is affected by the number of visitors 
indirectly. If there are many visitors using the system, the 
bottleneck of the system performance will be network 
capacity and Internet services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The paper is a part of the research carried out within the 
ENPI project KA322 Development of cross-border e-tourism 
framework for the programme region (Smart e-Tourism); 
projects funded by grants # 12-07-00298-a, 11-07-00045-a, 
and 10-07-00368-а of the Russian Foundation for Basic 
Research; project # 213 of the research program “Intelligent 
information technologies, mathematical modeling, system 
analysis and automation” of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences; project 2.2 of the Nano- & Information 
Technologies Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences; 
and contract # 14.740.11.0357 of the Russian program 
“Research and Research-Human Resources for Innovating 
Russia in 2009-2013”. 
The Hermitage 
Kunstkamera 
Dostoevsky 
museum 
Isaac 
Cathedral 
Gymnasium of Karl 
May History Museum 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

REFERENCES 
[1] A. Smirnov, N. Shilov, and A. Kashevnik, Context-Oriented 
Knowledge Management for Intelligent Museum Visitors 
Support, The Third International Conference on Advances in 
Future Internet (AFIN 2011), August 21-27, 2011 Saint 
Laurent du Var, France, pp. 120-125. 
[2] Smart 
Homes 
international 
conference, 
URL: 
http://www.smarthomes2011.com/, 
last 
access 
date: 
06.06.2012. 
[3] RuSMART international conference, URL: http://rusmart.e-
werest.org/2011.html, last access date: 06.06.2012. 
[4] Google 
Indoor 
Maps, 
electronic 
resource, 
2012: 
http://support.google.com/gmm/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer
=1685872. 
[5] Qubulus indoor positioning homepage, electronic resource, 
2012: http://www.qubulus.com/. 
[6] Walkbase indoor positioning platform, electronic resource 
2012: http://walkbase.com/. 
[7] Ericsson 
Labs, 
electronic 
recourse, 
2012: 
https://labs.ericsson.com/apis/indoor-maps-and-
positioning/documentation. 
[8] D. Kölsch, The Place Lab Project, Mobile Business Seminar, 
2006. 
[9] EE 
Dailynews, 
2012, 
electronic 
resource: 
http://www.eedailynews.com/2012/03/broadcom-introduces-
new-gps-chip.html. 
[10] N. Proctor, The Google Art Project: a new generation of 
museums on the web?, Curator: The Museum Journal, vol. 54, 
Issue 2, pages 215–221, april 2011 
[11] A. Kuusik, S. Roche, and F. Weis, SMARTMUSEUM: 
Cultural Content Recommendation System for Mobile Users, 
ICCIT2009 (IEEE/ACM) Int Conference on Computer 
Sciences and Convergence Information Technology, Seoul, 
Korea, Nov 2009. 
[12] A. Bianchi and M. Zancanaro, “Tracking Users' Movements 
in an Artistic Physical Space,” Proc. of the i3 Annual 
Conference. 1999, pp. 103–106. 
[13] F. Bohnert, I. Zukerman, and S. Berkovsky, T. Baldwin, and 
L. Sonenberg, “Using Interest and Transition Models to 
Predict Visitor Locations in Museums,” AI Communications, 
vol. 21(2-3), Apr. 2008, pp. 195–202. 
[14] T. Kuflik, J. Kay, and B. Kummerfeld, “Lifelong Personalized 
Museum Experiences,” Proc. Pervasive User Modeling and 
Personalization (PUMP'10), June 2010, pp. 9–16. 
[15] B. Schmidt-Belz, A. Zipf, H. Laamanen, and S. Poslad, 
“Location-based 
Mobile 
Tourist 
Services: 
First 
User 
Experiences,” International Conference for Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism, 2003, pp. 115–123. 
[16] B. Li, J. Salter, A. Dempster, and C. Rizos, Indoor Positioning 
Techniques Based on Wireless LAN, first IEEE international 
conference on wireless broadband and ultra wideband 
communications, 2008. 
[17] M. Hermersdorf, Indoor Positioning with a WLAN Access 
Point List on a Mobile Device, proc. Workshop on 
WorldSensorWeb, 2006. 
[18] K. Chintalapudi, A. Iyer, and V. Padmanabhan, Indoor 
Localization Without the Pain, Proceedings of the sixteenth 
annual international conference on Mobile computing and 
networking, 2010. 
[19] M. Youssef, and A. Agrawala, The Horus WLAN Location 
Determination System, Journal Wireless Networks, vol. 14 
Issue 3, pp. 357-374, 2008. 
[20] P. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan, RADAR: An In-Building RF-
based User Location and Tracking System, Proceedings of 
IEEE Infocom, 2000. 
[21] E. Martin, O. Vinyals, G. Friedland, and Ruzena Bajcsy, 
Precise Indoor Localization Using Smart Phones, Proceedings 
of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 
Florence, Italy, pp. 787-790, 2010. 
[22] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, N. Chilov, T. Levashova, and A. 
Krizhanovsky, “Knowledge Logistics as an Intelligent Service 
for Healthcare,” Methods of Information in Medicine, vol. 44, 
no 2, 2005, pp. 262–264. 
[23] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, T. Levashova, A. Kashevnik, and N. 
Shilov, “Context-Driven Decision Mining,” Encyclopedia of 
Data 
Warehousing 
and 
Mining, 
Information 
Science 
Preference, Second Edition, vol. 1, 2008, pp. 320–327. 
[24] D. 
Signore, 
“Ontology 
Driven 
Access 
to 
Museum 
Information, “Annual Conference of the International 
Committee for Documentation of the International Council of 
Museums, May 2005. 
[25] H. Mareka and W. Ron, “Ontology-based user modeling, in 
an augmented audio reality system for museums, “ User 
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 15(3-4), 2005, 
pp. 339–380. 
[26] J. Honkola, H. Laine, R. Brown, and O. Tyrkko, “Smart-M3 
information sharing platform,” The 1st Int’l Workshop on 
Semantic Interoperability for Smart Spaces (SISS 2010), June 
2010. 
[27] Gymnasium of Karl May History Museum web page: 
http://www.spiiras.nw.ru/modules.php?name=Content&pa=sh
showpa&pid=8 (In Russian, last access date: 03.06.2011). 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-211-0
AFIN 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

