Contention Aware Routing for Intermittently Connected Mobile Networks
Ahmed Elwhishi∗, pin Han Ho ∗, K. NaiK∗, and Basem Shihada†
∗Dept of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Email: { aelwhish@engmail, p4ho@engmail, S.Naik@ece}.uwaterloo.ca
†Department of Computer Science, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
Email: basem.shihada@kaust.edu.sa
Abstract—This paper introduces a novel multi-copy routing
protocol, called Self Adaptive Utility-based Routing Protocol
(SAURP), for Delay Tolerant Networks (DTNs) that are pos-
sibly composed of a vast number of miniature devices such
as smart phones, hand-held devices, and sensors mounted in
ﬁxed or mobile objects. SAURP aims to explore the possibility
of taking mobile nodes as message carriers in order for
end-to-end delivery of the messages. The best carrier for a
message is determined by the prediction result using a novel
contact model, where the network status, including wireless link
condition and nodal buffer availability, are jointly considered.
The paper argues and proves that the nodal movement and
the predicted collocation with the message recipient can serve
as meaningful information to achieve an intelligent message
forwarding decision at each node. The proposed protocol has
been implemented and compared with a number of existing
encounter-based routing approaches in terms of delivery delay,
and the number of transmissions required for message delivery.
The simulation results show that the proposed SAURP outper-
forms all the counterpart multi-copy encounter-based routing
protocols considered in the study.
Keywords-Encounter based Routing, DTN.
I. INTRODUCTION
Delay Tolerant Networks (DTNs) [1] are characterized
by the lack of end-to-end paths for a given node pair for
extended periods, which demonstrates a complete different
design scenario from that for the conventional mobile ad-hoc
networks (MANETs) [13]. Due to the intermittent connec-
tions in DTNs, a node is allowed to buffer a message and
wait until it ﬁnds an available link to the next hop that will
be able to store the message. Such a process is repeated until
the message reaches its destination. This model of routing
constitutes a signiﬁcant difference from that employed in the
MANETs, which is usually referred to as encounter-based,
store-carry-forward, or mobility-assisted routing, due to the
fact that nodal mobility serves as a signiﬁcant factor for the
forwarding decision of each message.
Depending on the number of copies of a message that may
coexist in the network, two major categories of encounter-
based routing schemes are deﬁned: single-copy and multi-
copy. With the single-copy schemes [5], no more than a
single copy of a message can be carried by any node at
any instance in the network. Although simple and resource
efﬁcient, the main challenge in the implementation of single-
copy schemes lies in how to efﬁciently deal with inter-
ruptions of network connectivity and node failures. Thus,
single-copy schemes have been reported to seriously suffer
from long delivery delay and/or large message loss ratio.
On the other hand, multiple-copy (or multi-copy) routing
schemes allow the networks to have multiple copies of
a same message that can be routed independently and in
parallel so as to increase robustness and performance. It
is worth of noting that most multi-copy routing protocols
are ﬂooding-based [3], [4] that distribute unlimited numbers
of copies throughout the network, or controlled tree-based
ﬂooding [20] that distribute just a subset of message copies,
or utility-based approaches [2], [22] that determines whether
a message should be copied to a contacted node simply
based on a developed utility function.
Although improved in terms of performance, the previ-
ously reported multi-copy schemes are subject to respective
problems and implementation difﬁculties. First of all, these
schemes inevitably take a large amount of transmission
bandwidth, and nodal memory space, which could easily
dominate the network resource consumption [6]. In addition,
they suffer from contention in case of high trafﬁc loads, in
which packet drops could result in a signiﬁcant degradation
of performance and scalability. Note that the future DTNs
are expected to operate on a vast number of miniature and
hand-held devices such as smart phones, tablet computers,
personal digital assistants (PDAs), and ﬁxed/mobile sensors,
which are subject to a stringent limitation on power con-
sumption and computation resources.
To cope with the deﬁciency of single-copy and multi-
copy schemes, a family of multi-copy schemes called Utility-
based controled ﬂooding [15], [21], [14], [12] was proposed.
The class of schemes generate only a small number of
copies to ensure that the network is not overloaded with the
launched messages. Although Utility-based controled ﬂood-
ing routing schemes have been reported to effectively reduce
the message delivery delay and the number of transmissions,
most of them assume that each node has sufﬁcient resources
for message buffering and forwarding. None of them have
investigated how the protocol should take advantage of
dynamic network status to improve the performance, such as
8
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

packet collisions, wireless link conditions, and nodal buffer
occupancy. There is obviously some room to improve for
the Spray routing schemes in the DTN scenario considered
in this study.
With this in mind, we introduce a novel DTN routing pro-
tocol, called Self Adaptive Utility-based Routing Protocol
(SAURP) that overcomes the shortcomings of the previously
reported multi-copy schemes. The main feature of the pro-
posed protocol is the strong capability in adaptation to the
ﬂuctuation of network status, trafﬁc patterns/characteristics,
and user behaviors, so as to reduce the number of transmis-
sions, message delivery time, and increase delivery ratio.
This is achieved by jointly considering node mobility statis-
tics, congestion, and buffer occupancy, which are subse-
quently fused in a novel quality-metric function. In speciﬁc,
the link availability and buffer occupancy statistics are
obtained by sampling the channels and buffer space during
each contact with another node. In addition to this feature,
we introduced new transitivity update rule and new adaptive
time-window update strategy for updating the quality metric
function. The developed quality-metric function targets to
facilitating decision making for each active data message,
resulting in optimized network performance. The accuracy of
the utility fuction is veriﬁed a statistical mathematical model.
We will show via extensive simulations that the proposed
SAURP can achieve a signiﬁcant performance gain over the
previously reported counterparts.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides related work. Section III describes the proposed
SAURP in detail. Then, Section IV provides the simulation
results and the comparisons with the other counterparts. In
Section V, we conclude the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
The previously reported encounter-based routing protocols
have focused on the node mobility which is exploited and
taken as the dominant factor in the message forwarding
decision. Those schemes contributed by introducing novel
interpretations of the observed node mobility in the per-node
utility function. Spyropoulos et al. in [12], [6] developed
routing strategies using different utility routing metrics based
on nodal mobility statistics, namely Most Mobile First
(MMF), Most Social First (MSF) and Last Seen First (LSF).
S. C Nelson et al. [29] proposed an enhanced version of
MSF, where the number of a message replica are transferred
during contact is proportional to per-node utility function
based on the evolution of the number of encounters a node
has during a time-window. Lindgren et al. in [2] introduced
a routing technique in DTNs which takes advantage of the
predicted encounter probability between nodes. Jones et al.
in [19] introduced a utility function for DTN routing which
manipulates the minimum expected inter-encounter duration
between nodes. Ling et al. in [23] designed a feedback adap-
tive routing scheme based on the factors solely determined
by the node mobility, where a node with higher mobility is
given a higher factor, and messages are transmitted through
nodes with higher inﬂuence factors. A. Balasubramanian et
al. in [22] considered statistics of available bandwidth and
the number of message replicas currently in the network in
the derivation of the routing metric to decide which message
to replicate ﬁrst among all messages in custodian buffer. The
derivation of the routing metric, nonetheless, is not related
to buffer status.
Another scheme is called delegation forwarding [14], [24],
where a custodian node forwards a message copy to an en-
countered node if the encountered node has a better chance
to “see” the destination. The key idea is that a custodian
node (source or relay) forwards a message copy only if
the utility function (represented by the rate of encounters
between node pairs) of the encountered node is higher than
all the nodes so far “seen” by a message, and then current
custodian will update its utility value of that message to be
equal to that of the encountered node. Mosli et al. in [17]
introduced a DTN routing scheme using utility functions that
are calculated from an evaluation of context information.
The derived cost function is used as an assigned weight for
each node that quantiﬁes its suitability to deliver messages
to an encountered node regarding to a given destination.
A sophisticated scheme was introduced by Spyropoulos et
al., called Spay and Focus [6], which is characterized by
addressing an upper bound on the number of message copies
(denoted as L). In speciﬁc, a message source starts with L
copy tokens. When it encounters another node B currently
without any copy of the message, it shares the message de-
livery responsibility with B by transferring L/2 of its current
tokens to B while keeping the other half for itself. When
it has only one copy left, it switches to a utility forwarding
mechanism based on the LSF (time elapsed since the last
contact). This scheme has proven to signiﬁcantly reduce
the required number of transmissions, while achieving a
competitive delay with respect to network contentions such
as buffers space and bandwidth. An approach very similar
to the Spray and Focus protocol was proposed by Li et al.
[7], which differs from that by [6] in the employed utility
function and queuing policy mechanisms. In speciﬁc, the
utility function is designed based on the probability of the
duration of the contact time between pairs for a given time
window interval.
Although some studies improved the previously reported
designs by overcoming some of the shortages [6], [7],
[2], [14], they are subject to various limitations in the
utility function updating processes. These limitations are
addressed in our previous work in [15]. More importantly,
the channel capacity and buffer occupancy states have never
jointly been considered as factor in the derivation of utility
functions. These two factors could be overlooked/ignored if
the encounter frequency is low, where the routing protocol
performance is dominated by node mobility, while the
9
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

network resource availability does not plays an important
role. However, in the scenario that the nodal encounter
frequency is large and each node has many choices for
packet forwarding, the network resource availability could
become a critical factor for improving routing protocol
performance, and should be taken seriously in the derivation
of utility functions.
Motivated by above observations, this work investigates
encounter based routing technique that jointly considers
node mobility and the network states, including wireless
channel and buffer occupancy. This work proposes other
strategies that can use fewer copies than the Spray and Focus
scheme by spreading a number of copies that is less than
or at most equal to the number of copies used in the Spray
and Focus scheme, while obtaining better guaranteed results
than those of other schemes described in the literature.
III. SELF ADAPTIVE UTILITY-BASED ROUTING
PROTOCOL (SAURP)
The most distinguished characteristic of SAURP is its
ability of adapting itself to the observed network behaviors
in order to reduce the number of transmissions, the message
delivery time, and the delivery ratio. This is made possible
by employing an efﬁcient strategy for achieving a time-
window based update mechanism for some network status
parameters at each node. We use time-window based update
strategy because it is simple in implementation and rather
robust against parameter ﬂuctuation. Note that the network
conditions could change very fast and make a completely
event-driven model unstable. Figure. 1 illustrates the func-
tional modules of the SAURP architecture along with their
relations.
The Contact Statistics (denoted as CS(i)) is obtained
between each node pair A, and B regarding the total nodal
contacts durations, channel condition, and buffer occupancy
state. These values are collected at the end of each time
window and used as one of the two inputs to the Utility-
function Calculation and Update Module (UCUM). Another
input to the UCUM, as shown in Figure 1, is the updated
utility denoted as △T (i)
new, which is obtained by feeding
△T (i) ( the inter-contact time between any node pair, A
and B) through the Transitivity Update Module (TUM).
UCUM is applied such that an adaptive and smooth transfer
between two consecutive time windows (from current time-
window to next time-window) is maintained. Inter-contact
time (△T (i+1)) is the output of UCUM, and is calculated at
the end of current time window W (i). △T (i+1) is thus used
in time window W (i+1) for the completely the same tasks
as in window W (i).
Forwarding Strategy Module (FSM) is applied at the cus-
todian node as a decision making process when encountering
any other node within the current time window based on the
utility value (i.e., △T (i)).
It is important to note that CS, TUM, FSM, and message
vector exchange are event-driven and performed during
each contact, while UCUM is performed at the end of
each time-window. The following subsections introduce each
functional module in detail.
A. Contact Statistics (CS)
To compromise between the network state adaptability
and computation complexity, each node continuously up-
dates the network status within a ﬁxed time window. The
maintained network states are referred to as Contact Statis-
tics (CS), which include nodal contact durations, channel
conditions, and buffer occupancy state, and will be fed into
UCUM at the end of each time window. The CS collection
process is described as follows.
Let two nodes A and B are in the transmission range
of each other, and each broadcasts a pilot signal per k
time units in order to look for its neighbors within its
transmission range. Let T(A,B), Tfree, and Tbusy represent
the total contact time, the amount of time the channel is
free and the buffer is not full, and the amount of time the
channel is busy or the buffer is full, respectively, at node A
or B during time window W (i). Thus, the total duration of
time in which node A and B can exchange information is
calculated as:
Tfree = T(A,B) − Tbusy
(1)
Note that the total contact time could be accumulated over
multiple contacts between A and B during W (i).
B. Utility-function
Calculation
and
Update
Module
(UCUM)
UCUM is applied at the end of each time window and
is used to calculate the currently observed utility that will
be further used in the next time window. The two inputs
to UCUM in time window W (i) are: (i) the predicted
inter-contact time (△T (i)), which is calculated according
to the previous time-window utility (i.e., △T (i)), as well
as an update process via the transitivity property update
(introduced in subsection 3.3), and (ii) the observed inter-
encounter time obtained from the current CS(i) (denoted as
△T (i)
cs ).
1) Calculation of Inter-encounter Time (△T (i)): An el-
igible contact of two nodes occurs if the duration of the
contact can support a complete transfer of at least a single
message between the two nodes. Thus, in the event that node
A encounters B for a total time duration Tfree during time
window W (i), the number of eligible contacts in the time
window is determined by:
nc =
Tfree
Tp

(2)
where Tp is the least time duration required to transmit
a single message. Let △T (i)
cs(A,B) denotes the average inter-
encounter time duration of node A and B in time window
10
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9


α has a signiﬁcant impact on the routing decision rule.
From theoretical perspective, when a node is encountered
that has more information for a destination, this transitivity
effect should successfully capture the amount of uncertainty
to be resolved regarding the position of the destination.
Thus, a transitivity property is needed to update values only
when △T (i)
(A,D) > △T (i)
(B,D) in order to ensure that node A
reaches D through B. Otherwise, if △T (i)
(A,D) < △T (i)
(B,D),
the transitivity property is not useful since node A is a better
candidate for forwarding messages directly to node D rather
than forwarding them through B. This rule is applied after
nodes ﬁnish exchange messages.
D. The Forwarding Strategy Module (FSM)
The decision of message forwarding in SAURP is mainly
based on the goodness of the encountered node regarding
the destination, and the number of message copy tokens. If
the message tokens greater than 1, weighted copy rule is
applied, the forwarding rule is applied otherwise.
1) The Weighted Copy Rule : The source of a message
initially starts with L copies; any node A that has n > 1
message copy tokens (source or relay) and that encounters
another node B with no copies and △T (i)
(B,D) < △T (i)
(A,D),
node A hands over to node B a number of copies according
to its goodness for the destination node D. Node A hands
over some of the message copy tokens to node B and keeps
the rest for itself according to the following formula:
NB =
NA


△T (i)
(A,D)
△T (i)
(B,D) + △T (i)
(A,D))



(8)
where NA is the number of message tokens that node A has,
△T (i)
(B,D) is the inter-encounter time between node B and
node D, and △T (i)
(A,D) is the inter-encounter time between
nodes A and D. This formula guarantees that the largest
number of message copies is spread to relay nodes that have
better information about destination node. After L messages
have been copied to custodian nodes, each of the L nodes
carrying a copy of the message performs according to the
forwarding rule as descried next. This idea of weighted copy
rule was examined in [15], [29] and has been proved with
improved delivery delay.
2) The Forwarding Rule :
• If the destination node is one hop away from an
encountered node, the custodian node hands over the
message to the encountered node.
• If the inter-encounter time value of the encountered
node relative to that of the destination node is less
than that of the custodian node by a threshold value,
△Tth, a custodian node hands over the message to the
encountered node.
The complete mechanism of the forwarding strategy in
SAURP is summarized as shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The forwarding strategy of SAURP
On contact between node A and B
Exchange summary vectors
for every message M at buffer of custodian node A do
if destination node D in transmission range of B then
A forwards message copy to B
end if
if △T (i)
(A,D)> △T (i)
(B,D) do
if message tokens >1 then
apply weighted copy rule
end if
else if △T (i)
(A,D) > △T (i)
(B,D) + △Tth then
A forwards message to B
end if
end if
end for
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section a statistical analysis is conducted on the
performance of the proposed SUARP. An adapted DTN
simulator similar to the one used by [6] was created [30].
Community-Based Mobility model (CBM)[9] ( the reader is
referred to [9] for more details) is employed in the analysis.
The problem setup consists of an ad hoc network with a
number of nodes moving independently on a
√
NX
√
N 2-
dimensional torus ( torus is used due to its symmetry; and
similarity in the performance when we have run simulations
in bounded networks) in a geographical region, and each
node belongs to a predetermined community. Each node
can transmit up to a distance K ≥ 0 meters away, and
each message transmission takes one time unit. Euclidean
distance is used to measure the proximity between two nodes
(or their positions) A and B. A slotted collision avoidance
MAC protocol with Clear-to-Send (CTS) and Request-to-
Send (RTS), is implemented for contention resolution. A
message is acknowledged if it is received successfully at
the encountered node by sending back a small acknowledg-
ment packet to the sender. The performance of SAURP is
examined under different network scenarios and is compared
to some previously reported schemes listed below.
• Epidemic routing (epidemic) [3]
• Spray and Focus (S&F) [6]
• Most mobile ﬁrst (MMF)[25]
• Delegation forwarding (DF) [14]
• Self-Adaptive utility-based routing protocol (SAURP)
The performance comparison was in terms of average deliv-
ery delay per message, and the total number of transmissions
performed for all delivered messages.
A. Evaluation Scenarios
In the simulation, 120 nodes move according to the
community-based mobility model [6] in a 600 x 600 meter
12
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9














	

	
	

	
















	
	

	
			



Figure 2.
Impact of the number of message copies
network, and community size = 60x60. The message inter-
arrival time is uniformly distributed in such a way that the
trafﬁc can be varied from low (10 messages per node in
40,000 time units) to high (70 messages per node in 40,000
time units). The message time to live (TTL) is set to 9,000
time units. Each source node selects a random destination
node, begins generating messages to it during simulation
time.
The performance of the protocols is evaluated with respect
to the impact of the number of message copies. Second, with
respect to the low transmission range and varying buffer
capacity under high trafﬁc load. Finally, with respect to the
moderate-level of connectivity and varying trafﬁc load.
1) Impact due to Number of Message Copies : We ﬁrstly
look into impact of the number of message copies toward the
performance of each protocol. The transmission range K of
each node is set to 40 meters, leading to a relatively sparse
network. In order to reduce the effect of contention on any
shared channel, the trafﬁc load and buffer capacity is set
to medium (i.e., 40 generated messages per node in 40,000
time units) and high (i.e. 1000 messages), respectively. The
number of message copies is then increased from 1 to 20 in
order to examine their impact on the effectiveness of each
protocol. The proposed SAURP is compared with the S&F
and MMF schemes, since each scheme has a predeﬁned L
to achieve the best data delivery. Note that the value of L
depends on the application requirements, the mobility model
considered, and the design of the protocol.
Figure. 2 shows the results on message delivery delay, and
number of transmissions under different numbers of copies
of each generated message. As can be seen, the L value has
a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of each scheme. It is
observed that best performance can be achieved under each
scheme with a speciﬁc value L. These L values can serve
as a useful rule of thumb for producing good performance.
2) The Effect of Buffer Size: In this scenario the perfor-
mance of SAURP regarding different buffer sizes is exam-
ined under a low transmission range (i.e., K = 30) and a high
trafﬁc load (i.e., 70 messages generated per node in 40,000
time units). Due to the high trafﬁc volumes, we expect to see
a signiﬁcant impact upon the message forwarding decisions
due to the degradation of utility function values caused by
buffer overﬂow. Note that when the buffer of the encountered







	









	


	

	



















	
		

	


	




Figure 3.
The effect of buffer size
node is full, some messages cannot be delivered even though
the encountered node metric is better than the custodian
node. This situation results in extra queuing delay, especially
in the case that ﬂooding-based schemes are in place. Figure
3 shows the experiment results where the buffer space was
varied from 5 (very limited capacity) to 200 (relatively
high capacity) messages to reﬂect the performance of the
protocols under the considered trafﬁc load. As shown in
Figure 3, when the buffer size is small (50 messages or
less) the performance of the protocols is very sensitive to
the change of buffer capacity.
It is observed that Epidemic routing produced the worst
delivery delay in all scenarios, since it has been critically
affected by both the limited buffer size and mobility model.
On the other hand, since SAURP takes the situation that a
node may have a full buffer into consideration by degrad-
ing the corresponding utility metric, it produced the best
performance. In speciﬁc, SAURP yielded a shorter delivery
delay than DF by 40%. Although SUARP produced more
transmissions than MMF, it yielded a smaller delivery delay
than that of MMF by 70%. As the buffer size increased, the
performance of all protocols was improved especially for
MMF. When the buffer size is larger than the trafﬁc demand,
the MMF scheme has yielded a competitive performance
due to the relaxation of buffer capacity limitation. SAURP
still yielded the best performance with a smaller number
of transmissions than S&F by 37%. At large buffer size,
epidemic routing performs much more transmissions than
other schemes at least an order of magnitude higher than
the SAURP scheme does, and thus not included in the plot.
3) The Effect of Trafﬁc Load : The main goal of this
scenario is to observe the performance impact and how
SAURP reacts under different degrees of wireless channel
contention. The network connectivity is kept high (i.e.,
the transmission range is set to as high as 70 meters)
under different trafﬁc loads, while channel bandwidth is set
relatively quite small (i.e., one message transfer per unit
of time) in order to create an environment with non-trivial
congestion. We have two scenarios for nodal buffer capacity:
1) unlimited capacity; and 2) limited capacity (15 messages).
Figure.7 shows the performance of all the routing algorithms
in terms of the average delivery delay, and total number of
transmissions.
13
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9














	
	
 	
	

	
	



















	
	
	









Figure 4.
The effect of trafﬁc load under high buffer capacity
It is observed that Epidemic routing produced the largest
delivery delay and requires a higher number of transmissions
compared to all the other schemes, thus it is not included
in the ﬁgure. Note that the Epidemic routing is subject to
at least 3 times of longer delivery delay than that by S&F
and an order of magnitude more transmissions than that by
SUARP.
As shown in Figure. 4(a), and 4(b), when the trafﬁc load is
increased, the available bandwidth is decreased accordingly,
which causes performance reduction. When the trafﬁc load
is moderate (i.e., less that 50 messages in 40,000 time units),
it is clear that the delivery delay is short in all the schemes,
while SAURP outperforms all other protocols and MMF is
the second best. This is because in MMF, the effect of buffer
size is relaxed, which makes “ “roaming nodes” buffer more
number of messages while roaming among communities.
SAURP can produce delay shorter than that of MMF, DF,
S&F by 52%, 400%, and 250%, respectively. Although
SAURP requires more transmissions compared to the MMF
and DF, the number is still smaller than that produced by
S&F.
As expected, the performance of all the schemes degrades
as wireless channel contention is getting higher especially
when the trafﬁc load exceeds 50 messages per node during
the simulation period 40,000 time units. We observed that
SAURP can achieve signiﬁcantly better performance com-
pared to all the other schemes, due to the consideration of
busy links in its message forwarding mechanism, where the
corresponding routing-metric is reduced accordingly. This
results in the ability of rerouting the contended messages
through the areas of low congestion. However, such a
rerouting mechanism makes messages take possibly long
routes and results in more transmissions than that of MMF.
In summary, the delivery delay obtained by the SAURP in
this scenario is shorter than that of MMF by 70% , S&F by
90%, and DF by 247%, respectively.
As the buffer capacity is low (e.g. 15 messages) and the
trafﬁc load is high, the available bandwidth decreases and
the buffer occupancy increases accordingly causing buffer
overﬂow. Buffer overﬂow prevents messages that should be
forwarded to wait longer time at the buffer of the current
custodian node until it ﬁnd es new custodian with available
buffer space. This situation makes the performance of all







	





	
	
	
	

	
	











	





	
	







Figure 5.
The effect of trafﬁc load under low buffer capacity
protocols degraded, especially for Epidemic and MMF. Epi-
demic routing produced the largest delivery delay compared
to all the other schemes. It is subject to at least 4 times of
longer delivery delay than that by S&F, and thus it is not
included in the ﬁgure. It is notable that SUARP outperforms
all the multiple-copy routing protocols in terms of delivery
delay under all possible trafﬁc loads. When the trafﬁc load
is high, SAURP yielded shorter delivery delay than that of
MMF by 52%, SF by 30%, and DF by 40%. Although
SAURP requires more transmissions compared to the MMF
and DF, the number is still smaller than that produced by
S&F. Figure. 5(a), and 5(b) shows the performance of all
techniques under this scenario. Note that the transmissions
produced by Epidemic routing are affected by the buffer size,
resulting lower transmissions and longer delivery delay.
V. CONCLUSION
The paper introduced a novel multi-copy routing scheme
called SAUPR, for intermittently connected mobile net-
works. SAURP is characterized by the ability of identifying
potential opportunities for forwarding messages to their
destinations via a novel utility function based mechanism, in
which a suite of environment parameters, such as wireless
channel condition, nodal buffer occupancy, and encounter
statistics is jointly considered.
Thus, SAURP can reroute messages around nodes expe-
rience either high buffer occupancy, wireless interference,
or congestion, while taking considerably smaller number
of transmissions. We veriﬁed the proposed SAURP via
extensive simulation and compared it with a number of
counterparts. SUARP has shown great stability and achieved
shorter delivery delays than all the existing spraying and
ﬂooding based schemes when the network experiences con-
siderable contention on wireless links and/or buffer space.
REFERENCES
[1]
Disruption Tolerant Networking. http://www.dtnrg.org.
[2]
A. Lindgren, A. Doria, and O. Schelen. Probabilistic routing
in intermittently connected networks. SIGMOBILE Mobile
Comput. Commun. Rev., 7(3):19–20, 2003.
[3]
A. Vahdat and D. Becker, “Epidemic Routing for Partially
Connected Ad Hoc Networks ,” Duke University, Tech. Rep.
CS-2000-06, July 2000.
14
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

[4]
Y. Tseng, S. Ni, Y. Chen, and J. Sheu, "The Broadcast Storm
Problem in a Mobile Ad Hoc Network", presented at Wireless
Networks, 2002, pp.153-167.
[5]
T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis, and C. S. Raghavendra. Efﬁcient
routing in intermittently connected mobile networks: the
single-copy case. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 16, 1 (Feb. 2008),
63-76.
[6]
______. Efﬁcient routing in intermittently connected mobile
networks: The Multi-copy case. IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, Vol. 16, No. 1. (Feb. 2008), pp. 77-90.
[7]
Z. Li and Haiying Shen. Utility-based Distributed Routing in
Intermittently Connected Networks. 37th International Con-
ference on Parallel Processing. (ICPP ’08).September 8-12,
2008, Portland, Oregon, USA.
[8]
H. Dubois-Ferriere, M. Grossglauser, and M. Vetterli. Age
matters: efﬁcient route discovery in mobile ad hoc networks
using encounter ages. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM in-
ternational symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking and
computing (MobiHoc ’03). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 257-
266.
[9]
T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis, and C. S. Raghavendra. Perfor-
mance analysis of mobility-assisted routing. In Proceedings
of the 7th ACM international symposium on Mobile ad hoc
networking and computing (MobiHoc ’06). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 49-60.
[10] Z. Zhang. Routing in Intermittently Connected Mobile Ad
Hoc Net-works and Delay Tolerant Networks: Overview and
Challenges. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials,
8(1), pp. 24 - 37.
[11] M. Musolesi, S. Hailes, and C. Mascolo.Adaptive routing
for intermittently connected mobile ad hoc networks. In
Proceedings of IEEE WoWMoM, June 2005, pp. 183–189.
[12] T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis, and C. S. Raghavendra. Utility-
based Message Replication for Intermittently Connected Het-
erogeneous Wireless Networks. Proceedings of IEEE WoW-
MoM workshop on Autonomic and Opportunistic Communi-
cations (AOC). June 2007, pp.1 - 6.
[13] J. Broch, D. A. Maltz, D. B. Johnson, Y.-C. Hu, and J.
Jetcheva. A performance comparison of multi-hop wireless ad
hoc network routing protocols. Proc. ACM MobiCom. Oct.
1998. New York, NY, USA, 85-97.
[14] V. Erramilli, M. Crovella, A. Chaintreau , C. Diot. Delegation
forwarding. Proceedings of the 9th ACM international sym-
posium on Mobile ad hoc networking and computing, May
26-30, 2008, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
[15] Ahmed Elwhishi and Pin-Han Ho. 2009. SARP - a novel
multi-copy routing protocol for intermittently connected mo-
bile networks. In Proceedings of the 28th IEEE conference
on Global telecommunications (GLOBECOM’09), Mehmet
Ulema (Ed.). IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 4482-4488.
[16] A. Elwhishi Pin-Han Ho, K. Naik, and B. Shihadda. ARBR:
Adaptive Reinforcement-Based Routing for DTN. WiMob
2010. Oct. 11-14: 376-385.
[17] Musolesi, M., and Mascolo, C. 2009. CAR: Context-aware
Adaptive Routing for Delay Tolerant Mobile Networks. IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing. 8, 2 (February 2009),
246-260.
[18] M. V. T. Karagiannis, Jean-Yves Le Boudec, “Power law
and exponential decay of inter contact times between mobile
devices,” in Proc. of ACM/IEEE MobiCom, 2007, pp.183 -
194 .
[19] Evan P. C. Jones, Lily Li, and Paul A. S. Ward. 2005. Practical
routing in delay-tolerant networks. In Proceedings of the 2005
ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Delay-tolerant networking
(WDTN ’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 237-243.
[20] T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis, and C. Raghavendra. 2005.
Spray and wait: an efﬁcient routing scheme for intermittently
connected mobile networks. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM
SIGCOMM workshop on Delay-tolerant networking (WDTN
’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 252-259.
[21] Q. Yuan, I. Cardei, and J. Wu. 2009. Predict and relay: an
efﬁcient routing in disruption-tolerant networks. In Proceed-
ings of the tenth ACM international symposium on Mobile ad
hoc networking and computing (MobiHoc ’09). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 95-104.
[22] A. Balasubramanian , B. Levine , A. Venkataramani, DTN
routing as a resource allocation problem, Proceedings of the
2007 conference on Applications, technologies, architectures,
and protocols for computer communications, August 27-31,
2007, Kyoto, Japan.
[23] Shen Ling, Wu Wei, "Feedback Adaptive Routing Algorithm
for DTN," cmc, vol. 2, pp.267-271, 2009 WRI International
Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing,
2009.
[24] V. Erramilli, M. Crovella. Forwarding in opportunistic net-
works with resource constraints. In Proceedings of the third
ACM workshop on Challenged networks (CHANTS ’08).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 41-48.
[25] T. Spyropoulos, T. Turletti, and K. Obraczka, “Routing in
delay-tolerant networks comprising heterogeneous node pop-
ulations,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 8,
no. 8, pp. 1132–1147, August 2009.
[26] R. Groenevelt, P. Nain, and G. Koole. The message delay
in mobile ad hoc networks. Perform. Eval. 62, 1-4 (October
2005), 210-228.
[27] Akkouchi M. On the convolution of exponential distributions.
J. Chungcheong Math. Soc, vol. 21 no.4. pp.501–510, 2008.
[28] A. Jindal and K. Psounis. Contention-Aware Performance
Analysis of Mobility-Assisted Routing. IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing 8, 2 (February 2009), 145-161.
[29] Samuel C Nelson, Mehedi Bakht, Robin Kravets, and Albert
F. Harris, III. 2009. Encounter: based routing in DTNs.
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev. 13, 1 (June
2009), 56-59.
[30] “DTN
java
simulator,”
http://people.ee.ethz.ch/
spyropot/dtnsim.html.
15
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

