Usability Heuristics for Interactive Digital Television 
 
Andrés Solano1, Cristian Rusu2, César Collazos1, Silvana Roncagliolo2, José Luis Arciniegas1, Virginica Rusu3 
 
1Universidad del Cauca 
Popayán, Colombia 
e-mail: afsolano@unicauca.edu.co, ccollazo@unicauca.edu.co, jlarci@unicauca.edu.co 
 
2Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Valparaiso, 
Valparaiso, Chile 
e-mail: cristian.rusu@ucv.cl, silvana@ucv.cl  
 
3Universidad de Playa Ancha, 
Valparaiso, Chile 
e-mail: virginica.rusu@upla.cl 
 
 
Abstract— Usability evaluation for applications based on 
emerging information technology brings new challenges. 
Interactive Digital Television (iDT) is considered as the 
convergence of television and computer technologies. The main 
iDT feature is that the user may interact with the application; 
therefore usability should be a main concern when designing 
iDT applications. Current research usually focuses on iDT 
applications from a technical point of view, rather than a user–
centered approach. There is a need for new usability 
evaluation methods or at least for the use of traditional 
evaluations in novel ways. A set of heuristics is proposed, in 
order to help the usability evaluations of iDT applications. 
Keywords- usability, usability heuristics, interactive digital 
television 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Interactive Digital Television (iDT) is considered as the 
convergence of television and computer technologies, which 
gather three typical features: interactivity, customization and 
digitization [1]. The iDT exceeds the analog TV in several 
aspects: capacity, better use of the spectrum, greater 
immunity to noise and interference, better sound and picture 
quality, potential for transmission of data simultaneously, 
saving power transmission. However, the main iDT 
advantage is that the user may interact with the application 
[2].  
Usability evaluation for applications based on emerging 
information technology brings new challenges. Is it the 
classical concept of usability still valid? Which are the 
dimensions of the (new) usability? How can it be measured? 
How should we develop for (better) usability? There is a 
need for new evaluation methods or at least for the use of 
traditional evaluations in novel ways [3].  
The ISO/IEC 9241 standard defines the usability as the 
extent to which a product can be used by specified users to 
achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and 
satisfaction in a specified context of use [4]. Usability 
evaluation methods are commonly divided into inspection 
and testing methods. Inspection methods find usability 
problems based on the expertise of usability professionals. 
Testing methods find usability problems through the 
observation of the users while they use (and comment on) a 
system interface.  
Usability evaluation is needed particularly if the design 
concept is new. Users look for more than just a usable 
product; they look for a pleasing and engaging experience 
[5]. Therefore, usability should be a main concern when 
designing interactive iDT applications. Current research 
usually focuses on iDT applications from a technical point of 
view, rather than a user–centered approach. There is a 
necessity to establish methodologies that could lead to 
applications with a high level of usability. Such 
methodologies have to include accurate usability evaluations. 
Heuristic evaluation is a widely used inspection method 
[6] [7]. A group of evaluators (usually from three to five) 
inspect the interface design based on a set of usability 
heuristics. In order to ensure independent and unbiased 
evaluations, the inspection is performed individually. After 
all individual evaluations have been completed, the 
evaluators are allowed to communicate and have their 
findings aggregated in a single list of usability problems. 
Later on, each evaluator assigns scores to each problem’s 
severity and frequency (on a 0 to 4 scale, from minor/less 
frequent to major/more recurrent). Severity and frequency 
are summed in order to get problem’s criticality. Problems 
are ranked based on their average severity, frequency and 
criticality. The usability evaluation report includes usability 
problems, solution proposals, as well as positive findings.    
Heuristic evaluation is easy to perform, cheap and able to 
find many usability problems (both major and minor 
problems). However, it may miss domain specific problems. 
That is why the use of appropriate heuristics is highly 
significant.  
The paper focuses on usability heuristic evaluation of 
iDT applications. A set of 14 specific usability heuristics is 
60
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

proposed. Section 2 presents the methodology that has been 
used in heuristics’ development. Section 3 highlights the 
main characteristics of iDT applications. The iDT usability 
heuristics proposal is presented in section 4. Section 5 
presents preliminary conclusions and future works. 
II. 
DEFINING USABILITY HEURISTICS FOR INTERACTIVE 
TELEVISION 
In order to develop usability heuristics for iDT, a specific 
methodology was applied [8]. The methodology to establish 
new usability heuristics includes 6 stages: 
 
• 
STEP 1: An exploratory stage, to collect bibliography 
related to the main topics of the research: specific 
applications, their characteristics, general and/or related 
(if there are some) usability heuristics.  
• 
STEP 2: A descriptive stage, to highlight the most 
important characteristics of the previously collected 
information, in order to formalize the main concepts 
associated with the research. 
• 
STEP 3: A correlational stage, to identify the 
characteristics that the usability heuristics for specific 
applications should have, based on traditional heuristics 
and case studies analysis. 
• 
STEP 4: An explicative stage, to formally specify the set 
of the proposed heuristics, using a standard template.  
• 
STEP 5: A validation (experimental) stage, to check 
new 
heuristics 
against 
traditional 
heuristics 
by 
experiments, through heuristic evaluations performed on 
selected case studies, complemented by user tests. 
• 
STEP 6: A refinement stage, based on the feedback from 
the validation stage. 
 
An early version of the iDT usability heuristics was 
proposed in 2009 [9]. Later on, STEP 1 to STEP 4 of the 
methodology were performed, and a refined usability 
heuristic proposal was defined. As no specific iDT usability 
heuristics were found, the proposal is based on the well-
known and widely used Nielsen’s 10 heuristics [7]. 
However, heuristic proposals for other fields, such as Social 
TV, Virtual Worlds and Grid Computing were also used. 
STEP 5 and STEP 6 are yet to be performed. 
III. 
INTERACTIVE DIGITAL TELEVISION 
CHARACTERISTICS 
Nowadays the concept of television does not refer to a 
specific device, but rather a specific kind of content available 
almost everywhere, freeing television from the TV set and 
bringing it out of home. Additionally, current trends combine 
iDT and the web; users may navigate on internet from their 
TV sets, download and use applications, download content 
or customize the TV schedule.  
iDT applications have a set of basic features that should 
be considered when evaluating their usability:  
 
• 
Interactivity: iDT applications should offer bidirectional 
communication, a fundamental requirement of any 
interactive system. An iDT application should invite 
user to participate, in order to have a more active 
experience while watching content. Interactivity is the 
ability to offer additional content to the television 
programs, allowing the user to view associated 
information with audiovisual content, to view the TV 
channels’ schedule, to participate in contests, polls, to 
buy products or services, and even to participate in the 
television programs creation/customization. 
• 
Customization: 
iDT 
applications 
should 
allow 
customization in terms of content, appearance and 
others, taking into account users’ needs, skills, personal 
preferences, etc. 
• 
Physical features of interaction: Human vision is 
optimal at a particular distance from the screen; 
therefore, iDT applications should take into account 
screen resolution and contrast. Traditionally, users 
watch TV in an environment that is oriented to 
relaxation and comfort. However, nowadays users can 
access this medium in various environments, from 
multiple devices (TV sets, phones, etc.) and using 
different technologies (high-definition, 3D, etc.).  
• 
Consistency 
of 
applications 
and 
content: 
iDT 
applications should be related to the content itself, and 
relevant for specific users. 
• 
Adaptability: iDT applications should be adaptable to 
different target public and environments. They should 
even suggest content/programs based on users’ 
preferences and history of selection (among others).  
IV. 
A USABILITY HEURISTICS PROPOSAL FOR 
INTERACTIVE TELEVISION 
iDT usability heuristics were specified using the 
following template: 
 
• 
ID, Name and Definition: Heuristic’s identifier, name 
and definition.   
• 
Explanation: Heuristic’s detailed explanation, including 
references to usability principles, typical usability 
problems, and related usability heuristics proposed by 
other authors. 
• 
Examples: Examples of heuristic’s violation and 
compliance. 
• 
Benefits: Expected usability benefits, when the heuristic 
is accomplished. 
• 
Problems: 
Anticipated 
problems 
of 
heuristic 
misunderstanding, 
when 
performing 
heuristic 
evaluations. 
 
The 14 proposed usability heuristics were grouped in 
three categories: (1) Design and Aesthetics, (2) Flexibility 
and Navigation and (3) Errors and Help. A summary of the 
proposed heuristics is presented below, including heuristic’s 
ID, name, definition and explanation. 
 
Design and Aesthetics Heuristics: 
 
(H1) Match between the system and the real world: 
An iDT application should speak the user’s language, with 
61
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

words, phrases and concepts familiar to the user. iDT 
applications should use specific conventions of the real 
world and should show the information in a natural order. 
The sequence of activities should follow user's mental 
processes. Metaphors should be easy to understand; there 
should be an intuitive mapping between controls and their 
functions. 
 
(H2) Simplicity: An iDT application should not overload 
users with irrelevant and/or unnecessary information. Every 
extra unit of information competes with the relevant units of 
information and diminishes their relative visibility. iDT 
applications should show concise (but all necessary) 
information. 
 
(H3) Consistency and standards: Design should be 
coherent and consistent throughout the iDT application; it 
should follow the norms or conventions for TV design in 
general, as well as for new specific elements of iDT. iDT 
applications should present similar elements in similar ways. 
Terminology, controls, graphics and menus should be 
consistent throughout the system; there should be a 
consistent look and feel for the system interface. As there are 
not yet widely recognized standards for iDT applications, 
highlights the importance of the consistency over standards. 
 
(H4) Feedback: An iDT application should provide 
feedback to the user, at least when he/she is performing key 
actions. iDT applications should provide feedback on user’s 
key actions, in a clear manner and within a reasonable time. 
User should be able to clearly identify their location into the 
application, and the available options. 
 
(H5) Physical constraints: An iDT application’s 
elements should be visible at the visual range of watching 
TV, and in various types of lighting. iDT applications design 
should consider issues related to the size, distances between 
elements displayed on screen, lighting, and others 
environmental factors. The concept of television is being 
redefined, television becomes ubiquitous; therefore specific 
factors should be considered. 
 
(H6) Extraordinary users: An iDT application should 
be inclusive, attending (all) special users’ needs. iDT 
applications should at least use appropriately color restricted 
and provide alternative mechanisms for users with hearing 
problems. 
 
Flexibility and Navigation Heuristics: 
 
(H7) Structure of information: An iDT application 
should organize information hierarchically, from general to 
specific. Related pieces of information should be clustered 
together; the amount of information should be minimized; 
option, titles and headlines should be straightforward, short 
and descriptive. 
 
(H8) Navigation: An iDT application should allow 
simple navigation; user should easily move through the 
application and locate information of interest. iDT 
applications should provide navigational feedback (e.g. 
showing a user's current and initial states, where they have 
been, and what options they have for where to go) and 
navigational aids (e.g. find facilities). 
 
(H9) Recognition rather than recall: The iDT 
application’s main elements and options should be always 
kept available; user should not have to remember 
information from one screen to another. Help and 
instructions should be visible or easily accessible when 
needed; relationship between controls and their actions 
should be obvious; input formats and units of values should 
be indicated.  
 
(H10) Flexibility and efficiency of use: An iDT 
application should allow a wide range of user expertise; it 
should allow users to personalize the application according 
to their skills; it should adapt to different environments. iDT 
applications should offer appropriate guide to novice users. 
Experienced users should get appropriate mechanism to 
customize applications according to their needs, skills, and 
personal preferences.  
 
(H11) User control and freedom: An iDT application 
should offer users control over their actions and should 
allow free exploration. iDT applications provide "undo" (or 
"cancel") and "redo" options; exits should be clearly marked 
(when users find themselves somewhere unexpectedly); 
facilities to return to the top level should be provided, at all 
stages. Facilities to return to previous points and to the main 
screen should be provided, from anywhere in the application. 
Users should be able to freely explore the application, 
without castigation. 
 
Errors and Help Heuristics: 
 
(H12) Error prevention: An iDT application should 
provide appropriate mechanisms to prevent errors. iDT 
applications should provide appropriate messages in order to 
prevent users’ errors. User confirmation should be required 
before carrying out a potentially “dangerous” action (e.g. 
deleting important information).  
 
(H13) Recovering from errors: An iDT application 
should provide clear messages, hopefully indicating causes 
and solutions for errors. Error messages should adequately 
describe problems; they should assist in diagnosis and 
suggest ways of recovery in a constructive way; error 
messages should be written in a non-derisory tone and 
refrain from attributing blame to the user. 
 
(H14) Help and documentation: An iDT application 
should provide users a clear and simple help, in their own 
language. iDT applications should offer clear, direct and 
simply help, expressed in user’s idiom, free from jargon and 
buzzwords; help should be easy to search, understand and 
apply. 
 
62
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

When refining the usability heuristics proposal, a 
usability checklist was also defined. It details the set of 14 
heuristics in order to help their use in heuristic evaluation 
practice. 
As Table 1 shows, a mapping can be made between iDT 
14 heuristics and Nielsen’s 10 heuristics. However, as the 
heuristics’ specification shows, the proposal is not just a 
particularization of Nielsen’s heuristics. 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING BETWEEN IDT HEURISTICS AND NIELSEN’S 
HEURISTICS 
iDT Heuristics 
Nielsen’s Heuristics 
ID 
Definition 
ID 
Definition 
H1 
Match between system 
and the real world 
N2 
Match between system 
and the real world 
H2 
Simplicity 
N8 
Aesthetic and minimalist 
design 
H3 
Consistency and 
standards 
N4 
Consistency and 
standards 
H4 
Feedback  
N1 
Visibility of system status 
H5 
Physical constraints 
N8 
Aesthetic and minimalist 
design 
H6 
Extraordinary users 
H7 
Structure of information 
N7 
Flexibility and efficiency 
of use 
H8 
Navigation 
N3 
User control and freedom 
H9 
Recognition rather than 
recall 
N6 
Recognition rather than 
recall 
H10 
Flexibility and efficiency 
of use 
N7 
Flexibility and efficiency 
of use 
H11 
User control and 
freedom 
N3 
User control and freedom 
H12 
Error prevention 
N5 
Error prevention 
H13 
Recovering from errors 
N9 
Help users recognize, 
diagnose, and recover 
from errors 
H14 
Help and documentation 
N10 
Help and documentation 
 
Heuristics H1, H3, H4, and H9 particularize Nielsen’s 
heuristics N2, N4, N1, and N6 (respectively), based on iDT 
applications’ characteristics. Heuristics H12, H13 and H14 
put Nielsen’s heuristics N5, N9 and N10 (respectively) into 
the context of iDT applications. Heuristics H2, H5 and H6 
particularize Nielsen’s N8 heuristics. Heuristics H7 and H10 
denote Nielsen’s N7 heuristic. Heuristics H8 and H11 detail 
Nielsen’s N3 heuristic.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
As iDT is nowadays a reality and the number and type of 
users is growing fast, the usability of iDT applications 
became a main issue. There is a need for new usability 
evaluation methods or at least usability evaluations should be 
particularized for iDT applications. 
A set of 14 specific usability heuristics and an associated 
usability checklist were developed. As no specific iDT 
usability heuristics were found, the proposal is based on the 
well-known and widely used Nielsen’s 10 heuristics as well 
as on heuristic proposals for other fields (such as Social TV, 
Virtual Worlds and Grid Computing). However, as the 
heuristics’ specification shows, the proposal is not just a 
particularization of Nielsen’s heuristics; the set of 14 
usability heuristics was specifically designed for iDT 
applications.  
As future work, the proposal has to be validated trough 
experiments. Heuristic evaluations will be performed, in 
order to check the iDT usability heuristics’ potential in 
practice. Heuristic evaluation experiments will also provide 
an important feedback for heuristics’ refinement.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work was highly supported by the IDIS Research 
Group of University of Cauca – Colombia, and by the 
“UseCV” Research Group in Human – Computer 
Interaction (School of Informatics Engineering) of the 
Pontifical Catholic University of Valparaiso – Chile. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Geerts and D. Groff, “Supporting the social uses of 
television: Sociability Heuristics for Social TV”. Proc. CHI 
2009, ACM 978-1-60558-246, 2009. 
[2] C. Collazos, J. Arciniegas, V. Mondragon, and X. García. 
“Directrices de diseño y evaluación de la televisión 
interactiva”. Proc. Interaccion 2008, Albacete, Spain, pp. 257-
260, 2008. 
[3] C. Wiberg, K. Jegers, and H. Desurvire, “How Applicable is 
Your Evaluation Methods – Really?”, Proc. 2nd International 
Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2009), IEEE Press, pp. 324-328, ISBN: 978-1-4244-
3351-3, 2009. 
[4] International Organisation for Standardisation, ISO 9241, 
“Software Ergonomics Requirements for office work with 
visual display terminal (VDT)”, Geneva, 1998. 
[5] H. Sharp, Y. Rogers, and J. Preece, Interaction Design. 
Beyond Human – Computer Interaction, 2nd edition, John 
Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
[6] J. Nielsen, “Usability Engineering”, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 1993. 
[7] J. Nielsen, “Ten Usability Heuristics”, Available at 
www.useit.com/papers/heuristic/heuristic_list.html 
(last 
access 21/03/2011). 
[8] C. Rusu, S. Roncagliolo, V. Rusu, and C. Collazos, “A 
Methodology to establish usability heuristics”, Proc. 4th 
International Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions (ACHI 2011), IARIA, pp. 59-62, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-003-1, 2011. 
[9] C. Collazos, C. Rusu, J. Arciniegas, and S. Roncagliolo, 
“Designing and Evaluating Interactive Television from a 
Usability Perspective”, Proc. 2nd International Conferences on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI 2009) 
IEEE Press, pp. 381-385, ISBN: 978-1-4244-3351-3, 2009. 
 
63
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

