 
 
Applications and Opportunities for Internet-based Technologies in the Food 
Industry 
Saeed Samadi  
Food Machinery dept. 
 Research Institute of Food Science & Technology (RIFST) 
Mashhad, Iran 
s.samadi@rifst.ac.ir 
 
 
Abstract— In the modern world, information technology (IT) 
has been incorporated in most development activities. The food 
production industry is one of the recent industries to embrace 
IT in their major daily operations. This study discusses 
applications and opportunities for Internet-based technologies 
in the food industry and highlights state-of-the-art technologies 
and trends in the field. These technologies are mainly classified 
into Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) for supply chain 
management, quality and safety monitoring, e-commerce, 
robotics, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), and Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS). Since all emerging technologies are 
coupled with challenges, the study addresses both challenges 
and benefits of incorporating IT in the food industry. Safety 
and quality of food products is a vital issue in the context of the 
food industry. As a result, this paper discusses how IT can be 
integrated to enhance the safety and quality of food products. 
The paper concludes by arguing that awareness be raised 
within the agro-food industry on the importance of the 
adoption of Internet-based technologies as a critical success 
factor in the twenty-first century. 
Keywords- food industry; information technology; Internet; 
RFID; e-commerce. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Information technology (IT) is one of the individual 
forces that has contributed to globalization and advancement 
of life standards. These advancements have been occurring 
rapidly due to the rate of innovation from the IT industry. 
Significant incorporation of IT in most of the developmental 
activities is proof of the spread and importance of this 
technology [1]. IT has been globally incorporated in 
construction 
industries, 
production, 
manufacturing, 
healthcare, education, information management, security, 
and food and agricultural production. However, IT has been 
embraced at different levels by the fields mentioned above. 
Information management ranks as the most advanced field 
concerning use of IT [2]. On the other hand, agriculture 
ranks as the least innovative field as far as incorporation of 
IT is concerned. Other fields of production besides 
agriculture and food obtain maximum potential production 
from their fields due to highly incorporated IT systems [3]. 
Unfortunately, agriculture and food production does not 
extract its maximum potential because of its low level of IT 
incorporation. Most of the yield available in the agricultural 
sector is retrieved from small and medium sized enterprises 
(SME). Therefore, high scale production firms from the food 
and agriculture production industry are not constructive 
parties in the business [4]. SME are characterized by either 
low or medium financial capacity. This financial background 
is not able to fully fund state-of-the-art technologies such as 
radio frequency identification (RFID), wireless sensor 
networks (WSN), and integration to e-commerce. These 
technologies are available for application by the food and 
agriculture industry, and once incorporated, agricultural and 
food production would be able to maximize its potential [5]-
[7].  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
summarizes a review of literature. Section III discusses the 
use of important and available Internet-based technologies in 
the food industry. Section IV discusses in finer detail, the 
aim of the paper. Section V includes an acknowledgement 
and conclusions. 
II. 
 LITERATURE REVIEW 
 Currently, food and agricultural production has 
incorporated IT to a significant degree. Unfortunately, there 
still exist technical challenges that have resulted in the 
industry incurring losses and gaining a bad reputation. These 
technical challenges can be corrected through application of 
the mentioned technologies [8]. IT is signified by techniques 
that result in faster, efficient production with minimal human 
effort. Agricultural production is an economic activity that is 
more dependent on human input relative to machine input 
than other activities. This does not mean that technologies to 
minimize human effort and input in the industry are absent. 
Technologies that can result in reduction of human input 
exist in the industry, but the prevailing challenge is the cost 
of operation. As initially stated, SMEs comprise robust 
producers in the industry and lack sufficient capital to sustain 
these technologies [9]. IT applications relevant to the field of 
agriculture require high initial capital, but are cost effective. 
Areas within the field of agricultural production that can 
incorporate 
IT 
include; 
supply 
chains, 
harvest, 
standardization, marketing, soil fertility, and yield prediction 
[10]. These areas can be improved by the following 
technologies: RFID, WSN, GIS, robotics control, and e-
commerce. These technologies are applied in the agricultural 
and food production industry to fulfill different objectives. 
These technologies utilize networks for communication.  
However, some technologies such as RFID have more than 
one application in the industry. It can be used in supply chain 
management and also in traceability for standardization [11].  
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
III. 
AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGIES 
A. RFID Technology  
This technology uses radio frequency to identify or 
retrieve information from production. It operates using the 
same mechanism as barcodes with magnetic strips [12]. 
Instead, of a barcode, RFID uses microchips that are 
embedded on the product of interest. RFID has two main 
advantages over barcodes. In the case of a barcode, it has to 
be on the line of sight of the barcode reader for information 
to be obtained from it. RFID is advantageous because the 
chip and the reader do not have to be on a line of sight to 
retrieve information from the chip, because the chip 
produces specific radio frequencies. The other advantage of 
RFID is that the chip is more reliable than the barcode [9]. 
This is because validity of barcodes is ruined once the code 
is scratched or removed. RFID microchips are not easily 
removed because they are not attached to the surface of the 
product.  
RFID technology can be used in supply chain 
management and standardization. Food quality has been the 
cause of controversy in the food industry. Food that has not 
been properly stored has higher chances of going bad and 
once food has attained this status, it can become toxic. Food 
toxicity is dangerous as it can result in complex health 
disorders or even death. Therefore, a compromise on the 
quality of food is likely to ruin the reputations of the supplier 
and manufacturer, and this translates into losses [4]. RFID 
enables the user to establish the amount and type of 
ingredients contained in the food product. In addition, it also 
provides the time elapsed from the time of manufacture to 
the time of first use. This information is imperative to both 
the retailer and the consumer. Cases of food poisoning as a 
result of consuming expired food or allergic substances 
would be substantially reduced.  
The other core challenge in the food production and 
agriculture industry is supply chain management. Some food 
products are essential for humans, but their production is 
unique in specific regions. Therefore, a comprehensive 
supply chain should be established so as to benefit both the 
manufacturer and consumer. The supply chain involves the 
food transit process from harvest, to processing, to 
distribution to the retailer [13]. Food undergoes this process 
before reaching the end user. Despite the extensive route, 
which is undergone before a product’s use, monetary value 
has to be established. This means that the end user is not 
overcharged and the manufacturer is not underpaid [14]. 
RFID technology establishes an infrastructure that tracks a 
food product’s location and ingredients, thus enhancing 
reliability of the end product. Farmers, specifically involved 
in food production, have been discouraged from expanding 
their investment due to limited profit from their enterprise. 
Previously, middle-men have benefited more than either the 
farmer or the consumer, minimizing profits to these 
constituents. Currently, with the employment of RFID, 
profits and satisfaction have improved because the supply 
chain of the goods has been bolstered by the technology. 
RFID technology has to be applied from the point of 
production (farmer) to the consumer. This reduces the bulk 
cost that could have been incurred by the distributor or 
supplier [15]. Wal-Mart is among the supply companies that 
have encouraged manufacturers to incorporate RFID to 
increase their profits. They encourage manufacturers through 
financing part of the RFID implementation. This practice is 
prevailing in most developing countries, as SMEs are 
financed 
to 
increase 
agricultural 
food 
production 
performance in the international market. 
B. Information  technologies applied in food quality and 
safety monitoring 
Poor performance in the food industry is due to loss of 
trust between food distribution companies and the end user. 
This is as a result of food contamination and poisoning. In 
China, profits in the food industry have declined by 50 
percent as a result of contaminated food. This shows the 
sensitive nature of the food industry as a single flaw has the 
potential to bring down the whole industry. In addition, 
China’s food production is also mainly extracted from small 
scale investors. This means the sector is not fully exploited. 
One of the technologies that the country has embraced to 
enhance the status of the food supply is RFID food 
packaging. This technology uses RFID to identify the 
ingredients and the inventory of food products [16]. It 
utilizes disposable biosensors that produce an antigen-
antibody reaction to identify any bacterial cells in the food 
product. When bacteria thrive in an enclosed food product, 
the result is a bio-chemical reaction that would either make 
the food product stale or poisonous. Therefore, this 
technology helps the food industry upgrade their monitoring 
systems, and the quality and safety of food products is 
enhanced. As a result, IT has aided in the restoration of trust 
between consumers and manufacturers. Furthermore, since 
the introduction of RFID food packaging, the number of 
health issues associated with food poisoning or food quality 
has declined by more than 50 percent [12]. RFID technology 
also has an additional use as biosensors used in the tags 
containing inventory information that can be used in supply 
chain management. Traceability of food products from the 
farmer to the consumer is the other main concern in the food 
production industry. Effective supply management is a 
barrier that prevents SMEs from maximizing their potential. 
RFID detection technology poses a remedy to this barrier; 
RFID stores ingredients, destination, and the appropriate 
geographic location of products [16]. This helps the food 
industry realize their market extent and as a result increase or 
reduce their production where necessary, thus minimizing 
losses. This technology enables rapid detection of poisons or 
derailed quality of finished food products. It also enables 
automatic identification of food products along a supply 
chain.  
 
C. E-commerce  
Internet technologies within the context of e-commerce 
have provided a more interactive market that enhances 
communication between manufacturers and consumers. This 
can be accomplished through existing social networking sites 
such as Facebook and Twitter. Manufacturers append their 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
social networking websites on containers of food products so 
that in case of a complaint or compliment, the user can 
directly communicate with the food company [17]. When 
there is a reliable communication pathway between service 
or good providers and the end user, performance of the 
product is likely to be high. This is relative to a scenario 
where there is no elaborate communication between the user 
and manufacturer. IT provides better database management 
systems that portray the accurate needs of consumers. E-
commerce expands the food market as the Internet is able to 
establish new consumers from regions where a specific food 
product has not yet been sold. E-commerce serves to benefit 
SMEs more because of their otherwise insufficient capital to 
market their food products. E-commerce is cheaper than 
hiring a marketing firm. This system requires less than five 
users to conduct online marketing and thus is affordable for 
SMEs [18]. As a result, SMEs can access a larger market 
without seeking additional financial assistance to facilitate 
marketing. 
Therefore, 
Internet 
technologies 
ensure 
development of a more reliable supply chain, higher quality 
food products, and a larger market for food products. 
The disadvantage of Internet technology among SMEs is 
that the business owners and staff have to undergo training 
so that they can understand computer systems [19]. This is 
an additional cost that a small scale investor aims to reduce 
by all means necessary. IT exposes SMEs to Internet hazards 
such as hacking and fraud, which can cause huge losses to 
investors.  
 
D. Robotics technology 
Immense human input, which is visible in the food 
production industry, can be replaced by machines as a result 
of IT. Human input is hindered by fatigue and non-uniform 
output. Opposed to human input, machine input as a result of 
IT, is both uniform and reliable. In addition, it is faster and 
produces more profit than human input. Robotics is applied 
in land preparation, planting, and weeding [19]. A series of 
corporative IT devices can sufficiently handle agricultural 
production leaving human application to solely play an 
oversight role. A combine harvester is one of the machines 
that has replaced human involvement in harvesting activity 
(see Figure 1). In cases where the machine has been used, 
there has been a greater than 100 percent advantage in yield 
compared to regions where human effort was used in 
harvesting. This prevailed in areas with the same size and 
climatic conditions.  
E. WSN technology applications 
WSN differ from RFID in that it is able to integrate with 
other network devices in the field while an RFID tag can 
only be read with the RFID tag reader. WSNs comprise of 
Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and ZigBee. The latter two operate within 
the Industrial Scientific and Medical (ISM) band of 2.4 GHz, 
which provides license-free operations, enormous spectrum 
allocation, and global compatibility. Other devices deployed 
on a farm to aid  agricultural activities [20].WSN technology   
 
Figure 1.  Diagram showing robotic harvesters 
is used in this industry for monitoring and surveillance of 
crops within a farm. However, weather variation is the sole 
challenge that affects performance of WSN in the agriculture 
industry. The technology utilizes radio frequencies that can 
be interfered with by weather conditions [21]-[23]. The 
technology is used in maintenance and monitoring of 
farmlands. This is achieved through installation of sensors 
and cameras on the field. These devices are linked to the 
control station on the farm via the mentioned wireless 
technology. Monitoring fields enables identification of 
severe conditions on the soil and weather. With this 
information, 
farmers 
make 
comprehensive 
decisions 
concerning planting activities. Wireless technology also 
enables pest control and irrigation activities that are essential 
when pursuing maximum yield. Sensors deployed on the soil 
are able to determine moisture content of the soil. When soil 
moisture content is below the minimum, the information is 
transferred to the control that commands the irrigator to 
sprinkle the soil. Phytophotra is a disease that affects 
potatoes and is influenced by temperature and humidity 
conditions. Between 868MHz and 916MHz, motes can be 
used in determining moisture content on air and temperature 
[24]. Extreme temperatures can be reflected and relayed to 
the control station which initiates spray of pesticides. 
F. GIS applications 
A GIS uses unique colors and shades of colors to 
represent different atmospheric and soil conditions. It also 
uses the same set of unique colors to depict different terrains 
and ground cover. They utilize satellites to obtain aerial 
images of the Earth’s surface. These satellites exist 
exclusively for GISs as the colors of objects and surfaces are 
different from ordinary depiction and representation. For 
instance, a water body would appear blue from ordinary 
satellites, whereas a GIS satellite depicts water bodies in 
dark. Food production and agriculture is governed by 
atmospheric conditions and soil fertility. Globally, farmers’ 
yields are affected by changes in weather and climate. This is 
because of poor decisions that are dependent on farm 
activities [25]. For instance, harvesting time is signified by 
dry weather and medium to high temperatures. Therefore, 
when a farmer harvests during other atmospheric conditions, 
the resultant yield will be low. Through GIS technology 
farmers have  been able to obtain  atmospheric  conditions  in 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
 
Figure 2.  Diagram of remote-sensed image of the soil (GIS image) 
real-time that have enabled them to conduct farming 
activities appropriately. GIS images are specific to natural, 
physical features. As a result, farmers or investors are able to 
locate ideal regions that will favor their agricultural 
investments. Planting on the wrong soil will result in lower 
yield and losses. Analyzing a soil using the naked eye does 
not necessarily yield an accurate description of the soil’s 
composition [26]. Therefore, advanced methods induced by 
IT would result in better land use, thus maximizing yield 
from the food production and agricultural industry (see 
Figure 2).  
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
The primary goal of IT incorporation in the food industry 
is to foster food security and extract maximum sustainable 
yield. Once the primary role has been fulfilled, there are 
numerous secondary goals that IT ensures are effectively 
addressed. They include: processing, distribution, marketing, 
and storage [27]. IT, through the technologies previously 
discussed, fulfills each of these goals successfully. RFID 
ensures comprehensive results from supply management, 
which constitutes a secondary goal of the industry [26]. 
Regions that have incorporated RFID in their supply chains 
receive more revenue from the agriculture and food 
production industry than regions that have not applied RFID 
technology [29]. Similarly, regions that have incorporated 
WSN practice sustainable farming on a larger scale than in 
regions where the technology has not been applied. After 
production, the other barrier to extracting maximum potential 
from agriculture is the marketing of harvested goods. Large 
scale producers in farming have extensive marketing 
strategies that cover almost ninety percent of their produce. 
On the other hand, SMEs in agricultural and food production 
lack elaborate marketing avenues that can ensure intake of 
their products in the market. The first obstacle is the cost, 
which is a requirement for establishing an elaborate 
marketing network. The other obstacle is technology. 
Technology now offers a solution to its initial problem in 
that the Internet has contributed positively towards 
establishing global villages. Farmers are able to establish 
first person contact between the manufacturer and the user or 
processing firm. For instance, the Kenyan association of 
coffee growers has established a direct link to coffee 
processing firms in England and the United States. This 
ensures farmers obtain maximum compensation for their 
products, and therefore represents an appropriate motivation 
for farmers to expand their farms. As a result, the potential of 
food and agricultural production is optimized.  
 Food investors who have embraced robotics and e-
commerce receive more income from the food industry than 
food investors not aware of the technology or those who 
have shunned it. Consequently, in countries where these 
practices have been encouraged and are prevailing at 
significant levels have a better economy than in countries 
where IT application is limited.  
Another added value of internet-based technologies in the 
agro-food industry is the improvement of efficiency and 
reactivity from real-time management of supply chains from 
farm to fork [30]. From a “food miles” point of view, this 
could result in a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and 
in the carbon footprint, e.g., decrease of transport kilometers 
or empty vehicles, less waste, and better decay management. 
The digital divide is a challenge that might hinder the 
applicability of the technologies discussed in this paper. 
Digital divide is mainly the gap between those with and 
those without access to ICT technologies and/or skills 
necessary to take advantage of ICT services. In addition, 
there is a widening gap between the urban and rural sectors 
on utilizing advanced and emerging technologies [31]. To 
overcome this, measures should be taken to strengthen 
informatics in the agro-food industry by fostering the 
development of national information capacity and new 
databases, linking national and international databases, and 
adding value to information to facilitate utilizing them at 
various levels. Also, innovative ways of combining ICT-
based information sources (such as agro-food information 
systems) with traditional ones should be considered. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper gives an overview of major IT-based 
technologies and their impact on the food industry. It 
presents how selected fields of application can make a 
considerable contribution to food industry both in increasing 
efficiency and making  data more available and easily 
managed. It discusses how these  technologies can be 
integrated to enhance safety and quality of food products and 
provide advantages such as mobility, transparency and 
autonomy. The example technologies are mainly built on 
networked devices or utilize networks for communication. 
However, much additional work still should be done for a 
large 
scale 
integrated 
communication 
and 
scalable 
coordination throughout the agro-food networks.  
The paper also highlights that there is great opportunity 
for internet-based applications in developing countries. 
However, in most developing countries, strategies should be 
employed to overcome  technical and societal barriers that 
can hinder further development of these technologies in 
agro-food sector. Therefore, it is a mandate of the ministry of 
agriculture and/or other governmental authorities to ensure 
IT techniques are being used in the food and agriculture 
sector to boost production and create an extensive market for 
the produced goods. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Yu, J. Li, and X. Y. Qin, “The Information Key 
Technologies 
for 
Quality 
& 
Safety 
Monitor 
and 
Management of Agricultural Products,” Advanced Materials 
Research, vol. 634, 2013, pp. 4004-4010. 
[2] N. P. Mahalik and A. N. Nambiar, “Trends in food 
packaging and manufacturing systems and technology,” 
Trends in food science & technology, vol. 21, 2010, pp. 
117-128. 
[3] A. Z. Abbasi, N. Islam, and Z. A. Shaikh, “A review of 
wireless sensors and networks' applications in agriculture,” 
Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 36, 2014, pp. 263-
270. 
[4] D. Prajogo and J. Olhager, “Supply chain integration and 
performance: The effects of long-term relationships, 
information 
technology 
and 
sharing, 
and 
logistics 
integration,” International Journal of Production Economics,  
vol. 135, 2012, pp. 514-522. 
[5] A. Suprem, N. Mahalik, and K. Kim, “A review on 
application of technology systems, standards and interfaces 
for agriculture and food sector,” Computer Standards & 
Interfaces, vol. 35, 2013, pp.355-364. 
[6] M. Cinque, D. Cotroneo, C. Di Martino,S. Russo, and A. 
Testa, “Avr-inject: A tool for injecting faults in wireless 
sensor nodes,” In IEEE International Symposium on Parallel 
& Distributed Processing, IEEE IPDPS 2009, May 2009, 
pp. 1-8. 
[7] C. Di Martino, G. D’Avino, and A. Testa, “icaas: An 
interoperable and configurable architecture for accessing 
sensor networks,”  International Journal of Adaptive, 
Resilient and Autonomic Systems, vol. 1 , no.2 ,2010 pp. 
30-45. 
[8] J. Von Braun,  The world food situation: new driving forces 
and required actions. Intl Food Policy Res Inst, 2007. 
[9] M.E. Yüksel and A. S. Yüksel, “RFID technology in 
business systems and supply chain management,” Journal of 
Economic and Social Studies vol.1, no. 1,2011,pp. 53-71. 
[10] J. Wolfert, C. N. Verdouw, C. M. Verloop, and A. J. M. 
Beulens, “Organizing information integration in agri-food—
A method based on a service-oriented architecture and 
living lab approach,” Computers and electronics in 
agriculture vol. 70, no. 2, 2010, pp. 389-405.     
[11] T. Kelepouris, K. Pramatari, and G. Doukidis, “RFID-
enabled traceability in the food supply chain,” Industrial 
Management & Data Systems vol.107, no.2, 2007, pp. 183-
200. 
[12] E. A. Soujeri, R. Rajan, and A. Harikrishnan, “Design of a 
zigbee-based RFID network for industry applications,” 
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Security 
of information and networks. ACM, 2009, pp. 111-116.   
[13] A. Sarac, N. Absi, and S. Dauzère-Pérès, “A literature 
review on the impact of RFID technologies on supply chain 
management,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Production 
Economics, vol.128, no.1, 2010, pp.77-95. 
[14] J. Fontanella, “Finding the ROI in RFID,” Supply Chain 
Management Review, vol. 8, no.1, 2004, pp.13-16. 
[15] K. Butner, “The smarter supply chain of the future,” 
Strategy & Leadership, vol. 38, no.1, 2010, pp. 22-31. 
[16] X.Zhu, S. K. Mukhopadhyay, and H. Kurata, “A review of 
RFID technology and its managerial applications in 
different 
industries,” 
Journal 
of 
Engineering 
and 
Technology Management, vol. 29, no.1, 2012, pp.152-167. 
[17] N. P. Mahalik, “Processing and packaging automation 
systems: a review,” Sensing and Instrumentation for Food 
Quality and Safety, vol. 3, no.1, 2009, pp. 12-25. 
[18] M. J. Meixell, “Quantifying the value of web services in 
supplier networks,” Industrial Management & Data 
Systems, vol.06, no.3, 2006, pp. 407-422. 
[19] R. A. Tabile, et al., “Design and development of the 
architecture of an agricultural mobile robot,” Engenharia 
Agricola, vol. 31, no.1, 2011, pp. 130-142. 
[20] T. Gulledge, “What is integration? ,” Industrial Management 
& Data Systems 106.1 (2006): 5-20. 
[21] L. Ruiz-Garcia, P. Barreiro, and J. I. Robla, “Performance 
of ZigBee-based wireless sensor nodes for real-time 
monitoring of fruit logistics,” Journal of Food Engineering, 
vol. 87, no.3, 2008, pp. 405-415. 
[22] A. Testa, A. Coronato, M. Cinque, and J. C. Augusto, 
“Static verification of wireless sensor networks with formal 
methods,” In Signal Image Technology and Internet Based 
Systems (SITIS), 2012 Eighth International Conference on , 
IEEE, November 2012, pp. 587-594. 
[23] M. C. Cinque, D. Di Martino, and A. Catello Testa, “An 
effective approach for injecting faults in wireless sensor 
network 
operating 
systems,” 
Computers 
and 
Communications (ISCC), 2010 IEEE Symposium on. June 
2010. 
[24] A. Baggio, “Wireless sensor networks in precision 
agriculture,” ACM Workshop on Real-World Wireless 
Sensor Networks (REALWSN 2005), Stockholm, Sweden. 
2005. 
[25] P. K. Haneveld, “Evading murphy: A sensor network 
deployment in precision agriculture,” O teu-Delft, Xuño 
2007.  
[26] T. Kalaivani, A. Allirani, and P. Priya, “A survey on Zigbee 
based wireless sensor networks in agriculture,” Trendz in 
Information Sciences and Computing (TISC), 2011 3rd 
International Conference on. IEEE, 2011. 
[27] D. Restuccia, et al, “New EU regulation aspects and global 
market of active and intelligent packaging for food industry 
applications,” Food Control, vol. 21, no.11, 2010, pp. 1425-
1435. 
[28] M. Bolic, D. Simplot-Ryl, and I. Stojmenovic (Eds), RFID 
systems: research trends and challenges. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010. 
[29] M. Canavari, R. Centonze, M. Hingley, and R. Spadoni, 
“Traceability as part of competitive strategy in the fruit 
supply chain,” British Food Journal, vol.112, no.2, 2010, pp.  
171-186. 
[30] G. Schiefer, R. Reiche, and J. Deiters, “Transparency in 
Food Networks‐Where to Go,” International Journal on 
Food System Dynamics, vol.4, no.4, 2014, pp. 283-293. 
[31] R. Bertolini, “Making information and communication 
technologies work for food security in Africa,” International 
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), No. 11, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-377-3
AFIN 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

