Hybrid Multicast Management in a Content Aware Multidomain Network  
 
Eugen Borcoci 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University Politehnica of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
 
Gustavo Carneiro 
INESC Porto, Faculdade de Engenharia, 
 Universidade do Porto 
e-mail: gjc@inescporto.pt 
Radu Iorga 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University Politehnica of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania  
e-mail: radu.iorga@elcom.pub.ro 
Abstract—This paper proposes an architectural management 
solution for a multicast hybrid infrastructure optimised to 
transport 
real 
time 
multimedia 
flows. 
The 
multicast 
capabilities are offered to the upper layers as connectivity 
services by an overlay multi-domain Content-Aware Network. 
The overall system is based on new concepts like Content-
Aware Network and respectively Network Aware Application. 
A hybrid multicast framework, Quality of Services capable is 
proposed, where IP intra-domain multicast is combined with 
inter-domain overlay multicast. The management aspects of 
this infrastructure are discussed. The design, validation and 
implementation of a system based on this architecture are 
currently under development in the European FP7 ICT 
research project, ALICANTE. 
 
Keywords - multicast; overlay multicast; content-aware 
nertworking; 
network 
aware 
applications; 
multimedia 
distribution; quality of services; Future Internet. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The multicast transport service has received more 
attention in the last years, in the context of increasing of 
group communication needs and also of real time flows and 
content/media distribution to large groups of users like 
IPTV, Video on demand (VoD), peer-to-peer (P2P). The 
traditional IP multicast (IPM) despite its two decade age[1], 
is not however globally deployed [2][3] , due to problems 
related to group management, needed router capabilities, 
inter-domain issues and QoS problems. On the other hand, 
Overlay Multicast (OM) has received increased attention in 
the last decade, including tree based and P2P solutions. OM 
[4][5][6], has lower efficiency and speed, but it is quickly 
implementable, due to not relying on network layer 
multicast capabilities. A hybrid approach (IPM + OM) can 
be an attractive trade-off, both in terms of scalability, 
efficiency and flexibility. One can benefit from intra-domain 
IPM where it exists, and use OM outside the IP multicast 
area. Therefore, in this paper, a hybrid solution is 
considered. 
For the Future Internet (FI) it is generally accepted that it 
will be [8][9] strongly service-content oriented and media 
oriented. A new concept proposes to increase the coupling 
between the transport/network and application layer, 
resulting in Content-Aware Networks (CAN) and Network 
Aware Application (NAA). Such CANs can be constructed 
as overlays, on top of traditional IP networks using partial or 
full network virtualization (VCAN). Note that virtualization 
is seen as a main way to make the Internet more flexible 
[10],[11]. Compared to the traditional ones, the CAN routers 
have 
additional 
tasks 
such 
as 
content/context-based 
classification 
and 
filtering, 
QoS 
processing,  
routing/forwarding, adapting  and transforming the packet 
flows. 
This paper considers the multicast service realization in a 
CAN/NAA context. The work is performed inside the 
European FP7 ICT research project, ―Media Ecosystem 
Deployment Through Ubiquitous Content-Aware Network 
Environments‖, ALICANTE, [15]-[19]. An architectural 
management solution for a multicast hybrid infrastructure, 
QoS capable is proposed here, optimized to transport real 
time multimedia flows. The multicast services are offered to 
the upper layers by the VCANs. The solution is based on 
hybrid multicast (H-Mcast) framework, QoS capable, where 
the IP intra-domain multicast (if available) is combined with 
inter-domain overlay multicast. The management aspects of 
this infrastructure are explored.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents 
samples of related work. Section III summarizes the overall 
ALICANTE architecture. Section IV is focused on the 
multicast hybrid framework. The multicast management 
solution is proposed in Section V. Section VI contains some 
conclusions and outline of future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The new approach CAN/NAA is currently investigated in 
many studies, targeting better performance (for multimedia) 
but without losing modularity of the architecture. The CAN  
and NAA are studied in the framework of Future Internet 
architecture discussions. 
The CAN/NAA approach can naturally lead to a user-
centric FI and telecommunication services, as described in 
[8],[9],[12],[13]. 
The 
works 
[12][13] 
consider 
that 
CAN/NAA can offer a way for evolution of networks beyond 
IP. The capability of content-adaptive network awareness is 
exploited in [13]. The CAN/NAA approach can also offer 
90
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

QoE/QoS capabilities of the future networks, [12]. The 
architecture can be still richer if, to content awareness we add 
context awareness [13]. To provisioning methods for QoS 
assurance one can add content adaptation as another set of 
methods [14][18].  The CAN approach, on the other hand, 
requires a higher amount of packet header processing in the 
CAN elements, similar to deep packet inspection techniques; 
therefore, new methods are needed to minimize this 
processing task.  Organizing the Internet in VCANs is a 
solution that fits naturally into the concepts of Parallel 
Internets [20]: each plane can be associated to a VCAN and 
to different QoS classes having different granularities, as 
described in [20], [22]. 
The approach of this paper is to enhance the VCAN 
capabilities with a powerful multicast service, QoS-enabled 
CAN, and multi-domain capability. 
III. 
SUMMARY OF ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The ALICANTE main concepts and general architecture 
has been already described in [15]-[19]. Here, a summary 
only is inserted to allow the next presentation of the multicast 
framework as shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
  
User 
Terminal 
AS2 
Service/Content Environment 
 
Home 
Box 
RMgr 
@ANP 
Umgr 
@HB 
Access 
Network  
 
AS1 
AS3 
CANMgr@NP 
Intra-
NRMgr@NP 
Intra-
NRMgr@NP 
CANMgr@NP 
Intra-
NRMgr@NP 
SMgr 
@SP 
UMgr 
@SP 
User Environment 
UMgr 
@CP 
Content 
Provider 
Service 
Provider
P 
SMgr 
@HB 
 
Transport 
layers 
@HB 
SMgr 
@CP 
P2P 
User 
Terminal 
User 
Terminal 
VCAN1 
SR 
Content Aware Network  
(CAN) layer 
CANMgr@NP 
Content 
Server 
SDB 
Media  flow 
Management and  
control flows 
VCAN 
May also be 
Content Provider 
Access 
Network  
 
VCAN 1 multiple domain 
plane (multicast, QoS, etc.) 
MANE 
IP 
Multicast 
Overlay 
multicast 
 
Figure 1 The ALICANTE Overall Architecture 
Notations: UMgr, SMgr, CANMgr, NRMgr, RMgr – are respective managers at user, service, CAN and network levels. 
MANE – Media Aware Network Element; SR Service Registry; SDB- Server Data Base 
 
ALICANTE 
proposed 
a 
new 
Media 
Ecosystem, 
comprising business entities, having roles of consumers 
and/or providers. It defines inter-working environments, [15], 
[16]: User Environment (UE), to which End-Users (EU) 
belong; Service Environment (SE), to which Service 
Providers (SP) and Content Providers (CP) belong; Network 
Environment (NE), to which the Network Providers (NP) 
belong. The business model contains a new actor - CAN 
Provider (CANP) which is the virtual layer connectivity 
services provider seen as an enhanced NP and offering 
VCAN services. A new entity is also defined: Home-Box 
(HB), partially managed by the SP, the NP, and the EU. The 
HB is located at end-user's premises and manages 
content/context-aware and network-aware information. The 
HB can also act as a CP/SP for other HBs, on behalf of the 
End User (EU). The HBs cooperate with SPs in order to 
distribute multimedia services (e.g., IPTV) in different 
modes (e.g., native multicast or Peer to Peer -P2P).  
Two novel virtual layers [15],[16] exist: CAN layer for 
network level packet processing, working on top of IP and 
HB layer for the actual content delivery, in the user 
proximity.  The HB layer hosts the service adaptation, 
91
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

service mobility, security, and overall management of 
services and content. The CAN routers are called Media-
Aware Network Elements (MANE) having additional 
capabilities: content/context - awareness, controlled QoS, 
security, monitoring, etc. The CAN/MANE approach offers 
advantages over conventional routing/forwarding, but raises 
several challenges given more tasks to be performed by the 
MANE. 
The CAN layer offers to the SP, Parallel Internets 
specialized for different types of applications/content, 
including multicast services. One or several CANs with 
different capabilities can be defined, installed and offered by 
each domain. They also can be chained in order to obtain 
multi-domain spanned CANs.  The CAN data operations are 
performed by MANEs which are installed at the domains’ 
edges (scalability reasons). The MANEs process the 
flows according to the content properties derived from the 
data flow and depending on VCAN network properties and 
its current status. The flows are classified in MANE based on 
Content Aware Transport Information (CATI) inserted by the 
content servers in the data packets, or packet headers 
analysis or information derived by on-the-fly content-type 
statistical analysis.  The Management and Control Plane 
supports contracts/interactions [19] of SLA/SLS type 
(appropriate protocols are developed in ALICANTE): SP-
CANP- through which the SP requests to CANP to provision/ 
modify/ terminate  VCANs; CANP-NP - through which the 
NP offers or commits to offer resources to CANP; CANP-
CANP – for multi-domain VCANS; Network Interconnection 
Agreements (NIA) between the NPs or between NPs and 
ANPs (these are not new ALICANTE functionalities but are 
necessary for NP cooperation). 
In Figure 1, a VCAN1 is configured, spanning AS1, 2, 3 
and offering multicast services. IP multicast is used inside 
ASes (if available) and overlay multicast between domains. 
The MANE is both IP multicast and OM capable. 
IV. 
HYBRID MULTICAST OVERLAY 
This section describes the multicast functionalities 
provided by the CAN, first at intra-domain level, and then 
expanding the scope to cover multi-domain multicast via 
VCANs. 
A. MANE Multicast Functionalities  
For intra-domain multicast, ALICANTE will use 
Protocol Independent Multicast – Sparse Mode or Source 
Specific Multicast (PIM-SM/SSM), [5],[7]complemented 
with QoS assurance mechanisms. For the first phase of 
system development, PIM-SM has been selected as an 
existing mature solution. In case that a given domain has no 
IPM capabilities, still the H-Mcast system can extend the 
OM to transit the respective domains.  
The inter-domain links between MANEs will transport 
UDP packets containing a header and the multicast data.  
Thus, in the case of native multicast traffic generated by the 
CP server, an Overlay Module (OMd) inside the MANE, 
encapsulates the native multicast packet or payload into a 
unicast one and send it to the next domain. The latter will 
strip the outside header and, based on OMd header, CATI, or 
SVC[24] layer information and then  forwards the multicast 
data to the HBs that are subscribed to it, using transport 
method selected for that session in that domain. 
MANEs can also contribute to P2P intra-domain multicast 
[17][18]. In such scenarios, the MANE is first instructed to 
forward the content as unicast flows, one flow per HB. Later, 
if a few more HBs subscribe to the content, in order to save 
bandwidth, switch to P2P distribution mode is triggered by 
the CAN Manager. Therefore, from the MANE point of 
view, only unicast sending is necessary. The P2P 
management and control actions will be done by the CAN 
Manager and HBs.  The MANEs are supposed to be both 
IPM and OM capable. MANE has a multicast data plane 
module (MDPM). It receives an input packet and retransmits 
it in a number of replicas as required. The MANE receives 
instructions of how to multiply and forward multicast traffic 
(forwarding table), from CAN Manager via Intra-NRMgr. 
The details of the MANE multicast functionality will be 
presented in a future paper. A short description is inserted 
here. The MDPM has two input drivers, one for multicast 
and another for unicast input, a high-level Multicast 
Bridge/Switch (MB) sub-module, and two output drivers, 
one for multicast and another for unicast.  The MB contains a 
Forwarding Table storing the tree information of that 
MANE.  As an example, for the case of an SVC application 
flow there will be associated a multicast tree for each SVC 
layer [18]. This is also done by the LOLCAST protocol [23], 
but it only supports OM, and not H-Mcast as is proposed 
here. The input driver receives packets from a network 
interface and analyzes them to extract the parameters 
{VCAN_ID, Layer#}. The input module delivers to the MB 
the original full packet, plus VCAN_ID, Layer# information. 
The MB generates the replicas to the output ports, in native 
multicast mode or unicast mode depending on the next 
device/network which follows that MANE. 
 
B. Multi-domain VCAN  Multicast Trees  
An H-Mcast tree is composed of several MANE nodes 
(H-MCast nodes) distributed in several NP domains. Each 
one may assume one or more of the following roles: root 
node, intermediate node, and leaf node. The latter are usually 
located at the ingress of ANs. Intermediate MANE nodes are 
capable of making an interface between the IPM and OM 
parts of the tree. 
A domain peering problem appears in multi-domain 
VCAN cases: how to determine the domains to compose the 
VCAN. The hub model has been proposed in ALICANTE, 
[19]. The SP contacts an initiating CAN Manager, which in 
turn determines and negotiates with other managers in order 
to establish the multi-domain CANs. The initiating CAN 
Manager is supposed to have inter-domain topology 
information (it should know all AS domains participating to 
this VCAN). The advantage of this approach with respect to 
others (e.g., cascade model) is that one has complete control 
of the VCAN, but knowledge on inter-domain topology is 
needed. However, the number of ASes involved in a CAN 
communication is low ( < 10), and they can be localized in 
92
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

an Internet region, therefore the scalability problem is not so 
stringent.  
Figure 2 shows an example of a multicast VCAN 
spanning three autonomous systems AS1, 2, 3, 4. The AS1 
and AS4 network routers are PIM-SM capable, while AS2 
and AS3 are not (except MANE). A multicast capable 
VCAN is constructed having a tree topology, with root in 
AS1 and leaves in other domains. The left side MANE 
routers in AS1 and AS4 plays also the role of Rendezvous 
Points (RP)[7] for the PIM-SM protocol. The thin lines of the 
tree in the picture represent the unicast links composing the 
overlay part, while the thick ones the IPM part. The leaf 
MANEs play also the role of Designated Routers for PIM-
SM protocol. The HBs can subscribe to the multicast tree by 
using the Internet Group Management Protocol IGMP. The 
construction of such tree will be described in the following 
sections. 
 
 
 
AS2 
AN3 
DR1 
AN1 
DR2 
DR3 
AS4 
AN2 
AS1 
AN1 
AS3 
AN2 
PIM-SM  
tree 
CANMgr 
CANMgr 
CANMgr 
2.1 
2.3 
2.2 
1 
CS 
NRM 
NRM 
NRM 
CANMgr 
NRM 
PIM-SM  
tree 
 
2 
HB2 
 
 
HB3 
 
 
HB1 
 
 
HB2 
 
 
HB1 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
IP PIM-SM/SSM domain 
Non-IP PIM-SM/SSM  domain 
PIM-SM Router 
Ordinary router 
MANE 
IP Multicast tree branch 
Unicast path 
Inter CAN Managers  
signaling actions 
Configuration commands 
issued by NRM 
CAN Network  
Resource Manager 
 
Service Life cycle 
 
Service Forecast 
and Planning 
 
CAN Mcast 
Planning 
 
CAN Mcast 
Provisioning  
Manager  
(Mcast) 
CAN  
Negotiation  
 
SP 
Multicast VCAN 
RP 
RP 
CAN Mcast 
Provisioning  
Manager  
 
CAN Mcast 
Planning  
 
 
Figure 2 Hybrid multicast tree and management actions 
AS – Autonomous System; CANMgr- CAN Manager; NRM – Intra-domain Network Resource Manager; DR – Designated 
Router; RP – Rendez-Vous Point (PIM-SM); HB- Home Box 
 
V. 
HYBRID MULTICAST MANAGEMENT 
In this section, the hybrid multicast management 
framework is described.  We focus first on defining the 
management entities involved, then the process of multicast 
VCAN construction, and finally QoS aspects of multicast 
trees. 
A. Management Entities 
This section outlines the management framework for H-
Mcast in ALICANTE. The decision to construct multicast 
enabled VCANs belongs to the Service Manager (SM@SP) 
of the Service Provider (Figure 2). More complete 
description of the SM@SP is given in [19]. Here we only 
emphasize those ones involved in multicast management. 
 The CAN Network Resources Manager (CAN_RMgr) is 
a SM@SP functional block performing all actions to assure 
the VCAN (unicast, multicast) support to the SP. It 
negotiates actions like VCAN planning, provisioning and 
operation. An SLA between SP and CANP establishes the 
provisioning and operation clauses for the future VCAN.  
The CAN_RMgr@SM  of the SP interacts with other 
modules of the SM@SP: Service Forecast and Planning - an 
offline process performing service predictions and their 
associated plans of deployment, considering the business 
needs as input; Service Deployment Policy (not shown in 
Figure 2)  - containing predefined rules for service planning 
and deployment. This information is derived from the high-
level SP business interests. The detailed functionality of 
these are out of scope for this paper. 
The CAN_RMgr@SM contains: CAN Mcast Planning, 
CAN Mcast Provisioning and CAN Negotiation modules as a 
main tuple to provision VCANS. Not shown in Figure 2, are: 
CAN Operation and Maintenance intervening during VCAN 
exploitation; VCAN Repository data base to keep all data 
related to VCAN provisioning, installation and current status; 
CAN Deployment and Operation Policies to guide the other 
blocks 
of 
the 
CAN_RMgr@SM. 
The 
interface 
implementation for communications between external 
93
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

modules will be based on SOAP/Web Services interfaces, 
used for SOAP requests and responses. 
At CAN layer, the CNMgr@CANP has a Multicast 
Manager (McastMgr@CANP) to perform actions to execute 
the SP multicast service requests, i.e., related to multicast 
VCAN provisioning and operation. In Figure 2, two modules 
called CAN Multicast Planning and CAN Multicast 
Provisioning Manager are suppose to perform the actual 
planning of the multicast VCAN in terms of all tree elements 
and domains to be spanned. 
 
C A N  
M c a s t 
P la n n in g  
C A N  
P ro v .  
M g r. 
C A N   
n e g o t. 
m c _ V C A N  _ S u b -re q  ( ) 
E s ta b lis h   
tre e  p a ra m e te rs  
S e rv ic e  M a n a g e r@ S P  
P re p a re  S L A  
M A N E  
1  
…  
M A N E  
k  
C A N   
M g r 1  
 
.. 
C A N   
M g r 2  
N R M
1  
N R M  
2  
A C  
M c _ V C A N -s u b -a c k  ( ) 
C A N  la y e r 
.. 
B u ild _ tre e -rs p  ( ) 
C o m p u te  tre e  
B u ild _ tre e -re q  ( ) 
C A N  M g r 
4  
N R M  
4  
D A  
S to re  re s u lts  
m c _ V C A N  _ S u b -re q  ( ) 
A C  
D A  
D A  
In s ta ll d e c is io n  
In s ta ll_ M c a s t_ tre e -c o n fig  ( ) 
m c _ V C A N  _ S u b -rs p  ( ) 
 
 
Figure 3. Message Sequence Chart example of communication between management entities to build a H-Mcast tree 
 
 
B. Multicast VCAN Construction  
To following SALs negotiation protocols/interfaces are 
currently specified and implemented in ALICANTE to 
support the multicast VCAN framework:  
- 
CAN Mcast Provisioning@SP – CAN Mcast 
Planning@CANP (Figure 2, action 1 ) 
- 
CAN Mcast Provisioning@CANPk - CAN Mcast 
Provisioning@CANPm (Figure 2, action 2.1,2.2, 2.3) 
- 
CAN Mcast Provisioning@CANPk- Intra-domain 
NRMk (Figure 2, action 3.1, ..3.4)) 
Figure 2 shows the sequence of actions to construct the 
multicast VCAN. Figure 3 shows the Message Sequence 
Chart presenting the required signaling between management 
entities. The sequence of action is: 
1.CAN Multicast Planning at SP, establishes (after 
cooperation with Service Forecast and Planning) the tree 
characteristics, from the service point of view, i.e., the root 
and leaves IDs ( where servers and current or future users are 
located)  QoS classes of services characteristics, bandwidth 
necessary, static/ dynamic characteristics, etc. We recall that 
the SP does not have to know the inter-domain topology but 
only the root and the network nodes that are leaves of the 
tree. How the VCAN Planning at SP is performed is out of 
scope of this paper.  
2. After this planning the CAN Mcast Provisioning 
Manager at SP, via its CAN Negotiation module, asks to 
CANP and negotiate with it the VCAN construction (Figure 
2, action 1). Let it be CANP1 at AS1. 
3. The CAN Mcast Planning@CANP1 computes details 
of the multicast tree. Initially, the other NP (let them be n, m, 
p,..) domains involved are determined. Then a mesh of 
possible ingress/egress MANE nodes is determined. Using an 
appropriate metric, a tree (containing not only number of 
―hops‖ but bandwidth constraints, etc.) is computed by using 
a modified constrained routing Dijkstra shortest path 
algorithm (SPF) algorithm. The details of this algorithm will 
be presented in a future work. 
4. The CAN Mcast Provisioning@CANP1 will contact 
the CNAP2, 3, 4 to negotiate with them the multicast VCAN 
( Figure 2, action 2.1, 2.2, 2.3). Details of such negotiations 
and cases of success failures wil be a future work.  
5. Each CAN Manager will negotiate with its Intra-
domain NRM the possibilities to realize the VCAN tree part 
in the corresponding domain. (Figure 2, action 3.1, ..3.4). 
6. Supposing success scenario, acknowledgments are 
returned to the CAN Mcast Provisioning@CANP1, and from 
this to SP concerning this multicast VCAN subscription. 
7. Immediately or later the SP can ask the tree installation 
in the network. To this set of actions the Provisioning 
managers will contribute at SP and CANP and also the 
involved IntraNRMs and associated MANEs. 
94
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

 
C. QoS assurance and Resource Management 
The approach adopted is that one CAN is associated to a 
given QoS class. The QoS classes in ALICANTE have 
reused the framework defined in [20],[21], but adapted to 
VCAN context. One may have several levels of granularity 
when defining CANs, while the main common idea is 
preserved:  that CAN layer offers to the SP, Parallel 
Internets specialized for different types of applications 
content. In ALICANTE the VCANs are constructed after 
successfully accomplishing Admission Control (AC) in each 
NP domain. This is the basis of capability to guarantee the 
QoS. In multicast case also AC is applied. This check can be 
applied 
statically, 
at 
VCAN 
subscription 
time, 
or 
dynamically at VCAN invocation time. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The paper proposed an architectural solution for 
management of hybrid multicast (H-MCast) capable to 
construct virtual Content Aware Networks, QoS capable  in a 
multi-domain 
network 
context. 
The 
overall 
system 
architecture is introduced and then the multicast-related 
management entities roles are defined. The necessary 
interfaces/protocols between the management entities are 
defined. A multi-domain peering solution is proposed and 
multicast scenarios are presented in order to emphasize the 
signalling phases required. Further work is going on to 
develop the above mentioned protocols and also the resource 
management framework in order to add QoS capabilities of 
the VCANs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the EC in the context of the 
ALICANTE project (FP7-ICT-248652). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Deering, IETF RFC 1112 ―Host Extensions for IP 
Multicasting‖, 1989. 
[2] C. Diot, B. Levine, B. Lyles, H. Kassem, D. Balensiefen , 
―Deployment Issues for the IP Multicast Service and 
Architecture‖, IEEE Network, Vol. 14, No. 1, 2000, pp. 
78–88  
[3] H. Asaeda, S. Suzuki, K. Kobayashi, J. Murai , 
―Architecture for IP Multicast Deployment: Challenges and 
Practice‖, IEICE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 
E89-B, No. 4, 2006, pp. 1044–1051.  
[4] B. Zhang, S. Jamin, and L.Zhang, ―Host Multicast: A 
Framework for Delivering Multicast to End Users‖, 
Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM 2002, Vol. 3, pp. 
1366–1375. 
[5] L. Lao, J.-H Cui, M. Gerla, and D.Maggiorini, ―A 
Comparative Study of Multicast Protocols: Top, Bottom, or 
In the Middle?‖, Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM 
2005, Vol. 4, Miami, USA, pp. 2809–2814,  
[6] B. Li and J. Liu, ―Multirate Video Multicast over the 
Internet: An Overview‖, IEEE Network, Vol. 17, No. 1, 
2003, pp. 24–29.  
[7] B. Fenner, M. Handley, H. Holbrook, I Kuevalos , IETF 
RFC 4601, „Protocol Independent ulticast - Sparse Mode 
(PIM-SM)‖ August 2006. 
[8] C. 
Baladrón, 
―User-Centric 
Future 
Internet 
and 
Telecommunication Services‖,  in: G. Tselentis, et al. 
(eds.), Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 
217-226. 
[9] J. Schönwälder, M. Fouquet, G. Rodosek, I. Hochstatter, 
―Future Internet = Content + Services + Management‖, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 7, Jul. 2009, 
pp. 27-33. 
[10] T. Anderson, L. Peterson, S. Shenker, J. Turner, 
―Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization‖, 
Computer, vol. 38, no. 4, Apr. 2005, pp. 34–41. 
[11] N. 
M. 
Chowdhury 
and 
R.Boutaba, 
―Network 
Virtualization: State of the Art and Research Challenges‖, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no.7,  Jul. 2009, 
pp. 20-26. 
[12] F. Liberal, J. Fajardo, H. Koumaras., ―QoE and *-
awareness in the Future Internet‖, in: G. Tselentis, et al. 
(eds.), Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 
293-302. 
[13] N. Baker, ―Context-Aware Systems and Implications for 
Future Internet‖, in: G. Tselentis et al. (eds.), Towards the 
Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 335-344. 
[14] T.Zahariadis, C. Lamy-Bergot, T. Schierl, K. Grunenberg, 
L. Celetto, C. Timmerer, ―Content Adaptation Issues in the 
Future Internet‖, in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), Towards the 
Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp.283-292. 
[15] FP7 ICT project, (2010), ―MediA Ecosystem Deployment 
Through 
Ubiquitous 
 
Content-Aware 
Network 
Environments‖, ALICANTE, No248652, http://www.ict-
alicante.eu 
[16] E. Borcoci, D.Negru, and C.Timmerer, ―A Novel 
Architecture for Multimedia Distribution based on Content-
Aware Networking‖ CTRQ 2010 Conference Proceedings, 
www.iaria.org. 
[17] ALICANTE, Deliverable D2.1, ALICANTE Overall 
System and Components Definition and Specifications, 
http://www.ict-alicante.eu/, Sept. 2010. 
[18] M. Grafl et al., Deliverable D2.2 Service/Content 
Adaptation Definition and Specification http://www.ict-
alicante.eu. 
[19] E.Borcoci, 
M.Stanciu, 
D.Niculescu, 
D.Negru, 
and 
G.Xilouris, ―Connectivity Services Management in Multi-
domain 
Content-Aware 
Networks 
for 
Multimedia 
Applications‖, INTERNET 2011, www.iaria.org.  
[20] Boucadair, M. et al., ―A Framework for End-to-End 
Service Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel 
Internets‖, IEEE Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, 
pp. 134-143. 
[21] P. Levis, M.Boucadair, P. Morrand, and P.Trimitzios, ―The 
Meta-QoS-Class Concept: a Step Towards Global QoS 
Interdomain Services‖, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[22] M. P. Howarth et al., ―Provisioning for Interdomain Quality 
of 
Service: 
the 
MESCAL 
Approach‖, 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, June 2005, pp. 129-137. 
[23] K. Ogura, H. Imaizumi, M. Minami, O. Nakamura, and J. 
Murai, ―Overlay Multicast Protocol for Delivering Layered 
Data Structure‖, IEEE CCNC 2007, pp. 996-1000. 
[24] H. Schwarz, D. Marpe, and T. Wiegand, ―Overview of the 
Scalable Video Coding Extension of the H.264/AVC 
Standard‖, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for 
Video Technology, 2007, pp. 1103-1120. 
 
95
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

