Efficient Content Sharing over Content Centric Networking 
 
Sho Harada 
Waseda University 
Tokyo, Japan 
shoharada1990@akane.waseda.jp 
  
Yong-Jin Park 
Waseda University 
Tokyo, Japan 
yjp@ieee.org
 
Abstract—Content Centric Networking (CCN) is a clean 
slate network architecture optimized for today’s and expected 
future’s demands for the Internet. It is a promising paradigm 
for the Future Internet architecture among new clean slate 
network architectures. It realizes the reduction of the load on 
servers, efficient mobility support, fast content distribution 
and retrieval, and high security. However, there is room for 
improvement on CCN when we share contents in a community 
or we distribute contents as a service provider. In this paper, 
we propose a method that enables us to share contents more 
efficiently in a community. Our content sharing model will 
reduce an extra processing and the network load by 20% on 
average. 
Keywords—Future Internet; Content Centric Networking; 
Named Data Networking; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the number of Internet users is 
explosively increasing. In the past, we used Internet for 
exchanging messages. However, the purpose changed and 
the majority of today’s users use the Internet for retrieving 
contents. To meet today's demands, researchers have been 
extending the functionalities of Internet protocols. However, 
in this scenario, we need to continue extending the 
functionality if the scale of the Internet keeps increasing. 
One promising solution is to make a clean slate architecture 
that is designed for large-scale Internet and optimized for 
today's demands. 
In the past five years, Information Centric Networking 
(ICN) [1] [2] is becoming popular. In ICN, we do not depend 
on location information such as IP address to request or 
retrieve contents, but Unified Resource Identifiers (URIs) 
that indicate resources. It enables us to request contents 
directly and we do not need to be aware of their exact 
locations. As ICN architectures, there are many promising 
architectures. PURSUIT [3], which is the succeeding project 
of PSIRP [4], has been researched mainly in Europe. It 
realizes the optimization of network by utilizing centralized 
management.  
Content Centric Networking (CCN) [5] [6] is the most 
promising one in ICN architectures. CCN enables us to 
reduce the burden on servers, efficient mobility support, and 
fast content retrieval by dispersion of network load. However, 
there is room for improvement. Our proposal realizes cutting 
out the extra communication and reducing network load 
when we share contents in a dynamic community. 
 
Figure 1. Structure of CCN Router 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section Ⅱ describes the basic CCN architecture and Voice 
over Content Centric Networking [7] as a related work. In 
Section Ⅲ, we explain the problem of the basic CCN, our 
proposed community model, the key distribution method, 
and the content sharing model. In Section Ⅳ, we show a 
performance evaluation. Finally, we conclude our paper in 
Section Ⅴ. 
II. 
CONTENT CENTRIC NETWORKING 
A. 
Basic CCN Architecture 
In CCN, we use two kinds of packets. Interest Packets 
are used to request content by name. Data Packets are used 
to deliver requested content to the requester in response to an 
Interest Packet. By using these packets, we can retrieve 
contents without knowing where they are. In CCN, we use 
an exclusive router called CCN Router. Fig. 1 shows the 
structure of CCN Router. CCN Router has three kinds of 
tables. Content Store (CS) is used to store contents, enables 
CCN Router to cache contents. When a CCN Router receives 
an Interest Packet and has the requested content in its CS, it 
will send the cached content to the requester instead of the 
content producer. Therefore, users can retrieve contents fast 
while the load on content producer is reduced. In addition, it 
supports mobility. When a user moves and fails to retrieve a 
Data Packet, the user just simply requests the content again. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
Figure 2. Communication Model in VoCCN 
In this case, the user can retrieve the content from the 
adjacent CCN Router, which has cached the content in its CS. 
Of course, we can use traditional technologies that are used 
in IP network for mobile support. Pending Interest Table 
(PIT) saves the face where an Interest Packet carried on and 
is used to forward Data Packet to the original requester. 
Forwarding Information Base (FIB) is similar to a routing 
table and used to forward Interest Packet to the content 
producer. The detail of FIB and the routing is written in [8].  
In CCN, users can retrieve contents by name and do not 
care about the content locations. In addition, adequate 
security measure is taken in contents. Therefore, it is difficult 
for malicious users to attack a specific server nor to tamper 
contents. 
B. 
Related Work 
Voice over Content Centric Networking (VoCCN) is a 
real-time, conversational, telephony application over CCN 
and simpler, more secure and more scalable than VoIP [9]. 
In VoCCN, data flows directly from producer to consumer. 
In addition, CCN architecture enables multipoint routing. 
Fig. 2 shows the processes to start a call over CCN. At 
first, a caller sends an Interest Packet, which includes “invite 
message” and the symmetric key encrypted by the callee’s 
public key combined with its content name. Then, the callee 
who received the caller’s Interest Packet will send a response 
message encrypted by the caller’s symmetric key as a Data 
Packet. By this method, the caller and the callee share a 
symmetric key and can communicate each other securely. In 
our proposal, secure key transmission is very important 
because our proposal is designed on the premise of it. 
III. 
EFFICIENT CONTENT SHARING MODEL 
In this Section, we explain the insufficient of basic CCN 
and our proposed content sharing model. Our content sharing 
model will reduce the load on servers. In addition, the 
average load on network will be cut by 20%.  
 
Figure 3. Proposed Community Model 
A. 
The Problem of Basic CCN 
In basic CCN, when a producer sends out content, the 
producer will encrypt the content with a key. Then, the 
requester will decrypt the content with a key that the 
requester received from the producer in advance. In this time, 
the encrypted content will be cached in every CCN Routers. 
Therefore, users can retrieve the content from these CCN 
Routers and decrypt it if they have the key. However, when 
the scope of disclosure is updated, all cached contents have 
to be deleted and the producer needs to re-encrypt content 
when they are requested again. It causes extra network load 
and processing since in a dynamic community or monthly 
subscription service, the scope of disclosure changes 
frequently. Therefore, we propose a method that enables 
CCN Routers to keep cached contents even when a 
community member list is changed and the scope of 
disclosure is updated. It will cut the extra network load and 
processing. 
B. 
Community Model 
We introduce a community model to realize our efficient 
content sharing model. Fig. 3 shows the structure of a 
community. A user belongs to a community that is a part of a 
big community.  In a community, group members share a 
Group Key that is managed by the group leader or the 
service provider. When a user distributes contents, the user 
will encrypt the contents with a Group Key. Based on the 
scope of disclosure, the user can choose a Group Key. When 
a list of group members is updated, its Group Key will also 
be updated. 
For example, when a producer wants to send out content 
only for the members of “Community X”, the producer will 
encrypt the content with the Group Key of “Community X”. 
However, when the producer sends out the content for all 
members of “Community Service”, the producer will encrypt 
the content with the Group Key of “Community Service”. 
Group Key is managed by the group leader or the service 
provider.  
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
Figure 4. Content Encryption 
In this case, the Group Keys of “Community Service” and 
“Paying Members” will be managed by the service provider. 
The Group Keys of “Community X” and “Community Y” 
will be managed by the group leaders. 
This method enables us to control the scope of content 
disclosure by the community. In addition, we can control the 
scope of disclosure only by encrypting contents with key. 
This model is suitable for CCN architecture because 
authentication by server is not needed to retrieve contents. 
C. 
Key Distribution 
In our model, it is very important to exchange or 
distribute keys smoothly and securely. Therefore, we 
propose a key distribution method that applies, simplifies, 
and optimizes the key transmission of VoCCN for our 
proposed model. 
To distribute a key, client sends Interest Packet by using 
the Public Key of Group Leader (PKG) and the Symmetric 
Key of the Client (SKC). The content name of Interest 
Packet will be like “Community Service/Paying Members/ 
Community X/PKG(SKC)/SKC(authentication message and 
key request message”. PKG(SKC) means that SKC  is 
encrypted with PKG. In response to this Interest Packet, the 
group leader will send its group key encrypted with SKC as a 
Data Packet. Once the group leader needs any information 
about the client, the group leader will send Interest Packet 
encrypted by SKC to authenticate the client before sending 
Group Key. 
D. 
Efficient Content Sharing Model 
Fig. 4 shows our content encryption model. To distribute 
content, the producer creates a Data Key. The content name 
of a Data Key will be defined like “Waseda/Network 
Community/MusicA.mp3/DataKey”. After creating a Data 
Key, the producer will encrypt the content with this key. 
The Data Key, which was used to encrypt the content, 
will also be encrypted with a Group Key. The producer will 
keep several Group Keys. Therefore, the producer will 
choose one of them to encrypt the content.  
 
Figure 5. Updating the Scope 
In our model, the content name of a Group Key will be 
defined like “Waseda/NetworkCommunity/GroupKey/v0”. 
Different from the name of Data Key, Group Key has the 
number of the version in its name. When a scope of 
disclosure is updated, the Group Key has to be updated. All 
users need to know it and distinguish the new Group Key. 
However, the old Data Key must be abandoned and replaced 
by the new Data Key. Therefore, the name of Data Key must 
be unique. When this content producer distributes the content, 
the content and the encrypted Data Key will be sent out at 
the same time.  
In basic CCN, if the list of a community member is 
updated, the manager of the Group Key needs to update the 
Group Key and abandon the encrypted content. In our model, 
the manager will update the Group Key and abandon the 
encrypted Data Key instead of the content itself (Fig. 5).   
Therefore, we do not have to update encrypted content 
and can continue to use cached contents. It will reduce the 
re-encryption cost and network load between the producer 
and the CCN router that caches the content because in many 
cases, the size of Data Key is much smaller than that of 
content itself. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
Our proposal will reduce the network load. We defined 
Efficiency as the network load in our proposal divided by the 
network load in basic CCN. The network load between 
consumers and routers that cache contents is almost same. 
However, the load between a producer and the routers will 
be greatly reduced. The average Efficiency of updating the 
scope will be the following calculation formula.  
 (1) 
 
I in this formula is the data size of an Interest Packet. Dc is 
the size of an encrypted content. Dk is the size of a key. The 
load by Dk and I increases. However, we can reduce the 
load by content from 1.0Dc to 0.8Dc. In many cases, Dc is 
far bigger.  
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

 
Figure 6. Comparison of Network Load 
 
We compared the network load between our model and 
basic CCN, as shown in Fig. 6. When the content size is 
more than 2000 bits, the efficiency of our method is better 
than basic CCN. The bigger the content size is, the more 
efficient our proposal will be. However, when the content 
size is small, the traditional method is better. Therefore, the 
producer needs to choose which method to use. When we use 
the evaluation result of [5] as an argument, the calculated 
efficiency is 80%. In other words, our proposed model can 
reduce the network load by 20% on average. 
In our model, the caching policy is based on on-path 
caching, which is a basic caching policy in CCN. However, 
many caching policies are already proposed [10,11,12]. If we 
combine our model with a appropriate caching policy, the 
efficiency will improve dramatically. In addition, our 
proposal is independent of security standards. Therefore, 
users can use any traditional security methods. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Content Centric Networking is a promising architecture 
in Future Internet research. It enables us to retrieve contents 
efficiently and reduces the network load. In addition, CCN 
realizes efficient mobility supports, high security, and fast 
content retrieval. CCN Routers have storage to cache 
contents, while acting as intermediate nodes. We can share 
contents efficiently by using caching function. In basic CCN, 
we encrypt contents to distribute them to particular group. 
However, when the scope of disclosure is updated, we have 
to abandon the cached contents. In this case, we have to re-
encrypt the contents and re-send them. In other words, we 
cannot use caching function effectively. In this paper, we 
proposed a community model, a key distribution method, 
and content sharing model. By using the community model 
and the key distribution model, our proposed content sharing 
model enables us to share contents efficiently in a dynamic 
community. In our content sharing model, content producers 
create Data Key, which is abandoned instead of the content 
itself. It reduces the network load and extra processions. 
Fig.6 shows the efficiency of our proposed method. We can 
reduce the network load by 20% on average because the size 
of Data Key is much smaller than that of the content itself 
and we are able to take advantage of CCN caching function. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Ahlgren, C. Dannewitz, C. Imbrenda, and D. Kutscher, “A Survey 
of 
Information-Centric 
Networking”, 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, Vol. 50, Issue. 7, 2012, pp. 26-36. 
[2] M. F. Bari, R. Boutaba, and B. Mathieu, "A Survey of Naming and 
Routing in Information-Centric Networks", IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Vol. 50, Issue. 12, 2012, pp. 44-53. 
[3] N. Fotiou, G.C. Polyzos, and D. Trossen, "Illustrating a publish-
subscribe Internet architecture", Journal on Telecommunication 
Systems, Springer, 2011, pp. 233-245. 
[4] N. Fotiou, P. Nikander, D. Trossen, and G.C. Polyzos, "Developing 
Information Networking Further: From PSIRP to PURSUIT", 
BROADNETS’10, 2010, pp. 52-58. 
[5] V. Jacobson, et al., “Networking Named Content”, CoNEXT ’09, 
2009, pp. 1-12. 
[6] L. Zhang, et al., "Named Data Networking (NDN) Project", NDN 
Technical Report NDN-0001, 2010.. 
[7] V. 
Jacobson, 
et al., 
“VoCCN: 
Voice-over 
Content-Centric 
Nwtworks”, ACM ReArch’09, 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[8] L. Wang, et al., "OSPFN: An OSPF Based Routing Protocol for 
Named Data Networking", NDN Technical Report NDN-0003, 2012. 
[9] B. Goode, "Voice over Internet protocol (VoIP)", Proceedings of the 
IEEE, Vol. 90, Issue. 9, 2002, pp. 1495-1517. 
[10] Z. Ming, M. Xu, and D. Wang, “Age-based cooperative caching in 
Information-Centric Networks”, INFOCOM WKSHPS’12, 2012, pp. 
268-283. 
[11] I. Psaras, W.K. Chai, G. Pavlou, “Probabilistic in-network caching for 
information-centric networks”, ICN’12, 2012, pp. 55-60. 
[12] K. Cho, et at., “WAVE: Popularity-based and collaborative in-
network caching for content-oriented networks”,  INFOCOM 
WKSHPS’12, 2012,  pp. 316-321. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-300-1
AFIN 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

