Ontology driven Augmented Exploitation of Pervasive Environments
Salvatore Venticinque, Alba Amato, Beniamino Di Martino
Dep. of Information Engineering
Second University of Naples - Aversa, Italy
Email: {salvatore.venticinque, alba.amato}@unina2.it, beniamino.dimartino@unina2.it
Abstract—Pervasive environments offer to software applica-
tions the possibility to interact with the reality in order to
perceive the information surrounding the users and to adapt
the environment and their own behavior. This problem is
modeled as a set of context aware services which learn and
augment the reality perceived by the user through her/his
device. Application are enabled to perceive the information
surrounding the users, to adapt the discovery and delivery
of contents and software in order to optimize the user’s
satisfaction. We present a framework that implements the
model to supports experts in the domain of the Cultural
Heritage to augment the archaeological site with a set of
multimedia contents which are delivered by innovative services
to the visitors in order to guide their tour and to enhance their
perception of the reality.
Keywords-Augmented Reality; Ontology; Context Aware-
ness; Mobile Devices
I. INTRODUCTION
Pervasive environments offer to software applications the
possibility to interact with the reality in order to perceive
the information surrounding the users and to adapt the
environment itself, or to improve the user’s perception by
exploiting available devices. Here we deal with the problem
about how to program the user’s personal device for enabling
the interaction between remote services and environment by
the devices themselves. Applications should be able to use
pervasive sensors as their own extension in order to let the
users beneﬁt of context awareness in services exploitation.
Many application contexts can beneﬁt of a tight coupling
between pervasive objects and services. Let’s imagine some
relevant scenarios:
• assisted exploitation of museums and archaeological
parks;
• information guides in wide and crowded environments
like big cities;
• discovery and recommendation of products in commer-
cial centers;
• rescue of missing peoples in disaster situations by
personal objects (smart-phones, RFIDs, Bluetooth de-
vices);
• monitoring and safety check of activities in working
areas.
For all the examples which have been cited before common
issues must be addressed but it is not straightforward that
the same technical and technological solution can be applied
across the different scenarios and within the same class of
applications. Some features to be considered in each new
case study are:
1) the kind of environment: indoor, outdoor,with or with-
out technological infrastructures;
2) dynamic changes and lack of landmarks;
3) heterogeneity of objects, entities and devices;
4) huge number of object/users and situations to be mon-
itored and managed. In this case the complexity could
increase and it could make impossible to perform the
necessary checks at the required frequency, limiting
the provisioning of real-time reactions.
Beyond the difﬁculties in dealing with the capability of get-
ting the awareness about the environment and its perception,
when this changes dynamically, services would implement
adaptive and reconﬁgurable behaviors in order to optimize
their delivery. Here we have to address many issues related to
the heterogeneity of parameters and criteria to optimize the
content delivery and to integrate the best suited techniques
and technologies. For example, time constraints and user’s
positioning and interest have to be considered together but
must be processed with different techniques. Furthermore
additional properties to be considered in critical applications
are security, traceability and certiﬁcation of events, real-time
reactions.
II. RELATED WORK
Many research contributions focus on the development of
software/hardware architectures and frameworks for mobile
context-aware tourist guides, also based on semantic tech-
niques and technologies. In [2] authors present iJADE Free-
Walker, a framework that integrates GPS, ontology and agent
technologies to support location awareness for providing
assisted navigation and classiﬁcation of tourist information
for the users. The system implements a context-aware tourist
guide for the city of Hong Kong. The ontology is extracted
using structural information from travel websites. CRUM-
PET, Creation of User Friendly Mobile Services Personal-
ized for Tourism [3], is an agent based framework that pro-
vides a context-aware tourist guide adapting the information
content and presentation according to user proﬁle, device
and connection characteristics. It is developed in microFIPA-
OS, an agent platform based on the FIPA-OS that is an Open
41
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Source implementation of the FIPA (Foundations of Intelli-
gent Physical Agents) standard. CRUMPET is modeled as
a multi-agent system (MAS) whose agents are autonomous
and share their knowledge using FIPA-ACL (Agent Com-
munication Language). Agents use a common ontology in
order to understand each other. The CHIP (Cultural Heritage
Information Personalization) [4] project is a framework that
uses Semantic Web technologies to provide personalized ac-
cess to digital museum collections. The framework supports
assisted navigation integrating heterogeneous technologies
and provides semantic browsing, searching and semantic
recommendations. In our approach semantic is used for
knowledge representation and management, but the ontology
is designed by experts of the application domain. It is used
both as a common vocabulary to support interoperability
aomng heterogeneous remot services, local applications and
users, and for intelligent discovery of media contents. Beside
pervasive technologies and augmented reality are used to
enhance the visit experience and to enable visitors to explore
easily pervasive areas according to their interests. Other
relevant issues, like ubiquity [5], are not addressed here.
III. PROBLEM MODELING
In order to approach the described problem we have to
model the environment where the user is moving and to
reconstruct the perceptions of the user himself in order to
get her/his particular vision about what is surrounding him.
A real representation of the environment is necessary to
identify landmarks and possibilities of intervention using
pervasive actuators and sensors. On the other hand we need
to get the special knowledge of the environment acquired
by the user in order to support him by augmenting her/his
perception of reality with something that can improve her/his
satisfaction. This problem can be modeled as a set of context
aware services which learn and augment the reality perceived
by the user through her/his device. Reality can be augmented
and adapted by interacting with neighbor objects and by
delivering relevant media contents.
In Figure 1 an high level representation of this model is
shown.
The environment will be modeled as a geo-referred map
with itineraries, landmarks and point of interest. Of course
localization of users and objects it is possible according
the device technology, the available infrastructures and the
kind of environment. Indoor or outdoor localization can be
implemented using heterogeneous technologies, and often
absolute localization could not be performed, but only
nearby landmarks or object can be detected. In the following
equation
E = {{POIs}, Pos(U), {pathi}}
(1)
the environment is modeled by a set of point of interest
which are known a priori, or which have been detected
dynamically by the user’s device. Pos(U) is the current
Figure 1.
Problem model
position of the user. It could be an absolute position, or
it could be a relative position according that has been
estimated by detecting close POIs. pathi represents an
available itinerary for the user.
User’s knowledge about the surrounding environment can
be acquired by using peripherals of her/his personal mobile
device, by recording and evaluating user actions or explic-
itly asking for user feedbacks. Some examples are user’s
position, interest, nearby objects, landscape, etc. Interaction
with the environment and presentation of contents can be
done again using user’s device and her/his peripherals.
K(U(t)) = {Per{0, t}, I{0, T}, D(t)}
(2)
K(U(t)) represents the user knowledge, and eventually
knowledge history, about the environment. It is recon-
structed by using information coming from pervasive sensors
(Per{0, t}); considering user’s interests which come from
what the user has done, what s/he declares, what are her/his
feedbacks (I{0, T}); taking into account device capabilities
(D(t)) . Of course different components could have different
weights according to their relevance or the time of percep-
tion. We could consider the knowledge at the current time, in
a time widows, or the complete history. Services, in order to
augment the user’s knowledge and the their/user’s capability
to interact with the environment, have to choose, according
their context awareness:
• what content and application they have to deliver;
• when it needs to execute the application or to present
the content;
• how this should be done.
AR = {C(K(U(t))), Mode}
(3)
AR represents the set of contents, and the way they will
be delivered, to be used for augmenting the reality perceived
by the user. The optimal set, and its organization, is chosen
to optimize the user’s satisfaction.
42
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

IV. ONTOLOGY BASED KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION
AND REASONING
Semantic techniques can be used both to model the knowl-
edge of applications and to reason about the decision to be
taken about how to adapt the service delivery. An ontology
implements the representation of the global knowledge. It
is necessary to share a common dictionary and to describe
the relationships among the entities/objects which are part of
the model. In our model a common ontology include all the
general concepts which are useful to describe a pervasive
environment where mobile users are moving, using their
devices and interacting with available facilities and other
users. The general ontology is complemented with a domain
ontology that is designed by an expert of the speciﬁc ﬁeld.
Concepts of the ontology are used on client side to describe
a representation of the reality as it is perceived by the user.
On the back-end the ontology is used to annotate digital
resources like points of interest, contents, applications. It
is also used to support reasoning. Users’ behaviors, infor-
mation from pervasive devices or from other users, device
properties, external events are heterogeneous data that are
perceived by the device and that are used to build a dynamic
changing representation of the user knowledge about the
reality within which s/he is moving. The applications are
knowledge driven. The user’s knowledge can be used by the
application that is running on the device to adapt its logic
locally, and it is updated remotely to improve the awareness
of services at server side.
Application are events based. Events can notify an update
of the user’s knowledge or can be explicit service requests
raised by the user. At each invocations a semantic queries,
that depend on the user’s knowledge, is built and processed
to get the action to be performed and to content to be de-
livered. Results of the query are individuals of the ontology
that are described by semantic annotations.
The user’s knowledge is composed of many semantic
concepts with static, dynamic or locked properties.
Components of the knowledge are:
• Device technology and capability. Among the static
properties here we means hardware resources, on board
peripherals, display size, total memory and storage.
Dynamic ones can be power level, available memory
and storage and bandwidth ;
• User’s position. It is a dynamic property that can
change over the time and can be evaluated using
different techniques and technologies, depending on the
devices, on the available infrastructures and the kind of
environment (indoor or outdoor);
• Pervasive objects. They are dynamically discovered
by the device. They can be sensors which provide
information about the environment or can be used by
the services themselves through the device or eventually
directly if they are connected in some way to the
network;
• Time information. We intend the current time at user
side and the time that the user is spending, or has spent
within the environment.
• User’s interests. This part of the knowledge could be
dynamically changed by the application according to
the user’s behaviors and to her/his feedbacks. The user
could choose to start from an empty or a standard pro-
ﬁle, to change it or to lock some properties interactively.
Semantic techniques are used for intelligent content and
application discovery and delivery. Knowledge representa-
tion, ontology and annotations of digital resources are used
to ﬁlter, organize and deliver contents and software to the de-
vice. Different techniques for reasoning can be experimented
such as graph matching, description logics, neural networks
or more simple ones like SPARQL (SPARQL Protocol and
RDF Query Language) queries. Furthermore semantic can
be integrated with other kinds of techniques to take into
account constraints such as user’s position and available time
for exploitation.
V. REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN
In Figure 2 the architectural solution of a framework that
allows to apply the described approach is shown. Users,
Figure 2.
Architecture and roles
devices, services and producers are actors in this scenario.
On the left side the user is using her/his device that hosts
a client application that is able to perceive information from
the ﬁeld by pervasive sensors.
The application executes autonomously and proactively in
order to support the users’ activity within the environment
s/he is moving. It discovers surrounding objects, uses them
to update the representation of the user’s knowledge, reacts
using the local knowledge to organize and propose the
available contents and facilities by an interactive inter-
face. It could also communicate with close devices. If the
connection works the device can access remote services
43
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

which can exploit a wider knowledge and complex reasoning
capabilities to look for additional contents and applications.
Experts of the application domain deﬁne the ontology
for the speciﬁc case study. They use or design a map to
represent the environment. They add POIs to the map to geo-
refer multimedia contents and can link them to a concept
of the ontology. Furthermore they select relevant contents
and annotate them using concept and individuals from the
ontology.
Remote applications implement context aware services.
They use personal devices to collect perceptions and for
content delivery. They use reasoning to access content
repositories or Internet, and are able to discover and adapt
contents which are relevant to optimize the user’s satisfac-
tion.
In order to support these activities in a real scenario we
need to provide:
• back-end tools for enabling content production, their
semantic annotation publishing and retrieval;
• services for content discovery, adaptation and delivery;
• a client application to support user interaction with
services, with the environment and with available con-
tents.
VI. A REAL SCENARIO
Exploitation of archaeological sites can be very difﬁ-
cult because of a lack of supporting infrastructures and
because of the complex recognition and comprehension of
the relevant ruins, artworks and artifacts. The availability of
personal devices can be used to plan and support the tourist
by suggesting him the visit tours, the point of interest and by
providing multimedia contents in the form of digital objects
which can semantically augment the perceived reality.
In this context a relevant issue is the proﬁling of the
user, the selection and the presentation of the contents
which can improve the user’s satisfaction, by providing new
models of interactions with reality, trough her/his device.
In this context the Second University of Naples is engaged
on a multidisciplinary project with both cultural and a
technological aims [1].
Following the approach deﬁned above we are implement-
ing a technological framework that supports the experts
in the domain of the Cultural Heritage to augment the
archaeological site with a set of multimedia contents which
are delivered by innovative services to the visitors through
their mobile devices in order to guide their tour and to
enhance their perception of the reality and learning.
Three case studies have been chosen to test the approach
and the framework. The S. Angelo in Formis Basilica, in
Campania, near S. Maria Capua Vetere - i.e. the ancient
Capua, is an interesting sample because of its uncountable
layers which begin with the ancient temple of the IV century
B.C., going on with the late- republican temple, unto the
basilica that witnesses so many previous phases. The devices
and the procedures allow to perceive some elements in the
landscape, such as landmarks, which otherwise could not
be noticed. It is necessary to understand the history and
the details of ancient sanctuary and for the exploitation of
the country nearby in ancient times. From the sanctuary one
sees at the bottom the pianura campana, which still witnesses
the centuriazione, and on the top the Monte Tifata, rich of
archaeological evidence- such as temples, dwellings, thermal
structures- to be studied with regard to the project. The
project is carried out also on the ancient town of Norba
and on the amphitheater of Capua: the former, because of
its 44 ha in width, in a huge open park, has to be described
with special regard to urban plan and architectural features
because it is largely saved and still buried. It was founded
in the V B.C. and destroyed in 81 B.C., later it was seldom
inhabited just at the beginning of the Middle Ages. Usually
visitors are surprisingly impressed by the walls in opera
poligonale: that is why, in this case, the aim is to draw
visitors attention on other landmarks (temples, houses, the
street frame) and to represent by interpretation of aerial
photographs, survey on the spot, speciﬁc digging sample,
by means GPS, what is still underneath the surface. The last
topic is the amphitheater of Capua, the second one as for
width in the ancient world: in this case visitors shall be able
to realize the whole building, with the service rooms and
the devices underneath, with reference especially to the set
of urban layers which the building stood in and which has
been radically altered.
VII. IMPLEMENTATION
To satisfy the requirements of the presented case studies
we need to provide a technological solution that does not
need infrastructures for letting the software know the user
location and her/his feeling about the environment. It means
that Bluetooth, RFID, GPS, electronic compass, camera, net-
work connection and others are the technologies which can
be used together or independently to get information about
the user perceptions and to augment her/his exploitation of
the archaeological site. The user will be able to download
at home, before to leave, or on site, if the network will be
available, the map of the area to be visited. The map will
include all the points of interest that identify the relevant
objects of that area and different cultural itineraries which
could be exploited on site. Also contents can be discovered
and downloaded in advance. On board software and remote
services will assist the cultural visit by augmenting the
reality by the user’s personal device. In the following we
detail the technological choices which have been taken to
implement each component of the framework.
A. Environement Map
To provide a description of the environment within which
the user is moving we need a geo-referenced map that
implements the model described in Equation 1 by describing
44
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

buildings, roads, bans, itineraries and Points of Interest
(POIs). We used the OpenStreetMap format to design open
maps. In Figure 3 the map of the S. Angelo in Formis
cathedral is shown. It has been built by exporting a model
that was originally built by Autocad and has been exported
into a GPX (GPS eXchange Format) format. The JSON
(JavaScript Object Notation) tool allowed us to import the
GPX (GPS eXchange Format) trace and to add manually
details and POIs. Each point represents an artifact, a ruin or
any other entities of cultural relevance and can be described
using a list of key-value pairs. Some of them have been used
to link the POIs to URLs of multimedia information, or to
provide a semantic description of the POIs itself. The tool
allow to export the map in an open format that can be read
and used by the client application that is presented in this
paper.
Figure 3.
S. Angelo in Formis map
B. Ontology and annotation
An ontology has been designed to describe the sites of
interest and to annotate the related media. It support the
implementation of the model described in Equation 2. A
general part includes the concepts which are common to
all the class of applications that can be modeled accord-
ing the proposed approach. Among the others the Time
class and her/his properties (CurrentTime, AvailableTime,
ElapsedTime, ExploitationTime) allow to organize and assist
the visit taking into account time information and handling
time constraints. Position class and its properties allow to
localize the user and objects around him. An application
speciﬁc part of the ontology include the concepts that
belong to the domain of the cultural heritage and additional
classes and individual which are proper of the case studies
introduced in the previous section. In Figure 4 a snapshot
of the ontology is shown. In particular we can see the
Building Element (Parte di Ediﬁci) class an its subclasses,
Amphitheater Element (Parte di Anﬁteatro) and Domus
Element (Parte di Domus) which are proper of the sites
of interests. The ontology is used: 1) for annotating the
Figure 4.
Ontology and annotations
multimedia contents; 2) to represent the user’s knowledge;
45
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

3) to perform reasoning for intelligent discovery of those
documents which are relevant to the optimize the quality of
the cultural visit. To annotate texts, images and any kind
of contents we chose the AktiveMedia tool (available at:
http://sourceforge.net/projects/aktivemedia/). In Figure 5 a
picture of the Amphitheater of S. Maria Capua Vetere is
annotate with the Column and the Arc classes which are
part of this kind of building.
Figure 5.
The annotator
The output produced by the annotator is an RDF ﬁle that
use concepts and properties of the AktiveMedia ontology
and of the domain ontology. An example of RDF annotation
is described below. We ﬁltered a set of properties. In partic-
ular hasConcept specify the ontology class or the individual
by which the selected part of the image has been annotated.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="windows-1252"?>
<rdf:RDF
xmlns:j.0=""
xmlns:rdf=""
xmlns:dc=""
xmlns:j.1="">
<rdf:Description rdf:about="">
<j.0:usesOntology></j.0:usesOntology>
<j.0:hasAnnotation>
<rdf:Description rdf:about="">
<j.1:anID></j.1:anID>
<j.1:hasContent></j.1:hasContent>
<j.1:annotationText></j.1:annotationText>
<j.1:botomX></j.1:botomX>
<j.1:bottomY></j.1:bottomY>
<j.1:hasShape></j.1:hasShape>
<j.1:hasConcept></j.1:hasConcept>
<j.1:topX></j.1:topX>
<j.1:annotationHeight>
</j.1:annotationHeight>
<j.1:topY></j.1:topY>
<j.1:hasComment></j.1:hasComment>
</rdf:Description>
</j.0:hasAnnotation>
<j.0:width></j.0:width>
<j.0:comment></j.0:comment>
<j.0:hasHashCode></j.0:hasHashCode>
<j.0:height></j.0:height>
<dc:description></dc:description>
<j.0:hasPath>
image_example.jpg
</j.0:hasPath>
<j.0:content> </j.0:content>
<dc:creator> </dc:creator>
</rdf:Description>
</rdf:RDF>
C. Digital repository and semantic discovery
The
Fedora
repository
(available
at:
http://fedora-
commons.org/) is used to store digital objects, which are
included in Equation 3, and supports their retrieval. Into the
Fedora repository a digital object is composed of a set of
ﬁles which are:
• object metadata: used by the client application to
understand how to deliver the content;
• binary streams: which are images, video, text ... any
kind of raw information to be delivered;
• RDF annotation: that describe the semantic of the
object according to the ontology;
• disseminations: ﬁlters to be eventually used for adapt-
ing the object according to the target client.
We loaded the Aktive-Media ontology and the domain
ontology into the Fedora repository in order to exploit its
embedded SPARQL (SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query
Language) engine that is used to select the optimal set of
individuals that means contents. Multimedia contents are
automatically stored into the repository after the annotation
phase. The RDF output is automatically processed using
an XSL (eXtensible Stylesheet Language) transformation to
make it compliant with the format required by the Fedora
repository.
D. Content types
Different types of content models have been deﬁned and
simple examples have been produced.
• Multiple images whose transparency can be graduate by
the user to compare changes in different periods. In the
same way real picture can be compare with paintings.
Old picture can be compared with what is seen by the
camera.
• Part of the image acquired by the camera are recognized
and linked to related multimedia contents;
• Virtual reconstructions which are synchronized with the
camera output or the detected RFIDs;
• Text, audio, video and composite media.
A content descriptor is attached to every digital object. It
is used by the device when the content must be delivered.
The descriptor deﬁnes the right player for that media,
conﬁguration parameter and necessary input.
In Figure 6 an example of delivered content is shown.
The user focus the camera on a particular view of the S.
Angelo in Formis Basilica and sees the original temple of
46
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Diana Tifatina. In particular the perspective viewed by the
camera is the same shown by the video.
Figure 6.
Synchronized video
E. Remote services
A remote service has been conceived to support content
discovery and delivery.
It uses multiple criteria to discover and ﬁlter relevant
multimedia contents. Some criteria are the available time
for the visit, the user’s position, the device technology, the
user interests. The service is implemented by independent
ﬁlters. Filters are executed on the occurrence of such event
that update the user knowledge, or by direct asynchronous
request from the user himself.
For example a change of the user position is used to
ﬁlter POIs which are close to him or are relevant to her/his
position. We could get information about a building located
close to the user or about some other buildings located
elsewhere but that have been designed by the same architect.
When the user shoots a new picture, a search by sample
facility is used to ﬁnd the images that are similar to the the
current subject. This can be used to suggest a new set of
contents, which are relevant to what the user is looking at.
Each time the interest of the users changes, or also
when any other event occur, a reasoner generates dynamic
SPARQL (SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language)
queries, by which the repository is searched, and organizes
the retrieved contents according to their relevance. The
ontology is used to perform additional reﬂexive reasoning.
Additional ﬁltering rules can be implemented using time
information if they are available. For example it could be
relevant to know the current time (to suggest a sunshine
rather than to avoid a closed attraction or museum). The
available time for the visit is important to limit the number
of contents and to plan an itinerary. A delay is important to
dynamically cut what is less relevant and cannot be exploited
anymore.
We have implemented a search by sample ﬁlter that use
the position of the user to select all the picture which
represent the subjects s/he shoot, such as landscapes, mon-
uments or buildings around him. Within this set a matching
algorithm is able to identify an image that is the most similar
to the picture. All the annotation for that image are also
matched with on the display of the user’s device.
Instead, some example of SPARQL query which are
processed and whose results depends on the user’s interest,
are provided automatically by the software guide.
F. A Mobile Archaeological Guide
At client side, to implement a value added guide, we
have extended an open source software navigator called
Navit (available at: http://www.navit-project.org/). We used
the android version. The navigator provides basic facilities
for map visualization and to guide the user along some pre-
deﬁned itineraries by using the on-board GPS receiver. By
new extensions the guide is able to sense the environment
by the available peripherals, to understand the situations
according to which the visit will be adapted, and to enhance
the user experience. Even if many experiences on augmented
reality are proposed nowadays, the exploitation of vision is
used only to overlap real and virtual images. The extensions
provide the following functionalities:
• access to device peripherals to sense the environment
and to update the representation of the user’s knowledge
about the reality around him;
• access to remote services to update the user knowledge
and to ask for available contents
• a local cache of objects for exploiting the visit without
connection;
• a limited reasoner that is able to organize the content
by itself when the connection does not work.
Perceptors are implemented by:
• GPS positioning to localize the user in open spaces and
to guide him on cultural itineraries;
• RFID for positioning and detection of nearby POIs.
This technology can be used to alert the user but also
for her/his positioning in indoor environments;
• CODEBAR recognition to get information about ar-
tifact, monuments, ... when a RFID reader is not
available;
• image recognition by search by sample techniques
which are speed-up and improved using a position
based ﬁltering;
• monitoring of device resources and conﬁguration;
• collection of user interest by feedback and by an
analysis of her/his behavior;
• time monitoring.
On the other hand a list of functionalities are provided to
deliver contents and to guide the visit. Content management
47
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

(discovery client,organization and fruition) is supported both
at client side and at server side. Knowledge visualization
and management to allow the explicit speciﬁcation of user’s
own interest is provided. The output of the camera is used
as a component of the user’s knowledge as well as a
map on which semantic additions are anchored, not simply
superposed.
The user will be able to ask for and exploit available
multimedia contents, which are related to points of interest,
or to personal interests expressed by semantic concepts.
Multimedia content will be adapted at server side according
to the device/user/session proﬁle to provide to the user the
best quality of service.
Figure 7 shows the output of the result of the content
discovery service. The service invocation starts the camera
that is used to take a photo of the landscape or of a subject
of interest. In background, the client upload the image and
wait for the content retrieval. The discovery of relevant
contents and the download of retrieved information run in
background meanwhile the user is interacting with other
facilities provided by the client. The list of contents are
presented to the user when they are available. Other events
which open dialog for suggesting action, itineraries, POIs or
media can be related to new perceptions.
Figure 7.
Content retrieval
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented an approach for delivering of
context aware services in pervasive environment. Services
adapt applications and contents to be delivered in order to
optimize the user’s satisfaction by augmenting and improv-
ing her/his perception of the reality. An ontology driven
methodology has been used to describe the environment, the
user’s knowledge and application/contents to be delivered.
Personal devices have been exploited to interact with the
environment, to run interactive applications and to present
contents to the user. Perceptions which come from on-board
peripherals, from user’s feedbacks and actions are communi-
cated to context aware services to update the remote image
of the user’s knowledge, and are used at client side by
the client application to adapt itself. We described a frame-
work that implements the proposed approach. It represents
preliminary research results about the aided exploitation
and context awareness of complex archaeological sites by
mobile devices. The framework that supports the experts
in the domain of the Cultural Heritage to augment the
archaeological site with a set of multimedia contents which
are delivered by innovative services to the visitors in order
to guide their tour and to enhance their knowledge of the
reality. We are extending the framework using intelligent
agents technology and modeling the interaction between the
two agents according to learning by teaching approach: a
student on the device and a teacher in remote. The teacher
agent produces contents that the student agent consumes
presenting them to the user. Future developments of this
work could be the storing of user’s information about the
tour, so allowing for multiple visits, as well as the addiction
of the possibility of exploiting the visit at home, or simply
planning it before the trip.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by PRIST 2009, Fruizione
assistita e context aware di siti archelogici complessi me-
diante terminali mobile, founded by Second University of
Naples.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Venticinque, B. Di Martino, S. Quilici Gigli, P. Carfora, and
G. Renda. Aided exploitation and context awareness of com-
plex archaeological sites by mobile devices, Museum Futures
workshop, November 2010, pp. 4-6.
[2] T.H.W. Lam and R.S.T. Lee, iJADE FreeWalker - An Intelli-
gent Ontology Agent-based Tourist Guiding System,Studies in
Computational Intelligence, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,
Vol.72, 2007, pp. 644-651.
[3] S. Poslad, H. Laamanen, R. Malaka, A. Nick, P. Buckle and
A. Zipf, CRUMPET: Creation of User-friendly Mobile services
Personalised for tourism, Second International Conference on
3G Mobile Communication Technologies, 2001, pp. 26-29.
[4] L. Aroyo, N. Stash, Y. Wang, P. Gorgels, and L. Rutledge,
Chip demonstrator: Semantics-driven recommendations and
museum tour generation, in Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference, November 2007, pp. 879-
886.
[5] M. O’Droma and I. Ganchev, The creation of a ubiquitous con-
sumer wireless world through strategic ITU-T standardization,
IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol.48, October 2010, pp.
158-165.
48
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

