QoS Support in UMTS Networks 
Performance Evaluation and Perspectives towards an Autonomic Resource Management 
 
Emanuel Puschita, Gabriel Manuliac, Tudor 
Palade 
Communications Department 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
{Emanuel.Puschita, Gabriel.Manuliac, Tudor.Palade} 
@com.utcluj.ro 
Alexandru Caruntu 
Research & Development Department  
Nokia Romania SRL 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
Alexandru.Caruntu@nokia.com
 
 
Abstract—In order to enhance the QoS support inside UMTS 
network architecture, this paper brings the perspective of a 
QoS support for self-managing resources based on knowing 
the service requests and the network capabilities. The 
originality of this approach lies in the perspective of certain 
integrated functionalities that will provide autonomy for the 
components of the managed system in terms of internal 
decisions and configurations. The analysis of the results will 
highlight the benefits of an autonomic resource management 
mechanism compared with native UMTS QoS support. 
Keywords-UMTS; QoS support; autonomic management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The success of Internet architecture, as evidenced by the 
variety of many types of applications and network 
technologies, has proven its centrality through the way it has 
influenced, and often determined the daily life. Internet’s 
ubiquity has brought a number of shortcomings that the 
current architecture cannot solve, hence a multitude of 
solutions to approach problems as addressing, routing, 
congestion, resource management or traffic precedence have 
been developed.  
We can distinguish two major trends in the way of the 
scientific community understood solving this set of 
problems, namely: the complete remodeling of the Internet 
architecture (i.e., 4WARD [1], AUTOI [2], 4D [3], GENI 
[4]), respectively the gradual improvement of functionalities 
in the existing architecture [5] (i.e., Self-NET [6]).  
The complete remodeling of the Internet architecture 
offers a purist approach, a clean slate kind of modeling the 
new architectural elements. On the other hand, the gradual 
development of network architecture, ruled by a pluralistic 
approach, considers that the leap towards a new Internet 
architecture indifferent to the existing technologies is 
impossible. 
Promoting the functionality promised by a clean slate 
approach (flexibility, reliability, fault-tolerance, autonomy 
and manageability), the authors of this paper believe 
however that passing to an architecture that will integrate all 
these features is progressive, at least for two reasons: the 
perspective of operators and Internet service providers on 
radical changes in the network and the difficulty in testing, 
evaluating and validating the proposed new architectural 
elements.  
Beyond the need for new legislative and normative 
agreements between Internet service providers and network 
operators, agreements required by fundamental architectural 
changes, a major issue in the revolutionary innovation of the 
Internet architecture is the difficulty of assessing the new 
concepts in real experimental scenarios.  
In [7], Peterson disputes the promotion of new 
architectural ideas, calling the scientific community to test 
the proposed solutions in the experimental testbed sites (i.e., 
PlanetLab platform with the Measurement Lab “M-Lab” 
back-end platform [8]) validation site completely different 
from what means the evaluation by simulation or emulation.  
Although the reality of testing on an experimental 
platform  is undeniable, just not to focus the proposed 
solution on an single extremely narrow issue, the authors of 
this paper believe that prior to live testing phase there are 
several steps that must be completed by simulation and 
emulation, namely: monitoring and highlighting critical 
situations to identify network problems, testing the effect of 
local parametric adjustments on the whole system, 
development and gradual integration of scalable features in a 
new 
architecture. 
Therefore, 
stepping 
towards 
a 
revolutionary architecture is a matter of time; the new 
capabilities added to the existing architectural elements 
represent the prerequisites for success in this matter. Because 
of this, we believe that it is impossible to jump towards an 
architecture 
which 
is 
independent 
of 
the 
existing 
technologies, the argument of this motivation being found in 
the evolutionary pluralist concept.  
Starting from these premises, which combine the 
requirements of a clean slate paradigm with current 
technological reality, the paper aims at investigating and 
testing the benefits of integrating autonomic resource 
management capabilities into UMTS (Universal Mobile 
Telecommunications System) architecture to support QoS.  
Besides analyzing the QoS parameters like average end-
to-end delay, throughput or average jitter experienced by 
time-critical applications in the UMTS radio access network 
[14], the paper enhanced and extends the QoS support even 
25
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

to the UMTS IP sub-network segment of through 
virtualization. 
As the UMTS QoS support acts only on the radio access 
network, by knowing the requirements of the source 
application, a best end-to-end performance could be offered 
through network virtualization in the core network. The 
analysis tool is QualNet 5.0.2 network simulator [13].   
Thus, while in Section 2 the capabilities of the UMTS 
network to provide a QoS support to applications that have 
stringent requirements concerning the time component are 
tested, in Section 3 the premises of an autonomic resource 
management that ensures a higher quality support in the 
network are investigated. This fact is revealed by the ability 
to select an alternative route between entities SGSN (Serving 
GPRS Support Node) and GGSN (Gateway GPRS Support 
Node) 
based 
on 
knowing 
the 
source 
application 
requirements. Finally, Section 4 presents the conclusions of 
the realized study by showing the perspective of an 
autonomic management of network resources that is based 
on the conjunction of application requirements and network 
context. 
II. 
QOS SUPPORT IN UMTS NETWORKS 
In order to achieve a certain QoS support, UMTS 
network has defined a so-called “Bearer Service”. A bearer 
service includes all aspects needed to enable the provision of 
a contracted QoS. These aspects are among others the 
control signaling, user plane transport and QoS management 
functionality. Various types of bearer service were 
established between different parts of UMTS network. More 
than that, each bearer service on a specific layer offers its 
individual services using services provided by the layers 
below. It is worth mentioning that bearers covering only a 
certain part of a system and being closer to the physical 
connection always have more stringent QoS requirements.  
In order to solve the QoS problem, UMTS defines four 
types of traffic classes: Conversational (CO), Streaming 
(ST), Interactive (IN) and Background (BK).  
The main difference between these QoS classes is the 
transfer delay value. Conversational QoS Class includes real-
time applications that require stringent limits for delay value, 
while Background QoS Class is the most delay insensitive 
traffic class. Table I shows the main characteristics of the 
above 
mentioned 
QoS 
classes 
and 
examples 
of 
corresponding applications. 
TABLE I.  
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF UMTS QOS CLASSES 
Traffic classes 
Characteristics 
Application 
Conversational 
(CO) 
low delay, low jitter, symmetric 
traffic, no buffering 
speech, VoIP, 
video 
Streaming 
(ST) 
moderate delay, moderate jitter, 
asymmetric traffic, buffering 
allowed 
video 
streaming, 
audio streaming 
Interactive  
(IN) 
moderate jitter, asymmetric 
traffic, buffering allowed, 
request response pattern 
web browsing  
 
Background 
(BK) 
destination doesn’t expect data 
within a certain time, preserve 
payload content, asymmetric 
traffic, buffering allowed 
email, file 
downloading 
 
In order to define the traffic characteristics, UMTS 
architecture introduces a set of QoS attributes. It must be 
mentioned that a particular type of traffic class is itself a QoS 
attribute.  
There are attributes specific to all classes (i.e., maximum 
bit rate, delivery order, maximum SDU (Service Data Unit) 
size) and some attributes that are applied only for a specific 
class (i.e., transfer delay is applied only for conversational 
and streaming classes; traffic handling priority is applied 
only for interactive class). 
A. Performance Evaluation of the UMTS QoS Support 
In order to evaluate the QoS support implicitly provided 
by an UMTS network, a scenario including a PLMN (Public 
Land Mobile Network) was simulated using QualNet 5.0.2 
network simulator, a widely used platform in the defense and 
telecommunication network design and evaluation [13]. 
The network scenario includes eight UE (User 
Equipment) nodes: four source nodes (UE nodes 6, 8, 10, 
and 12) and four destination nodes (UE nodes 7, 9, 11, and 
13), as presented in Fig. 1.  
 
 
Figure 1.  UMTS evaluation scenario 
Global parameters configured at the physical (PHY) 
network layer of the simulation are given in Table II. It 
should be noticed that two different radio channels were used 
in order to access the network resources. The frequency 
values of these channels were chosen accordingly with 
European 3G bands for UMTS 2100 recommendations [11].  
TABLE II.  
PHY LAYER CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Up-link channel frequency 
1.95 [GHz] 
Down-link channel frequency 
2.15 [Ghz] 
Path Loss Propagation Model 
Two Ray 
Shadowing Model 
Constant 
Shadowing Mean 
4 [dB] 
Propagation Limit (UE Sensitivity) 
-150 [dB] 
 
 
26
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Between the source nodes (SN) and destination nodes 
(DN), four CBR (Constant Bit Rate) applications, each of 
them corresponding to one QoS class defined by the UMTS 
network, were considered. The characteristics of all 
applications are summarized in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
CORRESPONDING QOS CLASS FOR EACH CBR 
APPLICATION USED IN THE EVALUATION SCENARIO 
Application 
Type 
SN 
DN 
Items 
to 
Send 
Item 
Size 
[bytes] 
Interval 
[s] 
QoS 
Class 
CBR 
6 
7 
1000 
32 
0.1 
BK 
8 
9 
IN 
10 
11 
ST 
12 
13 
CO 
The results of the simulations concerning average end-to-
end delay, average jitter and throughput for each QoS 
supported class are synthesized by Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
UMTS QOS PARAMETERS EVALUATION 
UMTS 
QoS 
Class 
Average  
end-to-end delay 
[s] 
Average jitter 
[s] 
Throughput 
[bits/s] 
BK 
3.493082507 
0.068259929 
2699 
IN 
0.180157479 
0.053124915 
1420 
ST 
0.130232583 
0.022149065 
1412 
CO 
0.103871283 
0.016113024 
2076 
 
The average end-to-end delay results for each QoS 
support class are presented in Fig. 2 and the results regarding 
average jitter are illustrated in Fig. 3. 
 
Figure 2.  Average end-to-end delay experienced by the test applications 
in each QoS support class 
Analyzing the obtained results, it can be noticed that 
application which corresponds to the Conversational and 
Streaming QoS class is characterized by the lowest value of 
average end-to-end delay and jitter delay, as expected for the 
type of application corresponding to this class (speech, VoIP, 
video or audio streaming). 
 
Figure 3.  Average jitter experienced by the test applications in each QoS 
support class 
If throughput values are compared, it can be seen that the 
application from Background QoS class has the highest 
value of this parameter, but it also has the highest value for 
the average end-to-end delay and the average jitter.    
Summarizing, the network complies with the priority 
level imposed on the test applications that were modeled by 
CBR-type traffic sources, and this is reflected in the average 
values of the end-to-end transmission delays and in the jitter 
for each QoS priority class.  
Correlating end-to-end transmission delays with the 
transmission flow rate and with the time interval between 
transmitted packets one can notice the increased flow rate in 
the case of Background class, which is due to transmitting a 
reduced total number of packets in a very short transmission 
time interval. 
III. 
PERSPECTIVES TOWARDS AN AUTONOMIC RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT IN A UMTS NETWORK 
Developed within the 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership 
Project), the 3G standard suggests an end-to-end QoS 
support based on a policy management system (Policy-Based 
Network Management) [9].  
The network architecture presented by the first 3GPP 
public versions has evolved to an architectural model SAE 
(System Architecture Evolution) [10], which ensures the 
convergence of different access network categories such as 
UMTS, 3GPP, WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) or 
any other non-3GPP radio access technology. 
The latest public 3GPP version considers the IMS (IP 
Multimedia Subsystem) [11] network architecture to be 
completely separated from the access technology, having the 
specific access functions completely isolated from the core 
network.  
In order to manage QoS resources, the SAE architecture 
integrates an informational QIF (QoS Information Function) 
function that interacts with all individual network models 
included within the IMS platform. This QoS resource 
management solution is an external part of the network, 
based on the use and interaction between a central entity and 
periferic elements. 
Although in the clean slate approach the resource 
management and the QoS support are considered an 
27
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

integrated part of communications networks, this fact is not 
reflected in the characteristics of current systems or by the 
UMTS network architecture.  
Therefore, the perspective of an autonomic resource 
management in an UMTS network proposed in this paper 
suggests the necessity of adding additional information at the 
level of the central UMTS network elements using 
virtualization technique. 
Network virtualization represents a high level abstraction 
process that overlaps the implementation and physical 
network configuration details. Allowing co-existence of 
multiple virtual architectures overlaid on a common substrate 
physically shared, network virtualization promises flexibility 
and security, promoting diversity and increased management 
capacity [12].  
In 
this 
way, 
UMTS 
core 
network 
nodes 
act 
autonomously, being able to sense the environment, to 
perceive the changes, to understand internal changes and to 
react in an intelligent manner by selecting the optimal path 
according to application requirements.  
To demonstrate this, native UMTS QoS support is 
analyzed by comparison to the potential of the autonomic 
management offered through network virtualization, using 
QualNet network simulator [13]. 
Thus, in the case of an autonomic management system, 
the proposed analysis scenarios highlight the ability of 
selecting the best route according to the source application 
constraints in terms of maximum acceptable end-to-end 
delay. 
A. Scenario description 
According to [15], it is possible for an UMTS network to 
have multiple SGSNs and GGSNs entities which can be co-
located or can be interconnected via an IP subnetwork in 
order to increase the geographical area served by an operator.  
Considering the second approach, it was developed an 
evaluation scenario in which the SGSN and the GGSN are 
interconnected via a simple IP sub-network that consists of 
ten generic routers denoted R1 to R10, as depicted in Fig. 4. 
CBR
        R10
       R6
NodeB
6
       R1
       R7
       R5
R3
R9
R8
       R4
       R2
Internet
7
Source Node
Destination Node
CBR
Constant Bit Rate
Generic Router
 
Figure 4.  The architecture of the evaluation scenario 
Obviously, in a real-life UMTS IP sub-network would be 
more complex, the motivation for this topology was to better 
illustrate the problems that may arise and the proposed 
solution. 
In this evaluation scenario a CBR test application 
corresponding to Conversational QoS class (highest priority 
QoS class) was considered. Main parameters that describe 
the characteristics for the tested application are indicated in 
Table V. 
TABLE V.  
CHARCTERISTICS OF THE MODELED APPLICATION 
 
Application 
Type 
SN 
DN 
Items 
to 
Send 
Item 
Size 
[bytes] 
Interval 
[s] 
QoS 
Class 
CBR 
6 
7 
1000 
32 
0.1 
CO 
 
As we have already mentioned, the motivation behind 
this evaluation is to highlight the benefits of the autonomic 
management offered through network virtualization process. 
In our case, the virtualization process could be illustrated 
by controlling, through the configuration files, the parametric 
values that characterize network architectural elements.    
Knowing the values of these parameters, it is possible to 
indicate a dedicated virtual network that offers the best path 
form the source towards destination in terms of minimum 
average end-to-end delay, maximum throughput, packet loss 
rate on selected route or other stringent requirements specific 
to a certain type of application.   
B. Performance Evaluation 
In order to emphasize the path selection mechanism 
between SGSN and GGSN, core nodes of UMTS IP sub-
network, two different cases were evaluated: a native UMTS 
QoS support selection compare to QoS network support 
provided by an autonomic network management selection, as 
a result of dedicated virtual network generation. 
When it defines the links between two intermediate 
generic routers in the UMTS IP sub-network, the simulator 
allows the association of specific transmission throughput 
and delay on each link, as presented in Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  UMTS IP sub-network path selection 
28
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

Broadcasting 
the 
test 
application 
scheduled 
as 
Conversational (CO) by the native UMTS QoS support in the 
access network, the default path from router R1 to router 
R10 in the IP sub-network was selected via routers R4 and 
R7, as illustrated in Fig. 5. This path selection was based 
only on the routing protocol mechanism (i.e., minimum hop 
count). 
An autonomic network management QoS support should 
consider and accommodate both differentiated application 
requirements and dynamic network context. This mandatory 
integrated capability of the Future Internet (FI) network 
elements is performed based on network virtualization.  
The objective of network virtualization process is to 
generate virtual networks and make each of these virtual 
networks appear to the user as a dedicated network 
infrastructure, with dedicated resources and services 
available for application requests. Therefore, the network 
virtualization process invokes a mode of selecting the virtual 
network that best integrates and satisfies the application 
requests at the physical network level.  
It must be mentioned that for the generated virtual 
network, in our case, only the value of average end-to-end 
delay and jitter are considered as critical parameters for the 
source application. 
Results of the simulations validate a virtual path from the 
router R1 to router R10 via routers R2, R5, R4, R7, R6, and 
R9, a corresponding physical network infrastructure that 
offers best performances in terms of requested average end-
to end delay and jitter. 
Parametric results of the average end-to-end delay, 
average jitter, and throughput, both for native UMTS QoS 
support and autonomic resource management QoS support, 
are summarized in TABLE V.  
TABLE VI.  
PARAMETRIC EVALUATION OF QOS SUPPORT 
Selected path in 
UMTS IP sub-
network 
Average end-
to-end delay 
[ms] 
Average 
jitter 
[ms] 
Throughput 
[bits/s] 
Native QoS support in UMTS access network 
R1→R4→R7→R10 
307.19 
21.26 
2580 
Autonomic resource management based on network virtualization 
R1→R2→R5→R4
→ 
R7→R6→R9→R10 
57.42 
20.79 
2575 
                              
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the UMTS IP sub-network 
decisively influences the applications performances in terms 
of average end-to-end delay and jitter.  
Simulations results validates the perspective towards an 
autonomic resource management QoS support that makes the 
conjunction between the application's requests and the 
network context by choosing an alternate route in a 
virtualized environment.  
The potential of the autonomic resource management is 
reflected by the capacity to identify an optimal path between 
the source node and the destination node, according to the 
imposed QoS constraints.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  UMTS IP sub-network path selection 
Some critical conditions or cost constrains could limit the 
resource optimization while using the QoS support only on 
the UMTS radio access network. These situations request for 
adaptation of the source application parameters to the 
network available resources in order to still broadcast the 
information on the channel. 
An implemented and tested solution (i.e., virtualization 
algorithm, virtualized parameters, in-network message flow, 
and source adaptation) for the network virtualization concept 
is offered in [16]. The conjunction between the source 
application requests and the network context is achieved 
through the QoS profiles message exchange and it represents 
the process of network virtualization.  
As long as this solution uses Multiprotocol Label 
Switching (MPLS) for route maintenance, it could be applied 
just in the UMTS IP-sub network. It could not offer an end-
to-end QoS support because of the UMTS radio access 
which does not offer MPLS support. For the further work, 
the authors intend to extend this solution also for the radio 
access network in cellular networks. 
As in [16], the paper assumes the network overflow by 
probing each UMTS IP sub-network link. In spite of that, the 
potential of the autonomic resource management is reflected 
by lower average end-to-end delay and lower jitter. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper aimed to investigate the potential benefits that 
could reside from the integration of the virtualization process 
in current UMTS IP sub-network architecture.  
In a first stage, the upper limit of native UMTS QoS 
support was analyzed in terms of average-end-to-end delay, 
average jitter, and throughput. Then, the efficiency of this 
QoS support was compared to the QoS support resulted from 
the usage of autonomic resource management implemented 
through network virtualization.  
The obtained results suggest that such an approach could 
enhance the native UMTS QoS support by assuring an 
autonomic resource management that will allow overcoming 
the situations in which the existent QoS support would not 
permit even the service itself.  
29
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was supported by the project "Development 
and support of multidisciplinary postdoctoral programmes in 
major technical areas of national strategy of Research - 
Development - Innovation" 4D-POSTDOC, contract no. 
POSDRU/89/1.5/S/52603, 
project 
co-funded 
by 
the 
European Social Fund through Sectoral Operational 
Programme Human Resources Development 2007-2013. The 
logistics costs  of the work (research infrastructure, 
conference fee and accommodation costs) were supported by 
CNCSIS-UEFISCSU, project number 184/2010. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Mingardi, G. Nunzi, D. Dudkowski, and M. Brunner, 
“Event 
Handling 
in 
Clean-Slate 
Future 
Internet 
Management,” 11th IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on 
Integrated Network Management (IM 2009), pp. 275-278, 
June 2009. 
[2] L. Mamatas, S. Clayman, M. Charalambides, A. Galis, and G. 
Pavlou “Towards an Information Management Overlay for 
Emerging Networks,” 12th IEEE/IFIP Network Operations 
and Management Symposium (NOMS 2010), pp. 527-534, 
April 2010. 
[3] A. Greenberg, G. Hjalmtysson, D. A. Maltz, A. Myers, J. 
Rexford, G. Xie, H. Yan, J. Zhan, and H. Zhang, “A clean 
slate 4D approach to network control and management,” 
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 
35, no. 5, pp. 41-54, October 2005. 
[4] D.H.C. Du, “Clean Slate Design of Internet for Supporting 
Service-Oriented 
Computing 
and 
Applications,” 
IEEE 
International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and 
Applications (SOCA 07), pp. 3-8, June 2007. 
[5] C. Dovrolis, “What would Darwin think about clean-slate 
architectures?,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication 
Review, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 29-34, January 2008. 
[6] A. Kousaridas, C. Polychronopoulos, N. Alonistioti, A. 
Marikar, J. Mödeker, A. Mihailovic, G. Agapiou, I.P. 
Chochliouros and G. Heliotis, “Future Internet Elements: 
Cognition and Self-Management Design Issues”, In ICST 
(The Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and 
Telecommunications Engineering) (ed.), Proceedings of the 
SAC-FIRE Workshop, Autonomics 2008 (sponsored by the 
European Commission), Turin, Italy, September 23-25, 2008. 
[7] T. Anderson, L. Peterson, S. Shenker, and J. Turner, 
“Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, 
Computer Journal, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 34–41, 2005. 
[8] PlanetLab platform, http://www.planet-lab.org/, March 2011. 
[9] 3GPP TS 23.207, “Technical Specification Group Services 
and System Aspects; End-to-end Quality of Service (QoS) 
concept and architecture, Release 9, December 2009.  
[10] 3GPP TR  23.882,  “3GPP system architecture evolution 
(SAE): Report on technical options and conclusions”, Release 
8, September 2008.  
[11] 3GPP TS  23.228, “IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 
2”, Release 10, September 2010. 
[12] A. G. Prieto, D. Dudkowski, C. Meirosu, C. Mingardi, G. 
Nunzi, M. Brunner, and R. Stadler, “Decentralized In-
Network Management for the Future Internet”, IEEE 
International Conference on Communications ICC’09, pp. 1-
5, 2009. 
[13] QualNet 
Developer 
5.0.2 
Network 
Simulator, 
http://www.scalable-networks.com/, March 2011. 
[14] D. Kaur, Pankaj Rakheja, and A. Kaur, “Analysing Quality of 
Service in UMTS”, International Journal of Computer 
Applications, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 31-34, 2010. 
[15] Cornelia Kappler, UMTS network and beyond, John Wiley & 
Sons, West Sussex, 2009. 
[16] E. Puschita, T. Palade, A. Moldovan, R. Colda, and I. 
Vermesan, “An Innovative QoS Paradigm based on Cognitive 
In-Network Management of Resources for a Future Unified 
Network Architecture: I-NAME QoS Model”, The Second 
International Conference on Advances in Future Internet 
AFIN 2010, ISBN 978-0-7695-4091-7, pp. 37-43, 2010. 
 
30
AFIN 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Future Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9

