A Web-based System to Manage Primary Students’ Homework
A Case Study for the Teaching of Portuguese
M. Candeias1, M.G.A.D. Reis2, E. Peres3, J.J. Escola1, M.J.C.S. Reis4
1 University of Tr´as-os-Montes e Alto Douro (UTAD), Vila Real, Portugal.
E-mails: {jmpcandeias, mgentil.reis}@gmail.com, {eperes, jescola, mcabral}@utad.pt
2 Escolas Jo˜ao de Ara´ujo Correia, Centro Escolar da Alameda, Peso da R´egua
3 INESC-TEC and UTAD.
4 IEETA and UTAD.
Abstract—Technology has profoundly changed the way we learn
and live. Internet provides a new paradigm, setting forth that
education and communication approach is truly more complex
than ever before. Here, we present a web-based system to support
students’ homework. In order to prove its usefulness, we present
the results achieved with the application of a set of exercises to
help improving Portuguese (mother tongue) language skills of
4th-grade primary pupils. This set of digital exercises proved to
be the child’s favorite, rather than their counterpart exercises
in paper form, also showing a fair more positive attitude from
the students’ point of view. A simple survey also showed that
students do prefer the use of the system here presented, when
compared to other more traditional ways of practicing. We also
believe that the prompt feedback about the exercises correctness,
together with the training provided by the different exercises
sets about the same subject, besides the exploitation of video,
color, sound, etc., positively reinforce the diverse child’s senses,
deﬁnitely contributing to capture and motivate the child.
Keywords–Web-based
homework
system;
improving
mother
tongue teaching/learning; primary education
I.
INTRODUCTION
Technology has profoundly changed the way we learn and
live. This relationship appears to be quite complex, in that
IT, and especially socially- and technologically-rich learning
environments, seems to both require and foster skills and
learning. Internet provides a new paradigm, setting forth that
education and communication approach is truly more complex
than ever before.
It is on the basis of such paradigm that we present a case
study where a set of exercises were used in order to improve
the Portuguese (mother tongue) language skills of 4th-grade
primary pupils. Being part of a web-based system to support
students’ homework [1], a set of digital exercises proved to
be the child’s favorite, rather than their counterpart exercises
in paper form, also showing a fair more positive attitude. To
the best of our knowledge, there is no system like the one
presented here available.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section is
used to present some related work. Section III is used to
present some of the advantages of using the web-based system
presented here to help with the student homework, and related
to the Portuguese mother tong teaching/learing. In Section IV,
we present the theoretical model used to support our research.
In Section V, we present an overview of the web-based system,
and also its developing context. In Section VI, we present some
of the main characteristics of the set of templates available
in the system and used to create the exercises offered to the
students during this study, and also the data and some of our
main achievements. Finally, in Section VII, we present the
major conclusions achieved with this work.
II.
RELATED WORK
As far as our knowledge, there are no systems using the
same approach and ideas as those used in the system presented
and discussed in this paper. However, there are many web-
sites and tools available for helping the teaching of virtually
everything.
Concerning the class of available web-sites we want to
highlight the following ones. The “Coursera” site/system [2]
offers free courses online from world-class universities. The
topics are varied and lectures are formatted into series of
15-minute-long clips, and students can watch videos at their
convenience and in their own time. “Learnist” is the “Pinterest”
of learning [3]. The interactive platform allows users collect
teaching materials and educational content that are grouped
into “boards”. The platform is equipped with the “Learn it!”
bookmarklet, which enables picking images anywhere on the
web and automatically shoots them to your “Learnist” board.
The “Open Culture” [4] system is a high-quality cultural and
educational media. A collection of 1,100 courses, online, for
free, from Ivy League universities, such as Stanford, UCLA,
Columbia and Oxford University is available. Courses run the
gamut from science and art to math and economics. “Brazilian”
Portuguese is one of the 48 languages available to learn for
free. However, the type of contents available is completely
different from the ones proposed here. “Udacity” [5] is free
education web-site for brainy types, founded by four Stanford
roboticists, and currently offers 11 courses, all of which are
in science and math-related topics. According to the web-
site, plans are underway to expand the curriculum. Udacity
is free of deadlines, free of prerequisites, free of quizzes and
other annoying school stuff. Courses are also free of charge.
TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design), the powerhouse
of jaw-dropping lectures needs no introduction. Now, they’re
bringing their talent into education with an offshoot, Ted-
Ed [6]. A treasure trove of beautifully animated and gripping
videos on a wide array of subjects, such as “The Power
of Simple Words” and “How Many Universes are there”, is
available. All videos are under 10-minutes-long. Supplemental
materials, such as quizzes and discussion questions, are also
available. Unfortunately, we were unable to ﬁnd any lessons
on Portuguese in the 108,138 lessons available. Effortless
learning based on three pillars science, fun and community
is the basis for the “MemRise” site [7]. Based on scien-
tiﬁc methods for implanting new information, “MemRise”
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

proves that what may seem impossible is in fact doable. The
“Guardian Wallcharts” are mapped “MemRise” style, teaching
you all about cheeses, herbs and other wonders of life. The
“MentorMob” site/system [8] is like the “YouTube” of learning
materials: users create learning “playlists” from ﬁrst-rate web-
sites. MentorMob is a community, whose members share and
rank each others’ learning playlists.
There are many “educational web-sites” for kids/students
available on the Internet. In the site “Wonderopolis” [9], a
kid/student may discover a new wonder each day. Wonders are
amazing facts and intriguing questions such as “Why are they
called Lava Lamps?” or “What Badger has a sweet tooth?” can
be answered. Surﬁng the web-site “Whyville” kids/students
can learn through playing games and socializing [10]. J.K.
Rowling created the site “Pottermore” so kids could read the
books and do interactive features and games [11]. The site
“National Geographic Little Kids” [12] features games, crafts
and recipes, science, videos, and animal information. It is
perfect for 5 years old and under kids. Math and reading
video-like games like math baseball and Mad Libs Junior are
available at the “Funbrain” web-site [13]. Kids/students can
get into cooking on the “Spatulatta” friendly cooking web-
site with lots of videos and recipes [14]. The “NGA Kids”
web-site [15] gives users art adventures and activities from
the United Sates National Gallery of Art. The “Yahoo Kids”
web-site is the least educational of all the choices listed above,
since the site includes both games and videos of all sorts. But,
kids/students can ﬁnd lots to learn on this interactive web-site
like homework help, learning about science, and access to an
encyclopedia.
Many more educational sites are available on the Internet;
there are even sites with sorted lists of educational sites, such
as those lists presented in [16]. However, all these sites offer
exercises or sets of exercises, which can (and should) be solved
by kids/students, but the teacher cannot change (customize)
them to create her/his own exercises based on the existing
ones, and then offer them to the kids/students. The web-based
system presented here allows this.
The Learning Managements Systems (LMS), such as Moo-
dle, Blackboard, Sakai, Desire2Learn, etc., possess their own
tools for the creation and publication of exercises, and obvi-
ously should be included in the list of web-based systems and
tools for helping building exercises. Also, there are other tools
available on the Internet:
•
“Hot Potatoes” [17] — This program is free to ed-
ucators, although registration is required. There are
six types of quizzes; JBC: multiple-choice exercises,
JCloze: gap-ﬁll exercises, JMatch: matching/ordering
exercises, JQuiz:short-answer questions, JMix: jum-
bled sentences. After the creation of the quizzes, Hot
Potatoes will convert the ﬁles to HTML, which the
author must then (manually) upload to the server.
•
“Quia! Create your own learning activities!” [18] —
There are eight types of games and two types of
quizzes to create at the Quia! site. The user must
be registered before using Quia!. At the Quia! web-
site the user enters the information and keeps track of
the resulting URL. The user can create a quiz from
any computer with Internet access, produce a page,
and then access it again if the user remembers the
URL. All pages stay on the Quia! server. The user
can choose a discipline on the main page to see what
others have done with Quia!
•
“QuizStar” [19] — The Quiz Star is an application
that allows bringing together web pages for a series of
lessons. The QuizStar quizzes remain on the TrackStar
server. Registration is needed.
•
“Charity Kahn’s JavaScript Quiz Creator” [20] — This
tool creates the code for a simple multiple choice quiz.
The user will need to copy the code and upload it to
the server.
•
“interactivetest.com” [21] — Here we can make online
quizzes (up to 100 total questions) for free. For more
than 100 and there is a charge. The quizzes stay on
the interactivetest.com server.
•
“Puzzlemaker” [22] — Is a puzzle generation tool for
teachers, students and parents. The user can create
and print customized word search, criss-cross, math
puzzles, and more-using his/her own word lists. The
user must choose a type of puzzle from the list of
ten templates available and make her/his own puzzle
online for classroom or home use.
•
“Rubric Generator” [23] — Rubrics are intended to
make grading quicker, clearer, and more objective.
The site contains tools that guide the user through the
process of creating the assessment tools for evaluating
student performance. There are over ﬁve hundred
printable rubrics on the web site.
•
“Quiz your Friends” [24] — A very simple site that
will guide the user through the creation of a quiz in
four steps. In the ﬁnal step the user chooses if the
quiz will be sent via Email, Instagram, Facebook or
Twitter, to the group of peoples/friends.
•
A list of many more quiz builders can be found in [25].
The big differences, and main characteristics, of the system
presented here and that makes it unique when compared to the
systems/sites listed above are the following:
•
the production/creation of exercises is based on exist-
ing templates;
•
exercises can only be created based on the existing
templates;
•
anyone, whose access was granted by the administra-
tor of the system, may create exercises;
•
the publication of every exercise just created is done
immediately and automatically after its creation, and it
will be available for everyone registered in the system;
•
the creation/production of a new exercise is based in
three simple steps:
1)
choose a template from the list presented in
the form of images containing all the exer-
cises;
2)
change the customizable ﬁelds in the tem-
plate;
3)
choose a name and save the new exercise in
the exercises database;
•
there is no need for any programming skills or expe-
rience.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

As can be seen from the list above, the template dictates
the “behavior” of the exercise. The exercise in “it-self” will
run on the computer of the user, i.e., the exercise will not
run in the “server-side” but in the “client-side”. As will be
discussed in Section V (“Overview of the System”), the system
was implemented using HTML 5, JavaScript, Adobe Flash, and
ActionScript. The system will be used to create the exercises
and store them in its internal databases. After that, the system
will work as a typical web-server.
In fact, in seeking to meet the latest requirements and
concepts used by leading standards in distance learning, we are
making efforts to make it possible to download the exercises in
a standard (SCORM and Common Cartridge) in order to make
possible the execution of exercises off-line and subsequent
communication of the results achieved by students at the time
of reconnection to the Internet. However, at the moment, this
is partially implemented.
III.
ADVANTAGES OF USING THE WEB-BASED SYSTEM
In the view of several authors it seems that we are
moving to a “digital learning” (e.g., [26]–[28]). According
to Weller [26], there are ﬁve factors that favor de use of
the Internet in education: its social acceptance, it facilitates
a sense of control and therefore ownership for educators far
more than previous technologies, the web browser has become
a generic interface, it is both an interactive (do something
with the information rather than just being a passive recipient)
and personal (all learners are not the same) medium, is a
sustaining (e.g., a retailer that uses it to supplement its physical
shops, for instance by home delivery from supermarkets) and
disruptive (e.g., it does not intend web based shopping to
displace its standard retail outlets, but rather it hopes the two
will complement each other, and thus altering the organization
in which it is implemented) technology.
Internet can be used to supplement face-to-face teaching;
for example, many campus based universities use the Internet
not to replace their traditional face-to-face mode of delivery,
but rather as a means of supplementing it (e.g., web pages can
be used to provide additional information, or e-mail be used
as a means of contacting tutors of large courses). Of course
that there are topics that better suit its use (an “Introduction
to Information Technology” course, and a course for teachers
wanting to learn about computer conferencing, are examples
of courses were using the technology effectively forms an
integral part of the academic content of the course) without
forget pedagogic suitability (for example, the resource based
learning, where students can be presented with a wide range of
resources, often external to the university, were students derive
their own learning experience from these resources within
the overall framework of the course). Internet’s usage also
leads to institutional beneﬁt because institutions can beneﬁt
from the use of Internet in education, both on campus and in
reaching new audiences, and from the fact that it can be seen
as a Computer Assisted Learning delivery mechanism—many
courses are using Internet to deliver simulations, visualization
aids and interactive tools.
In order to become more accurate in their work, both
in reading problems and in working out solutions, primary
students need more practice to reinforce what they are learn-
ing, a process which traditionally takes place on paper, and
traditionally are distributed in textbooks or tutoring books.
Unfortunately, these materials are usually designed for aver-
age learners, and it is often difﬁcult to ﬁnd the best-ﬁtting
content for students with differing abilities and skills. For
example, in Portugal all the classes have only one textbook
designed for all students, but literate students may need a
higher-level tutoring, and illiterate may need a lower-level
tutoring. Therefore, the depth and ﬂexibility of ability gained
from these textbooks are restricted. Some programs based
on e-learning technology may provide personalized contents
for learners by collecting the learning process. But primary
students may become restless and unfocused when staying in
front of computers during long periods of time. As putted by
Warschauer, [27], “New technologies do not replace the need
for strong human mentorship, but, indeed, amplify the role
of such mentorship”. Obviously students must become into
contact with the new teaching/studding tools progressively, in
order for they to become a part of the learning environment
as smoothly as possible.
Teachers, but also parents, have an important word to say
in this process; as noted by Warschauer [27], “the teacher
must be centrally involved, actively instructing and mentoring
students, especially at the initial stages of work on a project.
Unfocused instruction can leave students rudderless, and this
is particularly harmful to at-risk students, such as those with
learning disabilities, limited literacy, and language skills, or
insufﬁcient background knowledge”.
In general, after students have completed practice exercises
or homework, very often they have to wait for their teacher to
check it and provide feedback. These interruptions can reduce
students’ interest in learning as well as learning efﬁciency.
We believe that the prompt feedback about the exercises
correctness, together with the training provided by the different
exercises sets about the same subject, besides the exploitation
of video, color, sound, etc., positively reinforce the diverse
child’s senses, deﬁnitely contributing to capture and motivate
the child.
From the teacher point of view, one advantage of the
system here proposed is time saving. Most of the times, the
teacher writes in the exercise-book of each pupil (at least in the
“blackboard”) the set of homework exercises that s/he should
try to solve. This is a handy work, and consequently very
time consuming. When students return with their homework,
the teacher must read and correct, one-by-one, every exercise-
book, in order to have and give feedback to the pupils. During
this process, the teacher also analyzes each student’s work,
in order to evaluate the student’s progress and potentially
introduce some programme and/or pedagogical adjustments.
Obviously, this analysis should also be made to the global
class.
With the web-based system presented here the teacher
can select different sets of exercises for each student or,
alternatively, propose the same set of exercises to the whole
class, and this simply by creating e-mail lists and maintaining
these lists as needed. The system will then provide the teacher
with statistical data concerning each student and the entire
class. We believe that these data will greatly help the teacher
in evaluating his/her work, and help with the mentioned
adjustments. The selection of different exercises sets may not
directly lead to a time reduction of the teacher’s work, but
its automatic check and the statistical data do. We believe that
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

teachers can use this extra time to better understand where and
why some children are having troubles.
IV.
PEDAGOGICAL MODEL
The teaching and researching communities agree that it is
through the use of exercises and games that learning becomes
effective, regardless of the model or philosophy used. For
example, proponents of sociocultural theory claim that learning
is primarily a social process mediated through interactions us-
ing tools [29]–[31]. According to Vygotsky, mediation occurs
through the use of ‘semiotic’ and ‘material’ tools. The semiotic
tools include symbols, signs, and spoken languages. Material
tools include such items as pens, spoons, and particularly
networked (Internet) computers. These tools do not simply
facilitate the set of activity that might take place, but they
fundamentally shape and deﬁne the type of activities that might
be developed [30]. Seymour Papert proposed the use of tools,
particularly the computer “a mighty education tool”, in helping
in the process of construction of knowledge (given rise to
the “constructionist” theory), adapting the beginnings of the
cognitive constructivism of Jean Piaget in order to a better use
of technology, [32].
Traditionally, the dominant form of learning in schools has
been teacher-directed learning or guided learning: “a trainer
or teacher takes all the relevant decisions and the learner can
and should follow him or her. He decides about the goals of
learning, the learning strategies, the way to measure outcomes
and he takes care of feedback, judgments, and rewards” [33].
Besides guided learning, Simons, Linden and Duffy, [33],
distinguish two other ways of learning: experiential and action
learning. To facilitate and support learners through the gradual
and progressive acquisition of adaptive competence, novel
classroom practices and cultures are needed. These practices
and cultures should create the conditions for a substantial shift
from guided learning toward experiential as well as action
learning, resulting in a balanced and integrated use of the three
ways of learning: constructive, self-regulated, and contextual
or situated [34].
The constructivist view of learning has become com-
mon ground among educational psychologists (see, for ex-
ample, [33], [35]). Constructivism implies that constructive
learning is self-regulated. According to Zimmerman [36], self-
regulation “refers to the degree that individuals are metacog-
nitively, motivationally, and behaviorally active participants in
their own learning process”. According to De Corte [34], “con-
structive and self-regulated learning processes should prefer-
ably happen and be studied in context”, and because learning
is collaborative, the learning efforts are distributed over the
individual student, its partners in the learning environment, and
the (technological) resources and tools that are available [37].
As stated by De Corte [38], “starting as much as possible
from tasks and problems that are meaningful and challenging
for students, learning environments should initiate socially sup-
ported constructive learning processes that enhance students’
cognitive and volitional self-regulatory skills”. It is expected
that students will be able to use their acquired knowledge
and skills to solve situations and problems in everyday life,
something that Bransford and Schwartz [39] call preparation
for future learning.
This is the theoretical model supporting the web-based
system presented here and this research.
V.
OVERVIEW OF THE SYSTEM
Before start describing the system a word about its devel-
oping context is in order.
In 2006, the “ESchool” Programme (e.escola— [40]) en-
abled the purchase of laptops by students, form the 5th to
10th grade, and teachers for a price of 150 euro. Later,
the Portuguese government has developed a set of protocols
with Intel, the leading telecommunications operators (Optimus,
TMN, Vodafone, and Zon), Microsoft, “Magic Box” (Caixa
M´agica), and the local members, allowing children of the
primary schools access to portable computers “Magellan” (Ma-
galh˜aes), for a maximum cost of 50 euro [41]. Additionally, the
classrooms have been equipped with interactive “blackboards”.
The existence of computers in the schools is of course
necessary to integrate IT effectively in the learning process,
but it is by no means sufﬁcient. Setting-up infrastructures is
a relatively simple process in comparison with their actual
usage, since both the necessary training and the change of
habits that lead to routine usage are the result of slow and
gradual processes; the need to train, motivate and involve the
teachers, pupils and the community in general towards a cor-
rect use of IT tools entails a number of technical and cultural
difﬁculties [42], [43]. Additionally, several researchers claim
that it is what teachers think and believe and students’ attitudes
that ultimately shapes the activities in the classroom [44]–[46].
As usually happens, at least in Portugal, the lack of tools
supporting the authoring and automatic checking of exercises
for speciﬁc topics in primary education (e.g., check true or
false sentences) drastically reduces the advantages in the use
of e-learning/web-based environments on a larger scale. Some
technical details of the web-based system presented here were
presented elsewhere [47].
The web-based system presented here aims to contribute to
the resolution of problems in two distinct classes: ﬁrstly, for the
spreading, construction and sharing of educational resources,
particularly those closely related to the teaching of Portuguese
as mother tongue; secondly, to develop applications more “user
friendly” in terms of the average user, trying to eliminate the
necessary notions of programming that are currently required
by the existing applications.
It is 100% visual (graphical) for the preparation of the
exercises and games, which in turn are developed based on
existing templates.
Obviously the need for using standards when designing
and implementing tools to help in the creation of learning
objects became evident. Only then the exercises and games
(i.e., learning objects) will be truly available for reuse and
sharing, no matter the platform the students/learners are using.
In our view, SCORM (Sharable Content Object Reference
Model) is the most complete standard to be used in the case
presented here (Primary Students’ Homework), because in
its speciﬁcation it includes standards developed by various
third parties, integrating various standard speciﬁcations that
simultaneously enable better interoperability between systems
and sharing of content, and it is widely accepted that it is the
best standard to use with Computer Based Training [48].
The tool has two distinct modules: one related to the
development and personalization of the templates; and an-
other dedicated to the development and personalization of
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

the exercises and games. The main blocks of the applica-
tion include: user’s management (registration and authentica-
tion); templates’ management (creation, modiﬁcation, deletion,
etc.); exercise’s management (creation, modiﬁcation, etc.);
databases’ management; exercises’ and templates’ download-
ing; conﬁguring/customization; help; and exiting application.
The databases block is able to manage distinct databases,
including the templates’ and exercises’ databases, as well as all
the information related to the registered users. Also, a special
database containing all the images that can be used to produce
templates and exercises is implemented; obviously, the user
may add new images to the database. So, in its current version,
the tool implements the following data tables: users, templates,
exercises, images, classes (used to classify images).
The templates management block of the application is not
fully operational in its current version. In its current version,
only the exercises module is fully implemented. The templates
module is operational but it cannot be used to create or change
an existing template (i.e., it shows the existing templates to
the user and let he/she choose one from the presented list).
We have created only ﬁve templates, using other tools, for
demonstration proposes. When a user/teacher wants to create
a new exercise he/she must follow three main steps. First,
choose a template or an existing exercise, from a list presented
in the form of images containing all the exercises. Second,
change the customizable ﬁelds in the template. Third, choose
a name and save the new exercise in the exercises database;
this will generate a XML ﬁle with information corresponding
to the conﬁguration options of the exercise (exercise wording,
images, correct options/answers, etc.) that will be saved along
with the rest of the exercise. The number of interactions during
the second step will depend on the template. Typically, it will
be necessary to customize the exercise wording (i.e., the text
explaining what is expected for the student to do), the images
that will be used/presented to the student, as well as the correct
answers/options.
In the example presented in Figure 1, besides the ﬁelds
listed above, it is also possible to change the text of the
“Verify” and “Try again” buttons and the text displayed when
the answer is correct and when the answer is wrong. Also, it is
possible to choose the degree of help/difﬁculty the student will
have during the execution of the exercise (“easy”, “medium” or
“hard”). When in the “ease” mode every time a student chooses
an option or enters his/her answer, he/she will have immediate
feedback about its correctness. When in the “medium” mode,
only when he/she presses the “verify” button will get the
feedback about the correct and wrong answers. In the “hard”
mode only when he/she presses the “verify” button will get the
feedback about the exercise correctness, but the student will
have no feedback about the correct and incorrect answers (only
that there are errors, or not). All these interactions are based on
choosing elements form dropdown lists, check boxes, drag and
drop objects/images, among other. In the example presented in
Figure 2, the student is asked to ﬁll in the missing words (“the
gaps”) in order to form correct sentences; this Figure shows
the exercise seen by the student.
The system was implemented using HTML 5, JavaScript,
Adobe Flash, and ActionScript.
We want that in the near future this system may be used in
English-speaking countries, since the only thing that needs to
be changed is its interface. From the exercises point of view,
Figure 1. Creating a sample exercise a sample exercise—ﬁll in the missing
words (“the gaps”) in order to form correct sentences.
Figure 2. Solving a sample exercise a sample exercise—ﬁll in the missing
words (“the gaps”) in order to form correct sentences.
they do not need adjustments, because it all depends on the
templates (the templates should be designed in English, as well
as everything they contain, such as video, images, text, speech,
music, etc.).
VI.
SOME RESULTS
Currently, there are ﬁve templates that can be used in
the system to create new exercises: three relate to the teach-
ing/learning of Portuguese mother tong, and the other two
relate to the teaching of other concepts (notions of in and
out, animals and fruits, count, etc.). Here we will present and
discuss the results of ﬁrst three templates.
The results presented in this section report to a set of
exercises used to demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed
web-based system. We follow the methodology proposed by
Yin [49], where the researcher can conduct the research in its
working context.
Bearing in mind the teaching and learning of Portuguese
mother tongue, and the fact that the exercises should serve
as homework for primary students, we have developed three
speciﬁc templates: “ﬁll in the gapes”, “true or false”, and
“multiple choice”. In the “ﬁll in the gapes” template, the
pupils are asked to ﬁll the blank spaces in a sentence, or
set of sentences, in order to form correct sentences. This
template includes the possibility to present to the student the
missing words, but not necessarily obeying the order in which
they should be introduced in the sentence(s), i.e., the words
are randomly presented, functioning as extra help. Also, the
teacher can choose between one and ﬁve “missing words”; in
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

fact, the “gap” can be a complete sentence. In the “true or
false” template, the students are asked to classify a sentence
as being true or false. In the “multiple choice” template, the
students are asked to select the best possible answer out of the
choices from a list.
As
presented
above
in
Section
V,
the
degree
of
help/difﬁculty the student will have during the execution of any
of the exercises may be set to three different levels: “easy”,
“medium” or “hard”. For our set, we have choose easy and
medium levels.
We have also developed the corresponding counterpart
paper format of the set of digital exercises. The exercises were
presented to 4th-year (4th-grade) primary students during the
months of January, February and March 2015, in the context of
the project “Little Box of surprises” (Caixinha das surpresas).
Basically there are sets of “little boxes”, each with a set
of ten to twelve copies of the same story, and once/twice a
month a story is chosen (by the teacher in conjunction with
the librarian), and the students go to the library and read
the story. At the end they are asked to respond to a set of
questions, traditionally in paper form, of the types listed above
(ﬁlling gapes, true/false, writing sentences/ordering words, and
multiple choice). The sample exercise in Figures 1 and 2 was
produced based on the fairy tale “The Princess and the pea”
by Hans Christian Anderson. The full set is available in [1]. A
“scanned” form of the corresponding counter-part paper format
offered to the students is also available [50].
All the students have answered all the questions both in
paper format and directly in the web-based system using the
computers available at the library. Table I summarizes the
results achieved by the 23 4th-grade students. The students
have answered 12 questions of the type “True & False” (T&F),
one question with 5 “gapes” in the template “ﬁll in the gapes”,
and 6 questions of the type “multiple choice”. This table
presents the number of correct answers. During the application
process of the web-based exercises we gave the students the
possibility to answer correctly all the questions and registered
the number of tries. However, due to space limitations and
because in the paper form students have only one chance to
answer (correctly or not) all the questions, here we present
the results of the ﬁrst answers (i.e., here, we consider that an
answer was correct only if it was correctly answered during
the ﬁrst attempt). As can be seen, for the “T&F” exercises the
average value is the same both for paper and web-based types.
For the “gapes” and “choice” types the results were slightly
better for the exercises in paper format. Note that the mode is
the same for the “gapes” exercises, is better for the “choice”
exercises in paper format, and is better for the “gapes” when
using the web-based system.
We also presented the students a very simple survey with
the following questions:
1)
The web-based system was easy to use.
2)
It was easy to understand.
3)
I would have liked more in class use.
4)
It was helpful because I had prompt feedback.
5)
I would have preferred more homework questions
using it (in place of other assignments).
6)
I would have liked more contents of this type on it.
7)
It was easier to answer the questions in it.
8)
I felt better responding using the computer.
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Figure 3. Survey results: average answer to each question.
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Figure 4. Survey results: average answers from each student.
Figure 3 shows the mean responses to each question of this
survey. The Portuguese version of the survey (actually applied)
can be downloaded [50]. As can be seen from the plots in
this Figure, questions #1, 3 and 8 drew the highest responses,
indicating that students found the system easy to use and feel
comfortable using it. However, question #7 had the lowest
response, showing that they don’t feel that it was easier to
answer the questions using the computer, or at least they don’t
feel that the questions were not of lower difﬁculty degree. This
seems to be reinforced by the responses to questions #4 and
6. Average answers for each survey participant, presented in
Figure 4, show that some responses seemed to be either too
low or too high, i.e., showing dissatisfaction/satisfaction with
the class/subject itself and not speciﬁcally with the web-based
system.
Students’ comments were overall positive. The less positive
comments point to a need to have more homework examples,
and more time in order to gain experience in using the system
and computer. Next are listed some of the comments. “I think
we should use more often the computer”. “I really enjoyed
doing this on the computer where everything was cool and
made me learn a lot.” “I think it was easy to use the computer
because almost hit all the questions at ﬁrst!”. “I learned to
write on the computer.” “I really enjoyed! It was great fun!”.
“The computer is cool!”. “He liked to use the computer more
often”. “It was fun and also spectacular”. “I wish I had more
time to do so”. “I liked using the computer because it was fun
to learn on the computer”.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

TABLE I. EXERCISES’ RESULTS SUMMARY FOR THE 23 STUDENTS (T&F—TRUE & FALSE; GAPES—FILL IN THE GAPES; CHOICE—MULTIPLE CHOICE;
AVG—AVERAGE; STD—STANDARD DEVIATION; MOD—MODE).
Student
Avg Std Mod
1
2
3
4 5 6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Paper
T&F
10 8 10 10 8 12 11 11 11 8
9 10 10 11 10 10 10 9
7 10 11 11 11 9.9 1.2
10
Gapes
5
5
3
5 0 5
5
5
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
5
5
5
5
4.6 1.1
5
Choice 6
6
6
6 5 6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
5
6
6
3
6
6
5
5
6
5.7 0.7
6
Internet
T&F
11 10 8
9 9 9 11 8
8
8 11 11 10 10 11 12 10 10 11 9 11 11 9
9.9 1.2
11
Gapes
4
5
5
4 3 5
4
4
3
5
3
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
3
5
5
5
5
4.4 0.8
5
Choice 4
4
4
3 4 5
4
5
4
5
5
4
4
5
5
6
4
2
3
5
6
6
6
4.5 1.0
4
In conclusion, we could see that there are no big differences
in the results achieved by the students. However, during the
answers to the exercises students showed a more positive
attitude, happiness and greater openness to the use of the web-
based system.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented a web-based system [1] to support
students’ homework. In order to prove its usefulness, we have
built a set of exercises to help improving Portuguese (mother
tongue) language skills of 4th-grade primary pupils. This set
of digital exercises proved to be the child’s favorite, rather
than their counterpart exercises in paper form, also showing
a fair more positive attitude from the students’ point of view.
A simple survey also showed that students do prefer the use
of the system here presented, when compared to other more
traditional ways of practicing.
We believe that the prompt feedback about the exercises
correctness, together with the training provided by the different
exercises sets about the same subject, besides the exploitation
of video, color, sound, etc., positively reinforce the diverse
child’s senses, deﬁnitely contributing to capture and motivate
the child.
Students with disabilities are known for possessing a set
of unique characteristics that hinder their integration in school
and consequently their learning. We believe that students with
disabilities can be the ﬁrst beneﬁtting from using a system like
the one proposed here.
As stated by Warschauer, [27], “New technologies do not
replace the need for strong human mentorship, but, indeed,
amplify the role of such mentorship”. Obviously that the stu-
dents must become into contact with the new teaching/studding
tools progressively, in order for they to become a part of the
learning environment as smoothly as possible.
From the examples above, we could easily concluded that
the presented templates may be used to teach/learn other
subjects. For example, based on the “true or false” template a
teacher can build a set true or false questions for the teaching
of chemistry. Obviously, the “multiple choice” template may
be used to build exercises for the teaching of any subject.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.mcabral.utad.pt/apps/. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
[2]
https://www.coursera.org/. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
[3]
http://learni.st/. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
[4]
http://www.openculture.com/. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
[5]
https://www.udacity.com/. Accessed: 11-08-2015.
[6]
http://ed.ted.com/. Accessed: 11-08-2015.
[7]
http://www.memrise.com/. Accessed: 11-08-2015.
[8]
http://www.mentormob.com/. Accessed: 11-08-2015.
[9]
http://wonderopolis.org/. Accessed: 12-08-2015.
[10]
http://www.whyville.net/smmk/nice. Accessed: 12-08-2015.
[11]
https://www.pottermore.com/. Accessed: 12-08-2015.
[12]
http://kids.nationalgeographic.com/. Accessed: 12-08-2015.
[13]
http://www.funbrain.com/. Accessed: 12-08-2015.
[14]
http://www.spatulatta.com/. Accessed: 12-08-2015.
[15]
http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/education/kids.html. Accessed: 12-
08-2015.
[16]
http://www.parenting.com/. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
[17]
http://web.uvic.ca/hrd/halfbaked/. Accessed: 13-08-2015.
[18]
http://www.quia.com. Accessed: 13-08-2015.
[19]
http://quizstar.4teachers.org/. Accessed: 13-08-2015.
[20]
http://builder.i.com.com/. Accessed: 13-08-2015.
[21]
http://www.interactivetest.com. Accessed: 13-08-2015.
[22]
http://www.discoveryeducation.com/free-puzzlemaker/. Accessed: 13-
08-2015.
[23]
http://www.teach-nology.com/web tools/rubrics/.
Accessed:
13-08-
2015.
[24]
http://www02.quizyourfriends.com/. Accessed: 13-08-2015.
[25]
http://eleaston.com/quizzes.html. Accessed: 13-08-2015.
[26]
M. Weller, Delivering Learning on the Net: the why, what & how of
online education.
London and New York: RoutledgeFalmer, Taylor &
Francis Group, 2002.
[27]
M. Warschauer, “The paradoxical future of digital learning,” Learning
Inquiry, vol. 1, 2007, pp. 41–49.
[28]
K. Moeller, U. Fischer, H.-C. Nuerk, and U. Cress, “Computers in
mathematics education - Training the mental number line,” Computers
in Human Behavior, vol. 48, JUL 2015, pp. 597–607.
[29]
L. S. Vygotsky, Mind in society: Development of Higher Psychological
Processes, M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, and E. Souberman,
Eds.
Harvard University Press, 1978.
[30]
J. V. Wertsch, “The voice of rationality in a sociocultural approach
to mind,” in Vygostky and education: Instructional implications and
applications of sociohistorical psychology, L. C. Moll, Ed.
New York,
NY: Cambridge University Press, 1992, pp. 111–126.
[31]
C. A. Bisol, C. B. Valentini, and K. C. Rech Braun, “Teacher education
for inclusion: Can a virtual learning object help?” Computers &
Education, vol. 85, JUL 2015, pp. 203–210.
[32]
S. M. Papert, Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas.
New York: Basic Books, 1980.
[33]
R. J. Simons, J. van der Linden, and T. Duffy, “New learning: Three
ways to learn in a new balance,” in New learning, R. J. Simons,
J. van der Linden, and T. Duffy, Eds.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000, pp. 1–20.
[34]
E. D. Corte, “Learning from instruction: the case of mathematics,”
Learning Inquiry, vol. 1, 2007, pp. 19–30.
[35]
H. Passos, “Flexible contents: Communities of practice and distributed
cognitivism impact in instructional design,” in 3rd International Con-
ference of Education, Research and Innovation (ICERI2010), Chova,
LG and Belenguer, DM and Torres, IC, Ed.
Lauri Volpi 6, Valenica,
Burjassot 46100, Spain: IATED-INT Assoc Technology Education A&
Development, 2010, Proceedings Paper, pp. 329–333, 3rd International
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

Conference of Education, Research and Innovation (ICERI), Madrid,
Spain, Nov 15-17, 2010.
[36]
B. J. Zimmerman, “Dimensions of academic self-regulation: A con-
ceptual framework for education,” in Self-regulation of learning and
performance: Issues and educational applications, D. H. Schunk and
B. J. Zimmerman, Eds.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1994, pp. 3–21.
[37]
G. Salomon, Ed., Distributed cognition. Psychological and educational
considerations.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
[38]
E. D. Corte, “Mainstreams and perspectives in research on (mathemat-
ics) learning from instruction,” Applied Psychology: An International
Review, vol. 53, 2004, pp. 279–310.
[39]
J. D. Bransford and D. L. Schwartz, “Rethinking transfer: A simple
proposal with multiple implications,” in Review of research in educa-
tion, A. Iran-Nejad and P. Pearson, Eds.
Washington, DC: American
Educational Research Association, 1999, vol. 24, pp. 61–100.
[40]
http://www.eescola.net/indexA.aspx. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
[41]
http://eescola.pt/e-escolinha/Oferta.aspx. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
[42]
M. J. C. S. Reis, G. M. M. C. Santos, and P. J. S. G. Ferreira, “Promoting
the educative use of the internet in the Portuguese primary schools: a
case study,” Aslib Proceedings, vol. 60, no. 2, 2008, pp. 111–129.
[43]
R. Shillair, S. R. Cotten, H.-Y. S. Tsai, S. Alhabash, R. LaRose, and
N. J. Rifon, “Online safety begins with you and me: Convincing Internet
users to protect, themselves,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 48,
JUL 2015, pp. 199–207.
[44]
S. A. Yoon, J. Koehler-Yom, E. Anderson, J. Lin, and E. Klopfer,
“Using an adaptive expertise lens to understand the quality of teachers’
classroom implementation of computer-supported complex systems
curricula in high school science,” Research in Science & Technological
Education, vol. 33, no. 2, May 4 2015, pp. 237–251.
[45]
S. Kerckaert, R. Vanderlinde, and J. van Braak, “The role of ICT in
early childhood education: Scale development and research on ICT use
and inﬂuencing factors,” European Early Childhood Education Research
Journal, vol. 23, no. 2, Mar 15 2015, pp. 183–199.
[46]
A. Taneja, V. Fiore, and B. Fischer, “Cyber-slacking in the classroom:
Potential for digital distraction in the new age,” Computers & Education,
vol. 82, Mar 2015, pp. 141–151.
[47]
S. Neto, A. Capela, R. Morais, E. Peres, and M. Reis, “A HTML
5-based tool to help teachers in the creation of exercises and games
for the teaching of mathematical concepts in the primary schools,” in
2nd International Conference on Virtual and Networked Organizations
- Emergent Technologies and Tools (ViNOrg 13), P´ovoa de Varzim,
Portugal, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[48]
V. Gonzalez-Barbone and L. Anido-Rifon, “From SCORM to Common
Cartridge: A step forward,” Computers & Education, vol. 54, no. 1,
2010, pp. 88–102.
[49]
R. K. Yin, Case study research: Design and methods, 2nd ed. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage, 1984.
[50]
http://www.mcabral.utad.pt/HansChristianAnderson/
SapatinhosVermelhos. Accessed: 10-08-2015.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-428-2
AFIN 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Future Internet

