On the Undecidability of Mobility Prediction and What to Look at in Mobility to
Improve Communication in Mobile Networks
Marco Aur´elio Spohn
Federal University of Fronteira Sul
Chapec´o, SC – Brazil
Email: marco.spohn@uffs.edu.br
Marcelo Cezar Pinto
UNILA
Foz do Iguac¸u, PR – Brazil
Email: marcelo.pinto@unila.edu.br
Abstract—This work presents an analysis of mobility prediction,
concluding that it is an undecidable problem. Even though one
cannot always predict even its own future movement actions, it
does not mean that there is no use for mobility knowledge. In
mobile networks, better knowledge on how and when a node
(hereafter referred as a mover) will decide on its next movement
actions might lead to near-optimum protocol performance. In
such situations, before endeavoring into sophisticated analysis by
way of restricted mobility traces gathered just for that purpose,
one could start checking on how much we already know (or
are able to ﬁnd out) about mover’s actions. Based on that, the
next step would be to work on how to use mobility data more
appropriately. As we use such data, we can increasingly better
understand mobility, making space for adaptive communication
protocols. Such methodology does not go against any other ana-
lytical studies for capturing mobility properties; on the contrary,
it just anticipates other uses for mobility data. Even though it is
not feasible yet to consider upgrading existing routing protocols,
so that full mobility knowledge is taken into account, one can
envision an application routing over an overlay network. There
is much hope for such an approach given that mobile networks
are going to be more widely available as the Internet-of-Things
evolves.
Keywords–Mobile networks; mobility metrics; communication
protocols; computability; undecidability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It would be interesting to devise an algorithm for comput-
ing all future paths to be taken by a mobile node (hereafter
referred to as a mover). Understanding mobility at such level
would provide means for solving many problems in real life,
including networking by way of optimum communication pro-
tocols in mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) [1]. Nevertheless,
is it really possible to construct such algorithm?
One could start by comparing such an endeavor to other
similar problems already addressed in computer science.
Lloyd [2] proposed a turing test for free will, which consists
of determining whether one (or any other external decider)
can know one’s decision before the decision is even taken. He
concludes that, regardless if the world is deterministic or not,
the one who passes the test is inclined to believe that he is
endowed with free will, because it is an undecidable problem.
A mover can be anything capable of wandering around
under a given scenario, considering all its constraints, which
can be as complex as we can imagine. However, one could
imply that mover’s actions follow some pattern, which could
possibly be identiﬁed if there would be enough data on
mobility traces for analysis. Such an approach has already
been taken for some speciﬁc mobility targets (e.g., human
mobility [3] [4]). Nevertheless, the results usually provide just
some probabilistic insights into mobility patterns, which are
specially useful for enhancing mobility aware protocols.
A path can be thought of as a sequence of actions taken
by the mover when going from point A to point B, and it is up
to the mover to choose the next action. As for the whole path,
one can ask if the mover is able to predict all future actions
it will take. Of course, if the mover has the capabilities to do
so, we have already answered the very ﬁrst question.
What we take into account in terms of computer capabili-
ties could also be decisive to solve this problem. Assuming
that quantum computers can efﬁciently simulate the laws
of physics, it is also possible to conceive quantum Turing
machines [5]. The inner process involved in every mover’s
action can be thought of as a sequence of operations. The
situation is such that whether the mover itself or any other
mover tries to simulate such sequence of operations, it will take
more time than the original mover’s sequence of operations [2].
Once assured on the undecidability of mobility prediction,
one should not give up on ﬁnding ways to somehow explore
mobility information whenever available. This leads to laying
out the underlying requirements for taking part in the network
or the services’ agreement the mover has agreed upon. Based
on the mobility information the mover is going to make avail-
able, the next step is to identify services/protocols, which can
take advantage of such information. One desirable approach
would be having the basic networking services working with
and without mobility information. That is, mobility knowledge
should be used to improve existing networking services, basi-
cally following an on demand and software deﬁned network
approach [6] [7].
Therefore, before starting gathering mobility traces for
sophisticated analytical analysis, it is worth checking what
mobility data can be assumed as granted in given scenarios.
It does not mean that such analytical studies are not worth
the effort, but one might ask if the desired services are not
achievable through simpler approaches employing information
and mechanisms known to be available beforehand. In addi-
tion, getting mobility traces might end up being impractical or
not so representative depending on the sampling methodology
or the number of participants.
As the network evolves, mobility traces could also be stored
for later processing. That is, as there will be more mobility
traces over time, it will be possible to go further into the
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

0  0  1  1  ...
1  0  0  0  ...
0  1  1  0  ...
1  1  1  1  ...
1
3
2
...
P : paths
M:
movers
0
...
∞
0 1 2 3 ... ∞
mk = 1100 . . .
therefore
mk ̸∈ M
Figure 1. Cantor’s diagonal argument applied to the mobility prediction
problem.
analytical analysis as well (as a desirable side effect). In this
case, mobility metrics can be employed to better capture some
mobility properties [8].
Brieﬂy, the remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In Section II, we start by showing that mobility prediction is
an undecidable problem. That is, there is no way to know
in advance what is the path to be taken, or not, by any
mover (not even by the mover itself) in all situations. In
Sections III and IV, we focus on how mobility awareness could
improve communication in mobile networks. In Section IV, we
conclude this work.
II.
THE UNDECIDABILITY OF MOBILITY PREDICTION AND
ITS IMPLICATIONS
Let us consider two countably inﬁnite sets, one for all the
movers,
M = {m0, m1, . . . mi, . . . },
and the other for all the paths,
P = {p0, p1, . . . pj, . . . }.
We are going to leverage our analysis on Cantor’s diagonal
argument [9], showing that it is not possible to devise an
algorithm for computing whether a mover will or will not take
a path for all pairs (mi, pj).
For that, we start by taking into account the Cartesian
product M × P as the domain set of a function f, where
every pair (mi, pj) is mapped to 1 or 0, showing, respectively,
whether mover mi will or will not take path pj (see Figure 1).
Therefore, each row represents the possible movement actions
(i.e., paths) of a mover; that is, each mover in M is represented
as an inﬁnite binary sequence.
If we can show that there is a mover, mk, which is not
present in the set of movers, we actually show that the set
M is uncountably inﬁnite. To devise such mover, for each
i-th position of the sequence describing mk we assign the
complement of f(mi, pi). By doing so, mover mk’s sequence
differs by one position from every single mover in the set M
and, therefore, mk ̸∈ M. This is a contradiction, because we
had assumed that all movers were included in the set M.
As the number of Turing-recognizable languages (i.e.,
decidable sets) is countable [9], there is no algorithm capable
to deal with an uncountably inﬁnite set of movers. Thus, for
all possible movers and paths, it is not possible to know
beforehand whether a mover will take a particular path or not.
Therefore, mobility prediction is an undecidable problem.
When employing recursive reasoning, one uses a mathe-
matical relationship between terms in a given sequence, and
such recursive computation can be simulated by either classical
or quantum Turing machines [5]. If any system must operate
according to the known laws of physics, meaning that the
world itself could be simulated by a Turing machine, one can
conclude that:
1)
There is no general technique to determine whether
or not the mover is going to follow a given path at
all (i.e., the Cantor’s diagonal argument).
2)
In case the mover is under a time constraint, then
trying to determine the movers next path sometimes
takes more time than the mover takes to perform the
actions.
3)
A computationally universal mover can not answer
all questions about its future behavior.
4)
A time constrained computationally universal mover
takes more time to simulate its next path than it takes
it to actually perform that process directly.
Lloyd [2] employed the same reasoning for showing that
one cannot prove that a decider does not possess free will;
however, one cannot prove that one has free will either.
Basically, one can always claim its decision as one’s own
choice, and behave as possessing free will.
With all that said, it does not mean that one cannot ever
determine a given mover’s next path. Nevertheless, it is also
clear that one cannot always determine any mover’s next path.
Next, we explore ways to take advantage of the mobility
information which is already granted in many situations.
That is, before taking on any complex analytical approach,
start from the mobility information that can be provided
by the users/movers themselves, and build around that the
protocols/applications that can be used right away in mobile
networks even when it is not possible to change the behavior
of the lower layer protocols (e.g., network protocols).
III.
MOBILITY AWARENESS IN MOBILE NETWORKS
In this section, we ask ourselves how mobility awareness
might improve communication in mobile networks. It is always
desirable to have the means and mechanisms to improve the
network performance overall, but the focus here is just on the
beneﬁts from exploring mobility itself. Figure 2 presents an
overall schematic and guidelines for the mobility information
addressed in this section.
A. How much we know about mover’s actions?
Taking into account mobility information when devising
communication protocols may help improve the overall net-
work performance; and this has already been done [10]–[12]!
However, as it is not possible to predict all future movers’
actions, one could well focus just on the information which is
somehow related to mobility in an acceptable and predictable
way for at least some situations (which might be exactly the
ones we are interested in). In such cases, and before trying
to gather real traces for sophisticated analytical analysis, it
is worth focusing on the mover’s mobility data known in
advance to some acceptable degree of detail. To begin, one
could pinpoint some important mobility information such as:
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Is there a fixed
     itinerary?
we know about it?
Coarse in
time
have to?
How often?
Information about Mover’s Actions
Lots of
location and
Fine grained
Some
granted
info
How to use it
appropriately?
What info?
Coarse
(whereabouts)
Exact
some info
still might get
OK, but we
It wants to
It has to
Because
Any other info?
How detailed?
   How much 
info to
work on
But is it going to provide
 some info about its
         itinerary?
Who gets the info?
− A centralized node
In protocols
Relaying/Routing
− Among peers
− Among peers and
external nodes
Application 
layer:
− Anytime
anywhere an
and 
overlay net
What can we
learn from it?
mobility pattern
− A continuous overall
capturing process of
the whole network 
mobility characteristics
and capabilities
− Insight on one´s own
- A clusterhead
− All peers
AND
How often?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Follow standard
procedures
Does it 
Figure 2. Overall schematic and guidelines for mobility information.
•
Is there a repeating schedule with ﬁxed stopping points
(e.g., bus terminals)? Even though one might not know
in advance all intermediary positions when a mover
is going from a starting point A to a ﬁnishing point
B, just having the information about where the mover
should be at certain points in time is paramount if one
would like to schedule a message/packet relay to well
known communication agents (probably static routers)
at stopping points. Note that it is not the same as
not knowing when movers are expected to show up at
some deﬁned communication points (as static routers
by a highway waiting for any mover wandering about).
•
Is the mover willing to make available its exact
location or, at least, its whereabouts? Considering
there are ways to protect one’s conﬁdentiality and
privacy, ﬁnd ways to explore how we could enhance
communication protocols given that movers are will-
ing to help by providing some information about
their location (either exact or an approximation). Even
though this might sound unacceptable sometimes, the
fact is that there are ways to better explore these
situations specially when such information has already
been made available voluntarily by users through
many apps/servers (e.g., Global Positioning System
(GPS) location may be embedded within tweets in
Twitter).
•
Must the mover provide its location periodically? This
hypothesis is stronger than the previous one, because
now the mover does not get to choose if it shares
its location or not. The point here is how often the
mover does so, as well as assuming that there is a
communication link at such moments (i.e., it is not
about recording one’s position for later transmission).
•
Is the mover willing to provide some details about its
itinerary? As for the case when the mover has ﬁxed
stopping points, which are scheduled to be reached
at some known points in time (with an expected
variance), a mover could make available its complete
itinerary. The point here is how much detail is ex-
pected to be provided by the mover (i.e., How well
characterized is the itinerary?):
◦
The mover could provide both GPS coordi-
nates and their expected reaching times;
◦
Or just GPS estimates and coarse target times.
•
Must the mover provide some details about its
itinerary? Likewise, the mover might be forced to
provide its itinerary as part of the communication
service itself. In this case, even though there are
security concerns whenever location information is
shared with a third party, there are ways to guarantee
privacy, conﬁdentiality, and integrity.
B. How to use mobility information appropriately?
With the mobility information available, one can start
focusing on when and where such data should be part of
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

any decision making process. Communication protocols must
comply with safety and liveness properties, while efﬁciently
handling the available resources. Firstly, it is necessary to
address the following questions:
•
Who receives mobility data information?
◦
A centralized entity;
◦
A cluster/leader (cluster-head) in the vicinity;
◦
Or data gets broadcasted among all peers.
•
How often mobility information is obtained and sent
out by movers? This will depend on the information
granularity and the imposed restrictions/requirements
among the entities involved in the communication.
Secondly, it is required to sort out how mobility informa-
tion might be useful for communication protocols:
•
For the link layer and routing, the mover itself could
act as a router/relayer:
◦
Among movers, whether mobility information
is shared directly among movers or it comes
from a centralized node or cluster-head;
◦
Among movers and external nodes (e.g., any
node in the Internet): for example, in situations
where a centralized node acts as an access
point to the Internet.
•
For the upper layers (e.g., application):
◦
Application content can be shaped according
to on demand needs as we know the mover’s
whereabouts or its intended destination.
C. What can we learn from mobility?
As mentioned before, as a sort of good side effect, mobility
information can be gathered for further analysis in a similar
fashion as mobility traces are captured just for analytical
studies. However, it is not likely to produce as many details
as when it is solely planned for capturing mobility traces.
Considering the situations pinpointed earlier, by default, the
obtained traces are going to include some but not necessarily
all positions taken by the mover.
Nevertheless, even though the mover desires to or has
agreed upon providing only the required mobility information,
locally it can always track its own movement with more detail
for later use or to make it available to analytical analysis, if
desirable. At the end, it is even possible to have more and
better traces compared to those obtained just for some speciﬁc
purposes.
It is even worth checking how the mover might help itself
when analyzing its own movement actions. For example, if the
mover has a predictable behavior for the next hours or days,
it could plan where and when to get and send information in
advance. In addition, if the mover shares this information with
other peers or a centralized node, there will be plenty of other
possibilities.
According to Tanenbaum [13], “Never underestimate the
bandwidth of a station wagon full of tapes hurtling down
the highway”. Whatever storage capabilities one can conceive,
either in terms of storage capacity, size, and data transfer rates,
it is always possible to imagine that data can be stored in
the movers memory and be delivered later when reaching the
destination or getting closer to it (in terms of communication
connectivity or geographical location).
As one learns from its own behavior and from other peers,
it is possible to combine traditional communication approaches
with customized ones, and they could well be implemented at
the application layer as an overlay network infrastructure [14]–
[16]. There are many possibilities in this case: for example,
considering the movers capabilities that are acceptable for a
given delivery task (i.e., transporting a large backup ﬁle from
its own application or from another peer to the cloud), once it
is known in advance that the mover will stay connected to a
fast network for enough time (i.e., for relaying the content or
delivering it directly to the destination), such task could well
be planned accordingly.
IV.
WELL SAID, BUT WHAT TO DO THEN?
So far, we have been looking at how much mobility
information is available, how we could possibly use it, and
how we might improve our overall knowledge on mobility for
enhancing communication in mobile networks. One can take
for granted that there will be an ever growing number of mobile
entities with computer and communication capabilities (e.g.,
the Internet-of-Things [17] promises to contribute to that);
therefore, it is reasonable to consider a richer communication
environment. In such context, it is worth to take into account a
software deﬁned network approach whenever conceiving ways
to take advantage of mobility information. In this sense, it
might be possible to improve communication performance in
mobile networks even when focusing just on the application
layer itself.
When it comes to using such mobility information, one
should consider it as coming from a continuous feedback
process, evolving as the network advances. Once again, it does
not go against any particular mobility aware protocol approach
based solely on speciﬁc captured mobility patterns; however,
following our proposed methodology, one could start right
away from existing communication protocols by extending
them or working just on the application layer. As pointed
out before, movers’ current locations and the next intended
ones are straightforward for applying into routing processes in
mobile networks.
In a wider network environment (e.g., the Internet), of
course it would not be an easy task to adapt the existing routing
protocols to take into account mobility data in a broader
sense. However, given that we expect movers to be at the
last mile of the network, an application layer routing over an
overlay network [18] is possibly the most attractive alternative
when it comes to employing the proposed methodology. While
in direct reach of each other, movers could act as routers
among themselves, and whenever relaying any message/packet,
decisions should be leveraged on the better expected result
in terms of who can possibly make it faster to the desired
destination (or ﬁxed infrastructure leading to the destination)
based on the known mobility information. This might sound
like any traditional routing approach, but the difference here
is that it could be based on the mobility information provided
by those who know better about it: the movers.
Let us look at an example (see Figure 3 as a reference).
Consider mover A wants to send a backup ﬁle to a restricted
private cloud infrastructure accessible only to peers taking part
in the group. Having the mobility information of some of A’s
peers (i.e., movers B, C, D, and E), mover A decides to transfer
the ﬁle to mover B because it is going to be closer to another
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

A
B
C
C
D
E
E
Destination (private cloud)
Figure 3. What can we do then? An example of an application routing approach based on an overlay network.
mover, C, for an acceptable period of time (i.e., enough time
for transferring the backup ﬁle). In turn, later on, mover C is
known to shift to a place where it is going to stay connected
to the Internet for some extended period of time. Besides that,
it is also known that there is another peer, mover D, which
is going to stay connected for enough time to get the backup
ﬁle relayed through the Internet from mover C. In addition to
that, mover D is also a good candidate because it can relay the
ﬁle to another peer, mover E, which is known to get in touch
with the destination (a private cloud infrastructure) later on.
Even though this short example might sound a little far
from reality now, it is likely that such application overlay
networks will become common given the infrastructure to be
built on and around the Internet-of-Things.
One could as well argue that mobility awareness has been
receiving plenty of attention when designing communication
protocols so far [10]–[12] [19]–[21]; however, what is actually
proposed here is that we could change the starting point
when designing such protocols: ﬁrst of all, analyze what
useful mobility information coming from the user/mover is
already available or otherwise could be made available, and
starting to work with just that. Depending on the application
requirements, and the required security protocols, we could
possibly achieve better, or at least reasonable, performance
results.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
Even though it is impossible to predict all movement
actions of any mover, one could possibly enhance commu-
nication considering just what one already knows about its
own mobility actions, from other peers, and eventually from a
centralized point of coordination.
Basically, before going through speciﬁc analytical anal-
ysis (usually based solely on a restricted set of mobility
traces), we should focus on mobility information we could
get spontaneously or as part of the protocol/application re-
quirements/agreements. Again, this does not mean one cannot
continuously strive to improve one’s insight into mobility
patterns through the analytical approach. This can also go
hand in hand with the proposed methodology because mobility
traces are a possible good side effect of collaborative mobility
aware protocols/applications.
Using mobility data appropriately can improve overall
mobile network performance and introduce new features and
services not available yet (e.g., better cloud service experience
in a mobile environment) due to its intrinsic limitations. First,
one must take into account who actually gets such data (i.e.,
all peers, a centralized node, or cluster heads). Periodicity is
also crucial here, because of its impact on accuracy. When
thinking about protocols, depending on the granularity and
accuracy of mobility data, routing can be enabled among peers
or among peers and a ﬁxed infrastructure. At the application
layer, with the implementation of overlay networks, one can
really expand the mobile network possibilities, and there are
plenty of security mechanisms available for making it attractive
even to more concerned users.
What is missing then? Essentially, when designing new
mobility aware protocols, we suggest that a methodology
similar to the one proposed here be followed: start from
the mobility knowledge that is somehow granted given the
requirements/agreements for some service. That is, one should
start working on the mobility information provided by the
movers themselves. It is even possible that a more sophisticated
approach may end up not providing better performance results
or just only marginal improvements not worth the cost. Taking
into account the promises around the Internet of Things,
simple solutions for mobility awareness should be strongly
considered.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the Brazilian National
Council for Scientiﬁc and Technological Development (CNPq)
under grant 444610/2014-6.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Rajaraman, “Topology control and routing in ad hoc networks: A
survey,” SIGACT News, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 60–73, Jun. 2002.
[2]
S.
Lloyd,
“A
turing
test
for
free
will,”
Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical,
Physical
and
Engineering
Sciences,
vol.
370,
no.
1971,
pp.
3597–3610,
2012,
retrieved:
April,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/370/1971/3597
[3]
F. Giannotti et al., “Unveiling the complexity of human mobility by
querying and mining massive trajectory data,” The VLDB Journal,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 695–719, 2011.
[4]
W.-J. Hsu, T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis, and A. Helmy, “Modeling
spatial and temporal dependencies of user mobility in wireless mobile
networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 17, no. 5, pp.
1564–1577, 2009.
[5]
S. Lloyd, “Universal quantum simulators,” Science, vol. 273, no. 5278,
pp. 1073–1078, 1996, retrieved: April, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/273/5278/1073
[6]
N. Feamster, “Tomorrow’s network operators will be programmers
(keynote),” in Companion Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Systems, Programming, Languages and
Applications: Software for Humanity, ser. SPLASH Companion 2015.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 1–2.
[7]
D. Levin, M. Canini, S. Schmid, and A. Feldmann, “Incremental
sdn deployment in enterprise networks,” in Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2013 Conference on SIGCOMM, ser. SIGCOMM ’13. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 473–474.
[8]
S. Xu, K. Blackmore, and H. Jones, “An analysis framework for
mobility metrics in mobile ad hoc networks,” Eurasip Journal on
Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2007, no. 1, pp. 1–16,
2007.
[9]
M. Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 2nd ed.
Course
Technology, 2006.
[10]
S. J. Philip and V. Anand, “Mobility aware path maintenance in ad hoc
networks,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, ser. SAC ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp.
201–206.
[11]
L. Zhang, Z. Cai, J. Lu, and X. Wang, “Mobility-aware routing in delay
tolerant networks,” Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 19, no. 7, pp.
1111–1123, Oct. 2015.
[12]
J. C. Mukherjee and A. Gupta, “Mobility aware event dissemination
in vanet,” in Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on
Distributed Computing and Networking, ser. ICDCN ’15.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 22:1–22:9.
[13]
A. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 4th ed. Prentice Hall Professional
Technical Reference, 2002.
[14]
A. Nakao, L. Peterson, and A. Bavier, “Scalable routing overlay
networks,” SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 49–61, Jan.
2006.
[15]
——, “A routing underlay for overlay networks,” in Proceedings of
the 2003 Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and
Protocols for Computer Communications, ser. SIGCOMM ’03.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2003, pp. 11–18.
[16]
R. Cohen and D. Raz, “Cost-effective resource allocation of overlay
routing relay nodes,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 636–
646, Apr. 2014.
[17]
T. L. Koreshoff, T. Robertson, and T. W. Leong, “Internet of things: A
review of literature and products,” in Proceedings of the 25th Australian
Computer-Human Interaction Conference: Augmentation, Application,
Innovation, Collaboration, ser. OzCHI ’13.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2013, pp. 335–344.
[18]
J. Kurian and K. Sarac, “A survey on the design, applications, and
enhancements of application-layer overlay networks,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 5:1–5:34, Dec. 2010.
[19]
Q. Dong and W. Dargie, “A survey on mobility and mobility-aware mac
protocols in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 88–100, First 2013.
[20]
P. Bellavista, M. Cinque, D. Cotroneo, and L. Foschini, “Integrated sup-
port for handoff management and context awareness in heterogeneous
wireless networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop
on Middleware for Pervasive and Ad-hoc Computing, ser. MPAC ’05.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 1–8.
[21]
H. Abou-zeid, H. S. Hassanein, and R. Atawia, “Towards mobility-
aware predictive radio access: Modeling; simulation; and evaluation in
lte networks,” in Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference
on Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems,
ser. MSWiM ’14.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 109–116.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

