Ontology Driven Reputation Model for VANET
Renata M. P. Vanni1 
Departamento de Informática 
Federal Institute of Sao Paulo 
(IFSP)  
Araraquara, Brazil  
rportovanni@ifsp.edu.br 
rporto@icmc.usp.br
 
Luz Marina S. Jaimes1 
Engineering of Systems 
University of Pamplona 
Pamplona, Colombia 
lsantos@unipamplona.edu.co 
lsantosj@icmc.usp.br 
 
Glenford Mapp 
Department of Computer 
Science 
Middlesex University 
London, UK 
g.mapp@mdx.ac.uk 
 
Edson Moreira 
1Instituto de Ciências 
Matemáticas e de 
Computação (ICMC) 
University of Sao Paulo 
(USP) 
São Carlos, Brazil 
edson@icmc.usp.br
Abstract— As Vehicle Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) become a 
key component of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), 
trust is important in applications that besides traditional 
security requirements need to evaluate the behavior of 
different entities in VANETs. Highly dynamic environments of 
vehicles need an adapted form of trust establishment. There 
are efforts for evaluating trust in VANETs, based on 
reputation mechanisms. In this paper, we propose a definition 
of the reputation relying on the use of an ontology of VANETs, 
ensuring both an optimal coverage of the domain and a deep 
semantic rooting. This definition is based on the identification 
of the key aspects requiring the support of the ontology for 
their evaluation. 
Keywords- trust; ontology; VANETs; reputation model 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) are a special 
type of Ad Hoc networks, formed by vehicles with 
processing and wireless communication ability, traveling on 
streets 
or 
highways. 
Commonly, 
the 
vehicles 
can 
communicate directly or by the use of a roadside unit (RSU) 
[1] – Fig. 1. Through this infrastructure, vehicles can access 
network services and obtain data from other networks, such 
as the Internet. Due to this nature, VANETs can be 
established in different environments such as in urban 
centers and highways [2]. The communication takes place 
both between vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-
infrastructure (V2I), aiming to enable automated cooperation 
between different vehicles on the road. 
 
Figure 1. Example of an Intelligent Transport System (ITS) scenario [1] 
The emergence of VANET has generated new challenges 
and requires an even deeper consideration of reputation, as it 
is one of the ways to trust in vehicles or drivers sending 
messages. Reputation mechanisms are meant to offer 
insightful information about the capacity of nodes in a 
system to accomplish specific actions. Inter-vehicle 
communications can only occur when two vehicles are 
within the transmission range of each other, which we refer 
to as opportunistic forwarding. One key design question is: 
how do the vehicle/driver decide to (or not to) forward the 
data to adjacent vehicle/driver when the type of message 
requires trustworthiness based on node’s reputation? 
By nature, VANETs’ users may expect for opportunistic 
message forwarding than usual mobile users, as they intend 
to share information about traffic and road condition, for 
example. As such, the reputation of vehicles and drivers 
impact not only forwarding hops choice but also VANETs’ 
users relying on each other, driving users toward trying to 
build and maintain higher reputation. We suggest that not 
only the vehicles are evaluated. For instance, drivers are also 
part of the ecosystem, and have to correctly use services. 
Given this consideration, it becomes natural that reputation 
has to be envisaged as a characteristic of message forwarding 
service, but also a characteristic of vehicles, drivers and 
passengers if associated with this service. This research 
considers that reputation management based on ontology 
could drive many aspects of VANETs, and more particularly 
can serve as a reference for the production of feedback that 
will then feed the Reputation of the nodes. A formal 
specification 
of 
conceptualization 
permits 
data 
interoperability and attributes of reputation among the 
different entities involved in transportation systems. Trust 
relations can be built by the nodes through the definition of 
trust rules. Based on these rules, the users will be able to 
decide to forward the data to the neighbor node.  
In this paper, we propose the complexity of reputation by 
defining a model relying on the use of an ontology of 
VANET. This ontology ensures semantic consideration of 
the 
different 
elements 
and 
provides 
the 
necessary 
expressiveness, openness and mechanisms to fully represent 
their intrinsic complexity. The remainder of this paper is 
organized as follow. Section II describes the decision process 
of opportunistic message forwarding. Section III addresses 
the reputation model researched. Section IV goes into details 
with respect to the proposed reputation model for VANET. 
Discussion and future work conclude the article. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

II. 
OPPORTUNISTIC  FORWARDING  DECISION 
Everyday, vehicles transit in a city and along their 
trajectories they encounter other vehicles. The frequency of 
these encounters is influenced by many factors, such as: 
vehicle speed, destination, traffic condition, and the period of 
the day.  
A possible scenario is a road with two roadways, where 
vehicles can receive, generate and forward messages 
between them (V2V) or with the infrastructure  (V2I). To 
simplify, the vehicles can forward one message at a time (it 
is not possible to send in bulk) and the types of messages that 
are taken into account for each transaction should require a 
node reputation level. This model consists of three phases 
(discovery, forwarding and feedback) in six steps as follow. 
The phase of discovery uses a HELLO-RESPONSE 
technique for detecting approaching vehicles. Vehicles 
carrying data (Message – M) send out periodic HELLO 
beacon [3]. If a neighboring node hears a HELLO message, 
it will send a RESPONSE message  to announce its presence. 
The HELLO (H) and RESPONSE (R) messages will also 
contain reputation information about the nodes – Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Scenario to opportunistic forwarding decision  
The vehicle A (VA) sends “hello” beacon to its 
neighborhood. If vehicle B (VB) in the vicinity wants to 
interact with that VA, then it sends its reputation by a 
“response” beacon to VA. 
 
Step 1 – Hello message. 
VA is carrying data and waiting for a peer to forward its 
messages (M). VA sends out HELLO beacon every x 
seconds. Vehicles inside of range hear the HELLO message 
from VA and can send a RESPONSE message to announce 
their presence. 
 
Step 2 – Response message. 
VB hears a HELLO message from VA and sends a 
RESPONSE message to announce its presence. 
 
In second stage, phase of forwarding, VA executes the 
process which defines the next hop of the message M 
forwarding. First, VA listens the responses then determines, 
through the application of the opportunistic forwarding 
algorithm, which neighbor vehicles could forward the 
message. Aspects as vehicles' direction, position, and relative 
velocity could be taken as inputs to the algorithm [3].  After 
that, VA analyzes the reputation of vehicles based on 
opportunistic forwarding algorithm to select the vehicle with 
the highest reputation to the next hop.  
 
Step 3 – Analysis of reputation.  
VA verifies the reputation of VB, VC and VD, and then 
decides which vehicle has the highest reputation to receive 
M, in the example, VB.  The selected vehicle must be in the 
list of vehicles that sent responses to VA. 
 
Step 4 – Forwarding Message.  
VA adds to M its identification with its reputation and 
sends M to VB. If VB is not the final destination, VB will 
store M in cache and will restart from step 1, and so on, till 
M reaches its destination. 
 
In third phase, phase of feedback, when M reaches the 
final destination, the destination node performs the process 
of feedback of each vehicle involved in forwarding phase.  
 
Step 5 – Feedback. 
The destination node elaborates feedback of VA that 
generated M and feedbacks of the intermediary vehicles that 
forwarded M. Vehicles VA, VB and VK will receive 
feedbacks with weights according to the ontological structure 
(section IV). It is important to notice that no feedback will be 
generated if message M do not reach the destination. 
Feedbacks of intermediary vehicles depends on their mutual 
collaboration. Feedback of VA that generated M will be 
based in a subjective feedback related to message content. 
 
Step 6 – Feedback Reporting. 
The destination node sends the feedbacks to a Reputation 
Server via RSU/4G/LTE, as shown in Fig. 3.  In the server, 
the reputation of each vehicle is recalculated based on old 
and new feedbacks and updated. We represent feedback and 
reputation in section III.  
 
Figure 3. Feedbacks in opportunistic forwarding decision 
Besides the feedback, other aspects should be considered 
to calculate the reputation, for example type of message, 
content, context, time to delivery, etc,. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

III. 
REPUTATION MODEL 
We initiated our research from the work of Hamadache 
[4][5], which provided the basis for the construction of an 
ontology driven reputation model for service-oriented 
computing in clouds. According to the general consensus, 
the reputation of service-oriented computing is characterized 
by an aggregation of the feedback provided by the different 
actors of the service ecosystem. Starting from this idea, the 
first 
concept 
to 
formalize 
is 
‘feedback’. 
Different 
representations of feedback have been provided in the 
literature [6], according to the needs of their associated 
reputation. In our research, we decided to adopt a variation 
of Sabater [7] and Hamadache’s feedback tuple [4] using a 
6th element “time – T”.  
 
Feedback: F = (A, S, K, X, V, T). 
(1) 
Equation (1) defines Feedback as a 6-tuple composed of 
the following elements: A is the actor (vehicle, driver, 
passenger, etc.) giving the feedback, S is the service on 
which the feedback is given, K stands for the service 
characteristic evaluated by the feedback (forwarding, alert, 
chat, etc.), X represents the context in which the feedback 
was given, V is the value of the feedback, and finally, T is 
the time at which the feedback was provided. The actual 
Feedback “F” represents the evaluation of the characteristic 
K of service S, by actor A in context X, at time T. Context 
can encompass a wide range of information, from the 
neighborhood on which the feedback was given, to the type 
of message being sent at the time of feedback.  
The time dimension provides information for different 
aspects of the reputation. The aspect “decay”, for example, 
will be associated to a lower weight to older feedback. 
As suggested by Hamadache[4], the following notations 
will help to represent sets of feedback matching certain 
patterns. Equation (2) is the first notation, it follows a similar 
approach as the one used by Sabater [7] and depicts the set of 
feedback provided by a specific actor A.   
 
Actor Feedback Set: AFS = {F | (a, -, -, -, -, -). 
(2) 
From this first notation, a set of similar notations is 
derived for the different elements of the feedback:  
 
Service Feedback Set: SFS = {F | (-, s, -, -, -, -). 
(3) 
Service Feedback Set contains all the feedback given 
about a specific service.  
 
ASK Feedback Set: ASKFS = {F | (a, s, k, -, -, -). (4) 
ASKFS contains feedback provided by an actor on the 
characteristic of a specific service. A wide range of 
additional notations can be used, such as those used as 
illustrative samples. 
A. Individual Perception 
Starting from this consideration of feedback information 
(Feedback Set – 𝐹𝑆), it is possible to build the individual 
perception (IP) of a service characteristic (SK) for a given 
actor (𝐴) at a period of time 
!.  
 
SKIP! 𝐴𝑆𝐾𝐹𝑆 =
!"#$ ∈ !!  ρ t, t𝑖 . V𝑖
. 
(5) 
Here it is considered all feedback (𝐹𝑖) provided by the 
actor (𝐴) on the service characteristic (𝑆𝐾). Then it is 
aggregated the value (V𝑖) of each feedback by weighting 
them according to the time it was given. In this perspective, 
ρ t, t𝑖  ∈ [0,+1] is a function giving higher values to more 
recent feedback. This function is used as a basis to compute 
the individual perception of the service itself. The principle 
of computing this value relies on the aggregation of all 
feedback provided on all the characteristics of the service 
and weighting each characteristic, not only according to the 
service but also according to its context. This leads to 
formula (6):  
 
SIP! 𝐴𝑆𝐹𝑆 =
!" ∈ !"#"   Υ 𝐹𝑖  . ρ t, t𝑖 . V𝑖
. 
(6) 
On (6), Υ 𝐹𝑖  is the weight of the characteristic Ki. This 
weight is not always the same from one execution to another, 
as the actor may have varying expectations over time and 
may have, for example, sent/forwarded different message 
type, implying variability in the importance of the service 
characteristic. In order to compute this weight, it was 
proposed by Hamadache [4] to base the function on the 
ontological representation of service execution’s context.  
B. Ontology and Reputation 
The term ontology is used in the field of semantic web 
and refers to a structured set of concepts in a particular field 
of knowledge. There are generally two global entities in 
ontology. The first aims terminology, which defines the 
nature of the elements making up the field of ontology in 
question, as the definition of a class in oriented object 
programming in definition of the nature of the objects that 
we will manipulate later. The second part of ontology 
contains explicit relationships between multiple instances of 
the classes defined in the terminology. Thus, within 
ontology, concepts are defined in relation to each other (a 
graph model of the organization of knowledge), which 
enables reasoning and manipulation of knowledge. 
We can identify at least two functions that should be 
computed with the help of ontology. 
1) Weight of Message Type 
All characteristics of a message do not convey the same 
importance of the user and it may be completely irrelevant to 
consider that a message is sent/forwarded well but did not 
reach the final destination. Several approaches can be 
envisaged to tackle this need: establish a mapping between 
message types and importance of characteristics, asking 
users explicitly when they provide the feedback to rank the 
importance of the different parameters, or deducing the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

importance level from the context in which the message is 
sent and from the interaction between the peers. 
Finding an efficient way to evaluate the importance of 
characteristics implies to consider what would be user’s loss 
if the characteristic fails. Comparing the needs of each type 
of message and establishing a rank between them should 
evaluate this importance – (see (7)).  
 
γ F! =  importance evaluated by user
γ! (F!, K!)
           . (7) 
The rank of characteristic Ki within the set of 
characteristics K! of the service with feedbacks (F!) of user 
(r) – γ! (F!, K!) – should take advantage of the previous 
evaluation of characteristic weight. 
2) Similarity of Message Types 
This is an important aspect of our work. Defining the 
similarity of message types, it is possible to prioritize the 
forwarding of some message types, define the necessary 
level of trust for each group, and associate the context during 
the execution of the message forward.  
IV. 
REPUTATION MODEL FOR VANET 
The 
proposed 
Reputation 
Model 
for 
VANET 
(REMOVAN) considers the ideas suggested by The Regret 
system [7]. The Regret system structure is based on three 
dimensions of reputation. If we consider only direct 
interactions between nodes to establish reputations it is said 
that the decision is based on the individual dimension. If 
information coming from other nodes and their social 
relations are used, we are talking about the social 
dimension. Finally, if we consider that the reputation of a 
node is not a single and abstract concept but rather a multi-
facet concept, it is considered an ontological dimension. For 
example, the reputation of being a suitable forwarding node 
summarizes the reputations of respond HELLO messages 
and generates messages about road conditions. The different 
types of reputation and how they are combined to obtain new 
types are the bases of the third dimension of reputation, the 
ontological dimension.  
A. Individual Dimension 
The individual dimension models the direct interaction 
between two nodes. The reputation that takes into account 
this dimension is the most reliable. This is because it takes 
into account all the peculiarities of the target node. The 
called outcome reputation (noted as R a → b (𝛿) where 𝛿 is 
the reputation type) is the reputation calculated from direct 
interactions between nodes. 
The subset of issues of an outcome taken into account to 
calculate a given reputation type 𝛿 is domain dependent. It is 
defined by a grounding relation (gr) as the relation that links 
a reputation type 𝛿  with a list of issues (i.e., other 
reputations). This set of issues allows the selection of the 
right subset of outcomes from the general outcomes’ 
database. Each issue is a tuple with the form (Ii, {+, −}, αi) 
[7]. The first parameter (Ii) is a label that identifies the issue. 
The second parameter ({+, −}) indicates how an increment 
of the value of the issue affects the reputation, that is, a + 
means that if the value of the issue increases, the reputation 
also increases while a − means that if the value of the issue 
increases, the reputation decreases. Finally, the last 
parameter is the weight that issue has in the general 
calculation of the reputation. As an example, the grounding 
relation for an intermediate node, which could forward a 
message, in our scenario should be defined as in TABLE I. 
 
TABLE I. TABLE TYPE STYLES 
𝜹 
gr(𝜹) 
To_forward_message 
{(Forward, +, 0.8)} 
To_generate_message 
{(Generate, + 0.2)} 
To_refuse_message 
{(Refuse, −, 0.8)} 
To_have_ traffic_ticket 
{( Traffic_ticket, −, 0)} 
 
To calculate an outcome reputation it is desirable to use a 
weighted mean of the outcomes evaluation, giving more 
relevance to recent outcomes [4]. 
B. Social Dimension 
For an interaction between two nodes, past experiences 
of direct interaction is the most reliable source of 
information to define a reputation [1]. Unfortunately, the 
social dimension of VANETs does not permit the generation 
of reputation based just on direct experiences. Not only 
because the node can be a newcomer but also because for 
large networks such as the Internet, there will be a 
considerable amount of direct interactions to evaluate. We 
suggest indirect reputation processed by a broker of System 
Reputation. That reputation should be based on all direct 
experiences sent to a centralized database and used to 
calculate the individual reputation. 
C. Ontological Dimension 
Along the individual and social dimensions, reputation is 
always linked to a single behavioral aspect (an issue). With 
the ontological dimension it is added the possibility of 
combining reputations on different aspects to calculate 
complex reputations [5]. To represent the ontological 
dimension, graph structures are used. 
 Fig. 3 shows an ontological dimension for a vehicle in 
our scenario. In this case, the reputation of being a suitable 
vehicle to forward a message is related with the reputation of 
forwarding messages and the reputation of generate 
messages about road conditions. For the owner of this 
ontological structure, having traffic ticket is something 
irrelevant to be considered as a suitable vehicle to forward. 
Hence, to calculate a given reputation taking into account the 
ontological dimension, the reputation has to be calculated for 
each of the related aspects that, in turn, can be a node of 
another subgraph with other associated aspects. The 
reputations of those nodes that are related with an atomic 
aspect of the behavior are calculated using the individual and 
social dimensions. For instance, using the ontological 
structure in Fig. 3, we can calculate the reputation of B as a 
suitable vehicle to forward a message from A’s perspective 
using (8): 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

RA→B(suitable) = 0.8* RA→B (to_forward) +  
              0.2*RA→B (to_generate_message).  
(8) 
 
Figure 4. Ontological structure for a suitable vehicle 
 
V. 
RELATED WORK 
Reputation modeling has attracted the interest of 
researchers in the field of e-commerce and cloud computing 
[4]-[6]. Hamadache et al. [4][5] has focused on reputation of 
services in cloud computing in the basis of ontologies for 
Service Level Agreements. Vavilis et al. [6] has investigated 
reference models for reputation systems using subjective 
user’s feedbacks in e-commerce. However, these works 
mainly focused on the description of the rules and the math 
involved in reputation calculation. They do not propose a 
hybrid model from different sources for evaluating feedbacks 
based on collaborative activity as message forwarding. Our 
work goes one step further, since it attempts to monitor and 
update the evaluation of the feedbacks during the whole 
message forwarding, including the context of user feedback 
to create and feed a meaningful reputation management 
system for VANETs.  
 VANET research Group at Middlesex University is 
developing a set of simulations to evaluate a VANET 
mobility model [8]. At University of Sao Paulo, we are using 
a simulation environment to evaluate our model and 
integrate it with their work. Our environment is composed by 
those tools: Simulation of Urban Mobility (SUMO) [9] to set 
up the mobility model, object-oriented modular discrete 
event network simulation framework (OMNET++) [10] to 
support the network model, and the framework Vehicles in 
Network Simulator (Veins) [11] to implement the 
propagation model and communications between vehicles.  
In our mobility model, a grid scenario of 1 Km2 is 
considered. A group of 100 vehicles enter to the scenario and 
stay there, traveling the time it takes the simulation; a RSU is 
fixed in the center of the scenario and it is connected to the 
reputation server. The maximum speed of the vehicles is 
13.9 m/s. We configured 20% of vehicles generating 
messages. The final destination is located in a fixed position. 
REMOVAN is being implemented on the WAVE Short 
Message Protocol (WSMP) stack [12]; it has adopted the 
standard IEEE 802.11p [13] and the Simplified Path-Loss 
model.  In TABLE II is showed the parameters of mobility and 
network.  
The goal of our simulations is to evaluate the 
performance of the reputation system in VANETs. So, the 
response variable that will be evaluated at the beginning is 
the average of the reputation of the vehicles in the reputation 
server. We supposed an initial reputation with neutral value 
(0), each time the destination receives a message; it generates 
and sends the feedbacks to the reputation server. The server 
will increase the reputation of the vehicles that generated and 
forwarded messages.   
 
TABLE II. SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
𝐏𝐚𝐫𝐚𝐦𝐞𝐭𝐞𝐫 
Value 
Urban area 
(1km x 1km) 1km2 
Number of vehicles 
100 
Packet format 
WAVE Short Message 
Beacon Interval in the RSU 
1s 
MAC Protocol 
802.11p 
Transmission rate 
6Mbps 
Communication range 
320m 
Simulation time 
600s 
 
The main concepts of the ontology to be used in our 
model and their relationships are described in Figure 5. The 
main concepts are: Actor, Message, Feedback, Reputation 
and Broker. Context was omitted from this representation; it 
will be included into the ontology in next simulation. A 
Message is generated by an Actor. Car is an Actor, as are 
Passenger and Driver. So a Message can be generated by one of 
them. We are also categorizing cars in their types (Truck, Bus, 
Taxi, etc) to be further used on Context. A Message has a 
Content; Subjective Feedback is based on it, in other words, a 
Destination gives Feedback (Subjective Feedback) based on a 
Content of a Message. A Destination also gives Objective 
Feedback, but in this case, a route table is consulted in order to 
list all intermediary cars, which collaborated in message 
forwarding. A Message is addressed to a Destination. In future 
simulations, it should be addressed to more than one Destination 
or to all in the way, for example, an alarm message. A Broker 
(Reputation 
Server) 
receives 
Feedbacks 
and 
generates 
Reputation. Then Reputation is generated by a Broker. 
Reputation, as was said before, is an important concept in this 
work because message forwarding will take it into account.  
Note that Car has Reputation and not all Actors. It happens 
because Driver and Passenger will be linked to a car.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Ontology High Level Concepts 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have presented our reputation model for 
VANET. The very next steps for this research will consist in 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

the refinement of ontological structure and testing 
implementation of the proposed algorithms and their 
evaluation against simulated scenarios and from real testbeds 
[8]. This will ensure the coherence and the common ground 
on which ontologies are built. By ensuring the coherence, the 
goal is the long-term evolution of feedback and reputation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of 
São Paulo (IFSP) supports this work of post doctorate. 
University of Pamplona, Vehicle Ad-Hoc Networks 
Research group at Middlesex University and at University 
of Sao Paulo (USP) support the collaboration of coauthors. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] VANET research Group at Middlesex University. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.vanet.mdx.ac.uk/. [retrieved: March, 
2016].  
[2] A. Boukerche, H. A. B. F. Oliveira, E. F. Nakamura, and A. 
A. F. Loureiro, “Vehicular ad hoc networks: A new challenge 
for localization- based systems,” Computer Communications, 
vol. 31, no. 12, July 2008, pp. 2838– 2849 
[3] J. LeBrun, Chen-Nee Chuah, D. Ghosal, and M. Zhang, 
"Knowledge-based opportunistic forwarding in vehicular 
wireless 
ad 
hoc 
networks," 
in Vehicular 
Technology 
Conference, 2005. VTC 2005-Spring , vol.4, May 2005, pp. 
2289-2293 , doi:10.1109/VETECS.2005.1543743 
[4] K. Hamadache, "Ontology Driven Reputation Model for the 
Cloud," in IEEE 6th International Conference on Cloud 
Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), Singapore, 
December 
2014, 
pp. 
735-738.                                               
doi: 10.1109/CloudCom.2014.156  
[5] K. Hamadache and S. Rizou, "Holistic SLA Ontology for 
Cloud Service Evaluation," Advanced Cloud and Big Data 
(CBD), 2013 International Conference on, Nanjing, 2013, pp. 
32-39. doi: 10.1109/CBD.2013.18 
[6] S. Vavilis, M. Petković, and N. Zannone, “A reference model 
for reputation systems”, in Decision Support Systems, vol. 61, 
May 2014, pp. 147–154, doi:10.1016/j.dss.2014.02.002 
[7] J. Sabater and C. Sierra, “REGRET: A reputation model for 
gregarious societies,” in Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop 
on Deception, Fraud and Trust in Agent Societies, 2001, pp. 
61-69, Montreal, Canada,. doi:10.1145/375735.376110  
[8] A. Ghosh,, V. V. Paranthaman, G. Mapp, O. Gemikonakli and 
J. Loo, "Enabling seamless V2I communications: toward 
developing cooperative automotive applications in VANET 
systems," in Communications Magazine, IEEE , vol.53, no.12 
December 
2015, 
pp.80-86,   
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2015.735557 
[9] Intitute of Transportation Systems - DLR, “Sumo – 
simulation of urban mobility,” 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.dlr.de/ts/en/desktopdefault.aspx/tabid-
9883/16931_read-41000/. [retrieved: May, 2016] 
[10] OMNeT++, 
“Omnet++ 
community,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: http://www.omnetpp.org/. [retrieved: May, 2016] 
[11] C. Sommer, “Veins - vehicles in network simulation,” 2014. 
[Online]. Available: http://veins.car2x.org/. [retrieved: May, 
2016] 
[12] IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments 
(WAVE) - Networking Services," in IEEE Std 1609.3-2010 (Revision 
of 
IEEE 
Std 
1609.3-2007) , 
Dec. 
30 
2010, 
pp.1-144,  
doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2010.5680697 
[13] D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, "IEEE 802.11p: Towards an International 
Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments," Vehicular 
Technology Conference, 2008. VTC Spring 2008. IEEE, Singapore, 
2008, 
pp. 
2036-2040. 
doi: 10.1109/VETECS.2008.458 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

