Energy-Efficiency for Heterogenous Wireless Networks by using Hand-off
Approach
Samet Öztoprak1, M. Ali Aydın2
Department of Computer Engineering
Istanbul University
Istanbul, Turkey
sametoztoprak@hotmail.com1, aydinali@istanbul.edu.tr2
Tülin Atmaca
Laboratoire Samovar
Télécom SudParis, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay
Evry, France
tulin.atmaca@telecom-sudparis.eu
Abstract—With the dense use of smart phones, the global
mobile data traffic has increased from 0:2exabytes/month in
2010 to 2:5exabytes/month in 2014. With a growth of 1150%
over 4 years it is expected that global mobile traffic will
increase by a factor of 10 between 2014 and 2020 [1]. Mobile
Base station (BS) cell sites consumed over 60% of the company
total energy consumption for most mobile carriers, therefore
current research has a significant focus on improving the
energy efficiency of mobile access networks. In recent years,
the increasing impact of networks on the environment has
made energy efficiency in telecom networks an important
theme for researches. In this context, heterogeneous wireless
networks (HetNets) plays a key role in 4G and 5G due to offer
easily access services anywhere and anytime. Our study is
developed based on IPv4 protocol but our developed algorithm
can apply too IPv6 easily. In this paper, we propose a new
approaches which provides more energy efficient than Green
Joint Radio Resource Management (JRRM) Architecture. Our
proposed model has 2 stations, which are separated from each
other. One of them, which is called macrocell, addresses the
control of a vast territory. The other is located in more
sophisticated and local areas. All calls come to the macrocell at
first. According to the intensity of call rate microcells turn on
or off. These actions are performed by a threshold located in
the macrocell. Control of the macrocell achieves a good level of
energy efficiency. As it is showed in the illustrations, Handoff
Green JRRM Architecture is better than Green JRRM
Architecture in the aspect of energy-saving, in any case. The
energy-saving action changes the range from 45% to 70% in
an average traffic load. Handoff Green's Dynamic Coverage
Management (DCM) algorithm promises more opportunities in
saving energy. Using a Markov model, the diagram of the
states
transitions
is
represented
and
some
obtained
performance results are showed by the figures.
Keywords-Energy efficiency; HetNets; joint radio resource
management (JRRM); macrocell and microcell occupancy;
green network design; threshold macrocell and microcell;
Markov process; performance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we have proposed a new algorithm for
conserving energy in wireless networks which will be benefit
economically for the power industry. The reason of these
improvements to wireless networks is that the world of
mobile
communication
growing
at
an
amazing
rate.
Nowadays, Information Communication Technologies (ICT)
consumes a significant portion of all energy that is produced
in the world. It seems that ICT will continue to increase in
the consumption of energy for many years to come. Due to
this forecasted increase in energy consumption in the future,
it is vital importance that some energy-saving actions must
be taken in consideration. Furthermore, if precautions are not
taken soon to improve this situation, there will be enormous
negative effects on the environment. The production of
electrical energy releases harmful gases that contribute to the
Greenhouse Effect on the atmosphere. It is imperative that
we make an effort to decrease this energy consumption as
much as possible. One solution is finding "greener" ways to
produce
electricity,
and
another
is
to
develop
new
technologies and methods of reducing the consumption of
energy. In this paper, we have focused on the ways in which
the consumption of electrical energy can be reduced.
The current forecasts predict that by 2018, high-speed
coverage
will reach over 85 percent of the
world’s
population, and global traffic in mobile networks are going
to rise with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 50
percent, reaching a 12-fold increase since 2012 [2].
Nowadays, heterogeneous wireless networks (HetNets)
4G or 5G wireless networks allow to reach access services in
everywhere and every time, the ICT carbon emission is
comparable to that of the global aviation industry [3]. By
2020, this emission is foreseen to grow at a rate of 3.8
percent, expecting to contribute 2.3 percent of the global
greenhouse gas emissions, which represents 1.27
[4]. The important part of this energy is consumed by Base
Stations (BSs) [1]. This consumption is approximately 57%
of the whole energies used by all ICT sector [5].
In our study, while lowering energy consumption we have
to keep the performance of the system at acceptable level.
Our developed algorithm defines a threshold value as a
certain percentage of the whole capacity of the system. If the
number of calls is lower than the defined threshold, the calls
are accepted by macrocell and microcell is kept off. If the
number of calls is equal or higher than the defined threshold,
Calls are assigned to microcells from that are coming. The
most engaged microcell is activated and its calls are
transferred to their microcell. If microcell occupancy falls
under predefined microcell threshold, the microcell transfers
its calls to macrocell and closes itself. If microcell occupancy
is greater than its threshold value, the microcell stays on
working (on) state. Alternating microcells on working (on)
and off states, we can save electrical energy.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

In Section 2, we recall related works in this area and our
contribution. In Section 3, we introduce general scheme and
algorithm flow charts of the handoff green Joint Radio
Resource
Management
(JRRM)
algorithm
that
we
developed. Besides, the explanation of our algorithm and it is
shown the differences between green JRRM algorithm and
handoff JRRM algorithm. Section 4 presents the modelling
of our proposed scheme and the state transition diagram to
compute blocking probability and idle state probability.
Section 5 demonstrates the numerical results of energy-
saving. One of them compares the two algorithms based on
active microcell numbers. If we compare the number of
active microcells, we will find the energy-saving ratio. In the
last section, we talk about the future work to bring closer our
experimented results to real ones by using real traffic and
more microcells.
II.
RELATED WORK
Falowo et al. [6] proposed the issue of unbalance in radio
resources allocation among limited-capability heterogeneous
mobile terminals in HetNets. They reproduced a terminal-
modality based joint call admission control method that uses
the RAT terminal capability and the network load as criteria
for call admission control decisions.
Ngo et al. [7] addressed distributed RRM-based methods
to optimally separate subcarriers and power in OFDM-based
cognitive radio ad hoc networks. The issue of RRM is
formulated as an optimization issue where the throughput is
maximized subject to some network-related constraints such
as the number of sub channels that each individual
unlicensed user might engage, bearable interface at main
network level, etc.
Guerrero-Ibanez [8] addressed a QoS-based dynamic
pricing approach for services and besides resource supplying
in HetNets. In their suggested scheme, an access network
selection mechanism is proposed that assists choice the
convenient network for every requested user's service and
preferences.
Carvalho et al. [9] have proposed to build a green DCM
algorithm which is based on a threshold. There are 2 layers
which are called macrocell and microcell. Macrocell has the
threshold making a decision whether or not microcell is
needed to keep off.
In this study, the purpose of DCM algorithm is to ensure
the energy efficient through the opening and closing of
microcells on system by using a Markov model. Our
contribution to this work is to reduce energy consumption by
using handoff on macrocell and open the most engaged
microcell.
Yao et al. [10] addressed the effectiveness of the derived
centralized and decentralized QC-learning algorithms in
balancing the tradeoff between energy saving and QoS
satisfaction.
III.
HANDOFF GREEN JRRM DESIGN
Our green JRRM algorithm is based on the following idea.
We
have
to
take
into
consideration
the
traffic
load
fluctuating during the day. The data is used as input values.
Load of BSs is used to make a decision about the defining
the threshold. The power-saving will be obtained by this
threshold.
Macrocell
Microcell -2
Microcell -3
Microcell -1
DCM algoritm.
Load Control.
Incoming call n-1
KM ( treshold)
Km
Km
Km
Incoming call 1
.
.
.
Incoming call n
Figure 1 Handoff Green JRRM design
Figure 1 represents our green JRRM algorithm. It has two
layers. One of them is called macrocell and the other is
called as microcell. K is our Threshold value. According to
K value, we are going to make a decision whether a BS is
needed to be kept off or not. Load Control (LC) monitors the
load of the system by certain periods. The decision of turning
off a BS is made by DCM algorithm. In this architecture,
macrocell always needs to be kept open. macrocell covers
huge geographic territory generally considered as a country.
Macrocell and microcells are completely independent of
each other.
Figure 2 shows the flowchart of our algorithm. Let IM be
the call number of macrocell, let Im be the call number of
microcell and Rm is the number of calls continuing on
microcell. After the calling reached to Green JRRM, it is
necessary
to
determine
their
source,
which
requires
recognizing whether or not the incoming calls are coming
from the macrocell. After the call has been assigned as
macrocell, and it is checked if this macrocell has the
available capacity to handle the call, then if yes, the call will
be accepted by the macrocell. However, if the capacity of the
macrocell is full, the incoming call will be dropped. If the
incoming call is defined as microcell call, then it is necessary
to determine which microcell it belongs to. After the
microcell is found, its density variable is increased by 1. All
of the density variables of microcells are stored in the array.
If they are less than the threshold value, the incoming calls
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

will be handled by the macrocell. The microcells will
continue to stay in off. Energy savings will be achieved as
long as the microcells are kept off. If the value is greater than
threshold (K) value or equal to K value, the most engaged
microcell passes into an active position and accepts the call.
At this point, the microcell is active, which means that it is
consuming energy. The microcell has its own threshold as
well. DCM algorithm makes a decision by the assist of its
own threshold value whether or not the microcell needs to
keep itself off. If incoming calls are equal to the threshold
value of the macrocell, or more than the threshold value of
the microcell, then the microcell will remain active. If
incoming calls are less than the threshold value of the
microcell, then the microcell will ask about the intensity of
the macrocell. If the intensity of macrocell less than the sum
of IM and Rm calls, the microcell passed to off position itself
and Rm calls will be transferred to the macrocell. If macrocell
is not available the microcell will stay active. In this way,
Energy-efficiency and system balance is assured.
Incoming Call
Green JRRM
IsMacrocell
Mc ≥ IM
Microcell
No
Yes
IM + Im ≥ KM
Turn the most engaged
Microcell On
Covered by
Macrocell
No
Service
Completion
Yes
Drop
Call
Transfer Microcell calls and
Accept Microcell calls on
Microcell
Detect the call which
Microcell has belonged
and increase density
variable by 1.
Rm ≥ Km
IM + Im + Rm≥ KM
No
No
Turn Microcell off and
transfer Remaining
calls to Macrocell
Yes
No
Figure 2 Handoff DCM-based green JRRM algorithm.
IV.
PERFORMANCE MODEL FOR HANDOFF
As we mentioned earlier, our model has 2 layers:
macrocell and microcell. Arrival process are assumed to be
Poisson in both layers with
macrocell rate and
microcell rate. In the green JRRM scheme, the state
transition diagram for a small-scale system with
=5,
= 5, K=2. The number of macrocell and microcell
channels are
and
respectively. K is considered as
a threshold value defined by multiplying the capacity of
macrocell by a certain coefficient, shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3 State transition diagram for the handoff green JRRM
scheme with Mcell = 5, mcell =5, K=2
Figure 3 represents the state diagram threshold value is
calculated by multiplying the total capacity of the macrocell
by 0.6 (NICIN 0.6) In this case, it is calculated as 3. Using
bidimensional Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC)
model, we define the state as:
From this point, formula 1, the blocking probability in the
macrocell and formula 2, the blocking probability in the
microcell are obtained as [9]:
Regarding DCM algorithm, formula 3, the probability of
idle state of macrocell can be calculated as [9]:
V.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our DCM-
based green JRRM scheme. The scenario of this experiment
consists of 1 macrocell and 5 microcells and there is no any
macrocell call to measure the performance of microcell call.
We assume that the number of channels of the macrocell is
20, and the number of channels of the microcells is 10. The
threshold value is 10. The threshold value is automatically
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

determined so that the number of the macrocell's capacity is
multiplied by 0.5 coefficients.
Scenario
Figure 4 The occupancy of microcell calls on macrocell.
Figure 4 shows the sum of the number of incoming
microcell calls. The number of incoming calls can't exceed
the value of 10 due to fixing the threshold value to 10.
Figure 5 The occupancy of macrocell calls on macrocell.
Figure 5 shows the occupancy of macrocells which have
occurred by the incoming calls on them. If there are not any
microcell calls on the macrocell, then the macrocell has the
right to consume all of the function of the macrocell's
channels in order to recover its calls. The threshold value
defined on the macrocell means that the sum of the number
of microcell calls cannot exceed the threshold value. In our
study, first of all, it is necessary to determine exactly the
microcell to which the incoming call belongs. Secondly, the
intensity variable of the microcell is increased by 1. When
the sum of these calls reaches the threshold value, the most
engaged microcell is activated, and the calls of this microcell
are transferred to itself. Our aim is to underline the
advantage of Handoff Green JRRM Architecture versus
Green JRRM Architecture. If the number of incoming calls
exceeds the threshold value, then the following incoming
calls are diverted directly to microcells and will subsequently
activate new microcells. The advantage of our approach is
manifested at this point. The macrocell is alleviated after it
has opened the most engaged microcell on the macrocell.
Moreover, channels are opened for receiving new calls. For
example, let us assume that the threshold value is 10 and we
have 5 microcells. There are 10 calls. The distribution of
these calls would be divided in such a way that there would
be 4 calls coming from the first microcell, 3 calls coming
from the second microcell, and 3 calls coming from the third
microcell in a certain time period. In Green JRRM
Architecture's approach, the fourth and fifth microcells will
be opened even if there is only one call. In Handoff Green
JRRM Architecture's approach, the most engaged microcell
is activated and the calls are transferred. The other two
microcells are covered by the macrocell until a total of 4
calls are keeping one microcell active. In this way, the green
DCM algorithm is achieved. In the approach by Green
JRRM Architecture, 2 microcells remain in an activated
state. This example states that there is an energy savings of
50 %.
Figure 6 The average number of active microcell.
In
Figure
6,
the
energy
saving
experiment
is
demonstrated
by
5
microcells
as
shown
above.
The
maximum number of microcell calls is 10 because of setting
the threshold value to 10. As seen in Figure 6., there is a
huge difference between the varying approaches made by
Green JRRM Architecture and Handoff Green JRRM
Architecture. The energy saving activity is made by closing
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

the most engaged microcell. This action leads to alleviating
the macrocell. In this way, the calls made by other microcells
will continue being accepted on the macrocell.
Figure 7 The percentage of energy savings versus Green JRRM
Architecture.
.
In Figure 7, as seen, the energy saving action carried out
by 5 microcells is shown as a percentage in Figure 7. It states
that until threshold congestion occurs, both approaches act
the same. Neither one of these approaches opened a
microcell, nor were the calls handled by macrocells. With the
average rate of call traffic, energy savings has been recorded
in the range of 45% to 70 %. Further energy savings have
been achieved by keeping the microcells closed. Energy
saving opportunities were diminished by increasing the load
of calls.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have introduced a new approach to the
DCM-based energy efficient scheme for HetNets. Our
Handoff DCM algorithm is based on 2 basic structures. One
of them uses the Handoff mechanism and the other requires
setting a threshold on the macrocell. Using both of these
methods, we have obtained more energy savings and
developed
an
anti-pollution
algorithm.
Green
JRRM
Architecture diverts new calls directly to the microcell by
opening other microcells after the threshold is reached.
Handoff Green JRRM Architecture is interesting in the way
of opening the most engaged microcell by assigning
incoming calls. The results have shown that Handoff Green
JRRM Architecture has advantages in all ways, versus Green
JRRM Architecture.
In future work, we are going to develop a smarter program
by using statistics. We need not only instant data but also a
database to assist making a decision which BS needs to open
continuously to ensure more energy-efficiency. The next
Generation Handoff Green JRRM algorithm will consist of a
database and more complex decision mechanism. Further
work will include adding more microcells and testing the real
traffic load. This will enable us to understand the effect of
various traffic loads on our new green DCM algorithm. It
will be useful to take some precautions in order to avoid
congestion as we strive towards our goal of reaching the
pinnacle of energy-efficiency algorithm.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by ANR/N-GREEN
project (Project number ANR-15-CE25-0009/N-GREEN).
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Gonzalez, Energy Saving solution for integrated optical-
Wireless Access Network Telecom SudParis and University
of Paris VI, PhD thesis, July, 2015
[2]
E. Chavarria-Reyes, Ian F. Akyildiz, Etimad Fadel, “Energy
Consumption Analysis and Minimization in Multi-Layer
Heterogeneous Wireless Systems” IEEE Transactions on
mobile computing, vol. 14, no. 12, December, 2015, pp. 2474
– 2487.
[3]
Gartner, “Gartner estimates ICT industry accounts for 2
percent
of
global
CO2
emissions,”
April,
2007,
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/503867.
[4]
The Boston Consulting Group, “GeSI SMARTer 2020: The
role of ICT in driving a sustainable future,” Global e-
Sustainability Initiative, 2012,
http://gesi.org/assets/js/lib/tinymce/jscripts/tiny_mce/plugins/
ajaxfilemanager/uploaded/SMARTer%202020%20-
%20The%20Role%20of%20ICT%20in%20Driving%20a%20
Sustainable%20Future%20-%20December%202012.pdf
[5]
Alactel-Lucent Strategic White Paper, “Information and
Communication Technologies: Enablers of a low-carbon
economy”,http://www.alcatel-
lucent.com/eco/docs/CMO7526101103\ICT\Enablers-
eco\EN\StraWhitePaper.pdf, 2012
[6]
O. E. Falowo and H. A. Chan, “Joint Call Admission Control
Algorithm
for
Fair
Radio
Resource
Allocation
in
Heterogeneous Wireless Networks Supporting Heterogeneous
Mobile Terminals”, Proceedings of 7th IEEE Consumer
Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), Las
Vegas, NV, USA, January, 2010, pp. 1-5.
[7]
D. T. Ngo and T. Le-Ngoc, “Distributed Resource Allocation
for
Cognitive
Radio
Networks
With
Spectrum-Sharing
Constraints”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 60, no. 7, September, 2011, pp. 3436-3449.
[8]
A. Guerrero-Ibanez, J. Contreras-Castillo, A. Barba and A.
Reyes, “A QoS-based dynamic pricing approach for services
provisioning in heterogeneous wireless access networks”,
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol.7, no. 5, October, 2011,
pp. 569-583.
[9]
G. H. S. Carvalho, A. Anpalagan, I.Woungang and S. K.
Dhurandher, “Energy-Efficient Radio Resource Management
Scheme for Heterogeneous Wireless Networks: a Queueing
Theory Perspective” Future Technology Research Association
International, vol. 3, no 4, December, 2012, pp. 15-22.
[10] Y. Yao, Q. Cao and A. Vasilakos, “Energy-Efficiency
Oriented Traffic Offloading in Wireless Networks: A Brief
Survey and a Learning Approach for Heterogeneous Cellular
Networks”
IEEE
Journal
on
selected
areas
in
communications, vol. 33, no. 4, June, 2015, pp. 627- 640.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

