Time Slot Assignment Algorithms
for Reducing Upstream Latency in IEEE 802.16j Networks
Shimpei Tanaka
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
Osaka University, Japan
sinpei-t@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Go Hasegawa, Yoshiaki Taniguchi and Hirotaka Nakano
Cybermedia Center, Osaka University, Japan
{hasegawa, y-tanigu, nakano}@cmc.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In IEEE 802.16j wireless multihop networks,
transmission latency from relay nodes to a gateway node is
one of the important performance metrics. The transmission
latency is mainly aﬀected by a scheduling delay at every relay
node, which is determined by algorithms for assigning time
slots to wireless links between relay nodes. In this paper,
we propose 2 kinds of time slot assignment algorithms for
upstream wireless links in IEEE 802.16j multihop networks.
One of the proposed algorithms assigns time slots considering
the hop count from a gateway node, and the other takes the
path from the relay node to the gateway node into account. We
evaluated the performance of the proposed algorithms through
simulation experiments and conﬁrmed that our algorithms can
decrease the upstream latency by up to 15% compared with the
existing method, without increasing the average transmission
latency of the entire network.
Keywords-IEEE 802.16j, wireless multihop network, upstream,
time slot, latency.
I. Introduction
IEEE 802.16j wireless multihop networks [1] have re-
ceived a signiﬁcant amount of attention as a network tech-
nology providing a wide-area broadband wireless access
environment at low cost. As depicted in Figure 1, in an IEEE
802.16j network, each relay node connects to other nodes
with wireless links so that the overall topology becomes
a tree structure, unlike the star structure in typical IEEE
802.11-based networks. In general, IEEE 802.16j consists
of three kinds of nodes: gateway nodes that have wired
connections to external networks, relay nodes that are inter-
connected with other nodes by wireless links, and user nodes
that are connected to the nearest relay node [2]. Generally,
the wireless channel used for communication between relay
nodes and user nodes is diﬀerent from that used among the
relay nodes and the gateway nodes, and the wireless channel
used for upstream communication is diﬀerent from that used
for downstream communication [3]. In this research, we
ignore user nodes and focus on the communication between
relay nodes.
One problem in wireless networks in general is that 2
nodes that exist in transmission range of each other cannot
communicate simultaneously due to radio interference [4].
To solve this problem, IEEE 802.16j uses a time-division
scheduling mechanism based on Orthogonal Frequency Di-
vision Multiplexing Access (OFDMA) at the MAC layer
Figure 1.
IEEE 802.16j wireless multihop network.
[5]. In the OFDMA-based mechanism, time is divided into
constant intervals called frames, each of which consists of
multiple time slots of constant time duration. The time
slots are assigned to links in the network as communication
opportunities, and communication on the links can take
place only at the assigned time slots [6]. The gateway node
performs centralized control of the time slot assignment
for the links, while considering interference relationships in
order to avoid radio interference.
In such wireless multihop networks using the time-
division scheduling mechanism, we cannot ignore a schedul-
ing delay at each relay node during packet transmission
between relay nodes. The scheduling delay is deﬁned as
the period of time between the arrival of a packet at a relay
node and the departure of the packet at the assigned time
slot for the relay node. The end-to-end transmission latency
between a relay node and a gateway node increases due to
accumulation of scheduling delays at each relay node on
the path between the relay node and the gateway node. The
degree of scheduling delay is mainly dependent on the time
slot assignment to the wireless links in the network.
We have already proposed a time slot assignment al-
gorithm for reducing scheduling delay and evaluated its
performance in [7]. The proposed algorithm tends to assign
time slots to links in order of the density of interference
relationships. Therefore, the links with small hop count
from the gateway node obtain earlier time slots, and the
links with large hop count from the gateway node obtain
later time slots, when traﬃc demand is concentrated at
the gateway node. As a result, the method in [7] can
6
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

decrease the scheduling delay and the transmission latency
for downstream transmissions from the gateway node to the
relay nodes, compared with random method. On the other
hand, it decreases a little in the scheduling delay at upstream
transmissions from the relay nodes to the gateway node.
Therefore, in this paper, we focus on the upstream trans-
mission in IEEE 802.16j wireless multihop networks and
propose 2 kinds of time slot assignment algorithms to give
small transmission latency from the relay nodes to the
gateway node. Our proposed algorithms aim to decrease the
scheduling delay at each relay node on the path between
the starting relay node and the gateway node. One of the
proposed algorithms assigns time slots by considering the
hop count from the gateway node, and the other takes the
path from the starting relay node to the gateway node into
account. Performance evaluation of the proposed algorithms
was conducted through packet-level simulation experiments.
The evaluation results showed that the proposed algorithms
can improve the average transmission latency as compared
with an existing algorithm described in [7] without increas-
ing the average transmission latency of the entire network.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we describe the model of IEEE 802.16j wireless multihop
networks. In Section III, we propose 2 kinds of time slot
assignment algorithms. In Section IV, we present simulation
evaluation results. Finally, in Section V, we conclude this
paper and describe future work.
II. IEEE 802.16j Wireless Multihop Network
IEEE 802.16j uses an OFDMA-based mechanism for
avoiding radio interference. When assigning time slots to
links between relay nodes, the connections and the interfer-
ence relationships between relay nodes are very important.
In this section, we describe the network model and notation
of the IEEE 802.16 wireless multihop network. We also ex-
plain the radio interference model and time slot assignment
mechanisms based on TDMA.
A. Network Model
Figure 2(a) depicts a directed communication graph
Gc = (Vc, Ec) that indicates the communication relation-
ship between relay nodes and a gateway node. Vc
=
{v0, v1, v2, . . . , vn} is a set of relay/gateway nodes deployed in
a plane, and v0 is the gateway node. We assume that there
is only one gateway node in the network. Ec is a set of
the directed communication links ei, j, which represents an
edge directed from vi and v j when ||vi − v j|| < ti. Here, ti is
the communication range of vi, and ||vi − v j|| is the distance
between vi and v j. We deﬁne the hop count of a directed
communication link ei, j as the larger hop count between 2
nodes vi and v j.
In this paper, we assume that the gateway node connects
to an external network, and each relay node communicates
with the gateway node via other relay node(s) on the path
between the relay node and the gateway node. The path
between the relay node and the gateway node is determined
Figure 2.
Directed communication graph Gc and directed transmission
graph Gt.
by a routing algorithm, and the directed transmission graph
Gt = (Vt, Et) is constructed as a tree-like graph whose root
is the gateway node v0, as shown in Figure 2(b). Here, Gt is
a subset of Gc, Vt is a set of nodes satisfying Vt = Vc, and
Et is a set of directed transmission links that is determined
by the routing algorithm and satisﬁes Et ⊆ Ec.
In what follows, the directed transmission links ei, j(∈ Et)
are called links, the links on the path from a relay node to
the gateway node are called upstream links, and the links on
the path from the gateway node to a relay node are called
downstream links. We assume that Gt is given in advance by
the routing algorithm, and each link ei, j has a link weight
wi, j that represents the required time slots according to the
traﬃc load. In this paper, we consider algorithms to assign
time slots only to upstream links in the network.
B. Interference Model
In this paper, we use the radio interference model pro-
posed in [8]. The model deﬁnes the interference relationship
from ei, j to ep,q based on the distances among 4 vertices vi,
v j, vp and vq. Each relay node vi has the interference range
ri. The condition to determine the interference relationship
is as follows: ei, j interferes with ep,q when and only when
||vi − vq|| < ri. On the other hand, ep,q interferes with ei, j
when and only when ||vp − v j|| < rp. On the basis of
these conditions, ei, j and ep,q are in the interference rela-
tionship; that is, they cannot communicate simultaneously
when ||vi − vq|| < ri or ||vp − v j|| < rp is satisﬁed. Typically,
ri > ti, and the ratio of interference range to communication
range for node vi, denoted as γi = ri
ti , is in the range of 2–4
in practice [8]. We deﬁne a function I(ei, j, ep,q) that indicates
whether or not 2 links ei, j and ep,q are in the interference
relationship. The function returns 1 if the 2 links are in the
interference relationship, or returns 0 it the 2 links are not
in the interference relationship.
We introduce the conﬂict graph FGt = (FVt, FEt) obtained
by applying the interference model to a directed transmission
graph Gt, as depicted in Figure 3. FVt = {fei, j|ei, j ∈ Et} is a
set of nodes which are all elements of a link set Et in Gt,
and FEt = {li, j
p,q| fei,j, fep,q ∈ FVt} is a set of links which exist
when I(ei, j, ep,q) = 1, that is, FEt represents the interference
relationship among links in Gt.
7
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

Figure 3.
Directed transmission graph Gt and conﬂict graph FGt.
C. Time Slot Assignment based on TDMA
IEEE 802.16j controls transmission opportunities, called
time slots, using the TDMA mechanism and assigns time
slots to links in the network. Each link can communicate
only in assigned time slots. IEEE 802.16j does not assign
the same time slot to links that are in the interference
relationship. Meanwhile, multiple links can communicate si-
multaneously in one time slot when the time slot is assigned
to multiple links that are not in the interference relationship.
This is called spatial reuse, which enhances the network
throughput [9–13], and algorithms for assigning time slots
are required to consider the interference relationship to
increase the degree of spatial reuse. The algorithm in [7]
increases the degree of spatial reuse; however, it is not
applicable to upstream links in IEEE 802.16j because it
would increase the upstream latency. Therefore, we propose
algorithms in which priority is given to the time slot schedule
over spatial reuse.
III. Proposed Time Slot Assignment Methods
On upstream transmissions in an IEEE 802.16j wireless
multihop network, the time slot assignment to each link
aﬀects the scheduling delay and the end-to-end transmission
latency. The transmission latency of the relay node that
has large hop count from the gateway node is signiﬁcantly
aﬀected by the time slot assignment.
In this section, we propose 2 kinds of methods for assign-
ing time slots for reducing upstream transmission latency,
based on the models described in Section II.
A. Hopcount-based Method
The hopcount-based method is based on the following
idea. The order of the links for assigning time slots is
determined based on the hop count of each link from the
gateway node. The links with large hop count are assigned
earlier time slots than those with small hop count. In detail,
when a link ei, j is assigned a time slot(s), the hopcount-
based method assigns wi, j time slot(s) that are not assigned
to links in the interference relationship with ei, j and that
are not assigned to links with larger hop count than ei, j.
Note that we utilize a greedy approach, meaning that we
assign the earliest available time slots. Since the upstream
algorithm 1 Hopcount-based algorithm
INPUT: Gt = (Vt, Et), FGt = (FVt, FEt), wi,j of ∀ei, j
OUTPUT: time slot assignment to ∀ei, j
1: for all ei,j ∈ Et do
2:
Hk ← {ei, j | hi, j = k} ∪ Hk
3: end for
4: hmax = (the largest hop count in Et)
5: for H = Hhmax, Hhmax−1, . . . , H1 do
6:
y = z
7:
for all ei, j ∈ H do
8:
for all ep,q ∈ (Et ∩ (I(ei, j, ep,q) = 1)) do
9:
Xei,j ← Tep,q ∪ Xei,j
10:
end for
11:
for a = 1 ∼ wi, j do
12:
m = (the earliest number of time slot satisfying
((m > z) ∩ (sm < Xei,j)))
13:
Tei, j ← sm ∪ Tei, j
14:
if y < m then
15:
y = m
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
end for
19:
z = y
20: end for
transmissions in the network utilize the links on the path in
the reverse order of hop count, we expect that the scheduling
delay in upstream transmissions will be reduced by using
this method.
Algorithm 1 represents the hopcount-based method in
pseudo-code. hi, j is the hop count of ei, j. Hk is a set of the
links with k hop count from the gateway node, and Tei,j is a
set of the time slots assigned to ei, j. Xei, j is a set of the time
slots assigned to the links in the interference relationship
with ei, j. sm is the mth time slot.
B. Path-based Method
The path-based method assigns time slots to links along
with the paths from relay nodes to the gateway node. For
determining the order of assigning time slots to links, the
method ﬁrst determines the order of paths to which the time
slots are assigned. In detail, it orders the relay nodes in the
network by visiting them in the depth-ﬁrst order. When the
method assigns time slot(s) to links, it chooses a relay node
from the reverse order in which it visited relay nodes and
assigns 1 time slot to each link on the path from the chosen
relay node to the gateway node in descending order of hop
count. We use a greedy approach in which the interference
relationship is considered, as in the hopcount-based method.
The method is applicable when the traﬃc demand on a path
is determined only by the sender relay node, regardless of
the path’s characteristics.
Algorithm 2 shows the pseudo-code of the path-based
method. Tei,j is a set of the time slots assigned to ei, j. Xei, j is
a set of the time slots assigned to the links in the interference
relationship with ei, j. sm is the mth time slot, and seq is an
8
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

algorithm 2 Path-based algorithm
INPUT: Gt = (Vt, Et), FGt = (FVt, FEt), wi,j of ∀ei, j
OUTPUT: time slot assignment to ∀ei, j
1: n = (the number of relay nodes), w = 0
2: while Dw , φ do
3:
seq[n] = vm(m|m ∈ Dw)
4:
n = n − 1
5:
Dw ← Dw \ {m}
6:
if Dm , φ then
7:
w = m
8:
end if
9:
if (Dw = φ) ∩ (w , 0) then
10:
w = uw
11:
end if
12: end while
13: for a = 1 ∼ ((the number of relay nodes) do
14:
vk = seq[a], l = wk,uk
15:
repeat
16:
for all ep,q ∈ (Et ∩ (I(ek,uk, ep,q) = 1)) do
17:
Xek,uk ← Tep,q ∪ Xek,uk
18:
end for
19:
for b = 1 ∼ l do
20:
m = (the earliest time slot not in Xei, j)
21:
Tei, j ← sm ∪ Tei, j
22:
end for
23:
k = uk
24:
until (vk = v0)
25: end for
array of the relay nodes in the reverse order in which the
relay nodes were visited. Di is a set of the node numbers of
downstream nodes of vi and ui is the node number of the
upstream node of vi.
We can easily implement these 2 methods and their
computing overheads are following: overhead of hopcount-
based method and the existing method discussed below
is O((α + β × w) × n) and that of path-based method is
O((α + β) × w × n). α, β, w and n denote computing time
of interference relationships, time of determining time slot
to assign, average of link weight and the number of relay
nodes, respectively. The path-based method is unsuitable for
network that the topology or the traﬃc demand is frequently
changed compared with the hopcount-based method and the
existing method, because time slot assignment must be done
when one of them is changed.
IV. Performance Evaluation
We show the evaluation results of our time slot assignment
algorithms obtained by conducting packet-level simulation
experiments.
A. Evaluation Environment
We randomly located 99 relay nodes uniformly in a 1 × 1
square area and one gateway node at the center of the
area. All relay nodes had a communication range of 0.2.
As described in Section II-A, after obtaining a directed
communication graph based on the node location and the
communication range, we constructed a directed transmis-
sion graph as a tree-like graph rooted at the gateway node
and optionally minimized the hop count from the gateway
node to each node. Note that the detailed implementation of
the algorithm of the directed transmission graph is outside
the scope of this paper, and we used the method in [14].
We determined the interference relationship among links
between relay nodes using the interference model explained
in Section II-B. The traﬃc demand of the network was
uniform, and we generated one packet from a randomly
chosen relay node destined to the gateway node at regular
intervals, which were equal to the time slot duration. This
traﬃc demand setting means that the weight of each link
was equal to the number of paths between relay nodes and
the gateway node passing through the link. For packet-
level simulation experiments, we implemented a wireless
multihop network simulator that can simulate the packet-
level behavior of IEEE 802.16j-based networks, including
topology generation from the locations of relay/gateway
nodes, TDMA-based time slot assignment, and store-and-
forward packet transmission based on the FIFO principle. In
each experiment, we ran the simulation until 5,000 packets
were generated and arrived at the gateway node. For one
parameter set we conducted 3,000 simulations by changing
the relay nodes’ locations. When the interference ratio is 2.5,
though they change according to the topology, the average
of hop count is around 2.6–3.0 and the max of that is around
9–10.
We observed the frame size and the transmission latency
as performance metrics. The frame size represents the total
number of time slots needed for assigning time slots to all
links and is desired smaller because the large one decreases
network throughput. The transmission latency is deﬁned
as the time duration from when a packet is generated at
the relay node to when the packet arrives at the gateway
node. Note that in the packet-level simulation, some packets
were queued at some relay nodes when congestion occurred,
which may have increased the end-to-end transmission la-
tency.
We evaluated the proposed methods and the existing
method in [7] as the interference ratio γ was changed, taking
values 1.5, 2.5 and 3.5, for all relay nodes.
B. Existing Method for Comparison
Here we describe the existing method in [7] used for
comparison purposes. The method ﬁrst determines the order
of assigning time slots to links by using a conﬂict graph.
The assignment order is roughly the same as the order of
the degree of nodes in the conﬂict graph. The links are
assigned time slots along this order in a greedy manner,
as in the proposed methods. Since the conﬂict graph is
likely to be dense around the gateway node and have space
around the nodes far from the gateway node, the method
in [7] can decrease the transmission latency for downstream
9
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

transmission. We evaluated the upstream transmission of the
method to compare it with the proposed methods.
Note that we also consider the modiﬁed algorithm from
the above method to possibly decrease the upstream trans-
mission latency. The method utilizes the reverse order of
time slot assignment given by the above existing method.
Although we do not show the results due to space limita-
tion, we have conﬁrmed that the modiﬁed method cannot
outperform the proposed method in this paper.
C. Frame Size
We ﬁrst evaluated the frame size. The results are shown
in Figures 4(a), 4(b), and 4(c) for γ = 1.5, 2.5 and 3.5,
respectively. The x-axis of the graphs shows the topology
ID (1 ∼ 3, 000), which corresponds to the simulation exper-
iments with 3,000 patterns of node locations. The results are
sorted in ascending order of the frame size of the existing
method.
From Figure 4, we can see that the frame size of the
existing method was the smallest, and that of the hopcount-
based method was the largest for all interference ratios. In
the hopcount-based method, the wireless resource eﬃciency
was lower than that in the other methods due to spatial reuse
only among links with the same hop count. On the other
hand, the frame size of the path-based method was smaller
than that of the hopcount-based method because of spatial
reuse among all links. However, since the path-based method
assigns time slots to links along the path from the relay node
to the gateway node in the descending order of hop count,
the ratio of spatial reuse was less than with the existing
method. As a result, the frame size of the path-based method
was larger than that of the existing method.
On the one hand, by comparing Figures 4(a)–4(c), we can
ﬁnd as the interference ratio became larger, the frame size of
all methods increased, and as the interference ratio became
larger, the diﬀerence in the frame sizes among the three
methods decreased. This is because the large interference
ratio decreased the wireless resource eﬃciency due to less
spatial reuse.
From these results, we conclude that our proposed meth-
ods are less eﬀective than the existing method in terms of
the frame size.
D. Transmission Latency
Figures 5(a), 5(b), and 5(c) are the results of the end-to-
end transmission latency for γ = 1.5, 2.5 and 3.5, respec-
tively. The x-axis of the graphs is the hop count of the relay
nodes from the gateway node at which packets are generated.
From Figure 5, we can see that the transmission latency of
the path-based method was the smallest for all interference
ratios. Since the path-based method sequentially assigns
time slots to the links on a path from a relay node to
the gateway node, the links on the path are assigned close
time slots. Therefore, the transmission latency of path-based
method decreased. In addition, when the interference ratio
became large, the path-based method showed small latency,
especially for large hop count. In particular, in Figure 5(c),
when the interference ratio was 3.5, for the packets generated
at the relay nodes with seven or larger hop count, the path-
based method reduced the transmission latency by up to
15% as compared with the existing method. On the other
hand, from Figure 5(c), we can also see that the transmission
latency of the hopcount-based method was smaller than that
of the existing method when the interference ratio was large.
This is because the scheduling delay at each relay node
decreased due to the time slot assignment of the hopcount-
based method. However, when the interference ratio was
small, the diﬀerence in transmission latency between the
hopcount-based method and the existing method became
small due to the large diﬀerence in frame size of the 2
methods, as depicted Figure 4(a).
We can also observe from Figure 5 that as the interference
ratio became larger, the transmission latency of all methods
increased. The reason for this is the increase of the frame
size shown in Figure 4. The scheduling delay at each relay
node increased because the communication opportunities per
unit time for each link decreased when the frame size was
large. Furthermore, the transmission latency of the packets
with large hop count increased notably compared with small
hop count since the number of relay nodes traversed was
large.
From these results, we conclude that the hopcount-based
method is more eﬀective than the existing method when the
interference ratio is large, and that the path-based method
is superior to the existing method for all interference ratios
in terms of the upstream end-to-end transmission latency.
While both of them improve the upstream end-to-end trans-
mission latency, they do not degrade average transmission
latency of the entire network. Considering the increase in
the frame length of the proposed algorithms in Figure 4, the
proposed algorithms can make a good trade-oﬀ between the
network throughput and latency.
V. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we proposed 2 kinds of time slot assignment
algorithms for upstream wireless links in IEEE 802.16j
multihop networks to reduce the upstream end-to-end trans-
mission latency. One of the proposed algorithms is a method
based on the hop count from the gateway node. The other
takes the path from relay nodes to the gateway node into
account. Through simulation experiments, we conﬁrmed that
the proposed methods can reduce the upstream transmission
latency by up to 15% as compared with the existing method
without degrading average transmission latency of the entire
network, though the methods increase the frame size.
In future work, we need to evaluate the proposed methods
in other cases where parameters other than the interference
ratio change, and to consider the implementation complexity
and the overhead. We plan to improve the method not only
to reduce the transmission latency but also to enhance the
network throughput and to reduce the cost of assigning
time slots, to apply the methods to other radio interference
10
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 0
 500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000
frame size
topology ID
hopcount-based
path-based
existing method
(a) Interference ratio 1.5
 140
 160
 180
 200
 220
 240
 0
 500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000
frame size
topology ID
hopcount-based
path-based
existing method
(b) Interference ratio 2.5
 200
 210
 220
 230
 240
 250
 260
 270
 280
 0
 500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000
frame size
topology ID
hopcount-based
path-based
existing method
(c) Interference ratio 3.5
Figure 4.
Frame size
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
 3000
 3500
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
average data transmit delay (slot)
Hop count from GW
hopcount-based
path-based
existing method
(a) Interference ratio 1.5
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
 3000
 3500
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
average data transmit delay (slot)
Hop count from GW
hopcount-based
path-based
existing method
(b) Interference ratio 2.5
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
 3000
 3500
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
average data transmit delay (slot)
Hop count from GW
hopcount-based
path-based
existing method
(c) Interference ratio 3.5
Figure 5.
Average of transmission latency.
model using Signal to Interference and Noise Ration (SINR)
that is more realistic than the radio interference model
in this paper, and to develop the methods to a dynamic
scheme adapting the change of topology, the change of traﬃc
demand, condition of wireless channel and so on.
References
[1] IEEE 802.16 Working Group, “IEEE standard for local and
metropolitan area networks, part 16: Air interface for broad-
band wireless access systems, amendment 1: Multihop relay
speciﬁcation,” IEEE Standard 802.16j-2009, June 2009.
[2] D. Niyato, E. Hossain, D. I. Kim, and Z. Han, “Joint opti-
mization of placement and bandwidth reservation for relays
in IEEE 802.16j mobile multihop networks,” in Proceedings
of IEEE ICC 2009, pp. 1–5, June 2009.
[3] V. Genc, S. Murphy, Y. Yu, and J. Murphy, “IEEE 802.16j
relay-based wireless access networks: An overview,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 56–63, Oct
2008.
[4] P. Gupta and P. R. Kumar, “The capacity of wireless net-
works,” IEEE Transactoins on Information Theory, vol. 46,
no. 2, pp. 388–404, Mar 2000.
[5] T. Zhifeng, L. Anfei, T. Koon, and Z. Jinyun, “Frame
structure design for IEEE 802.16j mobile multihop relay
(MMR) networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE GLOBECOM
2007, pp. 4301–4306, Nov 2007.
[6] N. Salem and J. Hubaux, “A fair scheduling for wireless mesh
networks,” in Proceedings of WiMesh 2005, Sep 2005.
[7] R. Ishii, G. Hasegawa, Y. Taniguchi, and H. Nakano, “Time
slot assignment algorithms in IEEE 802.16 multi-hop relay
networks,” in Proceedings of ICNS 2010, pp. 265–270, Mar
2010.
[8] W. Weizhao, W. Yu, L. X. Yang, S. WenZhan, and F. Ophir,
“Eﬃcient interference-aware TDMA link scheduling for
static wireless networks,” in Proceedings of MobiCom 2006,
pp. 262–273, Sep 2006.
[9] L. Kleinrock and J. Silvester, “Spatial reuse in multihop
packet radio networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 75,
pp. 156–167, Jan 1987.
[10] P. Djukic and S. Valaee, “Link scheduling in polynomial
time,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 34,
pp. 910–917, Sep 1988.
[11] H.-Y. Wei, S. Ganguly, R. Izmailov, and Z. J. Haas,
“Interference-aware IEEE 802.16 WiMax mesh networks,” in
Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference 2005,
vol. 5, pp. 3102–3106, May–June 2005.
[12] S. Liu, S. Feng, W. Ye, and H. Zhuang, “Slot allocaton
algorithms in centralized scheduling scheme for IEEE 802.16
based wireless mesh networks,” Computer Communications,
vol. 32, pp. 943–953, Mar 2009.
[13] L.-W. Chen, Y.-C. Tseng, Y.-C. Wang, D.-W. Wang, and J.-J.
Wu, “Exploiting spectral reuse in routing, resource allocation,
and scheduling for IEEE 802.16 mesh networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 58, pp. 301–313,
Jan 2009.
[14] P. A. Humblet and S. R. Soloway, “Topology broadcast
algorithms,” in Proceedings of Computer Networks and ISDN
Systems, vol. 16, pp. 179–186, Jan 1989.
11
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

