Evolving Future Internet Clean-Slate Entity Title Architecture
with Quality-Oriented Control Plane Extensions
Jos Castillo Lema,
Felipe Silva
and Augusto Neto
Federal University of
Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN)
Natal, Brazil
Email: jcastillo@ppgsc.ufrn.br
Flavio de Oliveira Silva
and Pedro Frosi
Federal University of Uberlandia (UFU)
Uberlandia, Brazil
Email: flavio@facom.ufu.br
Carlos Guimares,
Daniel Corujo
and Rui Aguiar
Telecommunications Institute (IT)
Aveiro, Portugal
Email: cguimaraes@av.it.pt
Abstract—Due to the technological evolution, growth and various
new service demands requiring new solutions to support novel
usage scenarios, current Internet has been confronted with new
requirements in terms of network mobility, quality and scala-
bility, among others. New Future Internet approaches targeting
Information Centric Networking, such as the Entity Title Ar-
chitecture (ETArch), provide new services and optimizations for
these scenarios, using novel mechanisms leveraging the Software
Deﬁned Networking (SDN) concept. However, the current ETArch
approach is equivalent to the best-effort capability of current
Internet, which limits achieving reliable communications. In this
work, we evolved ETArch with both quality-oriented mobility and
resilience functions following the super-dimensioning paradigm
to achieve advanced network resource allocation integrated with
OpenFlow. The resulting framework, called Support of Mo-
bile Sessions with High Transport Network Resource Demand
(SMART), allows the network to semantically deﬁne the quality
requirements of each session to drive network Quality of Service
control seeking to keep best Quality of Experience. The results
of the preliminary performance evaluation of SMART were
analyzed using Mininet, showing that it allowed the support
of mobile multimedia applications with high transport network
resource and quality demand over time, as well as efﬁciently
dealing with both mobility and resilience events.
Keywords–Future Internet; SDN; ICN; QoS and QoE.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet is constantly evolving, motivated by its nat-
ural growth and by the introduction of new services and
applications to fulﬁll emerging needs. New requirements are
being placed over its architecture, such as mobility, security
and scalable content distribution. To cope with this new
set of requirements, several enhancements are being deﬁned,
increasing the complexity of the overall Internet architecture,
with many core components reaching their limit, and hindering
further evolutions [1]. In addition, the current Internet still
cannot address many of today’s and emerging requirements
adequately, such as efﬁcient transmission of content-oriented
trafﬁc and effective congestion control. As a result, clean-slate
attempts are being carried out as the next step towards an
efﬁcient Future Internet approach.
Information Centric Networking (ICN) [2] is one of such
proposed approaches focusing on content access and delivery
beyond current host-to-host communications. Content has a
more central role in the network operations, motivated by the
need to meet data-intensive applications. This paradigm shift
leverages in-networking caching and replication, improving
efﬁciency, scalability and robustness.
However deploying ICN capable nodes into current net-
works would require the update or replacement of exist-
ing networking equipment and protocols. Software Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) [3] emerges as a promising solution to
overcome this, since it could not only facilitate the deployment
of ICN functionalities in current networks without requiring
new clean-slate designs, but it could also improve and enhance
current and future Internet network management mechanisms.
The Entity Title Architecture (ETArch) [4] is an emerging
Future Internet clean-slate approach which shares the vision
of content-oriented paradigms, where entities request content
by subscribing to it, triggering the network to dynamically
conﬁgure itself in order to provide the users with the in-
tended content. The content is delivered trough a channel that
gathers multiple communication entities, called Workspace,
allowing communicating entities to express their require-
ments over time. Despite its innovative approach, ETArch
does not consider reliable communications provisioning in
its design, and omits important factors to determine the
connection, such as the quality requirements of demanding
applications and the level of quality of the network nodes.
Thus, ETArch lacks quality-oriented mechanisms for estab-
lishing workspaces, which means that network control func-
tions seriously restrict data dissemination over the best-effort
transport model of the current Internet. Moreover, ETArch
operates in a per-ﬂow driven way, and it is well known that
such signaling approach overloads the system performance
with the increasing session-ﬂow admissions, mainly in terms
of signaling and processing overheads [5]. As a result, the
entire system can reveal increasingly high latency (network
processing) and bandwidth use (exceeding signaling), which
may increase energy consumption levels while degrading users
perception.
This way, it is evident that ETArch is unable to accommo-
date bandwidth-intensive mobile session ﬂows (e.g., real-time
multimedia) guaranteeing both Quality of Service (QoS) and
Quality of Experience (QoE) over time, in terms of setting
workspaces connections with limited delay, error and loss
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

rates experience. This drawback seriously restricts the scope
of ETArch in Future Internet scenarios, especially when is
taken into account the fact that trafﬁc forecasts predict that
80% of the total data ﬂows will stream multimedia content by
2017 [6]. In view of this, the session setup control functions
of ETArch must take into consideration quality parameters
to guide quality-oriented sessions, specially real-time ones,
where losses above 5% generally lead to very poor effective
throughput [7]. This diversity of applications makes the current
ETArch approach of offering the same “best-effort” service to
all applications inadequate.
The limitations described above motivate our work in the
sense that there is a need to extend the control plane of legacy
ETArch with quality-oriented functions to improve the session
admission mechanism. First of all, it is required to deﬁne
the application session requirements that will semantically
describe the quality demands that must be fulﬁlled over time,
by deﬁning the minimum quality requirements of each mobile
session ﬂow (bitrate, tolerance to packet delay/loss/error, etc.).
We claim that adopting both QoS-connectivity over-estimated
provisioning capabilities and QoS-oriented mobility would
beneﬁt ETArch system to establish personalized multiparty
sessions while improving the system scalability. For this rea-
son, this paper proposes a new network architecture, denoted
as Support of Mobile Sessions with High Transport Network
Resource Demand (SMART), which redesigns the legacy
ETArch with advanced QoS and mobility control functions to
accommodate bandwidth-intensive mobile sessions over truly
reliable and robust communication channels, while optimizing
the network control plane. The SMART approach will act as
a communication service provider with the following main
innovations: (i) clean-slate Future Internet network architecture
with new addressing methods, group-based connectivity, QoS-
oriented mobility and resilience controls; (ii) IEEE 802.21
compliant signaling approach to control device handover; (iii)
over-provisioning paradigm based automated, systematic and
dynamic network resource allocation integrated with Open-
Flow; (iv) OpenFlow extensions to provide QoS support.
The results of the preliminary performance evaluation
of SMART were analyzed using Mininet, demonstrating its
superior beneﬁts with regard to the original conﬁguration in
the network and user perspectives in terms of QoE and delay.
The remainder of the document is organized as follows:
Section II presents the background for this work, highlighting
not only the supporting technologies, but also other related
approaches. Section III presents the proposed framework,
evaluated in Section IV, where results of its implementation
are presented. Finally, Section V presents some concluding
remarks.
II.
BACKGROUND
The Entity Title Architecture [4] is a clean-slate network
architecture, distinguished over other Future Internet initiatives
by its topology-independent naming, addressing and semanti-
cally driven designation scheme, that uniquely identiﬁes each
entity, and by the deﬁnition of a channel that gathers multiple
communication entities, called Workspace. A key component
of this architecture is the Domain Title Service (DTS), which
deals with all network control-plane aspects. The DTS is
composed of Domain Title Service Agents (DTSAs), which
maintain information about entities registered in the domain
and the workspaces that they are subscribed to, aiming to
conﬁgure the network devices to implement the workspaces
and to allow data to reach every subscribed entity.
The operation of ETArch, on which the DTSA entity
centrally controls the behavior of the forwarding plane, ma-
terializes the SDN paradigm through OpenFlow. OpenFlow
[8] is an instantiation of SDN already available in a number
of commercial products and used in several Future Internet
research projects. It separates the data plane from the con-
trol plane of the network, allowing the OpenFlow Controller
to manage and control the underlying data plane, and to
conﬁgure the forwarding table of the switches, via a well-
known service-oriented API. This approach enables switches
to be (re)conﬁgured on the ﬂy, enabling ﬂexible and dynamic
network management [3].
The adoption of OpenFlow is mainly focused on core/wired
networks. However, the support of QoS in OpenFlow-enabled
networks is very limited, relaying on manual external tools
to manage queue conﬁguration. Several recent attempts have
tried to overcome such limitation, such as QoSFlow [9], that
made possible for administrators to manage resources on the
controller level.
A. Related work
Regarding QoS, there is a continuing debate on how to
evolve the current Internet in order to efﬁciently accommodate
multimedia sessions. Currently, there is no QoS architecture
that is successful and globally implemented. Some researchers
argue that fundamental changes should be done to fully guar-
antee QoS, while others think slight changes are enough to
have soft guarantees which will provide the requested QoS
with high probability. Future Internet requires QoS control
approaches beyond current Internet standards, which mainly
leverage the per-ﬂow approach to allocate network resources
(queues, bandwidth, data paths, etc.). Drawbacks associated
to per-ﬂow approaches are well known [5], mainly in terms
of network performance (state, processing and signaling over-
heads), severely jeopardizing system scalability and increasing
energy consumption.
Our
previous
works
[10]
proposed
dynamic
super-
dimensioned provisioning network resource allocation tech-
niques, deploying a controlled oversizing strategy for both
bandwidth and data paths and allowing the admission of
several sessions without per-ﬂow signaling exchanges and
decisions in the entire network systems. We strongly believe
that an optimized network control approach enabled by the
over-provisioning technique will allow the evolution of ETArch
towards a truly efﬁcient and robust Future Internet network
system in comparison to what it is available in the literature.
Several works have explored QoS control and OpenFlow
integration in Future Internet architectures, as follows. B.
Sonkoly et al. [11] focus on enhancing OpenFlow switches
and OpenFlow testbeds with advanced QoS and virtualization
capabilities, in order to make them capable of running QoS
related experiments, but does not propose any speciﬁc QoS
control model. In the other hand, H. Egilmez et al. [12]
propose a per-ﬂow driven approach, while our focus is to
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

conceive QoS control mechanisms beyond IP and per-ﬂow
regular approaches.
In [13], key research topics in the area of future Inter-
net architecture are investigated. The most relevant research
projects from United States, European Union, Japan, China,
and other countries are introduced and discussed, aiming to
draw an overall picture of the current research progress on
the Future Internet architecture. Among all of them, only the
Japanese proposal AKARI brieﬂy mentions QoS in the design
principles of one of its sub-architectures. Not only clean-slate
proposals are not focusing on QoS (neither QoE), but most of
them are not even taking it under consideration.
The analysis of the related work justiﬁes our work, since
none of the proposals taken into consideration fulﬁlls the re-
quirements in providing a Future Internet clean-slate SDN sys-
tem supporting truly reliable and robust bandwidth-intensive
transport capacities.
III.
SMART PROPOSAL
The SMART has as main objective to enhance ETArch with
new mechanisms supporting advanced network control capa-
bilities aiming to enable QoS-guaranteed mobile multimedia
applications over time. Quality requirements are semantically
deﬁned for each session in order to guide SMART functional-
ities, supported by an extended OpenFlow approach to support
QoS control.
The SMART envisions enabling a new integrated Future
Internet clean-slate SDN system embedding new mechanisms
to support advanced routing, resource reservation, admission
control and priority queuing functionalities. In order to fulﬁll
the required end-to-end QoS, we designed a dynamic QoS
routing super-dimensioned provisioning centric strategy to pro-
vision automated, systematic and dynamic network resource
allocation for multimedia workspaces.
The innovating aspect of the advanced QoS control adopted
in SMART focuses on enabling the integrated use of admission
control and over-provisioning centric network resource allo-
cation to achieve a signaling constrained approach. SMART
bootstraps the system with oversized network resources,
namely surplus workspaces enforced with over-reservations
on all network interfaces, and stores such information in the
DTSA. As such information is available in advance, the DTSA
is enabled to take multiple session admission decisions without
any signaling events to enforce neither resource reservations
nor forwarding rules in the selected workspace. After the sys-
tem bootstrap (at the network boot up), SMART only generates
signaling events to adjust the over-reservation patterns, in order
to over-provision the system again, allowing multiple session
admissions with the least amount of signaling.
The SMART framework is presented in Figure 1, empha-
sizing the new QoS-Manager, which embeds the QoS control-
plane additions.
The DTSA acts as the OpenFlow controller of the network.
In what concerns its functions as OpenFlow controller, the
DTSA is responsible for storing information about the existing
entities (Entity Manager), workspaces (Workspace Manager)
and handover procedures (Mobility Manager), as well as for
performing routing related tasks, implementing the workspaces
into the switches. Moreover, these functions are interfaced by
a central module (NetConnector), allowing the integration of
procedures to optimize several aspects of the network. Lastly,
it features a Media Independent Handover Function (MIHF)
for exchanging IEEE 802.21 information with other nodes and
an OpenFlow Channel for communication with the OpenFlow
Switches. The IEEE 802.21 is the IEEE standard for Media
Independent Handover (MIH) [14]. Its main purpose is to
facilitate and optimize inter-technology handover processes by
providing a set of media-independent primitives for obtaining
link information and controlling link behavior in a heteroge-
neous way, thus creating an abstraction regarding the link layer.
The EDOBRA Switch consists of an IEEE 802.21-enabled
OpenFlow switch. Besides the standard OpenFlow switch
capabilities for executing data packet for- warding operations
and for storing information on how packets of each workspace
should be treated, the EDOBRA Switch is coupled with IEEE
802.21 mechanisms to control aspects of the link interface
regarding handover management, such as resource manage-
ment and/or events about the attachment and detachment of
nodes. Lastly, it is coupled with an MIHF for interacting with
the Mobile Node (MN) and the DTSA via IEEE 802.21 and
an OpenFlow Channel for communication via OpenFlow with
the DTSA. The OpenFlow Channel is also responsible for
encapsulating DTS messages into OpenFlow messages.
The Mobile Node represents the end-user equipment that
establishes connection with the endpoint switches. The MN
may be equipped with one or more access technologies, either
wired (e.g., Ethernet) or wireless (e.g., WLAN or 3G). The
MN deploys an MIHF, allowing higher-layer entities in the
device itself (Mobility Manager) or external network entities
(e.g., DTSA) to control the links and to retrieve information
in an abstract way. In this way, the MN is able to either
retrieve link conditions on the current connection or to provide
information about other networks in its range. In what concerns
DTS procedures (such as register, workspace creation and
attachment operations), the MN contains a DTS Enabler that
allows it to communicate with endpoint switches via DTS. In
addition, the DTS Enabler is also used by applications to send
their packets over DTS protocol.
The proposed new sub-components of the QoS-Manager
are described as follows:
Advanced Resource Allocator: The QoS Advanced Re-
source Allocator provides support to the QoS management by
controlling the usage of the network resources. It is responsible
for calculating the new over-reservation patterns, in case none
of the available workspaces can possibly satisfy the QoS
requirements of a new session; and for the enforcement of
the new over-reservation patterns over the workspace switches
through the Protocol Manager.
Admission Controller: The QoS Admission Controller
provides support to the network’s QoS management by regu-
lating the access to the network. It is responsible for querying
session requirements, candidate paths and their resource avail-
ability; and for taking the ﬁnal decision, either accepting or
rejecting the establishment of the workspace. The minimum
quality requirements for each mobile session ﬂow (bitrate,
tolerance to packet delay/loss/error, etc.) and the current con-
ditions of the candidates workspaces (available trafﬁc classes,
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

MIHF
OpenFlow Resource 
Adaptor
OpenFlow
Protocol
MIH
Protocol
MIH
Protocol
DTSA
Flow Table
OpenFlow 
Protocol Peer
MIHF
MIHF
!"#$%
&'(%)*
Mobility 
Manager
...
EDOBRA Switch
Mobile Node
DTS Enabler 
(socket)
Applications
!"#
$%&'&(&)
!"#$%
&'(%)+
!"#$%
&'(%)*
...
!"#$%
&'(%)+
MIH Resource Adaptor
NetConnector
Entity 
Manager
Workspace 
Manager
Mobility 
Manager
*+,$%&'&(&)
Route 
Manager
Admission 
Controller
Advance 
Resource 
Allocator
Qos Manager
Protocol 
Manager
Figure 1: Proposed framework
packet delay/loss/error current rates, link technology, etc.) are
taken into account.
The Admission Controller denies a session when the de-
manded QoS parameters cannot be satisﬁed (i.e., there is no
feasible workspace to accommodate the session), and informs
the controller to take necessary actions.
Route Manager: This function is responsible for deter-
mining the availability and packet forwarding performance of
routers to aid the route calculation. It requires collecting the
up-to-date network state from the switches on a synchronous
or asynchronous basis. Several routing algorithms, such as
shortest path or a dynamic QoS-aware one, can run in parallel
to meet the performance requirements and the objectives of
different sessions. Network topology information is needed as
input along with the service reservations.
Protocol Manager: The QoS Protocol Manager handles
communication between the QoS-Manager and the extended
OpenFlow API. It is responsible for the setup of the over-
estimated reservation patterns across the network through the
extended OpenFlow API, for collecting the ﬂow deﬁnitions
received from the QoS-Manager and for efﬁcient ﬂow man-
agement by aggregation.
SMART was designed under the principle of pushing com-
plexity to the network boundary (application hosts, leaf or ﬁrst-
hop routers and edge routers). Since a network boundary has
a relatively small number of ﬂows, it can perform operations
at a ﬁne granularity, such as complex packet classiﬁcation and
trafﬁc conditioning. In contrast, a network core router may
have a larger number of ﬂows, it should perform fast and
simple operations. The differentiation of network boundary and
core routers was accomplished through workspace aggregation,
and it is vital for the scalability of SMART.
A. System Setup
The System Setup is triggered by the DTSA as a con-
sequence of noticing that the underlying network topology
has changed. Therefore, DTSA agents unicast an OpenFlow
extended message to all OpenFlow enabled switches in the
network. On receiving the message, each switch initializes
the per-class over-estimated reservation patterns in a way
compatible with the underlying QoS approach (for instance,
conﬁguring the packet scheduling priorities).
At this stage, the DTSA polls each switch of the net-
work. The current condition of each switch must be taken
into account (available trafﬁc classes, packet delay/loss/error
current rates, link technology, ect). When the stats request
is responded, the DTSA stores all the information in local
state tables (unicast workspaces at this time). The generation
of multicast workspaces is still a part of the System Setup,
which is a fundamental support for the workspace selection.
To that, DTSA adopts a combinational algorithm that takes
unicast workpace registers to generate all possible combina-
tions between each ingress and all core/egress sequentially.
B. Session Setup
This process is triggered whenever the DTSA receives a
workspace attachment entity request.
It is necessary to decide the best-suited path in the core
network in order to maintain the established QoS parameters
of the multiparty content delivery (as described in Figure 2).
An efﬁcient approach to quality-oriented mobility control must
always keep the mobile nodes best connected over time, and
guarantee that the whole activated mobile session ﬂow meets
its quality requirements. The algorithm starts by searching in
the internal structures of the DTSA to determine whether there
is already a workspace that is being used for the speciﬁed ﬂow
from the trafﬁc source to the subscriber.
Figure 2: Session setup algorithm
If there is indeed a workspace able to acommodate the
QoS requirements of the new session-ﬂow, it is only necessary
to join the user to the existing workspace, which requires no
signiﬁcant signalization overhead (only end switches are noti-
ﬁed), as opposed to the original ETArch architecture without
the SMART extensions, in which all switches forming the
workspace must be signalized.
Considering
the
case
of
non-existence
of
available
workspaces to accommodate the demanded session, a suitable
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

workspace may be found by simply readjusting the current
over-reservation patterns. The workspace with a greater prob-
ability of acceptance is selected and the new over-reservation
conﬁguration is calculated, as can be seen in (1).
Bov(i) =
Bu(i)
MRth(i)(MRth(i) − Bu − Brq(i))
(1)
where Bov : Overreservation Bandwidth of CoS i;
Bu(i) : Bandwidth Used in CoS i;
Brq(i) : Bandwidth Required in CoS i;
MRth(i) : Maximum Reservation Threshold of CoS i
If the over-reservation patterns calculated by the DTSA
are not enough to ensure a suitable path, it is necessary to
make a readjustment of the maximum reservation thresholds
of all the classes. When none of the available paths are able to
accommodate the demanded session (not enough bandwidth
in the network) and there is no workspace candidate with
probability of acceptance, DTSA rejects the entity attachment
request.
IV.
EVALUATION
In order to evaluate the feasibility of our framework,
we extended the ETArch implementation with the SMART
architecture according to the proposals in Section III.
A. Evaluation Scenario
The results of the preliminary performance evaluation of
SMART were analyzed by using Mininet [15]. As presented
in Figure 3, two different Mobile Nodes (MN) were connected
to a common OpenFlow Switch.
!"#$%
&$'($'
)*&+
!"#"$%&"'(
)*'#+*&$%&"'(
,-$./0%1
&1"234
,-$./0%1
&1"234
*'563
7%5#$'
,-$./0%1
&1"234
MN 1
MN 2
Figure 3: Scenario environment description
The DTSA is connected to the OpenFlow devices using
two different connections: one for control and another for data.
The MN1, MN2 and the Video Server, on which the DTS
applications were run, are the remaining entities that complete
the evaluation scenario. The application in the video server is
sending a H.264 video stream over two workspaces, one of
them being a QoS-enabled workspace, with the MN1 and the
MN2 subscribed to each of them in order to receive the video
stream. The switches are connected in a triangular shape to
have path diversity. The video streaming server and the client
are connected to different switches, while the trafﬁc loader
inserting cross-trafﬁc into the network is connected to the
same switch that the server connects to. Each switch initiates
a secure connection to the controller using the OpenFlow
protocol (see dashed lines in Figure 3). The controller runs
our SMART implementation described in detail in Section III.
In this scenario, MN1 requests a QoS-enabled workspace to
receive content from the Video Server, while MN2 requests a
normal workspace with no special QoS requirements. Thus, the
video packets destined to MN1 are identiﬁed as being part of
a multimedia workspace by the SMART controller and routed
accordingly, while the stream (destined to MN2) is considered
as a data workspace which has no QoS support (i.e., best-
effort). Finally, in each test, long cross-trafﬁc is sent from the
loader to the client continuously.
B. Performance Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed framework, comparing it with a deployment of the
ETArch without QoS support. Throughout the tests, we used
a video sequence having 30 frames per second with the
resolution of 1280x720. We then encoded the sequence in
H.264 format using the ffmpeg encoder (v.1.2.4) to obtain a
stream at 1800 kbps (32.55dB).
We decoded the received videos using ffmpeg and measured
their qualities using Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and
Structural Similarity (SSIM) values with respect to the original
raw video. PSNR is the ratio between the maximum possible
power of a signal and the power of corrupting noise that affects
the ﬁdelity of its representation. It is widely used to measure
the quality of reconstructed transmitted images/videos. The
SSIM index is a method for measuring the similarity between
two images. It is a full reference metric; in other words, the
measuring of image quality based on an initial uncompressed
or distortion-free image as reference. SSIM is designed to
improve on traditional methods like PSNR and Mean Squared
Error (MSE), which have proven to be inconsistent with
human eye perception. The results are given in Figure 4, which
are in terms of received video quality versus time.
Results show that the video with QoS support (SMART
enabled) is not affected from the cross trafﬁc and approaches
full video quality, while the video without QoS support
(ETArch only) has a signiﬁcant amount of quality loss. In
terms of PSNR (Figure 4(a)), the original ETArch frame-
work achieved 19.02±9.03 dB, while the SMART-enabled
version achieved 20.97±7.94 dB. SMART achieved opti-
mized bandwidth-guaranteed multimedia transport with a 10%
of PSNR improvement. In terms of SSIM (Figure 4(b)),
ETArch achieved 0.61±0.16, while SMART-optimized version
0.79±0.14. This implies an improvement of almost 30%.
These results were achieved because, during the bootstrapping
procedure, switches composing candidate workspaces were
initialized with per-class over-reservation patterns. Besides, the
video packets destined to MN1 are identiﬁed as being part of
a multimedia workspace by the SMART controller and routed
accordingly, while the stream (destined to MN2) is considered
as a data workspace which has no QoS support (i.e., best-
effort).
Figure 5 shows random frames picked for both streams.
Figure 5(a) corresponds to the trafﬁc subscribed by MN2
(without QoS support), while Figure 5(b) corresponds to the
SMART enabled transmission.
C. Forwarding Table Size Analysis
In this section, we study the footprint of the proposed
framework, comparing it with a deployment of the ETArch
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
PSNR (dB)
Frame
 ET Arch only
 SMART  enabled
(a) PSNR metric
(b) SSIM metric
Figure 4: QoE metrics for multimedia video streaming
(a) Frame without SMART
(b) Same Frame using SMART
Figure 5: Video snapshot comparison
without QoS support. As explained in Section III, SMART
was designed under the principle of pushing complexity to
the network boundary. Besides, the larger the size of the
forwarding table, the worse the performance achieved. Studies
show the performance degradation with the increasing number
of ﬂows [16].
The results obtained are presented in Table I, showing the
number of entries for each protocol generated in the forwarding
table for different scenarios. We use real-world scenarios, from
different campus networks around the world. According to the
2011 report [17], the architecture of the campus network of the
University of Texas consisted of 14 cores and 2 border routers,
supporting up to 20.000 simultaneous connections. In 2013, the
campus network architecture grew up to 16 cores and 2 border
routers. Over 40,000 simultaneous connections spending 36
million hours combined on the system were monitored in
spring of 2013. Let’s also imagine a congestion scenario with
twice as many simultaneous connections (80.000).
Results from Table I show a very signiﬁcant optimization
in the forwarding table size of core routers. However, the
number of entries in the forwarding table of SMART signaling
scheme does not depend on the number of entities attachments
requirements, unlike the original ETArch signaling scheme.
Therefore, the relative percentage of the forwarding tables size
comparison could be even lower in more saturated scenarios.
In what concerns the DTS protocol, no control signaling was
required on core switches during the session setup procedure
TABLE I: FORWARDING TABLE SIZES AT CORE
ROUTERS
ETArch with SMART
ETArch only
University of Texas (2011 report)
952
20.000
University of Texas (2013 report)
1.330
40.000
University of Texas (congested
scenario)
1.330
80.000
since over-estimated reservations patterns were already initial-
ized during the bootstrapping procedure.
V.
CONCLUSION
We have presented a QoS-enabled framework that aims to
support mobile multimedia applications with guaranteed QoS
and QoE on top of ETArch, a clean-slate SDN-based ICN ap-
proach. It allows the dynamic and preemptive reconﬁguration
of the network resources using over-estimated reservation pat-
terns to achieve optimized bandwidth-guaranteed multimedia
transport. Results showed that our framework allows mobile
multimedia applications with guaranteed QoS maintained over
time, optimizing trafﬁc control and diminishing overhead and
forwarding table sizes at core network switches. Moreover, us-
ing our framework, applications become semantically capable
of deﬁning the quality requirements of each session.
The work presented in this article showcased the integration
and growth capabilities of multiple technologies, exposing
them to novel scenarios, contribution to the evolution of SDN,
ICN, mobility and QoS management procedures operating as
a suitable Future Internet framework embodiment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially funded by the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme, under grant
agreement n. 258365 (OFELIA project), and by Brazilian
agencies CAPES and FAPEMIG.
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

REFERENCES
[1]
M. Handley, “Why the internet only just works,” BT Technology
Journal, vol. 24, no. 3, Jul. 2006, pp. 119–129.
[2]
Information-Centric Networking Research Group (ICNRG). The inter-
net engineering task force.
[3]
M.-K. Shin, K.-H. Nam, and H.-J. Kim, “Software-deﬁned networking
(sdn): A reference architecture and open apis,” in ICT Convergence
(ICTC), 2012 International Conference on, 2012, pp. 360–361.
[4]
F. Silva, M. Goncalves, J. Souza, R. Pasquini, P. Rosa, and T. Kofuji,
“On the analysis of multicast trafﬁc over the entity title architecture,” in
2012 18th IEEE International Conference on Networks (ICON), 2012,
pp. 30–35.
[5]
J. Manner and X. Fu, “Analysis of existing quality-of-service signalling
protocols,” RFC 4094, Internet Engineering Task Force, May 2005.
[6]
Cisco, “Cisco visual networking index: Global mobile data trafﬁc
forecast update, 2012-2017,” 2013.
[7]
J. Babiarz, K. Chan, and F. Baker, “Conﬁguration guidelines for diffserv
service classes,” RFC 4594, Internet Engineering Task Force, 2006.
[8]
N. McKeown, T. Anderson, H. Balakrishnan, G. Parulkar, L. Peterson,
J. Rexford, S. Shenker, and J. Turner, “Openﬂow: enabling innovation
in campus networks,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 38,
no. 2, Mar. 2008, pp. 69–74.
[9]
A. Ishimori, F. Farias, E. Cerqueira, and A. Abelem, “Control of
multiple packet schedulers for improving QoS on OpenFlow/SDN
networking,” in 2013 Second European Workshop on Software Deﬁned
Networks, vol. 0.
Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2013, pp. 81–86.
[10]
J. Castillo-Lema, E. Cruz, A. Neto, and E. Cerqueira, “Advanced
resource provisioning in context-sensitive converged networks,” in 2013
International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communica-
tions (ICNC), Jan. 2013, pp. 77–81.
[11]
B. Sonkoly, A. Gulyas, F. Nemeth, J. Czentye, K. Kurucz, B. Novak,
and G. Vaszkun, “OpenFlow virtualization framework with advanced
capabilities,” in 2012 European Workshop on Software Deﬁned Net-
working (EWSDN), 2012, pp. 18–23.
[12]
H. Egilmez, S. Dane, K. Bagci, and A. Tekalp, “OpenQoS: an Open-
Flow controller design for multimedia delivery with end-to-end quality
of service over software-deﬁned networks,” in Signal Information Pro-
cessing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC),
2012 Asia-Paciﬁc, 2012, pp. 1–8.
[13]
J. Pan, S. Paul, and R. Jain, “A survey of the research on future internet
architectures,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 7, 2011,
pp. 26–36.
[14]
LAN/MAN Committee of the IEEE Computer Society, “IEEE Std
802.21-2008, Standards for Local and Metropolitan Area - Part 21:
Media Independent Handover Services,” 2008.
[15]
B. Lantz, B. Heller, and N. McKeown, “A network in a laptop: Rapid
prototyping for software-deﬁned networks,” in Proceedings of the 9th
ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, ser. Hotnets-
IX.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, p. 19:119:6.
[16]
A. Bianco, R. Birke, L. Giraudo, and M. Palacin, “OpenFlow switching:
Data plane performance,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), 2010, pp. 1–5.
[17]
I. T. Services, “Campus network report. academic year 2010-2011,”
University of Texas, Tech. Rep.
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

