Carrier-Grade Internet Access Sharing in Wireless Mesh Networks:  
the Vision of the CARMNET Project 
Mariusz Glabowski 
Chair of Communication and Computer Networks 
Poznan University of Technology 
Poznan, Poland 
e-mail: mariusz.glabowski@put.poznan.pl 
Andrzej Szwabe 
Institute of Control and Information Engineering 
Poznan University of Technology 
Poznan, Poland 
e-mail: Andrzej.Szwabe@put.poznan.pl 
 
 
Abstract — The paper presents the vision of CARMNET – a 
Swiss-Polish project aimed at investigating “CARrier-grade 
delay-aware resource 
management 
for 
wireless 
multi-
hop/Mesh NETworks”. The project focuses on developing 
solutions that will motivate telecom operators to reconsider 
their view on user-operated IEEE 802.11-compliant wireless 
mesh networks. The project is driven by the vision of networks 
operated jointly by telecom operators – likely appreciating the 
CARMNET compliance with their IP Multimedia Subsystem 
(IMS) infrastructure – and a community of users contributing 
to and enjoying the pervasiveness of the CARMNET-based 
Internet access. The project aims at providing, both telecom 
operators and potential end users, with solutions that will 
create appropriately strong incentives – technological, 
functional and economical – for a widespread adoption of 
CARMNET-like networks within a steadily expanding group 
of users. Initial results indicate, that despite the originality of 
the project vision, the preliminary CARMNET system 
architecture complies with key relevant standards. 
Keywords – wireless mesh networks, user-operated Internet 
access sharing, IMS, AAA, NUM 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The core idea of the CARMNET project [1] is to make 
the user-provided Internet access an important alternative to 
the currently widespread 3G/4G-based mobile Internet 
access, in particular this provided in the femtocell 
scenario [2]. The main assumption of the project is that 
wireless mesh networks [3], while effectively enhanced by 
the introduction of advanced resource management 
mechanisms [4][5] and the compliance with the core of the 
telecom 
operators’ 
IMS-based 
Authentication, 
Authorization, Accounting (AAA) infrastructure [6], may 
serve as an appropriate basis for a real-world realization of 
the core CARMNET idea. However, the successful 
realization of the vision of CARMNET networks – operated 
jointly by telecom operators and an informal community of 
Internet access-sharing users – requires facing several 
scientific and technological challenges that have not been 
yet completely investigated in the literature [7]. The 
assumed research tasks have to lead to determination of the 
comprehensive solution ensuring satisfactory levels of 
reliability and sustainability of the user-provided Internet 
access sharing [8]. The research will focus mostly on 
elaboration of algorithms for reliable servicing of multi-
service traffic, with different packet delay tolerance, 
including algorithms related to: traffic stream classification, 
packet scheduling, buffer memory management, routing and 
nodes mobility management.  
Targeting the CARMNET objectives implies the need 
for facing several technological challenges, in particular 
those related to the compatibility with the key relevant 
standards, such as Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) 
protocol for the reliable multi-criteria routing within 
wireless mesh networks, or relevant to IMS-based AAA [6] 
technologies used by telecom operators. Moreover, as far as 
the long-term sustainability of CARMNET is concerned, 
some user-centric features are of the key importance, as 
well. They correspond to functional aspects of a 
CARMNET network use, such as the user-perceived 
network utility [5] and the user-friendliness of mobile 
applications running on smartphones that constitute such a 
network.  
The further part of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, the project’s research motivation is presented. 
Section III describes the main phases of the project. In 
Section IV, the exemplary scenarios for CARMNET-like 
networks are presented and the research areas of the project 
are outlined. Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
RESEARCH MOTIVATION 
The attractiveness of wireless mesh networks to telecom 
operators, despite a significant research effort that has been 
put in the last decade [3], remains quite limited. The 
following issues related to the CARMNET vision may be 
recognized as potentially postponing the wide adoption of 
existing wireless networking solutions:   
• 
The lack of integration between the wireless network 
resource management and the AAA mechanism of 
telecom operators IMS-compliant networks, 
• 
The lack of carrier-grade systems enabling telecom 
operators to measure the usage of shared Internet access 
in wireless mesh networks,  
• 
The lack of solutions enabling end users to request the 
same level of Quality of Service (QoS) parameters as in 
3G/4G networks, 
• 
The lack of integration of the wireless network resource 
management 
oriented 
on 
the 
Network 
Utility 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Maximization (NUM) with ‘utility-aware’ accounting, 
in particular in a scenario providing users with ‘society-
building’ incentives similar to those familiar to users of 
popular Internet file-sharing applications based on the 
Peer-to-Peer  (P2P) protocols [9]. 
It is worth mentioning that the scope of CARMNET 
research corresponds to the recent trend of intensive studies 
on various wireless Internet access sharing methods [7].  
The need for CARMNET-like solutions may also be 
observed in efforts of several commercial Internet service 
providers, such as FON or Meraki [8]. Moreover, similar 
scientific projects have been recently conducted, including 
EU CARMEN [16]. However, to the best of our knowledge, 
all such initiatives differ from CARMNET in one of its core 
assumptions: they are based on the use of non-standard 
hardware. 
III. 
CARMNET WORKPLAN 
The CARMNET work plan is divided into three phases. 
The main goal of the CARMNET theoretical research 
(Phase 1) is to develop a framework and implementable 
solutions 
(i.e., 
the 
network 
architecture, 
resource 
management models and algorithms, as well as extensions 
of existing network protocols) enabling realization of the 
carrier-grade wireless mesh networks.  
During the second phase, the theoretical results will be 
converted into technically implementable and commercially 
feasible network protocols and systems, which will be 
experimentally evaluated in realistic wireless testbeds. 
Finally, 
the 
key 
implementation-oriented 
project 
outcome will be provided: an IMS-compliant prototype of a 
wireless network resource management system enabling the 
realization of ‘charging per utility’. This way we hope to 
propose a solution capable to provide incentives for market-
like, self-optimization of the Internet access sharing 
provided within a community of users. 
Selected research topics of the project, as well as the 
scenarios of CARMNET network usage that will be 
considered during realization phases of the CARMNET 
project, are described in Section IV. 
IV. 
CARMNET VISION 
The implementation of the CARMNET vision, i.e., a 
wireless network that allows its end-user to share their 
network resources, requires defining the usage scenarios and 
the studies on several research areas implied by such 
definitions.  
A. Scenarios 
The CARMNET research methodology follows the 
approach of the user-centered scenario-based design, 
focused on functional specification of the system in 
correspondence to the user requirements and activities [10]. 
Since various wireless network topologies impose different 
user roles and activities, the main classification of 
CARMNET scenarios is made according to the types of 
connections (one-hop versus multi-hop) available in the 
wireless mesh network. The first scenario represents the 
case of the fully-connected mesh network (Figure 1), 
whereas the second scenario allows utilization of multi-hop 
mesh connections (Figure 2) and imposes the additional role 
of CARMNET relaying nodes. The figures show the 
components of the IMS architecture used in CARMNET: 
Home Subscriber Server (HSS), Proxy – Call Session 
Control Server (P-CSCF), and Serving-CSFS (S-CSCF), as 
well as Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Servlet located at 
Application Server (AS) [6]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The CARMNET fully-connected mesh network scenario.  
 
Figure 2.  The CARMNET multi-hop mesh network scenario. 
In both the CARMNET scenarios the basic network 
connectivity role is played by the CARMNET Internet 
sharing nodes,  i.e., the network nodes, which may offer the 
Internet connection to users of other nodes. 
B. Multi-Criteria Routing  
Within the activities related to CARMNET project a 
new routing protocol (based on the OLSR protocol) that 
allows for multi-criteria path selection will be proposed. The 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

protocol will be capable to build the routing table (at each 
node), including not only the best path but a set of paths that 
lead to the specified destination network. The paths in the 
set will be selected as the subsequent shortest paths to the 
specified destination, based on one of the k-shortest paths 
algorithms [11][12][13]. The paths will be determined 
according to main criterion, e.g., delay, and they will 
include additional criteria (metrics). The additional metrics 
will be useful in order to choose the best path, that fulfills 
the criteria for a given traffic stream. The criteria will 
correspond to the QoS requirements for all traffic classes 
offered in the CARMNET network. An example of the 
criteria can be delay, a number of hops, link reliability or 
link load.  Thus, the proposed QoS routing protocol will be 
able to use different traffic profiles and for each of them will 
propose the best path, i.e., the path, which fulfills 
recommended (for the considered traffic profile) QoS values 
in the best possible way.   
The multi-criteria routing is dedicated primarily to the 
multi-hop scenario, but it can be also used in the single-hop 
scenario, to select the best CARMNET Internet-sharing 
node. Additionally, the routing protocol introduced in the 
CARMNET may be also used as one of the possible 
methods for mobility management: one or more of the 
criteria can be used by a mobile node to select the best path 
(next-hop node) for a traffic stream of a given class. 
C. Utility-based Charging 
The original CARMNET concept of the utility-based 
charging is largely based on a synergic combination of the 
following conceptual components (Figure 3):  
• 
Charging per traffic volume, 
• 
Traffic volume virtualization based on the mechanism 
of explicit transfer of virtual units that has been 
proposed as the key element of the Delay-Aware NUM 
System (DANUM) framework [5], 
• 
IMS-based AAA, realized in the scenario of charging 
per traffic volume. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The concept of the utility-based charging as the integration of a 
DANUM system with an IMS-compliant AAA system. 
Typically, CARMNET users are the ones that do not 
have the direct and acceptably cheap access to 3G/4G 
network. It is assumed that virtual utility units, after being 
earned by users sharing their mobile Internet access with 
other users of CARMNET-based wireless networks, may be 
spent by these users (‘potentially altruistic’, i.e., risking the 
lack of a reward for sharing the Internet connection) for 
accessing mobile Internet connection shared by other users.  
D. Resource Management  
One of the key objectives of CARMNET is to integrate 
IMS-based AAA support with the utility-oriented resource 
management for wireless mesh networks, in particular the 
one based on DANUM System (DANUMS) [5][4]. 
DANUMS is an application-layer system providing a delay-
aware indirect flow control mechanism based on a system 
transporting virtual utility units and a packet forwarding 
component aimed at providing an approximation of Max-
Weight Scheduling (MWS) [14]. The system is the first 
delay-aware NUM solution interoperable with widely used 
protocols such as Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), 
User Datagram Protocol (UDP), Internet Protocol (IP), and 
802.11 Media Access Control (MAC) [5].  
The other key objective of the CARMNET project in the 
area of resource management is to elaborate a model of a 
multiservice state-dependent queuing system with limited 
queue and state-dependent dynamic resource sharing 
between individual classes of calls. The advantage of the 
proposed model will be the possibility to evaluate 
analytically the average parameters of queues for individual 
classes of calls, which may prove to be of particular 
importance in engineering applications, especially in 
solutions concerning the analysis, dimensioning and 
optimization of mobile networks.  
E. IMS-Compliant AAA Support  
The CARMNET architecture assumes the application of 
an open implementation of the IMS server infrastructure 
(OpenIMS), extended by the SIP servlet located on the 
Application Server (AS). The communication between the 
network nodes and the IMS Server is realized with the use 
of CARMNET User Agent (a lean SIP client application).   
It should be stressed that according to the vision of 
CARMNET, 
the 
standard 
session 
management 
functionalities provided by IMS core servers are used in a 
non-typical way - for the management of user-shared 
Internet access sessions (so called “CARMNET sessions”) 
rather than, e.g., for the management of VoIP sessions. On 
the other hand, the standard AAA functionalities provided 
by IMS core are extended by additional CARMNET-
specific features of utility monitoring that enable utility-
based charging. These additional functionalities are 
provided in an IMS-complaint way, as a result of an 
implementation of SIP servlet and a special “CARMNET 
over SIP protocol” used for exchanging the information for 
the purpose of the utility-based charging. What is specific 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

for CARMNET is that the IMS infrastructure is used to 
manage users profiles and to store the configuration of end-
users’ utility functions.  
F. Multi-Testbed Experimentation  
The 
project 
aims 
at 
achieving 
a 
significant 
experimentally evaluated improvement in wireless network 
resource management. The experiment evaluation will 
involve both the effectiveness of network resource 
management systems and user-oriented network reliability.  
In order to make the experimentation more reliable and 
effective, a special evaluation methodology and experiment 
description framework will be defined. A set of software 
components enabling an automated, highly controllable 
experimentation evaluation of IMS applications realized in 
wireless multi-hop networks will be developed.  
The project outcomes will be evaluated in several 
experimental scenarios of infotainment and conversational 
services for networks of wire-line infrastructure limited to 
Internet access points, in wireless fully-connected mesh 
network and multi-hop network scenarios, as well as in 
mobility-oriented scenarios.  
CARMNET solutions will be tested in several realistic 
testbeds, in particular in the ones located at CARMNET 
partners facilities (including the wnPUT testbed [4], and the 
SUPSI [1] testbed). Additionally, experiments in large-scale 
wireless testbeds, i.e., DES-Testbed [15] and NITOS testbed 
[4], are planned, as well as experiments performed within 
the facilities of a telecom operator. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS  
In our opinion, CARMNET is a project worth a 
significant interest of researchers working in – so far rather 
distinct – areas of wireless mesh networking and IMS-based 
session and user management. On the other hand, the 
practical importance of the project research objectives 
seems to be in line with the recent trend of deploying 
wireless Internet access sharing by commercial service 
providers and telecom operators. The project is aimed at 
ensuring incentives for both telecom operators and potential 
mobile Internet end users for a fast and widespread adoption 
of CARMNET-like networks. 
Although, for the time of writing this paper, the project 
is at an early stage, its initial results are already 
encouraging. In particular, despite the originality of the 
functional and the technological assumptions with regard to 
the CARMNET system, the initial system architecture 
design seems not to compromise the compliance with key 
relevant standards, such as OLSR, and IMS core standards. 
We believe that, largely thanks to the originality of the 
CARMNET vision and the appropriateness of the 
experimentation-oriented methodology, CARMNET will 
provide outcomes of both the purely scientific impact and 
the practical added value. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a grant CARMNET 
financed under the Polish-Swiss Research Programme by 
Switzerland through the Swiss Contribution to the enlarged 
European Union. 
REFERENCES 
[1] CARrier-grade 
delay-aware 
resource 
management 
for 
wireless multi-hop/Mesh NETworks, http://www.carmnet.eu 
[retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[2] V. Chandrasekhar, J. Andrew, and A. Gatherer, "Femtocell 
networks: A survey," IEEE Commu. Magazine, vol. 46, IsFU 
9, Sep. 2008, pp. 59-67. 
[3] I. Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, “Wireless mesh 
networks: a survey,” Computer Networks 47 (4), 2005, pp. 
445–487. 
[4] K. Choumas, et al., “Optimization driven Multi-Hop Network 
Design and Experimentation: The Approach of the FP7 
Project OPNEX,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 50, 
no. 6, June 2012, pp. 122-130. 
[5] A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “Delay-Aware 
NUM system for wireless multi-hop networks,” Proc. of  17th 
IEEE European Wireless 2011, EW2011, Vienna, Austria, 
April 27-29, 2011, pp. 530–537 . 
[6] H. Khartabil, A. Niemi, M. Poikselka, and G. Mayer, “The 
IMS: IP multi-media concepts and services in the mobile 
domain. In The IMS: IP Multimedia Concepts and Services in 
the Mobile Domain”, 2004, pp. 32–148. 
[7] S. 
Jakubczak, 
D.G. 
Andersen, 
M. 
Kaminsky, 
K. 
Papagiannaki, and S. Seshan, “Link-alike: using wireless to 
share network resources in a neighborhood,” ACM 
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications 
Review, vol. 12 n.4, Oct. 2008, pp.  1-14. 
[8] C. Middleton and A. Potter, “Is it good to share? A case study 
of FON and Meraki approaches to broadband provision,” 
Proceedings of International Telecommunications Society 
17th Biennial Conference, Montreal, 2008. 
[9] M. Chen, M. Ponec, S. Sengupta, J. Li, and P. A. Chou, 
“Utility maximization in peer-to-peer systems,” Proceedings 
of the 2008 ACM SIGMETRICS international conference on 
Measurement and modeling of computer systems, June 02-06, 
2008, Annapolis, MD, USA. 
[10] J.M. Carroll and R.H.J. Sprague, “Five Reasons for Scenario-
Based Design,” Proc. of the 32nd Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on Systems Sciences. 1999. HICSS-
32., 1999, pp. 3051-3061. 
[11] A.W. Brander and M.C. Sinclair, “A Comparative Study of k-
Shortest Path Algorithms,” Proc. of 11th UK Performance 
Engineering Workshop, 1995, pp.370-379. 
[12] D. Eppstein, "Finding the k Shortest Paths," SIAM Journal on 
Computing, vol. 28, no. 2, 1998, pp. 652-673. 
[13] C.N. Clímaco, M.B. Pascoal, M.F. Craveirinha, M. Eugénia, 
and V. Captivo, "Internet packet routing: Application of a K-
quickest path algorithm," European Journal of Operational 
Research, vol. 181, no. 3, Sep. 2007, pp.1045–1054. 
[14] L. Georgiadis, M. J. Neely, and L. Tassiulas. “Resource 
allocation and cross-layer control in wireless networks.” 
Foundations and Trends in Networking, 2006, pp. 1–149. 
[15] A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, M. Urbański, F. Juraschek, and M. 
Guenes : “Multi-path OLSR Performance Analysis in a Large 
Testbed Environment,” in L. Bononi et al. (Eds.): ICDCN 
2012, LNCS, vol. 7129, Springer, 2012, pp. 488–501.   
[16] A. Banchs, et al., “CARMEN: Delivering Carrier Grade 
Services over Wireless Mesh Networks” PIMRC 2008, 15-18 
Sep. 2008, pp. 1-6. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

