Software-Deﬁned Networking for Industry 4.0
Theo Lins,
Mauricio Jose da Silva and
Ricardo Augusto Rabelo Oliveira
iMobilis Laboratory - DECOM
Federal University of Ouro Preto
Ouro Preto - MG - Brazil
Email: theosl,badricio,rrabelo@gmail.com
Abstract—The growing interest in Industry 4.0 increased the
search for technologies that can help in its implementation. This
technology has also evolved over the years enabling an increasing
deployment of these industries. The Internet of Things (IoT),
communication machine-to-machine (M2M) and Cypher Physical
Systems (CPS) are essential for the implementation of Industry
4.0, while the Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN), arrives as a new
concept that can help in communicating devices that are part
of the network that works with these industries. In our paper,
we present an SDN architecture that implements the control
plane together with the production control of an industry, where
production decisions are passed directly to the SDN controller.
In addition to the implementation of SDN communication, we
also show the communication using a traditional network of
computers. To validate the SDN architecture, we perform some
simulation in scenarios of Industry 4.0, where success was
obtained in the communications of industrial components.
Keywords–Industry 4.0; SDN; IoT; M2M; CPS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the emergence of new technologies over the past few
years, several industry sectors have beneﬁted from advances.
The trend is that more and more technologies are created in
to assist us in everyday tasks. But for this to happen, we must
use them efﬁciently and effectively.
Among these technologies, we can highlight the Internet
of Things, which are physical objects with some kind of
technology such as Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID)
tags or sensors connected to the computer network, known as
smart devices. These smart devices enable the integration of
various processes such as communication devices themselves,
production information, environmental information, equipment
status and many other services.
New global requirements, such as environmental awareness
also beneﬁt from the use of these technologies, which have
changed the way of production in industries with the use of
green products and energy efﬁciency Based on these changes
and developments, the main purpose of our paper is to propose
a architecture of communication that can help in the techno-
logical evolution of industries, better known as Industry 4.0,
making the communication more agile and efﬁcient.
In Section II, we will present the technologies used in
Industry 4.0. In Section III, we will present the SDN archi-
tecture for communication in Industry 4.0. In Section IV, we
will perform the simulation with the proposed architecture,
and ﬁnally in Section V, we present the conclusion and future
work.
A. Problems and Goals
In the Industry 4.0, there may be hundreds of smart devices,
devices that require network connections to cooperate with
each other, and to perform increasingly complex tasks without
manual assistance.
In addition to the proposal for an architecture that can
connect the various components of Industry 4.0, from sensors
to customers, there are also speciﬁc goals that would approach
the requirements necessary for the operation of Industry 4.0.
Some requirements for the implantation of Industry 4.0
highlight some cited by Shrouf et al. [1]:
•
Mass customization: Production processes have to
meet varying requirements of production orders. It
allows individuals to be included in the design, and
enables last minute changes.
•
Flexibility: Intelligent production processes and self
conﬁguration have to consider different aspects; such
as time, quality, price and the ecological aspects.
•
Factory visibility and optimized decision-making:
Making the right decisions at anytime is a key to
succeed in the market. IoT provides end-to-end trans-
parency almost in real time (e.g., production status),
allowing for optimization across factory sites in the
area of production, and then improvement in factory
efﬁciency.
•
Connected Supply Chain: IoT will help manufactur-
ers gain a better understanding of the supply chain
information that can be delivered in real time. By
connecting the machines and equipment to suppliers,
all parties can understand interdependencies, the ﬂow
of materials, and manufacturing cycle times.
•
Energy management: Energy efﬁciency improvement
requires awareness of energy consumption behavior
at production line and machine level. Smart meters
can provide real time data, and take decisions based
on their capabilities and in collaboration with external
services.
•
Creating values from big data collected: New improve-
ments and value can be provided by the analysis of
large quantities of data connected by IoT devices (i.e.
big data).
•
Remote monitoring: IoT technology will enable in-
volvement by a third party (e.g., suppliers) in moni-
toring, operating and the maintenance of factories with
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

new services.
•
Proactive maintenance: Monitoring production system
and collecting performance data in real time will have
a positive impact to improve proactive maintenance.
B. Contributions of Work
To achieve our main goal, we implemented an architecture
of computer networks for Industry 4.0 using the paradigm of
SDN to connect the components of Industry 4.0. With the new
architecture we can mention some of the contributions:
•
External communication for devices through Gateway
SDN.
•
Connection and management of data a cloud.
•
Dynamic management of smart devices.
•
Feed of data and automatically decision-making.
•
Optimization and fault tolerance in production lines.
•
Connection of customers and suppliers directly with
Industry 4.0.
•
We create scenarios for Industry 4.0 and run tests with
simulators.
II.
INDUSTRY 4.0 AND ITS TECHNOLOGIES
The next step in the industrial development will be related
to smart devices and the interaction of the products that are
a part of the manufacturing process. Also called the New
Industrial Revolution, Industry 4.0 or Intelligent Industry aims
to transform the product which is usually a passive object
into an active object, it is essential for decision-making and
optimization of its manufacturing.
Among the main features of smart devices is the ability
to self-monitor, detect faults, alter ﬂows, perform calculations,
and the main function is to communicate with other compo-
nents.
Some recent research already addresses the Industry 4.0,
Varghese et al. [2], discuss some of the challenges of wireless
communication that must be met before it can be utilized in
Industry 4.0. They describe how the 5G can help with the
implementation, considering the communication m2m focused
on latency, longevity, and reliability of communication. In our
work in addition to addressing wireless communication and
M2M communication, treat interoperability between commu-
nications technologies and validated through simulation, the
implementation of an Industry 4.0. M2M communication, the
study [3] Paelke show that the Intelligent Industry can also
help users in manual tasks performed in the industry. An initial
experience with an augmented reality system helps workers in
an environment with constant changes in production decisions.
The system helps workers in unfamiliar tasks through spatially
registered task information in the users ﬁeld of vision.
Gorecky et al. [4] also highlight the participation of users in
Industry 4.0, with the ﬂexibility proposed in this new concept,
users will be faced with a wide variety of works ranging
from the speciﬁcation and monitoring, to also check production
strategies. The aid technology will allow users to perform the
management more accurately as well as control the production.
But there are still many essential concepts behind the
Industry 4.0, such as Cyber Physical Systems, the Internet of
Things and Machine-to-machine communication.
A. Cyber-Physical Systems
CPS are automated systems that enable connection of
the operations of the physical reality with computing and
communication infrastructures. Unlike traditional embedded
systems, which are designed as standalone devices, the focus
in CPS is on networking several devices. CPS goes with the
trend of having information and services everywhere at hand,
and its inevitable in the highly networked world of today [5].
The infrastructure of Industry 4.0 is composed of CPS,
which makes the study of these systems necessary for correct
implementation. Jazdi [5]present a prototype that demonstrates
the essential aspects of Industry 4.0. In our work as well as
evidenced in an architecture for network communication, we
conducted several tests to validate the operation of the network.
B. Internet of Things
With the growth and popularization of the Internet emerged
the IoT, this evolution is the future of communication and even
computation. But for it to develop further, it depends on new
technologies and service models that are being created and/or
improved. For the IoT is a network of devices that make the
integration between the physical and computational systems
all through an infrastructure that collects and exchanges infor-
mation.
To better understand the information circulating in IoT
networks, Perera et al. [6] made a study of the context aware of
this information. The work is an analysis of the context of the
life cycle, and evaluates a subset of related projects. Based on
these evaluations, they compare, highlight the lessons learned,
and discuss the applicability to the Internet of Things.
In addition, the IoT is also one of the main factors involved
in the implementation of Industry 4.0, if not the biggest
supporter so that the next step is taken. This is due to its
connectivity and interaction with many devices such as the
Industry 4.0.
In [1], it is shown the relationship between IoT and Industry
4.0, which is created an architecture for Industry 4.0 based
on IoT. They deﬁne the main characteristics of Industry 4.0
focused on sustainability. And propose an approach to power
management in Intelligent Industries based on the paradigm
IoT.
C. Machine-to-Machine
M2M technologies are used for communication between
devices. Kim et al. [7] did a study on the M2M communication.
They discuss the need for M2M platforms, comparing and
analyzing the existing approaches and M2M solutions plat-
forms, Thereby Identifying the requirements and functionality
of the optimal service platform for M2M. Finally based
on this information, the authors propose an architecture for
M2M services platform (M2SP) and its features, then present
the M2M ecosystem with this platform. Different application
scenarios are presented to Illustrate the interaction between the
components of the proposed platform.
So in the Industry 4.0 M2M, the communication between
production components is allowed, enabling the exchange of
information between them, facilitating decision making and
speeding up the entire production process.
D. Software-Deﬁned Networking
In recent years, the traditional networks have been limited
compared to other technologies, as it relates to the manage-
ment, performance, and scalability. Contrary to this limitation,
a new paradigm in networks has shown to be the solution,
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

SDNs propose networks which have more ﬂexible and dynamic
computers.
The idea of SDN is to separate the control plane from
the data plane while the data plan stays in the forwarding
devices, the control plane stays in a central controller with
a software responsible for the behavior of the network. The
protocol OpenFlow is the most used for communication of
SDN components and the main focus of recent related research
because it allows the creation of SDN networks with common
forwarding devices.
Despite many studies related to SDN and OpenFlow, so
far there are few studies using SDN applied to IoT, some
work as [8], presenthow the structure should be made, but
does not simulate and generate statistic results. Already in
[9] they designed an approach deﬁned by software to an
IoT environment in a scenario involving a heterogeneous
wireless network. The prototype then uses a scenario with
electric vehicles, locations for electric loading, and a smart
grid infrastructure. But the IoT network vehicle has different
requirements from a network of Industry 4.0, as a much greater
mobility.
SDN can also address many challenges of Industry 4.0,
since the adaptability which is one of the main characteristics
of SDN to the energy efﬁciency that can be improved with
communication between devices. Because the Industry 4.0 has
a knack for effective communication as well as its ﬂexibility
and self-management, its exactly what the SDN has to offer.
What makes SDN one with a potential tool for technology
deployment Industry 4.0.
A well-known SDN limitation is centralized control. In
Industry 4.0 network this limitation tends to be lower, due to
the low data ﬂow during production. But the network controller
is a point of failure, meaning that if it stops working, the whole
network stops. But this problem has been solved by using some
techniques [10] of distributed network control.
In this paper, the SDN network is responsible for every con-
nection made by smart devices and products. In order to have
more efﬁcient connections, favoring communication between
devices, products, customers, suppliers, and administrators.
III.
SDN ARCHITECTURE FOR INDUSTRY 4.0
The traditional computer networks are not prepared to
adapt to constant changes that occur in the network ﬂow
and a lot of devices and information travels on it. These
are the characteristics of most IoT networks. Based on these
characteristics some authors have proposed SDN architectures
for IoT [11][12][13], but to date none about Industry 4.0.
In Figure 1 it is shown an SDN architecture with applica-
tions and equipment used in Industry 4.0.
The application layer has applications that communicate
with the SDN controller, and we implemented an Application
Programming Interface (API) that communicates the SDN con-
troller with the Production controller. The production controller
is responsible for managing the production, as well as the
one who makes all decisions related to production. When
a decision is recieved, the production controller passes the
information necessary to the SDN controller, in reverse the
same thing is done when the SDN controller collects infor-
mation related to the network, it transfers it to the production
controller, all done through the API.
We also have the application layer of the cloud of data that
Figure 1. SDN architecture with the Production Controller.
is responsible for storing all the data collected. In the cloud,
part of the production data can be accessed by customers and
suppliers, who use this to follow the production process and to
send data to the cloud, data that will be used by the production
controller. While the production controller writes production
data in the cloud, the Network Controller (SDN) enables
automation of services, which is critical for cloud services.
From the network details collected, all changes requested by
cloud components are automatically reﬂected in the forwarding
plane.
The control layer has the SDN Controller which is the
central node of the industrys communications network, and
responsible for all network management. The API that com-
municates with the application layer must be implemented in
the same language of the controller. To communicate with the
infrastructure layer a SDN protocol should be used, in our
case, we use the OpenFlow.
In the infrastructure layer, all the SDN devices are managed
by SDN controller, these devices have only the data plan that
is sent by the controller, and any other decision is taken by
the SDN controller, which has the control plane. While the
switches receive and must perform packet forwarding, the gate-
way receives this and mounts their routes for communication.
Status and information of sensors can be collected, as well
as the necessary information to communicate with different
networks and technologies, for example we can mention the
cloud communications.
A. Packet Forwarding
The data path of an OpenFlow switch contains one or more
ﬂow tables. Each ﬂow table in the switch contains a set of
ﬂow entries where each entry contains match ﬁelds, counters,
and instructions. An entry is identiﬁed by its extensible match
ﬁelds which comprise the switch ingress port and different
packet header ﬁelds. For received packets on the data path,
the switch tries to match the ingress port and packet headers
with the match ﬁelds in the different ﬂow entries.
If a ﬂow entry ﬁeld is wildcarded and has a value of ANY,
it matches all possible values in the header. Only the highest
priority ﬂow entry that matches the packet must be selected.
The counters associated with the selected ﬂow entry must be
updated and the included instruction set must be applied. If a
matching entry is found, the instructions associated with the
speciﬁc ﬂow entry are executed. If no match is found in a ﬂow
table, the outcome depends on the switch conﬁguration. The
default in the OpenFlow switch speciﬁcation version 1.2 is to
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

send packets to the controller over the OpenFlow channel via
a packet-in message. Another option is to drop the packet. The
packet-in message may either contain the entire packet or just
a fraction of the packet header [14].
IV.
SIMULATION AND VALIDATION
Industry 4.0 implies the use of concepts that tangent state
of the art, such as CPS, M2M and IoT, to create a smart
production process, which is self-manageable and dynamic.
SDN apply under this scenario allows a ﬂexible manage-
ment resource. In order to evaluate the performance of the
communication mechanisms of an SDN network a different
simulation was implemented in OMNeT ++ simulator [15]
with an extension to OpenFlow call ofomnet [14]. In addition
to the performance analysis of the SDN, we also provide an
analysis of the capacity of a production process on Industry
4.0 to self-manage and self stabilize.
A. Scenarios
Based on some studies [16][17], about Industry 4.0, we
developed a production scenario that addresses some charac-
teristics in these industries. The chosen scenario is a generic
factory that has N line productions, with several interconnected
devices. In Figure 2 a production line used at work in Industry
4.0. Therefore, all applications used in the scenarios were
implemented in the Industry 4.0 standards.
Figure 2. Scenario addressing Industry 4.0 on OMNeT ++.
To compare the possible deployments of Industry 4.0, we
implemented two scenarios, the ﬁrst scenario works with a
traditional network of computers and is called Scenario 1. The
second is Scenario 2 and works on an SDN network, in this
case there is an additional network controller, and network
switches are SDN, speciﬁcally OpenFlow.
Below is a description of each component of the scenario:
•
Manufactured product: the product is an active object
in production, where each product has an RFID tag,
which will be used to identify the product, from the
start of production until such time that it is ready to
be sent to a client.
•
Client: It is an agent, which can be a person or another
industry, which should be able to place orders on
demand and monitor the production process of your
order. The manufacturing process is a response to a
client request.
•
Supplier: It is notiﬁed by Industry 4.0 when there is
a need for more raw material for production.
•
Production controller: Controls the entire process of
production in Industry 4.0, in Scenario 2 some of its
features are automated by the SDN. In addition to
collecting information about each product throughout
the production line, the production controller is able
to make decisions such as:
◦
When a production line is overloaded, the load
is distributed with other production lines.
◦
If the inventory level of raw material is low,
more raw materials are required to go to the
supplier
◦
If the production line is idle, the line is used
to produce another product.
•
Data Cloud: The cloud stores all the information that
is transmitted in Industry 4.0, and customers and
suppliers also have access. The production control and
data cloud could be implemented together, but for
better organization and independence, we decided to
implement them separately.
•
SDN Controller: Is implemented using the Open-
Flow protocol, and used in the scenario 2. The SDN
controller is responsible for managing the Indust.ry
4.0 network. In the scenario 2, the SDN controller
exchanges information with the production controller
to make decisions about packet forwarding, and net-
working devices status check.
•
Switch/Gateway: In the scenario 1 we use common
switching devices. In scenario 2 everything is imple-
mented using the OpenFlow protocol. In this case, the
Switch/Gateway is managed by SDN controller, that
mounts the data plan.
•
Production start sensor (RFID Product): RFID sensor
that collects product tags to begin the manufacturing
process.
•
Quality sensor (RFIDSize and RFIDWeigth): RFID
sensors that are responsible for quality control. If the
product does not have the quality requirements it is
discarded and the request for a new product is sent to
the server.
•
Factory Equipment: The equipment is used in the
manufacture of the product, and are also connected to
the production controller by an switch. Eg laser cut-
ting machine, laser welding system, bending machine,
thermoforming machine, etc.
B. Testing and Results
In order to evaluate the use of traditional computer net-
works and SDN in Industry 4.0, we implemented two pro-
duction lines that are able to attend the demand of a client
automatically. Products used generically to illustrate that this
process can be applied to other kinds of industry.
The simulation begins with a client requesting 100 products
in producing. Throughout the simulation, the client makes 10
requests for 100 products in each. These requests are made
periodically, and it is important to validate the properties of
the industry cope with the demand scale, distributed production
between the various production lines reducing the possibility
that they are idle.
The production process begins when the production con-
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

troller receives a client request. At this time, the production
controller checks for raw materials in sufﬁcient inventory to
meet the new demand for products, if there is no stock of raw
materials, or if the stock not enough, the production controller
makes a request to the supplier for more feedstock. As we are
dealing with a factory, it is common for some raw material is
lost during the production process, therefore, the production
controller considers it a waste rate of 10% when making a
request to the supplier.
As noted above, a stock or raw material may exist, but
this stock is not enough to attend the clients demands. In
this case, the production controller requests the production of
many products as the stock allows, and the other products of
demand are produced when the production controller is able
to guarantee enough stock to produce them.
Still with the objective of maintaining the tests applicable
to other industries, monitoring the product within the produc-
tion process is made by three sensors which represent: a sensor
for registering the start of manufacturing of a product, from
this moment the product is monitored until it is ready to be
delivered to the customer.
The two other sensors represent quality tests to which
products must attend. For each product, it is generated a
random number between 0 and 1 with uniform distribution.
If the generated number is greater than 0.9, the product is
considered defective and the production process has to deal
with such a problem requiring the production of a substitute
product, guaranteeing that the client demand is met.
During the simulations, to meet customer demand of 1000
products, the error function used by the sensors detected in
average 224 defective products in scenario 1 and 226 in
scenario 2, that is, during the entire production process in
average were produced 1224 products in scenario 1 and 1226
in scenario 2. Despite that error rate though it may seem large
for a production process for our experiments it represents
greater opportunities for communication, the greater amount
of data transmitted and even still, an opportunity for more
learning.
The simulations used parameters related to the Ethernet
protocol, which can be seen in Table I. To generate the
results we conducted 3 simulations for each scenario, then we
averaged the results.
TABLE I. PARAMETERS USED IN THE SIMULATION.
Parameter
Value
Delay in channel
1µ
Transmission rate
100Mbps
Request package size
200B
Response package size
1MB
As a result the communication showed the most common
metrics used in computer networks such as end-to-end delay,
sent packets, and received packet. Figures 3 showed the end-to-
end delay of main simulation devices, with the information of
maximum delay, minimum delay, average delay, and standard
deviation.
Made more comparisons between scenarios can be seen in
the Figure 4, is made counting the number of incoming and
outgoing packets in Mbytes, respectively. The communication
usually begins with a request from a client that attends and
is then answered by the server. As we can see in Table I, the
size of the request and response packets are 200B and 1MB,
respectively. That server usually answers the requests and the
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
Client
Supp
RWei
RSize
RProd
RWei2
RSiz2
RPro2
Server
End-to-end delay(s)
Components
max1
mean1
min1
stddev1
max2
mean2
min2
stddev2
Figure 3. End-to-End delay - Scenario 1 and 2.
requests contain only 200B, which causes it to transmit fewer
bytes than the other network nodes.
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Client
Supp
RWei
RSize
RProd
RWei2
RSiz2
RPro2
Server
Packets sent and received in Mbytes
Components
Scen1-Rcvd
Scen2-Rcvd
Scen1-Sent
Scen2-Sent
Figure 4. Number of packets sent and received in Mbytes.
To illustrate the beneﬁts of using the SDN Industry 4.0,
we made some simulations to show the efﬁciency of the use
of SDN. In the simulation, a product takes on average 100s to
ﬁnish, and a new product starts on the production line every 5s,
thereby a production line has a maximum 20 products being
produced.
In Figures 5 and 6, it is shown the simulation of 50
products in the same two scenarios with two Production
Lines(PL1Cen1, PL2Cen1, PL1Cen2, PL2Cen2). In Figure 5,
it is shown a number of products in process of production at
an instant of time. The increasing number means new products
being produced, and the declining number means products
being ﬁnalized. During the simulation a failure occurs in a
production equipment at 120s, between the interval of 60s and
180s.
In scenario 2, when a problem occurs in some equipment
production, the moment in which the machine fails or stops
the communicate, the Network Controller detects based on
communication with the switch, and communicates the Pro-
duction Controller. Then, the production controller changes the
production line until the problem is resolved. In scenario 1, if
the equipment fails, the production controller will not have
a quick feedback, it will not know if the communication is
slow or stopped. When the problem occurs in any network
equipment, in scenario 2 it automatically can be solved by the
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

network controller, which can change the route of communi-
cation, which can not be done in Scenario 1.
In Figure 6, it is shown the ﬁnished products where the
scenario 1 ﬁnished all production in 355s, the scenario 2 ﬁn-
ished the same amount of products in 305s. Other simulations
were realized with some types of failures(Failure to equipment,
switch overload, failure to sensors) and all had similar results.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
Number of Products
Time (s)
Failure PL1
60
180
PL1Cen1
PL2Cen1
PL1Cen2
PL2Cen2
Figure 5. Production.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
Number of Products
Time (s)
Failure PL1
180
FPCen1
FPCen2
Figure 6. Finalized Products
From these results it is possible to observe that the bigger
the number of production lines and equipment, the more
evident will be the advantages of using the SDN.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the article, we propose an SDN architecture for network
communication in Industry 4.0 based on SDN, which enables
a ﬂexible and effective management in the ﬂow control of
production and resources. The architecture uses the SDN
Controller working together with the Production Controller,
providing speed in decision making. Many APIs have been
implemented and tested in a simulation in scenarios for Indus-
try 4.0. The infrastructure has enabled customers and suppliers,
consult and add information in real time on production.
The simulation results showed that it is possible to imple-
ment this new concept called Industry 4.0 and will soon be a
reality for most industries. It was also shown that the features
of technologies such as IoT, M2M, CPS and SDN are essential
to the implementation of the Industry 4.0.
As future work we intend to simulate variations in the
scenarios, implement new functions for SDN devices, and
work on the security of network devices.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Shrouf, J. Ordieres, and G. Miragliotta, “Smart factories in industry
4.0: A review of the concept and of energy management approached
in production based on the internet of things paradigm,” in Industrial
Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM), 2014 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 697–701.
[2]
A. Varghese and D. Tandur, “Wireless requirements and challenges in
industry 4.0,” in Contemporary Computing and Informatics (IC3I), 2014
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 634–638.
[3]
V. Paelke, “Augmented reality in the smart factory: Supporting workers
in an industry 4.0. environment,” in Emerging Technology and Factory
Automation (ETFA), 2014 IEEE.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[4]
D. Gorecky, M. Schmitt, M. Loskyll, and D. Zuhlke, “Human-machine-
interaction in the industry 4.0 era,” in Industrial Informatics (INDIN),
2014 12th IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 289–
294.
[5]
N. Jazdi, “Cyber physical systems in the context of industry 4.0,” in
Automation, Quality and Testing, Robotics, 2014 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[6]
C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, “Context
aware computing for the internet of things: A survey,” Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 16, no. 1, 2014, pp. 414–454.
[7]
J. Kim, J. Lee, J. Kim, and J. Yun, “M2m service platforms: survey, is-
sues, and enabling technologies,” Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
IEEE, vol. 16, no. 1, 2014, pp. 61–76.
[8]
H. Huang, J. Zhu, and L. Zhang, “An sdn based management frame-
work for iot devices,” in Irish Signals & Systems Conference 2014
and 2014 China-Ireland International Conference on Information and
Communications Technologies (ISSC 2014/CIICT 2014). 25th IET.
IET, 2013, pp. 175–179.
[9]
Z. Qin, G. Denker, C. Giannelli, P. Bellavista, and N. Venkatasubrama-
nian, “A software deﬁned networking architecture for the internet-of-
things,” in Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS),
2014 IEEE.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–9.
[10]
A. Krishnamurthy, S. P. Chandrabose, and A. Gember-Jacobson,
“Pratyaastha: An efﬁcient elastic distributed sdn control plane,” in
Proceedings of the third workshop on Hot topics in software deﬁned
networking.
ACM, 2014, pp. 133–138.
[11]
N. Omnes, M. Bouillon, G. Fromentoux, and O. Grand, “A pro-
grammable and virtualized network & it infrastructure for the internet
of things: How can nfv & sdn help for facing the upcoming challenges,”
in Intelligence in Next Generation Networks (ICIN), 2015 18th Inter-
national Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 64–69.
[12]
L. Galluccio, S. Milardo, G. Morabito, and S. Palazzo, “Sdn-wise:
Design, prototyping and experimentation of a stateful sdn solution for
wireless sensor networks,” in Computer Communications (INFOCOM),
2015 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 513–521.
[13]
N. A. Jagadeesan and B. Krishnamachari, “Software-deﬁned networking
paradigms in wireless networks: a survey,” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), vol. 47, no. 2, 2015, p. 27.
[14]
D. Klein and M. Jarschel, “An openﬂow extension for the omnet++ inet
framework,” in Proceedings of the 6th International ICST Conference
on Simulation Tools and Techniques.
ICST (Institute for Computer
Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering),
2013, pp. 322–329.
[15]
A. Varga et al., “The omnet++ discrete event simulation system,” in
Proceedings of the European simulation multiconference (ESM 2001),
vol. 9, no. S 185.
sn, 2001, p. 65.
[16]
H. Kagermann, J. Helbig, A. Hellinger, and W. Wahlster, Recom-
mendations for Implementing the Strategic Initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0:
Securing the Future of German Manufacturing Industry; Final Report
of the Industrie 4.0 Working Group.
Forschungsunion, 2013.
[17]
M. Hermann, T. Pentek, and B. Otto, “Design principles for industrie
4.0 scenarios: A literature review,” 2015.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

