Quality of Service Parameter Tracking and Transformation in Industrial Applications
Gy¨orgy K´alm´an
Centre for Cyber and Information Security
Critical Infrastructure Protection Group
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
mnemonic AS
Email: gyorgy.kalman@ntnu.no
Abstract—Quality of Service (QoS) is a key property to deliver
communication services in automation environments. Machine to
machine communication offers both an opportunity and poses
a challenge for communication networks. In this paper, an
overview of typical QoS metrics is given and their relation
to automation metrics is analysed. The paper recommends the
use of formalized methods from industrial safety to introduce
formalized management of communication network requirements
in an industrial scenario.
Keywords–critical infrastructure; QoS; metrics; automation;
operational envelope
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since the introduction of packet switched networks, ques-
tions and analyses around the possible service level have been a
hot topic. In current networks, the use of best-effort forwarding
is dominating. Although it is very efﬁcient, guaranteeing end-
to-end connection parameters is a challenge.
The technology landscape is similar in both ofﬁce or
communication and industrial networks: on the Local Area
Network (LAN) ﬁeld, Ethernet is dominating, on the WAN
side, standard telecommunication solutions are used also for
industrial applications.
Since its introduction in industrial automation, Ethernet’s
determinism has been a returning concern, mainly because of
both outdated information (use of, e.g., 10-Base2) and bus-like
topologies [2] with long chains of switches.
Most of the bandwidth-related problems were solved with
the introduction of Gigabit Ethernet and for the most demand-
ing applications, technologies like EtherCAT, with intrinsic
QoS are available. For traditional switched networks, there are
efforts for the inclusion of a resource management plane in the
IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking Task Group (TSN).
The paper is structured as follows: the second section
gives an overview of different QoS metrics. Section 3 provides
an overview of Distributed Control System (DCS) structures,
Section 4 provides an analysis of how formal methods from
safety development could be adapted in QoS requirement
speciﬁcation. Section 5 analyses the need for requirements
tracking. The sixth section presents parameters of a control
loop and how QoS parameters can be converted between the
industrial and communication metrics. Section 7 draws the
conclusion and provides an outlook on future work.
II.
QUALITY OF SERVICE
QoS is the measure of transmission quality and service
availability of a network [3], thus not only limited to actual
forwarding parameters like bandwidth and delay, but also,
e.g., availability, reconﬁguration time and reliability.
Keeping a certain service level was a requirement in
telecommunication networks and it was a natural decision to
have features to support service level deﬁnition when packet
switched networks were introduced in the telecom networks.
Providing QoS in Local Area Networks (LANs) networks
was focused on services, where at least one of the commu-
nicating parties was a human. The services could range from
web browsing through VoIP to multi-party video conferencing.
The parameters were adopted to the human perception and also
tolerance for disturbances was adapted to the human users. The
metrics for service quality were not new either at that time;
telecommunication networks had service levels deﬁned already
and since those were also technical and focused on human
users, metrics introduced there were also adapted to computer
networks, like Ethernet or more generally, Internet Protocol
(IP). In current industrial applications, IPv4 is generally used,
if needed, then as IPv4 islands interconnected with tunnels
over IPv6 networks. In Internet of Things (IoT) installations,
the use of IPv6 is expected as a result of the large number of
connected devices.
The evolution of technology showed, that in the vast ma-
jority of cases, an over dimensioning of the network resources
is both the cheapest and easiest to manage.
A. Telecommunication metrics
As an example, Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) met-
rics for trafﬁc contracts are composed from trafﬁc parameters
such as:
•
Peak Cell Rate (PCR) The maximum allowable rate at
which cells can be transported along a connection in
the ATM network. The PCR is the determining factor
in how often cells are sent in relation to time in an
effort to minimize jitter.
•
Sustainable Cell Rate (SCR) A calculation of the
average allowable, long-term cell transfer rate on a
speciﬁc connection.
•
Maximum Burst Size (MBS) The maximum allowable
burst size of cells that can be transmitted contiguously
on a particular connection.
and QoS parameters,
•
Cell Transfer Delay (CTD) The delay experienced by a
cell between the time it takes for the ﬁrst bit of the cell
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

to be transmitted by the source and the last bit of the
cell to be received by the destination. Maximum Cell
Transfer Delay (Max CTD) and Mean Cell Transfer
Delay (Mean CTD) are used.
•
Peak-to-peak Cell Delay Variation (CDV) The dif-
ference between the maximum and minimum CTD
experienced during the connection. Peak-to-peak CDV
and Instantaneous CDV are used.
•
Cell Loss Ratio (CLR) The percentage of cells that are
lost in the network due to error or congestion and are
not received by the destination.
The list shows the focus areas of QoS already in the
90s: bandwidth (in bits per second), burstiness and parameters
related to disturbances in forwarding.
In addition to these connection-related parameters, the
communication network had also network-wide parameters in
other relations, like redundancy with, e.g., reconﬁguration time
in case of link loss or routing alternatives.
ATM is raised as an example, since it offers one of the
widest range of possibilities for QoS. It also introduced a
couple of concepts, which, although ATM was later deemed
as a failure, do a comeback in today’s QoS networks.
B. Metrics on packet switched networks
On packet switched networks, initially the focus was on
efﬁcient forwarding. Efﬁciency and simple network operation
lead to cheaper devices and ultimately to today’s technology
landscape with the domination of Ethernet and IP.
While there were different approaches for QoS (integrated
and differentiated services), the main QoS metrics were band-
width, loss, delay and jitter [3]. In future installations with
IPv6 it is expected that the use of differentiated services will
be more widespread, as after RFC 2460/3697, the properties
of Trafﬁc Class and Flow Label can be used to select ﬂows
of the aggregated trafﬁc and grant priority. The 20 bit ﬁeld
of Flow Label also allows a large number of ﬂows to be
present concurrently which would ﬁt even a large industrial
deployment. The impact of this feature however depends on the
timing of tasks running on the network and also how this ﬁeld
could be used for other properties important in the automation
applications: redundancy and reconﬁguration time in case of
link loss.
An effort to include some of the trafﬁc engineering possi-
bilities of ATM for LANs is the IEEE Shortest Path Bridging
(SPB). This standard is being developed by the TSN working
group and allows, amongst others call admission, resource
reservation over the whole path. SPB has raised a high interest
in the automation ﬁeld and most of the industry is either
contributing directly or closely following the development.
C. Automation
QoS requirements of an automation system tend to be
very different than those of an ofﬁce network. The protocol
set used is different and the typical communication inside an
automation system runs on Layer 2 [13]. Sources and sinks of
trafﬁc streams are typically machines with little tolerance on
disturbances, but good predictability in communication.
The network topology of automation networks is often
contributing to the challenges around QoS [5]. Networks are
Controller
Controller
Plant network/intranet
Client/server network
Control network
Fieldbus
Workplaces
Servers
ERP, Remote control
Proxy
Figure 1. Traditional DCS network architecture
built with low port count switches. This typically results in
an infrastructure that has more devices than an ofﬁce network.
A bigger reﬁnery can have several hundreds of switches with
a typical branching factor of 4-7. The still widely used bus-
topology leads to even longer forwarding chain, introducing
delay and jitter, which only exists in considerably larger
networks in the ofﬁce/telecommunication scenarios.
III.
DCS ARCHITECTURE
Control systems are traditionally built using a three net-
work levels (Figure 1). The plant, the client-server and the
control network. These levels might have different names, but
they share the following characteristics:
•
Plant network is home of the traditional IT systems,
like Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), ofﬁce ser-
vices and other support applications. It is typically
under the control of the IT department.
•
Client-server network is the non-time critical part
of the automation system, where the process-related
workplaces, servers and other support entities are
located. It is ﬁrewalled from the plant network and
is under the control of Operations.
•
Control network includes everything close to the ac-
tual process: controllers, sensors, actuators and other
automation components. Typically it follows a strict
time synchronization regime and contains the parts of
the network with time-critical components. It is acces-
sible through proxies from the client-server network
and under the control of Operations.
Remote monitoring was introduced to industrial appli-
cations decades ago with the different Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems. These used various
communication technologies (leased lines, radio links, etc.) to
feed in status data to a central monitoring entity. Typically
remote control was not available.
With current developments in the smart grid and IoT the
possibilities for remote operations is being extended by taking
current communication solutions in use. The extension of the
features also requires a well-deﬁned network infrastructure [9].
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

A. QoS in automation
Trafﬁc ﬂows in automation typically are machine to ma-
chine (M2M). This property and the systems connectivity
to the physical world require both different tolerances for
disturbances and potentially different metrics [7].
An automation system somewhere in the process is con-
nected to the physical world. This means, that amongst others,
it has to refer to real time. Forwarding disturbances might
lead to potentially dangerous situations with implications far
beyond a dropped Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) call.
The deﬁnition of QoS requirements in the automation
world has its roots in the deﬁnition of control loops. In control
of the early DCSs bus and serial links were used, which
typically operated in a slotted or polled way. This allowed
the automation engineers to exactly set the communication
parameters to meet the requirements of the control system in
a deterministic way.
For special applications, technologies with intrinsic QoS
are used, e.g., Ethernet for Control Automation Technology
(EtherCAT), which allows deterministic communication, but
represents a minority of installations. In the following, focus
will be on solutions, where no intrinsic QoS is available.
The physical world connection also has an inﬂuence on the
used QoS metrics. In automation, beside bandwidth, time and
availability related metrics are more emphasized, like delay
and jitter or availability (redundancy, reconﬁguration time).
A special aspect is also the quality of time synchronization.
The importance and weighting of these metrics is different
compared to the telecommunication or other communication
operations. One of the most important differences is, that
at the moment there is no protocol which would bridge the
gap between requirements speciﬁcation in automation terms
and network operations, which results in extended engineering
work and challenging life-cycle support. This is in contrast
with, e.g., VoIP, where protocols like the Resource Reservation
Protocol (RSVP) can be used to reserve resources on the
communication path.
IV.
REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
Deﬁning requirements and keeping the original intention
in complex systems is a problematic task. In automation, the
main challenge is, that the requirements are deﬁned in the
automation context, but the bearer network uses by default
different metrics for expressing forwarding parameters.
In a control loop, typical parameters are control frequency
(how often the data is refreshed or modiﬁed), maximum toler-
able delay, jitter and availability parameters. One of the most
demanding applications, where no technology with intrinsic
QoS is used is substation automation with IEC 61850 [6].
IEC 61850 is a standard for communication networks and
systems for power utility automation. This protocol is a great
step forward for substation automation, as it, amongst others
translates all information into data models, which is supported
by the application focused architecture. This speeds up the
engineering process both in planning and integration [4].
However, also IEC 61850 is not deﬁning exact QoS re-
quirements for the network infrastructure. Although the Spe-
ciﬁc Communication Service Mapping (SCSM) feature allows
the deﬁnition of communication links inside the IEC 61850
world, the translation of requirements is not included.
When the control loops are deﬁned, the current process is
based on individual mapping of automation requirements to
network QoS parameters. This process, although not efﬁcient,
can and is working for smaller installations, but suffers from
scalability problems.
The lack of direct coupling between the automation and
communication parameters typically leads to very pessimistic
QoS requirements and over dimensioning the network capacity
which leads to excess cost.
In the Internet of Things (IoT) scenario, where the au-
tomation networks are extended behind the LAN [8], tracking
requirements is becoming more important. Very strict param-
eters of the automation system on the LAN can be mixed into
the WAN requirements, which might lead to prohibitive cost
on communication. Validity of requirements for each ﬂow has
to be analysed to ensure an efﬁcient ﬁt. The efforts for keeping
the QoS parameters as close to the requirements as possible
can lead to more efﬁcient and cheaper operation.
A. Industrial safety
Conversations on Safety Integrated Systems (SIS) mainly
include questions on QoS. The cause is that these installations
share the communication network between the automation task
and the safety function (as they can also share infrastructure
with the ﬁre alarm system). In a safety sense, SIS have no
QoS requirements. The safety logic is built in a way, that a
communication error is interpreted as a dangerous situation and
the safety function will trip. So the system avoids dangerous
situations at the expense of lower productivity and availability.
Safety as such is an availability question and through
availability, it implies QoS requirements on the automation
system as any other communication task. Special treatment is
not required.
Although a solution like this does not exists for commu-
nication QoS, but the industry has a ﬁeld, where a similar
challenge was solved with structured approach and formal
methods: safety. Safety is already considered as a process,
which is present for the whole life cycle of the product.
Safety systems are classiﬁed into 4 levels, Safety Integrity
Level (SIL) 1 to 4. The different levels pose well-deﬁned
requirements towards the system. These integrity levels cover
all aspects of the system, including hardware, software, com-
munication solution and seen in contrast with the application.
A similar approach could be also beneﬁcial for formalizing the
relationship between the automation application and the bearer
network.
The IEC 61508 standard requires that each risk posed by
the components of the safety system is identiﬁed and analysed.
The result of the risk analysis should be evaluated against
tolerability criteria.
Key processes of a safety development are risk analysis
and risk reduction. These are executed in an iterative manner
until the acceptable risk level is achieved. A possible method
for risk classiﬁcation is shown on ﬁgure 2 from the United
Kingdom Health and Safety Executive.
Analogue to this, a similar approach could be used for
deﬁning an operational envelope for the communication in-
frastructure. All possible ﬂows of data should be identiﬁed
(analogue with identifying risk), which is possible with high
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 2. The Health and Safety Executive’s Risk criteria
conﬁdence on a mostly machine to machine (M2M) commu-
nication system. Then these ﬂows should be analysed and as a
result, QoS requirements for the ﬂows should be identiﬁed. As
these are identiﬁed, the aggregated results should be evaluated
against the possibilities of the underlying infrastructure [14].
The analysis will result in a range, stating the minimum
QoS requirement (with a certain conﬁdence) and the preferred
QoS requirement. If the expected QoS after taking communi-
cation ﬂows into account is inside the operational envelope,
the system can deliver with the deﬁned conﬁdentiality level.
The operational envelope will be larger than zero (not
just forming a baseline composed from the single QoS re-
quirements) because of the stochastic nature of best-effort
forwarding and large networks. Also, an analogy with the
different SIL can be drawn with comparing them to the
conﬁdentiality level of keeping the Service Level Agreement
(SLA) [11].
The approach taken for safety can be a solution for other
properties of the industrial communication system, e.g., QoS
for transport or security [15].
V.
REQUIREMENTS TRACKING
One of the key aspects missing in engineering work today
is the follow-up of requirements stated against the communi-
cation infrastructure.
On the LAN level, the lack of tracking only results in minor
problems, as network resources are typically not problematic.
Even not on the redundancy requirements, since most of the
critical network will have approximately the same reliability
requirements. As an example, a current IEC 61850 substation
will have tens of devices connected to the network.
The local communication of IEC 61850 is composed from
horizontal and vertical ﬂows, where horizontal ﬂows tend to
use more resources, as Sampled Values (SV) trafﬁc is sent this
way. SV is the continuous stream of sampled input or output
values, which is sent to a controller for processing. The stream
can ﬁll 10s of Mbps. On a network with a gigabit backhaul,
conveying trafﬁc in several 100 Mbps range is not problematic.
Redundancy is typically covered by either a secondary network
or redundant links.
Figure 3. Requirements traceability matrix by the U.S. Department of
Transportation
Already in the horizontal-vertical split of ﬂows, different
requirements are valid against the network infrastructure. As
the automation task gets more far away from the ﬁeldbus level
(direct contact with the physical world), so are the deadlines
for communication and processing more relaxed.
Requirements tracking is becoming key as the automation
system passes the LAN boundary. Costs associated to network
communication are becoming more expensive and obeying
QoS parameters increasingly problematic.
Several well-known approaches can help the aggregation
and validation of the QoS parameters during the life cycle
of the project. One of these solutions is the requirements
traceability matrix.
In such a matrix, requirements posed by different automa-
tion tasks towards the infrastructure can be gathered (ﬁgure 3).
To allow both aggregation of parameters and identiﬁcation of
the source of a speciﬁc requirement.
Source identiﬁcation is key for long-life installations,
where extensions and updates can be expected during the
lifetime of the system.
Evaluation if a requirement is still valid in different parts
or domains of the system has also a key importance in efﬁcient
deployments. It is important to set up an iterative process
for QoS parameter evaluation. Here, a possible solution could
be to follow the V-model used in, amongst others, software
development and safety development. Figure 4 shows the iter-
ative development process. The QoS requirements should be
evaluated at each step and their fulﬁlment validated after each
step. With using such a model, the bearer infrastructure would
be more integrated into the development process. Integration
can lead to more optimized QoS requirements. Current practice
results more in a worst-case requirement list.
For Wide Area Network (WAN) situations, tracking re-
quirement validity has key importance. The validity area of
the respective QoS parameters has to be limited to cover only
the necessary parts. As part of an iterative process, when the
communication scope is getting wider (e.g., the data is being
passed upward in a hierarchical network architecture), validity
of the QoS parameters has to be checked. An example is that
if there is a strict time synchronization requirement with IEEE
1588, but there is no such requirement for the WAN section,
nor is a loop covering two endpoints in different networks,
then the 1588 requirement should not be taken over to the
SLA deﬁnition of the WAN interface.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 4. V-model [10]
VI.
CONTROL LOOP PARAMETERS
Requirements deﬁnition for the communication network
is one of the actual challenges in automation. The challenge
in this task is, that the automation ﬂows are deﬁned using
different metrics than the communication links. An exam-
ple IEC 61850 control loop would be deﬁned as: having a
sampling rate of 80 samples per cycle (4800 Hz for 60 Hz
networks), with sampling 16 inputs, 16 bit per sample. Event-
based trafﬁc is negligible compared to the periodic trafﬁc.
If there is a requirement for synchronous operation, time
precision (quality) can also be a QoS metric. Redundancy
requirements can lead to topologies, which are unusual in a
normal network infrastructure: ﬁrst, the use of Rapid Spanning
Tree Protocol (RSTP) to disable redundant links, second the
general use of loops (rings) in the network to ensure that all
nodes are dual-homed. With dual-homing, the network can
survive the loss of one communication link without degra-
dation in the service level. From the network viewpoint, this
control loop will introduce a trafﬁc ﬂow, with a net ingress
payload stream of approx. 98Mbps. The sampling will generate
2560 bytes of trafﬁc each second, which can be carried by
at least two Ethernet frames, thus the system can expect at
least approx. 10000 frames per second. The trafﬁc will be
forwarded on a horizontal path to the controller. On the ingress
port to the backbone, it will enter with approx. 110 Mbps
(header+payload). The trafﬁc ﬂow will be consumed at the
egress port to the controller.
Due to the stochastic nature of Ethernet, there will be
jitter between the frames transmitted over the network. The
maximum jitter is deﬁned by the maximum delay variation
tolerance of the control loop (typically, every second frame
must arrive in good time). This requirement can then be
calculated with either the length of the typical frame of the
ﬂow or with a maximum length frame. In both cases, the
allowed jitter will be considerably longer than the expected
disturbances on the LAN. Precision requirement on the time
synchronization implies two choices: the choice of protocol
and time source. The choice of protocol is generally IEEE
1588v2, which allows high precision time synchronization and
GPS as a time source. The choice of GPS is actually an input to
the risk analysis of the whole project, as then the time reference
will depend on a network controlled by a third party.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With communicating automation systems covering large
geographical areas and also expanding in logical complexity,
current, non-scalable solutions for performance deﬁnition and
evaluation are getting outdated.
Introduction of the structured approach used in safety
development can both enhance the quality of deployments and
also allow easier communication between the parties. One of
the main advantages of the safety-approach is, that it is widely
known and accepted in the industry, so the two worlds of
operations and IT could work better together.
Future work will focus on how the transformation of QoS
parameters can be formalized and which modiﬁcations are
needed in the safety processes to suit the QoS process and
possibly the security process in an effective manner. Also
protocol development or adaptation for resource reservation for
automation applications in both LAN and WAN environments
is an important ﬁeld of study, including the use of Software
Deﬁned Networking (SDN) in automation [1], [12].
As an outlook, future hot spots of research could be auto-
matic parameter tracking through the design process and real
time monitoring of deployments also during their operation.
Automation and smart grids are an important ﬁeld of 5G efforts
and it is expected to utilize the existing telecommunication
protocols with applying industry-speciﬁc proﬁles. Developing
these proﬁles which will not only deﬁne the infrastructure
requirements, but also interfaces towards other systems is one
of the interesting areas for the success of 5G.
REFERENCES
[1]
Gy. K´alm´an, ”Applicability of Software Deﬁned Networking in Industrial
Ethernet”, in Proceedings of IEEE Telfor 2015, pp. 340-343, Belgrade,
Serbia
[2]
Gy. K´alm´an, D. Orfanus, and R. Hussain, ”An Overview of Switching
Solutions for Wired Industrial Ethernet”, The Thirteenth International
Conference on Networks ICN 2014, pp. 131-136, Nice
[3]
Cisco, ”End-to-End QoS Network Design: Quality of Service for Rich-
Media & Cloud Networks”, Cisco Press, 2013.
[4]
M. Rensburg, D. Dolezilek, and J. Dearien, ”Case Study: Using IEC
61850 Network Engineering Guideline Test Procedures to Diagnose and
Analyze Ethernet Network Installations”, in proceedings of PAC World
Africa 2015, November 12-13., Johannesburg, South Africa
[5]
L. Sheng, ”QoS Design and Its Implementation for Intelligent Industrial
Ethernet”, International Journal of Materials, Mechanics and Manufac-
turing, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016., pp. 40-45.
[6]
V. Skendzic, I. Ender, and G. Zweigle, ”IEC 61850-9-2 Process Bus
and Its Impact on Power System Protection and Control Reliability”,
in proceedings of the 9th Annual Western Power Delivery Automation
Conference, April 3-5, 2007, Spokane, USA
[7]
J. Bilbao, C. Cruces, and I. Armendariz, ”Methodology for the QoS
Characterization in High Constraints Industrial Networks”, Open Journal
of Communications and Software, Volume 1, Number 1, 2014., pp. 30-41
[8]
A.
Al-Fuqaha,
M.
Guizani,
M.
Mohammadi,
M.
Aledhari,
and
M. Ayyash, ”Internet of Things: A Survey on Enabling Technologies,
Protocols, and Applications”, IEEE Communication Surveys and Tuto-
rials, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2015., pp. 2347-2376
[9]
N. Barkakati and G. C. Wilshusen, ”Deﬁcient ICT Controls Jeopardize
Systems Supporting the Electric Grid: A Case Study”, Securing Elec-
tricity Supply in the Cyber Age, Springer, 2009, pp. 129-142
[10]
G.
Blank,
”Object-oriented
Software
Engineering”,
http:
//www.cse.lehigh.edu/∼glennb/oose/ﬁgs/pﬂeeger/Vmodel.jpg, Accessed
18.03.2016.
[11]
P. Blanco, G. A. Lewis, and P. Merson, ”Service Level Agreements in
Service-Oriented Architecture Environments”, Technical Note, Software
Engineering Institute, CMU/SEI-2008-TN-021
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[12]
D. Cronberger, ”The software-deﬁned Industrial Network”, The Indus-
trial Ethernet Book, Issue 84, 2014., pp. 8-13
[13]
C. Alcaraz, G. Fernandez, and F. Carvajal, ”Security Aspects of
SCADA and DCS Environments”, In Critical Infrastructure Protection:
Information Infrastructure Models, Analysis, and Defense, LNCS 7130.,
Springer, 2012., pp. 120-149
[14]
Open Networking Foundation, ”Software-Deﬁned Networking: The
New Norm for Networks white paper”, https://www.opennetworking.org/
images/stories/downloads/sdn-resources/white-papers/wp-sdn-newnorm.
pdf, Accessed 28.01.2016.
[15]
R.C. Parks and E. Rogers, ”Best practices in automation security”,
Security & Privacy, IEEE (Volume:6 , Issue: 6 ), 2009., pp 37-43
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

