Entity Title Architecture Pilot: Deploying a Clean Slate SDN Based Network
at a Telecom Operator
Luiz Cl´audio Theodoro,
Pedro Henrique A. D. de Melo,
Fl´avio de Oliveira Silva,
Jo˜ao Henrique de Souza Pereira,
Pedro Frosi Rosa and Alexandre Cardoso
Federal University of Uberlˆandia
Uberlˆandia, MG, Brazil
Email: lclaudio@feelt.ufu.br,
pedrodamaso@mestrado.ufu.br, ﬂavio@ufu.br,
joaohs@ufu.br, pfrosi@ufu.br,
and alexandre@ufu.br
Alex Vaz Mendes,
Murilo Borges Gomes Machado,
H´elvio Pereira de Freitas, Luiz Cl´audio Theodoro
and Jo˜ao Henrique de Souza Pereira
Innovation, Research and Development
Algar Telecom
Uberlˆandia, MG, Brazil
Email: alexvaz@algartelecom.com.br,murilo.bgm@algartelecom.com.br,
helvio@algartelecom.com.br, lclaudio@algartelecom.com.br
and joaohs@algartelecom.com.br
Abstract—Due to Internet’s remarkable success, its architecture
is being challenged to attend new applications requirements such
as mobility, security and Quality of Experience (QoE), among
others. The requirements that the architecture faces today are
far away from the design principles of the protocols in the
sixties. Several research initiatives are based on a clean-slate
approach, a disruptive view that might result in a completely
new network. Our research group proposed the Entity Title Ar-
chitecture (ETArch), a clean-slate Software Deﬁned Networking
(SDN) based approach that currently is able to satisfy applications
requirements such as support to multicast trafﬁc, mobility and
QoE. This work goes further and presents the deployment of
ETArch on a telecommunications service provider network. This
work contributes to Future Internet initiatives by presenting a
viable approach to deploy new network architectures on top of
current providers networks.
Keywords–Software-Deﬁned Networking;Domain Title Service;
Workspace; Telecommunications.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Despite the huge success, the Internet architecture is facing
a completely new technological context that deﬁes its evolu-
tion. In spite of its ubiquity, the Internet has some difﬁculties
to attend new applications requirements, such as mobility,
security and Quality of Experience (QoE), among others [1].
The developed protocols contributed for the current Internet
success but the requirements that the architecture faces today
are far away from their design principles [2] of the sixties.
Several research initiatives [3][4] are on their way in order
to provide a solution for the new demands regarding the
Internet architecture. One of the approaches to evolve Internet
architecture is based on a clean-slate view [5], which suggests
drastic changes and might result in a completely new network.
In order to experiment with these new network architec-
tures, several infrastructures are being deployed around the
world, such as OFELIA [6] in the Europe, GENI [7] in the
United States and FIBRE [8] in Brazil in a joint effort with
Europe. These infrastructures enable the deployment and the
scaling of the experiments that are necessary to face current In-
ternet scale, however ongoing efforts are using infrastructures
that are apart from the current Internet.
Although there are several contributions at a global level,
it is not easy to reproduce the research outside a laboratory
environment. Experiments involving small equipment sets with
few users are an important step for a research validation.
However, before going to production, this research must be
deployed into real infrastructures and the validation must
take into account around millions of users. In this scenario,
it becomes a critical issue because the companies do not
release their plant and environment in order to be manipulated
by researchers with the fear of risking themselves because
somehow could affect the services provided for the public.
In previous work, our research group proposed the Entity
Title Architecture (ETArch) [9], a clean-slate Software Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) based approach which aims at satisfying
different applications requirements, such as support to multi-
cast trafﬁc [10] , mobility [11], and QoE [12].
The present work goes further and presents and details
the deployment of ETArch at a telecommunication service
provider production network. This initiative represents an im-
portant path towards the actual deployment of Future Internet
initiatives on real networks.
ETArch architecture guarantees the possibility of imple-
menting a clean slate SDN network, in a telecom operator, by
using the concept of horizontal addressing based on titles, an
unambiguous designation of an entity. In a traditional scenario,
involving residential customers connected to a commercial
network, an alteration in their access methods is induced in
a non-conventional way. All of this happens without great
setbacks for the ﬁnal user and a ETArch based chat application
is executed with trafﬁc monitoring among the participants.
After this deployment, there is a ﬁrm intention to promote
a set of developments which can attest the efﬁciency and
potentiality of this solution collaborating so that the future
Internet can answer to a series of current and future demands.
The remainder of this work is organized as follows: Section
II presents an overview of related work about deployment of
new network architectures on top of current networks. Section
III introduces ETArch concepts and presents the operator
infrastructure. Section IV describes the technical aspects of
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

the deployment. Section V presents some results of the current
work and ﬁnally, Section VI presents some concluding remarks
and future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Several research groups has initiatives in order to make
Internet capable to support the new requirements that chal-
lenges the current Internet architecture. One of the approaches
is to decouple the architecture and the infrastructure and
the OpenFlow standard is cited as one of the most popular
solutions to this end [13][14][15]. Some of these initiatives
goes towards the direction to deploy the research results onto
real environments.
BeHop [16] has an interesting approach, by implementing
a wireless testbed for dense WiFi networks frequently found in
residential and corporative environments. This prototype was
implemented in a campus with about thirty active users as
“guinea pigs” allowing researchers to study and evaluate pros
and cons of new ways of controlling WiFi networks. BeHop
supplies a general purpose framework for experimenting new
techniques in order to control power, channel allocations and
associations.
The integration between BeHop and the production net-
work showed the beneﬁts of an implementation in the actual
world while maintaining the aimed ﬂexibility to process others
experiments. It was essential to study and to evaluate the
WiFi management strategies and its impacts on the conditions
found in a real network such as clients diversity, mobility,
and interference with neighbor networks. A testbed was used
in order to transport real trafﬁc of users connected to WiFi
devices and at the same time to keep the ﬂexibility to apply
frequent changes and occasionally force the network down
aiming to show network resilience.
Yiakoumis’ work [17] points out the possibility of leaving
the network control to the user instead of the Internet Service
Provider (ISP). This statement raised controversies and con-
trary opinions have been coming up but the defended idea is
to allow that the user’s choice can guide the network trafﬁc
managing not only inside residences but also inside the ISP
[18].
An interesting implementation has been made by Hampel,
Steiner and Bu [19]. They suggest the idea of the SDN in an
operator, but on top of an Internet Protocol (IP) network. In this
case, OpenFlow capable elements run vertical forwarding to
interoperate with a legacy infrastructure using IP in consonance
with routing traditional protocols.
All these proposals have in common the approach that
new solutions could be created by using current network
infrastructure. These new solutions are decoupled from the
network infrastructure and enables new types of experiments
using a SDN based approach.
This study also is based on the assumption that SDN is
the enabler of changes in the network which would make it
more programmable and ﬂexible. However, it goes further and
deploys a clean-slate network architecture on top of a legacy
infrastructure at a real network operator. A particular feature of
ETArch is that it aims at supporting the application communi-
cation requirements over time and support these requirements
from top to lower layers of the protocol stack.
III.
ENTITY TITLE ARCHITECTURE (ETARCH) PILOT
Countless researches are being made with the intention
of recreate the Internet architecture that collaborates for the
evolution of this great worldwide network. The more ex-
pressive proposals have built a large-scale experimentation
facility, supporting both research on networks and services,
by gradually federating existing and new testbeds for emerging
or future Internet technologies [20][4]. Joining this researchers
initiative around the world, the ETArch Pilot group intends to
create conditions so that researches in future experiments leave
the laboratory and go to the actual world.
The suggested architecture in this work has as basic point
of view to semantically approximate upper and lower layers
and for that it uses the ETArch proposal operating over a
commercial network. When it comes to this model it foresees
the possibility of attending Internet demands whether current
or future ones. ETArch is a clean slate network architecture
in which identiﬁcation and addressing schemes are based in
an independent topology designation that uniquely identiﬁes
an Entity: its Title. ETArch transport mechanism is based
on a logical channels named Workspace which is capable of
unifying multiples communication entities.
Entities in the Title Model [21] differ from the deﬁned
concept in some literatures and they are not considered simple
resources inside a network but beings whose communication
needs must be understood and supported by the Service Layer
and then by the lower layers as Physical and Link layers.
Hereinafter ETArch main concepts and components are better
detailed.
An Entity has list of requirements and capacities related
to communication. An entity may be an equipment, a user,
an application, a thing, and so on. It has at least one title
and one location, known as Point of Attachment (PoA). From
mobility point of view such separation is important because
an entity’s location could change over time. These entities can
relate among themselves and through such relations they can
inherit properties, except the title [9][22].
A group of Titles is bundled in a Namespace which
also must have a single title. A Title can be repre-
sented by a tuple and its speciﬁcation could be such
as
Namespace::Identiﬁcation-entity.
On
the
other
hand,
Workspace is a logic bus, independently of underlying topol-
ogy, with which entities can be attached to be part of a
communication domain. The entities addressing happens in an
application level and these entities do not communicate directly
but they communicate through a workspace.
The Workspace can work on wired and wireless networks.
The workspace has the following properties: a title; a group of
Network Elements (NE); a list of capacities; the visibility; and
a list of requirements. The title identiﬁes that workspace in a
unique way. The NE list represents the physical infrastructure
that supports the workspace. The capacities indicate the proper-
ties that the workspace must satisfy regarding communication
such as QoS and security parameters. The requirements must
be supported by one entity that wants to attach to a given
workspace.
A Workspace is created when an entity produces some kind
of thing that can be consumed by other entities such as in a
ﬁle sharing, a content or a video streaming. It is controlled by
a Domain Title Service (DTS), which has the responsibilities
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 1. Components of the Architecture - DTS, DTSA, Entity, Title and
Workspace.
mentioned as follows: titles resolution, entities management
and their relationship with their Entities and Titles relation
management. The DTS is constituted by DTS Agents (DTSAs)
and it has a base of knowledge with information from the
environment so it is possible to monitoring and controlling the
requisites from an entity. The DTSA manages the entities cycle
of life from the beginning to the activities end. The Figure 1
shows an illustration of a Workspace controlled by DTSAs
encompassing some NEs.
IV.
DEPLOYMENT AND EXPERIMENTATION
This work proposes the deployment of a testbed based on
ETArch architecture as a response to the challenges regarding
future internet. By considering that current Internet is an
ubiquitous architecture, it is desirable that any changes would
be transparent to the users around the world.
By having that ETArch can be deployed on openﬂow
switches, it is possible to implement it by using a telecom
operator MetroEthernet network. At the last mile, OpenFlow
based switches will be deployed as customer premise equip-
ments.
The operator where this work was conducted is Algar Tele-
com [23]. A Brazilian operator located in the southeast region
of the country. Considering 2014 information, the company has
1.321 million customers and 380 thousand customers in the
broadband access. The deployment in this work considers the
technologies related to this group of broadband access users.
The MetroEthernet network topology is based on primary
and secondary rings as depicted in the Figure 2. Home users
are connected to the secondary rings. The primary rings are
distributed over the interconnected area and link the secondary
rings. Such equipments in their vast majority operate with
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) or Dense Wavelength
Division Multiplexing (DWDM) [24]. Primary rings are char-
acterized by throughput superior to 100 Gbps. Secondary rings
link smaller geographic area and their throughput are under 40
Gbps.
To provide access to the customers in the last mile, the
operator uses different access technologies such as Asymmetric
Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL), Very-high-bit-rate Digital
Subscriber Line (VDSL) and Fiber To The Home (FTTH) [25].
Usually the customers are connected to the secondary rings.
In some cases, the customers requires higher throughput rates
Figure 2. MetroEthernet Topology
Figure 3. OpenFlow Network
such as in a private condominium, a commercial building or a
big company. These customers can be connected to the primary
ring as depicted in the Figure 2. In typical ADSL access, the
modem is connected to a Digital Subscriber Access Method
(DSLAM), which in turn is attached to the secondary ring in
a Metro Network. Secondary rings are aggregated in primary
ring that connects to the IP routing core.
Two or more areas (domains) will be linked by a virtual
networking, by using IP networks, providing researches and
developers with an actual usage scenario for the deployments
and tests. At a local environment, inside an area, OpenFlow
switches are directly linked to each other, as represented by
Figure 2.
However, as shown in the operator’s network the OpenFlow
switches would be separated by an IP structure that does not
implement such speciﬁcation conforming Figure 3.
There are several challenges related with the deployment
of ETArch on a MetroEthernet network infrastructure. For
example, ETArch does not use the TCP/IP protocol stack on its
control and data planes. The legacy infrastructure is completely
based on TCP/IP. To solve the problem it was necessary to use
a strategy where the ETArch components could communicate
in a transparent way over the legacy infrastructure. By using
this approach, the legacy infrastructure would work only as a
forwarding plane. As a result, the OpenFlow switch will work
as being directly connected, as depicted in the Figure 3.
The forwarding graph in an OpenFlow based network can
be discovered by using the Link Layer Discovery Protocol
(LLDP) [26]. Brieﬂy, LLDP is a link layer protocol used
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 4. Operator Network
by network devices for informing their identity on a local
area network (LAN). The forwarding graph contains all of
the OpenFlow switches that are directly connected. However,
the legacy infrastructure contains several middleboxes between
the switches. These switches are also geographically scattered
along the network infrastructure.
Therefore, it was necessary to solve this issue to have
all switches directly connected in a virtual way. The adopted
solution was to create a tunnel using the Generic Routing
Encapsulation (GRE) protocol [27] in order to forward the
LLDP frames. The GRE protocol is very popular due to its
simplicity and compatibility. GRE is a tunneling protocol that
can encapsulate, among other things, the link layer protocols
inside a virtual point-to-point link over an IP network. Thus, it
was possible to create a virtual network of OpenFlow switches
directly connected over the operator IP network, according to
Figure 4.
Thus, the tunnel creation could interconnect the Open-
Flow switches. However, the telecom operator does not have
OpenFlow capable switches deployed on the infrastructure.
Replacing current switches is not a feasible alternative. To
overcome this, Open vSwitch (OVS) was used. Although this
brings a new requirement for the deployment, OVS can be
easily installed in commodity hardware at customer premises.
OVS is an open-source implementation of a virtual multilayer
switch and support multiple protocols and standards including
some OpenFlow versions.
In the end, the virtual switches, based on OVS, where
scattered along the network and interconnected using GRE
tunnels. The DTSA acts as the OpenFlow controller of these
switches.
The deployment was based on the most recent version of
the software components of ETArch. The components were
installed in servers located inside the Operator network. In
the ﬁrst stages, PCs using Ubuntu Linux (14.04) operating
systems played the role of each customer’s equipment. On each
PC, OVS was installed and a new bridge interface (br0) was
created. This bridge interface can be used also for data plane
and for the control plane in order to communicate with the
DTSA.
From the moment this process is realized in both machines,
the bridge is added to the switch and established a register in
the controller. Both switches (machines) use a GRE because
it offers a tunnel, by simulating a link between two network
nodes, and this is done by using an IP address (then attending
to the initial proposal). Atop of it, the OVS itself is already
capable of creating this kind of tunnel internally thus the
process is ﬁnished by adding the GRE tunnel in the same
bridge of the controller.
V.
RESULTS
To meet the initially proposed objectives, the veriﬁcation
may be done by the assembly of the network structure and by
the execution of an application speciﬁcally developed for the
ETArch architecture.
The ﬁrst scan mode is based on the application of ETArch
controller which asks every registered switch to send LLDP as
a regular package. This proceeding is very important for the
network mapping itself because it signals what are the most
important options and the paths between them.
In this way, the controller can take a complete view of
the network. A packet monitoring tool (tcpdump) has been
used to observe the exchange of information between switches,
speciﬁcally the LLDP messages, encapsulated in GRE packets
as mentioned before, as shown in Figure 5.
Such information indicates that these options are virtually
adjacent; which means that the legacy structure remains present
in the network lab, transparently, where it was initially de-
ployed, which did not require considerable changes in the usual
practices within the carrier.
Upon conﬁrmation of adequate controller setup, the
switches (machines) were transferred to MetroEthernet envi-
ronment, where it obtained a valid IP. Every customer has
been connected by using the existing network, meaning that
customers would be connected to each other by the controller
and network elements such as switches, DSLAMs and the
access modems. For the construction of GRE tunnels, the
OVSs must have a valid IP and therefore the customer must
send the Ethernet over the Point-to-Point Protocol (PPPoE)
frames to the ISP.
The OVSs setup process is repeated by replacing the
previous IPs, by the one obtained on the new network, and
thus all the legacy structures are transparent for the control
and connection between customers. LLDP packets and their
respective answers are inspected to check whether this phase
of the process has been successful.
Figure 5. Monitoring LLDP
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 6. Running Chat
A chat application is invoked to prove that the deployed
environment, which involves entities and other ETArch com-
munications concepts[28], is working properly (even though it
is using non-traditional TCP/IP protocols).
The chat application has been developed in Python and
invoked directly on a command line interface, by passing
parameters as entity titles and Workspace. By invoking them
(chats) on both machines, each one by its title, it was found
that, according to the concept deﬁned in the ETArch archi-
tecture, both applications could share the speciﬁed workspace
(W1), as it can be seen in Figure 6. It allows validate the
implementation and shows the results obtained by the new
architecture in the proposed environment.
VI.
CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE WORK
This work presented the deployment of ETArch, a clean
slate network architecture, over the production network of
a telecom operator. In order to test and experiment this
deployment, a chat application was used. This application is
based on ETArch concepts such as Workspaces, Entities and
Titles enabling the use of a new protocol stack between end
users over the legacy networks.
In this process, the physical infrastructure was kept in
place and only software based framework where added to the
infrastructure. In the end user side, a software based OpenFlow
switch was introduced and on the operator side, the DTSA, the
entity responsible for the control plane of ETArch.
As a future work there are several previewed fronts such
as increasing the number of customers and switches, the
deployment of new applications based on ETArch workspaces
in order to show its efﬁciency in areas such as video streaming
and ﬁnally the withdraw of some network elements from the
legacy network.
We are conﬁdent that this deployment will bring facilities
and dynamism to researchers facing the Future Internet’s evo-
lution and it can enable new types of services and applications
which can be offered by the operator to their customers,
helping to bring Future Internet research into reality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially funded by the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme, under grant
agreement n. 258365 (OFELIA project), by the Brazilian agen-
cies: CAPES, CNPq and FAPEMIG and also by PROPP/UFU.
We also would like to thanks ALGAR Telecom for the support
and partnership on this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Zahariadis et al., “Towards a future internet architecture,” in The
Future Internet. Future Internet Assembly 2011: Achievements and
Technological Promises, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
J. Domingue, A. Galis, A. Gavras, T. Zahariadis, and D. Lambert,
Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, May 2011, vol. 6656,
pp. 7–18. [Online]. Available: http://www.springerlink.com/content/
978-3-642-20897-3#section=881237&page=15&locus=86
[2]
D. Clark, “The design philosophy of the darpa internet protocols,”
SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 18, no. 4, Aug. 1988, pp.
106–114. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/52325.52336
[3]
J. Pan, S. Paul, and R. Jain, “A survey of the research on future internet
architectures,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 49, no. 7, July
2011, pp. 26–36.
[4]
A. Gavras, A. Karila, S. Fdida, M. May, and M. Potts, “Future internet
research and experimentation: the ﬁre initiative,” ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review, vol. 37, no. 3, 2007, pp. 89–92.
[5]
J. Rexford and C. Dovrolis, “Future internet architecture: clean-slate
versus evolutionary research,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 53,
no. 9, 2010, p. 36–40.
[6]
OFELIA. OpenFlow in europe - linking infrastructure and applications.
[Online]. Available: http://www.fp7-ofelia.eu/about-ofelia/ [retrieved:
May, 2014]
[7]
C. Elliott, “GENI: opening up new classes of experiments in global
networking [Internet predictions],” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 14,
no. 1, Feb. 2010, pp. 39–42.
[8]
FIBRE. FIBRE Project - Future Internet Testbeds Experimentation
Between Brazil and Europe. [Online]. Available: http://www.ﬁbre-ict.
eu/ [retrieved: May, 2014]
[9]
F. de Oliveira Silva, J. H. de Souza Pereira, P. F. Rosa, and S. T. Kofuji,
“Enabling future internet architecture research and experimentation by
using software deﬁned networking,” in Software Deﬁned Networking
(EWSDN), 2012 European Workshop on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 73–78.
[10]
M.
Amaral
Gonc¸alves,
F.
de
Oliveira
Silva,
d.
S.
Pereira,
J.
Henrique,
and
P.
Frosi
Rosa,
“Multicast
Trafﬁc
Aggregation
through
Entity
Title
Model,”
Jul.
2014,
pp.
175–
180. [Online]. Available: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=aict 2014 7 40 10177
[11]
C. Guimaraes et al., “IEEE 802.21-enabled Entity Title Architecture for
Handover Optimization,” in 2014 IEEE Wireless and Communications
and Networking Conference.
Piscataway, NJ:: IEEE, 2014, pp. 2671–
2676.
[12]
Castillo et al., “Evolving Future Internet Clean-Slate Entity Title
Architecture with Quality-Oriented Control Plane Extensions,” Jul.
2014, pp. 161–167. [Online]. Available: http://www.thinkmind.org/
index.php?view=article&articleid=aict 2014 7 20 10164
[13]
B. Raghavan et al., “Software-deﬁned Internet architecture: Decoupling
architecture from infrastructure,” Journal of Something, 2012, p. 43–48.
[14]
T. Anderson et al., “NEBULA - A Future Internet That Supports
Trustworthy Cloud Computing,” 2012, pp. 1–31.
[15]
J. Roberts, “The clean-slate approach to future internet design: a
survey of research initiatives,” annals of telecommunications - annales
des t´el´ecommunications, vol. 64, no. 5-6, May 2009, pp. 271–276.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12243-009-0109-y
[16]
Y. Yiakoumis et al., “BeHop: a testbed for dense wiﬁ networks,”
in Proceedings of the 9th ACM international workshop on Wireless
network testbeds, experimental evaluation and characterization.
ACM,
2014, pp. 1–8.
[17]
——, “Putting home users in charge of their network,” in Proceedings
of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing.
ACM, 2012,
pp. 1114–1119.
[18]
M. Chetty, R. Banks, A. Brush, J. Donner, and R. Grinter, “You’re
capped: understanding the effects of bandwidth caps on broadband use
in the home,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2012, pp. 3021–3030.
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[19]
G. Hampel, M. Steiner, and T. Bu, “Applying software-deﬁned network-
ing to the telecom domain,” in Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2013 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp.
133–138.
[20]
J. Rexford and C. Dovrolis, “Future internet architecture: Clean-slate
versus evolutionary research,” Commun. ACM, vol. 53, no. 9,
Sep. 2010, pp. 36–40. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1810891.1810906
[21]
J. de Souza Pereira, F. de Oliveira Silva, E. Filho, S. Kofuji, and
P. Rosa, “Title model ontology for future internet networks,” in The
Future Internet, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, J. Domingue
et al., Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6656, pp. 103–114.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20898-0 8
[22]
F. d. O. Silva, J. H. d. S. Pereira, S. T. Kofuji, and P. F. Rosa, “Domain
title service for future internet networks,” in Anais do II Workshop de
Pesquisa Experimental na Internet do Futuro (WPEIF). Campo Grande:
SBC, 2011, pp. 33–36.
[23]
TELECO. Algar telecom. [Online]. Available: http://www.teleco.com.
br/en/en operadoras/ctbc.asp [retrieved: May, 2015]
[24]
M. Huynh and P. Mohapatra, “Metropolitan ethernet network: A move
from lan to man,” Computer Networks, vol. 51, no. 17, 2007, pp. 4867–
4894.
[25]
A. S. Tanenbaum, “Computer networks 4th edition,” ed: Prentice Hall,
2003.
[26]
P. Congdon, “Link layer discovery protocol and mib,” V1. 0 May 20.
2002, http://www. IEEE802, 2002.
[27]
S. Hanks, D. Meyer, D. Farinacci, T. Li, and P. Traina, “RFC 2784 -
generic routing encapsulation (GRE),” 2000.
[28]
F. de Oliveira Silva et al., “Semantically enriched services to
understand the need of entities,” in The Future Internet, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, F.
´Alvarez et al., Eds.
Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 7281, pp. 142–153. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-30241-1 13
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

