Performance Comparison of Clipping Technique with Adaptive Filters for 
Impulsive Noise Reduction in AWGN Environment 
 
Sumrin Mehak Kabir, Alina Mirza, Shahzad Amin Sheikh 
College of E&ME, National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), 
Islamabad, Pakistan 
E-mail: sumrin.mehak75@ee.ceme.edu.pk, alinamirza2002@yahoo.com, sheikh.shahzadamin@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Impulsive noise is a non-Gaussian noise that 
appears in the communication and it may affect the 
information badly. In the past, methods have been investigated 
to mitigate this noise. In this paper, clipping based impulsive 
noise cancellation technique is compared with a previously 
existing technique comprised of Normalized Least Mean 
Square 
(NLMS) 
and 
Recursive 
Least 
Square 
(RLS) 
algorithms. The scheme is tested on binary data modulated 
over different types of constellation schemes. The performance 
of the adaptive filters is quite better than that of clipping for 
different modulation schemes namely Quaderature Phase Shift 
Keying (QPSK), 16-Quaderature Amplitude Modulation 
(QAM) and 32-QAM. The convergence characteristics of both 
methods are demonstrated by the simulation results in terms of 
Bit Error Rates (BER). 
Keywords- Impulsive Noise; Adaptive Filter; NLMS; RLS; 
QPSK; 16QAM; 32QAM; BER. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Adaptive 
Filters 
with 
non-stationary 
statistical 
characteristics, low cost, and their ability to adapt to the 
unknown environment make them most suitable for the 
control applications and signal processing [1]. Therefore 
adaptive filters have been successfully used in numerous 
signal processing applications over the past decades. 
The adaptive filter systems have general characteristics 
i.e., an output signal is generated by the adaptive filter and 
is compared with a desired signal, to generate an error. That 
error is then used to modify the adjustable coefficients of 
the filter, generally called filter tap weights, in order to 
minimize the error. 
However practically, noise is impulsive in nature which 
is non-Gaussian generated by human activities [2] [3] and 
has more catastrophic effects in communication systems. 
Nowadays active area of research is to inspect the impulsive 
noise behavior and suggest solutions to improve the 
performance of systems by suppressing it. For noise 
cancellation, clipping technique is implemented in literature 
which attempt to recover the original transmitted signal [5]. 
 In [6], the performance comparison of the adaptive filter 
algorithms such as the least mean square (LMS), Normalized 
LMS (NLMS) and Recursive least squares (RLS) were 
carried out to remove the noise from the audio signal. 
Impulsive noise has been removed using NLMS filter over 
different modulation schemes in [7] on the basis of step size 
and likelihood probabilities.  
In this paper, a comparison of the already existing 
NLMS and RLS filters with clipping method for impulsive 
noise cancellation has been presented. Though clipping 
method is simple in terms of implementation and carrying 
out the parameters, it can be used for impulsive noise 
removal in the presence of Additive White Gaussian Noise 
(AWGN). 
The paper is organized as: Section II briefly describes the 
basic principle of noise cancellation. Section III gives the 
review of clipping method which is followed by discussion 
of different adaptive filters in Section IV, supported with the 
simulation results in Section V. In the end, Section VI 
concludes the paper followed by the references. 
II. 
IMPULSIVE NOISE GENERATOR MODEL 
Impulsive noise has been generated using the model 
given in Figure 1 in MATLAB/Simulink [2]. It includes the 
zero-order hold, data source, and sign as a comparator. The 
output is multiplied by a random number to generate fixed 
or 1 unit width and variable amplitude impulses as shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
Figure 1. Impulsive noise generator model [2] 
 
Figure 2. Impulsive noise signal and spectrum 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The frequency response of the generated impulsive noise 
is also shown in Figure 2. The impulsive noise being a non-
Gaussian noise, has a flat response having all the 
frequencies in equal amount. 
III. 
NOISE CANCELLATION 
Adaptive filter have an adaptation algorithm that 
monitors the environment and vary the filter transfer 
function accordingly. Each adaptive filter depends on the 
error signal computed from the adaptive filter to update its 
filter taps.  
 
Figure 3. Block Diagram of noise cancellation in adaptive filters 
 
IV. 
CLIPPING 
In practical applications, clipping method is usually used 
for impulsive noise mitigation due to its simplicity. A 
clipping algorithm is employed at the receiver end of the 
AWGN channel, where we presume that impulsive noise is 
being added by the channel itself during the communication 
[5]. It is to reckon that clipping method only changes the 
amplitude of the data without changing the other parameters 
such as phase.  
 
 
   
 
, if        
 
    
 
 
 
 
      (1) 
 
               
, if        
 
 
Tc is the Clipping Threshold that can be set according to 
the maximum value of data if known. And rk is a sample of 
the signal to be clipped over Tc. The arg(rk) is used due to 
the possibility of the existence of complex valued samples 
in the signal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Block diagram of Clipping method 
 
The output of the adaptive filter is compared with the 
desired signal d(n).The desired signal is a random signal 
corrupted with another noise source or system noise, as 
shown in Figure 3. The coefficients of adaptive filters adapt 
recursively to make the error signal e(n) to be minimum so 
that the output signal y(n) approaches to be equivalent to the 
desired signal having minimum error. 
The interference cancellation application of the adaptive 
filters is employed to cancel the noise from the signal. For 
that, the adaptive filter updates recursively in order to 
remove the noise from the input signal using the noise in the 
desired signal by subtracting it from the output signal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this method the amplitude of the received data is 
clipped or limited by the threshold and no other change 
occurs to the signal/data that has been received. Figure 4 
shows the simple model carried for the clipping method. 
V. 
ADAPTIVE FILTERS 
There are many adaptive algorithms used for noise 
removal. The brief summaries of adaptive algorithms which 
are used in this research are as follows.  
 
A. NLMS 
The Normalized Least Mean Square (NLMS) is 
one of the variants of LMS algorithm whose convergence 
ate is faster than LMS. The drawback of LMS algorithm is 
its sensitivity. 
To avoid gradient noise amplification problem 
NLMS algorithm is used in which the tap weight w(n) at 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

n+1 is normalized with the Euclidean norm of the square of 
the input to the filter so that the convergence is stable. The 
filter tap weights are updated using following equation 
during the recursive procedure: 
                               
         
                 
      (2) 
Where   is a small number added for algorithm 
stability,   is the step size and       is error signal. 
B. RLS 
The Recursive least squares (RLS) adaptive filter 
belongs to the least square family of the adaptive filters. It 
tends to minimize a linear least cost function related to the 
input signal by finding the coefficients recursively. Also the 
input signal for RLS is deterministic. The convergence rate 
of RLS is far higher than many other adaptive algorithms. 
However, it costs in higher computational complexity. The 
weights of the filter are updated by these equations: 
                     
 
      (3) 
     
               
                                       
      (4) 
                                        (5) 
Where   is the forgetting factor.     is the cross 
correlation matrix.  
VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In the first part of simulations, the binary data perturbed 
by impulsive noise in Figure 5, is recovered using clipping 
method. This is shown by initially generating impulsive 
noise by following steps mentioned in [2] and depicted in 
Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 5. Binary input signal with Impulsive noise 
 
The binary data is generated randomly, comprised of 
100,000 randomly generated bits, in MATLAB. This binary 
data is added with the impulsive noise after modulation as 
shown in Figure 5 and is then transmitted over an AWGN 
channel, pretending that impulsive noise has been added 
during the communication.  
For clipping method, the received binary data is clipped 
over a threshold of amplitude 1 after demodulation. It can be 
put in the way that the clipping method can clip or limit the 
data above the threshold but it cannot remove the noise that 
lie below the threshold. The noise below the threshold is 
usually caused by additive white Gaussian noise from the 
channel. 
In the second part of the simulations, in adaptive 
algorithms the demodulated data is filtered using the 
adaptive filters (NLMS & RLS). The basic scenario is that 
the output y    of the filter is compared with the desired 
signal s(n). Their difference produces the error signal e(n) 
and the filter updates its weights recursively using the 
adaptive weight update equations (2) and (5), such that the 
error signal is minimized. 
 
                            
                        
(6) 
 
In an optimum sense, the system output signal should 
contain the original signal as in (6). For these simulations 
the length of the two adaptive filters is fixed to 32. The step 
size parameter µ for NLMS Algorithm is chosen to be 0.1 
and forgetting factor  λ for RLS is 0.98. 
Figure 6 represents the bit error rate (BER) plot of 
clipping method, NLMS algorithm and RLS algorithm for 
QPSK modulation. The performance of IN reduction 
methods is compared through the BER plots of the received 
signal that does not contain impulsive noise and is 
considered to show the minimum number of errors occurred 
in the signal, due to the channel only.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of BER (dB) over QPSK modulation 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
It can be seen that among the three algorithms, the 
performance of RLS is quite better than the rest of the 
methods for an SNR of up to 20 dB. 
 
 
Figure 7. Comparison of BER (dB) over 16-QAM modulation 
 
For 16-QAM modulations or square constellation, the 
results show that among the performances of the three 
methods, RLS is better as shown in Figure 7. Similarly, 
Figure 8 shows the BER comparison for 32-QAM 
modulation that is a rectangular QAM constellation and the 
results are hereby proven that RLS depicts far better 
performance in comparison with the clipping method. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of BER (dB) over 32-QAM modulation 
 
The performance metric bite error rate in decibel 
indicates that RLS filter has lowest BER compared to other 
used algorithms. The BER of RLS filter is close to the 
performance of minimum possible errors for the removal f 
impulsive noise. Whereas the BERs of NLMS and clipping 
method are much greater than the RLS BER and the AWGN 
only performance that has no impulsive noise. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, adaptive noise cancellation technique based 
on Normalized Least Mean Square (NLMS) and Recursive 
Least Square (RLS) algorithm, are compared with another 
previously existing technique named as clipping. Due to 
recursive parameters, the adaptive filters require the 
reference signal and exhibit better impulsive noise 
cancellation when compared with the clipping technique. 
The conducted comparison guarantees that adaptive RLS 
filter is an efficient noise canceller for different modulation 
schemes such as QPSK, 16 QAM (square constellation) and 
32 QAM (rectangular constellation). It ensured the better 
performance of RLS in terms of convergence speed and 
lower BER and is verified by the simulation results.  
REFERENCES 
[1] B. F. Boroujeny, Adaptive Filters: Theory and Applications, 
John Wiley, BaffinsLane, Chichester, 1998.  
[2] S. R. Al-Araji, M. A. Al-Qutayri, and M. S. Al-Tenaiji, 
“Impulsive noise reduction using Auto-Gating technique,” 
GCC Conference and Exhibition (GCC), 2011 IEEE, 19-22 
Feb, 2011, pp.104-107. 
[3] S. V. Vaseghi, “Advanced Digital signal  processing and 
noise reduction,” John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Fourth edition, 
2000. ISBN : 978-0-470-75406-1 
[4] S. Haykin, “Adaptive filter theory,” 3rd Edition, Prentice 
Hall, 1996. 
[5] S. Al-Mawali, and Z. H Hussain, “Adaptive-threshold 
clipping for impulsive noise reduction in OFDM-based power 
line 
Communications,” 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced Technologies for Communications, 12-14 Oct, 
2009, pp.43-48. 
[6] R. K. Thenua, and S. K. Agarwal, “Simulation And 
Performance 
Analysis 
Of 
Adaptive 
Filter 
In 
Noise 
Cancellation,” International Journal of Engineering Science 
and Technology, vol. 2(9), 2010, pp. 4373-4378.  
[7] S. A. Jimaa, S. R. Al-Araji, A. Al-Kaabi, and T. Shimamura, 
“Impulsive Noise Reduction using Adaptive  Receiver 
Structure Technique,” IEEE 11th International Conference on 
Signal Processing (ICSP),  Beijing, China, vol. 1, 21-25 
October, 2012, pp. 119-122. 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

