Double Directional Channel Characterization on Board Ships 
H. Kdouh, H. Farhat, C. Brousseau, G. Zaharia,  
 
G. Grunfelder, G. El Zein 
Institut d’Electronique et de Télécommunications de Rennes 
Rennes, France 
hussein.kdouh@insa-rennes.fr 
T. Tenoux, Y. Lostanlen 
Siradel 
Rennes, France 
ttenoux@siradel.com
 
 
Abstract— Due to the metallic structure of decks, bulkheads 
and watertight (WT) doors, wireless communications are a 
serious challenge in the particular environment of ships. In 
order to deploy reliable shipboard wireless networks, wireless 
devices (access points, routers, sensor nodes, etc.) must be 
located at strategic locations ensuring full radio coverage and 
network connectivity. Strategic locations can be determined 
from the identification of the main propagation directions of 
electromagnetic (EM) waves within a ship. This paper presents 
the results of a radio propagation measurement campaign 
performed on board a ship. A dual-band Multiple-Input 
Multiple-Output (MIMO) channel sounder and antenna arrays 
have been used. Measurement data have been processed with a 
classic beamforming technique and a high resolution algorithm 
to extract dominant paths. A ray-tracing based simulation tool 
has been used to understand measurement results. Obtained 
results are used for optimal placement of radio devices when 
deploying shipboard wireless networks. 
Keywords-propagation; channel sounding; ray-tracing; ships 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Ships are an important part of modern systems, which are 
widely used in commercial and military purposes. Modern 
ships are equipped with automatic alarm and monitoring 
systems, which control and ensure safety and accuracy of the 
whole ship operation. Current shipboard monitoring systems 
use extensive lengths of cables to connect several thousands 
of sensors to control units. In addition to the high cost and 
weight due to wires installation during ships construction, 
vessels represent a complex and harsh environment in which 
extensive lengths of wires are vulnerable to heat, moisture 
and toxic agents [1]. Hence, applying wireless technologies 
such as Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) to shipboard 
monitoring systems may be a cost-effective and survivable 
solution. Furthermore, wireless systems are easily and 
inexpensively 
reconfigured. 
Moreover, 
wireless 
communications can be used for other applications on board 
ships. Ferry companies, for example, aim to enhance their 
passengers' satisfaction by equipping their boats with WiFi 
networks. 
Cordless 
phones 
are 
very 
useful 
for 
communication between crew members. 
However, wireless communications are a serious 
challenge in the particular harsh environment of ships. In 
fact, several factors may limit the performance of wireless 
systems on board ships [2]. Firstly, bulkheads and doors are 
made of metal, most often steel. Although the steel is not a 
perfect conductor, it can severely decrease the power of radio 
waves. Another limiting factor is the multipath propagation: 
a transmitted EM wave could be reflected, scattered or 
diffracted by different objects leading to several delayed 
copies to the receiver. The existence of multiple copies of the 
transmitted wave may cause disturbing interference signals 
at the receiver. In order to deploy reliable wireless networks 
on board a ship, wireless devices must be located at strategic 
locations ensuring optimal radio coverage and network 
connectivity. Strategic locations can be determined by 
identifying the main directions of EM waves within a ship. 
Few works have studied the EM waves propagation on 
board ships [2-5]. However, spatio-temporal characterization 
of EM waves propagation within this particular environment 
has not been done yet. Existing studies have only considered 
the 
possibility 
of 
wireless 
communications without 
determining the directions of EM waves propagation. In [6], 
we have conducted Continuous Wave (CW) measurements 
on board several ferries to verify the possibility of intra-, 
inter-compartments and inter-decks radio communication. 
Measurement results helped us to determine the path loss 
exponents in different shipboard environments and different 
communication configurations. However, CW measurements 
cannot determine the Directions of Departure (DoD) and 
Directions of Arrivals (DoA) of EM waves. Double 
directional or MIMO measurements may be an efficient 
technique to estimate DoD and DoA by using antenna arrays 
at both link ends. In this paper, we present the results of a 
measurement campaign using a dual-band MIMO channel 
sounder [7]. This measurement system, developed in the 
IETR laboratory, was already used for outdoor, indoor and 
outdoor-to-indoor MIMO channel sounding [8]. The 
performed 
measurements 
provide 
a 
spatio-temporal 
characterization of the EM wave propagation within a ship. 
Collected data are analyzed using a classic beamforming 
technique and a high resolution algorithm. Obtained results 
are then compared to simulation results based on a ray-
tracing tool. This comparison helps us to understand 
directions of propagation of EM waves in typical shipboard 
environments such as engine rooms, parking and passenger 
decks. Obtained results are used to ensure an optimal 
placement of radio devices when deploying shipboard 
wireless networks. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes the methodology and measurement setup 
used in this study. Section III presents and analyzes the 
obtained measurement and simulation results. Finally, 
several conclusions are drawn in Section IV. 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

II. 
METHODOLOGY AND MEASUREMENT SETUP 
The dual frequency band (2.2 and 3.5 GHz) used channel 
sounder transmits a spread spectrum waveform using a 
periodic M-sequence. It has an 11.9 ns temporal resolution 
for 100 MHz sounding bandwidth. The dynamic range is 50 
dB for the 1023 code length. Synchronization between the 
transmitter (Tx) and the receiver (Rx) is achieved with 
highly stable 10 MHz rubidium oscillators. Different impulse 
response lengths can be chosen from 1.27 to 81.84 µs, 
depending on the sounding bandwidth and the code length. 
As an example, for 100 MHz bandwidth and 1023 code 
length, the recorded impulse response length is 10.23 µs. 
Different types of antenna arrays were developed for this 
sounder. At 2.2 GHz, a 4-element Uniform Linear antenna 
Array (ULA) and a 16-element Uniform Rectangular antenna 
Array (URA) are used respectively for the Tx and the Rx to 
characterize the double directional channel on a 120° 
beamwidth in the horizontal plan. At 3.5 GHz, a 4-element 
Uniform Circular Array (UCA) is used at Tx and a 16-
element UCA is used at Rx. With this configuration, we can 
characterize 360° azimuthal double directional channel at 
both link sides. In order to improve the measurement 
dynamic range, power amplifiers have been directly 
integrated in the Tx antenna array, and low noise amplifiers 
have been placed directly behind the Rx antenna array. 
We assume a quasi time-invariant channel during the 
measurements. Attention was paid that no people were 
moving in the surrounding area. For each Rx location, 
several measurements were taken and averaged to reduce the 
noise effect. The collected channel data were stored on a 
laptop for post-processing. 
The measurement objective was to characterize the 
double directional channel impulse response h [9]. In the 
case of omnidirectional antennas at Tx location rTx and Rx 
location rRx, it could be expressed as: 
)
,
,
,
, ,
,
(
      
          
          
)
,
,
,
, ,
,
   (
          
          
1
DoA
DoD
DoA
DoD
Rx
Tx
S
s
s
DoA
DoD
DoA
DoD
Rx
Tx
r
r
h
r
r
h













    (1) 
where S is the number of multipath components, is the 
delay, Ө and Ф are the azimuth and elevation angles of DoD 
and DoA. With the plane wave assumption, the contribution 
of each multipath component s is:  
)
). (
(
       
)
). (
). (
. (
    
)
,
,
,
, ,
,
(
,
,
,
,
DoAs
DoA
DoDs
DoD
DoAs
DoA
DoDs
DoD
s
j
s
DoA
DoD
DoA
DoD
Rx
Tx
s
e s
a
r
r
h

 




 

 
















 
    (2) 
where 
s
j
s e
a

is the multipath component complex 
amplitude of the component s. 
Analysis of collected data is performed with a classic 
beamforming technique [10] and the high resolution Space-
Alternating Generalized Expectation-maximization (SAGE) 
algorithm [11], in order to determine dominant paths which 
propagate between Tx and Rx. We gave a special attention to 
the DoD and DoA, which are the most important parameters 
to determine the directions of propagations. In order to 
precisely determine these directions, a simulator of  EM 
propagation [12] has been used. This simulator, based on a 
3D ray tracing algorithm [13], computes successive EM 
interactions thanks to the Geometrical Optics (GO) or 
Uniform geometrical Theory of Diffraction (UTD). This 
computation is associated with a 3D geometrical description 
of the considered scene, including the structures and the 
positions of bulkheads, floors, ceilings and WT doors. A 
maximal number of 4 reflections and one diffraction are 
considered for each simulation scenario. When diffraction is 
involved, only one reflection can occur before and after it. 
III. 
MEASUREMENT RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
This section presents and analyzes the obtained 
measurement 
and 
simulation 
results. 
Three 
typical 
environments have been studied on board the “Armorique” 
ferry: the engine rooms, the parking and the passenger deck. 
The engine rooms of “Armorique” include metallic engines, 
generators, valves and pumps arranged in a complex way. 
The common bulkheads of these rooms are metallic and 
include sliding metallic WT doors. The parking is a big hall 
with metallic walls. A metallic wall located in the middle of 
the parking divides it into two main parts. Vehicles of 
different types were parked in the parking (cars, buses, 
trucks, etc.) when performing measurements. The passenger 
deck is composed of passengers' cabins and corridors. In 
contrast with the two previous environments, corridor walls 
and cabin doors are not fully made of metals. 
A. EM waves propagation within engine rooms 
In spite of the fully metallic structure of bulkheads and 
WT doors in the lower decks areas of ferries, CW 
measurements have shown that wireless communications 
between adjacent rooms remain possible after closing WT 
doors [6].  A MIMO channel sounder and antenna arrays are 
used to identify the openings allowing EM waves leakage. 
The studied environment is the second deck of “Armorique”, 
where sliding metallic WT doors are used between adjacent 
rooms. This environment is highly metallic and confined. It 
generates several propagation phenomena (reflection, 
diffraction, scattering). Measurements were carried out using 
the URA and ULA arrays at 2.2 GHz. The study was limited 
to a 120° characterization in the azimuthal plan. It is 
sufficient to characterize the propagation phenomena 
through the bulkheads doors between adjacent rooms. Fig. 1 
shows the layout of the rooms, locations of Tx and Rx in the 
second deck of “Armorique”. 
 
Figure 1.  Tx and Rx locations in the engine rooms. 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Two WT doors, called WT1 and WT2 on Fig. 1, are 
located on the propagation path between Tx and Rx, which 
are in No Line of Sight (NLoS) configuration. Measurements 
were carried out when WT1 was opened and when it was 
closed respectively, while WT2 was maintained closed. 
Measurement data were processed using the conventional 
beamforming. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 present the normalized 
space-delay power graph for the two measured scenarios 
(radius scale of beamformer graph is in ns, and the color 
represents the normalized amplitude at each angle). These 
graphs represent the spatio-temporal channel response and 
allow identifying the main directions of energy propagation 
between Tx and Rx. It can be seen that the received energy is 
not homogeneously distributed on the 120° beamwidth. For 
the two scenarios, the angular distributions of energy are 
similar. It can be seen that a main beam of energy with about 
20° beamwidth (between 125° and 145°) and other beams 
around 180° direction are formed at the Tx side. Moreover, a 
beam of 50° is formed around 0° at the Rx side. The main 
beams formed at the Tx and Rx sides correspond to the 
energy going to WT1 and coming from WT2 respectively. 
This similarity between the two scenarios (closed and open 
door) shows that the energy is propagating through the WT 
doors regardless their status. The other beams seen at 180° at 
the Tx side may be probably due to two respective 
reflections of EM waves on the bulkhead in front and behind 
the Tx, before penetration through WT1 and WT2 towards 
Rx. We have presented in [14] similar measurements for 
scenarios where the direct path between Tx and Rx is 
blocked by the WT door. Its results show that radio signals 
propagation is made through the openings on the edges of 
the metallic watertight doors.  
B. EM waves propagation within the parking 
As stated before, the parking of “Armorique” is a big hall 
where all walls, ceiling and floor are totally metallic. A big 
bulkhead installed in the middle divides the parking into two 
parts (called lower part and upper part in the following). Two 
communication scenarios were considered. In the first one, 
Tx and Rx are both located in the lower part of the parking 
(Line of Sight LoS configuration). In the second scenario, Tx 
is located in the upper part of the parking and the Rx is 
located in the lower one. The middle bulkhead blocks the 
LoS between the Tx and Rx (NLoS configuration).  
 
 
 
 
 
     (a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (b) 
Figure 2.  Beamforming results when WT1 and WT2 are closed: (a) At Rx (DoA), (b) At Tx (DoD).
 
              
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 3.  Beamforming results when WT1 is opened  and WT2 is closed: (a) At Rx (DoA), (b) At Tx (DoD).  
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
The ULA and URA 2.2 GHz are used in these 
measurements. The results are processed using beamforming 
and compared to ray-tracing simulation results. 
Fig. 4 shows the layout of the parking, locations of the 
Tx and Rx and ray tracing results for the LoS configuration. 
A guiding effect is clearly observed in the lower part of the 
parking due to the middle bulkhead; some other paths 
coming from the upper part can be detected. The middle 
bulkhead and the wall of the parking act as a waveguide 
between the Tx and Rx. Fig. 5 shows the comparison 
between beamforming results and ray-tracing simulation 
results at Tx and Rx. The comparison indicates also that 
main beams (in red) are formed in the lower part of the 
parking. A significant agreement between measurement and 
simulation results is found. 
Fig. 6 shows the layout of the parking, locations of the 
Tx and Rx and beamforming and ray-tracing results for the 
NLoS configuration. In spite of the middle bulkhead, which 
blocks the direct path between Tx and Rx, EM waves are 
able to achieve the Rx through reflections on the parking 
walls and the middle bulkhead, and diffraction on the middle 
bulkhead edges. As in the LoS configuration, a significant 
agreement between measurement and simulation results is 
found. This agreement proves that the model of the parking 
used for simulation can be considered as realistic. 
 
Figure 4.  Ray-tracing results for the parking in LoS configuration. 
C. EM waves propagation on the passenger deck 
Fig. 7 shows the layout of the passenger deck and the 
locations of Tx and Rx. Rx is placed in the stairway located 
at the top left of this deck. The stairway door is opened. Tx is 
placed at three locations (Tx1, Tx2 and Tx3 in Fig.7).Tx is 
firstly located in a passenger cabin whose door is closed 
(location Tx1), then in a corridor in the middle of the deck 
(location Tx2) and finally at the bottom right corner of the 
deck (location Tx3). In all these measurement scenarios, Tx 
and Rx are in NLoS configuration. As this environment is 
not totally metallic like the parking and the engine rooms, no 
particular propagation directions can be excluded. Thus, the 
circular arrays have been used at the Tx and Rx to determine 
the directions of propagation in the 360° azimuth. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)  
Figure 5.  Beamforming and ray-tracing simulation results for LoS configuration in the parking: (a) at Tx (DoD), (b) at Rx (DoA). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Beamforming and ray tracing results for the parking in NLoS configuration. 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 7.  Layout of the passenger deck of “Armorique” with the locations 
of transmitter (Tx1, Tx2 and Tx3) and the receiver (Rx).  
The propagation paths parameters are extracted using 
SAGE algorithm. Fig. 8 presents the normalized DoD and 
DoA results for all measurement positions. Black arrows 
indicate directions and the length of each one indicates its 
normalized amplitude (one tick interval corresponds to 10 
dB). This overview shows that for the DoD, some privileged 
propagation directions can be easily identified. Concerning 
the DoA, for the three Tx locations, we notice that received 
energy directions are more equally distributed on 360°. This 
can be explained by the receiver location in the stairway. 
Due to its metallic walls, this environment is similar to a 
reverberant chamber. One can think that EM waves will 
arrive mainly through the entrance door of the stairway. 
After that, EM waves are reflected on the metallic walls of 
stairway and achieve the receiver from all 360° directions.  
An adaptation of the ray-tracing based simulation tool 
was made at 3.5 GHz, mainly concerning the dielectric 
properties of materials constituting the passenger deck (used 
for the computation of the reflection, transmission and 
diffraction coefficients).   
 
Figure 8.  DoA and DoD for the three measurement scenarios on the 
passenger deck. 
For the ray-tracing simulations, by assuming that the 
propagation is made through the corridors, and because of 
the current limitation of the RT simulator to compute 
complete paths from Tx to Rx, a virtual point of reception is 
located in the corridor near the Tx position. The idea is to 
visualize how the radio waves reach this point from the Tx. 
Fig. 9 presents the comparison between the DoD obtained 
from the measurements (black arrows) and ray-tracing tool 
(blue lines) for the Tx1 location. In this measurement 
scenario, Tx was located in a passenger cabin. The main 
directions of energy propagating from the passenger cabin to 
Rx position obtained from ray-tracing present a significant 
agreement with the measurement results. The obtained 
results validate our assumption that the propagation in this 
environment mainly occurs through the corridors. These 
directions show that EM waves penetrate through the thin 
walls of cabins (which are not metallic) before arriving to the 
corridor, and then they are guided to the Rx (through 
reflections). Note that the wall located at the left of the figure 
corresponds to a metallic structure. 
 
Figure 9.  DoD results for the location Tx1.  
Fig. 10 presents the comparison between DoD obtained 
from the measurements and ray-tracing tool for Tx3. As in 
the previous scenario, a significant agreement is observed 
between the main directions flows from the measurements 
and the ray-tracing simulation results. The obtained results 
also validate our assumption that the propagation in this 
environment mainly occurs through the corridors (but some 
waves can propagate through cabin walls). In this 
configuration, reflections are observed on the corridor walls 
surrounding the Tx3 location before arriving to the receiver. 
 
Figure 10.  DoD results for the location Tx3. 
Virtual Rx 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

D. Engineering rules for intermediate nodes placement 
As mentioned in Section I, the main objective of these 
measurements is the optimization of wireless devices 
placement when deploying wireless networks on board a 
ship. This study is a part of SAPHIR project, which aims at 
applying WSN technologies to shipboard alarm and 
monitoring systems. Sensor nodes must be placed in all ship 
rooms and compartments to measure physical parameters 
such as tank level, water level, temperature, humidity, etc. 
and then send collected data to central control units located 
in the wheelhouse or the control room. As direct 
communications between sensor nodes and control units are 
impossible 
(due 
to 
large 
distances 
and 
metallic 
environments), intermediate nodes must be located to ensure 
the 
whole 
network 
connectivity. 
Results 
of 
these 
measurements are useful for placing intermediate nodes. 
Therefore, 
the 
following 
engineering 
rules 
are 
recommended. In the engine rooms, EM waves propagate 
mainly through watertight doors even when they are closed. 
It will be then recommended to place intermediate nodes in 
front of watertight doors to ensure connectivity between 
adjacent rooms. In the parking, the walls constitute a wave 
guide between communicating nodes. Intermediate nodes 
may be placed on the walls of the parking, including those of 
the middle bulkhead, to ensure the network connectivity of 
different nodes in the parking. In the passenger deck, EM 
waves propagate mainly through corridors. Intermediate 
nodes will may be located in the ceiling of corridors (to 
minimize the fluctuation due to passengers' movement). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a measurement campaign was conducted on 
board a ferry using a MIMO channel sounder. The objective 
of this measurement campaign was to determine the 
directions of propagation of EM waves in typical shipboard 
environments. In spite of the totally metallic structure of 
bulkheads and WT doors in the lowest decks of the ferry, 
obtained results show that closing WT doors does not block 
totally the radio waves propagation, which is made through 
the openings on the edges of the metallic WT doors. 
Moreover, the results show that parallel metallic bulkheads, 
such as in the parking, act as a waveguide between Tx and 
Rx. In spite of NLoS configuration, EM waves are guided 
through reflections on the metallic bulkheads and diffraction 
on the bulkheads edges, to the Rx. Measurement and 
simulation results on the passenger deck show that EM 
waves propagate mainly through corridors on the passenger 
deck. When the Tx is located in a passenger cabin, EM 
waves penetrate through the thin walls of cabins before 
arriving to the corridor, by which they are guided to the Rx. 
All these results are used to determine engineering rules for 
sensor nodes placement. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is a part of the SAPHIR project supported by 
the ‘Pôle Mer Bretagne’ and ‘Region Bretagne’. The authors 
thank Marinelec Technologies and Brittany Ferries for the 
opportunity to conduct these measurement campaigns. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. P. Lynch and K. J. Loh, “A summary review of wireless 
sensors and sensor networks for structural health monitoring,” 
The Shock and Vibration Digest, vol. 38, no. 2, 2006, pp.91-
128. 
[2] D. R. J. Estes, T. B. Welch, A. A. Sarkady, and H. Withesel, 
“Shipboard radio frequency propagation measurements for 
wireless networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE Military 
Communications 
Conference 
(MILCOM), 
IEEE 
Communications for Network-Centric Operations: Creating 
the Information Force, Virginia, USA, October 2001, pp. 247-
251. 
[3] B-G. Paik, S-R. Cho, B-J. Park, D. Lee, B-D. Bae, and J-H. 
Yun, “Characteristics of wireless sensor network for full-scale 
ship application,” Journal of Marine Science and Technology, 
vol. 14, no. 1, January 2009, pp. 115–126. 
[4] T. Pilsak, J. L. Ter Haseborg, and H. Hanneken, “WLAN 
propagation on the bridge of vessels under consideration of 
materials properties,” Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Symposium 
on 
Electromagnetic 
Compatibility 
(EMC 
Europe), Athens, Greece, June 2009, pp. 1-4. 
[5] A. Mariscotti, M. Sassi, A. Qualizza, and M. Lenardon, “On 
the propagation of wireless signals on board ships,” 
Proceedings of Instrumentation and Measurement Technology 
Conference (I2MTC), Austin, Texas, USA, May 2010, pp. 
1418-1423. 
[6] H. Kdouh, C. Brousseau, G. Zaharia, G. Grunfelder, and G. El 
Zein, “Measurements and path loss models for shipboard 
environments at 2.4 GHz,” European Microwave Conference 
(EuMC), Manchester, United Kingdom, October 2011, pp. 
408-411 . 
[7] H. Farhat, R. Cosquer, G. Grunfelder, L. Le Coq, and G. El 
Zein, “A Dual Band MIMO Channel Sounder at 2.2 and 3.5 
GHz”, Proceedings of The IEEE International Instrumentation 
and Measurement Technology Conference (I2MTC 2008), pp. 
1980-1985, Victoria, Vancouver Island, Canada, May 2008, 
pp. 1980-1985. 
[8] Y. Lostanlen, H. Farhat, T. Tenoux, A. Carcelen, G. 
Grunfelder, and G. El Zein, “Wideband Outdoor-to-Indoor 
MIMO channel measurements at 3.5 GHz”, Proc. of the 
European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, EUCAP 
'09, Berlin, Germany, March 2009, pp. 3606-3610. 
[9] M. Steinbauer, A.F. Molish, and E. Bonek, “The double 
directional radio propagation channel,” IEEE Antennas and 
Propagation Magazine, vol. 43, August 2001, pp. 51-63. 
[10] M. S. Bartlett, “An Introduction to Stochastic Process,” New 
York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1956. 
[11] B. H. Fleury, M. Tschudin, R. Heddergott, D. Dahlhaus, and 
K. Ingman Pederson, “Channel parameter estimation in 
mobile radio environments using the SAGE algorithm,” IEEE 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 17, no. 3, 
March 1999, pp. 434–450. 
[12] Y. Lostanlen, G. Gougeon, S. Bories, and A. Sibille, “A 
deterministic indoor UWB space-variant multipath radio 
channel modelling compared to measurements on basic 
configurations,” Proceedings of the 1st European Conference 
on Antennas and Propagation, EUCAP ‘06, November 2006, 
Nice, France, pp. 1-8. 
[13] A. Corucci, P. Nepa, F. Furfari, P. Barsocchi, and A. Buffi, 
“Accuracy limits of in-room localisation using RSSI,” 
Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, 
APSURSI '09, Pisa, Italy, June 2009, pp. 1-4. 
[14] H. Kdouh et al., “Double directional characterisation of radio 
wave propagation through metallic watertight doors on board 
ships,” Electronics Letters, vol. 48, no. 6, March 2012, pp. 
307-309. 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

