The Impact of Regulatory Frameworks and Obligations on Telecommunication 
Market Developments 
Analysis of the European and Asian Broadband Markets and Regulatory Frameworks 
Erik Massarczyk, Peter Winzer 
Faculty of Design – Computer Science – Media 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
Email: erik.massarczyk@hs-rm.de, peter.winzer@hs-rm.de 
 
Abstract—Based on the rising numbers of broadband Internet 
users and the resulting higher importance of broadband 
infrastructures, previous analyses often focused on the relation 
between competitive market behavior and the development of 
customer broadband penetration rates. Additionally, some 
prognoses also consider the relation between the development of 
market concentration and customer prices. Taking into account 
the focus on both of these connections, the influence of 
competitive intensities, regulatory frameworks and the 
broadband development are rarely considered. Here, this paper 
will especially examine the interrelation between 
the 
development of market 
concentrations 
and regulatory 
frameworks on broadband access speeds and different customer 
prices and price models. Furthermore, impacts of the national 
regulatory frameworks are not considered in depth. Previous 
analyses have often examined the influence of regulatory 
behaviors and decisions on the development of market 
concentration. However, the impact of national regulatory 
frameworks on the other named factors is not considered in 
detail. Therefore, in this paper, we start addressing the named 
open issues. Due to the paper’s status as a work in progress, it 
will mostly indicate some theoretical background, literature, 
methodology and some first results of the competitive analysis. 
Despite increasing competition (based on Hirschmann-
Herfindahl values), approximately half of the considered fixed 
broadband markets still demonstrate huge discrepancies 
between the incumbent and competitive network operators.   
 
Keywords-broadband 
development; 
market 
concentration; 
Hirschmann-Herfindahl-Index; broadband access speeds, prices 
and penetration.  
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As a result of the increasing use of Internet services within 
broadband Internet infrastructures in daily business and 
private life, the availability of these services is becoming 
increasingly important as a location factor [1][2]. 
In the world and particularly in the considered European 
and Asian broadband markets, different standards for the 
provision of broadband infrastructures subsist [3], which are 
responsible for the various broadband developments. On this 
account, in each regional/national market, different technical 
standards 
of 
broadband 
infrastructures, 
broadband 
penetrations, market situations and regulatory obligations in 
fixed-line telecommunication markets can be observed 
[1][4]. These differences result by the following reasons: (a) 
customer broadband demand, (b) prices for broadband 
services, (c) quality and combination of technologies 
providing broadband infrastructures (availability of wires and 
ducts), (d) implementation costs, (e) competition policy, (f) 
competition, and (g) demography and culture [1][4][5].   
Most publications on this topic focus on the analysis of 
the relationship between: (a) regulatory and governmental 
frameworks, (b) competition, (c) broadband diffusion and 
adoption, (d) coverage and (e) penetration [6][7]. 
Furthermore, various papers deal with considerations 
regarding (a) the relations between implementation costs and 
customer prices, (b) operators and different broadband 
infrastructures, and (c) demand and supply of broadband 
Internet services [8][9][10]. Yet, the development of 
broadband does not only depend on the customer adoption 
and diffusion of broadband infrastructures. Broadband 
developments include all services and benefits which are 
targeted to strengthen and process: (a) higher broadband 
coverage and penetration, (b) higher broadband connection 
speeds, (c) higher number of offered services, (d) a higher 
technical standard of the infrastructures, and (e) measures to 
create acceptable prices for customers and to induce customer 
broadband demand. The following relations have been rarely 
considered so far: (a) the influence of competition (market 
concentration) on the development of broadband access 
speeds, (b) the influence of competition on the development 
of customer prices for broadband services, (c) the impact of 
regulatory frameworks on the market concentrations in 
broadband networks, (d) the impact of regulatory frameworks 
on the development of broadband penetration rates, and (e) 
the influence of regulatory behavior on the customer prices. 
The regulatory frameworks are considered solely as drivers 
for the different kinds of competition and the impact of this 
competition on the development of broadband penetration 
rates. As mentioned, the other impacts are not considered.  
This study will firstly examine the impact of market 
concentrations on the fixed-line broadband development. 
Based on this relationship, we will analyze the different types 
of regulatory frameworks and their influence on competition. 
In the further steps, we will focus on the influences of the 
aforementioned factors with the focus being on broadband 
access speeds. For the evaluation, we have collected 
secondary data of fixed-line broadband markets in Europe 
and Asia to conduct a combined cross-sectional and 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

longitudinal panel data analysis with ordinary least square 
regressions. The chosen time range of said data will include 
the years between 2004 and 2015 in order to reflect on the 
reasons for the different country-specific broadband 
developments, levels of competition/market concentration 
and regulatory behaviors over time. Apart from the different 
regression models, the intensity of competition will be – in a 
first step – measured through the usage of different economic 
concentration models. Following this approach, we will 
discuss how the regulatory frameworks can be examined. 
The paper will proceed as follows: based on the 
introduction, Section 2 will present the literature review and 
the hypotheses. Section 3 will include the research 
methodology. Section 4 will indicate the first results of the 
examinations. After all, we will conclude the paper in Section 
5.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Due to the various influence factors described, broadband 
market conditions and issues of broadband provision, the 
term of broadband development includes: the development of 
coverage and penetration of the existing broadband 
infrastructures, the expansion/upgrade of new and old 
infrastructures, the changing customer prices for broadband 
services and the quality of the broadband networks 
(broadband connection speeds).  
Based on liberalizations of the fixed-line broadband 
markets in developed and emerging countries, various 
network operators and service providers compete in the 
provision of broadband Internet accesses and services. In 
order to address potentially large customer base and to 
quickly get back the effected expenditures, the operators 
often focus on broadband developments in regions with high 
population densities and low implementation costs [9][11], 
which count as economic efficient areas [10]. This approach 
significantly reduces the incentives for investments, 
implementations and upgrades of the existing broadband 
infrastructures in rural regions with lower population density 
significantly.  
However, in situations when competitors get access to the 
broadband infrastructure of the incumbent or when the 
competitors have their own broadband access infrastructure 
(cable or fiber), the customer prices for broadband services, 
the broadband diffusion and provision respectively are 
influenced. Especially in cases of providing access for new 
entrants and controlled prices, regulatory decisions and 
behaviors by the governmental authorities could possibly 
strongly influence the existing market situations.  
The opening of existing broadband infrastructures creates 
an intense price competition, which strengthens the 
broadband adoption by customers [6][7]. 
In case of competitive situations in broadband markets, 
the prices for broadband services decrease and the broadband 
diffusion and provision increase strongly [6][7]. The 
competition of different network operators and service 
providers exert a positive influence on customer adoption of 
broadband access networks and can be named as one of the 
key drivers to reach high broadband penetration rates [7].  
To sum up the previous findings [6][7], the first 
hypothesis will examine the relationship between broadband 
diffusion and the development of market concentrations. 
 
H1: A stronger competition (higher competitive intensity) 
leads to higher broadband penetration rates.  
 
The relationship between (1) competitive intensities and 
(2a) the development of broadband connection speeds and 
(2b) customer prices for broadband services has thus far not 
been considered in greater detail. As a result of the mentioned 
market conditions, one can assume that competition is a main 
driver for the development of broadband infrastructures and 
broadband services. It can be expected that a competitive 
broadband market structure leads to higher connection 
speeds, since competitors invest financial resources in new 
infrastructures and equipment in order to differentiate from 
existing market players and to get in a better market position 
in comparison to the incumbent.  
 
H2: Regional telecommunication markets with a higher 
level of broadband competition have higher broadband 
connection speeds.  
 
The hypothesis expects that more competition leads to 
faster broadband connection speeds, lower prices and higher 
penetration rates. If the hypothesis turns out to be true, it can 
be concluded that in broadband markets with higher 
concentrations usually strong monopolists and oligopolists 
try to hold and increase their market shares instead of 
investing into new infrastructures and push further broadband 
developments. In the past incumbents are often not forced to 
grant possible market entrants access to their broadband 
network. Based on the missing fear of a possible new market 
entry of a new competitor, the incumbent has no incentive to 
develop a new or better infrastructure.  
Only if the monopolist fears a competitor’s market entry 
or the incumbent is forced to grant the access for new market 
entrants, it will have an incentive to upgrade the current 
infrastructure in order to improve the quality of its broadband 
networks and services.  
In addition to the first two described hypotheses, existing 
competitive intensities in broadband markets could positively 
impact customer prices for broadband services [8][9][12]. 
Price reductions influence individual market shares and 
market power compared to the competitors. In addition, the 
market entry is made more difficult by the fact that the 
(potential) new providers achieve lower sales with their end 
customers at constant costs for the use of the infrastructure of 
the incumbent [5]. Due to these circumstances, the following 
hypotheses H3 and H4 will investigate and capture the open 
issue: Do customer prices have an impact on broadband 
developments in regional markets? Currently, measurements 
of the relationship between competition, customer broadband 
prices and broadband penetration are not considering the 
achieved and the delivered broadband connection speeds [8].  
In competitive market situations, competitors decrease 
their prices to reach a broader customer base. Therefore, the 
broadband adoption can be positively influenced and will 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

increase over time.  This relationship turns out to be one of 
the driving indicators for broadband penetration [9]. But 
operators and providers in competitive market structures have 
to deal with the issue that enterprises lead a price competition 
based on the margin of cost coverage, which results in 
decreasing customer revenues. The influence of competition 
on customer revenues leads to problems if the network 
operators have difficulty to provide the financial resources for 
new investments in broadband infrastructures.  Furthermore, 
companies try: (a) to differentiate their products and (b) to 
invest in the broadband infrastructure to get into a better 
market position than competitors [9]. In general, a weaker 
competition (higher market concentration) leads to higher 
customer broadband prices and lower investments in 
infrastructure [9].  
Generally, it can be ascertained that prices for broadband 
services and the adoption of accesses are negatively related 
[6][13]. However, the prices also depend on the customer’s 
willingness to pay and the demand for broadband services. 
Since customers are price sensitive, a declining price induces 
a higher willingness to adopt and use broadband access [9]. 
So far, researchers have only considered the influence of 
broadband prices on the development of penetration rates. 
However, there is currently no evidence regarding the 
relation between broadband prices and the development of 
broadband connection speeds. 
 
H3: A stronger competition leads to lower monthly 
customer prices for broadband access. 
 
H4: Lower customer prices for broadband access lead to 
a faster development of broadband connection speeds. 
 
Following the introduction of the presented competitive 
considerations, 
the 
relationships 
of 
the 
regulatory 
frameworks on the development of (a) market concentrations, 
(b) customer prices, (c) penetration rates, and (d) broadband 
connection speeds need to be analyzed too.  
Based on the vast range of governmental initiatives and 
regulatory instruments (e. g., implementation of market 
liberalization), it is normally intended that the competitive 
forces rule the market power and market shares on their own 
[14]-[17]. However, in some cases the market forces are not 
strong enough to regulate the market and regulatory 
authorities have to intervene [16]. On the base of different 
kinds of regulations (especially access regulations), 
Kiesewetter et al. [18], and Waverman and Koutroumpis [19] 
found out that regulations directly influence the market 
concentration in broadband markets. Regulations are able to 
force the incumbent to open the networks for competitors 
[20]. Therefore, the existing market structures and especially 
the market position of the incumbent can be influenced by the 
implementation of regulations. In this situation, the 
regulations shall remove burdens and constraints and may 
overcome the lack of competitive behavior [7][16][20]. A 
possible change of market structures allows new entrants to 
enter the market and take the risk of a foreclosure of the 
incumbent [20]. Hence, the acceleration of competition 
should induce a stronger competition with a higher rate of 
broadband adoptions [6].  
 
H5: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations will positively enhance competitive market 
behaviors.   
 
Supporting the previous explanations, Gruber and 
Koutroumpis [7], and Wallsten [21] mention the fact that the 
implementation of regulations (especially unbundling) 
stimulate higher broadband penetration rates. However, 
Briglauer and Gugler [5] found that only few regulatory 
decisions influence broadband penetration rates directly. 
Possibly, regulations can also negatively impact the 
development of broadband penetration rates [3].  
 
H6: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations will positively relate to broadband penetration.   
 
Furthermore, regulatory authorities are able and allowed 
to set price regulations. Therefore, they have to check if the 
incumbent is trying to use his market power to set higher 
prices than a market with competitive structures. If the 
incumbent cannot force higher prices, the gained revenues, 
financial resources and the incentives for further broadband 
investments will decrease. Also, the new entrants are not 
willing to invest high amounts, because they cannot set higher 
prices as the incumbent to get customers [7][20]. On one 
hand, regulatory authorities have to verify whether the prices 
are based on the long incremental or opportunity costs [20]. 
This behavior could discourage possible investments in 
broadband infrastructures, because the companies do not gain 
high revenues. On the other hand, governmental authorities 
support the roll-outs of new infrastructures with different 
offers of funding [5]. Based on these explanations, we 
originate the following two hypotheses.    
 
 
H7: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations will positively impact stronger broadband 
developments and higher broadband connection speeds. 
 
H8: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations will negatively relate to customer prices. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
As the previous explanations indicate, we will analyze 
relationships 
between 
broadband 
developments, 
the 
respective market concentrations and broadband market 
regulations in particularly Western European and Southeast 
Asian markets.  
The focus lies on countries of the European Union 28 
(EU28) and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN), as well as additional countries such as 
Switzerland, Japan and the Rep. of Korea. The reason why 
said regions of the world were selected are as follows: (1) 
EU28 and ASEAN are regions with (a) multiple countries, (b) 
a comparable number of inhabitants, and (c) national 
territories. (2) Like the EU28, the ASEAN system is also 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

developing to get in the position of a central commission for 
economic, social, regulatory and juridical resolutions. 
For the cross-sectional and longitudinal panel data 
analysis of the described relationships, we have collected 
secondary data from: (a) the regulatory authorities of the 
considered 
countries, 
(b) 
the 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), (c) the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), (d) the 
European Union, (e) telecommunication authorities and 
ministries, and (f) national institutions and governments. Due 
to the different sources, the elicitation of the data can vary. 
Therefore, we test the data validity and reliability with 
exploratory factor analysis and Cronbach’s Alpha to verify 
the trust in the collected secondary data [22]-[24]. 
Nevertheless, some discrepancies between the collected data 
and the anticipated time trend of the data cannot be excluded. 
Due to few data errors and issues, some of the considered 
countries are not considered in detail.   
The evaluation of the competitive intensities follows 
different concentration models, (Hirschmann-Herfindahl-
Index (HHI), Linda-Index (LI)) which measure the intensity 
and disparity of the national broadband markets’ competition 
and to compare the different operators’ market shares [25]-
[28]. 
The HHI, as one of the most popular models to evaluate 
market concentrations, will be used to measure the intensity 
of competition based on absolute key figures. The collected 
market shares illustrate the number of customers of each of 
the biggest three providers in relation to the total number of 
customers in the specific national broadband market [25][26]. 
The HHI describes the weighted average of concentration and 
squares the collected market shares (see (1), S describes the 
market share of each specific network operator, i describes 
the considered operator) [26]-[28]. 
 
HHI = ∑
Si
2×10.000
m
i=1
 = ∑
(100 × Si)2
m
i=1
 (1) 
 
The LI does not reach the same usage and awareness level 
but the results show how much the market varies from perfect 
competition (LI-value of 1). Generally, the LI is used to 
examine the disparity between the biggest and following 
companies. Therefore, the disparity measures an existence of 
market dominance and describes if the inequalities between 
the operators lead to significant changes in the competitive 
behavior [26]. The LI value is based on a two times 
calculation and presents a double average index (see (2) and 
(3), CR stands for the Concentration Ratio, which is the single 
sum of the market shares of the considered number of 
network operators, i describes the considered operator) [26], 
which separates the enterprises with significant and 
insignificant impact on the market enterprises, where the 
quotient of the market shares reaches the maximum. 
 
Vi,m= 
CRi
i
CRm- CRi
m-i
  
 
(2) 
 
Lm= 
1
m-1 × ∑
Vi,m
m-1
i=1
 
 
(3) 
 
Nevertheless, we may also use the Exponential-Index and 
Horvath-Index (a) to investigate the collected data with 
alternative concentration models, (b) to cover the results of 
the previous named concentration models, and (c) to establish 
some other possible interpretations of the data base.  
Furthermore, we will only examine the developments in 
the fixed-line broadband markets. Analyses of the market 
concentration and competitive situation are based on the three 
largest network operators (according to customers). This is 
justified by the fact that: (a) there are only three network 
operators in some of the individual markets [29]; and (b) in 
markets with a larger number of network operators the 
influence of these other / smaller network operators is of 
secondary importance for the competition situation. 
The longitudinal analysis, which spans a time range from 
2004 to 2015, will also cover some cross-sectional elements 
to conduct comparisons between the various countries in 
consideration. The needed data is composed of the network 
operators’ market shares, broadband penetration rates, 
customer prices and some basic economic facts like Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP), exchange rates, price parities, 
households and population density. The hypotheses will be 
analyzed and estimated using various econometric and panel 
data techniques. Generally, each hypothesis will be tested by 
an ordinary least square regression to figure out if the results 
are significantly able to present the named relationships. For 
each hypothesis, we define the following regression 
equations, which can be seen in Table 1. All stated equations 
will be calculated twice. In the first attempt, we test the 
regression 
equation 
assuming 
single/multiple 
linear 
relationships between the dependent and independent 
variables. In the second step, we analyze the collected data 
with logarithmic equation models. Both approaches will be 
utilized to get a broader understanding of the collected data 
and the possible relationships.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

TABLE 1. REGRESSION EQUATIONS 
 
H1: a) PEt = α + β1CIt + β2SFt + β3PDt + ε 
       b) TPEt = α + β1TCIt + β2SFt-1 + β3PDt + ε 
       c) PEt+1 = α + β1CIt + β2SFt + β3PDt + ε 
PE – value of the broadband penetration 
TPE – trend based value of the broadband penetration 
CI – values of the competition index (HHI. LI etc.) 
TCI – trend based values of the competition index  
SF – monthly subscription fee 
PD – population density 
BS – broadband connection speeds 
IF – installation fee 
GDPC – Gross Domestic Product per Capita 
RI – regulatory index 
DM – years of membership in EU28 or ASEAN 
Β – changing variable term 
ε – error term 
α – constant  
t – year of consideration 
t-1 – past year of consideration 
H2: a) BSt = α + β1CIt + β2PEt + ε 
       b) BSt = α + β1TCIt + β2PEt-1 + ε 
       c) BSt = α + β1CIt-1 + β2PEt-1 + ε 
H3: a) SFt = α + β1CIt + β2GDPCt + β3IFt + ε 
       b) SFt = α + β1TCIt + β2GDPCt-1 + β3IFt + ε 
       c) SFt = α + β1CIt-1 + β2GDPCt-1 + β3IFt + ε 
H4: a) BSt = α + β1SFt + β2GDPCt + ε 
       b) BSt = α + β1SFt + β2IFt + ε 
       c) BSt = α + β1SFt-1 + β2GDPCt-1 + ε 
H5: a) CIt = α + β1RIt + β2GDPCt + β3DMt + ε 
       b) CIt-1 = α + β1RIt-1 + β2GDPCt-1 + ε 
       c) TCIt = α + β1RIt + β2GDPCt + β3DMt + ε 
H6: a) PEt = α + β1RIt + β2DMt + ε 
       b) TPEt = α + β1RIt + β2DMt + ε 
       c) PEt+1 = α + β1RIt + β2DMt + ε 
H7: a) BSt = α + β1RIt + β2DMt + ε 
       b) BSt = α + β1RIt-1 + β2DMt + ε 
H8: a) SFt = α + β1RIt + β2GDPCt + β3IFt + ε 
       b) SFt = α + β1RIt + β2GDPCt-1 + β3IFt + ε 
       c) SFt = α + β1RIt-1 + β2GDPCt-1 + β3IFt + ε 
IV. 
FIRST RESULTS 
In order to analyze the relationship between competition, 
broadband 
connection 
speeds, 
customer 
broadband 
penetration rates and prices, the intensity of competition 
(HHI) and the disparity (LI) between the market players will 
be examined.  
For the analysis of the broadband market concentrations, 
the considered values of the HHI will be separated into the 
three parts: (1) HHI below the value of 2,000 (low 
concentration), (2) HHI between the values of 2,000 and 
4,000 (moderate concentration), and (3) HHI above the value 
of 4,000 (high concentration), based on [25]-[28].  
Ideally, the fixed-line broadband markets should have 
stable HHI market concentration values which do not exceed 
1,800 overt time.  
Apart from Japan (divided consideration of NTT East and 
West), all European countries with low HHI-values below 
2,000 are European countries situated in the continent’s 
Northern or Eastern parts (Lithuania, Denmark, Sweden, UK) 
(see Figure 1, 3, and 4). These countries are also in the Global 
top ten of highest average broadband connection speeds [30]-
[34].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in Northern Europe from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: HHI values) 
 
 
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
Ireland
UK
Sweden
Iceland
Denmark
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 2. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in the biggest four Western European countries (except 
UK) from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-axis: HHI values) 
 
 
Figure 3. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of further European countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: 
years; y-axis: HHI values) 
 
 
Figure 4. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of Asian countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: HHI values) 
In general, most fixed-line broadband markets of the 
EU28 and ASEAN now reach HHI-values between 2,000 and 
4,000 and are moderately concentrated. When considering 
the named period, it can be concluded that market 
concentrations in most countries have decreased from HHI-
values above 4,000 (high concentrated) to moderate 
concentrated market structures. This development presents 
diminished market forces and the change of strong 
monopolistic into rising competitive market structures. 
Generally, the considered broadband markets are moderately 
concentrated (e. g., Ireland, Germany, Portugal, South Korea) 
(see Figure 1, 2, 3, 4). Nevertheless, some countries (Croatia, 
Iceland, India, Philippines) still have HHI-values above 
4,000, which implies that the biggest operators were able to 
hold their market powers and avoid strong competitive 
structures (see Figure 1, 3, 4). 
Generally, the moderate or high market concentrations in 
the broadband markets suggest that national regulatory 
authorities should review the current market behaviors of the 
existing network operators. To create better competitive and 
network access opportunities, regulatory authorities could 
introduce access regulations, which secure possible market 
entries by competitors.   
Nevertheless, two different developments can be mainly 
comprehended. (1) During the last ten years, the intensity of 
competition in the most considered broadband markets 
increased and the previous monopolistic structures could be 
diminished. (2) In the developed countries, the reduction of 
the power of the monopolistic incumbent is stronger than in 
the developing countries and the developed countries also 
have stronger competitive broadband market structures.  
The used Linda-Index describes the disparity between the 
biggest three operators. In general, higher market 
concentrations translate into higher disparities between the 
operators. The disparity can be measured in two different 
ways. On one hand, the LI examines the discrepancy between 
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
7.000
8.000
Germany
France
Spain
Italy
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
7.000
8.000
9.000
Lithuania
Austria
Portugal
Switzerland
Croatia
0
2.000
4.000
6.000
8.000
10.000
12.000
China
India
Hongkong
South Korea
Japan
Phillipines
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

the biggest and second biggest companies in the market and 
on the other hand, the LI can evaluate the discrepancy 
between the biggest, the second biggest and third biggest 
companies in the considered market. Based on the evaluation 
of the three biggest operators in the broadband markets, we 
will consider the second option with the inclusion of the 
second and third biggest companies.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in Northern Europe from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: LI values) 
 
 
Figure 6. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in the biggest four Western European countries (except 
UK) from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-axis: LI values) 
 
 
Figure 7. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of further European countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: 
years; y-axis: LI values) 
 
 
Figure 8. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of Asian countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: LI values) 
The consideration of the European and Asian fixed-line 
broadband markets yields LI-values between 2 and 5 for the 
most countries (see Figures 5, 6, and 8), which indicates that 
discrepancies between the operators still exist. Nevertheless, 
the declining trend of the LI-values shows that in most 
countries the differences between the incumbents and the new 
market entrants decrease (e. g., Germany, Italy, Slovenia, see 
Figures 6 and 7). In the future, these broadband markets could 
reach a nearly equal distributed market power. However, the 
results also show that the disparities between the network 
operators in some markets increase (e. g., Austria, 
Switzerland, see Figure 7).  Only in the British market the LI-
value is close to 1 and indicates a nearly equal distributed 
broadband market (between the different market operators) 
(see Figure 5). Combining this result with the fact that the 
British market has the oldest history of liberalization, it can 
be concluded that longer open access market could lead to 
more equally distributed market shares. This issue needs 
verification by hypothesis testing and we will include this in 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
UK
Sweden
Iceland
Ireland
Denmark
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Germany
Spain
Italy
France
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Austria
Switzerland
Lithunia
Slovenia
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
India
Japan
South Korea
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

their evaluations. Furthermore, a couple of countries show 
nearly the same LI-values over the whole-time frame (e. g., 
France, South Korea, see Figure 6 and 8). The reasons why, 
on one hand, the disparities are very stable and, on the other 
hand, they vary, will be investigated in the future.  
The variations between European and Asian markets are 
quite low, but nonetheless the LI-values of a couple of 
countries present higher values. Therefore, network operators 
in these countries should compensate more inequalities as far 
as possible. These discrepancies are not sufficiently to draw 
conclusions from since the results of the LI-values also vary 
too strongly among network operators in a couple of 
countries. In general, the disparity (difference in market 
power and influence) between the incumbent and the 
competitors cannot be taken as reason for the different 
broadband connection speeds and developments. It can be 
just estimated that a more equal distribution of market power 
could lead to higher broadband connection speeds.  
In the beginning of the regression analyses, the evaluation 
of the correlations shows that the calculated market 
concentrations correlate significantly (p-values below 0.05) 
with the development of the broadband connection speeds. 
The result supports the assumption that a stronger 
competition could lead to higher broadband connection 
speeds.  
In addition, the same significant correlations between 
broadband penetration rates and market concentrations exist 
(p-values below 0.05). The correlations imply that higher 
competitive intensities and stronger competitive behaviors 
lead to rising broadband penetration rates.  
Due to the correlative relations, it is necessary to prove if 
a regressive context between the mentioned factors exists.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
As aforementioned, the status of the paper is a work in 
progress and therefore, improvements in the results and in 
ongoing research will be necessary. Currently, we have 
collected the needed secondary data and have started to 
analyze the competitive intensities. Following this first 
overview, we will evaluate the above-mentioned hypotheses 
using the ordinary least square regressions to test the 
established regression equations. Additionally, we will 
measure the different regulatory behaviors of the considered 
countries and to be able to examine the named relationships 
in the regression equations.  
Despite the named conditions and the different 
developments in the national broadband markets, the general 
trend presents increasing competitive structures in the fixed 
broadband markets. Combining the results of the HHI and LI 
analysis, the incumbents in each national broadband market 
have lost market shares and the disparity between the 
different providers is decreasing. As shown in the results, few 
countries (especially in Asia) still have very powerful 
incumbents and a general statement concerning all 
considered countries cannot be done at this status of work.  
At this time in evaluation work, the results are on a 
preliminary stage, which will be a starting point for the 
ongoing research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] International Telecommunication Union,  “The state of 
broadband 2014: broadband for all”, Report from the 
broadband 
commission, 
pp. 
16-23, 
2014. 
(http://www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/reports/bb
-annualreport2014.pdf), [retrieved: 05.2017] 
[2] P. Koutroumpis, “The economic impact of broadband on 
growth: A simultaneous approach”, Telecommunications 
Policy, Volume 33 (9), pp. 471-485, 2009. 
[3] W. Briglauer, “The impact of regulation and competition on the 
adoption of fiber-based broadband services: recent evidence 
from the European Union member states”, Springer Verlag, pp. 
450-468, 2014. 
[4] Monopoly 
Commission, 
“Special 
Report 
61 
– 
Telcommunication 2011: Strengthen investments and secure 
the 
competition”, 
in 
German: 
Monopolkommission 
“Sondergutachten 
61 
– 
Telekommunikation 
2011: 
Investitionsanreize stärken, Wettbewerb sichern“, pp. 24, 40-
41, 
55, 
76-86, 
2011.  
(http://www.monopolkommission.de/sg_61/s61_volltext.pdf), 
[retrieved: 05.2017] 
[5] W. Briglauer, and K. Gugler, “The deployment and penetration 
of high-speed fiber networks and services: Why are EU 
member states lagging behind?”, Telecommunications Policy, 
Volume 37, pp. 819-835, 2013. 
[6] W. Distaso, P. Lupi, and F. M. Maneti, “Platform competition 
and broadband uptake: Theory and Empirical evidence from 
the European Union”, Information Economics and Policy, 
Volume 18 (1), pp. 87-106, 2006.  
[7] H. Gruber, and P. Koutroumpis, “Competition enhancing 
regulation and diffusion of innovation: the case of broadband 
networks”, Springer Science + Business Media, New York, 
Volume 43 (2), pp. 168-195, 2013. 
[8] R. L. Katz, “The present and future of the telecommunication 
in Costa Rica”, in Spanish: "El presente y futuro de las 
telecommunicaciones de Costa Rica”, 4ta Expo-Telecom Costa 
Rica – Telecom Advisory Services, LLC, pp. 14, 2011. 
[9] R. L. Katz, and T. A. Berry, “Driving demand for broadband 
networks 
and 
services, 
signals 
and 
communication 
technology”, Springer Verlag, pp. 5-40, 135-200, 2014. 
[10] U. Stopka, R. Pessier, and S. Flößel, “Broadband study 2030 – 
Prospective services, broadband adoption and demand”, in 
German: “Breitbandstudie 2030 – Zukünftige Dienste, 
Adoptionsprozesse und Bandbreitenbedarf“, pp. 42-50, 60, 
166-164, 2013. 
[11] T. Tjelta, et al., “Research topics and initial results for the fifth 
generation (5G) mobile network”, 1st International Conference 
on 5G Ubiquitous Connectivity (5GU), pp. 267-272, 2014. 
[12] R. L. Katz, and F. Callorda, “Mobile broadband at the bottom 
of the pyramid in Latin America”, Telecom Advisory Services, 
LLC, pp. 23-25, 2013. 
[13] H. Gruber, “European sector regulation and investment 
incentives: European options for NGA deployment”, In I. 
Spiecker and J. Krämer (Eds.), Network neutrality and open 
access Baden-Baden: Nomos, pp. 191-202, 2011. 
[14] Bundesnetzagentur, “Annual Report 2013 – Strong networks – 
consumer protection”, in German: “Jahresbericht 2013 – Starke 
Netze im Fokus – Verbraucherschutz im Blick”, pp. 70-81, 
2013. 
(http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/D
E/Allgemeines/Bundesnetzagentur/Publikationen/Berichte/20
14/140506Jahresbericht2013Barrierefrei.pdf?__blob=publicat
ionFile&v=4), [retrieved: 05/2017]  
[15] Bundesnetzagentur, “Definition of market regulation”, in 
German: 
“Definition 
von 
Marktregulierung“, 
2013. 
(http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/DE/Sachgebiete/Telekom
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

munikation/Unternehmen_Institutionen/Marktregulierung/mar
ktregulierung-node.html) [retrieved: 05/2017] 
[16] I. Cava-Ferreruela, and A. Alabau-Munoz, “Evolution of the 
European broadband policy: Analysis and perspective”, pp. 1-
17, 2005. 
[17] W. Kerber, “Competition Policy – Vahlens compendium for 
economic theory and economic policy”, in German: 
“Wettbewerbspolitik. 
Vahlens 
Kompendium 
der 
Wirtschaftstheorie und Wirtschaftspolitik”, Volume 2 (8), p. 
302, 2003.  
[18] W. Kiesewetter, L. Nett, and U. Stumpf, “Regulation and 
competition in European mobile telecommunication markets”, 
in German “Regulierung und Wettbewerb auf europäischen 
Mobilfunkmärkten”, WIK – Wissenschaftliches Institut für 
Kommunikationsdienste, 2002.  
[19] L. Waverman, and P. Koutroumpis, “Benchmarking telecoms 
regulation – The Telecommunications Regulatory Governance 
Index (TRGI)”, Elsevier – Telecommunications Policy, 
Volume 35, pp. 450-468, 2011. 
[20] J. Bouckaert, T. van Dijk, and F. Verboven, “Access 
regulation, competition, and broadband penetration: An 
international study”, Elsevier – Telecommunications Policy, 
Volume 34, pp. 661-671, 2010. 
[21] S. Wallsten, “Broadband and unbundling regulations in OECD 
countries”, AEI-Brookings Joint Center Working Paper No. 
06-16, pp. 1-28, 2006. 
[22] L. J. Cronbach, “Coefficient Alpha and the internal structure of 
tests. Psychometrika, Volume 16, pp. 297-334, 1951. 
[23] A. Field, “Discovering statistics using SPSS”, Sage 
Publications Ltd., Volume 4, 2013. 
[24] J. F. J. Hair, and R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, and W. C. 
Black, “Multivariate data analysis”, Macmillan, New York, 
NY, Macmillan, Volume 3, 1995. 
[25] T. Apolte, et al., “Vahlens compendium for economic theory”, 
in German: “Vahlens Kompendium der Wirtschaftstheorie und 
Wirtschaftspolitik”, Verlag Franz Vahlen, Volume 9 (2), pp. 
404-411, 2007. 
[26] I. Schmidt, “Competition Policy and law”, in German: 
“Wettbewerbspolitik und Kartellrecht“, Volume 7, Stuttgart, 
pp. 49-55, 2001. 
[27] M. Motta, “Competition policy – theory and practice”, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
2004. 
[28] W. K. Viscusi, J. E. Harrington Jr., and J. M. Vernon, 
“Economics of regulation and antitrust”, MIT Press, Volume 4, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, pp. 155-162, 2005.  
[29] S. Bicheno, “South Korea to add fourth mobile operator”, 
Telecoms, 2015.  (http://telecoms.com/423611/south-korea-to-
add-fourth-mobile-operator/), [retrieved: 05.2017] 
[30] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q1 2012 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2012. . 
[31] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q1 2013 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2013. 
[32] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q1 2014 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2014. 
[33] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q3 2015 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2015. 
[34] International Telecommunication Union, “Yearbook of 
Statistics 2014 – Telecommunication/ICT Indicators 2004-
2013”, 2014.   
 
 
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

