A Routing Protocol Proposal for NDN Based Ad Hoc Networks
Combining Proactive and Reactive Routing Mechanisms
Ngo Quang Minh, Ryo Yamamoto, Satoshi Ohzahata, and Toshihiko Kato
University of Electro-Communications
Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: mingus@net.is.uec.ac.jp, ryo_yamamoto@is.uec.ac.jp, ohzahata@is.uec.ac.jp, kato@is.uec.ac.jp
Abstract— In this paper, we propose a new routing protocol for
named data networking (NDN) based ad hoc networks.
One
feature of our protocol is that it adopts a hybrid approach
where a proactive routing is used in the producer side network
and a reactive routing is used in the consumer side network.
Another feature is that we focus only on the name prefix
advertisement
in the
proactive routing.
The result
of
performance
evaluation
focusing
on
the
communication
overhead shows that our proposal has a moderate overhead
both for routing control
messages and Interest
packets
compared with some of conventional NDN based ad hoc
routing mechanisms proposed so far.
Keywords- Ad Hoc Network; Named Data Networking;
Proactive Routing; Reactive Routing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, Information Centric Networks (ICNs) have
been widely studied as a future Internet architecture well
suited for large scale content distribution.
Named Data
Networking (NDN) [1] has been widely adopted as a
platform for ICN research activities.
The fundamental
adopted in NDN is the name of required content, not the
address of hosts containing content. NDN uses two types of
packets in all communications: Interest and Data.
A
consumer requesting a piece of content sends an Interest
packet containing the content name. A producer providing
the corresponding content data returns a Data packet to the
consumer. NDN routers transferring the Data packet cache
the packet for future redistribution.
Originally, NDN was designed
for wired network
topology, but it can be effectively applied to wireless multi-
hop ad hoc network topology. Since nodes move around in
wireless ad hoc networks, the routing mechanism is a more
important research topic compared with wired networks. In
NDN, the purpose of routing is how to construct Forwarding
Information Base (FIB) for name prefixes, which specifies
the correspondence between a name prefix and a face (or a
neighbor identifier) to the content with this name prefix.
There are several proposals on the routing in NDN. For
the wired NDN topology, those proposed in [2] and [3] are
examples introduced in an early stage.
Both of them are
based on the link state routing protocol, which maintains and
advertises link statuses between neighbors, shares the
topology information, and creates routing tables from it. The
protocol in [4] is a new proposal based on the link state
routing considering multipath routing.
In the case of NDN based wireless ad hoc networks, both
proactive and reactive approaches are proposed [5]-[9]. This
trend is the same as IP based ad hoc networks. MobileCCN
[6] and TOP-CCN [7] are examples of the proactive routing
mechanism. MobileCCN is an application of RIP [10] to the
NDN based ad hoc routing. TOP-CCN is an application of
OLSR [11]. On the other hand, E-CHANET [8] and REMIF
[9] are examples of the reactive routing mechanism, which
are considered extensions of Ad Hoc On-Demand Distance
Vector routing (AODV) [12].
These NDN based ad hoc routing mechanisms have pros
and cons. The proactive routing can create FIB in response
to an up-to-date network topology, but has some overheads
of routing control message exchange. On the contrary, the
reactive routing has no overheads of routing, but has some
overheads of Interest packet transfer.
In this paper, we propose a new NDN based ad hoc
routing which has the following two features.
First, in a
typical ad hoc network used in a public space, such as
shopping malls and museums, a content producer side has a
stable network where producers and intermediate routers are
located in fixed positions. On the other hand, consumers are
mobile nodes which change their locations quite often.
Therefore, a hybrid approach which uses the proactive and
reactive routing is considered to be useful. In the IP based
ad hock network, a hybrid routing is also proposed [13].
Based on these considerations, we take a hybrid approach
that the proactive routing is adopted in a producer side
network, because of its in-advance route setting, and the
reactive routing is adopted in a consumer side network,
because of its flexibility for mobility.
The second feature is about the procedure of proactive
routing. The NDN proactive routing procedures proposed so
far are advertising both the network topology and the name
prefixes.
However, the point of NDN routing is how the
name prefixes are disseminated.
In order to realize this
requirement, it is sufficient that the shortest path information
is maintained for individual producer.
So, we proposes a
new proactive NDN routing focusing on just the name prefix
advertisement.
The rest of this paper consists of the following sections.
Section II describes the related work on NDN and NDN
based ad hoc routing. Section III proposes our new protocol,
and Section IV shows the performance evaluation focusing
on the routing control and Interest transfer overheads.
Section V concludes this paper.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

II. RELATED WORK
A. Overview of named data networking
NDN nodes (consumers, NDN routers and producers)
maintain the following three major data structures [1].

Forwarding Interest Base (FIB): used to forward
Interest packets toward producers of matching Data.

Pending Interest Table (PIT): keeping track of Interest
packets forwarded to producers so that returned Data
packets can be sent to consumers.

Content Store (CS): caching received Data packets
temporarily.
When an Interest packet arrives on some face, the content
name in the Interest is looked up. If there is a copy of the
corresponding Data packet in CS, it is sent out to the face the
Interest packet arrived on and the Interest packet is discarded.
Otherwise, if there is a PIT entry exactly matching to the
received content name, the Interest’s arrival face is added to
the PIT entry and the Interest packet is discarded. Otherwise,
if there is a matching FIB entry, then the Interest packet is
sent to the face specified in the FIB entry.
As described above, the routing mechanism in NDN is a
procedure to create FIB entries for published name prefixes.
As for the routing in wired NDN topology, the major
protocols proposed so far [2]-[4] are based on Open Shortest
Path First (OSPF) [14], which is a link state based intra-
domain routing protocol used widely in IP networks.
Among them, Named-data Link State Routing protocol
(NLSR) [3], for example, introduces two types of link state
advertisements (LSAs): Adjacency LSA and Prefix LSA.
An Adjacency LSA is similar to an LSA defined in OSPF
and contains a list of neighbor name and cost of the link to
neighbor. A Prefix LSA is designed for NDN and contains
name prefixes. An NDN node sends Periodic “info” Interest
packets for neighbor detection.
If it receives an “info”
Content reply, it considers that a neighbor is alive. An NDN
node also sends periodic “Root Active” Interest packets. If
any link state information has changed, its reply is returned.
After that, an Interest packet requesting a new LSA and its
corresponding Data packet are exchanged.
B. NDN based ad hoc routing mechnisms
For NDN based ad hoc networks, there are a lot of
research activities [5].
Among them, MobileCCN [6] and
TOP-CCN [7] are typical examples of the proactive routing
mechanism. In MobileCCN, NDN nodes regularly broadcast
their own FIB, obtain neighbors’ FIB, and re-create own FIB.
The idea is similar to that of Routing Information Protocol
(RIP), in which routers send their own routing table to their
neighbors periodically [10]. As is in RIP, the scalability is a
problem in MobileCCN.
TOP-CCN is an extension of the Optimized Link State
Routing (OSLR) [11] to the NDN based ad hoc routing.
TOP-CCN
introduces
a
new
packet
called
Content
Announcement (CA).
It also introduces the idea of
multipoint relay (MPR) and publisher MPT (PMPR). A CA
packet contains name prefixes, node id and type of sender,
list of neighbors’ id and type, and so on. It is used for the
neighbor discovery and MPR selection, through single hop
broadcast, and for the link state information announcement,
through multi-hop flooding.
A multi-hop CA packet is
generated by PMPR and flooded by MPRs and PMPRs, and
it is used to create the topology information and FIB. Since
the base of TOP-CCN is OLSR used in IP networks,
however, multi-hop CA packets provide over-specified
information.
For example, a route between consumers,
which is never used in NDN, can be obtained from this
information.
On the other hand, the reactive routing mechanism is
original in ad hoc networks. There are many examples [5],
including REMIF [9], which we use in the performance
evaluation.
REMIF does not use any routing control
messages and therefore NDN nodes do not maintain FIBs.
Instead, a route to producer is detected during Interest packet
flooding.
In order to avoid a broadcast storm problem,
REMIF adopts differed re-broadcasting with remaining
energy checking. Although REMIF has better performance
than E-CHANET [8] as for the Interest forwarding overhead
[9], the overhead may increase depending on the node
density and the average hops between consumers and
producers.
III. PROPOSAL
A. Design principles
We have adopted the following design principles for our
hybrid NDN based routing mechanism.

As described above, we divide a whole NDN network
into the producer side and the consumer side. In the
producer side, NDN nodes including producers and
intermediate routers have their location fixed.
So, a
proactive routing mechanism is introduced in this part.
On the other hand, the consumer side includes mobile
nodes working as consumers or intermediate routers.
Those
nodes
move
around
and
the
network
configuration often changes.
In this part, a reactive
routing mechanism is introduced.

For the producer side, our proactive routing focuses
only on the name prefix advertisement. It constructs a
directed acyclic graph (DAG) starting from each
producer. An FIB entry for a specific name prefix is
given by pointing upstream nodes so as to traverse the
corresponding DAG in a reverse direction. If there are
more than one upstream nodes, all of them are
registered
in
the
entry
and
used
for
multipath
forwarding [15].

In order to create a DAG for a specific name prefix, the
corresponding
producer
issues
a
Name
Prefix
Announcement
Request
(NPAreq)
packet.
It
is
broadcasted, and if any receiving NDN nodes are on the
corresponding
DAG,
they
return
a
Name
Prefix
Announcement Reply (NPArep) packet by unicast.

As for the consumer side, NDN nodes do not use any
control packets for routing.
Instead, the FIB entry is
created by the first Interest packet for a name prefix.
The first Interest packet is flooded throughout the
consumer side, and after it reaches some node in the
producer side, this Interest packet is transferred to the
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

producer. When the corresponding Data packet returns,
a temporary FIB entry is created at the nodes in the
consumer side. For the following Interest packets for
the same name prefix, this FIB entry is used.
B. Detailed design for producer side
Table 1 shows the parameters contained in NPAreq and
NPArep packets. Producer node ID is the MAC address of
the producer node, and NPAreq and NPArep packets can be
uniquely identified using this ID and nonce.
A producer
periodically generates NPAreq packets containing the name
prefix list which it is publishing. Hop count is the number of
hops from the producer. When a producer side node receives
an NPAreq packet, it rebroadcasts the received packet with
incrementing
hop
count
and
setting
the
number
of
downstream nodes, and returns an NPArep packet to the
sender of the NPAreq packet, according to the procedure
described below.
Figure 1 shows the structure of FIB used by producer
side nodes. An FIB entry is created for an individual name
prefix, and it may contain multiple forwarding candidates.
Each candidate has the forwarding parameters and the
routing parameters. The forwarding parameters are the ID
(MAC address) of upstream node and other performance
related values as defined in [14]. The routing parameters are
used both to select and rank the upstream node providing
shortest path to the name prefix and to compose a NPAreq
packet to be rebroadcasted.
A node receiving an NPAreq packet follows the below.
1.
The node checks whether there is an FIB entry for the
name prefix specified in the received NPAreq packet.
2.
If there are no such entries, it adds a new entry with the
MAC address of the sender of the NPAreq packet set in
the upstream node ID. It sends an NPArep packet to
the NPAreq sender, and rebroadcasts the NPAreq
packet.
3.
Otherwise, it checks whether there is a forwarding
candidate which has the same producer node ID.
If
there is such a candidate, then look for candidates in
which the nonce is the same as that in the NPAreq
packet.
(3-1)If there are no such candidates, handle this
NPAreq as a new advertisement.
That is, it
deletes the producer node ID and nonce pair from
the list in all of found candidates. If the list
becomes empty, it deletes the candidate and adds
the producer node ID and nonce with creating a
new candidate when necessary.
It sends an
NPArep
packet
to
the NPAreq
sender, and
rebroadcasts the NPAreq packet.
(3-2)Otherwise, that is, when there are some candidates
having the same pair of producer node ID and
nonce with the NPAreq packet, it compares the
hop count in the entry with that in the NPAreq.
(3-2-1) If the hop count in the entry is smaller,
then ignore the received NPAreq packet.
(3-2-2) If two hop counts are the same, then it
checks whether there are any candidates
which have the upstream node ID identical to
the NPAreq sender address.
A)
If there is such a candidate, it ignores
the received NPAreq packet.
B)
Otherwise, that is, when the NPAreq is
sent by a new upstream node, it adds a
new forwarding candidate, and returns
an
NPArep
and
rebroadcasts
the
NPAreq.
(3-2-3) Otherwise, that is, when the hop count in
the entry is larger than that in NPAreq packet,
it
handles
this
NPAreq
as
a
new
advertisement, and acts as specified in step
(3-1).
4.
Following the first part of step 3, the last step is for
when there are no candidates with the producer node ID
specified in the NPAreq packet, that is, when an
NPAreq with the same name prefix from a new
provider. In this case, it compares the hop count in the
FIB entry with that in the received packet, and acts in
the same way as (3-2-1) through (3-2-3) according to
the result.
When a forwarding candidate is created or modified, the
number of downstream nodes managed by upstream node
needs to be modified according to the received NPAreq
packet.
When a node receives an NPArep packet, it looks for a
forwarding candidate with the producer node ID and nonce
in the packet, and increments the number of downstream
nodes managed by this node by one.
Figure 2 shows an example of this protocol. As shown in
Figure 2(a), there are six producer side nodes connected with
wireless links shown in dashed lines. Among them, node 2
is a producer and the others are NDN routers. As shown in
Figure 2(b), in the beginning, node 2 broadcasts an NPAreq
packet with producer node ID = 2, nonce1, “name”, hop
count = 1, and number of downstream nodes = 0. Nodes 1, 2,
and 5 receive this packet, create an FIB entry as shown in the
figure, and return an NPArep packet individually.
Then
TABLE 1. PARAMETERS IN NPAreq AND NPArep PACKETS.
Figure 1. Structure of FIB at producer side.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

node 5 rebroadcasts the NPAreq packet with changing hop
count to 2, and nodes 4 and 6 respond it. Node 2 receives the
packet but ignores it.
When node 5 receives the NPArep
packets from nodes 4 and 6, the number of downstream
nodes in this node is set to 2.
Next, node 1 rebroadcasts the NPAreq packet, to which
node 4 responds. As a result, the FIB entry in node 4 has
two forwarding candidates to node 1 and 5. Similarly, the
NPAreq packet rebroadcasted by node 3 is handled by node
6. In the end of this advertisement, the NPAreq packets are
rebroadcasted by nodes 4 and 6, but nobody responds to
them. The generated DAG is shown in Figure 2(c).
After some periods, node 2 broadcasts a new NPAreq
packet with nonce2.
After this new NPAreq packet is
disseminated, the FIBs of individual nodes are set as shown
in the figure. It should be noted that the FIBs in nodes 4 and
6 have two forwarding candidates with node 5 and nodes 1/3
as the upstream nodes, respectively.
These candidates are
ranked by the number of downstream nodes managed by
upstream node (“dw2”). Since node 5 has two downstream
nodes, the forwarding candidate to node 5 is ranked first.
So far in this subsection, we do not mention PIT in
producer side nodes.
The PIT structure in producer side
nodes is identical to that used in original NDN nodes [15],
except that the face ID is replaced by the neighbor node ID
(MAC address).
C. Detaild design for consumer side
We introduce a reactive routing mechanism to the
consumer side network in the following way. FIB is not set
in the consumer side in the beginning. When a node starts to
retrieve a specific content, the first Interest packet for the
content is flooded among consumer side nodes.
When an
Interest packet reaches some producer side node, it will be
transferred to the corresponding producer.
The producer
sends back the Data packet containing the requested content.
It is transferred through the reverse path of the Interest
packet. When it goes through the consumer side nodes, FIB
entry is set in individual nodes.
The following Interest
packets accessing to this name prefix use the FIB arranged.
For the consumer side, we use the original formats of Interest
and Data packets and the original structures of FIB and PIT,
except that the first Interest packet is broadcasted and that a
neighbor node MAC address is used as a face ID.
Figure 3 shows an example of the communication
sequence between a mobile consumer and a producer.
As
shown in Figure 3(a), the producer side nodes are the same
as in Figure 2(a), and there are three consumer side nodes
(nodes p, q, r). The dashed line shows a wireless link.
We assume that the FIBs are arranged in the producer
side nodes. As shown in Figure 3(b), node p starts contest
retrieval for name prefix “name” and the first Interest is for
“name/001”. The Interest packet is broadcasted and nodes q
and r receive it. Then node q rebroadcasts the Interest packet,
and nodes 6 and p receive it. Node p ignores this Interest,
because it is a duplicate one.
Node 6 relays the received
Interest packet to node 5 according to its FIB. On the other
hand, node r also rebroadcasts the Interest packet, which
nodes 6 and p receive. But both nodes ignore this Interest
because of the duplication.
The Interest packet is sent to node 2, the producer, via
node 5, and in response to it, the Data packet containing the
content of “name/001” is returned along the reverse path of
the Interest packet. That is, the Data packet goes via nodes 5,
6, and q, and reaches node p. When node q relays the Data
packet, it creates an FIB entry for “name” which indicates
that the upstream node is node 6. Similarly, when node p,
the consumer, receives this Data packet, it creates an FIB
entry for “name” indicating that the upstream node is node q.
Figure 2. Communication sequence at producer side.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

For the following Interest packets, nodes p and q use the
created FIB.
That is, the next Interest packet requesting
content for “name/002” is sent to node q in the unicast
communication.
Similarly, node q relays this Interest to
node 6 directly.
When some nodes move and the communication link is
broken, the Data packet is not returned and the timer for
Interest packet will expire.
At that time, node p will
broadcast the lost Interest packet, and the similar procedure
with the first Interest is performed.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
This section describes the results of performance
evaluation for the overhead of routing control and Interest
packet transfer. We compare our proposal, TOP-CCN as an
example of proactive mechanism, and REMIF as an example
of reactive mechanism.
Figure 4 shows the network
configuration used in the evaluation. Nodes are arranged in
a
grid network, n nodes in the horizontal direction and 4
nodes in the vertical direction. Similarly with the examples
above, the dashed line is a wireless link.
Figure 4(a) shows the detailed configuration for our
proposal. The first and second rows are the producer side,
and the third and fourth rows are the consumer side. Figure
4(b)
shows
the
detailed
configuration
for
TOP-CCN.
According to [7], the light gray nodes are PMPRs and the
dark gray nodes are MPRs. In REMIF, all nodes are handled
equally.
We assume that some nodes in the first row work as
producers. That is, the number of producers changes from 1
to n. We also assume that consumers locate in the third and
fourth rows. In the evaluation, one consumer communicates
with one producer for independent content. So, the cache is
not effective in this evaluation.
A. Results of routing control overhead
Since our proposal and TOP-CCN use a proactive routing
mechanism, they have some overheads in routing control.
Routing control is performed periodically, but in this
evaluation, we calculate the total number of control packets
exchanged in one turn. We suppose there are ݉ producers.
The details for our proposal are as follows.
First, we
consider the case that there is one producer (a node among
1,1 through 1,n).
The producer issues an NPAreq packet,
and it is rebroadcasted by any other nodes in the first and
second rows, once per node.
So, the total number of
broadcasted NPAreq packets is 2݊.
As a result of routing
control, a rudder style network is generated as a DAG (see
Figure 2(c)).
In order to generate this configuration, one
NPArep packet is transferred once over one wireless link.
Therefore, the total number of transmitted NPArep packets is
equal to the number of wireless links, that is, 3݊ − 2. So,
the routing overhead for one producer is 5݊ − 2 in our
proposal.
For the case of ݉ producers, the total number
becomes ݉ times as the case of one producer. Therefore, the
result is ݉(5݊ − 2).
In the case of TOP-CCN, the number of control packets
does not depend on the number of producers. The details for
TOP-CCN are as follows. For non-MPR nodes (white nodes
in Figure 4(b)), one CA packet is sent for advertising itself,
and another CA packet is sent for MPR selection. So, the
number of CA packets is 2 per node. For MPR nodes, a CA
packet is sent after one neighbor detection, and the number
of neighbors is 3. One CA packet is sent for MPR selection.
For route announcement, it sends CA packets as many as the
Figure 4. Evaluation network for proposal and TOP-CCN.
Figure 3. Communication sequence between consumer and producer.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

number of PMPR. Therefore, the number of CA packets is 4
+ number of PMPR per node.
For PMPR nodes, one CA
packet is sent after one neighbor detection (there are four
neighbors), and one for MPR selection. For relaying multi-
hop CA packets, the number of CA packet transfer is equal
to the number of PMPR nodes. Therefore, the total number
is 5 + number of PMPR per node. The number of MPR and
PMPR is 2݊ and 2(݊ − 2), respectively.
As a result, the
total number is
2 × 4 + 2݊൫4 + 2(݊ − 2)൯ + 2(݊ − 2)൫5 + 2(݊ − 2)൯ =
8݊ଶ − 6݊ + 4.
Figure 5 shows the number of routing control packets
when n is 10, by changing the number of producers (m) from
1 to 10. In our proposal, the number of NPAreq and NPArep
packets changes from 48 to 480 when m changes from 1 to
10.
On the other hand, in TOP-CCN, the number of CA
packets is always 744 independently of m. In REMIF, there
are no routing control packets.
B. Results of Interest transfer overhead
In spite of the weakness in routing control overheads, the
proactive mechanism provides more efficient Interest packet
transfer then the reactive mechanism. Here, we suppose that
there are one hundred Interest packets for one specific name
prefix, and count the total number of Interest packets
transmitted over wireless links (total Interest hop count).
The calculation is done by changing the number of consumer
and producer pairs from 1 to n.
In the case of TOP-CCN, the optimum route is used for
all Interest packets. When there is one consumer / producer
pair, the average hop count of one Interest packet is obtained
in the following formula. Please remember that a producer is
located in the first row, and a consumer is located in the third
or fourth row. The first item is an average vertical hop and
the second is for horizontal transfer.
ହ
ଶ +
∑
∑
|௜ି௝|
೙
೔సభ
೙
ೕసభ
௡మ
=
ହ
ଶ +
௡మିଵ
ଷ௡
For 100 Interests with m consumer / producer pairs, the total
Interest hop count (average) for TOP-CCN is
100݉ ቀ
ହ
ଶ +
௡మିଵ
ଷ௡ ቁ.
In the case of our proposal, only the first Interest packet
is flooded among consumer side nodes and producer side
nodes except the producer itself. So, the total Interest hop
count (average) for our proposal is
(4݊ − 1)݉ + 99݉ ቀ
ହ
ଶ +
௡మିଵ
ଷ௡ ቁ.
In the case of REMIF, since there is no FIB, every
Interest packet is flooded.
In the grid configuration used
here, every node except the producer will rebroadcast each
Interest once. So, the result is 100(4݊ − 1)݉.
Figure 6 shows the total Interest hop count (average)
when n is 10, by changing the number of consumer /producer
pairs (m) from 1 to 10. This figure indicates that the total
number of REMIF is much larger than the others. The result
of our proposal is slightly higher than TOP-CCN.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a new NDN based ad hoc
routing protocol, which combines the proactive and reactive
approaches. We assume that, in a common ad hoc network,
nodes in the information provider side are located in a fixed
position and user nodes are mobile terminals. The proposed
method introduces a proactive routing in the producer side
and a reactive routing in the consumer side. Our proactive
routing focuses only on the name prefix advertisement.
Through a theoretical analysis, we showed that our proposal
provides a lighter routing overhead than TOP-CCN, a
proactive approach, and the similar Interest transfer overhead
with TOP-CCN, which is much better than REMIF, a
reactive approach.
REFERENCES
[1]
V. Jacobson, et al., “Networking Named Content,” Proc. of
CoNEXT ’09, pp.1-12, Dec. 2009.
[2]
L. Wang, A. Hoque, C. Yi, A. Alyyan, and B. Zhang,
“OSPFN: An OSPF Based Routing Protocol for Named Data
Networking,” NDN, Technical Report NDN-0003, pp.1-15,
Jul. 2012.
[3]
A. Hoque, et al., “NLSR: Named-data Link State Routing
Protocol,” Proc. of ICN ’13, pp.1-6, Aug. 2013.
[4]
E. Hemmati and J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, “A New Approach
to Name-Based Link-State Routing for Information-Centric
Networks,” Proc. of ICN ’15, pp.29-38, Sep. 2015.
[5]
X. Liu, Z. Li, P. Yang, and Y. Dong, “Information-centric
mobile ad hoc networks and content routing: A survey,” Ad
Hoc Network, Available online, pp.1-14, Apr. 2016.
[6]
S. Yao, X. Zhang, F. Lao, and Z. Guo, “MobileCCN:
Wireless Ad-hoc Content-centric Networks over SmartPhone,”
Proc.of ACM International Conference on Future Internet
Tech. (CFI ’13), pp.1-2, Jun. 2013.
Figure 5. Number of routing control packets (n=10).
Figure 6. Total Interest hop count (average; n=10).
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[7]
J. Kim, D. Shin, and Y. Ko, “TOP-CCN: Topology aware
Content Centric Networking for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,”
Proc. of ICON ’13, pp.1-6, Dec. 2013.
[8]
M. Amadeo, A. Molinaro, and G. Ruggeri, “E-CHANET:
Rouiting, fowarding and transport in Information-Centric
multihop wireless networks,” Conputer Communications,
Vol.36, pp. 792-803, 2013.
[9]
R. Rehman, T. Hieu, and H. Bae, “Robust and Efficient
Multipath Interest Forwarding for NDN-based MANETs,”
Proc. of WMNC ’16, pp.1-6, Jul. 2016.
[10] G. Malkin, “RIP Version 2,” IETF RFC 2453, Nov. 1998.
[11] T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized Link State Routing
Protocol (OLSR)”, IETF RFC 3626, Oct. 2003.
[12] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc On-
Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing,” IETF RFC 3561,
Jul. 2003.
[13] F. Ducatelle, G. Caro, and L. Gambardella, “A New
Approach for Integrating Proactive and Reactive Routing in
MANETs,” Proc. of MASS 2008, pp.377-383, Sep. 2008.
[14] J. Moy, “OSPF Version 2,” IETF RFC 2328, Apr. 1998.
[15] C. Yi, et al., “A Case for Stateful Forwarding Plane,” NDN,
Technical
Report
NDN-0002,
2012.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

