New QoT-Aware Rerouting Algorithms in WDM All-Optical Networks
Naama Amdouni1,2 and Taouﬁk Aguili1
1Universit´e de Tunis El Manar, ´Ecole Nationale d’Ing´enieurs de Tunis, Laboratoire de Syst`emes
de Communications, 1002, Tunis, Tunisie;
2Universit´e de Jendouba, Institut Sup´erieur de l’Informatique du Kef, 7100, Le Kef, Tunisie;
Email: naama.amdouni@gmail.com,taoufik.aguili@enit.rnu.tn
Abstract—The wavelength continuity constraint and the wave-
length integrity constraint imposed by Wavelength-Division Mul-
tiplexing (WDM) all-optical networks have been, for a long time,
the main constraints to be considered when solving the Routing
and Wavelength Assignment (RWA) problem in such networks.
However, in addition to the two aforementioned constraints, a
third constraint cannot be neglected anymore. This constraint is
related to the lightpaths’ Quality of Transmission (QoT), which
might become potentially unacceptable when the optical signal
propagates through long distances. Indeed, in WDM all-optical
networks, no signal regeneration at intermediate nodes is allowed
which induces some impairments in the transmission signal.
Since these impairments continue to degrade the signal quality
as it progresses toward its destination, the received Bit Error
Rate (BER) at the destination node might become unacceptably
high. This result might lead to inefﬁcient utilization of network
resources resulting in higher rejection ratios. This is especially
severe when dynamic lightpath demands are considered. In this
paper, we propose to use rerouting as a solution to improve the
network throughput. We investigate and compare three different
rerouting categories, namely, passive rerouting, active rerouting
and hybrid rerouting. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
attempt to use active and hybrid rerouting for optimizing WDM
all-optical network throughput with transmission impairments
consideration. Multiple simulation studies have been carried out
on different network topologies to evaluate and compare the
performance of the proposed algorithms.
Keywords–WDM all-optical networks; passive, active and hybrid
rerouting; Wavelength continuity constraint; Quality of Transmis-
sion (QoT); Service disruption period.
I.
INTRODUCTION
WDM [1] optical networks are promising candidates that
are expected to satisfy the continually evolving requirements
for higher bandwidth services. Nowadays, 40 and 100 Gbps
connections are used thanks to WDM all-optical networks, also
known as WDM transparent optical networks, in which the
signals remain in the optical domain. In such a network, data
trafﬁc is transported from one node to another in the form of
optical pulses carried over an end-to-end optical path, called
lightpath. A lightpath, generally spanning several ﬁber-links,
is established by allocating the same wavelength on all the
ﬁber links it traverses. This requirement is referred to as the
wavelength continuity constraint. Also, two lightpaths sharing
the same ﬁber must be identiﬁed by different wavelengths.
This requirement is called wavelength integrity constraint.
The problem of establishing lightpaths with the objective
of optimizing the utilization of network resources is known
as the Routing and Wavelength Assignment (RWA) problem
[2]. Many surveys have been carried out to investigate the
RWA problem assuming an ideal optical medium [2]. But
such a perfect optical transmission could never be achieved
in a realistic WDM network where ﬁbers and non ideal
components induce multiple transmission impairments which
affect signiﬁcantly the quality of transmission. Indeed, to
ensure the feasibility of proposed algorithms, in addition to
the two aforementioned constraints, a third constraint cannot
be ignored anymore. This constraint is related to the lightpaths’
QoT, which might become potentially unacceptable when the
optical signal propagates over long distances without electrical
regeneration.
Taking into account physical layer impairments, wave-
length continuity constraint and wavelength integrity constraint
when solving the RWA problem leads to inefﬁcient utilization
of network resources and results in higher rejection ratios.
Trafﬁc rerouting is a viable and cost effective solution to
improve the network throughput conditioned by the afore-
mentioned constraints. There are two ways to rearrange an
existing lightpath. One is wavelength rerouting (WRR), which
keeps the original path of the lightpath to be rerouted but
reassigns a different wavelength to the ﬁber links along the
path. Another is lightpath rerouting (LRR), which consists of
ﬁnding a new path with possibly another wavelength to replace
the old path. A comprehensive survey of rerouting techniques
can be found in [3]. Transmission of the existing lightpaths
to be rerouted must be temporarily shut-down to protect data
from being lost or misrouted. This period is referred to as
the service disruption period. It has been demonstrated in [4]
that WRR induces a service disruption period shorter than
that induced by LRR. Trafﬁc rerouting can be divided into
three categories with respect to the timestamp of initiating
the rerouting procedure. The ﬁrst is passive rerouting, which
initiates the rerouting procedure when an incoming lightpath
demand is about to be rejected due to lack of resources.
It aims at rearranging a certain number of existing light-
paths to free a wavelength-continuous route for the incoming
lightpath demand. The second category is active rerouting,
also called intentional rerouting, which reroutes dynamically
existing lightpaths to a more suitable physical path according
to some predeﬁned criteria, without affecting other lightpaths,
so as to achieve a better rejection ratio performance. The
third category is hybrid rerouting which combines passive
rerouting and active rerouting. In this paper, the main objective
consists in applying active and hybrid rerouting to maximize
the number of established lightpath demands satisfying the
required QoT for a given physical network topology with
a ﬁxed number of wavelengths per ﬁber-links and minimize
the incurred service disruption period. Lightpath demands are
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

assumed to be with random arrivals and departures and referred
to as Random Lightpath Demands (RLDs). Four main physical
layer impairment effects are considered as dominating factors
that affect signal quality, namely Chromatic Dispersion (CD),
Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD), Optical Signal to Noise
Ratio (OSNR) and Nonlinear Phase Shift (φNL).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we brieﬂy describe the investigated problem and
present related works. In Section III, the QoT computation
as well as the four QoT parameters considered in this pa-
per are presented. In Section IV, we present in details our
proposed QoT-aware rerouting algorithms. Performance results
are presented and analyzed in Section V. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper.
II.
DESCRIPTION OF THE INVESTIGATED PROBLEM AND
RELATED WORK
Taking into account the impact of physical layer impair-
ments when solving the RWA problem in order to make the
proposed RWA algorithms more effective has been, recently,
extensively investigated in the literature [5]. Impairments can
be classiﬁed into linear and non-linear effects [5]. Linear
effects are independent of signal power and affect wavelengths
individually. Ampliﬁer Spontaneous Emission (ASE), PMD,
and CD investigated in [5][6][7], are generally considered
as the predominant factors inducing signal degradation when
evaluating network performance in low-speed transmission
systems. However, in high-speed optical networks non-linear
impairments as well as linear ones become more prominent and
could not be ignored anymore. Self-Phase Modulation (SPM),
considered in [8], and Four Wave Mixing (FWM) investigated
in [9], are some of the important non-linear impairments af-
fecting transmitted signal quality. Taking into account physical
layer impairments should lead to lower network performance
especially in terms of rejection ratio. That is why, we propose
here to use trafﬁc rerouting to alleviate the effect of considering
these impairments.
The trafﬁc rerouting concept has been applied to WDM all-
optical networks to alleviate only the impact of the wavelength
continuity constraint. Different rerouting techniques have been
proposed so far in the literature [3]. But, they assumed perfect
physical layer conditions. To the best of our knowledge, the
ﬁrst attempt to use rerouting as a solution to maximize the
number of established RLDs satisfying the required QoT is
found in our studies presented in [10][11][12], where passive
lightpath and/or wavelength rerouting was considered. In this
paper, we investigate active and hybrid rerouting to alleviate
the transmission impairments consideration effect and mini-
mize the incurred service disruption period. The performances
of our QoT-aware rerouting algorithms are evaluated and
compared to those of our impairment-aware passive lightpath
rerouting algorithm previously published in [10] through illus-
trative numerical examples.
III.
QUALITY OF TRANSMISSION COMPUTATION
In WDM all-optical networks, the QoT is generally eval-
uated in terms of BER. Generally, the required value of
BER in optical networks is varying between 10−9 and 10−12.
Determining the BER value instantaneously may be sometimes
very difﬁcult. That is why another factor called Q-factor is
used to estimate the QoT in the network.Equation (1) shows
the relationship between Q−factor and BER.
BER = 1
2erfc
 Q
√
2

(1)
To provide a qualitative description of the QoT in the
network, the Q-factor is estimated by combining four linear
and nonlinear effects. The effects considered in this study
are respectively: CD, PMD, SNR and φNL. In the following
subsections, we discuss the aforementioned four main quality
of transmission parameters and estimate the associated Q-
factor based on the models proposed in [5].
A. Chromatic Dispersion
The disparity in propagation velocity causes an optical
pulse broadening in the time domain. This phenomenon is
called CD. The CD’s power penalty is given by (2) [5].
EOPDC = 10log
r
1 + (DLσλ
σ0
)

(2)
where σ0 is the pulse width, σλ is the spectral width, L is
the ﬁber-link length and D represents the dispersion param-
eter characterizing the single mode ﬁber (SMF) used in the
transmission system.
B. Polarization Mode Dispersion
Different propagation velocities cause pulse broadening in
the frequency domain called PMD. The PMD’s power penalty
is evaluated according to (3), where TB is the bit time.
EOPP MD=5.1



P
f∈links
(
D. Nonlinear Phase Shift φNL
Enhancing the intensity of the optical signal propagating
through the ﬁber raises the ﬁber nonlinearities which create a
nonlinear phase shift φNL computed according to Equation 5
[5]:
φNL = n2ω0Pin
cAeff
1 − eαL
α

(5)
where α is the attenuation parameter, n2 represents the
cladding index, Aeff is the area of cross-section of the ﬁber
core and ω0 and c are respectively the frequency and the light
velocity.
E. Q-factor Estimation
The Q-factor considering the four impairment parameters
described above is estimated according to the following ex-
pression:
Q =
 s
OSNR∆foptEXTP
EOPDCEOPφNL∆felect
!
1
EOPP MD
(6)
where ∆fopt is the optical bandwidth, ∆felect is the
electrical bandwidth and EXTP is the extinction ratio which
represents the ratio between the ”one” level and the ”zero”
level.
IV.
THE PROPOSED ALGORITHMS
In this section, we describe our QoT-aware rerouting algo-
rithms called the QoT-Aware Active Rerouting algorithm and
the QoT-Aware Hybrid Rerouting algorithm and referred to as
the QoT-AAR and the QoT-AHR algorithms, respectively. Our
proposed algorithms aim to optimize the network throughput
in WDM all-optical networks with QoT consideration and min-
imize the incurred service disruption period. Both algorithms
use the same routing and active rerouting procedures. They
consider the RLDs sequentially, that is demand by demand
at their arrival dates and compute for each RLD a suitable
path-free wavelength that meets the required QoT without
considering any rerouting. Also, both algorithms execute an
active rerouting procedure when an established RLD leaves
the network. Already established lightpaths that can be set up
on a new vacant shorter path are selected to be rerouted by
the active rerouting procedure in order to improve the network
resources utilization efﬁciency. The main difference between
the two proposed algorithms is that the QoT-AHR algorithm
launches a passive wavelength rerouting procedure to hopefully
free a wavelength-continuous route with an acceptable QoT
to accommodate an incoming RLD which will otherwise be
blocked by the routing procedure. On the other hand, the QoT-
AAR algorithm rejects any RLD failed to be set up by the
routing procedure.
Our proposed algorithms differ from the previously pub-
lished ones in the following aspects: First, when solving the
RWA problem, they explicitly take into account the physical
impairments imposed by the optical layer. However, rerouting
algorithms previously presented in the literature did not con-
sider any transmission impairments. Second, our algorithms
do not construct any auxiliary graph with crossover edges to
determine the set of existing lightpaths that should be rerouted.
Also, they do not use a random search algorithm to compute
the RWA for lightpath requests. We hope, therefore, that our
algorithms are less Central Processing Unit (CPU) intensive
than rerouting algorithms previously presented in the literature.
In the following subsections, ﬁrst we deﬁne some nota-
tions. Then, we detail the routing and rerouting procedures,
respectively.
A. Notations
•
Λ = {λ1, λ2, ..., λW } is the set of available wave-
lengths on each ﬁber link. W denotes the number
of available wavelengths per ﬁber link. We assume
that all the network links have the same number of
available wavelengths.
•
The
ith
RLD,
is
deﬁned
by
a
5−tuple
(si, di, πi, αi, βi). si and di are the source and
the
destination
nodes
of
the
lightpath
demand,
respectively; πi is the number of requested lightpaths.
For the sake of simplicity, we assume here that
π = 1. αi and βi are the setup and teardown times of
the lightpath demand, respectively.
•
Pi,k, 1 ≤ i ≤ D (D the total number of RLDs),
1 ≤ k ≤ K, represents the kth alternate shortest
path connecting node si to node di. We use the hop
count as the link metric and compute beforehand K-
alternate (loop-free) shortest paths for each source-
destination pair (if as many paths exist, otherwise we
only consider the available ones).
•
Ci,k,w is the cost of using wavelength λw on Pi,k.
The cost function is determined as follows:
Ci,k,w =

ε,
if λw is path − free on Pi,k
+∞,
ifλw is already used
ε is a tiny positive value corresponding to the hop
count on Pi,k.
B. The routing procedure
The routing procedure uses the Quality Path Selection
Algorithm (QPSA) described in [5]. To establish an incoming
RLD, the QPSA considers the K-alternate shortest paths
(computed ofﬂine) in turn according to their number of hops. It
looks for the ﬁrst path-free wavelength with a Q-factor higher
than the ﬁxed threshold, Qthreshold. The Q-factor associated
with each couple (path, wavelength) is estimated according to
the expression given by (6). The RLD is hence established
on the ﬁrst met suitable path among its K-alternate shortest
paths if such path exists.Otherwise, we distinguish two cases:
the QoT-AAR algorithm rejects the RLD deﬁnitively, or, the
QoT-AHR algorithm executes a passive wavelength rerouting
procedure.
C. The active rerouting procedure
Both algorithms execute the active rerouting procedure
every time an established RLD leaves the network. The active
procedure ﬁrst computes φt
i, the set of existing RLDs that
should be rerouted when the ith RLD leaves the network at
time t knowing that the rerouting of an existing RLD is allowed
once during its life period in order to avoid the rerouting of an
active RLD multiple times as the RLDs departure times may
be very close. By doing so, we reduce the number of RLDs
to be rerouted and consequently the overall service disruption
period. Once φt
i is computed two cases may happen:
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

•
φt
i
= ∅: None of the existing RLDs satisfy the
preceding constraints. No rerouting is to be executed.
•
φt
i ̸= ∅: Each RLD in φt
i is hence rerouted to a vacant
shorter path using the routing procedure described in
Subsection IV-B. The costs of the new path’s edges
used by the rerouted RLD are updated to +∞ and to
1 the costs of the released path’s edges.
D. The passive rerouting procedure of the QoT-AHR algorithm
The QoT-AHR algorithm launches the passive rerouting
procedure whenever the routing procedure fails to satisfy an
incoming RLD. It aims at freeing a wavelength-continuous
route that meets the required QoT as follows:
For each shortest path k, 1 ≤ k ≤ K, associated to the
incoming RLD numbered i and for each wavelength λw,
1 ≤ w ≤ W, we determine the set of RLDs that should
be rerouted φi,k,w to set up the incoming RLD numbered i.
We then compute the corresponding rerouting cost RCk,w =
|φi,k,w|. After that we compute RCmin the minimum rerouting
cost to satisfy the new RLD on Pi,kmin. If RCmin is ﬁnite,
the kth-alternate shortest path and the wth wavelength that
requires a minimum number of already established RLDs to be
rerouted is hence selected. Let φmin denote the corresponding
set of RLDs to be rerouted. Two cases may happen: all the
RLDs in φmin can be rerouted by only changing the used
wavelength whilst keeping the same physical path. In this case,
the incoming RLD is serviced using Pi,kmin on wavelength
λwmin. Ci,kmin,wmin is updated to +∞. We also update the
costs of the new paths used by the rerouted RLDs to +∞ and
to 1 the cost of the released paths. The second case that may
happen is that Pi,kmin using λwmin cannot be freed because
one or several RLDs cannot be rerouted. In that case, we
update RCkmin,wmin to +∞ and compute again the minimum
cost. If RCmin is inﬁnite, the incoming RLD is rejected
deﬁnitively.
V.
SIMULATIONS RESULTS
In order to evaluate the performance of the QoT-aware
rerouting algorithms presented in the previous section, we
carried out multiple simulation experiments on the 15−node
Paciﬁc Bell network topology and the 16−node Cost Core
network topology, respectively. We assume that 43 wavelengths
are available on each ﬁber-link of the network (W = 43). Also,
5−alternate shortest paths (K = 5) are computed for each
possible source-destination pair in the network. We assume
that RLDs arrive at the network randomly according to a
Poisson process with common arrival rate per node r and once
accepted, will hold the circuits for exponentially distributed
times with mean holding time equal to 10 much larger than
the network-wide propagation delay and the connection set-up
delay. The source and destination nodes of the RLDs are drawn
according to a random uniform distribution in the intervals
[1, 15] and [1, 16] for the 15−node network and the 16−node
network, respectively. The required value of the Q−factor is
chosen equal to 6 which corresponds to a BER of 10−9.
We generate 25 test-scenarios, that is, 25 different trafﬁc
matrices, run algorithms for each scenario, and compute mean
values. The QoT-aware rerouting algorithms performances are
measured in terms of average rejection ratio and average ratio
of rerouted RLDs. The average rejection ratio is deﬁned as
the ratio of the average number of rejected RLDs to the total
number of RLDs arriving at the network. The average ratio of
rerouted RLDs is computed as the average number of rerouted
RLDs divided by the total number of RLDs arriving at the
network. In the following, we only provide the curves obtained
with the 15−node network as those obtained with the 16−node
network present the same tendency.
Figure 1. Average rejection ratio versus r.
In the following, we propose to compare the average re-
jection ratios, computed by our proposed QoT-aware rerouting
algorithms to those computed by the Quality Path Selection
Algorithm (QPSA) described in [5] which computes the RWA
for RLDs sequentially taking into account QoT requirements
and our Impairment-Aware Sequential Routing with Passive
Lightpath Rerouting (IA-SeqRwPLR) algorithm described in
[10]. The IA-SeqRwPLR algorithm considers the RLDs se-
quentially and computes for each RLD a suitable path and
a suitable path-free wavelength that meet the minimum QoT
requirement. The rerouting procedure is launched whenever the
routing procedure fails in setting up the considered RLD. The
rerouting procedure aims at freeing a path-free wavelengths
that meets the required QoT by rerouting a minimum number
of already established RLDs either by only changing the
used wavelength whilst keeping the same physical path or
by changing the physical path and then possibly the used
wavelength.
In Figure 1, we draw the average rejection ratios computed
by the four algorithms described above for various arrival
rates per node, r. From Figure 1, one may deduce three main
conclusions.
•
The average rejection ratios increase with r due to the
limited number of available resources with acceptable
Q-factor. Thanks to rerouting (be it passive, active or
hybrid), the average rejection ratio is improved. On
the average, the rejection ratio is reduced up to: 8.58%
(respectively 6.55% for the 16-node network) with the
IA-SeqRwPLR algorithm, 8.16% (respectively 6.12%
for the 16-node network) with the QoT-AHR algo-
rithm and 1.5% (respectively 1.3% for the 16-node
network) with the QoT-AAR algorithm.
•
The IA-SeqRwPLR and the QoT-AHR algorithms
outperform the QOT-AAR algorithm, outlining a sig-
niﬁcant improvement in term of average rejection
ratio. In fact, the QOT-AAR algorithm has the worst
rejection ratio performance because it is so difﬁcult,
for a given established RLD, to ﬁnd a new shorter
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

physical path satisfying the required QoT among its
K shortest paths. Also, imposing that an established
RLD can be rerouted on new physical path only once
during its life period results in decreasing the number
of rerouted RLDs and hence the network resources
consumption reduction becomes limited.
•
Unexpectedly the IA-SeqRwPLR algorithm has a re-
jection ratio that is slightly lower than that computed
by the QoT-AHR algorithm despite the fact that the
QoT-AHR algorithm applies both active and passive
rerouting procedures. This is mainly due to the fact
that when applying passive rerouting procedure LRR
rerouting is not allowed which causes the failure of
the passive wavelength rerouting procedure to free a
wavelength-continuous route to set up an incoming
RLD. Also, the active procedure does not provide an
impressive network resources consumption reduction
as discussed above.
Figure 2. Average ratio of rerouted RLDs versus r.
In Figure 2, each group of three bars shows the average
ratio of rerouted RLDs computed using the IA-SeqRwPLR,
the QoT-AHR and the QoT-AAR algorithms respectively with
respect to r. The height of the blue bar indicates the average
ratio of rerouted RLDs using LRR whereas the height of the
white one shows the average ratio of rerouted RLDs using
WRR.
We notice, obviously, that the IA-SeqRwPLR and the QoT-
AHR algorithms require more RLDs to be rerouted when
r increases. In fact, when r increases, the probability that
an incoming RLD be rejected is higher and hence, more
existing RLDs have to be rerouted to set up the new RLD
and consequently the number of RLDs to reroute increases.
Under high trafﬁc load, the average number of rerouted RLDs
reaches an upper bound corresponding to the network satu-
ration. Unlike those algorithms, the average ratio of RLDs
to be rerouted by the QoT-AAR algorithm decreases when
r increases. Indeed, when the network reaches its saturation
regime, it becomes difﬁcult to reroute an active lightpath to a
shorter path satisfying the required QoT.
We also notice that the average ratios of rerouted RLDs by
the IA-SeqRwPLR and the QoT-AHR algorithms using LRR
are much lower than the average ratios of rerouted RLDs using
WRR. This should, hopefully, lead to short service disruption
period.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have investigated the RWA problem
with signal-quality constraint for dynamic trafﬁc in WDM all-
optical networks. Our proposed RWA algorithms apply active
or hybrid rerouting to alleviate the inefﬁciency brought by the
wavelength continuity and the QoT requirement constraints.
Obtained results show that passive and hybrid rerouting work
much better than active rerouting. Passive lightpath rerouting
is an efﬁcient way to improve the rejection ratio performance
with a short service disruption period. Our forthcoming studies
will consider more physical layer impairment effects to make
the proposed algorithms more effective.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Naas and H. Mouftah, ”Towards realistic planning of WDM transport
network”, Proc. 2005 7th International Conference Transparent Optical
Networks, pp. 54-57, 2005.
[2]
H. Zang, J.P. Jue, and B. Mukherjee, ”A review of routing and wavelength
assignment approaches for wavelength-routed WDM networks,” Optical
Networks Magazine, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 47-60, 2000.
[3]
E. W. M. Wong, A. K. M. Chan, and T. S. P. Yum, ”A taxonomy of
rerouting in circuit switched networks,” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 116-122, 1999.
[4]
K. C. Lee and V. O. K. Li, ”A wavelength rerouting algorithm in wide-
area all-optical networks,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1218-1229, 1996.
[5]
M. Bakri, M. Kouba, M. Menif, and I.Ouerda, ”Static lightpath establish-
ment with transmission impairments consideration in WDM all-optical
networks,” Proc. the 7th International Workshop on Design of Reliable
Communication Networks, pp. 251-258, 2009.
[6]
R. Sabella, E. Iannone, M. Listanti, M. Berdusco, and S. Binetti, ”Impact
of transmission performance on path routing in all-optical transport
network,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology. vol. 16, no. 11,
pp. 1965- 1972, 1998.
[7]
B. Ramamurthy,D. Datta, H. Feng, J. Heritage, and B. Mukherjee,
”Impact of transmission impairments on the teletrafﬁc performance of
wavelength-routed optical networks,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave
Technology, vol. 17 no. 10, pp. 1713-1723, 1999.
[8]
I. Cerutti, A. Fumagalli, and M. J. Potasek, ”Effects of chromatic
dispersion and self-phase Modulation in multihop multirate WDM rings,”
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 411-413, 2002.
[9]
I. E. Fonseca, M. R. N. Ribeiro, and H. Waldman, ”Differentiated
optical QoS under a low complexity FWM-aware wavelength assignment
algorithm,” Proc. the Optical Network Design and Modeling Conference,
pp. 431-438, 2005.
[10]
N. Amdouni, M. Koub`aa, and T. Aguili, ”A Novel lightpath rerouting al-
gorithm for dynamic trafﬁc with transmission impairments consideration
in WDM all-optical networks,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Computer Systems and Industrial Informatics (ICCSII12), pp. 1-6, 2012.
[11]
N. Amdouni, M. Kouba, and T. Aguili, ”On the impact of lightpath
rerouting on connection provisioning with transmission impairments in
WDM all-optical Networks,” Journal of Emerging Trends in Computing
and Information Sciences, vol.4, pp. 76-84, 2013.
[12]
N. Amdouni and T. Aguili, ”A new wavelength rerouting scheme with
short service disruption period for dynamic trafﬁc in WDM transparent
optical networks with physical layer impairments consideration,” in
press. 2016 7th International Conference on Sciences of Electronics,
Technologies of Information and Telecommunications (SETIT), pp. 1-
4, 2016.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

