5G Programmable Infrastructure Orchestration Using ONAP 
 
 
Horia Ştefănescu, Marius Iordache, Bogdan Rusti, 
Cătălin Brezeanu, Jean Ghenţa  
Technology Department 
Orange Romania 
Bucharest, Romania  
e-mail: Horia.Stefanescu@orange.com, 
Marius.Iordache@orange.com, Bogdan. Rusti@orange.com, 
Catalin Brezeanu@orange.com, Jean.Ghenta@orange.com 
Michał Chabiera∗, Łukasz Rajewski∗†, Grzegorz 
Panek∗† 
∗Orange Polska, 
†Warsaw University of Technology,  
Warsaw, Poland  
e-mail: first.second@orange.com
 
 
Abstract - Telco operators are currently reinventing their 
operational model by adopting agile principles and making the 
shift from hardware centric towards software centric 
networks. 5G is not coming only with a very advanced radio 
layer, but also with the evolutionary concept in which the 
network is programmable and accessible through Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs). This stands as a game 
changer and it will allow verticals (e.g., transport, media, 
energy) to seamlessly integrate their applications within the 5G 
ecosystem. This paper presents a programmable infrastructure 
leveraging Open Network Automation Platform (ONAP) 
capabilities developed within two European projects 5G-EVE 
and 5G-VICTORI. The focus is on presenting the work 
performed for Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) onboarding, 
deployment and in life management together with the 5G 
slicing capabilities for Radio Access and Core networks.  
Keywords-ONAP; 
programmable 
infrastructure, 
VNF; 
vRAN;  vEPC; Openstack. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The evolution from 4G to 5G is disruptive for the telco 
operators as they do not only need to embrace new concepts 
such as software centric networks, but also to change their 
operational model completely which has been effectively 
functional for decades.  
The new software centric network model will bring two 
main benefits such as: 
1. Being able to apply DevOps principles in the telco 
world, therefore facilitating a faster pace in 
developing and implementing new functionalities or 
integrating verticals. 
2. End-to-end automation of day 0, 1 and 2 operations 
considering cognitive Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
enhanced capabilities, which will truly simplify 
operations. 
In order to benefit from these advantages, the telco 
operator will need to adapt its operating model from the 
traditional one, in which engineering and operation are 
separated to a DevOps one. This is not simple as it will 
require update in all the existing processes, which will lead 
to a serious organizational transformation. Nevertheless, the 
telco operators are also aware of the high complexity of the 
ecosystem. Firstly, this will require more advanced skills 
from the network engineers and secondly, as more frequent 
operations will be performed, it will be more prone to errors 
and incidents, therefore strict control mechanism should be 
enforced. At the same time, the telco operator will need to 
adapt and evolve its infrastructure, making it fully 
programmable. Besides costs, this comes with a lot of 
technological changes, as the existing model based on 
monolithic equipment is disrupted. 
This paper presents the technical capabilities of the 
programmable infrastructure deployed within 5G-EVE[1] 
and how it will further be utilized by the vertical use cases 
from 5G-VICTORI [2]. At the time of writing this paper, the 
programmable infrastructure allows several Virtual Network 
Functions (VNFs) on boarding and deployment based on 
ETSI specification for Network Function Virtualization 
Management and Orchestration (NFV-MANO) [3]. The 
VNFs are deployed in an OpenStack [4] environment: the 
Radio Access Network (RAN) VNFs are container based 
using Kubernetes or VM based, while the Core VNFs are 
only VM based. Slicing mechanism and proper radio 
resource allocation are also supported in the RAN through 
the Software Defined Network (SDN) controller Open Air 
Interface (OAI)-FlexRAN implementation [5], but also in the 
Core through proper resources and Quality of Service (QoS) 
assurance 
in 
the 
proposed 
communication 
network 
deployment. The programmable infrastructure is orchestrated 
using ONAP [6] with specific features implemented for 
Service Design, Service Deployment and Service Operation. 
The paper emphasizes the technical capabilities available at 
this moment, including the specific configuration needed to 
deploy the RAN and Core VNFs using ONAP.  
The paper is organized as follows. This section is 
dedicated to the introduction. Section 2 relates to a previous 
published paper and it highlights the evolutions presented by 
the current paper. Section 3 summarizes the current ONAP 
capabilities enabled over the OpenStack infrastructure 
providing also a practical guide for deploying end-to-end 
network slices. We conclude the paper in Section 4 where we 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-802-0
AICT 2020 : The Sixteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

also focus on our future work from 5G-EVE and 5G-
VICTORI projects. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In a previously published paper [8] in 2019, by one of the 
co-authors of this paper, the 5G ecosystem intended to be 
developed within 5G-EVE was presented. The work from 
this paper is evolutionary and it is depicting practical 
guidelines for orchestrating VNFs and end-to-end slices 
using ONAP. The related work from standards, working 
groups, and other 5G-PPP European projects is exhaustively 
presented in [8] and will not be repeated here as, from our 
knowledge, no major change took place.  
The research for end-to-end network slicing in 5G is 
intensive, as this is one of the key capabilities of the new 
technology with major outcomes for the vertical industries. 
The research is not limited only to the end-to-end slicing 
mechanism per se (which is also documented in the 3GPP 
standards), but extended to the whole ecosystem/framework 
which enables automated and business agile provisioning 
and maintenance of the slices. In the following paragraphs, 
some related works are briefly presented. These papers help 
in understanding the concept of slicing and the different 
technical challenges that need to be overpassed in order to 
achieve a fully functional framework. 
The work from [9]  presents a framework for automating 
the slicing management in the RAN part, with special 
attention dedicated to the functions, interfaces and 
information models. The theoretical framework is applied in 
a Proof of Concept with limited implementation of Radio 
Resource Management (RRM) algorithms. 
In [10] the authors focus on the technical implementation 
of end-to-end slicing providing resource isolation and 
programmability on resources. The slicing is achieved by 
using OAI-RAN capabilities (similar with this paper) for the 
radio part and by introducing a deeply programmable node 
architecture (FLARE) for the core slicing with complete 
segregation among data and control plane.  
The work from [11] presents the implementation of end-
to-end slicing using Mosaic5G software packages [12] 
which are also utilized in this paper. The authors present 
different configuration scenarios for the Virtual Machines 
(VMs) in order to achieve the required performance for a 
certain VNF, which is also very useful for the work from 
this paper. 
III. 
ORCHESTRATION OF PROGRAMMABLE 
INFRASTRUCTURE USING ONAP 
In this paper, we are presenting a novel end-to-end 
network slicing mechanism implementation comprising 
both RAN and Core network elements using the Open 
Network Automation Platform (ONAP) [6] for NFV/VNFs 
onboarding and service deployment in 5G Non Standalone 
Architecture (5G NSA) [7]. The slicing mechanism is based 
on RAN Public Land Mobile Network (PLMN) identity 
(ID) techniques for the core network selection.  
ONAP is an open source project developed by Linux 
Foundation, which allows design and creation of VNFs and 
network services orchestration. A set of blueprints is made 
available with every new platform release. ONAP 
Architecture provides two frameworks which enable the 
user to split the design and the creation phases (Design 
Time Framework) from the deployment phase (Run Time 
Framework). The ONAP implementation for 5G-EVE is 
depicted in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. ONAP implementation in 5G-EVE 
 
The main component of Design Time Framework is 
Software Design and Creation (SDC). Network services are 
represented as forwarding graphs composed of multiple 
VNFs. Each of them is represented in ONAP Catalog as 
Virtual Service Product. Deployment process begins with 
creation of the vendor’s entitlements. In order to onboard 
the VNF, the user has to provide HEAT template, describing 
this network function, which has to meet ONAP specific 
requirements. The correctness of each template is checked 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-802-0
AICT 2020 : The Sixteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

automatically during uploading. Once the template is 
onboarded, the certification process could be started. The 
above-mentioned steps, Vendor Software Product (VSP) 
creation, template onboarding and certification, have to be 
done for each VNF. The network service could be 
composed of the network functions stored in the catalog and 
afterwards it is submitted for testing before being deployed 
to the production environment. The service model is stored 
in SDC which notifies the Service Orchestrator (SO) and 
Active and Available Inventory (A&AI). Once onboarding 
steps are finished, ONAP can deploy service instance on 
virtualized infrastructure based on models distributed to SO. 
Virtual Infrastructure Deployment (VID) enables the 
selection of the service and the triggering of the instantiation 
process in SO. In order to deploy the service, a la carte flow 
involves performing a set of steps and actions called 
building blocks. Service and VNFs objects need to be 
created first. 
During the preloading phase, some VNF parameters 
values required during the instantiation are provided to SDN 
Controller (SDN-C). Once this is done, the VF modules that 
host VNFs could be instantiated. In fact this is triggered by 
the SO utilizing MultiVIM component, which is responsible 
for collecting information about tenants and clouds 
registered into ONAP. It also enables deploying VF 
modules in different type of infrastructure managers like 
OpenStack or Kubernetes. ONAP does not manage images 
of network functions. They have to be provided by the 
vendor and registered in specific cloud. 
In 5G-EVE project, the operations from both Design and 
Run Time Framework are automated with open source 
onap_tests library [13]. The user has to provide HEAT 
templates for VNFs and network service composition, and 
requests to relevant ONAP components APIs are made in 
appropriate order. It is important to note that the images are 
previously uploaded to infrastructure managers. 
 
The 5G-EVE Portal is the functional entity that provides 
access to the 5G-EVE Platform for verticals. Portal allows 
execution of functionalities such as instantiate, monitor 
KPIs and reconfigure. Each request from the Portal is 
passed through Experiment Lifecycle Manager (ELM) to the 
Interworking Layer which is composed of Multi Site 
Network Orchestrator (MSNO) and Adaptation Layer. 
MSNO decides which site should host the requested service 
and through the Adaptation Layer, it communicates with the 
specific site's orchestrator. SOL005 [14] Translation 
Component has been implemented on top of the ONAP 
instance dedicated to French site orchestration. It enables to 
communicate with ONAP Northbound API interface (NBI) 
(5) in order to perform operations ordered to execute by 5G-
EVE Platform (4). 
The VNF management capabilities of ONAP are assured 
by the joint interaction of the Service Orchestrator 
component with SDN-C(11) or Application Controller 
(APP-C)(14) 
components. 
The 
post 
instantiation 
configurations can have two origins. They are the result of 
the service reconfiguration request initiated by the end-user 
or the result of the control loop automation actions. The first 
one is triggered by SO APIs (9) or VID portal (10) where 
external applications or end-users can trigger orchestration 
workflows. Such workflows are either embedded into the 
orchestration logic, or they are network service and network 
function specific. In the latter case, the service designers can 
compose custom orchestration workflows with Workflow 
Designer capability of C portal. The standard or user-
defined orchestration 
workflows can include day-2 
reconfiguration operations or other VNF life cycle 
management operations into one orchestration workflow. 
APP-C component is leveraged by SO for execution of 
selected life cycle management actions and reconfiguration 
actions on VNFs (14). The first includes such actions (15) 
like start, stop, or restart which are invoked on OpenStack 
directly. The reconfiguration actions can utilize NetConf 
configuration protocol or Ansible reconfiguration utility. 
For the latter one, APP-C is equipped with dedicated 
Ansible server which ensures communication with devices 
and it performs delegated reconfiguration tasks. APP-C 
enables also the design of configuration templates for each 
action with the Controller Design Tool dashboard, where the 
selection of communication protocol and translation of input 
parameters can be specified. It is worth mentioning that 
APP-C actions can be executed without SO and APP-C can 
be integrated directly with third party applications as a key 
functionality within 5G-EVE Portal (16). 
The slicing implementation developed within the 5G-
EVE project is achieved using the ONAP over the 
OpenStack cloud infrastructure [15]. The goal is to show the 
deployment of several telco VNFs - virtual Evolved Packet 
Core (vEPC) and virtual Radio Access Network (vRAN) for 
supporting different 5G use cases like Ultra Reliable Low 
Latency Communication (URLLC) and Massive Machine-
Type Communications (mMTC), which will further be 
developed in the 5G- VICTORI project.  
Figure 2 depicts the two end-to-end network slices (slice 
1 represented in orange and slice 2 represented in green), 
using the described NFV/VNFs components. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 5G testbed for programmable infrastructure orchestration using 
ONAP 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-802-0
AICT 2020 : The Sixteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The virtualized infrastructure was prepared in advance in 
terms of communication network, so throughout the ONAP 
deployment, each of the two slices are connected to its own 
OpenStack provider network. In this implementation, we 
used as Remote Radio Unit (RRU) the X310 [16] device, 
which is a high-performance, scalable Software Defined 
Radio (SDR) platform for designing and deploying next 
generation wireless communications systems, providing 
reliability and fault-tolerance for deployments, simplifying 
the  control and the management of a network. 
Based on the Mosaic5G group of software packages 
available [12], the vEPC core function network components 
– virtualized Mobility Management Entity (vMME),  
virtualized 
Serving/Packet 
Gateway 
(vS/PGW) 
and 
virtualized Home Subscriber Server (vHSS) – are deployed 
in a single Virtual Machine (VM), using HEAT templates. 
The first VM (Figure 3) deployed is a 64-bits operating 
system, using 4 cores Intel i7, 16GB RAM and 2 Ethernet 
interfaces for service connectivity and all the specific vEPC 
application configuration files related to: hostname, Domain 
Name Server (DNS), S6a diameter, S1-AP, authentication 
functions, Full Qualified Domain Names (FQDNs), 
communication networks and PLMNs.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Mosaic 5G Core implementation 
 
The second VNF (Figure 4) deployed through ONAP 
over the OpenStack infrastructure in one VM is the RAN 
eNodeB. The VM is using Ubuntu 18.04 LTS 64-bits as 
operating system and with a kernel version greater than 
4.10.x, 4 cores Intel i7, 16 GB of RAM and two Ethernet 
interfaces.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Mosaic 5G Core implementation 
 
In order to be able to instantiate and run the VNF in 
virtualized environment, it is required to ensure several 
specific computing environment prerequisites configured in 
OpenStack infrastructure.  
For the use case implementation presented, the specific 
infrastructure configuration was applied only on the 
physical host where the VM is intended to be deployed 
through ONAP. The physical host must have available the 
following special CPU flags enabled: avx, avx2.  
Also, KVM mode needs to be enabled to be used in the 
OpenStack nova file path /etc/nova/nova.conf for the  
compute_driver parameter libvirt.LibvirtDriver, setting the 
libvirt section configuration for  virt_type to  kvm and 
specifying the CPU model parameter cpu_mode  value to  
host-model. An OpenStack specific flavor has been 
configured for this VNF as depicted in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. vRAN OpenStack special VM flavor 
 
After the vRAN VM is running, the proper VM CPU 
allocation and configuration for avx settings were checked. 
In order to automatically instantiate the RAN VNF 
application, 
the 
script 
inside 
the 
VM 
is 
used 
(start.mosaic5g). This script instantiates the vRAN 
application after deployment, as this is not implicitly done.  
Figure 6 depicts the success of this instantiation. The 
other 
specific 
application 
configurations 
related 
to 
hostname, S1-MME, communication networks and PLMNs, 
are being done through the HEAT templates. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. vRAN function running in VM 
 
The correct functioning of the end-to-end slice is 
demonstrated by checking the statistics on the vMME in 
Figure 7. 
 
 
 
Figure 7 vMME network statistics 
 
At this moment, our research is showing successful 
deployment of end-to-end slices with proper QoS enabled 
and automated network resource allocation leveraging 
ONAP capabilities over an OpenStack infrastructure.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-802-0
AICT 2020 : The Sixteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have exposed a programmable 
infrastructure leveraging ONAP capabilities, with focus on 
presenting the onboarding and deployment of the VNFs, 
showing the 5G slicing capabilities in the RAN and Core 
subsystems in 5G Non Standalone Architecture. The 
network slicing end-to-end mechanism is based on the RAN 
PLMN ID techniques for the selection of the Core Network. 
The novelty for network slicing implementation resides in 
using of ONAP over OpenStack cloud infrastructure. The 
aim is to demonstrate the deployment of a small number of 
telco VNFs (vEPC, vRAN) for providing services to 
different 5G use cases like URLLC and mMTC. 
In the 5G-EVE project, a dedicated portal was developed 
having the functionality of providing access for verticals at 
5G-EVE Platform. Through this entity, there is a possibility 
to instantiate, monitor KPIs or reconfigure the service. A set 
of information is mandatory to be fulfilled as a pre-requisite: 
the vendor of VNFs must provide the HEAT templates and 
the service graph, which are stored in a specific cloud. The 
requests to related ONAP components APIs are made 
accordingly with the network service composition. 
Based on the Mosaic5G group of software packages, the 
vEPC, containing vMME, vPGW and vHSS, is deployed in 
one VM. A similar approach is used also for deploying of 
VNF RAN eNB. This model is capable of providing 
multiple e2e flexible and efficient network slices (the time 
of deployment is less than 1 minute), automatic network 
resource allocation and VNF life-cycle management (in the 
future). The research will be enhanced within 5G-EVE with 
in life management capabilities resulting in a fully 
functionable test bed to be further utilized for the 5G-
VICTORI usecases, as described in Section 5. 
  
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
The work from this paper stands as basics for the future 
evolutions envisioned in the 5G-EVE and the 5G-VICTORI 
European projects. Therefore, it is important for the reader 
to understand the future plans as the research and 
development will continue for the next years.  
In-life slice configuration will be performed by 
increasing the network compute capacity triggered by 
service reconfiguration request initiated by the user through 
the portal or as a result of control loop automation actions. 
In the run-time step, a set of in-life management actions are 
involved: upgrade, network slice instance (NSI) scaling, 
changes of NSI capacity, changes of NSI topology.  
The entire functionality will be further evaluated on 5G-
VICTORI France/Romania cross site orchestration cluster 
using 5G-EVE test bed facilities in two use cases: 
transportation 
and 
energy. 
The 
test 
bed 
physical 
infrastructure will contain control and compute servers, 
storage, eNodeB PNF, 4G/5G video cameras, radio licensed 
spectrum, IP/MPLS between 5G-VICTORI Bucharest 
facility and Alba Iulia Municipality infrastructure; L3VPNs 
and IPsec connectivity between 5G-VICTORI infrastructure 
and 5G-EVE French Cluster ONAP, MEC for video data 
analytics. The virtualized infrastructure will be deployed 
using OSMv5; Docker; ONAP and SDNC suite and 
Prometheus will be used for performance monitoring. 
NFV/VNF suite will be provided through 4G5G RAN OAI 
Mosaic5G for radio part, 4G5G Core OAI Mosaic5G for 
core part and the application software for use case 
application experimentation. Grafana is used for Service 
data visualization and KPI performance validation. 
The first use case is addressing the transportation service 
that addresses URLLC feature requirements and pop-up 
network on-demand creation capabilities. Infotainment 
versus public safety services will be orchestrated when a 
threat is identified by the system, the infotainment resources 
are back-logged and a public safety high quality live stream 
is established. The use case will cover all deployment 
phases: infotainment and public safety application design; 
5G deployment and instantiation, immediate setup time 
(triggered) service, service in life management and 
automation, service instantiation & MEC analytics function, 
QoS experimentation and service optimization. The creation 
of the slice will be triggered either manually or 
automatically by an external event alert, the functionality of 
the digital mobility use case will be assessed trough a set of 
tests spanning from vertical applications performance 
evaluation to solution functionality.  
The second use case is a Low Voltage (LV) smart 
energy metering use case addressing mMTC capabilities to 
show that 5G mMTC services can be used for an advanced 
energy metering deployment. It will be demonstrated using 
the same 5G-EVE test bed facilities to provide energy 
metering services for energy consumers like public 
buildings and street lighting in the Alba Iulia Smart City 
environment and for energy sources like photovoltaic panel 
or national grid. Smart Energy metering use case demands 
advanced requests of high data processing capacities, 
flexible provisioning capabilities and service customization 
to create automated capabilities for deployment and in-life 
management over network virtualized infrastructures. The 
scenario assumes metering data collection from endpoints 
scattered across a city and requires scalability of network 
slice from get-go. The collected measurements will be 
transferred to the central cloud facilities where they will be 
stored, processed and analyzed by the telemetry platform. 
Advanced analytics will be used to predict future power 
demands. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-802-0
AICT 2020 : The Sixteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly funded by the European 
Commission under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
program - grant agreement number 815074 (5G-EVE 
project) and 857201 (5G-VICTORI). The paper solely 
reflects the views of the authors. The Commission is not 
responsible for the contents of this paper or any use made 
thereof. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 5G-PPP Phase 3 Project 5G-EVE. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.5g-eve.eu/ 2020.06.12 
[2] 5G-PPP Phase 3 Project 5G-VICTORI. [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.5g-victori-project.eu/ 2020.06.12 
[3] Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV); Management and 
Orchestration, Group Speciﬁcation, Dec. 2014. 
[4] Openstack 
framework. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.openstack.org/ 2020.06.12 
[5] OAI-FlexRAN. [Online]. Available from:  
https://gitlab.eurecom.fr/mosaic5g/mosaic5g/wikis/tutorials/o
ai-
ran?fbclid=IwAR3V__MC60MMPV6KqFIJpOox0EnUphKg
eH0hApCGiIsSDs3NwVNe70oBAZ8 2020.06.12 
[6] ONAP Architecture Overview. [Online]. Available from:   
https://www.onap.org /architecture 2020.06.12 
[7] 5G NSA: Universal Mobile Telecommunications System 
(UMTS); 
LTE; 
5G; 
NR; 
Multi-connectivity; 
Overall 
description; Stage-2  (3GPP TS 37.340 version 15.5.0 Release 
15. 
[8] L. Yala, M. Iordache, A. Bousselmi, S. Imadali, “5G mobile 
network orchestration and management using open-Source”, 
2019 
IEEE 
2nd 
5G 
World 
Forum 
(5GWF), 
doi: 10.1109/5GWF.2019.8911690 
[9] R. Ferrús, O. Sallent, J. Pérez-Romero and R. Agustí, “On the 
automation of RAN slicing provisioning: solution framework 
and applicability examples”, Eurasip journal on wireless 
communication and networking, Dec. 2019, pp. 1-12, doi:  
10.1186/s13638-019-1486-1. 
[10] A. Nakao et al.,” End-to-end network slicing for 5G mobile 
networks”, Journal of Information Processing 25, Feb. 2017, 
pp. 153-163, doi: 10.2197/ipsjjip.25.153 
[11] I. Afolabi et al., “End-to-end network slicing enabled through 
network function virtualization”, 2017 IEEE Conference on 
Standards for Communications and Networking (CSCN), Sep. 
2017, doi: 10.1109/CSCN.2017.8088594 
[12] Mosaic5G, 
https://gitlab.eurecom.fr/mosaic5g/mosaic5g/-
/wikis/tutorials 
[13] Orange Opensource onap-tests library. [Online]. Available 
from:  https://gitlab.com/ Orange-OpenSource/lfn/onap/onap-
tests/-/tree/dublin/onaptests 2020.06.12 
[14] ETSI GS NFV-SOL 005. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver 
/etsigs/NFV-
SOL/001099/005/02.04.0160/gsNFV-SOL005v020401p.pdf 
2020.06.12 
[15] Openstack Infra: OpenStack installation tutorial for Ubuntu. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://docs.openstack.org/newton/install-guide-
ubuntu/overview.html 2020.06.12 
[16] x310 
RRU 
USRP. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ettus.com/all-products/x310-kit/ 2020.06.12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-802-0
AICT 2020 : The Sixteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

