Using Service Delay for Facilitating Access Point Selection in VANETs 
 
Tin-Yu Wu1, Wei-Tsong Lee2, Tsung-Han Lin2, Wei-Lun Hsu2,Kai-Lin Cheng2 
 
1Institute of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Ilan University, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
2Department of Electrical Engineering, Tamkang University, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
tyw@niu.edu.tw, wtlee@mail.tku.edu.tw, possiblejay@hotmail.com, hsuweiluntw@hotmail.com, mypc_01@yahoo.com.tw
 
Abstract—With the rapid development of wireless mobile 
networks, VANET (vehicular ad hoc networks) that adopt 
transportation tools as mobile platforms have received great 
attention. Integrating VANETs with wireless infrastructure to 
provide high-quality transmission services also has become one 
of the important research topics. Because terminal devices in 
vehicular environments are highly mobile, a MN (mobile node) 
will encounter frequent handoffs while accessing wireless 
network services. However, supposing the chosen handoff AP 
(access point) presents too long service delay, the quality of the 
Internet, 
especially 
real-time 
services, 
like 
VoIP 
and 
multimedia streaming, will be greatly influenced. Therefore, by 
using the packet scheduling architecture for classified service 
at APs, this paper proposes a handoff scheme based on service 
delay prediction. According to the scheduling scheme, we can 
estimate the load and service delay of different access 
categories of the regional APs. Our proposed scheme allows the 
MN requesting real-time services to be allocated to the AP with 
the lower service delay and the chosen AP thus can reduce the 
service delay for users. 
Keywords- VANET; Wireless network switch; AP selection 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, wireless network has been extensively 
deployed in the environment for users to access network 
services. Wireless communication, consequently, becomes 
more and more important in our daily life because users at 
any locations are able to use wireless network via APs during 
the moving process. Because of the emergence of abundant 
real-time network services, the QoS (quality of service) of 
wireless network also becomes significant. By integrating 
wireless network with telematics, VANETs (vehicular ad 
hoc networks) provide more and more services for vehicles 
on the roads. Nevertheless, owing to the high mobility of 
terminal devices in VANETs, handoffs occur frequently 
while users access wireless network services [1][2]. If the 
handoff latency is too high, the quality of network services, 
like VoIP and multimedia streaming, will be greatly 
influenced [3]. Previous VANET researches mainly focused 
on the reduction of scan delay during the handoff procedure, 
but did not consider the delay resulted from the load of the 
target AP. For example, not only the processing speed of 
different service types but also the load of different service 
types in an AP varies. Thus, the existing methods cannot 
select the most suitable AP to decrease the service delay. For 
this reason, this paper presents a scheduling scheme to 
estimate the load and service delay of different service types 
for the APs in the area and select the optimal AP for each 
service type for handoff. Our proposed scheme allows the 
MN requesting real-time services to be allocated to the AP 
with the lower service delay.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II 
introduces the background and related works. Section III 
explains our proposed scheme, including system architecture, 
scheduling architecture of APs for different service types, 
load estimation for APs, service delay prediction for APs, 
service-oriented plus service delay prediction-based regional 
load balance, and AP selection flowchart. Section IV uses 
the simulation to prove that our proposed scheme decreases 
the service delay for users. Finally, the conclusion and future 
objective is given in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Every AP on a wireless network is responsible for a 
specific coverage area. When a MN is leaving the coverage 
area of the current AP, the MN has to search for the 
surrounding APs and handoff to the next suitable one. The 
complete 
handoff 
procedure 
includes 
scanning, 
authentication, and re-association. Through the selection 
mechanism, the MN can determine the most suitable AP, 
perform the authentication and re-associate with the AP to 
finish the handoff. All existing handoff mechanisms choose 
the best AP to handoff based on the RSSI (received signal 
strength indicator) but such mechanisms are not suitable for 
highly mobile VANETs since the time for a MN to stay with 
an AP is short and handoffs thus frequently occur. Because 
MNs choose the target APs by themselves and most of them 
connect to the network via several specific APs, the service 
delay increases greatly and consequently affects the quality 
of network transmissions, especially real-time network 
services.  
Therefore, traditional mobility management mechanisms 
for Internet and MANET (mobile ad hoc network) cannot 
satisfy the needs of vehicular networks and the performance 
degrades severely owing to the unique features of vehicular 
networks [4]. In this paper, we mainly focus on the 
communication between vehicles and infrastructure of RSU 
(roadside unit) with the attempt to satisfy users' requirements 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

by improving the handoff according to the characteristics of 
VANETs. 
Up to now, many AP selection schemes have been 
proposed to determine the best AP to handoff by different 
load metrics and we will introduce several existing AP 
selection schemes next. The load metric proposed in [5] is 
the Maximizing Local Throughput, which is based on the 
number of MNs connected by each AP and the PER (packet 
error rate). However, the number of MNs only roughly 
implies the load of each AP because the degree of network 
utilization of each AP differs and the states of different 
traffic types alter with the time. In addition, this mechanism 
depends on the PER very much. When the PER is very low, 
the load balance cannot be improved efficiently. Another AP 
selection mechanism presented in [6] chooses the AP in light 
of the signal strength of APs, the number of MNs and the bit 
rate. By considering the bit rate between APs and MNs and 
the number of MNs connected to each AP, [7] estimates the 
throughput between APs and MNs at the higher rate. In [8], 
on account of queue congestion that might occur when the 
network is overloaded, the authors use the frame dropping 
rates of the current AP as the load metric and regulate the 
received signal strength from each AP to adjust the coverage 
area of each AP with the aim of achieving load balancing. 
Based on the measurements of delay incurred by 802.11 
beacon frames, [9] selects the AP with the maximal potential 
throughput or bandwidth. Due to QoS considerations, [10] 
proposes the iLB (integrated Load Balancing) scheme, 
which chooses the AP with the lower packet delay and 
defines a handoff threshold value based on the packet loss 
rate. The iLB scheme establishes an APC (AP controller) to 
gather related information for the APs periodically and 
broadcast the information of the adjacent APs to the MNs by 
beacon frames. For QoS management and congestion control 
for wireless APS, Tartarelli et al. [11] proposes to establish a 
Policy Server to differentiate QoS guarantees for different 
traffic types and users, and to reduce network congestion by 
traffic distribution. Tüysüz et al. [12] present a novel  AP 
selection algorithm, which uses E-model conversational 
audio quality factor R to estimate the perceived voice quality 
as the criterion in selecting the most suitable AP to handoff. 
III. 
PROPOSED LOAD BALANCE SCHEME 
In VANETs, MNs connect to APs to access wireless 
services, but MNs may encounter different levels of service 
delay because of frequent handoffs. According to the 
scheduling, we propose to quantize the load of different ACs 
(access categories) in each AP and present the Service Delay 
Prediction scheme, a service delay-based AP selection 
mechanism. After the scheme quantizes the service delays of 
different ACs in each AP, users can select the handoff APs 
with the lower service delay based on the current services. 
Such a classified selection scheme distributes the load 
efficiently in case the throughput is degraded and some APs 
are overloaded due to load imbalance. Previous AP selection 
methods chiefly select the best AP to handoff based on 
various load metrics after the affiliation of MNs. In this 
paper, we classify the network services, use the service delay 
of different ACs in each AP as the load metric, and select the 
most suitable AP that meets the requirements of the MN to 
decrease the service delay. 
A. System Deployment and AP Control Architecture 
Based on the AP architecture proposed in [14], this paper 
divides the vehicular environment into several service areas 
and APs in each area offer services for local MNs. When 
several MNs are leaving the current service area, APs in the 
forward area will provide wireless services to MNs. To 
guarantee QoS and distribute the load, our scheme gathers 
users' statuses and APs' load in the forward area to estimate 
the load of the next handoff AP for MNs to select a suitable 
AP. As shown in Figure 1, an AP controller is established to 
periodically gather the area information. Every AP in the 
area regularly uploads its own information and the conditions 
of the current MNs in the area to the APC. AP information 
includes the current channel, location and data amount of 
each AC that is waiting to be processed. MN information 
records the traffic flow of all ACs that users are accessing in 
the area. Supposing a MN is accessing several kinds of 
services simultaneously, the AC with the highest use 
frequency is regarded as the representative category. 
According to the information, the APC estimates the loading 
states and waiting delay of each AC in APs in the forward 
area and sends the computed result to the MNs in the current 
area through the current APs.  
v
AP10
APC
AP9
AP7
AP6
AP10
AP8
AP3
AP2
AP1
AP5
AP4
AP8
AP3
AP2
AP1
AP4
AP4
AP6
AP7
AP9
Beacon Next Area's AP Info
Gather Area Information
Send Computed Result
 
Figure 1.  System architecture. 
B. QoS for Service Classification 
For APs to support QoS-guaranteed service classification, 
when packets of various traffic types arrive at APs in the 
vehicular network, the classifier of each AP maps the packets 
to the ends of the corresponding FIFO (First In First Out) 
queues and the packets in the queues wait to be delivered. 
Packets in the output queue of each category will be 
scheduled by the packet scheduler. By the weighted round 
robin module, the scheduler transmits the packets from the 
high-priority queues first. Queues of different ACs have 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

different priority values and thus the number of packets will 
be different in each round- robin cycle. In every round-robin 
cycle, the packet number of every queue is fixed and 
proportional to the weight. As defined in IEEE 802.11e, 
packets in vehicular environment include four access 
categories: AC0=AC_VO, AC1=AC_VI, AC2= AC_BE, 
AC3= AC_BK and each AP has four output queues  to store 
the packets of VO (Voice), VI (Video), BE (Best Effort) and 
BK (Background). In this paper, the packet size of the four 
categories is the same and the time for an AP to deliver 
packets is set to T (Delivery Time Unit). Every AC has its 
own weight: WVO,WVI,WBE and WBK, which means the 
packet number that can be delivered in each round-robin 
cycle. Packets are sent in order from the highest-priority VO, 
VI, BE to BK. The total deliver time of packets from four 
queues in every complete round-robin cycle can be denoted 
by Equation 1:  
        
3
0
i
A C
i
W
T



                             (1) 
Queues with the higher weights can deliver more packets 
in each round-robin cycle and the processing speed for 
different queues differs. The scheduler transmits the data of 
four ACs in order in each round-robin cycle until the packets 
of each AC are fully delivered. 
C. Load Estimation for APs 
In the previous section, we have introduced the service-
classified packet scheduling architecture for APs. The packet 
number of each AC that is waiting to be delivered in the AP 
is set to NNN. Based on the parameters of priority 
scheduling for the router in [15], we set the weight values of 
four ACs (WVO,WVI,WBE,WBK) to (8,4,2,1). 
M U A C i
 means the 
number of round-robin cycles for all the packets in the 
queues waiting to be transmitted completely and to serve the 
MNs. Supposing the number of round-robin cycles of two 
ACs at an AP is the same, the waiting delay for users who 
access the two ACs will be similar, which implies the 
loading states of the two ACs are the same. On the contrary, 
the bigger difference between the numbers of round-robin 
cycles refers to not only different loading states of the two 
ACs but also their waiting delay. The number of round-robin 
cycles displays the comparative busyness of the ACs and the 
number of rounds that users have to wait.  
3
1
0
4
i
n
n
A C
n
I
M U
M U
n







   
(2)
 
Equation 2 uses   to represent 
M U A C i
, the average 
number of round-robin cycles of each AC at an AP. In this 
paper, the value of   is regarded as the load of an AP. The 
higher value of   means the larger average number of 
round-robin cycles of the ACs at an AP. Therefore, the data 
that waits to be delivered must be processed by more rounds 
and the load of the AP is comparatively heavy.   
D. Service Delay Prediction for Different Access 
Categories 
Because we use a round-robin algorithm to schedule 
packets from several output queues, the amount of time 
needed to process one queue is directly influenced by the 
amount of data in the other queues. The packet scheduler 
transmits the packets in the queues in order. When a MN 
chooses the ACs on an AP, different amount of data in the 
queues results in different levels of service delay. Figure 2 
displays the flowchart for computing service delay of 
different ACs.  
Several basic parameters are defined as follows: 
 
N A C i
: number of the AC packets waiting for 
transmission at an AP 
 
T o ta l : AP's service delay caused by the cumulative 
number of packets sent before serving users 
 
W A C i
: number of the AC packets that can be 
transmitted during a round-robin cycle 
 
M U A C i
: number of round-robin cycles for the AC 
queue to wait for processing the MN's data  
 
T : delivery time unit for the AP to transmit packets 
 
I : serial number of the target AC { 0=VO , 1=VI , 
2=BE , 3=BK } 
Through the APC, we know the states of the four AC 
queues in the APs in the forward area, estimate the service 
delay of the AC queues, and obtains the service delay of each 
AC while the MN determines the best AP to handoff. 
Different levels of service delay is required for different 
service types. Compared with previous load estimation 
methods, our proposed scheme  measures the service delay 
that users may encounter after choosing the target AP and 
thus reveals the loading states that users actually experience 
more. The APC gathers the information of the forward area 
and obtains  , the current loading states of the APs, and 
service delay of each AC according to 
N A C i
, the data amount 
of the ACs. 
Target AC
Service Delay  Total
i=0
     ACi's           
              <
Target AC's
Aci   Priority<Target 
AC
ACi
MU
AC
MU
Add  
N*T
YES
NO
YES
Add   
Weight*(MUAC-1)*T
NO
Add   
Weight*MUAC*T
i+1
i=3
YES
Service Delay  Total
NO
 
Figure 2.  Flowchart for the computation of service delay. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

E. Service-oriented plus Service Delay Prediction-based 
Regional Load Balance 
This paper presents a service-oriented scheme, which 
selects the best AP to handoff according to the service delay 
of all APs. As shown in Figure 3, the vehicle MN1 can 
choose AP1 or AP2 for the handoff. Because different ACs 
have different advantages, the processing speed of the four 
AC queues in each AP is also different and so are the queue 
lengths. Thus, before MN1 makes the decision, several 
considerations must be made. As for the simple circumstance, 
MN1 demands VI service currently, keeps uploading a fixed 
number of packets to its designated AP, and will choose the 
best candidate AP to handoff. Figure 3 shows that AP2 is 
lighter loaded than AP1 but the number of VI packets to be 
delivered in AP2 is more than AP1. Different queue lengths 
of the four ACs influence the service delay. For this reason, 
our proposed scheme considers both the service delay of 
each AC and the loading states of the APs to guarantee the 
QoS of each AC and to achieve the regional load balancing. 
We aim to select an AP with the lower service delay of a 
specific AC and the less average round level for the handoff. 
BK
VI
BE
BE
AP  2
VI
VO
VO
VO
BE
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
BE
BE
BK
BK
VI
BE
BK
BK
AP  1
BE
BK
VO
VO
VO
VO
VO
VO
VO
VO
VO
VO
VO
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VO
VO
VO
BE
BK
BE
BK
BK
MN1
0
1
2
3
?
?
 
Figure 3.  Service-oriented AP selection. 
By our scheme, we can get the service delay of each AC 
on each AP in the forward area. Since AC VO clients cannot 
endure too long delay, service delay is significant to AC VO 
and an AP with the lower service delay will be necessary for 
the handoff procedure. Also, AC VO traffic has low 
bandwidth requirement. On the other hand, with the design 
of the buffer, AC VI often can endure longer delay than AC 
VO, but the data generation rate of  AC VI is higher and thus 
demands higher bandwidth requirement than AC VO. 
According to ITU-T, G.1010 [13], based on users' tolerance 
of real-time services, we set the threshold values for service 
delay, Th1 and Th2, and classify the service delay of the ACs 
on each AP into three levels, as displayed in Table 1.   
TABLE I.  
SERVICE DELAY LEVELS 
Service Delay<Th1
Service Delay Level
Th1<Service Delay<Th2
Th2<Service Delay
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
 
In the APC, each AC has a table of service delay levels to 
level the APs and APs in the forward area are divided into 
three levels according to the table. Level 1 means the service 
delay that is lower than Th1 and is imperceptible to users. 
Level 2 means the service delay ranging between Th1~Th2 
that is perceptible but tolerable to users. The service delay 
that is higher than Th2 and intolerable to users is leveled as 
Level 3. Therefore, four ACs are leveled into different 
service delay levels based on the same thresholds. 
F. Service Delay Prediction AP Selection Scheme 
The APC gathers the states of each AP in each area, 
calculates the service delay of each AP, and lists each AP in 
the target AC's service delay level table. After the APs 
broadcast the service delay level table of the APs in the 
forward area, users can examine the table of the target AC 
and select the AP with the minimum service delay level and 
the least average round level for the handoff. By the load 
estimation, our service delay prediction scheme allows the 
MNs to select the APs that satisfy the service delay of the 
target AC and choose the handoff AP with the minimum 
service delay level and the minimum average round level. 
Instead of choosing the AP with the minimum waiting time, 
we choose the AP with the lightest load so that the MN can 
distribute the load efficiently while selecting the AP to 
handoff. To satisfy QoS guarantee and achieve load 
balancing, our scheme maps users to different ACs, 
considers the APs with the minimum service delay level first, 
and selects the AP with the minimum average round level.  
APC gather 
information in 
each area
Calculate  
Each AC 
Service Delay
Put each AP in 
Target AC's
Service Delay Level Table
Min(Service Delay Level )  
&&  
Min(Average Round Level            )

Send the result to 
Mobile Node 
By Each AP
Mobile Node choose the AP
 
Figure 4.  Mobile Node Handoff Architecture. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
This section will simulate and analyze our proposed 
scheme. Section 4.1 investigates the average service delay 
variation of four ACs under different traffic flow. Matlab is 
used as the simulation tool and related steps and parameters 
are described in the following. 
By referring to [14], we group the APs in the areas and 
choose the best APs to handoff when MNs move from one 
area to the other. Figure 5 presents the simulation scenario, 
in which each area is constructed by a fixed number of APs. 
The overlapping range of the two areas is assumed to be 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

50M. The average data generation rate of each AC is set 
based on ITU-T, G.1010[13] and the weight values of the 
four ACs are set to (8,4,2,1). Compared with (4,3,2,1), our 
assumed setting conforms to the service delay of the four 
ACs more under the same load. To choose the most suitable 
APs to handoff, we predict the service delay that MNs might 
encounter while moving into the next area. Moreover, to 
avoid too long service delay affecting the QoS of real-time 
services and to maintain the load balancing of the next area, 
we classify the APs and MNs according to the service types 
and use the average round level and service delay as the load 
metrics. In the following simulation, with 5 APs in the 
forward area, we examine the service delay variation of the 
four ACs when the amount of data increases. The rest 
parameters are listed in Table 2. 
v
 
Figure 5.  Simulation Scenario. 
TABLE II.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
 
Parameters 
Value 
Packet Size 
1024 bytes 
AP Service Rate 
100MBps 
AP transmission Radius 
500m 
Overlap range 
50m 
Mobile Node Speed 
100 Km/h 
Access Category 
VO,VI,BE,BK 
(WVO,WVI,WBE,WBK) 
(8,4,2,1) 
Service Upload Rate 
8~50 packets/sec 
Offered Load(MB)  
5MB~30MB 
Th1 
150ms 
Th2 
400ms 
 
4.1  Analysis of Service Delay 
In the scenario, there are 5 APs in the forward area. 
When the MNs' load during the handoff procedure increases, 
we use different load metrics and compare the average delay 
variation of the four ACs under different traffic flow 
conditions. The results are shown in Figure 6~8. The load 
metrics include: (1) service delay, proposed in this paper that 
calculates the service delay of four ACs in each AP and 
classifies the APs, (2) load balance, proposed in [10] that 
selects the best AP to handoff according to the packet delay 
metric, and (3) RSSI. Because Service Delay Prediction 
scheme levels the APs in the forward area based on service 
delay, Figure 6 reveals that our method allows the MNs 
requesting real-time services to have lower service delay. 
Compared with the packet delay-based scheme presented in 
[10] and the RSSI-based scheme, considering that different 
ACs require different service delay, our Service Delay 
Prediction scheme classifies the APs according to the 
services to the MNs, classifies the MNs, and chooses the AP 
with the lowest service delay levels for the handoff.  
 
Figure 6.  Simulation Scenario. Average delay variation of four access 
categories (Service Delay Prediction). 
 
Figure 7.  Average delay variation of four access categories (Load 
Balance). 
 
Figure 8.  Average delay variation of four access categories (RSSI). 
To satisfy QoS guarantee and achieve load balancing, the 
AP with the minimum average round level is chosen for the 
handoff. Figure 7 shows that the packet delay-based AP 
selection scheme proposed in [10] does not consider service 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

delay caused by different busyness of different ACs in each 
AP and thus the MNs accessing real-time services cannot 
have the lower service delay. To select the handoff AP based 
on the RSSI, Figure 8 reveals that the handoff APs chosen by 
the MNs will be closer to the previous area and cannot 
satisfy the service delay for the ACs. Therefore, the service 
delay of the four ACs is obviously longer than the other two 
schemes.  
4.2   Analysis of AP Load Balance in the Area 
 , the average number of round-robin cycles of APs, is 
taken as the balance index in our proposed method, as shown 
in Equation (3): 


2
2
(
)
x
N







             (3) 
To compare packet delay-based load balancing scheme 
[10], RSSI-based scheme and our Service Delay Prediction 
scheme, we simulate two situations, in which there are 4 and 
5 APs in the area, respectively, to examine the load 
distribution of different ACs by each scheme in different 
handover load when the MNs are in the overlapping area. 
The simulation results displayed in Figure 9 and 10 reveal 
that by using our Service Delay Prediction scheme, the load 
balancing method in [14] enables the system to reach load 
balance, which is very close to 1. As for the RSSI-based 
scheme, the balance index is low and becomes unstable with 
the increase of handover load. Because of the RSSI, some 
APs nearer the previous area are easily selected by the MNs 
without considering the current load of the APs and the load 
thus cannot be distributed to the regional APs. The load 
balancing method presented in [14] chooses the handover AP 
according to the busyness of AP and thus performs better 
than 
the 
RSSI-based 
scheme 
in 
load 
distribution. 
Nevertheless, the load of different ACs in each AP is not 
considered and therefore the general load dispersion is below 
the Service Delay Prediction scheme. Our Service Delay 
Prediction scheme chooses the suitable AP for the MNs 
moving to the forward area according to the service delay of 
different ACs in the APs, thus making good use of resources 
of each APs in the forward area. 
 
Figure 9.  Load Balance Analysis (Four APs in the area) 
 
Figure 10.  Load Balance Analysis (Five APs in the area) 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the service delay of the APs in the forward area, 
this paper proposes an access point selection scheme for 
VANETs, in which an APC (Access Point controller) is 
established to gather the information of APs and users in 
each area and compute the service delay of the APs in the 
forward area. The computed result is sent to MNs by the 
regional APs. A QoS-guaranteed handoff AP not only 
reduces the service delay of real-time services in each AP but 
also maintains the load balancing among the regional APs 
and the simulation result proves that our proposed method 
achieves the above-mentioned goals. In the future, we aim to 
include users statuses under frequent handoffs during long-
term movement to enhance the regional load-balancing 
capacity in the area. Also, to classify the services for further 
discussions will be more pertinent to actual utilization. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by the National Science 
Council, Taiwan, R.O.C., under grant no. NSC 101-2219-E-
197-003. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Kwak, J. Mo, and M. Kang, "Investigation of Handoffs for IEEE 
802.11 Networks in Vehicular Environments," in Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks, 
Hong Kong, China, June 2009, pp. 89-94.  
[2] N. Choi, S. Choi, and Y. Seokt, et al., "A Solicitation-based IEEE 
802.11p MAC Protocol for Roadside to Vehicular Networks," Mobile 
Networking for Vehicular Environments, 2007, pp. 91-96. 
[3] Y. A. Powar and V. Apte, “Improving the IEEE 802.11 MAC Layer 
Handoff Latency to Support Multimedia Traffic,” Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC 2009), 2009, 
pp. 1-6. 
[4] K. Zhu, D. Niyato, P. Wang, E. Hossain, and D. I. Kim, “Mobility 
and handoff management in vehicular networks: a survey,” Wireless 
Communications and Mobile Computing, Oct. 2009. 
[5] Y. FUKUDA, and Y. OIE, “Decentralized Access Point Selection 
Architecture for Wireless LANs Deployability and Robustness,” 
Vehicular Technology Conference, vol. 2, 2004, pp. 1103-1107. 
[6] Kuang-Hui Chi, and Li-Hsing Yen, "Load balancing for Non-
homogeneous IEEE 802.11 networks using association control," work 
in progress. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[7] M. Heusse, F. Rousseau, G. berger-Sabbatel, and A. Duda, 
"Performance anomaly of 802.11b," in Proc. Infocom 2003, San 
Francisco, CA, USA, 2003, pp. 836-843. 
[8] O. Brickley, S. Rea, and D. Pesch, “Load Balancing for QoS 
Enhancement in IEEE 802.11e WLANs Using Cell Breathing 
Techniques,” Proc. IFIP Mobile and Wireless Communication 
Networks Conf., Int’l Federation for Information Processing, 2005, 
www.aws.cit.ie/personnel/ Papers/Paper268.pdf. 
[9] S. Vasudevan et al., “Facilitating Access Point Selection in IEEE 
802.11 Wireless Networks,” Proc. Internet Measurement Conf., 
Usenix Assoc., 2005, pp. 293–298. 
[10]  E. H. Ong and J.Y. Khan, “An Integrated Load Balancing Scheme 
for Future Wireless Networks,” International Symposium on 
Wireless Pervasive Computing ( ISWPC 2009), 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[11] S. Tartarelli and G. Nunzi, “QoS Management and Congestion 
Control in Wireless Hotspots,” Network Operations and Management 
Symposium (NOMS 2006), 2006, pp. 95-105. 
[12] Tüysüz M.F., and Mantar, H.A., "Access point selection for 
improving the voice quality and overall throughput in wireless 
LANs," 
2010 
International 
Conference 
on 
Software, 
Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), pp. 165-
169, 23-25 Sept. 2010 . 
[13] ITU-T, "G.1010: End-user multimedia QoS categories," 2001. 
[14] Tin-Yu Wu, Wei-Tsong Lee, Fong-Hao Liu, Hung-Lin Chan, and 
Tsung-Han Lin, "An Efficient Pre-scanning Scheme for Handoff in 
Cooperative Vehicular Networks", 22nd Annual IEEE International 
Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications 
(IEEE PIMRC 2011) , Toronto, Canada, September 11-14, 2011. 
[15] Cisco,Catalyst 2948G-L3 and Catalyst 4908G-L3 Software Feature 
and Configuration Guide 
[16] Tin-Yu Wu and Wei-Fang Weng, "Reducing handoff delay of 
wireless access in vehicular environments by artificial neural 
network-based geographical fingerprint", IET Communications, Vol. 
5, Issue 4, pp. 542-553, March 2011. 
[17] Tin-Yu Wu, Yan-Bo Wang, and Wei-Tsong Lee, "Mixing Greedy and 
Predictive approaches to Improve Geographic Routing for VANET", 
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (WCMC), Vol. 12, 
Issue 4, pp. 367-378, March 2012. 
[18] Tin-Yu Wu, S. Guizani, and Wei-Tsong Lee, and Kuo-Hung Liao, 
"Improving RSU service time by Distributed Sorting Mechanism", 
Ad Hoc Networks, Vol. 10, Issue 2, pp. 212-221, March 2012. 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

