A Business Model for Video Transmission Services
using Dynamic Adaptation Streaming over HTTP
Dem´ostenes Zegarra Rodr´ıguez, Renata Lopes Rosa, Grac¸a Bressan
Laboratory of Computer Architecture and Networks - Computer and Digital System Engineering Department
University of S˜ao Paulo
S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
{demostenes,gbressan}@larc.usp.br , rrosa@usp.br
Abstract—A business model for video transmission services
is proposed that uses the Dynamic Adaptation Streaming over
HTTP (DASH) mechanism using different versions of the same
video. These video versions are encoded using different pa-
rameters, such as spatial resolution or number of frames per
second. The transmission of each video version depends on the
capabilities of the network at the end user point. The business
model proposed considers different costs for each version of video
fragments transmitted. The costs of video resolution upgrade are
predeﬁned by the service provider and used during the video
streaming. Also, in this model, the user can either accept or
reject an upgrade. Subjective tests were performed using different
spatial resolutions of the same video, in which the interest level
of users to perform a video upgrade is evaluated. Furthermore,
the network architecture of the proposed solution is presented
and the technical feasibility to deploy the proposed solution in
commercial networks is shown. As a consequence, the proposed
solution can improve the earnings of the video service provider.
Keywords-Video Streaming; DASH; Businees Model; Video
Quality; QoE; MOS.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, there are several types of video services appli-
cations over IP networks. In this context, video streaming
services over the Internet have gained popularity, such as,
YouTube [1], Dailymotion [2] among others. This is one of
the reasons why the trafﬁc estimated for video on Internet,
excluding shared ﬁles and games, will reach 61% of the total
Internet trafﬁc in 2015 [3].
It is worth noting that, depending on the requirements of
video applications and the information to be transmitted, a
speciﬁc transport protocol can be used. The User Datagram
protocol (UDP) is not a connection oriented protocol and
therefore the data is not guaranteed to reach its destination;
it is generally used for real-time services such as VoIP,
some video services or applications of simple request/response
e.g., Domain Name System (DNS). The Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) is a connection-oriented mechanism, thereby
ensuring that data arrives correctly and in the right order.
Most of the video streaming applications run over Hy-
perText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) which uses TCP as the
transport protocol. This is because communication services
based on UDP are in some cases intercepted and blocked
by ﬁrewalls or Network Address Translation (NATs), for this
reason, UDP is rarely offered for this type of service.
One problem that arises in the Internet network is conges-
tion. In order to minimize these problems, several congestion
control mechanisms for TCP are implemented. Hence, there
are many studies aiming to improve its performance, as
presented in [4]-[6].
These algorithms can reduce the impairments but none of
them solves the problem when TCP detects packet losses.
The algorithm reduces the congestion window size and, con-
sequently, the TCP transfer rate decreases. If this new rate
is smaller than playback rate, the device’ player takes all the
buffer information and after that it will enter it into a rebuffer-
ing process. During this rebuffering period, no information
is displayed and this causes degradation of users’ Quality of
Experience (QoE).
Different players, such as the open source Adobe Dynamic
Streaming [7], Microsoft Smooth Streaming [8], Apple HTTP
Live Streaming [9], as well as the players developed by
Netﬂix, and others, use the DASH technique. In adaptive
streaming, the video server maintains different versions of
the same video, encoded in different bitrates considering
spatial and temporal conﬁgurations. Also, the video to be
transmitted is partitioned into fragments. Then, the client can
request different video fragments at different encoding bitrates,
considering the network conditions or the users’ QoE.
Subjective tests are relevant to quantify the human percep-
tion on the quality of voice and video services. As a result,
we obtain an index value known as Mean Opinion Score
(MOS), which is the mean of the scores granted by at least 15
subjects. Furthermore, providers improve their services based
on subjective test results [10].
The most important contribution of this paper is to introduce
a new business model for video streaming service using the
DASH approach. A test scenario was implemented, in which
a video streaming service using DASH was complemented
with a billing system. Different resolutions of the same video
were stored on the video server for testing purposes. Subjective
tests were conducted in a laboratory environment. The goal of
these test was to evaluate the users’ interest in accepting the
suggested video upgrade. Results show that the majority of
real users are motivated to improve their QoE watching better
spatial resolutions. Additionally, each video version (each
resolution) has an identiﬁer (id). For commercial purposes,
these identiﬁers are associated with a predeﬁned cost, and the
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

upgrade cost is the difference between the cost of two video
versions.
In this context, the remainder of this paper is structured
as follows. Section II presents the Methods to assess Video
Quality considering subjective and objective methodologies.
Section III shows the DASH messages and main character-
istics. Section IV introduces the Proposed Business Model
for video streaming services. Section V presents the results,
indicating the users’ interest in performing the upgrade and the
main functionalities of the proposed solution. Finally, Section
VI presents the conclusions.
II. VIDEO QUALITY ASSESSMENT
Video evaluation methods can be classiﬁed considering
different criteria. The evaluation method can be classiﬁed by
either using the score given by a subject or the score obtained
by an algorithm:
• Objective: these methods use an algorithm or mathemati-
cal model to estimate the video impairments. The output
of the algorithm could be expressed in different scales.
The output of these methods are known as objective
metrics.
• Subjective: based on the subject’s perception, who grants
a video quality score.
The subjective test methodologies and objective metrics are
described next.
A. Subjective Test Methodologies
Subjective Methods have been used since the beginning
of video quality assessment, and are still valid. They are
described in Recommendation ITU-R BT.500-8-11 [11]. This
recommendation presents the number of tests and methodolo-
gies to correctly conduct the subjective test. The methods are:
• Single Stimulus Continuous Quality Scale (SSCQE);
• Double Stimulus Impairment Scale (DSIS);
• Double Stimulus Continuous Quality Scale (DSCQS);
The ITU-T Recommendation P.910 [12] describes methods
of subjective evaluation of video in multimedia applications.
The methods presented in this recommendation are:
• Absolute category rating (ACR);
• Absolute
category
rating
with
hidden
reference
(ACRHR);
• Degradation category rating (DCR);
• Pair comparison method (PC).
The description of both, conditions and procedures to pro-
duce a video reference is presented in ITU-T Recommendation
P.930 [13]. A model to determine the quality of a video
transmission using ITU-T P.910 is presented in [14], and its
results show how the network variations affect the user’s QoE.
B. Objective Metrics
There are different criteria to classify the video quality
assessment methods, and they are treated in this section. The
ITU deﬁnes different categories for the objective methods
depending on the type of information considered as the input
of the evaluation algorithm, and these categories are the
following [15]:
• Media Layer models use either the voice signal or video
as an input to estimate the signal quality that determines
the end-user QoE. For this method is not necessary to
know the network parameters.
• Parametric packet-layer models do not consider the total
information content in the packets transmitted. They
consider only the headers to estimate the video signal
quality
• Planning packet-layer models. In order to perform the
estimation quality using this method, prior knowledge of
network parameters is required. This method can help the
network administrator to optimize the network resources.
A proper network planning helps to ensure a good quality
of services.
• Bitstream-layer models consider the bit transmitted and,
therefore, also use the information used in the parametric
packetlayer models.
• Hybrid models are methods that combine two or more of
the models described above.
As shown above, there are different objective metrics for
video quality assessment, but most of them are not suitable for
video streaming over TCP, such as: Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(PSNR), Mean Squared Error (MSE), Structural Similarity
(SSIM) [16], and algorithms based on Region of Interest (RoI)
[17] or attentions maps [18, 19]. This reason is because they
do not take into account intrinsic characteristics of pauses.
In recent years, few studies have presented metrics based on
the application layer parameters, such as the pause intensity
metric introduced in [20] or Video Streaming Quality Metric
(VsQM) presented in [21]. In this work, we use the VsQM
metric in our test scenario.
The VsQM metric proposed in [21] was determined by the
parameters: number of pauses, pauses length and weight of
the temporal segment during which the pauses occur. These
parameters represent the network layer conditions.
The metric V sQM is deﬁned by equation [21]
V sQM =
k
X
i=1
Wi ∗ Ni ∗ Li
T
(1)
Where:
• Ni is the number of pauses;
• Li is the average length of pauses, in seconds, that
happened in the same temporal segment;
• Wi is a weigh factor which represents the degree of
degradation that each segment adds to the total video
degradation;
• Ti is the time period in seconds of each segment, and
• k is the number of temporal segments of a video.
III. VIDEO STREAMING SERVICE AND DASH
Currently, video streaming services do not use any mech-
anism based on IP networks conditions to improve the QoE.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

End user devices are implemented with adaptive video players
that use rate adaptation algorithms to minimize the network
problems. However, in some cases, this is not enough. In
this arena, adaptive streaming plays an important role to
improve the user QoE [22]. DASH optimizes and adapts the
video characteristics during the video transmission taking into
account the network conditions at end user point. Thus, DASH
is able to switch from one video fragment to another; the video
fragment length is usually between two to ten seconds [23].
Figure 1 shows the messages sent between the client and video
server during a DASH process.
Fig. 1.
Messages sent in DASH
The DASH technique presents new challenges and business
opportunities for video service providers, telecommunication
companies and device developers. Additionally, the research
on both video and voice quality metrics are very important,
because the adaptive algorithms will choose the video frag-
ment based on these metrics.
The procedure of video streaming over IP network using
DASH is described as follows. First, different characteristics
of the same video are generated and stored on the video server.
These video characteristics can be, for example, the resolution
in both spatial and temporal domain, video quality and audio
quality. As a second step, each video is logically divided into
several fragments; each fragment is identify by a Metadata in
the ﬁle header. Thus, the client accesses a speciﬁc fragment
considering its characteristics.
Later, the client sends a HTTP request to the video server
ready to attend client requirements. The video server starts
the communication sending a DASH-capable video player to
the web browser of the client. If an adaptation algorithm is
implemented in the player, this algorithm returns a quality
metric, which is used to send a new request (standard HTTP
GET). Thus, the player requires a video fragment that maps
the quality level obtained by the metric. All these steps are
performed continuously during the video streaming without
any user’s action.
IV. THE BUSINESS MODEL PROPOSAL
In order to propose a business model for video streaming
service, this paper takes into account the DASH technique. The
proposal methodology assigns an index value to each version
of the same video available in the server. Every video fragment
can be identiﬁed, and a speciﬁc cost can be associated to each
fragment.
Figure 2 introduces the solution architecture of the business
model proposed for streaming video service using DASH. As
depicted in this ﬁgure, there are four different versions (A,B,C
and D) of the same video. Also, each video fragment is named
as FXi. Where, X represents de video version, and i is the
fragment number.
Fig. 2. Architecture of the Business Model for Video Streaming using DASH
From Figure 2, a charging module connected directly with
the video server can be observed. In this module, the infor-
mation sent to the client, regarding all the video fragments
is stored and processed. Later, this information needs to be
processed in the billing system of the service provider, and
ﬁnally, charged to the user’s account.
The VQM module represents the video quality assessment
metric, which is implemented at the application layer, and it is
based on the VsQM [21]. In order to estimate the user’s QoE,
this metric takes in consideration the different buffer status
(initial buffering, playing and rebuffering status) in the user’s
device player. The rebuffering statuses are directly related with
the number of pauses and their duration. Then, if the number
and duration of pauses increase during a speciﬁc period of
time, the user’s QoE decreases. Further detail about VsQM
metric is provided in Section 2.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The module named RDA represents the video Resolution
Determination Algorithm that, based on the VQM metric,
sends a request for the most appropriated video quality frag-
ment. To perform this action, RDA needs the information
contained in the Multimedia Protocol Description (MDP) ﬁle.
Some additional considerations about the proposed solution
are described below:
• When the RDA module determines that a better video
resolution can be received, it sends a message request
(HTTP GET - Fragment Ai). The applications running in
the video server send the video fragment required (Frag-
ment Ai), and also sends a message with the information
regarding the upgrade costs.
• The new video resolution is displayed on the user’s
device for a time period. This period is programmable,
for example, 1 or 3 minutes.
• The user is free to accept or reject the proposed upgrade.
Furthermore, there is an option to require not to receive
this type of suggestion again.
• If the user accepts the proposed upgrade, the billing
module saves the time and the video type transmitted.
• Another input could be used for the RDA module; this
new input is related to the networks parameters, such
as bandwidth, throughput among others, and is currently
under investigation.
• There are other commercial elements that need to be
included in the business model, such as content providers
and network providers.
V. TEST SCENARIO AND RESULTS
In order to determine how the user reacts against a change in
video resolution, subjective assessment tests were performed,
regarding the user’s intention to perform an upgrade. It should
be clear that the objective of these tests is not to assess the
monetary cost of the upgrade, but the degree of user’s interest
in performing the video resolution upgrade.
Considering the architecture of Figure 2, tests were per-
formed using only three categories of video resolution, which
were previously stored in the video server. These categories are
resolution A (A), resolution B (B) and resolution C (C), where
A is the lowest resolution, B is the intermediate resolution and
C is the highest resolution.
We used the following video quality upgrade scenarios:
from A to B, B to C, and A to C. Each upgrade scenario was
evaluated using a score into a four-point scale, in which score
one represents that user has no interest. Score four represents
the case in which the user is very interested in performing the
upgrade.
The scale used in the subjective test is presented in Table I.
Carrying out subjective tests involved 23 volunteers who
are economically independent, for example, they do not need
a third person’s authorization to make a payment. Additionally,
none of them have any sight problem.
It is considered that the new resolution video (for example,
resolution B, in the case of an upgrade of type A - B) is
shown for a period of time, i.e., one minute, and in parallel, the
TABLE I
SCALE USED IN SUBJECTIVE TESTS
Grading
Interest on video
Value
resolution upgrade
1
I am sure I have no interest
2
Not right now, maybe later
3
I have interest
4
I am very interested
upgrade cost is sent to the user screen. If the user accepts the
upgrade cost, the charging module of Figure 2 starts recording
the new resolution.
The global subjective test results of video resolution upgrade
intention are presented in Table II.
TABLE II
GLOBAL RESULTS OF SUBJECTIVE TESTS ON VIDEO
RESOLUTION UPGRADE
Upgrade
Score
Scenario
(Mean)
A - B
2.91
B - C
2.13
A - C
3.30
Table III presents the subjective test results in more detail,
indicating the number of votes for each option.
TABLE III
RESULTS OF SUBJECTIVE TESTS ON VIDEO RESOLUTION
UPGRADE
Scale
Upgrade A-B
Upgrade B-C
Upgrade A-C
(number of votes)
(number of votes)
(number of votes)
1
3
7
2
2
5
9
5
3
6
4
8
4
9
3
10
It can be concluded from the results that users have more
interest in performing the upgrade; when they are watching
the smallest resolution and the possibility to watch the highest
resolution appears. Thus, for example, upgrade scenario ”A to
C” reached the highest score. Also, Table II allows observing
that in all upgrade cases, the mean score is higher than 2; this
fact indicates that many users intend to accept the upgrade.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The DASH technique permits deploy different solutions,
such as the business model proposed for video streaming
services. The network architecture of the solution proposed
only adds the charging module to the DASH architecture.
For this reason, the deployment in commercial networks over
Internet or cellular networks is feasible. The implementation
of the solution does not represent great costs, and the technical
deployment is not complicated.
In the solution proposed, the user is free to accept or reject
the video resolution upgrade offered. Thus, the user has the
control and takes the decision.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Results of subjective tests show that real users are interested
in performing an upgrade, and they can accept to pay a
bit more for the spatial resolution upgrades. Thus, video
streaming service providers using the business model proposed
can increase their income due to the different video rates.
This work shows that video quality metrics play an impor-
tant role in video streaming services, because their results can
be used in different solutions in order to improve the user’s
QoE.
As future work, conducting subjective tests using more
spatial resolution of the same video as test material are
proposed, and also different video contents. Also, videos with
different temporal resolutions will be included in the test
material. Additionally, to have statistically valid results, the
number of volunteers to perform the test will be increased.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the Laboratory of Computer Architecture
and Networks (LARC) at University of S˜ao Paulo for the
motivation to research in the area of Computer and Telecom-
munication Systems. This work was supported by FAPESP
(Foundation for Researching Support of S˜ao Paulo -Brazil).
FAPESP project number: 2011/12724-8
REFERENCES
[1] Youtube, available at http://www.youtube.com. Retrieved Apr. 15, 2013.
[2] Dailymotion, available at http://www.dailymotion.com/. Retrieved Apr.
15, 2013.
[3] Cisco System, Visual Networking Index. White Paper. Jun. 2011.
[4] O. Hiroki, H. Hisamatsu and H. Noborio, Design and Evaluation of
Hybrid Congestion Control Mechanism for Video Streaming. 11th IEEE
International Conference on Computer and Information Technology, 2011.
[5] H. Hisamatsu, G. Hasegawa, and M. Murata, Non bandwidth-intrusive
video streaming over TCP. Proceedings of 2011 Eighth International
Conference on Information Technology, pp. 78-83, Apr. 2011.
[6] L. Cai, X. Shen, J. Pan, and J.Mark, Performance analysis of TCP friendly
AIMD algorithms for multimedia applications. IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Networking, pp. 339-355, Apr. 2005.
[7] Adobe, HTTP Dynamic Streaming on the Adobe Flash Platform,
http://www.adobe.com/products/httpdynamicstreaming. Retrieved Apr. 18,
2013.
[8] Microsoft, Smooth Streaming technical overview.
[9] Apple, HTTP Live Streaming., http://developer.apple.com/resources/http-
streaming. Retrieved Apr. 18, 2013.
[10] H-J. Park and D-H. Har, Subjective Image Quality Assessment based on
Objective Image Quality Measurement Factors, IEEE Trans. Consumer
Electron., Vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1176-1184, Aug. 2011.
[11] ITU-R Recommendation BT.500-11, Methodology for the Subjective
Assessment of the Quality of Television Pictures.
[12] ITU-T Recommendation-P.910, Subjective Video Quality Assessment
Methods for Multimedia Applications, Geneva, Sep. 1999.
[13] ITU-T Recommendation-P.930, Principles of a reference impairment
system for video, Geneva, Sep. 1996.
[14] ITU-T Recommendation-P.931, Multimedia communications delay, syn-
chronization and frame rate measurement, Geneva, Nov. 1998.
[15] A. Takahashi, D. Hands, and V. Barriac, Standardization activities in
the ITU for a QoE assessment of IPTV. IEEE Commun. Mag., Vol. 46,
no. 2, pp. 78, Feb. 2008.
[16] A. Wang, and C. Bovik, and H. Sheikh, Image Quality Assessment: From
Error Visibility to Structural Similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, Vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600-612, Apr. 2004.
[17] H. Kwon, H. Han, S. Lee, W. Choi, and B. Kang, New Video Enhance-
ment Preprocessor Using the Region-Of-Interest for the Videoconferenc-
ing. IEEE Trans. Consumer Electron., Vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2644-2651, Nov.
2010.
[18] J. You, A. Perkis, M. Gabbouj, and M. M. Hannuksela, Perceptual
quality assessment based on visual attention analysis, in Proc. ACM Int.
Conf. Multimedia, Beijing, China, pp. 561-564, May 2009.
[19] A. K. Noorthy and A. C. Bovik, Visual importance pooling for image
quality assessment, IEEE J. Select. Topics Signal Processing, Vol. 3, no.
2, pp. 193-201, Apr. 2009.
[20] T. Porter and X. H. Peng, An Objective Approach to Measuring Video
Playback Quality in Loss Networks using TCP, IEEE Communications
Letters, Vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 76 - 78, Jan. 2011.
[21] D. Rodr´ıguez, J. Abrah˜ao, D. Begazo, R. Rosa, and G. Bressan, Quality
Metric to Assess Video Streaming Service over TCP considering Temporal
Location of Pauses, IEEE Transaction on Consumer Electronic, Vol. 58,
Issue: 3, pp. 985 - 992, Aug. 2012.
[22] O. Oyman and S. Singh, Quality of experience for HTTP adaptive
streaming service, IEEE Commun. Mag., Vol. 50, Issue:4, pp. 20 - 27,
Apr. 2012.
[23] A. Begen, T. Akgul, and M. Baugher, Watching video over the Web:
Part 1: Streaming Protocols, IEEE Internet Computer, Vol. 15, Issue:2,
pp. 54-63, Mar. 2011.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

