Efﬁcient Rerouting Algorithm for Optimizing Performances of WDM Transparent
Networks Under Scheduled and Random Trafﬁc
Naama Amdouni1,2 and Taouﬁk Aguili1
1Universit´e de Tunis El Manar, ´Ecole Nationale d’Ing´enieurs de Tunis, Laboratoire de Syst`emes
de Communications, 1002, Tunis, Tunisie;
2Universit´e de Jendouba, Institut Sup´erieur de l’Informatique du Kef, 7100, Le Kef, Tunisie;
Email: naama.amdouni@gmail.com,taoufik.aguili@enit.rnu.tn
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate further improvement in
performances of Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) trans-
parent networks under scheduled and random trafﬁc by applying
trafﬁc rerouting. Scheduled trafﬁc corresponds to high priority
trafﬁc, whereas random trafﬁc corresponds to best effort trafﬁc.
Indeed, in WDM transparent networks, the wavelength clash
constraint along with the wavelength continuity constraint result
in inefﬁcient utilization of network resources and lead to higher
rejection ratio. The trafﬁc rerouting concept is a cost-effective
and viable solution used to alleviate the inefﬁciency brought by
the wavelength continuity, but it induces a service disruption
period. Therefore, minimization of the incurred service disruption
period is imperative. Our proposed rerouting algorithm proceeds
in two separate phases. It ﬁrst computes off-line the routing and
wavelength assignment (RWA) for scheduled lightpath demands
(SLDs) before considering random lightpath demands (RLDs)
on the ﬂy on the remaining network resources. Thus, if an
incoming RLD cannot be established in the absence of a free
wavelength-continuous path between its source and destination
nodes, the proposed algorithm may reroute a minimum number
of not yet routed SLDs and already routed RLDs. Rerouting
of already routed SLDs is not allowed since they correspond to
high priority guaranteed service. Allowing rerouting of not yet
routed SLDs should lead to a shorter service disruption period.
The performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated and
discussed through extensive numerical experiments. Signiﬁcant
improvements are demonstrated, either in terms of rejection ratio
or in terms of service disruption period, in comparison with
rerouting algorithms previously presented in the literature.
Keywords–Routing and Wavelength Assignment (RWA); Service
disruption period; Trafﬁc rerouting; Wavelength continuity con-
straint; WDM transparent networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
An optical network provides a common infrastructure over
which a variety of services, such as video on demand, video
conference, distance education can be delivered [1]. The re-
quirement for networks with high capacity is increasing. There
are many ways to increase the capacity of the optical ﬁber and
one of the ways is Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM).
In WDM networks, an optical communication path, referred
to as lightpath, is set up to support a connection between two
optical wavelength-routing nodes. The problem of establishing
lightpaths with the objective of optimizing the utilization of
network resources is known as the Routing and Wavelength
Assignment (RWA) problem [2]. The RWA problem has been
extensively investigated in the literature and several approaches
have been proposed either for static trafﬁc or dynamic trafﬁc
(see [3], among others).
In the absence of wavelength converters, optical networks
are referred to as transparent networks or all-optical networks
[4]. In such networks, a lightpath is established before data
can be transferred by allocating the same wavelength on all the
ﬁber links in the route through which data trafﬁc is transmitted.
This constraint is called the wavelength continuity constraint
[5]. Also, two lightpaths sharing at least one common ﬁber-
link must be identiﬁed by different wavelengths to prevent the
interference of the optical signals. This second constraint is
called the wavelength integrity constraint. These limitations
lead to inefﬁcient utilization of wavelength channels which
results in higher blocking ratios. Wavelength conversion and
trafﬁc rerouting are the two possible mechanisms that can
increase the efﬁciency. Using wavelength converters poten-
tially allows the network to support a larger set of Lightpath
Demands (LDs). But, such converters remain too expensive.
When wavelength conversion is not available, rerouting is used
to improve network usage. It consists in rearranging certain
existing lightpaths to free a wavelength-continuous path for
the incoming LD. There are two ways to rearrange an existing
lightpath. One is partially rearranging, which only changes the
used wavelength and keeps the same physical route. This is
also referred to as wavelength rerouting (WRR). Another is
fully rearranging, which consists of ﬁnding a new physical
path with possibly a new wavelength to replace the old path.
This is referred to as lightpath rerouting (LRR). A taxonomy
of rerouting schemes can be found in [6]. Transmission of the
existing lightpaths to be rerouted must be temporarily shut-
down to protect data from being lost or misrouted resulting
in service disruption incurred by the longer propagation delay
for transmitting signaling messages in transparent wide-area
networks [7]. This period is referred to as the service disruption
period. Therefore, in such networks, minimization of the
incurred service disruption is imperative.
In this paper, we present a new rerouting algorithm in order
to get further improvement either in terms of rejection ratio or
in terms of service disruption period when two classes of trafﬁc
demands are considered:
•
The ﬁrst class is referred to as Scheduled Lightpath
Demand (SLD). A SLD is a connection request with
known setup and teardown times. The SLD model is
deterministic since the demands are known in advance
and is dynamic because it takes into account the
evolution of the trafﬁc load in the network over time.
•
The second class is referred to as Random Lightpath
Demand (RLD). A RLD, also called dynamic lightpath
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

demand, is a connection request that arrives randomly.
Through numerical results, we outline that thanks to rerout-
ing, the lightpath demands’ rejection ratio is improved and that
our LRR algorithm selects a minimum number of established
RLDs to be rerouted which should hopefully lead to a short
service disruption period.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents related work. In Section III, we summarize our
main contributions. In Section IV, some notations are given.
In Section V, we present in detail the proposed rerouting
algorithm. Numerical results and concluding remarks are given
in Sections VI and VII, respectively.
II.
RELATED WORK
The trafﬁc rerouting concept has been applied to WDM
transparent networks to alleviate the impact of the wavelength
continuity constraint. In [7], Lee et al. introduced the WRR
concept by studying the rerouting problem with the objective of
minimizing the disruption incurred due to WRR. In [8], Mohan
and Murthy proposed a time optimal wavelength rerouting
algorithm based on the Parallel Move-To-Vacant Wavelength-
Retuning (MTV-WR) rerouting scheme. In [9] and [10], the
authors proposed two low complexity wavelength rerouting
algorithms to improve throughput and to reduce blocking
probability in wavelength division multiplexed networks. The
former is called the Shortest Path Wavelength ReRouting
(SPWRR) algorithm while the latter is called the Lightpath
ReRouting Algorithm (LRRA). The authors also demonstrated
that LRRA gives better results and can be implemented in
huge networks for good blocking performance. Recently, a
new lightpath rerouting scheme called Sequential Routing with
Lightpath Rerouting (SeqRwLR) has been proposed in [11] to
improve the rejection ratio while keeping a short service dis-
ruption period. In [12] and [13], the authors investigated hybrid
rerouting to increase the network throughput and minimize the
incurred service disruption period. In [14], the authors com-
pared passive, active and hybrid rerouting. They demonstrated
that when there is wavelength conversion, passive rerouting
outperforms active rerouting, and hybrid rerouting can only
improve the performance over passive rerouting slightly. Also,
they demonstrated that, in the absence of wavelength convert-
ers, hybrid rerouting can improve the blocking performance
signiﬁcantly. Later, two RWA algorithms applying active light-
path rerouting are presented in [15]. The authors show that,
in the absence of wavelength converters and in contrast to
the results announced in [14], active rerouting works much
better than passive rerouting but induces a longer service
disruption period. Improving the performances of transparent
optical networks in terms of rejection ratio by exploiting the
set-up delay tolerance speciﬁcation contained in the Service
Level Agreement (SLA) has already been investigated in
[1][16][17][18]. The basic idea is to delay LDs instead of
rejecting them due to the current network state and try to
establish them after some time, since other routed LDs may
leave the network and its network resources are released.
While in all of the above described algorithms dynamic trafﬁc
is considered, in [19], the authors proposed a new lightpath
rerouting scheme to optimize network resources allocation
considering scheduled and random lightpath demands. Their
scheme prohibits SLD rerouting while the establishment of a
new RLD may require the rerouting of one or several RLDs.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to
apply rerouting of not already established SLDs to maximize
the number of established RLDs and moreover, minimize the
incurred service disruption period. The performances of the
proposed algorithm either in terms of rejection ratio or in terms
of service disruption period are demonstrated to be promising
through illustrative simulation results.
III.
CONTRIBUTION OF THE PAPER
In this paper, we present an efﬁcient RWA algorithm
for WDM transparent networks working under the wave-
length continuity constraint without wavelength converters.
We anticipate to alleviate the inefﬁciency brought by the
wavelength continuity constraint by the use of an efﬁcient
lightpath rerouting strategy minimizing the number of rejected
LDs. A combination of two trafﬁc classes, namely, SLDs and
RLDs are considered. Permanent lightpath demands (PLD)
(i.e. static lightpath demands which are preknown connection
requests and if accepted, remain in the network indeﬁnitely)
are not considered in this study because, once established,
these demands remain in the network indeﬁnitely. This can
be considered as a reduction in the number of available
wavelengths channels on some network ﬁber-links.
Our proposed scheme computes the RWA for the SLDs
and the RLDs separately. First, it computes the RWA for
the SLDs off-line, as SLDs correspond to preknown trafﬁc,
aiming at minimizing the number of blocked SLDs. Taking the
assignment of the SLDs into account, the RWA for the RLDs
is computed sequentially. When an incoming RLD cannot be
established in the absence of a wavelength-continuous path
between the source and the destination of the RLD, we try to
reroute one or several SLDs in the set of SLDs that are not
yet routed and/or a minimum number of already routed RLDs
aiming hopefully at freeing a wavelength-continuous path to
accommodate the incoming RLD. We assume that an already
established SLD cannot be rerouted since SLDs correspond
to high priority guaranteed service, and only SLDs that have
not been routed yet can be rerouted. Unlike SLDs, already
established RLDs may be rerouted to accommodate the new
incoming RLD. In order to shorten the duration of the service
disruption period, our rerouting algorithm promotes rerouting
of not yet routed SLDs. This is because the service disruption
period incurred by rerouting a not yet routed SLD is shorter
than that incurred by rerouting an already established RLD.
Theoretically, the service disruption period incurred due to
rerouting a not yet routed SLD is very short since the SLD
is not yet routed and the data transmission is not yet started.
Our proposed algorithm differs from the previously published
ones in the following aspects:
•
First, it considers two classes of trafﬁc demands.
Only RLDs have been considered in all the others
algorithms presented in the literature. In [19], two
types of trafﬁc demands are considered.
•
Second, when a new RLD is to be rejected by the rout-
ing phase, the rerouting phase selects one or several
RLDs and/or not yet routed SLDs to be rerouted in
order to accommodate the new RLD. Whereas, in [19],
the rerouting of SLDs is forbidden once the optimal
RWA for the SLDs is computed off-line and only
rerouting of already established RLDs is allowed. As
mentioned above, rerouting not yet routed SLDs has a
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

direct impact on the duration of the service disruption
period.
•
Third, our proposed algorithm does not construct any
auxiliary graph with crossover edges to determine the
set of active lightpaths that should be rerouted as in
[7][8][11]. Thus, our algorithm should be less Central
Processing Unit (CPU) intensive than rerouting algo-
rithms previously presented in [7][8][11].
IV.
NOTATIONS
We use the following notations and typographical conven-
tions:
•
G = (ν, E, ϑ) is an arc-weighted symmetrical directed
graph representing the network topology with vertex
set ν (representing the network nodes), arc set E (rep-
resenting the network ﬁber-links) and weight function
ϑ : E → R+ mapping the cost of the links set by the
network operator.
•
N = |ν|, L = |E| are respectively, the number of
nodes and links in the network.
•
D is the total number of LDs (SLDs and RLDs) which
arrives at the network over the considered time period.
•
W denotes the number of wavelengths per ﬁber-link.
•
Λ = {λ1, λ2, ..., λW } is the set of available wave-
lengths on each ﬁber-link of the network.
•
The ith LD, 1 ≤ i ≤ D (to be established), is
deﬁned by a 5−tuple (si, di, πi, αi, βi). si ∈ ν and
di ∈ ν are the source and the destination nodes of
the LD, respectively; πi is the number of requested
lightpaths; and αi and βi are the setup and teardown
time of the LD, respectively. Here, for the sake of
simplicity, we assume that each LD requires only one
lightpath between the source and the destination nodes
(πi = 1).
•
Pi,k, 1 ≤ i ≤ D, 1 ≤ k ≤ K, represents the kth
alternate shortest path in G connecting node si to
node di (source and destination of the ith LD). The
hop count is used as the link metric and K-alternate
(loop-free) shortest paths for each source−destination
pair (LD) are computed beforehand according to the
algorithm described in [20] (if as many paths exist,
otherwise we only consider the available ones).
•
Pi, 1 ≤ i ≤ D, is the set of alternate shortest paths
computed between the source and destination nodes
of LD number i. Hence |Pi| ≤ K. This computation
is done in a preliminary step prior to any routing.
•
P is the set of alternate shortest paths computed
between the source and destination nodes of each
possible node pair in the network. Clearly |P| ≤
N(N − 1)K.
•
c(i, k, w, t), 1 ≤ i ≤ D, 1 ≤ k ≤ K, 1 ≤ w ≤
W is the cost of using wavelength λw on the kth-
alternate shortest path in G from node si to node di
of LD numbered i at time t. The cost function of each
considered path is determined as follows:
c(i, k, w, t) =
( ε
if λw is path-free on Pi,k
∞
if λw is already used by another
LD on at least on link of Pi,k
ε is a tiny positive value corresponding to the hop
count on path Pi,k.
•
θ(i, k, w, t), 1 ≤ i ≤ D, 1 ≤ k ≤ K, 1 ≤ w ≤ W,
denotes the set of LDs to be rerouted when serving the
incoming RLD number i at time t using wavelength
λw on Pi,k.
•
cr(j), 1 ≤ j ≤ |θ(i, k, w, t)| is the cost of rerouting
the jth LD ∈ θ(i, k, w, t) in order to satisfy the
incoming RLD on Pi,k, using wavelength λw.
cr(j) =





τ,
if the LD to be rerouted is a not
yet established SLD
σ,
if the LD to be rerouted is an already
routed RLD
τ is a tiny positive constant and σ is a positive
weighting factor indicating the penalty of rerouting an
already routed RLD to accommodate the new demand.
σ is chosen such that (σ ≫ τ) to promote rerouting
of not yet routed SLDs. τ and σ are chosen such
that the number of RLDs to be rerouted is minimized
which should lead to the minimization of the service
disruption incurred by rerouting.
•
cr(i, k, w, t) = P
j∈|θ(i,k,w,t)| cr(j), 1 ≤ i ≤ D, 1 ≤
k ≤ K, 1 ≤ w ≤ W is the cost of rerouting to
set up the incoming RLD number i at time t using
wavelength λw on Pi,k.
•
crmin = min1≤k≤K,1≤w≤W cr(i, k, w, t) is the mini-
mum cost to satisfy the new RLD number i at time t
on Pi,kmin using wavelength λwmin.
V.
THE PROPOSED SCHEME
Our proposed LRR algorithm called SepRwLR, for Sepa-
rate Routing with Lightpath Rerouting, handles the SLDs and
the RLDs separately, as shown in Figure 1. First, it considers
the RWA for SLDs before considering the RLDs. The objective
is to minimize the number of blocked SLDs. No rerouting is
performed when computing the RWA for SLDs. Taking the
RWA of the SLDs into account, the SepRwLR then tries to
route sequentially the incoming RLDs in the following two
phases:
•
The ﬁrst phase, also called routing phase, computes
the RWA for a new RLD without considering rerout-
ing.
•
If Phase I fails, rerouting phase determines which
LDs (already routed RLDs and not yet routed SLDs)
are to be rerouted and how they will be rerouted to
accommodate the incoming RLD.
Subsection V-A details the routing and wavelength assign-
ment algorithm for LDs (be it scheduled or random) whereas
Subsection V-B details the rerouting algorithm for RLDs.
A. Routing and Wavelength Assignment for LDs
At the incoming time of a new LD, we ﬁrst try to establish
it without rerouting any active lightpaths according to the
traditional sequential Dijkstra based algorithm. The associated
K-alternate shortest paths (computed off-line and denoted Pi)
are considered in turn according to their number of hops. We
look for the ﬁrst path-free wavelength. The LD is hence set
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 1. Block diagram of the SepRwLR algorithm.
up on the ﬁrst met path-free wavelength among its K-shortest-
paths if such path exists. The wavelength assigned to this
path is selected according to a ﬁrst-ﬁt scheme [21] whenever
multiple wavelengths are available on the considered path. If
a path-free wavelength to satisfy the demand does not exist,
two cases may happen: the demand is a SLD, in which case
it is rejected since no rerouting is performed when computing
the RWA for SLDs. The second case that may happen is that
the demand is a RLD in which case the rerouting phase will
be considered.
B. Rerouting algorithm for RLDs
We assume that a new RLD arrives at time t and that the
routing phase fails to set it up. Thus, the rerouting phase is
launched aiming hopefully to free a path along one of its K
shortest paths as follows:
For each shortest path Pi,k, 1 ≤ k ≤ K, associated to
RLD numbered i, rejected by the routing phase, and for each
wavelength λw, 1 ≤ w ≤ W, we determine the set of RLDs,
θ(i, k, w, t), that should be rerouted to establish the incoming
RLD on the selected path and wavelength. The minimum cost
of rerouting, crmin, is then computed. If crmin is ﬁnite, its
associated kth-alternate shortest path and the wth wavelength
are hence selected. Let θmin denote the corresponding set of
LDs to be rerouted. Two cases may happen: all the LDs in
θmin can be rerouted by only changing the used wavelength
whilst keeping the same path or by changing the physical path
and then possibly the used wavelength. In this case, the incom-
ing RLD is established using Pi,kmin on wavelength λwmin.
c(i, kmin, wmin, t), the cost of using Pi,kmin on wavelength
λwmin, at time t is updated to +∞, as well as the cost of
all the paths in P that share at least one common link with
Pi,kmin. We also update the costs of the new paths used by
the rerouted LDs to +∞ and to ε the cost of the released
paths. The second case that may happen is that Pi,kmin using
λwmin cannot be freed because one or several LDs cannot be
rerouted. In that case, cr(i, kmin, wmin, t) is updated to +∞
and the minimum cost is computed again. If crmin is inﬁnite,
the incoming RLD numbered i is deﬁnitively rejected.
For an illustration, we consider a graph representing a net-
work with ﬁve nodes and bidirectional ﬁber-links, as shown in
Figure 2, and the set of LDs described in Table I. Two shortest
paths (K = 2) are computed for each source destination pair
as shown in Table I. We assume that each ﬁber has only one
wavelength λ0.
Figure 2. 5-node test network.
TABLE I. SET OF LDS TO BE SET UP.
Number
s
d
π
α
β
K shortest paths
Nature
1
5
3
1
100
808
5-3 / 5-4-1-2-3
RLD
2
2
5
1
303
1100
2-5 / 2-1-4-5
SLD
3
2
5
1
405
715
2-5 / 2-1-4-5
RLD
4
1
2
1
607
1118
1-2 / 1-4-5-2
SLD
The RWA for the SLDs is shown in Table II.
TABLE II. RWA FOR THE SLDS.
Number
s
d
π
α
β
Path
Wavelength
2
2
5
1
100
1100
2-5
λ0
4
1
2
1
607
1118
1-2
λ0
Now, we have to consider the RLDs taking into account the
RWA for the SLDs. When RLD 1 arrives, λ0 is selected to set
it up on P1,1 = 5 − 3. SLD 2 arrives at time t = 303 and has
to be set up on P2,1 = 2 − 5 using wavelength λ0 according
to Table II. At time t = 607, RLD 3 has to be set up. The
routing phase fails to ﬁnd a path-free wavelength and hence
the rerouting phase is considered. On P3,1 = 1−2−3, the set
of LDs to be rerouted is θ3,1,λ0,607 = {SLD4}. SLD4 is an
SLD not routed yet, thus cr3,1,λ0,607 = τ. The set of LDs to
be rerouted, on P3,2 = 1−4−5−3, is θ3,2,λ0,607 = {RLD2}.
RLD2 is an already routed RLD hence cr3,2,λ0,607 = σ. Since
τ ≪ σ the minimum cost crmin = cr3,1,λ0,607 is selected and
the algorithm selects the not yet routed SLD 1 → 2 to be
rerouted on the following new physical path 1 − 4 − 5 − 2.
Then, it routes RLD3 on P3,1 = 1 − 2 − 3.
VI.
NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we attempt to experimentally evaluate and
compare the performance of the SepRwLR scheme presented
in the preceding section. We use the 14−node network topol-
ogy shown in Figure 3. The source and destination nodes for
SLDs and RLDs are chosen according to a random uniform
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

distribution in the interval [1, 14]. The RLDs requests arrive
as independent Poisson processes with common arrival rate
ν = 1 and, once accepted, hold the network resources with
independent exponential times with common mean holding
time µ = 300. The set-up and tear-down times for the SLDs
are set according to a random uniform distribution in the same
interval of RLDs arrivals. We compute K = 5 shortest paths
between each node pair in the network if so many paths exist,
otherwise we consider only the available ones. We assume also
that there are W = 32 wavelengths on each ﬁber-link.
Figure 3. The 14-node network topology (NSFNET).
In order to evaluate the performance of our proposed
scheme, we propose to compare the results obtained with the
SepRwLR algorithm to those obtained with the following two
algorithms:
•
The separate routing algorithm (SepR) which com-
putes separately the RWA for the SLDs and the
RLDs according to the algorithm described in [22]
without considering rerouting. The average rejection
ratio obtained by this algorithm is considered in order
to highlight the gain obtained thanks to rerouting.
•
The separate routing with rerouting algorithm (SRWR)
which routes in two separate phases the SLDs and the
RLDs. To accommodate an incoming RLD rejected at
the end of the ﬁrst phase, the SRWR algorithm uses
the rerouting algorithm described in [19]. SLD (be it
routed or not yet routed) rerouting is forbidden. The
SRWR algorithm is the only algorithm presented in
the literature considering two types of trafﬁc. All the
others consider only random trafﬁc.
Figure 4 shows the average rejection ratio computed when
D, the total number of LDs arriving at the network during
the observation period, varies. We notice that the rejection
ratio increases with the trafﬁc loading. This is because when
the trafﬁc loading increases, network resources decrease and
therefore it becomes more difﬁcult to serve a new incoming
demand. The curves show that both of rerouting algorithms
improve the rejection ratio signiﬁcantly compared to the no-
rerouting case. We also observe that the SepRwLR algorithm
performs better than the SRWR algorithm. In fact, as the
SepRwLR allows the rerouting of not yet routed SLDs (which
is forbidden in SRWR) in addition to existing RLDs to set
up an incoming RLD to be rejected by the routing phase, the
number of rejected RLDs is hence minimized.
Figure 5 shows the average rejection ratio gain computed
by the SepRwLR algorithm versus D. The rejection ratio gain
Figure 4. Average rejection ratio versus D.
Figure 5. Average rejection ratio gain versus D.
has been computed as the difference between the average num-
ber of rejected LDs computed without rerouting i.e computed
by the SepR algorithm and the average number of rejected
LDs computed by the SepRwLR algorithm divided by D and
multiplied by 100. A maximum rejection ratio gain of 3.5% is
observed for D = 1300 under the aforementioned simulation
parameters. The average rejection ratio gain decreases when D
increases. This is mainly due to the fact that, when the number
of LDs exceeds 1300 and since the number of wavelengths
on each link is ﬁxed, the network becomes saturated and it
becomes impossible to accommodate more incoming LDs even
by rerouting since no network resources are left.
Figure 6 shows the average number of rerouted LDs when
D increases. Each group of two bars shows the average number
of rerouted LDs by the SepRwLR (ﬁrst bar from the left-
hand side) and the SRWR algorithm (second bar), respectively.
The height of the white segment indicates the average number
of rerouted not yet routed SLDs whereas the height of the
black one shows the average number of rerouted already routed
RLDs. We observe that the SepRwLR algorithm requires fewer
already routed RLDs to be rerouted than the SRWR algorithm.
This is because the SepRwLR promotes rerouting of not yet
routed SLDs at the expense of rerouting of already routed
RLDs in order to reduce the service disruption period and that
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 6. Average rerouted LDs versus D.
is why we can say that the service disruption period incurred
by our rerouting algorithm is shorter than that of the SRWR
algorithm. From Figure 6 we also notice that the number of
LDs to be rerouted by the SepRwLR and the SRWR algorithms
respectively decreases under heavy trafﬁc load because the
probability that an already routed RLD or a not yet routed
SLD be retunable on the same path or on new path becomes
infeasible. This is because the saturation regime of the network
is achieved.
VII.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a lightpath rerouting scheme to
further improve the performances of transparent networks. Our
algorithm considers both SLDs and RLDs. Our algorithm’s
objective is to further minimize the rejection ratio and the
service disruption period. Simulation results show that our
algorithm achieves better performance in terms of rejection
ratio and reduces considerably the service disruption period
since it promotes rerouting of not yet routed SLDs. Our
forthcoming studies will investigate further improvement of
WDM transparent networks performance by applying trafﬁc
rerouting and set up delay tolerance.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Muhammad and R. Forchheimer, ”Reducing blocking probability in
dynamic wdm networks by rerouting and set-up delay tolerance,” Proc.
17th IEEE International Conference on Networks, pp. 195-200, 2011.
[2]
H. Zang, J.P. Jue, and B. Mukherjee, ”A review of routing and wavelength
assignment approaches for wavelength-routed wdm networks,” Optical
Networks Magazine, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 47-60, 2000.
[3]
X. Chu and B. Li, ”Dynamic routing and wavelength assignment in the
presence of wavelength conversion for all-optical networks,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 704-715, 2005.
[4]
A.A.M. Saleh, ”Transparent optical networking in backbone networks,”
Proc.Optical Fiber Communication Conference, pp. 62-64, 2000.
[5]
I. Chlamtac, A. Ganz, and G. Karmi, ”Lightpath communications: an
approach to high bandwidth optical WAN’s,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 1171-1182, 1992.
[6]
E. W. M. Wong, A. K. M. Chan, and T. S. P. Yum, ”A taxonomy of
rerouting in circuit switched networks,” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 116-122, 1999.
[7]
K.C. Lee and V.O.K. Li, ”A wavelength rerouting algorithm in wide-area
all-optical networks,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol.
14, no. 6, pp. 1218-1229, 1996.
[8]
G. Mohan and C. S. R. Murthy, ”A time optimal wavelength rerouting
algorithm for dynamic trafﬁc in wdm networks,” IEEE/OSA Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 406-417, 1999.
[9]
A. Wason and R.S. Kaler, ”Rerouting technique with dynamic trafﬁc in
wdm optical networks, Journal of Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 16, no.
1, pp. 950-954, 2010.
[10]
A. Wason and R.S. Kaler, ”Lightpath rerouting algorithm to enhance
blocking performance in all-optical wdm network without wavelength
conversion,” Journal of Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 16, no. 3. pp.
146-150, 2010.
[11]
N. Amdouni, M. Koub`aa, and T. Aguili, ”Lightpath rerouting scheme for
dynamic trafﬁc in wdm all-optical networks,” Proc. IEEE International
Conference on Computer Systems and Industrial Informatics (ICCSII12),
pp. 1-6, 2012.
[12]
X. Chu, T. Bu, and X Li, ”A study of lightpath rerouting schemes in
wavelength-routed wdm networks,” Proc. IEEE International Conference
on Communications, pp. 2400-2405, 2007.
[13]
N. Amdouni, M. Koub`aa, and T. Aguili, ”A new hybrid rerouting
scheme in wdm all-optical networks under dynamic trafﬁc,” Proc. 2014
Global Summit on Computer & Information Technology (GSCIT), pp.
1-7, 2014.
[14]
X. Chu, H. Yin, and X. Li, ”Lightpath rerouting in wavelength-routed
wdm networks,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and
Networking, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 721-735, 2008.
[15]
M. Koub`aa, N. Amdouni, and T. Aguili, ”Efﬁcient trafﬁc engineer-
ing strategies for optimizing network throughput in wdm all-optical
networks,” International Journal of Computer Network and Information
Security, vol. 6, pp. 39-49, 2015.
[16]
C. Cavdar, M. Tornatore, F. Buzluca, and B. Mukherjee, ”Shared-path
protection with delay tolerance (sdt) in optical wdm mesh networks”,
IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 28, no. 14, pp. 2068-
2076, 2010.
[17]
C. Cavdar, M. Tornatore, and F. Buzluca, ”Availability-guaranteed
connection provisioning with delay tolerance in optical wdm mesh
networks,” Journal of Optical Fiber Communication, pp. 1-3, 2009.
[18]
A. Muhammad, C. Cavdar, L. Wosinska, and R. Forchheimer,” Effect
of delay Tolerance in wdm network with differentiated services,” Journal
of Optical Fiber Communication, pp.1-3, 2011.
[19]
M. Koub`aa and M. Gagnaire, ”Lightpath rerouting strategies in wdm
all-Optical networks under scheduled and random trafﬁc,” IEEE/OSA
Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 2, no. 10, pp.
859-871, Oct. 2010.
[20]
D. Eppstein, ”Finding the k shortest paths,” SIAM Journal of Comput-
ing, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 652-673, 1998.
[21]
X. Sun, Y. Li, I. Lambadaris, and Y. Q. Zhao, ”Performance analysis of
ﬁrst-ﬁt wavelength assignment algorithm in optical networks,” Proc. 7th
International Conference on Telecommunications, vol. 2, pp. 403-409,
2003.
[22]
M.Gagnaire, M. Koub`aa, and Nicolas Puech, ”Network dimensioning
under scheduled and random lightpath demands in all-optical wdm
networks,” IEEE Journal On Selected Areas in Communications, vol.
25, no. 9, pp. 58-67, 2007.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

