MYHand: a Novel Architecture for Improving
Handovers in NGNs
Mario Ezequiel Augusto
Department of Information Systems
Santa Catarina State University, Brazil
Email: mario.augusto@udesc.br
Renata Porto Vanni
Federal Institute of Sao Paulo
Campus Araraquara, Brazil
Email: rportovanni@ifsp.edu.br
Helio Crestana Guardia
Department of Computer Science
Federal University of Sao Carlos, Brazil
Email: helio@dc.ufscar.br
Mahdi Aiash
School of Science and Technology
Middlesex University, London
Email: M.Aiash@mdx.ac.uk
Glenford Mapp
School of Science and Technology
Middlesex University, London
Email: G.Mapp@mdx.ac.uk
Edson dos Santos Moreira
Department of Computer Systems
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Email: edson@icmc.usp.br
Abstract—The on demand access, provided by Next Generation
Networks (NGN), will allow users of mobile devices to choose
from and connect to networks with no pre-established service
contract. Besides signal strength, knowledge about different
parameters of the available networks shall base the selection of
the attachment point to use. No mechanism currently available
provides the desired integrated support for network discovery
and on demand access. This paper presents MYHand, an archi-
tecture for providing extended information in NGN scenarios. By
using the IEEE 802.21 protocol Basic Schema and part of the Y-
Comm architecture, MYHand improves the handover managed
by mobile devices (user-centric management). This paper also
presents an extension to the IEEE 802.21 Basic Schema, which
is used by MYHand for extra information exchange between
mobile devices and heterogeneous networks.
Keywords-NGN; MIH; Y-Comm; Handover Management
I. INTRODUCTION
Internet service providers currently share a relatively static
market where a multitude of mobile devices send and receive
data using different wireless technologies. Costs and different
aspects of Quality of Service (QoS) are key factors for
customer ﬁdelity. Next Generation Networks (NGN) [1] will
change this scenario by providing support for multimedia
services and device mobility, accompanied by mechanisms
for network discovery and selection. Other features of NGNs
include the simultaneous support for different transmission
technologies and overlapping network coverage.
NGNs will bring the user to the center of a handover deci-
sion process, which shall be done transparently, by matching
pre-established desired QoS parameters with the character-
istics of the available networks. Handover is deﬁned as the
switching of the Point of Attachment (PoA) of a mobile
device [2]. A handover can be classiﬁed as a horizontal
handover, which occurs when the new point of attachment is
technologically identical to the previous one, or as a vertical
handover, which occurs when the new PoA is technologically
different to the previous one [3].
An advanced classiﬁcation of handover divides it into two
types: imperative or alternative [4]. Imperative handovers
occur due to technological reasons such as signal strength,
coverage and QoS, and it is called imperative because there
may be a severe loss of performance if they are not performed.
Alternative handovers occur due to reasons other than techni-
cal issues, such as, pricing, incentives, preferences, context, or
available services.
Information about networks within reach includes SSIDs,
signal strength and noise ratio, when using IEEE 802.11
interfaces, and network IDs, and frequency related parameters
for different 3G networks. Network discovery, however, may
imply switching different communication interfaces into a
costly scanning procedure. Besides, several QoS parameters,
and dynamic billing information cannot be observed by such
mechanisms.
Authentication, authorization and accounting (AAA) also
challenge the viability of NGNs since, in the envisioned on-
demand service model for NGNs, no ﬁxed contract will be
required to allow an user access to the available network
infrastructures. The use of multiple access technologies be-
comes an implication, because different terms can be used for
the same information. For instance, parameter jitter is called
”jitter” in IEEE 802.11, ”tolerated jitter” in IEEE 802.16, and
”delay variation” in 3GPP networks.
No mechanism currently available provides the desired in-
tegrated support for network discovery and on demand access.
Even if the support for IEEE 802.21 [5] services are available
in a network, terminology issues make it difﬁcult to correctly
detect events and match the desired QoS with the offered ser-
vices. Only a rich and coherent set of information will enable
the envisioned dynamic and on demand service selection in
NGNs. Dynamic handovers and the free competition among
providers shall then beneﬁt users in a virtuous cycle.
As the variety of wireless technologies and mobile devices
is increasing, the discovery and selection of networks is
becoming an important issue. This paper presents MYHand, an
architecture for providing the mobile devices with additional
information for dynamic handover decisions in Next Gener-
ation Networks. The name MYHand stands for ”MIH-based
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

and Y-Comm-based Handover Management”. In the MYHand
architecture, network information is provided to the nodes
via Y-Comm [4] [6], along with instances of the information
service (MIIS), events service (MIES), and command services
(MICS) of the IEEE 802.21 protocol [5]. An extension to the
IEEE 802.21 Basic Schema (Extended Schema) was also intro-
duced wherewith the provider can offer additional information
to the mobile devices, including incentives, thus increasing
competition among access providers. MYHand optimizes the
handover process as it aids in the early and effective discovery
of available networks. A ﬂowchart is presented, which details
an alternative handover procedure with minimum throughput
requirement, using MYHand architecture. Simulation results
based on this architecture show that the mobile user could
prioritize a preference without loosing the access quality.
Unlike other works, the proposed extended schema focuses
on alternative handover, although MYHand could also be used
in imperative handovers. In addition, MYHand is user-centric,
i. e., the handover if managed by the user device, as opposed
to network-centric, offering greater freedom of choice.
As contributions of this work, we highlight the beneﬁts
for providers and mobile users. By adopting the proposed
architecture, providers can disclose additional informations
other than usual, for instance, incentive information, and thus
attract new users. Besides, MYHand can be extended to
offer any kind of information, including service offering. The
information provided by the MYHand architecture will help
the mobile in the discovery and selection of an access network.
The rest of the paper is organized as it follows. Section
II presents some approaches to obtain information about
available networks. Section III presents some related works.
MYHand architecture is presented in Section IV. The last
section concludes the paper and suggests some future work.
II. STRATEGIES FOR SELECTING TRANSMISSION
INFRASTRUCTURE IN NGN
The choice of a network depends on the knowledge of the
available options at each time. For this purpose, an operational
entity running on the device in the form of a high-level process
or something embedded inside the kernel should do a matching
between the user desired features in terms of price and QoS
parameters, for instance, and the available options.
There are different approaches to ﬁnd out the available
networks in the mobile device vicinity. At a lower level, it
is possible to scan for the available access points of each
network interface on the device. Using IEEE 802.11 networks,
for instance, it is to know the available access points (APs) and
their characteristics such as frequencies and signal strength.
The same goes to Wimax and LTE networks. To this end,
the decision-making entity should start a scanning process
with the desired frequency. A consequence of this periodic
scanning is the transmission interruption by the interface being
queried, thus decreasing the throughput and increasing the
power consumption.
The IEEE 802.21 protocol [5] introduces events that could
minimize the need for periodic scanning for mapping available
Fig. 1.
Y-Comm Architecture, extracted from [6]
access points. If supported by a device, this standard foresees
that the network interface itself, possibly using driver support
in the operating system, performs a search for the desired
network and generate notiﬁcations for a client entity that
registers interest in such information. At a broader level, an
element called MIIS (Media Independent Information Service)
may be present in some device on the same network to collect
information on the available access points and provide them
later to probing customers. In this case, it avoids scanning on
each mobile device. The communication between the client
decision entities and the MIIS server occurs using application
protocols over TCP/IP.
In the Y-Comm project [4] [6], an entity present in the
Network Management layer performs equivalent functions to
those provided by the MIIS, sending some information to the
mobile, such as, network topology, resources, QoS parameters,
etc. Obtaining such information also minimizes the need of
scanning. The possibility of performing authentication on de-
mand with a target network extends the functionality provided
by the IEEE 802.21, but it is expected in Y-Comm, which
communicates with several access providers.
The Y-Comm architecture is divided into layers and it is
composed by two frameworks, as shown in Fig. 1. The Pe-
ripheral Framework, implemented in the Peripheral Network,
deals with operations and functions on the mobile, and the
Core Framework, implemented in the Core Network, which
deals with the functionality required in the core network to
support the Peripheral Framework. A detailed explanation
about each layer can be found in [4] and [6]. In this paper,
the terms Peripheral Framework and Peripheral Network are
used interchangeably (the same to Core).
To understand how Y-Comm does handover, Fig. 2 shows
a proactive handover procedure. The Network Management
layer (NML) provides the AAA system, which is not provided
by IEEE 802.21, and stores information about local networks.
In the mobile, the Policy Management layer (PML) polls
the Network Management layer (NML) to obtain information
about all local wireless networks, their topologies and QoS
characteristics. This information, along with others provided
by higher layers such as, location, speed and direction are
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Fig. 2.
Proactive handover using Y-Comm, extracted from [4]
used by the PML to evaluate the circumstances under which a
handover should occur. The PML can be conﬁgured with some
rules related to handover decision. The PML also calculates the
Time Before Vertical Handover (TBVH) and communicates
this information to the Vertical Handover layer (VHL), which
requests resources to the Reconﬁguration layer. In addition,
once the PML decides to hand over, the new IP address, the
new QoS, the TBVH and estimated Network Dwell Time are
communicated to the upper layers. The Network Abstraction
layer, both in the peripheral and core network, is responsible
for providing a common interface to manage and control all
the network links, and for sending L2 events to the PML.
MYHand is an application of the dynamic negotiation
model trading under Y-Comm project, adding facilities of
the MIHF (Media Independent Handover Function) services
(event, information and command) supported by an extension
of the Basic Schema. This extension provides a more efﬁcient
interaction between mobile and access network in terms of
information exchange.
III. RELATED WORK
There are several works related to network discovery and
handover optimization using IEEE 802.21 protocol. In [7] the
authors propose a multiple attributes decision making-based
terminal controlled vertical handover decision schema using
IEEE 802.21. The proposed schema is compared to RSS-based
and cost function-based schema through simulations, which
show that the proposed schema provides smaller handover
times and lower dropping rate than the RSS-based and cost
function-based vertical handover methods. But the authors
focus on decision making in the integrated Wi-Fi and Wimax
networks. MYHand architecture is designed to work with any
network technology. In [8] the authors propose an architecture
of MIIS server and the procedures for handover optimization,
which avoid scanning and reduces energy consumption, but
the management is network-controlled. Both works are aimed
for imperative handover.
A lot of work focuses on handover optimization. Rizvi et. al.
[9] presents an intelligent vertical handover decision algorithm
and points out other works. In [10] the authors present an
overview of the handover decision strategies, which are classi-
ﬁed in categories, and present a new approach which considers
context-aware and policies, aided by a Fuzzy Logic system.
In [11] the authors present a multiservice vertical handover
decision algorithm (MUSE-VDA) and a general cost function
used to choose a target network. In [12] the authors describe a
policy based handover decision algorithm (POLIMAND) and
point several link layer parameters in heterogeneous networks
used in the decision making. These works do not use IEEE
802.21, in a way that higher layers do not receive notiﬁcations
from the lower layers when an important event occur.
The IEEE 802.21 protocol does not specify how the infor-
mation of the available networks is ﬁlled in the databases.
The authors in [13] propose a mechanism for this. Thus, this
related work can be used as an adjunct to MYHand. In [14] the
authors propose a new architecture for network discovery and
a solution for the construction of the information database.
Their work focuses in mobile-assisted and network-assisted
proactive handover (when the mobile attempts to know the
condition of the various networks at a speciﬁc location before
the mobile node reaches that location) and pre-authentication.
In this architecture, the information stored in the servers is
restricted to the ones registered by the mobiles from visited
networks and the information that Reporting Agents (RAs),
present in each network, catch via SNMP and send it to the
information server. In [15] the authors propose an Hierarchical
IEEE 802.21 Information Service Management infrastructure,
which places MIIS servers in three levels: Zone MIIS, Local
MIIS, and Global MIIS, aiming to improve the response time.
In the MYHand architecture, the Y-Comm information server
obtains information from many different places as, for in-
stance, its local database, MIIS servers, and other information
services such as the WFP server [16].
The works related to network discovery found in the lit-
erature concerned with technological information, needed for
imperative handover process. MYHand extends the network
discovery by embedding additional information related, for
instance, to incentives, required for alternative handover pro-
cess [17]. The extended schema presented in this paper is
focused on alternative handover, but MYHand can optimize
both, imperative and alternative handovers.
IV. MYHAND ARCHITECTURE
This section presents the extended schema and the MYHand
architecture, as well as its validation.
A. IEEE 802.21 Information Service Schema
The Information Service Schema is an RDF/OWL ontology
(Resource Description Framework / Web Ontology Language).
The schema is used in the IEEE 802.21 Information Service
to deﬁne the structure of each information element, as well as
the relationship among the information elements. The IEEE
802.21 Information Service schema is supported by every
MIHF that implements the MIIS to support ﬂexible and
efﬁcient information queries.
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Fig. 3.
Proposed Extended Schema Relationship
The RDF/OWL schema deﬁnition for MIIS consists of
two parts: the basic and the extended schema. The MIIS
RDF/OWL representation method is extensible using an ex-
tended schema.
B. Proposed Extended Schema
Due to the independence of service-related functions from
underlying transport technologies in NGNs, and appearance
of new technologies, it is expected more concurrence among
access providers. The proposed schema extends the selection
of new networks, embedding information related to incentives,
enriching the alternative handover, in which the device may
choose the target network based on incentives.
Fig. 3 shows the proposed extended schema in the form
of a new element, called Incentive, which is related to Thing
and NETWORK. Thing is a generic element of RDF/ OWL
language which deﬁnes the basic type for an element, from
which all other elements inherit their properties. The element
NETWORK aggregates information from other elements, re-
lated to a certain network, such as network type, Point of
Attachment list, Operator ID, among others, and the Incentive
element becomes another attribute of NETWORK.
The element Incentive is a simple example on how MYHand
architecture can improve handovers. This element provides
information about amount of credits offered to the user, who
connects to a certain access provider. This amount of credits
can be used for future connections, for gaining discounts for
example, and thus be an attractive to the loyalty of the user.
This element has two properties, according to Fig. 3:
Credits: credits to be assigned to the user during the network
usage. It is associated to property ’unit’;
Unit: amount of time, in seconds, that the user must keep
connected for gaining that amount of credits. For instance, the
incentive is 3 credits for each 60 seconds connected.
Part of the proposed extended schema deﬁnition is shown in
Fig. 4 as an XML document. The extended schema is obtained
through DHCP service by the same way that the Basic Schema
[5].
C. MYHand architecture
Fig. 5 presents the MYHand architecture with four entities
involved: the MobileNode (MN), the Serving Point of Attach-
ment (PoA-S), with a co-located Serving Point of Service
(PoS-S), a Candidate / Target Network and a MIIS Server,
each of them with IEEE 802.21 modules properly inserted in
the Y-Comm layers.
The Mobile Node (MN) can have more than one net-
work interface. The MIHF module is located in the Net-
Fig. 4.
Proposed extended schema deﬁnition
work Abstraction Layer and it is responsible for the ab-
straction of the network interfaces to the higher layers. This
module receives commands and sends events and informa-
tion to the Handover Manager module, receives commands
from Vertical Handover Manager and forwards commands
from higher modules to remote MIHFs. The Service Access
Points MIH SAP, MIH LINK SAP and MIH NET SAP are
the interfaces between the MIHF and the other modules.
The Handover Manager module acquires information from
the device, user and networks (MIH Get Information and
MIH MN HO Candidate Query commands) and it decides
when and to which antenna a handover should be done.
The Vertical Handover Manager module receives commands
from the Handover Manager module calling for a handover
(do handover), acquires target network resources and actually
performs the handover (MIH MN HO Commit). Both, the
Handover Manager and Vertical Handover Manager modules
are implemented as MIH Users. The Mobile IP protocol allows
the user mobility at network level.
Still in Fig. 5, the PoA-S/PoS-S is the network point to
which the MN is directly connected. In the PoS-S and other
PoSs, the MIH-LINK-SAP is not necessary because the MIH
Users do not need to communicate with modules below the
MIHF. The MIHF module abstracts the network interface to
the upper layers and forwards remote MIH commands to the
respective modules. The Handover Manager module acts as
an MIIS Server proxy and it is the responsible for providing
information to the MN. This information can be gathered
from a local database, a server information MIIS Server
(MIH Get Information) or other possible sources. This mod-
ule also veriﬁes resource availability at candidate networks by
means of the MIH N2N HO Query Resources message. The
Resources Manager module (RM) requests resource allocation
to the MN in the target network.
In the Candidate/Target Network, the MIHF module also
abstracts the network interface to the upper layers and forwards
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Fig. 5.
MYHand architecture
remote MIH commands to the respective modules. The Han-
dover Manager module checks and informs to the Handover
Manager of the PoS-S about resource availability for new
connections. The Resources Manager module (RM) allocates
network resources to an user who will connect to this access
point, when requested by the RM of the PoS-S.
In the MIIS Server, the module which implements the in-
formation server receives and responds to information requests
about available networks in a given area.
For better understanding the architecture operation, Fig. 6
shows a ﬂowchart which details an alternative handover proce-
dure with minimum throughput requirement, which prioritizes
the amount of credits that a provider offers, as explained in
Section IV-B. IEEE 802.21 commands are started by ”MIH ”.
Before starting the handover, the MN is connected to
network A by means of its Wi-Fi interface and it is running an
application with a minimum throughput requirement. Higher
layer applications in MN inform the Handover Manager mod-
ule (with an appropriate frequency) on information about min-
imum QoS and user preferences (provider, access technology,
price or minimum credits, for instance). In the case the MN
is not yet connected to any network, a scanning is necessary,
through the MIH Link Actions.request command, to search
for an available network. This command reports information
about AP address, network ID, signal strength, among others.
To enable an alternative handover, the Handover Manager
module (HM) of the mobile node periodically requests in-
formation to the HM of the PoS-S on available networks
in that area by means of the MIH Get Information.request
message. In this message, the MN sends its location and
desirable access technology (according to its available net-
work interfaces and user preferences) and receives informa-
tion (MIH Get Information.response) on each network as,
for instance, provider SSID, roaming partners, access cost,
maximum data rate, and credits to be gained (in the case of
our extended ontology), and information about each available
antenna as, for instance, MAC address, technology, geographic
location, channel, and IP address. Eventually the HM of PoS-
S can query the MIIS to update information. All remote MIH
messages pass through the MIHF of the respective entities.
The MN can identify each network as belonging to a
provider to which it has a contract or belonging to a partner of
its home provider (through the roaming partners information
of the IEEE 802.21 protocol).
If, after a query for available networks, the MN identi-
ﬁes a network offering more credits than the network cur-
rently being used, the HM module can decide to do a han-
dover to that network. As the application requires a mini-
mum throughput, the HM module sends an MIH MN HO
CandidateQuery.request message to the HM module of the
PoS-S, requesting resources veriﬁcation, stating which net-
works must be checked (candidate networks) and the min-
imal required resources. This module, in turn, queries the
resources availability in each candidate network by sending an
MIH N2N HO QueryResources.request message to the HM
module of each candidate network, advising which resources
are required. So, the HM of the PoS-S joins the informa-
tion about those networks and responds to the MN with an
MIH MN HO CandidateQuery.response message.
Having all the necessary information, the HM module of
the MN decides if a handover should be done. If so, it sends
the do handover command to the Vertical Handover Manager
(VHM) to proceed with the handover, stating the link type (Wi-
Fi, LTE, etc) and to which network the handover should be
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Fig. 6.
Alternative handover ﬂowchart
done. The VHM module notiﬁes the Resources Manager (RM)
of the PoS-S about the selected target network, by means of an
MIH MN HO Commit.request message. The RM module of
the PoS-S sends the MIH N2N HO Commit.request message
to the RM module of the target network to advise that the
mobile will connect to that network. Then the RM of the
target network allocates the resources for the MN and replies
sending a MIH N2N HO Commit.response message advising
on sucess or not. If so, the RM module of the PoS-S notiﬁes
the VHM of the mobile on the success of the operation by
means of an MIH MN HO Commit.response message.
Having the resources already allocated on the target net-
work, the VHM module sends an MIH Link Actions.request
command to the MIHF requesting that the interface is turned
on to establish the connection at the link level to the target
antenna in a given channel, or requesting that the current
interface disconnects the current antenna and connects to
the target antenna. Finally, the connection to the target is
established and the VHM module informs the HM module
that the handover is done (handover done message).
After, Mobile IP is executed in the MN, Home Agent and
Foreign Agent to keep the connection at transport layer.
D. Architecture Modelling Validation
For validating the modelling of the MYHand architecture,
a scenario with 3 access providers (P1, P2 and P3) was
simulated by using NS2 (Network Simulator 2) [18]. Although
NGN networks foresees the usage of different technologies
with signal overlay, the aim of this validation is focusing in
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Fig. 7.
Simulated scenario
the MYHand architecture with information about incentive.
Because of this, only one wireless technology was simulated.
Each provider has 4 Wi-Fi antennas positioned along an 1000
meters avenue, as showed in Fig. 7. Each antenna covers,
approximately, 200 meters diameter. P1r, P2r and P3r are edge
routers belonging to providers P1, P2 and P3, respectively.
The link speed between each antenna and the edge router is
20Mbps, the delay is 10ms, and Droptail queue.
A mobile (User1) walks through the avenue handing over
according to a speciﬁc handover decision policy, totalling a 15
minutes walk (common speed of 4 km/h, i.e., 1.11 m/s). Two
decision policies were adopted. In the ﬁrst policy, the mobile
prioritized signal strength, as commonly simulated in the state-
of-the-art, and in the second policy the mobile prioritized the
amount of credits offered by each provider, using MYHand.
Provider P1 offers 30 credits for each minute that the mobile
stay connected, Provider P2 offers 45 credits and Provider
P3 offers 60 credits. Three different amount of credits were
simulated such that the mobile could gain more or less credits
according to the policy (prioritizing credits or not).
To generate trafﬁc in the scenario, each simulation had 3
ﬁxed users in each antenna, at most 10 meters away from
the antenna, downloading a 100 Kbps constant bit rate whose
source was the host Content Provider. To verify the inﬂuence
of the trafﬁc in the total of credits gained, other simulations
were realised with 6, 9, 12 and 15 users connected in each
antenna. In the mobile a VoIP connection, whose peer was
the host VoIP peer, was simulated. The link speed between
hosts Content Provider and VoIP peer, and the core network
is 100Mbps, the delay is 2ms, and Droptail queue. The
total of received bytes and gained credits were measured in
each simulation. Varying number of users and the policy, 10
different simulations were executed.
The propagation model used was shadowing. The loss
exponent and the shadowing deviation parameters were, re-
spectively, 3.2 and 4, characterizing an external environment
of an urban area, according to [18]. The MAC layer was
conﬁgured to the IEEE 802.11g standard by following the
parameters used in [19]. The routing protocol used was NOAH
Fig. 8.
Results of gained credits
Fig. 9.
Results of received bytes
[20], suitable for the infrastructure mode.
The results of gained credits by the User1 as a function
of the number of connected users are shown in Fig. 8. In all
simulations in which the amount of credits was prioritized,
the mobile User1 gained more credits than RSSI prioritization
(between 20.7% and 26.7% more). The increase in the number
of users, and trafﬁc, did not affected the amount of gained
credits, because it was not veriﬁed a drop or an increase trend.
Fig. 9 shows the amount of received bytes as a function of
the number of connected users. In the simulations prioritizing
credits, the amount of received bytes decreased compared to
RSSI prioritization but it was 1.38% in the worst case, not a
signiﬁcant loss.
The same 10 simulations were duplicated by changing the
credits offered by providers P1, P2 and P3, respectively, 10,
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

20 and 30 credits. The results were similar to the former.
The cost to the mobile for gathering incentive information
was not measured because the architecture is not implemented,
but it would be a few dozen of bytes. These informations will
be received together to other basic schema informations, there
being no need for scanning.
The handover process can be divided into three stages:
decision, initiation and execution, and all these stages have
dynamic features. These features do not affect MN ability to
identify each network as belonging to a provider to which
it has contract. The MN identiﬁes the provider by means
the SSID and roaming partners information, provided in the
MIH Get Information.response message.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Next Generation Networks (NGN) empower the users of
mobile communication devices to opportunistically navigate
through different access networks. Network selection can
change according to the circumstances of offered services and
required transmission parameters. An extended AAA mech-
anism provides on-demand connectivity to the devices even
without a pre-established access plan. Speciﬁc information on
the available networks and offered services must be provided
to the handover decision mechanism on the mobile.
This paper presented the MYHand architecture, for provid-
ing the mobile devices with extended information for perform-
ing conscious alternative handover decisions. The architecture
combines the use of the Y-Comm model and the IEEE 802.21
protocol, which is incremented with an extended schema. The
MYHand architecture does not specify a decision algorithm,
but assists in the decision-making process performed at the
mobile device.
Validation results show an increase of 26.7% in the gained
credits by using the MYHand architecture, compared to signal
strength prioritization, as proposed by other works in the
state-of-the-art. A decrease in the throughput using the new
architecture was observed but it was less than 1.4%.
According to the MYHand architecture, different incentives
and negotiation procedures can be used in the network se-
lection mechanism, as exempliﬁed by the rank-based model
presented in this paper.
As future work, we intend to extend the architecture to
include other informations, and to implement policy and access
parameters negotiation between mobile and network.
Another possible future work is simulating a heterogeneous
scenario with Wi-Fi and LTE antennas and evaluating the
beneﬁts of the new architecture in terms of amount of re-
sources, robustness of RDF/OWL ontology, and the reliability
if occurred changes in terms of territorial coverage area, speed
of the user’ moving, etc.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the National Science and
Technology Institute for Critical Embedded Systems (INCT-
SEC, Brazil) for funding this work by means of the following
agencies: CNPq (grants # 573963/2008-8 and # 451487/2013-
3) and FAPESP (grant # 2008/57870-9), and UDESC.
REFERENCES
[1] ITU-T Recommendation Y.2001, “General Overview of NGN,” Interna-
tional Telecommunication Union, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[2] J. Schiller, Mobile Communications, 2nd ed.
Addison Wesley, 2003.
[3] J. McNair and F. Zhu, “Vertical handoffs in fourth-generation multinet-
work environments,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 8–15, 2004.
[4] G. Mapp, et al., “Exploiting location and contextual information to de-
velop a comprehensive framework for proactive handover in hetegeneous
environments,” Computer Networks and Communications, vol. 2012, pp.
1–7, February 2012.
[5]
, “IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks - part 21:
Media independent handover services,” IEEE Std 802.21-2008, January
2009.
[6] G. Mapp, F. Shaikh, D. Cottingham, J. Crowcroft, and J. Baliosian,
“Y-comm:
a
global
architecture
for
heterogeneous
networking,”
in Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Wireless
internet, ser. WICON ’07.
ICST, Brussels, Belgium, Belgium:
ICST
(Institute
for
Computer
Sciences,
Social-Informatics
and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2007, pp. 22:1–22:5. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1460047.1460075
[7] J. Wu, S. Yang, and B. Hwang, “A terminal-controlled vertical han-
dover decision scheme in IEEE 802.21-enabled heterogeneous wireless
networks,” International Journal of Communication Systems, vol. 22,
no. 7, pp. 819–834, Jul. 2009.
[8] C. Cicconetti, F. Galeassi, and R. Mambrini, “A software architecture
for network-assisted handover in IEEE 802.21,” Journal of Communi-
cations, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 44–55, 2011.
[9] S. Rizvi, A. Aziz, and N. Saad, “An overview of vertical handoff decision
policies for next generation wireless networks,” in Circuits and Systems
(APCCAS), 2010 IEEE Asia Paciﬁc Conference on, dec. 2010, pp. 88
–91.
[10] M. Kassar, B. Kervella, and G. Pujolle, “An overview of vertical
handover decision strategies in heterogeneous wireless networks,”
Computer Communications, vol. 31, pp. 2607–2620, June 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1379906.1380018
[11] F. Zhu and J. McNair, “Multiservice vertical handoff decision algo-
rithms,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Network-
ing, vol. 2006, pp. 1–13, April 2006.
[12] S. Aust, D. Proetel, N. A. Fikouras, C. Paupu, and D. Gorg, “Policy
based mobile ip handoff decision (polimand) using generic link layer
information,” in Proceedings of the 5th IEEE Int. Conf. Mobile and
Wireless Communication Networks, October 2003.
[13] A. Mateus and R. Marinheiro, “A media independent information service
integration architecture for media independent handover,” in Ninth
International Conference on Networks (ICN), april 2010, pp. 173 –178.
[14] A. Dutta, S. Madhani, and T. Zhang, “Network discovery mechanisms
for fast-handoff,” in 3rd International Conference on Broadband Com-
munications, Networks and Systems, BROADNETS 2006, oct. 2006, pp.
1 –11.
[15] F. Buiati, L. Villalba, D. Corujo, S. Sargento, and R. Aguiar, “IEEE
802.21 information services deployment for heterogeneous mobile en-
vironments,” Communications, IET, vol. 5, no. 18, pp. 2721 –2729, 16
2011.
[16] R. Lopes, et al., “Exploring user’s habits and virtual communities to
improve ip-connectivity management,” in International Conference on
Ultra Modern Telecommunications Workshops, ICUMT ’09., oct. 2009,
pp. 1 –6.
[17] G. Mapp, et al., “Exploring efﬁcient imperative handover mechanisms
for heterogeneous wireless networks,” in International Conference on
Network-Based Information Systems, NBIS ’09., aug. 2009, pp. 286 –
291.
[18] “Network Simulator - NS2,” http://nsnam.isi.edu/nsnam, retrieved: April,
2013.
[19] D. F. K. Medepalli, P. Gopalakrishnan and T. Kodama, “Voice capacity
of IEEE 802.11b, 802.11a and 802.11g wireless lans,” in Proceedings of
IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference - Globecom 2004, vol. 3,
2004, pp. 1549–1553.
[20] “The
no
ad-hoc
routing
agent
(NOAH)
website,”
http://icapeople.epﬂ.ch/widmer/uwb/ns-2/noah/,
retrieved:
April,
2013.
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

