A Simple Precoding Scheme for Multi-User MIMO Transmission Over a Shared
Channel in a TDD Cellular Network
Abheek Saha
Hughes Systique Corporation,
Gurgaon, India
Email: abheek.saha@hsc.com
Abstract—Multi-User
Multiple-Input
Multiple-Output
(MIMO) transmission is one of the key technologies for
achieving the ambitious targets for coverage and throughput
in modern cellular networks. It allows us to take advantage
of the large number of transmission elements possible in the
radio-heads or eNodeB and allow users to share a channel.
A key challenge in the deployment of multi-user MIMO is
the problem of cross-user interference due to mutual non-
orthogonality within the shared channel. The transmitter must
select an optimal transmit precoding so as to eliminate this
cross-user interference, since the receivers cannot coordinate
and jointly decode the transmission. In this paper, we propose
a novel algorithm for multi-user MIMO precoding over a
shared channel. Our algorithm is a combination of ideas
both from Dirty Paper Coding as well as the more recent
Interference Alignment techniques. We demonstrate that we
can achieve better performance than zero-forcing and that
our algorithm is practical to implement within the framework
of existing 4th and upcoming 5th generation systems, being
realizable in linear time.
Keywords—Multi-user MIMO; Dirty Paper Coding; Interfer-
ence Alignment; Shared channel; Block Cholesky decomposition.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fourth and ﬁfth generation cellular networks are distin-
guished by the rapid and widespread deployment of mul-
tiple antenna systems. These systems can be deployed in
various ways; multiple antenna deployed at a single tower,
multiple distributed antenna installations under the control
of a single centralized Radio Access Node (cRAN), or
even multiple cooperating eNodeBs (this is known as a
Coordinated Multipoint or CoMP deployment). The initial
deployment of multiple antenna transmission was in the
single user MIMO systems [1], where a single eNodeB and
a single User Terminal (UT) communicate over a dedicated
channel using multiple receive and transmit elements. These
have been commercially deployed for about a decade, with
mixed results ; in practical environments, achieving more
than 2 simultaneous streams per channel has proven to be
difﬁcult. Advances in radio technology are pushing multi-
user MIMO (MuMIMO) as a replacement to single user
MIMO. MuMIMO [2] consists of a single eNodeB with
a large number of antennas to simultaneously transmit to
multiple MIMO-capable UTs each equipped with a smaller
number of antennas, over a common shared channel (Figure
1). The promise of MuMIMO is in the increase of the number
of simultaneous streams per channel, hence increasing both
Figure 1. Deployment of MuMIMO
the throughput and coverage at both cell-center and cell-
edge. The primary advantage is that it is easier to put
larger numbers of antenna elements on an eNodeB than on
a UT (due to the form factor) and independent UTs with
geographical separation have a higher spatial diversity than
that of large number of antennas on a single receiver. This
spatial diversity leads to a corresponding independence in
channel matrices which is the basis of the gains of MIMO
transmission.
MuMIMO has been supported in 4th generation cellular
networks (Long Term Evolution (LTE)) standards since Re-
lease 10 and is increasingly seeing commercial deployment.
As we move towards the ﬁfth generation, the number of
antenna on the wireless network nodes (Remote Radio Heads
or eNodeBs) is also increasing manifold (Massive MIMO).
More complex modes of deployment, such as cooperative
MuMIMO and multi-user CoMP are being proposed, es-
pecially to support the cell-edge (Figure 2) [3]. Over the
last few years, the 3rd Generation Partnership Project has
rapidly pushed the MuMIMO transmission modes into the
mainstream of cellular access networks [4], standardizing the
relevant operating modes, associated sounding and dedicated
reference signals etc. The 5G New Radio standard (5G-NR)
recognizes the importance of MuMIMO and has introduced
further enhancements to the existing LTE standards to support
more complex and efﬁcient deployments [5]. This includes
the use of comb-structures and cyclic shifts to support a
higher number of orthogonal training signals, to support up
to 32 simultaneous layers. The speciﬁcations also allow for
ﬂexible deployment of training signals, so as to support
very low-latency decoding and adaptation for high-doppler
environments.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 2. Cooperative MuMIMO
In contrast to the single-user MIMO, where the com-
putation of optimal precoding matrix is well understood,
optimal/near-optimal precoding/decoding for MuMIMO is
relatively complex and has been the subject of much recent
research. MuMIMO performance is limited by co-user inter-
ference over a complex shared medium; the individual chan-
nels of the individual UTs cause interference between each
other in a manner which is tied to the mutual information in
the channel. While the network can fully anticipate the cross-
user interference, the UTs have only knowledge of their own
channel and cannot coordinate with each other. This creates
an interesting problem of optimal multi-user encoding at the
network, which is the subject of this paper.
The contribution of this paper is as follows. We propose a
novel MuMIMO transmit precoding scheme for a transmitter
with N ∗ K, N, K > 1 antenna transmitting to N receivers,
each with K antenna elements. In the existing literature
(Section III) there are two main approaches to the MuMIMO
precoding problem. The earlier research was based on the
technique of Dirty Paper Coding (DPC) [6], which is an
elegant approach to solving the known interference issue, but
is however, difﬁcult to scale to a large number of users due
to the need to solve a difﬁcult joint optimization problem.
On the other hand, in recent years, much work has taken
place using the technique of Interference Alignment(IA) [7],
which was primarily designed for the shared cross-channel
environment, i.e., K transmitters and K receivers on a
single channel. Our Successive interference Compensation
(SiC) algorithm is a mixture of both approaches. We use
the block diagonalization approach of DPC and join it with
the sub-space reduction technique of interference alignment.
We show that the resultant algorithm is fast, easy to im-
plement and provides an intuitive outer bound of the K
user MuMIMO bounds. We note that the K user MIMO
case is relatively less addressed in the interference alignment
literature as well as the older DPC literature, in terms of
theoretical upper bounds for achievable rate. This shall be
described in more detail in Subsection II-B.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we describe the problem in context of the generic theory
of interference channels and provide a survey of previous
work, organized in terms of the two main approaches, Dirty
Paper Coding (II-A) and Interference Alignment (II-B). In
Section III, we give a detailed mathematical framework for
our problem, followed by the description of the algorithm in
Subsection III-A. In Section IV, we provide some simulation
results comparing our approach against the baseline Zero-
Forcing approach. Finally, in Section V, we conclude the
paper by proposing future directions in our research.
II. MULTI-USER INTERFERENCE CHANNELS - THEORY
AND PREVIOUS WORK
Our problem involves the multi-user shared channel in a
generic LTE Time Division Duplex (TDD) cellular network.
A single eNodeB with N × K antennas is controlling a cell
in which there are N UTs with K receive antennas each. The
eNodeB has to transmit simultaneously to all N UTs during
each transmission frame over a shared good quality (high
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR)) Gaussian channel, varying
stochastically from frame to frame. The eNodeB has perfect
Channel State Information (CSI) for all UTs because it is a
TDD network. It can also control the exact decoding matrix
to be used by each UT, by embedding appropriate reference
signals in each frame. The UTs have knowledge only of their
own channels. Our aim is to design an algorithm by which
the single eNodeB, given the knowledge of the complete set
of channels for all N receivers, can near-optimally choose
the transmission precoding matrix, so as to maximize the
aggregate capacity for the channel. The aggregate capacity is
a function of the number of layers transmitted, the number of
UTs transmitted to and the Bit Error Rate (BER) for each UT.
Because the system is operating in a high SNR environment,
the system performance i.e. BER is constrained by the cross-
user interference rather than the external noise.
The most generic case of a shared channel is the cross-
channel case, which supports K transceiver pairs over a
common channel. The broadcast channel case, on the other
hand, has a single transmitter with K receivers. The common
thread among both these cases is that the system performance
(aggregate rate capacity) is limited by co-channel interference
and the individual agents are cooperative, as pointed out
by the authors in [8]. The problem of rate maximizing for
selﬁsh users is an open problem. In the most generic model
of the distributed cross channel, neither the receivers nor
the transmitters can coordinate with each other in realtime
[9]. In other words, the individual receivers and transmitters
have to individually process their own signals for precoding/
decoding. In such a system, the individual transmitters and
receivers may agree on common parameters such as the
precoding/decoding matrices and the operating codebook,
but cannot share their processing in real-time; each will
have to work on their own copy of the signal (transmit
or receive) once the system is activated. Clearly, MuMIMO
and Coordinated Multipoint systems are both special cases
of the shared channel. MuMIMO is a broadcast channel
case where there is a single transmitter, but multiple non-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

communicating users. The CoMP case is a variant of the
cross-channel, as there are multiple transmitters with limited
ability to coordinate with each other.
Interest in the problem of shared channel transmission
dates back at least 15 years starting from the two-user
broadcast channel. The theoretical background is much older,
dating back to the 1970s. The research question is as follows;
how do we conﬁgure the transmitters and receivers in a
shared channel so as to maximize the aggregate transmission
rate. There are at least four parameters for optimization. The
obvious ones are the transmit and receive ﬁlters (precod-
ing/decoding matrices in MIMO terms). Alternately, one can
design appropriate code-books, or decompose the code-book
into separate subsets and reserve one for each transceiver pair.
Finally, there exists user selection/scheduling. An associated
problem is the need is to estimate the theoretical achievable
rate capacity of such a channel in terms of the covariance
between the channel matrices of individual users [10].
Over the years, there have been two major approaches to
the shared channel rate optimization problem. The ﬁrst is the
DPC approach [6] as applied to the wireless channel, as is
seen in the works of [11] and others. This approach works on
the theory of pre-compensation; how to adjust the transmit
signal so as to null out the effect of the known interference
at the receiver. The second, which has garnered enormous
interest of late, is the technique of interference alignment
[12]. This technique (and its predecessor, Zero-Forcing(ZF))
works on the basis of one-time optimal precoding.
A. Dirty Paper Coding
Dirty Paper Coding originated in the work of Costa [6].
It solves the problem of transmitting a signal s to a receiver
on top of a known (to the transmitter) interference vector
z and a random noise term n. The problem is to construct
an encoding operation T (z, n) based on the knowledge of
z and r and a corresponding decoding operation R, which
can be used without knowledge of the interference term z.
The original paper shows that the problem is solvable by
proving the existence of an alphabet to encode s, z jointly
and a corresponding pair of operations T , R, which can
be used independently at either end of the channel for
the encoding/decoding operations. A simple realization of
DPC is Tomlinson Harashima Precoding (THP) [13][14], ﬁrst
introduced to solve a problem of self-interference due to
cross-talk in cabled environments. In this work, T and R
are modulo operations on the transmit symbol.
In the context of wireless and broadband MIMO, the early
research in DPC focussed on the two receiver broadcast
channel [15].The achievable rate for a two user broadcast
channel have been extensively studied [16]–[18], culminating
in the Marton’s upper bound for two user broadcast channels.
In [15, Slepian Wolf Theorem], it is shown that the rate-
capacity of the two user channel is limited only by the
mutual information between the two signal-spaces and hence,
achievable using a DPC method. The same result has been
proven in different contexts by [19] and others.
Yu and Ciofﬁ propose an alternate technique to achieve
Marton’s rate capacity in a two user broadcast system,
using a decision feedback equalizer from the precoder output
[11][20]. Published literature on practical DPC techniques for
the shared wireless channel is relatively sparse, especially
in the multiple user (N > 2) case. Much of the available
literature uses Tomlinson Harashima precoding (or similar
techniques) as a means of constrained interference suppres-
sion [21]. In [22], the authors pair the THP approach with
a decision feedback ﬁlter to meet the power constraints on
a per symbol basis. In [23], the authors implement a robust
form of the THP for a decision feedback structure. Similar
work is presented in [24]–[26].
B. Interference alignment
Interference alignment(IA) [9][12][27] works by decom-
posing a single channel into multiple sub-spaces, each corre-
sponding to one of the degrees of freedom of each individual
user. The key idea is that of trading degrees of freedom
for interference [28]. In a standard IA realization, one of
the subspaces is selected as the designated ’interference’
subspace and all transmitters have to select an encoding
such that the interference vector generated by that transmitter
lies in the designated interference sub-space. This makes the
other sub-spaces available for use for interference-free signal
transmission. IA is a more efﬁcient successor for the earlier
zero-forcing (ZF) approach [29][30], as ZF requires each user
to choose a separate interference sub-space, which is the null-
space of the complement channel. The simplest case of IA
is a K-user Multiple Input Single Output (MISO) interfer-
ence channel [8], where K pairs of users sacriﬁce half the
available degrees of freedom for interference free operation.
Over the last ten years, an enormous corpus of literature
has been created for interference alignment as a interference
nulling technique in multiple contexts [7]. The theoretical
work on interference alignment addresses the cross-channel
case in two modes. In [12][27] we have two transmitters
and two receivers sharing a single channel and both the
transmitter and the receiver has multiple antenna. A speciﬁc
subcase of the cross channel case is given in Section 10 of
[12], which is the cognitive transmitter case; here, the two
transmitters are able to share the transmit message that each
intends to transmit to the other. In these enviroments, IA has
been proposed as a distributed optimization problem [8][28]
extended to the generic multi-antenna case in [31]. The
other application of IA is in the K-user MISO cross-channel
case [8], where we have a single transmitter transmitting to
N users, each equipped with a single antenna. These IA
techniques maybe adapted to the K user MuMIMO broadcast
channel but are very complex to implement. This is both due
to the full CSI requirement as well as the need to implement
multiple matrix optimization passes for each frame. Practical
algorithms mostly involve some version of ZF using rank-
reduction technique [32][33]. Alternately, the somewhat more
realizable alternating minimization algorithm in [34] can be
used iteratively.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

III. SUCCESSIVE INTERFERENCE COMPENSATION WITH
BLOCK DIAGONALIZATION
In this section, we present a simple to implement algo-
rithm for precoding a MuMIMO transmission over a known
broadcast channel with N receivers (UTs). The novelty of
our solution is in that approaches interference compensation
as in the DPC approach, using diagonalization to linearize
the problem. It then uses the rank-reduction technique of in-
terference alignment in order to compensate the interference
vector without violating the transmit power norm. This idea
of trading off between power and degrees of freedom is an
adaptation of the theoretical work in [10].
As is standard in LTE cellular networks, the UTs are not
aware that they are part of a MuMIMO cohort. They simply
obey the eNodeB instructions as encoded in the reference
signals to decode the transmitted symbols. In LTE Release
12 and onwards, this is achieved by an appropriately encoded
Demodulation Reference Signals (DMRS) embedded in the
transmission frame, which can be used both to control both
the decoding matrix the UT will use and the number of
streams each UT should decode. The UTs can only act as
per the subset of information they have and cannot anticipate
what the eNodeB is going to do. The eNodeB, however,
requires full CSI information for all UTs. In a TDD network,
this is directly available from the uplink. In an Frequency
Division Duplex (FDD) network, this has to be signaled and
has the additional complexity of quantization error. For the
purpose of this paper, we assume that the CSI information for
all user channels are available at the eNodeB with arbitrarily
small error, as is achievable in a standard TDD network.
The SiC algorithm is computationally simple as it is single-
pass and only involves matrix operations of size K × K.
The inversion of a Hermitian matrix required in the ﬁrst
block diagonalization stage is easily computed from the
singular value decomposition. In contrast, the ZF approach
requires us to implement Gram-Schmidt orthogonolization of
an assymetric N.(K −1)×N.K matrix, this operation being
repeated N times per frame. Standard IA algorithms are even
more complex, because the optimal matrix search requires
multiple iterative passes, each of which require quadratic
operations on the entire N.K × N.K transmission matrix.
In the rest of the paper, we use the following conven-
tions. We number matrix/vector rows and columns from 1
to N. Variables denoted by capital letters, i.e., A, B, C...
are considered to be elements of MN.K×N.K the set of
matrices of N.K rows and columns. Variables of the form
˜Am,n, ˜Bm,n, ˜Cm,n represent the sub-matrix of size K ×K of
the corresponding matrix A, B, C etc, starting from the row
position (m−1)×K and column position (n−1)×K. Vectors
are denoted by lower case letters x, y, etc. Uppercase greek
letters (Υ, Γ, etc.) are used exclusively to denote diagonal or
block-diagonal matrices and ˜Υm,n, ˜Γm,n their K × K size
submatrices as deﬁned above. Vector norms are denoted by
|x|. For the equuivalent matrix norms, we utilize the trace
function, which is given by |X| = Tr(X) . x∗ and X∗
represent the complex transpose of the vector x and the
conjugate transpose of the matrix X respectively. The square
root of a Hermitian semideﬁnite matrix S is obtained by
taking the Singular Value Decomposition S = V ΣV ∗ and
then constructing the root S1/2 = V Σ1/2V ∗. S−1 is the
matrix inverse.
A. Algorithm description
The SiC algorithm is implemented in two steps. In the ﬁrst
step (Subsection III-B), we block diagonalize the channel and
hence separate the interference and signal space for each user.
In the second step (Subsection III-C), we add a compensating
vector for each user to cancel the effect of the causal noise
and simultaneously reduce the number of transmitted streams
so as to normalize the transmit power.
The interference compensation step can be interpreted both
in the DPC sense and in the IA sense. In the DPC sense, we
are successively modifying the space of code-words for each
user to take into account the code-word transmitted by the
previous user. If we see this in the sense of the formulation
provided in [10], we are essentially choosing a transmit code-
word from a modiﬁed dictionary W, which maps to a sub-
set of valid receiver code-words, but can cancel interference
without violating the power transmit norm. In the IA sense,
we can view the rank reduction step as a tradeoff between
the degrees of freedom in the spatial sense to reduce the
overlap between the users, without fully orthonormalizing
them. This trade-off frees up some power so that we can add
the additional compensating vector to cancel out interference.
Thus, we are considering the combination of power and
MIMO spatial sub-channels as a joint resource within which
the optimal operating conﬁguration has to be found.
Our algorithm improves upon the performance of standard
MIMO IA algorithms, which are completely driven by the
condition number of the aggregate channel matrix. If the
condition number is large, i.e., the individual channel ma-
trices are strongly correlated, IA algorithms provide poor
results for all the UTs. This is because the act of subspace
decomposition forces each user into a very poor channel,
in order to achieve orthogonalization with respect to the
common channel. Consider the worst case where there are
two users, both with the exact same channel. The nullspace
of one is the nullspace of the other, and neither will achieve
any transmission in the IA case. In the SiC algorithm, at
least one of the users will get through with no interference
whatsover (the one which is encoded ﬁrst), at the cost of the
subsequent users.
B. Block Decomposition of a Composite Channel Matrix
The Block Cholesky decomposition (BLDL) technique has
been used for DPC of the MuMIMO channel because it
converts a multi-variate optimization problem to an stepwise
optimization problem [35][36]. It allows us to decompose
each UT’s channel into a simple K × K effective channel,
independent of the other UTs. For a symmetric matrix,
the K × K block decomposition is computationally simple,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

because the diagonal matrices can be easily inverted. We let
the channel matrix between the eNodeB and the M UTs, each
with K antenna be written as a composite H ∈ MMK×MK
as in (1).
H =


˜H1
˜H2
. . .
˜HM

 =


˜H1,1
˜H1,2
. . .
˜H1,M
˜H2,1
˜H2,2
. . .
˜H2,M
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
˜HM,1
˜HM,2
. . .
˜HM,M

 (1)
The matrix ˜Hj represents the channel between the j UT
and the eNodeB. Each ˜Hj,k is a K × K matrix within the
composite matrix, where the diagonal terms represent the
interference free channel and the off-diagonal terms represent
the covariance between the different UTs. In the ﬁrst step, we
carry out Block Cholesky decomposition composite matrix
HH∗ in the form given in (2), where the size of each sub-
matrix is K × K.
HH∗= GΣG∗
Σ= diag[ ˜S1, ˜S2, . . . , ˜SM]
G=


I
0
0
. . .
0
˜G2,1
I
0
. . .
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
0
˜GM,1
˜GM,2
. . .
I


˜Hk,k=
X
p<k
˜Gk,p ˜Sp ˜G∗
k,p + Sk,k
˜Hj,k<j=
X
p<k
˜Gj,p ˜Sp ˜G∗
k,p + ˜Gj,kSk,k
(2)
Note that Sk, 1 ≤ k ≤ N is a sequence of symmetric
positive semi-deﬁnite matrices. We can write the singular
value decomposition of Sk as in (3), where U is once again
a unitary matrix of size K × K
˜Sk = ˜Uk ˜
∆k ˜U ∗
k
(3)
The eNodeB precodes the transmission by the precoding
matrix given in (4) choosing λk so as to meet the transmit
norm ||P|| = 1.
P = H∗G


˜U1λ1
0
. . .
0
0
˜U2λ2
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
˜UM−1λM−1
0
. . .
. . .
0
˜UMλM

 (4)
The precoding is implemented on an appropriately chosen
transmit vector z comprising of a block of K size transmit
vectors ˜zk, each k-th block targetted to the k-th receiver (5).
λk is the power loading term.
z =
 ˜z1
˜z2
. . .
˜zM

(5)
In the rest of this paper, we have assumed that λk = ∆−1/2
k
which essentially ensures that the eNodeB has a ﬁxed power
output (NK)2|z|. The composite signal after passing through
the channel is given as the vector r in (8).
A particularly useful feature of the BLDL decomposition
is that the amount of interference at each stage (the power
norm of the interference vector) is computable step-wise
from the sub-matrices of the block diagonalized channel
matrix. Further, the total co-channel interference in the Block
Diagonalization is upper bounded by P
p | ˜Hp,p − ˜Sp,p|. We
can verify this as follows. Assume that the individual transmit
blocks ˜zk are of unit norm. The interference vector for the
k-th user is given as ik from (7). By triangle inequality, we
get upper bound of ik as in (6).
|ik| ≤
X
p≤k
|Gk,p−1∆1/2
p−1˜zp| ≤
X
p≤k
|Gk,p−1Sp−1G∗
k,p−1|
|
X
p≤k
Gp,p−1Sp−1Gp,p−1| = | ˜Hk,k − ˜Sk,k|
⇒ |ik| ≤ | ˜Hk,k − ˜Sk,k|
(6)
Intuitively, we can check the result from the fact that each
receiver has K antennas and can thus coherently decode
K streams. This means that the energy of the K streams
can be removed from the interference seen by the system
as a whole. Each submatrix Gk,j, k ̸= j then captures the
mutual information between the k-th and the j-th user. If the
sum of the off-diagonal terms of HH∗ were negligible, (i.e.,
P
p ˜Hj,p ˜Hp,j ≡ 0) in (2), then the inter-receiver co-channel
interference terms would also vanish.
C. Cancelling the co-channel interference vector
Because of the nature of the precoding, the co-channel
interference also takes a particular form, in that each i-th
user is only affected by the interference generated by the
previous users. We can verify this by formally deriving the
interference vector ik from the structure of the receive vector
given in (7).
y1= ∆1/2
1
˜z1
y2= U ∗
2 G2,1U1∆1/2
1
˜z1 + ∆1/2
2
˜z2
. . .
yk= ˜U ∗
k
X
j<k
Gk,j ˜∆1/2
j
˜Uj ˜zj + ˜
∆k
1/2˜zk
= ik + ˜
∆k
1/2˜zk
(7)
We will now compensate for this interference. To each
transmit vector zm, we shall add an additional compensating
vector ζm, so that the combination, after precoding will
counteract the effect of im, the known interference vector
for this, the m-th user. While this step will cancel the
interference vector completely, it may cause the combined
output vector zm + ζm to exceed the power norm. To take
care of this, we shall truncate the transmit block as shown
in (9). The output vector will have zero co-user interference,
but some of the streams will be nulled out. We interpret this
as a reduction in the degrees of freedom available for this
particular channel. The only impact on the receiver is that
it has to discard the last Lk symbols it receives. We repeat
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

r= HPˆz = HH∗G


˜U1∆−1/2
1
0
. . .
0
0
˜U2∆−1/2
2
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
˜UM−1∆−1/2
M−1λM−1
0
. . .
. . .
0
˜UM∆−1/2
M
λM




˜z1
˜z2
. . .
˜zM


= λ


1
0
. . .
0
˜G2,1
1
0
. . .
. . .
1
0
. . .
˜GM,1
˜GM−1,1
1
. . .




˜U1 ˜∆1/2
1
0
. . .
0
0
˜U2 ˜∆1/2
2
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
˜UM−1 ˜∆1/2
M−1
0
. . .
. . .
0
˜UM ˜∆1/2
M




˜z1
˜z2
. . .
˜zM


(8)
this step successively for the (k +1)-th and then the (k +2)-
th user, as long as the impact of the interference is more
than the reduction of throughput due to truncation. We note
that the interference vector (i)k has to be updated after the
compensation is completed for the (k − 1)-th user, because
it is dependent on the compensated output as well. For each
user, the crucial task, hence, is to minimize the value of Lk,
the number of streams that the k-th user has to reduce.


zk,1
zk,2
· · ·
zk,K−Lk
· · ·
zk,K


→


zk,1
zk,2 + ζk,2
· · ·
zk,K−Lk + ζk,K−Lk
· · ·
0


(9)
1) Truncation step: We consider the problem of transmis-
sion of a vector ˜zk through a channel with matrix Hk ∈ MK
with a known interference vector ik with norm εk. We can
ﬁnd an interference compensating vector ζk which we can
add to ˜zk to get ˆzk with K −L non-zero spatial streams, such
that T (˜zk, K − L) = T (ˆzk + ik), K − L), where T (A, n) is
the truncation operator. The receive vector y is given by the
equation (10), where the eNodeB uses the precoding matrix
V ˜∆−1, where V comes from the SVD of H, H = U∆V ∗.
y = U ∗ik ˜∆−1 + (x + ζ)
(10)
We know that U is a unitary matrix, so |U ∗ik| = εk. If we
set ζ =

−U ∗ik ˜∆−1
then y = x. However, by triangle
inequality
|x + ζ| ≤ |x| + εk
| ˜∆|
(11)
Hence, our modiﬁed transmit vector x + ζ may violate the
transmit power norm by an amount up to
εk
| ˜∆|. To solve this
problem, we reduce the number of spatial streams from K to
K−L. Hence we only wish to ﬁnd a ζ whereby the ﬁrst K−L
entries in y match K − L entries in x. The remaining entries
in ζ are set to zero. The equation in (10) is then modiﬁed to
that of (12), where T (S, k) is the truncation operator when
truncates the matrix S to its ﬁrst k rows and columns.
ζ= −U ∗η ˜∆−1
y= U ∗ik ˜∆−1 +


x1
x2
. . .
xK−L
0
. . .
0


+


ζ1
ζ2
. . .
ζK−L
0
. . .
0


(12)
D. Aggregate Rate
We now come to the problem of estimating the aggregate
rate we achieve by the SiC algorithm. We recall that for a
MIMO transmission, the aggregate rate for a given user is
the sum of the eigen-values of the effective channel matrix
for that user, corresponding to each stream or layer chosen
for transmission. In our case, we have deliberately truncated
the effective precoding matrix; this is the cost incurred for
mitigating cross-user interference. From the expression in
(12) we can estimate the number of streams Lk which the k-
th user has to sacriﬁce in order to achieve the null interference
condition. The aggregate simply becomes the throughput of
remaining streams, as in (13)
X
i∈K
log2 (1 + αλi/ ρ)
(13)
K is the set of streams which are retained for transmission
and ρ is the wide-band Gaussian (non-causal) noise in the
system. For a given k-th user facing the interference vector
ik as given in (6), the number of streams which have to
be reduced is given by L in the equation (14). Note that if
|i| ≈ | ˜
∆k
1/2|, we get L = K/2 which is the MISO case.
L = K
|i|
|Σk| + |i|
(14)
Consider the vector zk with known interference vector k. For
each stream that we reduce, we reduce the norm of the inter-
ference vector by at least 1/K. We also allow for the addition
of a compensating vector ζk of norm 1/K. To achieve null
interference condition, we have to allow the norm of the
compensating vector to match the worst case norm of the
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

interference vector. Hence, we get |i|(K − L/K) = L/K.
Simplifying for L we get the result above.
From the above result and the overall upper bound on the
interference given in (7), we get an upper bound on the total
number of streams that have to be sacriﬁced to achieve the
null interference condition. The total number of streams to
be reduced over the entire cohort of M receivers is given by
M
X
k=2
Lk =
X
k
˜
|Hk − ˜Sk|
| ˜Hk − ˜Sk| + | ˜Sk|
(15)
E. Optimal ordering
The expression in (2) also gives us a useful heuristic
for ordering the UTs prior to the block-diagonalization
stage. Let us assume that we are scheduling a set of UTs
whose indices are given in U. If we compute the relative
orthogonality of the k-th channel to the rest in terms of
R(k, U) = mink̸=j,j∈U |Hj,kH∗
j,k|, then ordering the UTs
in descending order of R(k, U) improves the aggregate
capacity. The initial UTs get the best transmission rate, since
their interference vectors are relatively low. The UTs which
may interfere with the others are further down the list. We
can demonstrate this by a simple example. Consider a 3 UT
system, where the UTs have channel matrices H1, H2 and
αH1+(1−α)H2, where H1 and H2 are perfectly orthogonal
to each other. If we organize the composite channel matrix is
˜H =
 H1
H2
αH1 + (1 − α)H2

, then the cross user
interference vectors are 0, 0 and α2 + (1 − α)2. On the other
hand, if we ﬂip the positions of the 2nd and the 3rd UTs,
i.e., ˜H =
 H1
αH1 + (1 − α)H2
H2

, then the cross
user interference vectors are 0, α2 and 1 respectively. As we
can see, the second ordering has lower rate capacity though
the ﬁrst one is less fair. In general, we ﬁnd the ordering in
terms of descending R(k, u) gives good results as we shall
see in Section IV below.
A scheduling algorithm to balance ordering and capacity
is currently under study.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present some simulation results. We
have simulated a system comprising of a single eNodeB
with 64 transmit antenna (an 8x8 antenna conﬁguration) and
multiple UTs; only the basic downlink shared channel is
implemented and the DMRS and other reference signals are
communicated directly to the UTs. The entire simulation
code is written in C and the key elements of the transmit
and receive chain are implemented using the Gnu Scientiﬁc
Library (GSL). The channel matrices are randomly generated
(using the GSL random number generator) with full rank
and condition number 0.5. At each frame, the eNodeB
creates a transmit vector for transmission to the N users
simultaneously, with K symbols per UT, from a standard
16-QAM constellation. All transmit vectors are normalized
to a unit norm; hence, the power saved by decimating any
of the spatial streams is distributed over the rest of the
spatial streams. The channel matrices are then randomly
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 55
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
Aggregate capacity (nats)
Number of Antenna per UE
Performance of SIC algorithm with multiple antennae configurations
Figure 3. Relative performance of the successive interference cancellation
algorithm vs full coordination
generated and then the algorithm given in is implemented
at the simulated eNodeB. The resultant precoded transmit
vector is passed through the random composite channel with
AWGN noise added to it and handed over to the UTs. At each
UT, the decoding chain is implemented using the signaled
decoding matrix and SNR computed individually. Figure 3
show the combined bit-rate achieved for four cases; 2 UTs
of 32 antenna each, 4 UTs of 16 antenna each, 8 UTs of
8 antenna each, 16 UTs of 4 antenna each and ﬁnally, 32
UTs of 2 antenna each. For each conﬁguration, we have run
the simulation 500 times. As we can see in Figure 3, as the
number of antenna increase, the total bitrate asymptotically
approaches the best case performance. The gap in between
is equivalent to the coordination penalty described by [37].
In Figure 4, we compare the performance of the system
against a reference case. The reference for us is the zero-
forcing algorithm as implemented in [29]. Zero-forcing worsk
by setting the precoding matrix for each user to Pi = Hii ˜Vii,
where ˜Vi,i lies in the nullspace of the complementary vector
((16).
˜Hi,i=
 Hi,1
Hi,2
. . .
Hi,i−1
Hi,i+1
. . . 
(16)
We chose ZF as the baseline algorithm, because as of now it
remains the most practical algorithm in the N >> 1, K > 2
case, being implementable in approximately linear time. As
mentioned earlier, MuMIMO implementations of existing
IA or DPC algorithms, or more sophisticated lattice cod-
ing algorithms remain prohibitively expensive to implement
since they scale super-linearly in N for large values of K.
Further, multi-pass algorithms as suggested in literature are
not realizable in current cellular networks, given that the
corresponding signaling mechanisms don’t exist. As we have
previously indicated, the SiC algorithm should substantially
outperform the ZF algorithm when the condition number of
the aggregate channel matrix is high. The chart in Figure
5 shows the relative performance of the two algorithms for
different channel condition numbers.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
Aggregate capacity (nats)
Number of antenna per UE
Comparative performance of SIC and ZF with number of antennae
SIC algorithm
ZeroForcing
Figure 4. Performance of SIC Algorithm versus ZF
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 55
 60
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
Aggregate throughput (nats)
Number of Antennae per UE
Performance of SIC vs ZF for different condition numbers
SIC (cn=5)
ZF (cn=5)
SIC (cn=2)
ZF (cn=2)
SIC (cn=1.125)
ZF (cn=1.125)
Figure 5. Performance of SIC Algorithm versus ZF with different channel
conditions
Our ﬁrst Figure 3 shows the expected performance of the
SIC as the number of users reduce and the number of antenna
per user goes up. As the users have larger and larger numbers
of receive antenna, the amount of signal energy which gets
converted to interference drops off asymptotically. Further,
the interference per user is now spread over a larger number
of streams and hence is easier to eliminate. Figure 4 shows
that there is a substantial gain of the Successive Interference
Compensation algorithm versus the standard zero-forcing
case. As argued earlier, this is because of the very large
penalty in the zero-forcing case due to full orthonormaliza-
tion of all channels, whereas the SiC algorithm trades off
transmit power for overlap. In the last chart, we can see that
performance in the ZF case ﬂat-lines at low
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an algorithm for Mu-
MIMO transmission over the shared channel from a single
transmitter (eNodeB) to multiple UTs. The SiC algorithm
is implementable at the eNodeB of a standard LTE cellular
network, operating in TDD mode, using standard linear
operations. We have implemented it in cloud RAN settings
relatively easily, because the matrix operations are straight-
forward to implement and all the algorithms are linear, with
no requirement for complex iterative optimization proce-
dures. We have demonstrated its performance with respect to
the existing standards of zero-forcing. The future extension
of the SiC algorithm is to the CoMP case, which has to
take into account the limitations of how much information
can be shared between the cooperating eNodeBs. We have
considered one case where we have two eNodeBs (conﬁgured
in master-slave mode) and N UTs, where the slave eNodeB is
dedicated to generating the interference compensation vector
for the block diagonalized transmission of the master . In this
case, we have to share just the interference vector (as known
to the master) between the two eNodeBs. The slave, based on
its own knowledge of the channel can use the interference
vector can do interference cancellation. This allows us to
extend the successive interference compensation to multiple
eNodeBs, without requiring full CSI. This will be further
explored in the future. Another area which we are pursuing
is the optimal scheduling algorithm for all users, so as to
guarantee minimum guaranteed QoS rates, while maintaining
maximum aggregate rate capacity. This shall be published in
future work.
REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Paulraj, D. A. Gore, R. U. Nabar, and H. Bolcskei, “An overview
of mimo communications-a key to gigabit wireless,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 92, no. 2, 2004, pp. 198–218.
[2] R. W. H. Jr., T. Wu, Y. H. Kwon, and A. C. K. Soong, “Multiuser
mimo in distributed antenna systems with out-of-cell interference,”
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 59, no. 10, Oct 2011,
pp. 4885–4899.
[3] Y.-N. R. Li, J. Li, W. Li, Y. Xue, and H. Wu, “Comp and interference
coordination in heterogeneous network for lte-advanced,” in Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2012 IEEE, Dec 2012, pp. 1107–1111.
[4] J. Lee, J.-K. Han, and J. Zhang, “Mimo technologies in 3gpp
lte
and
lte-advanced,”
EURASIP
J.
Wirel.
Commun.
Netw.,
vol. 2009, Mar. 2009, pp. 3:1–3:10.
[Online]. Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1155/2009/302092
[5] M. Shaﬁ, A. F. Molisch, P. J. Smith, T. Haustein, P. Zhu, P. De Silva,
F. Tufvesson, A. Benjebbour, and G. Wunder, “5g: A tutorial overview
of standards, trials, challenges, deployment, and practice,” IEEE jour-
nal on selected areas in communications, vol. 35, no. 6, 2017, pp.
1201–1221.
[6] M. H. M. Costa, “Writing on dirty paper (corresp.),” Information
Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 29, no. 3, May 1983, pp. 439–
441.
[7] N. Zhao, F. R. Yu, M. Jin, Q. Yan, and V. C. M. Leung, “Interfer-
ence alignment and its applications: A survey, research issues, and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 3,
thirdquarter 2016, pp. 1779–1803.
[8] V. R. Cadambe and S. A. Jafar, “Interference alignment and degrees
of freedom of thek-user interference channel,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, Aug 2008, pp. 3425–3441.
[9] M. A. Maddah-Ali, A. S. Motahari, and A. K. Khandani, “Communi-
cation over mimo x channels: Interference alignment, decomposition,
and performance analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 54, no. 8, Aug 2008, pp. 3457–3470.
[10] S. Vishwanath, N. Jindal, and A. Goldsmith, “Duality, achievable
rates, and sum-rate capacity of gaussian mimo broadcast channels,”
Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 49, no. 10, Oct 2003,
pp. 2658–2668.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[11] W. Yu and J. Ciofﬁ, “Sum capacity of gaussian vector broadcast
channels,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 50, no. 9,
Sept 2004, pp. 1875–1892.
[12] S. A. Jafar and S. Shamai, “Degrees of freedom region of the
mimoxchannel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 54,
no. 1, Jan 2008, pp. 151–170.
[13] M. Tomlinson, “New automatic equaliser employing modulo arith-
metic,” Electronics letters, vol. 7, no. 5, 1971, pp. 138–139.
[14] H. Miyakawa and H. Harashima, “Information transmission rate in
matched transmission systems with peak transmitting power limita-
tion,” in Nat. Conf. Rec., Inst. Electron., Inform., Commun. Eng. of
Japan, 1969, pp. 138–139.
[15] T. Cover, “Comments on broadcast channels,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 44, no. 6, Oct 1998, pp. 2524–2530.
[16] ——, “Broadcast channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 18, no. 1, Jan 1972, pp. 2–14.
[17] ——, “An achievable rate region for the broadcast channel,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 21, no. 4, Jul 1975, pp. 399–
404.
[18] K. Marton, “A coding theorem for the discrete memoryless broadcast
channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 25, no. 3,
May 1979, pp. 306–311.
[19] A. E. Gamal and E. van der Meulen, “A proof of marton’s coding
theorem for the discrete memoryless broadcast channel (corresp.),”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 1, Jan 1981,
pp. 120–122.
[20] W. Yu and J. Ciofﬁ, “Trellis precoding for the broadcast channel,”
in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. GLOBECOM ’01.
IEEE, 2001, pp. 1344–1348 vol.2.
[21] R. Wesel and J. Ciofﬁ, “Achievable rates for tomlinson-harashima
precoding,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 44, no. 2,
Mar 1998, pp. 824–831.
[22] K. Kusume, M. Joham, W. Utschick, and G. Bauch, “Efﬁcient
tomlinson-harashima precoding for spatial multiplexing on ﬂat mimo
channel,” in Communications, 2005. ICC 2005. 2005 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, May 2005, pp. 2021–2025 Vol. 3.
[23] M. Shenouda and T. Davidson, “A framework for designing mimo
systems with decision feedback equalization or tomlinson-harashima
precoding,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on,
vol. 26, no. 2, February 2008, pp. 401–411.
[24] A. Liavas, “Tomlinson-harashima precoding with partial channel
knowledge,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 53, no. 1,
Jan 2005, pp. 5–9.
[25] L. Sun and M. Lei, “Quantized csi-based tomlinson-harashima pre-
coding in multiuser mimo systems,” Wireless Communications, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 12, no. 3, March 2013, pp. 1118–1126.
[26] W. Yu, D. Varodayan, and J. Ciofﬁ, “Trellis and convolutional pre-
coding for transmitter-based interference presubtraction,” Communica-
tions, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 53, no. 7, July 2005, pp. 1220–1230.
[27] S. A. Jafar and M. J. Fakhereddin, “Degrees of freedom for the
mimo interference channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 53, no. 7, July 2007, pp. 2637–2642.
[28] K. Gomadam, V. R. Cadambe, and S. A. Jafar, “Approaching the capac-
ity of wireless networks through distributed interference alignment,”
in IEEE GLOBECOM 2008 - 2008 IEEE Global Telecommunications
Conference, Nov 2008, pp. 1–6.
[29] Q. Spencer, A. Swindlehurst, and M. Haardt, “Zero-forcing methods
for downlink spatial multiplexing in multiuser mimo channels,” Signal
Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52, no. 2, Feb 2004, pp. 461–
471.
[30] Q. Spencer, C. Peel, A. Swindlehurst, and M. Haardt, “An introduction
to the multi-user mimo downlink,” Communications Magazine, IEEE,
vol. 42, no. 10, Oct 2004, pp. 60–67.
[31] C. M. Yetis, T. Gou, S. A. Jafar, and A. H. Kayran, “On feasibility of
interference alignment in mimo interference networks,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Signal Processing, vol. 58, no. 9, Sept 2010, pp. 4771–4782.
[32] L.-U. Choi and R. D. Murch, “A transmit preprocessing technique
for multiuser mimo systems using a decomposition approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 3, no. 1, Jan 2004, pp.
20–24.
[33] C. Wang and R. Murch, “Adaptive downlink multi-user mimo wireless
systems for correlated channels with imperfect csi,” Wireless Commu-
nications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 9, September 2006, pp.
2435–2446.
[34] S. W. Peters and R. W. Heath, “Interference alignment via alternating
minimization,” in 2009 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, April 2009, pp. 2445–2448.
[35] V. Stankovic and M. Haardt, “Generalized design of multi-user mimo
precoding matrices,” Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 7, no. 3, 2008, pp. 953–961.
[36] R. Zhang, “Cooperative multi-cell block diagonalization with per-base-
station power constraints,” Selected Areas of Communication, IEEE
Journal on, vol. 28, no. 9, 2010, pp. 1435–1445.
[37] K.Gomadam, V. R. Cadambe, and S. A. Jafar, “A distributed numerical
approach to interference alignment and applications to wireless inter-
ference networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57,
no. 6, June 2011, pp. 3309–3322.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

