Code-Based Public-Key Cryptosystem Based on Bursts-Correcting Codes
E. Krouk, A. Ovchinnikov
Saint-Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation
Saint-Petersburg, Russia
email: ekrouk@vu.spb.ru, mldoc@ieee.org
Abstract—In this paper, the public-key cryptosystems based on
error-correcting codes are considered. The most known code-
based public-key cryptosystem belongs to McEliece and its
security is based on decoding vectors of given weight t in linear
code, equivalent to some private code with minimal distance
d = 2t + 1. Another class of code-based cryptosystems is known,
whose security is based on complete decoding task (or searching
through all possible error vectors). It is supposed that the security
of these systems may signiﬁcantly overcome those of McEliece.
In the paper, the cryptosystem from this class is proposed based
on bursts-correcting codes.
Keywords–Code-based public-key cryptosystems; Cryptosystems
based on complete decoding task; Bursts-correcting codes.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The public-key cryptosystem, proposed in 1978 by R. J.
McEliece, is based on error-correcting codes [1]. The idea
of the system is to select the error-correcting code for which
the effective decoding algorithm is known, and then to hide
this code in linear code of arbitrary structure. The description
of initial code, usually given by its generator matrix, serves
as private key, while the description of obtained code with
arbitrary structure is public key. Being very computationally
effective, McEliece cryptosystem did not obtain much practical
usage, which is mainly argued by its large key sizes.
Though the decoding task of arbitrary linear code is NP-
complete [2], it should be noted that in classical variant of
McEliece cryptosystem its public and private keys are equiv-
alent codes, and in fact the adversary should solve the task of
decoding in sphere of some radius, which seems simpler than
arbitrary linear code decoding by minimal distance. Besides,
the attacks revealing the code’s structure are also possible [3]-
[4].
In [5], the class of public-key cryptosystems is proposed
which is based on the task of complete decoding, that is,
decoding of coset leaders in the standard array [6]. However,
the selection of particular system from this class requires
deﬁnition of masking transformation and the set of error
vectors applied during encryption. Some attacks on the variants
of such deﬁnitions were considered in [7]. Practical examples
of the systems based on complete decoding task are also given
in [7][8].
The paper is organized as follows. Section II gives the
description of McEliece cryptosystem. Section III describes
the class of cryptosystems based on complete decoding task.
In Section IV, the variant of the system from this class is pro-
posed based on bursts-correcting codes. Section V concludes
the paper.
II.
MCELIECE CODE-BASED CRYPTOSYSTEM
The construction of McEliece public-key cryptosystem is
based on linear (n, k) code for which the polynomial decoding
procedure is known, providing correction of any combination
of t or less errors. The family of Goppa codes are usually
considered for this purpose [1][6].
In McEliece cryptosystem, each user constructs private and
correspondent public keys as follows:
1)
Select integers k, n, t as general system parameters.
2)
Select generator (k × n) matrix G of linear (n, k)
code, for which the effective procedure ψ of correct-
ing any combination of t errors is known.
3)
Select random binary non-singular (k×k) matrix M.
4)
Select random (n × n) permutation matrix P.
5)
Calculate (k × n) matrix G′ = MGP.
6)
Public key is (G′, t), private key is (M, G, P).
To encrypt the message, one should do the following:
1)
Represent the message as binary k-bit sequence m.
2)
Select random n-bit binary vector e of weight t.
3)
Calculate ciphertext c = mG′ + e.
To decrypt the ciphertext, one should do the following:
1)
Calculate c′ = cP−1.
2)
Obtain m′ by decoding c′ in code G using ψ.
3)
Calculate m = m′M−1.
Decryption is correct, since c′ = cP−1 = (mG′ +
e)P−1 = (mMGP + e)P−1 = (mM)G + eP−1 and eP−1
is the vector of weight t.
In the next section, we will describe the class of public-key
cryptosystems based on complete decoding task.
III.
THE CLASS OF CRYPTOSYSTEMS BASED ON
COMPLETE DECODING TASK
The straightforward attack on McEliece cryptosystem is
decoding of error vector of weight t in the code G′. The system
would be signiﬁcantly harder break into if decryption would
require to correct not only error vectors of weight t, but all
coset leaders, that is, performing complete decoding [6].
Consider the following variant of public and private keys
construction [5][7]:
1)
Select generator (k × n) matrix G of linear (n, k)
code, for which the effective procedure ψ of correct-
ing any errors from the error set E is known (for
example, E may be the set of vectors of weight t).
2)
Select random binary non-singular (n×n) matrix M.
3)
Calculate (k × n) matrix G′ = GM.
4)
Deﬁne the error set E′ = {e′ : e′ = eM, e ∈ E}.
5)
Public key is (G′, E′), private key is (G, M).
To encrypt the message, one should do the following:
1)
Represent the message as binary k-bit sequence m.
2)
Select random n-bit binary vector e′ ∈ E′.
3)
Calculate ciphertext c = mG′ + e′.
To decrypt the ciphertext, one should do the following:
1)
Calculate c′ = cM−1.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

2)
Obtain m by decoding c′ in code G using ψ.
Decryption is correct, since c′ = cM−1 = (mGM +
eM)M−1 = mG + e, where e ∈ E, and the procedure ψ
may be effectively used.
The security of the described class of systems is based
on the fact that the adversary needs decoding in the code
G′, while G′ is not only non-equivalent to the code G as in
McEliece cryptosystem, but after multiplying G by M from
the right the error-correction capability of public code G′ is
unknown (and may be rather low). In addition, the structure
(for example, weight) of vector e′ is unknown (and, in fact, it
may not be the coset leader for G′), thus the best attack may
turn out not to perform the complete decoding, but instead to
use brute force by vectors from E′, which may be a more
complicated task. Finally, we note that the set E itself may
not be published and this may be used to further strengthen
the system.
On the other hand, the described class proposes only a
general approach, and not the particular cryptosystem. First,
not only Goppa code may be used as private code G, and
not only vectors of ﬁxed weight may form the set E. This
is of special interest since, in the last years, code-based
cryptosystems using codes other than Goppa codes have been
considered [9][10]. Surely, by selecting particular classes of
codes new possibilities may arise for the adversary, which
should be thoroughly taken in consideration.
Next, the method of deﬁning the set E′ should be speciﬁed,
which for security reasons should have exponential cardinality.
In [7][8], some examples of such deﬁnition are given. In the
next section, the public-key code-based cryptosystem from the
described class is proposed, based on bursts-correcting codes.
IV.
CODE-BASED CRYPTOSYSTEM USING
BURSTS-CORRECTING CODES
Let us consider the following variant of the system from
the class described in the previous section:
1)
Select generator (k × n) matrix G of linear (n, k)
code, for which the effective procedure ψ of correct-
ing any errors from the error set E is known.
2)
Select random binary non-singular (n × n) matrix
M2.
3)
Deﬁne the error set ˜E and (n × n) matrix M1 such
that for any ˜e ∈ ˜E vector ˜eM1 belongs to E.
4)
Calculate matrix M = M1M2.
5)
Calculate (k × n) matrix G′ = GM2.
6)
Public
key
is
(G′, M, ˜E),
private
key
is
(G, M1, M2).
To encrypt the message, one should do the following:
1)
Represent the message as binary k-bit sequence m.
2)
Select random n-bit binary vector ˜e ∈ ˜E and calcu-
late e′ = ˜eM.
3)
Calculate ciphertext c = mG′ + e′.
To decrypt the ciphertext, one should do the following:
1)
Calculate c′ = cM−1
2 .
2)
Obtain m by decoding c′ in code G using ψ.
Decryption is correct, since c′ = cM−1
2
= (mGM2 +
˜eM1M2)M−1
2
= mG + e, where e ∈ E, and the procedure
ψ may be effectively used.
In this variant, the set E′ is deﬁned by the vectors ˜eM,
which in turn requires effective deﬁnition of ˜E. Besides, the
Figure 1. Deﬁnition of matrix M1
matrix M1 should be deﬁned mapping the vectors from ˜E to
E.
For example, ˜E and E may coincide and be formed by the
vectors of some ﬁxed weight. In this paper, we propose the
system, where the set E is formed by vectors in which the
number of positions between ﬁrst and last non-zero elements
are no greater than some value b and such error vectors are
called error bursts of length b. In coding theory, the bursts-
correcting codes are known to be capable of correcting single
error bursts of a given length [11][12]. As the set ˜E we will
also consider the set of error bursts of some length.
Consider as M1 the matrix shown in Figure 1. The
gray color corresponds to positions ﬁlled by random binary
elements, other positions are zeros. Clearly, such matrix deﬁnes
mapping of error bursts of length x to error bursts of length b.
Then, the speciﬁcation of the proposed system may be
ﬁnalized by the following conditions:
•
Set E: the set of bursts of length ≤ b.
•
Matrix G should deﬁne the code for which effective
procedure of correcting single bursts of length b is
known.
•
Set ˜E: the set of bursts of length ≤ x. Clearly, x
should be included in system’s public key as deﬁnition
of ˜E.
Note that code G′ has no known structure: neither
its bursts-correction capability nor its minimal distance are
known. Moreover, the set E′ = {e′ : e′ = ˜eM} contains
vectors of arbitrary structure, with arbitrary weights and which
are not error bursts. Thus, it seems that the structure of bursts
used by private code cannot be exploited by the adversary, and
the best attacking strategy is to search through the elements of
E′.
Quantitative
estimation
of
system
parameters:
bursts
lengths x and b, cardinalities of E′ and ˜E, and ﬁnally selection
of k and n which deﬁne the key size depends on class of
bursts-correction codes being used. This class should contain
exponential number of codes for given b, k, n, and the codes
should not possess the structure which may be used by the
adversary to perform the structural attack. One variant for
such codes is the class of low-density parity-check codes
(LDPC). The bursts-correction capabilities of some LDPC
codes were investigated in [13][14]. However, these codes
cannot be directly applied in proposed cryptosystem since
they are strongly structured, and the task of bursts-correction
code selection for usage in the proposed cryptosystem may be
considered as further research.
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, a code-based cryptosystem using bursts-
correction codes is proposed. This system belongs to the
class of cryptosystems based on complete decoding task.
It is supposed that cryptosystems from this class allow to
achieve better security than the McEliece cryptosystem. The
selection of particular codes for usage in the proposed system,
which allows qualitative estimation of parameters and perhaps
requires additional cryptanalysis research is the direction of
further investigations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The reported study was funded by RFBR according to the
research project No. 16-01-00716 a.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. J. McEliece, “A Public-Key Cryptosystem Based on Algebraic
Coding Theory,” 1978, DSN progress report #42-44, Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, Pasadena, California.
[2]
E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent
intractability of certain coding problems (corresp.),” IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, May 1978, pp. 384–386.
[3]
V. M. Sidelnikov and S. O. Shestakov, “On insecurity of cryptosystems
based on generalized Reed-Solomon codes,” Discrete Mathematics and
Applications, vol. 2, no. 4, 1992, pp. 439–444.
[4]
E. Krouk, A. Ovchinnikov, and E. Vostokova, “About one modiﬁcation
of McEliece cryptosystem based on Plotkin construction,” in 2016 XV
International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and
Control Systems (REDUNDANCY), Sept 2016, pp. 75–78.
[5]
E. Krouk, “A New Public-Key Cryptosystem,” in Sixth Joint Swedish-
Russian International Workshop on Information Theory, Moelle, Swe-
den, 1993, pp. 285–286.
[6]
F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes.
North-Holland publishing company, 1983, 782 p.
[7]
E. Krouk and U. Sorger, “A Public Key Cryptosystem Based on Total
Decoding of Linear Codes,” in VI International Workshop ”Algebraic
and combinatorial coding theory”, Pskov, 1998, pp. 116–118.
[8]
G. Kabatiansky, S. Semenov, and E. Krouk, Error Correcting Coding
And Security For Data Networks: Analysis Of The Superchannel
Concept.
John Wiley & Sons, 2005, 278 p.
[9]
R. Misoczki, J. P. Tillich, N. Sendrier, and P. S. L. M. Barreto, “MDPC-
McEliece: New McEliece variants from Moderate Density Parity-Check
codes,” in 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory,
July 2013, pp. 2069–2073.
[10]
E. M. Gabidulin, A. V. Ourivski, B. Honary, and B. Ammar, “Reducible
rank codes and their applications to cryptography,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, Dec 2003, pp. 3289–3293.
[11]
R. Blahut, Theory and practice of error control codes. Addison-Wesley,
1983, 500 p.
[12]
W. Zhang and J. K. Wolf, “A class of binary burst error-correcting
quasi-cyclic codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 34,
no. 3, May 1988, pp. 463–479.
[13]
E. A. Krouk and S. V. Semenov, “Low-Density Parity-Check Burst
Error-Correcting Codes,” in 2 International Workshop ”Algebraic and
combinatorial coding theory”, Leningrad, 1990, pp. 121–124.
[14]
E. A. Krouk and A. A. Ovchinnikov, “2-Stripes Block-Circulant LDPC
Codes for Single Bursts Correction,” Smart Innovation, Systems and
Technologies, vol. 55, June 2016, pp. 11–23.
[15]
N. Sendrier, “Finding the permutation between equivalent linear codes:
the support splitting algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, vol. 46, no. 4, Jul 2000, pp. 1193–1203.
[16]
E. Krouk and A. Ovchinnikov, “About one structural attack on McEliece
cryptosystem,” in 2016 XV International Symposium Problems of
Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (REDUNDANCY),
Sept 2016, pp. 71–74.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

