Fixed Complexity Soft-Output Detection Algorithm
Through Exploration and Exploitation Processes
Bastien Trotobas, Amor Nafkha
SCEE/IETR UMR CNRS 6164, CentraleSup´elec
Avenue de la Boulaie, 35576 Cesson S´evign´e, France
Email: {bastien.trotobas,amor.nafkha}@centralesupelec.fr
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a soft-output Multiple-Input
and Multiple-Output (MIMO) detector algorithm, which is based
on two complementary techniques: exploration and exploitation.
The proposed detector, called List Exploration and Exploitation
(L2E), achieves near-optimal performance with low and ﬁxed
computational complexity. It has a high parallelism degree, which
makes it suitable for efﬁcient practical implementation. The soft-
output values are calculated by means of squared Euclidean
distances in a max-Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) approximation.
The average Bit Error Rate (BER) performances of the L2E
are compared to the well-known List Sphere Decoding (LSD)
algorithm and it is shown that our method considerably reduces
the computation complexity while maintaining near-optimal per-
formance in comparison to LSD algorithm.
Keywords-MIMO detection; sphere-decoding; soft demod-
ulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
MIMO systems can be used to increase data rates by adopt-
ing spatial multiplexing method or to improve the reception
reliability by exploiting spatial diversity. In spatial multiplex-
ing systems, the maximum likelihood (ML) detection leads
to the optimal method for minimizing transmission errors.
However, it involves high computation complexity and requires
a brute-force search over all of the transmitted vectors. A
promising and efﬁcient alternative, with reduced computational
complexity, is the original sphere decoding (SD) algorithm by
Fincke and Phost and its variants [1]–[4].
Nevertheless, the computational complexity of the sphere
decoding algorithm is still exponential in problem size [5]. Fast
but suboptimal ML detection algorithms such zero forcing,
minimum mean-squared error, semi-deﬁnite programming, and
interference cancellation detectors have already been proposed
in the literature [6]. This wide variety of detectors is mainly
due to a lack of optimum performances and/or higher compu-
tational complexity.
It has already been shown that the soft-output detector
improves the error performance compared with a hard-output
detector [8]. A soft-output detector generates the LLR value of
each bit, deﬁned as the ratio of the probabilities that a zero or
a one has been transmitted conditioned on the received vector.
However, the computation complexity of exact a-posteriori
probabilities (APP) is exponential in the MIMO system di-
mensions [9]–[11]. Recently, a number of soft-output MIMO
detectors have been reported, which approximate the APP and
provide soft outputs [7]. Several demodulation schemes use
a list of candidate data vectors to obtain approximate LLRs.
To the best of our knowledge there are three families of
candidate list generation algorithms for the suboptimal soft-
output maximum a-posteriori (MAP) detector. The ﬁrst type
of algorithms is a modiﬁed version of well-known hard tree
search detector where the goal of is to ﬁnd one tree leaf with
the best metric. The goal of soft-output is to ﬁnd and keep
a list in which one seeks to efﬁciently identify all bit vectors
that dominate the LLRs. The mostly well-known list type of
soft-output MIMO decoding algorithms are LSD algorithm
[8], sequential sphere decoding (LISS) algorithm [12], and the
M-Algorithm [13]. The second type of algorithms is based
on simple bit ﬂips around the hard solution [14]. Therefore,
a hard decoder is employed to ﬁnd a maximum a posteriori
symbol estimate, and a candidate list is generated by bit-
ﬂipping of the MAP estimate. This technique may produce
a LLRs approximation with high probability. The third type
of techniques is based on lattice-reduction (LR) aided detector
following by bit-ﬂipping technique, which generates a list from
which it computes the APP of all bits comprising the symbol
vector. The channel matrix properties can be improved using
an efﬁcient lattice reduction and by this way we can reduce
the complexity of the hard demodulator.
Our contribution in this paper is multi-fold: Based on
previous MIMO detection studies of the hard detector [15][16],
we propose a new near-optimal soft-output demodulator based
on list generation algorithm. The algorithm list’s size is
controlled using the number of considered candidates, Nc,
during the exploitation phase, and the number of considered
direction, Nd. The proposed soft-output MIMO detection algo-
rithm L2E was closely approximate the max-log LLR functions
based on the generated initial solutions list with a reduced and
ﬁxed computational complexity. In contrary, the List Sphere-
Decoding algorithm has a variable computational complexity
depending on the MIMO channel conditioning. Moreover, the
growth of the LSD complexity is exponential in the low Signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) region.
The computation complexity of the proposed L2E algo-
rithm is independent from the SNR and thus has a constant
value over all SNR regions. In our algorithm, the complexity
depends only on the number of transmitter/receiver antennas,
the number of considered candidates Nc, and the number of
considered directions Nd. Monte Carlo simulations show that
the proposed soft-output list detector has better complexity
and performance trade-offs than the well-known LSD detector.
Moreover, the L2E detector has an inherent parallel structure,
thus it is very suitable for massive parallel architectures.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II introduces the mathematical model of the studied MIMO bit-
interleaved coded modulation (BICM-MIMO) system and the
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

associated maximum likelihood detection (MLD) problem. The
hard-output version of the exploration and exploitation detector
algorithm (H2E) will be introduced and it is extended to
compute soft-outputs. The proposed algorithm will be called as
list exploration and exploitation detector (L2E). Computational
complexity issues are given in Section IV. Section V provides
Monte Carlo simulation results of the proposed algorithm
and gives same discussions. Finally, Section VI is devoted to
concluding remarks;
II.
MATHEMATICAL MODEL
In this section, we introduce the BICM-MIMO model and
the LLR generation with perfect channel state information
(CSI) at the receiver is described.
A. MIMO-BICM system Model
Herein, we consider a MIMO system with N transmit
antennas and M receive antennas associated to a BICM
schema where a block of information bits is mapped to transmit
symbols through a channel encoder and a symbol mapper
separated by a code-bit interleaver [17] [18]. Let us consider
a MIMO-BICM system with M × N channel matrix Hc. At
the receiver, a detector calculates the log-likelihood ratios for
the coded bits, which are deinterleaved and passed to the
subsequent channel decoder. The coded bit stream is mapped
to N-dimensional transmit vector symbols xc ∈ φN, where
φ is a 2Q-QAM modulation. The individual coded bits are
denoted by bij, where the indexes i and j refer to the ith
bit in the binary label of the jth entry of the transmitted
symbol vector xc = [xc
1, xc
2, ..., xc
N]T . In considered MIMO-
BICM system, the transmitted signal and the received signal
are related through a complex baseband input-output relation
as:
yc = Hcxc + wc
(1)
where wc is an independent and identically distributed
complex zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance σ2/
√
2 per
complex entry, yc is the received symbol vector, and xc is
the transmitted symbol vector with the average transmit power
of each antenna normalized to one, i.e. E[xcxH
c ] = IN. The
M × N channel matrix Hc contains uncorrelated complex
Gaussian fading gains where the element hc
ij represents the
complex transfer function from the jth transmit antenna to
the ith receive antenna. Thus, the channel matrix Hc, which
is assumed to be known by the receiver, is modelled as
an independent and identically distributed complex Gaussian
variable with zero mean and variance 1/2 per complex entry.
Treating real and imaginary part of (1) separately, and with
the real-valued channel matrix and the real-valued vectors, the
system model can be rewritten as

ℜ(yc)
ℑ(yc)

=

ℜ(Hc)
−ℑ(Hc)
ℑ(Hc)
ℜ(Hc)
 
ℜ(xc)
ℑ(xc)

+

ℜ(wc)
ℑ(wc)

where ℜ(z) and ℑ(z) denote the respective real and
complex parts of a complex number z. Let m = 2M and
n = 2N, then the dimension of the real channel matrix is
given by m × n. Likewise, the dimension of the vectors are
given by y ∈ Rm, w ∈ Rm, and x ∈ ξn where ξ ≡ ℜ(O). In
this paper, we restrict our study to the case where ξn ≡ {±1}n.
B. Optimum Soft-output Demodulation
Given the channel matrix H, the received vector y, and
assuming an ideal interleaver, the optimum soft-output max-
imum a posteriori decoder minimizes the BER by evaluating
the LLRs of the a posteriori probability of each bit bij.
L(bij) = log P(bij = 1|y)
P(bij = 0|y)
(2)
where P(bij|y) is the probability mass function of the code bits
conditioned on y. The exhaustive evaluation of (2) has a high
computational complexity. Thus, using Bayes’ theorem and the
max-log approximation as shown in [7][9], the equation (2) can
be further rewritten as:
L(bij)
≈
min
x∈X 0
ij
∥y − Hx∥2 − min
x∈X 1
ij
∥y − Hx∥2
(3)
where X 1
ij and X 0
ij are the sets of symbols vectors having
bij equal to 1 and 0, respectively. The set ξn can be seen
as the union of the previous two subsets ξn = X 1
ij ∪ X 0
ij.
The computation complexity of (3) is exponential in the
number of transmit antennas. Thus, we propose a novel soft-
output detector, called L2E, which keeps a limited number
of candidates in order to evaluate the equation (3). Hence,
the LLR of the ith bit bij in the jth symbol xj can be
approximated as
L(bij)
≈
min
x∈Γ∩X 0
ij
∥y − Hx∥2 −
min
x∈Γ∩X 1
ij
∥y − Hx∥2 (4)
where Γ denotes the candidates list, which is the subset of
the feasible set ξn. The computational complexity the soft-
output detector is affected by the list size and it increases
approximately linearly (see Section IV).
III.
PROPOSED SOFT-OUTPUT DETECTOR
In this section, we propose an soft-output MIMO detec-
tor based on the exploration and exploitation strategies. The
proposed L2E detector allows a sub-optimal solution for the
optimum soft-output demodulation problem that limits the
complexity of the receiver design.
A. Exploitation technique
The exploitation step can be deﬁned as a simple and naive
local search technique. This section gives a mathematical basis
to understand how the exploitation (intensiﬁcation) is applied
on the subset ξn
st ⊂ ξn. The subset ξn
st is generated by the ﬁrst
phase, which is the exploration (diversiﬁcation) step. In the
remainder of this section, we show that a simple greedy policy
of position switching between neighbouring feasible solutions
to locally minimize the objective function f(x) = ∥y − Hx∥2
over the subset ξn
st.
1) Deﬁnition 1: A neighbourhood operator is a function
Z : ξn 7−→ Z(ξn) that assigns to every solution u ∈ ξn
a set of neighbours Z(u) ⊆ ξn. The subset Z(u) is called
neighbourhood of u and it is equivalent to a neighbourhood
graph, which has ξn as vertex set, and which contains directed
edge v 7−→ u ⇔ v ∈ Z(u).
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

2) Deﬁnition 2: A local minimum solution with respect to
a neighbourhood operator Z is a solution u∗, such that for all
u ∈ Z(u∗) ⇒ f(u∗) ≤ f(u). The exploitation technique starts
at a given solution u ∈ ξn and makes it as the current solution
x0 = u. At each iteration, it examines all the neighbours of
the current solution and seeks to best one having a better
objective function value than x0, i.e., v ∈ Z(x0) such that
f(v) ≤ f(x0). If such a solution is found, it becomes the
current solution, i.e., x0 = v. These iterations are repeated
until there is no better solution in the neighbourhood Z(x0)
of the current solution. For the exploitation step, we perform
a simple 1-ﬂip local search algorithm where only one variable
is ﬂipped, per step, to reach the nearest neighbour. The local
neighbourhood is the Hamming ball with distance one. More
expensive, p-ﬂip methods can be adopted where at most p
variables are simultaneously ﬂipped. In general, for a total
number of n variables, the cardinality of the neighbourhood
set is equal to

be 10. As in [8], we generate independent Rayleigh ﬂat fading
channels between transmit/receive antennas and we assume a
perfect channel estimation at the MIMO receiver side.
In the N × M MIMO system (i.e., n = m = 8) case, the
Figure 2 compares the performance of proposed soft output
L2E algorithm versus the list sphere decoding (LSD) with
candidate list of maximal length Ncand = 1024 as show in
[8] and the shifted spherical list APP detector [19]. It can be
seen that for this MIMO systems scenario, the shifted spherical
list APP detector, with Ncand = 1024, has a slightly better
performance than the L2E decoder with parameters (Nd = 3
and Nc = 4). However, the soft-output L2E use not more than
nNdNc feasible solutions to generate the log-likelihood ratios
of different outputs.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
SNR(dB)−−−−−−−−−−>
BER−−−−−−−−−−−−−−>
L2E D= 3    C= 4
LSD candidates = 1024
shifted list SD
Figure 2. BER performances versus the SNR of L2E, LSD and shifted list
sphere decoder, N = M = 4.
In Figure 3, the bit error rate performances between
following soft-output MIMO detectors has been compared:
list sphere-decoding, list exploration and exploitation detector,
and soft-output semi-deﬁnite programming (SDP). Numerical
results are presented for a MIMO system with N
= 8
and M = 8 in a Rayleigh fading channel. The bit error
rate difference is not even noticeable between the L2E with
parameters Nd = 3 and Nc = 4 and the soft output SDP. At the
bit error rate of 10−4, L2E performance is only less than 0.2
dB from the LSD with candidates list length Ncand = 1024.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a soft-output MIMO detector
algorithm called the list exploration and exploitation. We
have shown that the proposed algorithm achieves near-optimal
performance with low and ﬁxed computational complexity.
Furthermore, it is suitable for efﬁcient practical implemen-
tation because of its parallelism. We have compared the bit
error rate performances of the proposed detector are compared
to the well-known list sphere decoding algorithm and it is
shown that our method maintains near-optimal performances
in comparison with LSD while considerably reducing the
computation complexity.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
SNR(dB)−−−−−−−−−−>
BER−−−−−−−−−−−−−−>
L2E D=3 C=4
SDP APP
LSD size=1024
Figure 3. BER performances versus SNR of L2E, LSD and soft-output SDP
detector, N = M = 8.
REFERENCES
[1]
U. Fincke and M. Pohst, “Improved methods for calculating vectors
of short length in a lattice, including a complexity analysis,” Math.
Comput., vol. 44, pp. 463-471, Apr. 1985.
[2]
B. Hassibi and H. Vikalo, “On the sphere-decoding algorithm I. Expected
complexity,” in IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 53, no. 8,
pp. 2806-2818, Aug. 2005.
[3]
J. Jalden and B. Ottersten, “On the complexity of sphere decoding in
digital communications,” in IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1474-1484, April 2005.
[4]
T. Kailath, H. Vikalo, and B. Hassibi, MIMO Receive Algorithms,
Cambridge, U.K.:Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.
[5]
H. Vikalo and B. Hassibi, “On the sphere-decoding algorithm II. Gener-
alizations, second-order statistics, and applications to communications,”
in IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2819-2834,
Aug. 2005.
[6]
L. Bai, J. Choi, and Q. Yu, Low Complexity MIMO Receivers. Springer
Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2014.
[7]
R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, M. Ahmadian-Attari, and H. Saeedi,“LLR
Approximation for Wireless Channels Based on Taylor Series and its
Application to BICM With LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
munications, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1226-1236, May 2012.
[8]
B. M. Hochwald and S. T. Brink, “Achieving near-capacity on a multiple
antenna channel,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 51, no.
3, pp. 389399, March 2003.
[9]
C. Xu, D. Liang, S. Sugiura, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Reduced-
Complexity Approx-Log-MAP and Max-Log-MAP Soft PSK/QAM De-
tection Algorithms,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61,
no. 4, pp. 1415-1425, April 2013.
[10]
F. Jiang, C. Li, and Z. Gong, “A low complexity soft-output data
detection scheme based on Jacobi method for massive MIMO up-
link transmission,” IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), Paris, 2017, pp. 1-5, 2017.
[11]
X. Qin, Z. Yan, and G. He,“A Near-Optimal Detection Scheme Based
on Joint Steepest Descent and Jacobi Method for Uplink Massive MIMO
Systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 276-279, Feb. 2016.
[12]
S. Baro, J. Hagenauer, and M. Witzke,“Iterative detection of MIMO
transmission using a list-sequential (LISS) detector,” IEEE International
Conference on Communications, pp. 2653-2657, vol.4, 2003.
[13]
K. Wong and P. McLane, “A low-complexity iterative MIMO detection,
scheme using the soft-output M-algorithm,” In Proceedings of the IST
Mobile Summit, June 2005.
[14]
W. Shin, H. Kim, M. h. Son, and H. Park, “An Improved LLR
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Computation for QRM-MLD in Coded MIMO Systems,” IEEE 66th
Vehicular Technology Conference, Baltimore, MD, pp. 447-451, 2007.
[15]
A. Nafkha,“Near maximum likelihood detection algorithm based on 1-
ﬂip local search over uniformly distributed codes,” IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), Budapest, pp. 4900-4904, 2013.
[16]
A. Nafkha, E. Boutillon, and C. Roland, “Quasi-maximum-likelihood
detector based on geometrical diversiﬁcation greedy intensiﬁcation,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 926-929, April
2009.
[17]
A. Stefanov and T. M. Duman, “Turbo-coded modulation for systems
with transmit and receive antenna diversity over block fading channels:
system model, decoding approaches, and practical considerations,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 958-
968, May 2001.
[18]
S. H. Muller-Weinfurtner, “Coding approaches for multiple antenna
transmission in fast fading and OFDM,” IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2442-2450, Oct 2002.
[19]
J. Boutros, N. Gresset, L. Brunel, and M. Fossorier, “Soft-input soft-
output lattice sphere decoder for linear channels,” IEEE Global Telecom-
munications Conference, GLOBECOM ’03, pp. 1583-1587 vol.3, 2003.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

