4R(%DVHG$GDSWLYH&RQWURORI6SHHFK4XDOLW\LQD9R,3&DOO
 
Edgard Silva, Leandro Galvão, Edjair Mota 
Institute of Computing – ICOMP 
Federal University of Amazonas – UFAM 
Manaus – Brazil 
e-mail: {edgard, galvao, edjair}@icomp.ufam.edu.br  
Yuzo Iano 
Department of Communications – DECOM 
University of Campinas – UNICAMP 
Campinas – Brazil 
e-mail: yuzo@decom.fee.unicamp.br  
 
$EVWUDFW²7KLV VWXG\ SUHVHQWV WKH LGHD RI EXLOGLQJ D UREXVW
FRQWUROOHU IRU D FRGHF LQ FKDUJH RI D WZRZD\ DXGLR VWUHDP
EULQJLQJWRJHWKHUWKHFRQWULEXWLRQVRIWKHDUHDVRI9RLFHRYHU
,3 9R,3 DQG DGDSWLYH V\VWHPV 6XFK D FRQWUROOHU ZLOO EH
SRVVLEOHZLWKWKHDSSOLFDWLRQRIDVROXWLRQEDVHGRQWKH4XDOLW\
RI([SHULHQFH4R(IRUWKHFRQWUROSUREOHPUHDOWLPHVSHHFK
TXDOLW\RI9R,3FDOOVIRUWKHIXWXUHDSSOLFDWLRQVDQGVHUYLFHV
.H\ZRUGV4XDOLW\RI([SHULHQFH4R(9RLFHRYHU,QWHUQHW
3URWRFRO9R,3$GDSWLYHFRQWUROV\VWHPVSHHFKTXDOLW\&RGHF
6ZLWFKLQJ
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Speech transmission over computer networks is liable to 
several impairments from both application and network 
layer, such as codec compression, end-to-end delay, and 
packet loss. In the last years, Quality of Service (QoS) 
control mechanisms have been developed to make optimum 
use of network and terminal resources in order to minimize 
the effects of network impairments on speech quality. Some 
of these mechanisms seek to adapt the voice flow or other 
VoIP-related parameters in accordance with significant 
changes in the network, end user’s preferences, or service 
provider’s requirements. 
Adaptive systems in general respond to changes in their 
internal state or external environment with the guidance of 
an underlying control system. VoIP systems are particularly 
likely to require a dynamic adaptation solution for dealing 
with the complex trade-off between speech quality and 
impairments, due to the decentralized control nature of IP 
networks and the stochastic nature of data packet delivery. 
Although the existing adaptive solutions for QoS control of 
VoIP show some performance improvement and exhibit 
some feedback, they do not provide explicit focus on the 
control loop [1]. 
In this paper, we aim to develop a robust controller for a 
codec in charge of a bidirectional audio flow. This controller 
will take some observation variables as input, such as latency 
and packet loss, and map them into adjustable variables, such 
as packetization, bitrates, sampling frequency, redundancy 
level, among others. The control objective will be initially 
set towards speech quality performance, in terms of QoE. It 
can also be extended to other issues, such as energy 
consumption, resource optimization, security aspects, and so 
on. 
Figure 1 and Figure 2 give an overview of the controller 
to be developed. Figure 1 shows the feedback loop that lies 
at the core of any self-adaptive system. The feedback loop, 
also known as adaptation or autonomic loop, typically 
involves four key activities: monitoring, analysis, planning, 
and execution [2][3]. 
As depicted in Figure 1, sensors collect data from the 
managed system. The feedback cycle starts with the 
monitoring of relevant data that reflect the current state of 
the system. Next, the system analyzes the collected data, 
structuring and reasoning about the raw data. Upon 
completing this step, decisions must be planned about how to 
adapt the system to reach a desirable state. Finally, to 
implement the decision, the system must execute it by means 
of available effectors. Central to this loop, there will be a 
knowledge base that keeps the necessary information about 
the managed entities and their operations.  
Current VoIP solutions for QoS control of speech quality 
lack of this view. Bringing the control loop to surface can 
improve the efficiency of such solutions.  
Whereas Figure 1 shows the agents that compose the 
control loop, Figure 2 shows the information flow among 
these agents. Usually, a system converts input signals into 
output signals by performing operations on the inputs and 
intermediate products. The values of measurable properties 
of system’s states are called variables [4]. A first step in 
designing an adaptive mechanism is to identify the key 
variables of the managed system: 
• Observation 
parameters. 
They 
are 
measurable 
variables from which the adaptive mechanism can 
infer the status of the managed system.  
• Decision metrics. They characterize the system 
performance over a sampling period and that the 
planning agent tries to optimize. They can be 
equivalent to a single observation parameter, such as 
delay and packet loss, or a synthesis of a set of 
observation parameters, such as Mean Opinion Score 
(MOS).  
• Performance references. They represent the desired 
system 
performance 
in 
terms 
of 
observation 
parameters.  
• Adjustable parameters. They correspond to the 
effectors in the feedback loop (Figure 1), an attribute 
of the managed system that can be manipulated to 
apply the necessary adaptations.  
Essentially, adaptive systems implement a transfer 
function that takes decision metrics as input and gives the 
amount of change (if needed) in the adjustable parameters as 
output.  
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 1.  The feedback loop. 
This project will be a follow-up of the work of Carvalho 
[5], in the sense of exploring newer codecs, such as Opus [6], 
and making use of a larger set of adjustable parameters in 
order to adapt the audio flow to monitored network 
conditions. 
$ ([SHULPHQWDO7HFKQLTXHV
The four classes of agents of the feedback control loop 
(Monitoring, Analysis, Planning and Execution) in Figure 1 
can be arranged in different ways in order to control an audio 
flow between two endpoints (sender and receiver). Some of 
these arrangements will be implemented as candidate 
controllers. Hence, some comparative tests will be performed 
to select the best arrangement of the control loop agents. 
The validation of the adaptive controller will be based on 
measurements over both simulated and real Internet 
scenarios. The audio flow will be systematically submitted to 
some network impairments, and its performance will be 
measured in terms of latency, packet loss, and MOS. Those 
measurements will support the researcher to check the 
candidate codec controllers against the following self-
adaptive properties [7]: stability, accuracy, short settling 
time, small overshoot, robustness, and scalability. 
The collected data will be analyzed by statistical tools 
like Akaroa [8][9] and R [10], based on statistical hypothesis 
testing, longitudinal data analysis, among other techniques. 
% :RUNRUJDQL]DWLRQ
The project execution is divided into two basic steps: 
controller implementation and experimentation. During the 
controller implementation step, the researchers will design 
and implement an adaptive controller for an audio codec. 
During the experimentation phase, the controller candidates 
will have their performance compared in order to determine 
which arrangement of the control loop agents is more robust 
against network impairments. 
The software development steps will be conducted by a 
PhD candidate and a student. The PhD candidate will specify 
the audio flow parameters that should be monitored and 
adjusted by the controller, and the arrangements of control 
loop agents that will be tested. 
 
Figure 2.  Variables related to a generic adaptive system. 
Also, he or she will plan the experimental setup, conduct the 
statistical analysis of the collected data and look for 
improvements in controller design, code writing or 
experimental procedures. 
The student will be responsible for writing the code of 
the controller candidates, and executing and automating the 
experimental apparatus. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the School of Technology (EST) 
of the State University of Amazonas (UEA), the Foundation 
for Research Support of the State of Amazonas (FAPEAM), 
the Department of Communications of the Faculty of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering of the University of 
Campinas (UNICAMP), FAPESP, CAPES and CNPq for 
support in developing this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  H. Müller, M. Pezzè, and M. Shaw, “Visibility of control in adaptive 
systems,” em 

