Movement Generators in Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network Simulation 
Przemyslaw Pochec  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
e-mail: pochec@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network (M2ANET) is the 
network model introduced in 2011 that could replace the 
Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) model. Rather than 
focusing on user node mobility, the M2ANET models a cloud 
of mobile nodes forming a forwarding network accessible to 
any users (stationary or otherwise). The performance of such a 
network depends on the pattern of node movements. Thus, any 
performance evaluation requires modelling of the movement of 
the forwarding nodes. We review different node movement 
paradigms used in our research and suggest use cases for their 
applications. 
 
Keywords-MANET; Mobile Medium; simulation; movement 
generators. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network (M2ANET) 
concept [1] introduced in 2011 precedes the discussion of 
the drone networks [2] and Flying Ad Hoc Networks 
(FANETs) [3]. As a new concept, it introduces a cloud of 
mobile forwarding nodes at a service of communicating 
clients. The Mobile Medium is not necessarily tied to any 
physical implementation of mobility so, as a model, it can 
be applied in multiple scenarios, including the likes of drone 
and FANET networks. Simulation of M2ANETs requires 
modelling of the movement of mobile nodes [4]. In this 
short paper, we survey the node movement generation 
techniques used in our research on M2ANETs over the past 
decade.  
In Section II, we review the new Mobile Medium model 
and compare it to a standard MANET. In Section III, we 
present different methods for modelling movement of 
mobile nodes in simulation. In Section IV, we discuss a 
novel methodology for node movement modelling which is 
based on processing the movement files themselves. Finally, 
Section V presents some ideas about the future of Mobile 
Medium research. 
II. 
MANET VS M2ANET 
Typically, a network is called a Mobile Ad Hoc Network 
if it consists of a group of mobile wireless nodes exchanging 
messages with one another [5]. During the lifetime of the 
network, nodes move freely and form opportunistic 
connections that allow for establishing routes and 
forwarding data within the network. Thus, the node mobility 
plays an important role in formation of the links, 
establishing the routes and then forwarding data between the 
nodes [5]. In a Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network [1], the 
mobile nodes are divided into two categories: (i) the 
forwarding only nodes forming the so-called Mobile 
Medium, and (ii) the communicating nodes, mobile or 
otherwise, that send data and use this Mobile Medium for 
communication. The key performance measure of the 
M2ANET is its capability of forming a route between the 
specific user client nodes sending data. In other words, 
whether all the mobile nodes forming the Mobile Medium 
are fully connected is irrelevant as long as they can form a 
route between the specific users trying to connect through 
this network.  The network is the medium and it only 
matters for forming a route between the user client nodes.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Mobile nodes moving randomly on a lattice. 
 
In a M2ANET, standard MANET routing protocols can 
be used for establishing the routes for transferring data 
between the user client nodes through the Mobile Medium 
created with forwarding nodes [5].  
III. 
MODELLING NODE MOVEMENT IN MOBILE MEDIUM 
SIMULATION 
In any Ad Hoc Network, opportunistic connections form 
between stations positioned within the transmission range. 
In the Mobile Medium, the wireless links proliferate when a 
sufficient node density is achieved in a region long enough 
for the routing algorithms to successfully detect the 
available connections and establish the available routes [1]. 
The location of the nodes in a network is determined by 
their movement pattern. Therefore, in order to model the 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

operation of the Mobile Medium, we have to model the 
movement of the nodes. The following is the discussion of 
the mobile movement models we used in our research.  
A. Random Models 
Random mobility is commonly used as a reference 
scenario in investigating the behavior of mobile networks. It 
is available in the popular open source simulator ns2 where 
it is referred to as the Random Way Point (RWP) model [6]. 
In RWP, nodes are moved in a piecewise linear fashion, 
with each linear segment pointing to a randomly selected 
destination (way point) and the node moving at a constant, 
but randomly selected speed. While the RWP model 
available in the standard ns2 simulation suite operates in 
two dimensions, it can also be extended to 3D [7]. RWP 
models suffer from what is called the border effect [8], 
which is a non-uniformity in node density occurring along 
the edges of the region where the mobile nodes are confined 
to stay. In our research, we experimented with modifications 
to the RWP movement generator in order to minimize the 
border effect [9].  
B. Constrained Random Models 
In a more realistic scenario, nodes may not have 
complete freedom to move in any direction. The existing 
restrictions on the node movement may be due to the 
physical environment constraints (e.g., obstacles) or due to 
the limitations on the node propulsion system (e.g., a 
balloon can change altitude, but cannot move in a chosen 
direction). An example of a constrained movement 
modelling would be having nodes placed randomly, but 
allowed to move only by changing one coordinate, i.e., 
move either in a horizontal or vertical direction [10]. In our 
research, we also used another example of the constrained 
random model with all the node movements constrained to a 
square lattice, Figure 1, representing a city grid [11]. In this 
scenario, the nodes can choose to move up and down the 
lattice grid and can also turn at the grid intersections. We 
note here that, in similar studies, the network nodes were 
modelled to move like vehicles in a simulated urban 
environment, for example in Simulation of Urban Mobility 
(SUMO) [12]. 
C. Deterministic Models 
Here, we consider the scenarios where a node is moving 
in a specific direction predetermined by other factors. This 
would include the use of the prerecorded movement traces 
in setting the motion of mobile nodes. One quasi 
deterministic model considered in our research (with 
possible applications for modelling drone swarms) is based 
on modelling the movement of nodes in formations [13]. A 
formation is a group of nodes moving together with one 
specific node playing the role of a leader; all other nodes in 
the group follow the leader. In this case, only the leader 
retains the flexibility of choosing the direction of the 
movement (e.g., moving randomly) while the other nodes in 
the group simply retrace the path of the leader node 
following it at a predetermined distance. Possible 
parametrizations of this scenario include varying the number 
of members of the group, the path each member takes and 
the distance at which one node follows another. 
IV. 
PROCESSING THE MOVEMENT FILES 
In general, network simulations systems use a node 
mobility model to create network scenarios for testing. First, 
the movement model is chosen, then the scenario is defined 
in terms of the number of nodes, the area of movement, 
initial positions of the nodes, the velocity of their movement 
etc. Parameters are entered into the movement generator, 
like an RWP, and the movement file is generated. This 
movement file is then used as the input to a network 
simulator, like ns2, to define the networking scenario. The 
movement file can also be analyzed for characteristics of the 
movement patterns like, for example, the presence of the 
border effect already mentioned in the previous section.  
In our research on M2ANETs, we proposed a novel 
approach to generating new movement files by processing 
the existing movement files. (A good analogy to this idea is 
image processing, where the objective is not to create a new 
image, but rather to “improve” on an existing one.) This 
processing can be used to achieve the desired characteristics 
of the node movements not available directly in the existing 
movement generators. For example, new way points can be 
added to the ones already included in the movement file 
generated based on the RWP model, or the speed of 
movements can be modified. Specifically, we processed 
standard RWP generated files replacing each move along a 
straight line with the movement along a curve [14] (for 
efficiency, each straight line movement was replaced by the 
movement along a fractal curve by inserting additional way 
points into the movement file; the computational complexity 
of this process was managed by limiting the number of 
iterations in constructing the fractal curve). A possible 
application of this technique could be in replacing the 
straight line trajectories generated using a standard RWP 
model with a more realistic movement, for example, along 
ballistic curves in a 3D simulation.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Mobile Medium is an interesting way to model the 
operation of wireless Ad Hoc Networks. The model favors 
path forming over the full connectivity when assessing the 
performance of a network. Like in any Ad Hoc Network, the 
performance is dependent on proximity between nodes 
which facilitates connectivity and formation of routes across 
the network. Experimenting with M2ANETs is facilitated 
by the use of simulators coupled with movement generators. 
The standard random movement models allow for 
establishing general characteristics of the networks built on 
the principle of the Mobile Medium, like establishing a 
relation between the node density and the path forming 
capacity of the Medium. For more particular scenarios, 
more tailored movement generators may be required.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

In this paper, the novel concept of transforming the 
movement files is introduced. In general, this procedure is 
applicable to both randomly generated and deterministic 
(recorded) movement files. Processing the movement files 
directly would allow to test the new “what if” scenarios 
without modifying the original process of generating the 
movement file. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, “M2ANET: a Mobile Medium 
Ad Hoc Network”, Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and 
Practice, WSN 2011, Paris, France, Feb. 2011, pp. 1-4. 
[2] E. Yanmaz, S. Yahyanejad, B. Rinner, H. Hellwagner, and C. 
Bettstetter, “Drone networks: Communications, coordination, 
and sensing”, Ad Hoc Networks, Elsevier, vol. 68, 2018, pp. 
1-15. 
[3] I. Bekmezci, O. K. Sahingoz, and S. Temel, “Flying Ad-Hoc 
Networks (FANETs): A survey”, Ad Hoc Networks, Elsevier, 
vol. 11, 2013, pp. 1254-1270. 
[4] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies, “A survey of mobility 
models 
for 
Ad 
Hoc 
Network 
research”, 
Wireless 
Communications and Mobile Computing, Wiley, vol. 2, 
2002, pp. 483-502. 
[5] S. K. Sarkar, T. G. Basavaraju, and C. Puttamadappa, Ad Hoc 
Mobile Wireless Networks, Principles, Protocols, and 
Applications, Auerbach Publications Taylor & Francis Group, 
2007. 
[6] H. Ekram and T. Issariyakul, Introduction to Network 
Simulator ns2, Springer, 2009. 
[7] N. Mahmood, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, “M2ANET 
simulation in 3D in ns2”, The Sixth International Conference 
on Advances in System Simulation SIMUL 2014, Nice, 
France, Oct. 12-16, 2014, pp. 24-28. 
[8] C. Bettstetter, H. Hartenstein, and X. Perez-Costa, 
“Stochastic Properties of the Random Waypoint Mobility 
Model”, Wireless Networks, vol. 10, 2004, pp. 555-567. 
[9] R. Alghamdi, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, “Avoiding Border 
Effect in Mobile Network Simulation”, The Twelfth 
International Conference on Networks ICN 2013, Seville, 
Spain, Jan. 27- Feb. 1, 2013, pp. 184-189. 
[10] M. Alzaylaee, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, “Linear Node 
Movement Patterns in MANETS”, The Ninth International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications 
ICWMC 2013, Nice, France, July 21-26, 2013, pp. 162-166. 
[11] X. Zhang, Simulation of Manet in Urban Environment, 
University of New Brunswick MCS Thesis, 2010. 
[12] D. Krajzewicz, J. Erdmann, M. Behrisch, and L. Bieker, 
“Recent Development and Applications of SUMO – 
Simulation of Urban Mobility”, International Journal of 
Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 6, no. 3&4, 
2012, pp. 128-138. 
[13] A. Alshehri, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, “The Advantage of 
Moving Nodes in Formations in MANETs and M2ANETs”, 
The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile 
Communications ICWMC 2013, Nice, France, July 21-26, 
2013, pp. 228-232. 
[14] H. Alseef, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, “A Method for 
Transforming Movement Paths in Wireless Mobile Network 
Simulation”, the International Journal on Advances in 
Networks and Services, vol. 9, no. 1&2, 2016, pp. 11-19. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

