Technical Criteria for Value-Added Services Creation, Execution and Deployment, 
on Next Generation Networks
Gerardo Rojas Sierra 
University of Cauca 
Engineering Telematics Group 
Popayán, Colombia 
gerardorojas@unicauca.edu.co 
 Felipe Estrada Solano 
University of Cauca 
Engineering Telematics Group 
Popayán, Colombia 
cfestrada@unicauca.edu.co 
 
 
Oscar M Caicedo Rendon 
University of Cauca 
Engineering Telematics Group 
Popayán, Colombia 
omcaicedo@unicauca.edu.co 
Julian A Caicedo M 
University of Cauca 
Engineering Telematics Group 
Popayán, Colombia 
jacaicedo@unicauca.edu.co 
Abstract—Create new services, in a faster way and at lower 
costs in order to attract new customers, keep existing ones and 
increase revenue, is the great target for telecom operators. This 
is possible with concepts like Next Generation Networks 
(NGNs), Service Delivery Platforms (SDPs) and Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA), due to they enable the 
integration of the Telecommunications and Information 
Technologies (IT) domains. However, the telecom operators of 
non-developing countries have a limited knowledge about the 
technologies that adapt better to their needs, and how they can 
be used and integrated into their networks for Value-Added 
Services (VAS) provisioning. Therefore, a set of technical 
criteria that supports telecom operators in non-developing 
countries for VAS creation, execution and deployment, is 
proposed in this paper. In the same way, a general scheme for 
the establishment, description and definition of technical 
criteria is proposed under the context of NGN telecom 
operators with Softswitch in the control layer (without IP 
Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) control layer). Then, the 
Color/Caller Ring Back Tone (CRBT) as VAS, is developed for 
testing the general scheme and the technical requirements 
proposed. For this matter, Rhino Service Logic Execution 
Environment 
(SLEE) 
(Java 
Application 
Programming 
Interface (API) for Integrated Networks (JAIN) SLEE 1.1 
specification compliance) was used. Furthermore, the results of 
CRBT integration into a real environment (NGN of EMCALI 
Colombian telecom operator) are presented. Finally, some 
conclusions are presented. 
Keywords- JAIN; SDP; SLEE; NGN; Technical Criteria 
VAS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, telecom services providers understand their 
necessity to create new services in a faster way and at lower 
costs in order to attract new customers, as well as maintain 
the 
existing 
ones 
and 
increase 
revenue. 
New 
telecommunications services require more flexible systems 
with high levels of performance, large scalability and based 
on open standards [1]. The Next Generation Networks 
(NGNs) are the solution to almost all these challenges, 
defining 
a 
reference 
architecture 
that 
enables 
the 
development of new telecom services and integrates both 
legacy networks and Internet Protocol (IP) based ones. 
Today, many paradigms and technologies have emerged to 
develop and deploy this trend. This is the case of Service 
Delivery Platforms (SDPs), which was created with the idea 
of adapting the business model philosophy from the 
Information Technology context to the telecom domain. 
Many research teams and communications companies 
look for those technologies that implement or adapt better to 
the SDP architecture, focusing on the solution for telecom 
service providers. However, a lot of telecom operators, 
mainly in the non-developing countries, have a lack of 
knowledge about how to integrate or exploit those emerging 
technologies for Value-Added Services (VAS) provisioning. 
Therefore, making technological changes is not simple and 
does not guarantee an optimal performance or good revenue 
to those telecom operators. Consequently, it is necessary to 
define technical criteria to be considered by telecom 
operators from non-developing countries in order to offer 
VAS on NGN. As a result this paper proposes: i) different 
technical criteria to be considered for VAS creation, 
execution and deployment on NGN with Softswitch in the 
control layer (non IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) in the 
control layer), and with SDP in the application layer. These 
criteria allow deciding the architecture and the required 
components to achieve a correct VAS provisioning. ii) A 
framework for organizing the technical criteria defined. For 
showing it, the reminder of this paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 mentions the related work. Section 3 
presents the technical criteria definition and the framework. 
Section 4 shows the implementation of the technical criteria 
under a study case. Finally, Section 5 presents the 
conclusions. 
123
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

II. 
RELATED WORK 
In [2], a SDP is proposed in order to integrate both 
Telecommunication and (IT) industries. This SDP is 
focused on creation and execution control of IMS 
convergent 
services. 
However, 
for 
non-developing 
countries, where IMS has not been totally deployed, it is not 
possible to adapt those technical recommendations. This 
paper is only focused on technologies such as Parlay-X and 
on the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA), but Java Application 
Programming Interface (API) for Integrated Networks 
(JAIN) is not considered. 
Tselikas et al. [3] presents an efficient performance 
comparison between several similar middleware systems 
based on open APIs and service protocols. The paper 
describes the implementation of telecom services supported 
by open interfaces and standard protocols exposing call 
control network functions. It analyzes a middleware 
implementation based on a subset of technologies, such as 
Open Service Architecture (OSA)/Parlay APIs, JAIN APIs 
and SIP, regarding call control functionality. 
Femminella et al. [4] describes a Session Initiation 
Protocol (SIP) based call control service for Internet 
Telephony, designed for an IP-Public Switched Telephone 
Network (PSTN) converged scenario. The authors work 
with a service based on the Back-To-Back User Agent 
(B2BUA) architecture. The service is deployed into a 
Service Logic Execution Environment (SLEE) [5] based on 
Mobicents [6]; an open-source platform for telecom 
applications, which offers a JAIN SLEE specification 
implementation. In this case [4] doesn’t address all the 
technical criteria to be considered in VAS development, and 
deployment. 
In [7], the authors present a practical deployment of a 
contextual service offered by a convergent telecom operator, 
whose functionality is to provide intelligent context-based 
call routing and rerouting, orchestrated from the operator 
service layer. Nevertheless, [7] is based on IMS control layer 
capabilities to properly capture the user context in a 
ubiquitous coverage area, and it doesn’t propose a schema 
for organizing the technical criteria for VAS creation. 
III. 
TECHNICAL CRITERIA FRAMEWORK 
Figure 1 shows the general outline proposed structure for 
defining the technical criteria required for VAS provisioning. 
A. VAS View 
Telecom operators and third parties develop services 
defined in the VAS view. These new services should be 
defined for allowing market differentiation and the 
increasing of the operator revenues.  
NGN Environment 
NGN defines a reference architecture that enables the 
development of new telecom services and integrates both 
legacy networks and IP-based ones. Thus, it is necessary 
define clearly the NGN context to be used for VAS 
provisioning. 
 
VAS VIEW
TELCO
CREATION VIEW
EXECUTION-
DEPLOYMENT 
VIEW
TECHNOLOGIAL 
ADAPTATION 
VIEW
T
THIRD PARTIES
Colombian Context:
NGN, VAS and SDP in Colombia
VAS Implementation
In House 
development
External 
Development
Execution and deployment of VAS logic
Technological Panorama
Operator 
domain
IT world 
oriented
 
Figure 1. Framework for VAS creation, execution and deployment. 
 
VAS Environment 
There is not VAS standard definition. The VAS concept 
depends on the law regulations and the market context in 
each country. Therefore, it is extremely important to set a 
clear VAS definition and to establish a fully description. In 
order to do this, a functionality description based on states 
machines is recommended. 
SDP Environment 
It is vital for telecom operators to develop, deploy, 
implement, coordinate and manage new services, efficiently 
and effectively, generating higher incomes and maintaining 
low prices. These platforms enable telecom operators to have 
a complete environment for the creation, deployment, 
implementation, management and billing of a wide range of 
services and value-added content. Here, the main idea is to 
establish the environment(s) used for VAS provisioning, 
giving support to legacy infrastructure. 
B. CreationView 
In this case, the technical criteria are defined from two 
points of view: Third Parties and Telecom Operators. 
Third Parties 
Telecom operators need to increase the VAS portfolio. In 
order to do this, they must allow a safely interaction of third 
parties with their network infrastructure. Thus, in this case, 
open technologies, high level APIs network abstraction and 
solutions based on Web Services (WS), provides to IT 
developers, tools to develop more advanced services into 
telecom domain. Technologies such as OSA/Parlay [8], 
Parlay X [9] and Open network enablers API (OneAPI) [10], 
which is based on existing specifications, such as Parlay X, 
and has improved them to be far easier for Web developers 
to use, were designed with the intention of exposing network 
facilities to external domains through several protocols. In 
the other hand, Resources Adapters (RAs) from JAIN SLEE 
technology also enable network abstraction and third parties 
connection. Therefore, with these technologies a telecom 
operator is allowed to open its network in order to increase 
its services portfolio. 
124
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

Telco 
It is important to know the technical criteria on the 
telecom operator side in order to find the most efficient way 
of creating and having a short time-to market. 
Programmable APIs: define software components that 
abstract network protocols and allow the new applications 
development. The abstraction level can be classified like 
high, medium and low. For IT developers, it is 
recommendable use high level APIs. The other ones require 
a detailed knowledge about the mechanisms, the protocols 
and the infrastructure. 
Scripting Language: scripting languages are appropriate 
technologies for faster application development due to the 
fact that they are used to connect existing components. They 
are lightweight and customizable interpreted languages 
based on eXtensible Markup Language (XML) representing 
the behavior of certain applications, making it possible to 
change at runtime. Therefore, the XML use may offer 
services customization and composition. 
 Service Creation Environment (SCE): a SCE should 
be based on open technologies and standards. A service 
usually developed by a SCE proprietary, it only runs in the 
SLEE of the same ownership, whereas a service created 
with a standard SCE can be implemented with few changes 
within any SLEE that supports the respective standard. For 
mentioned reason, here it is recommended to use 
standardized tools based on Java. Thus, it is possible to get 
better interoperability and costs decrease. 
C. Execution and Deployment View 
These technical criteria are developed from two points of 
view: third parties and telecom operators. 
Third Parties 
Integrating the IT world with NGN capabilities will 
enable to enrich the services offered to users and most 
important, it will enable third parties to develop new faster 
applications that impact the telecom services market. Hence, 
the idea is working with Java Enterprise Edition (JEE) [11] 
technology for third parties. This will make an easier and 
clearer 
communication 
possible 
between 
application 
providers 
and 
telecom 
operators, 
due 
to 
many 
telecommunication servers are based on Java SIP Servlets 
[1] or JAIN SLEE. Besides, a lot of services platforms 
based on Parlay X are also supported on Java. 
Telecom Operator 
It is extremely important that the operator has a service 
execution environment that optimizes the execution and 
deployment of convergent applications which are meeting 
the telecommunications requirements. 
Performance: to achieve high performance, is desirable 
to use technologies to ensure high throughput and low 
latency. The architecture used here should meet these 
requirements. In this sense, JAIN SLEE is recommended. 
JAIN SLEE is a generic application environment designed 
specifically for supporting carrier-grade and event-driven 
requirements.  
High Availability: in order to achieve high availability, 
the cluster server mechanisms are the most appropriate. 
These mechanisms increase the percentage of availability in 
critical environments such as telecom services. Although, 
the cluster configuration provides redundancy, it does not 
mean that high availability will be achieved. The reason for 
this affirmation is because of the fact that one node of the 
array can fail and the processed information will not be 
transmitted to the backup node automatically. Therefore, the 
memory synchronization process is also an important 
mechanism for high availability. 
Reliability: 
an 
application 
server 
must 
include 
mechanisms to control bugs as well as robust processes that 
give the system the ability to bounce back and face different 
problems. In this case, the cluster active architecture is 
desirable. 
Portable Service: in order to decrease the services 
development time is important to keep on the philosophy 
"written once, run anywhere" through technologies with 
high levels of interoperability between different Operating 
Systems (OSs), architectures and even other technologies, 
like the proposed by Java. This way, the selection of an 
execution environment based on JAIN SLEE standard, 
enables services to be developed and deployed with the least 
effort in any runtime environment compatible with the 
specification. 
Event Driven Applications (EDA): to meet the 
requirements for telecom operators, the programmers need to 
develop 
applications 
over 
event-driven 
states 
and 
asynchronous platforms such as JAIN SLEE. Besides, the 
mechanisms of events distribution (service selection) enable 
a way to routing requests to the most appropriate functional 
blocks to process them. 
D. Technological Adaption Criteria 
The criteria in this view are focused on building a 
technology landscape that enables the operator to adopt and 
adapt any technologies into its network infrastructure in 
order to achieve convergence in any services that demand the 
NGN structures implementation. 
Network abstraction layer 
Here are considered all the technologies that enable the 
underlying network abstraction. This type of technologies 
exposes the capabilities that enable the smooth functioning 
of services, providing access to network resources. For 
example, into OSA/Parlay [8], JAIN, Parlay-X [9], OneAPI 
[10] and OMA [12], these capabilities are encapsulated in 
APIs which hide the network infrastructure complexity. Due 
to more abstraction high level, JAIN SLEE APIs are 
recommended. The JAIN SLEE RAs give a network high 
abstraction, as well as OneAPI, but this last one is focused 
on Web development, while the first one is oriented to 
telecom services. The Parlay APIs can be considered as 
medium level abstraction. 
125
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 Product support and maturity 
The adoption of execution environments and tools for 
VAS creation should be based on standard specifications. 
For this reason, it is extremely important to choose a 
standard that clearly defines the technology path (versions 
of the specification), the backwards compatibility and the 
adaptability to future technologies. 
Learning curve 
If a parameter for the VAS deployment is the time spent 
in application development, then third parties (external 
services) and telecom operators (in-house services) should 
select a high-level API. Thus, the service creation time can 
be decreased. Likewise, to enrich the applications, the 
developers should select a high-capacity technology in order 
to enable the development of many applications supported 
by different protocols (e.g., JAIN SLEE). 
Roadmap 
Organizations such as European Telecommunications 
Standars Institute (ETSI), Parlay Group, 3GPPP and Telco 
companies, continually, through their working groups, study 
and analyze new requirements in order to further enhance 
the capabilities of technologies related to services 
provisioning. In fact, many companies have opted for 
existing architectures such as OSA/Parlay and JAIN SLEE. 
Therefore, it is important that the selected SDP for meeting 
telecom operator requirements also has a clear roadmap for 
supporting the new specifications [13]. In this sense, the 
support of previous specifications is essential, too. 
Future permeability 
The telecom operators must adopt new technologies with 
facility of growth [14]. 
Test environment 
Years ago, the telecom operators of non-developing 
countries did not have test environments due to huge 
economical costs. However, technological advancement and 
the IT and Telco domains integration have enabled the test 
environment appearance. In a test environment, it is 
important to use simulation tools to emulate the SDP 
components and to test performance, traffic and latency, 
features, among others. In addition to performance testing, it 
is also possible to analyze the services behavior. Therefore, 
it is desirable to create a test environment for decreasing the 
development and deployment time. 
SOA 
Criteria such as the Services Buildings Blocks (SBBs), 
the reuse of components, the composition and the 
orchestration, enable a model inside the service layer, which 
streamlines and promotes the creation, implementation and 
deployment of new services [15]. These services must be 
defined so that they have loosely coupled and be 
interoperable. For achieving it, SOA is the most 
appropriated technology. 
IV. 
STUDY CASE 
This section will describe the way like the above criteria 
were applied. Promptly, in order to do it, the EMCALI 
study case is shown. EMCALI telecommunications is a 
fixed-line operator in Colombia, a non-developing country. 
A. 
VAS View 
NGN Environment 
The study case was developed into the EMCALI NGN. It 
has two Softswitch in the control layer, and an application 
layer built on the Parlay X standard release three. Besides, 
this NGN has interoperability with PSTN, Global System 
for Mobile communications (GSM), TErrestrial Trunked 
RAdio (TETRA), among others. Due to market changes and 
challenges, EMCALI requires adapting new technologies 
that support new services for VAS provisioning, allowing 
positioning in the market and revenue increase. 
VAS Environment 
The adopted VAS concept is: “Next Generation Services 
that 
integrate 
the 
world 
telecommunications 
and 
information, allowing an operator to develop and deploy a 
wide range of potential service according to some key 
futures and capabilities expected in the NGN” [16]. The 
Color /Caller Ring Back Tone (CRBT) service was taken 
into account due to its high-host in mobile networks. The 
CRBT VAS allows the subscriber to replace the traditional 
Ring Back Tone (RBT), and even the busy-status and the 
not-available-status tones, by audio components that have 
been downloaded and defined by himself through a 
customized interface [17][18]. The CRBT operation process 
is as follows: when a call from a subscriber А is directed to 
subscriber B (service user), the caller (subscriber А) hears a 
sound fragment replacing the RBT. There are several audio 
files to configure the CRBT, such as song fragments, 
melodies, voice recordings, promotional messages, sound 
effects, among others. 
SDP Environment 
The EMCALI operator does not have an SDP. This 
makes its participation difficult on the VAS market. Thus, 
to meet this requirement, the OpenCloud Rhino SDP was 
used, which is compliant with JAIN SLEE, the open Java 
standard for telecommunications event-driven application 
servers. 
Figure 2 shows the solution proposed in this work: 
--JAIN SLEE server: contains the CRBT prototype 
service logic blocks, and the modules to adapt it to outside 
resources. 
--Media server: exposes the module to play the audio file 
that replaces the call RBT. It communicates with the JAIN 
SLEE server through Media Gateway Control Protocol 
(MGCP) messages. 
--Enterprise Information System (EIS): includes the 
module responsible for storing user information and the 
126
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

needed data for the CRBT prototype. 
--Softswitch: contains the control and signaling units that 
handle the information flow of the EMCALI NGN. It 
communicates with the JAIN SLEE server through SIP 
messages. 
--Transport network: refers to transport nodes that belong 
to the EMCALI NGN infrastructure. 
-- The service logic CRBT prototype architecture is based 
on B2BUA because it offers the flexibility to handle all SIP 
call signaling between two users. 
 
EMCALI Transport Network
RA
Adaptation
container
Logic service
container
CRBT
Enterprise 
Information Systems
JAIN SLEE Server
Media Module
Media Server
Database Module
Control
Unit
Signaling
Unit
Softswitch
Database Module
TELCO -
EMCALI
EMCALI + 
SDP
(Proposed)
 
Figure 2: System solution modular architecture. 
B. 
Creation View 
The JAIN SLEE technology was selected because it 
allows abstraction at a high level, a not so steep learning 
curve for services creation and deployment. Besides, JAIN 
SLEE supports all SS7 protocols (including vendor variants) 
and all the IP/IMS protocols. As SCE, the Rhino Software 
Development Kit (SDK), by OpenCloud, and the Eclipse 
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) were used. 
Eclipse IDE easily integrated the libraries and plug-ins 
provided by OpenCloud to develop, deploy and test, the 
service. The SIP RA from OpenCloud (OCSIP RA) was 
used for binding the application layer and the control layer 
of the EMCALI NGN. Finally, the MGCP RA from 
Mobicents allowed the connection between the Rhino SLEE 
and the Mobicents Media Server (MMS). 
C. 
Execution and Deployment View 
Telco servers  
It is extremely important to count with an execution 
environment geared exclusively for the telecom domain. As 
mention above, the JAIN SLEE technology is the most 
appropriate to meet the requirements of an operator like 
EMCALI. There are several JAIN SLEE implementations, 
such as Rhino SLEE [19], jNetX [20] and Mobicents JAIN 
SLEE [6]. In this case, Rhino SLEE by OpenCloud is highly 
recommended, because it is JAIN SLEE 1.1 specification 
fully compliant, it provides distinct licenses (open SDK, 
educational, commercial) and it supplies a complete set of 
RAs, tools, documentation and technical support.  
Performance, high Availability and reliability 
The technological developments made by OpenCloud, 
provide a robust environment to support large amounts of 
traffic, low latency, high availability, fault tolerance and 
overload. The active cluster architecture is widely used as a 
mechanism to resolve these high requirements.  
Service Portability  
The SBBs are the service basic elements that allow the 
development of reusable components with high performance 
operability [5]. The JAIN SLEE 1.1 specification defines a 
robust architecture that standardizes the RA, improving the 
interoperability and portability of its components. 
EDA 
Rhino SLEE is compliant with both versions 1.0 and 1.1 
JAIN SLEE specification which are based on event-driven 
application model. 
D. 
Technological Adaption Criteria 
Rhino SLEE comprises a large number of RAs (SIP, 
Diameter, ISC, SOAP, SS7 family: INAP, CAP, MAP), 
allowing the development of applications that interact with 
all kind of network infrastructures. 
Product support and maturity 
JAIN SLEE is the only open standard for an application 
server designed to provide an execution environment for 
telecom services. Rhino SLEE, the selected JAIN SLEE 
implementation, is supported for a lot of companies such as 
Almira Labs, HP, Infocom, IBM, Motorola, Nokia Siemens, 
Sun (Oracle), among others. 
Learning curve 
This approach gathers the following three points: i) 
developer knowledge, where the selection of high-level 
APIs reduces the learning curve; ii) development and 
deploying time, which is decreased through high-level 
abstraction 
and 
service 
creation 
technology 
(e.g., 
EclipSLEE, OpenCloud JAIN SLEE plug-in); iii) high 
availability of tools. 
Roadmap 
The roadmap of JAIN SLEE technology and building 
services in Java is certainly promising. This community has 
highly distributed structured mechanisms and participation 
agreements for defining new recommendations.  
 Future Permeability 
As well as JAIN SLEE achieves satisfactory scalability 
levels, technologies based on Java allow the constant 
binding and interoperability with emerging technologies to 
contribute to the new services enrichment [13].  
E. 
Tests and results analysis 
Signaling test 
To proof that the CRBT service has been successfully 
integrated into the EMCALI NGN infrastructure, it has been 
registered the distinct messages of the different protocols 
present between the several equipments involved in a phone 
127
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

call from a PSTN conventional phone to an IP domain 
Softphone, which has subscribed the CRBT service. Both 
user terminal devices are configured with numbers that are 
registered into the EMCALI Softswitch that has been 
configured to operate with the Rhino SLEE (see Figure 3). 
Data recording was made using:  
-- ZXNM01 ZTE Equipment Management System, which 
includes a signaling tool that logs the traffic sent and 
received by the Softswitch. 
--Wireshark, a protocol analyzer that logs all the traffic 
that passes through the network which is connected to the 
computer where it has been installed. 
 
 
Figure 3: Network topology and test-design tools 
F. 
Performance Test Description 
The reference scenario used for the performance test was 
entirely independent from the EMCALI NGN. The Rhino 
SLEE Server 2.1 was deployed on a HP desktop PC with 
Intel Core 2 Duo E8300 @ 2.83 GHz; 2 GB RAM; OS 
Debian 5.0.4; Java Virtual Machine (JVM) 1.6.0_18 64 bit. 
The MMS 2.0.0.CR1 was deployed on a Gateway laptop PC 
with AMD Turion X2 TL-60 @ 2.0 GHz; 4 GB RAM; OS 
Debian 5.0.4; JVM 1.6.0_18 64 bit. The SIPp traffic 
generator was deployed on a HP laptop PC with Intel Core 2 
Duo T9400 @ 2.53 GHz; 4 GB RAM; OS Linux Ubuntu 
9.10. All computers were connected using a dedicated 
switch ZTE ZXR10 2826S Local Area Network, Ethernet 
100 Based-TX. 
Taking into account the MMS hardware features, it was 
configured to support 500 simultaneously multimedia 
sessions. Furthermore, the MMS source code was modified 
to solve an implementation failure. Moreover, the open files 
limit on OS Linux was incremented to 65535 due to the 
number of simultaneous calls to test. 
Two different services were tested: the Traditional Call 
Service (TCS) and the CRBT service. Both services were 
configured in a SIPp scenario with 10 seconds call answer 
time and 3.5 minutes call duration. In the TCS, the MMS 
component doesn’t operate. 
The SIPp UAC and UAS were used to generate SIP 
traffic with an average rate equal to λ ranging: i) for TCS, 
from 10 to 110 calls per second (cps) in 10 cps steps; ii) for 
CRBT, from 10 to 50 cps in 10 cps steps. This last one has a 
smaller range due to MMS capacity limitations. 
Each test was done with a constant λ value for 30 
minutes. Before starting to collect statistics, a warm-up 
session of 15 minutes was performed to allow the Java 
Garbage Collector to be executed at least once and avoid 
JVM and JAIN SLEE transient effects [4]. 
G. 
Performance Test Metrics and Results 
Throughput, obtained as the percentage of successful 
calls, and Session Request Delay (SRD) are used as 
performance metrics. SRD [21] is measured on the caller 
side and it is defined as the time interval from the initial 
INVITE to the first non-100 provisional response. It is used 
to measure the latency experienced by the caller when 
initiating the call session. Also, the CPU utilization was 
measured, which is extremely important to define hardware 
requirements. 
Figure 4 shows that for up to 50 cps almost all call 
attempts were successful. Besides, taking into account that 
the operator handles 45 cps so during peak hours, this 
indicates that the development of CRBT using the technical 
criteria is appropriate. 
 
99,92%
99,93%
99,94%
99,95%
99,96%
99,97%
99,98%
99,99%
100,00%
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
% Successful calls
λ (CPS)
Successful Calls
TCS
CRBT
 
Figure 4: Throughput vs. cps 
 
Figure 5 shows less than 100 ms between 0 and 50 cps, 
presenting a great performance and low latency in the 
response message. 
The Creation View criteria were evaluated through two 
service implementation development time cases: while in 
this project the CRBT prototype service was built in four 
months, other project developers created a similar one in 
eight months [22], demonstrating the reduced development 
time 
with 
the 
JAIN 
SLEE 
use. 
Besides, 
after 
documentation, the components service (SBBs) building 
started soon and they were developed faster each time, 
exposing a slow learning curve of this technology. These 
SBBs were successfully deployed and tested in another 
JAIN SLEE implementation (Mobicents JAIN SLEE), 
128
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

evaluating the service portability capacity provided by the 
standard release 1.1. On the other hand, high availability 
and reliability criteria were reached through the Rhino 
SLEE technological tool, due to its exclusive cluster 
architecture design. 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100 110
Miliseconds
λ (CPS)
Service Request Delay
CRBT
TCS
 
Figure 5: Average setup delay vs. cps 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents technical criteria necessary for the 
creation, execution and development of VAS in NGN with 
Softswitch in the control layer. It also shows the 
technologies and tools for the creation, execution and 
development of VAS.  
Within the development, implementation and deployment 
of VAS, the service execution environment is the key 
element in a NGSDP. This component must meet the high 
requirements in the Telco domain. 
JAIN SLEE is the only open standard agreement for a 
telecom application server designed for high performance 
event-driven applications with reuse of components and 
high levels of growth. 
The JAIN SLEE technology enables to make through its 
RA architecture, an abstraction of the transport layer of the 
NGN architecture, achieving rapid development and 
deployment of new applications and services. 
The development of NGN applications is similar in many 
aspects to developing applications on the Internet, mostly 
because 
the 
main 
skills 
required 
for 
application 
development in this context are based on the use of Java and 
XML technologies. This makes creating applications more 
accessible to a broad community of developers, as it is 
easier, more productive and more creative. 
The technical criteria defined allowed to decrease the 
development time, an outstanding achievement in the 
market context. 
The technical criteria defined above, allowed meet the 
requirements for VAS provisioning on non-developing 
countries. This was demonstrated in the EMCALI operator 
study case. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Kryvinska, C. Strauss, L. Auer, and P. Zinterhof, "Conceptual 
Framework for Services Creation/Development Environment in 
Telecom Domain," 10th International Conferene on Information 
Integration and Web-based Applications & Services (iiWAS2008), 
Procedings ACM, pp. 324-33, November 2008, 978-1-60558-349-
5/08/0011.  
[2] S. Hiroshi, et. al., “Service Delivery Platform Architecture for the 
Next-Generation Network,” [Online] [Cited: February 25, 2011.] 
http://www.icin.biz/files/2008papers/Session9A-2.pdf. 
[3] N. Tselikas, G. Tselikis, and N. Sagias, "Software and Middleware 
Technologies based on Open APIs and Protocols for modern Service 
Provision in Telecoms,” 14th Panhellenic Conference on Informartics 
(PCI 2010), pp. 33-37, September 2010, 978-1-4244-7838-5. 
[4] M. Femminella, et al., "Design, Implementation, and Performance 
Evaluation of an Advanced SIP-based Call Control for VoIP 
Services" Dresden : s.n., 2009. Communications, 2009. ICC’09. On, 
pp. 1-5, August 2009, 978-1-4244-3435-0. 
[5] D. Ferry, JSR 240 JAIN SLEE v1.1, [Online] [Cited: February 25, 
2011.] http://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=240. 
[6] Mobicents Web Site, [Online] [Cited: February 25, 2011.] 
http://www.mobicents.org. 
[7] A. Cadenas, A. Sanchez, and B. Carro, "Deployment of Contextual 
Corporate Telco Services Based on Protocol Adaptation in the NGN 
Environment.," Procedings IEE Communications Magazine, vol. 48,  
pp. 34-40, April 2010, 0163-6804. 
[8] ETSI 
TISPAN., 
Open 
Service 
Access 
(OSA);Application 
Programming Interface (API);Part 1: Overview (Parlay 6). ETSI. 
2008. Standar. ETSI ES 204 915-1 V1.1.1. 
[9] M. Unmehopa, K. Vemuri, and A. Bennet, Parlay/OSA From 
Standards to Reality, Wiley, 2006, 296 p. 
[10] D. Wang, M. Song, and Y. Li, “OneAPI Services and Java 
Implementation,” Advanced Materials Research. Beijin, China, vol. 
143 – 144, pp. 1159-1163, October 2010. 
[11] Oracle, Java EE 6 Technologies, [Online] [Cited: February 25, 2011.] 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javaee/tech/index.html. 
[12] ITU NGN-GSI., ITU-T NGN FG Proceedings Part II. Ginebra : ITU, 
2005. 
[13] M. Femminella, et al., "Scalability and performance evaluation of a 
JAIN SLEE-based platform for VoIP services," 21st International 
Teletraffic Congress (ITC2009), pp. 1-8, October 2009,  978-1-4244-
4744-2. 
[14] J. Zuidweg, "Middleware en Telecomunicaciones." Tecsidel Tic. 
[Online] 
[Cited: 
February 
25, 
2011.] 
http://www.tecsidel.es/tecsidel/index.php?id=896&L=2. 
[15] T. Van de Velde, Value-Added Services for Next Generation 
Networks. Boca Ratón : Auerbach Publications, 2008. 
[16] J. Crimi, Next Generation Network (NGN) Services. Telcordia 
Technologies.  
[17] Blogspot., "Ring Back Tone." Blogspot. [Online].[Cited: February 25, 
2011.] http://rbt-review.blogspot.com. 
[18] Dialogic., "Mobile CRBT." Dialogic. [Online] [Cited: February 25, 
2011.] 
http://www.dialogic.com/solutions/mobile-vas/mobile-
crbt.htm. 
[19] OpenCloud 
Web 
Site, 
[Cited: 
February 
25, 
2011.] 
http://www.opencloud.com 
[20] jNetX Web Site, [Cited: February 23, 2010.] http://www.jnetx.com. 
[21] D. Malas, “SIP End-to-End Performance Metrics,” IETF Internet 
Draft, 
draft-ietf-pmol-sip-perf-metrics-01.txt, 
[Online] 
[Cited: 
February 
25, 
2011.] 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-malas-
performance-metrics-08. 
[22] O. Mondragon and Z. Solarte, Propuesta de un modelo arquitectonico 
para la implementación de nuevos servicios telematicos sobre la red 
multiservicios de EMCALI, 1st ed., Autonoma University, September 
2010, 80p, 1692-2832.   
129
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

