 
 
 
 
Design and Development of an Android Accounting Application Using Web Services 
and Quality of Experience for Mobile Computing 
Ustijana Rechkoska     
“St. Paul the Apostle” University 
Faculty for Computer Science and Engineering 
Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia 
ustijana@gmail.com  
Darjan Djamtovski 
“St. Paul the Apostle” University 
Faculty for Communication Network Security 
Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia 
dzamtomk@gmail.com 
Danco Davcev 
“Sts Cyril and Methodius” University 
Faculty for Computer Science and Engineering 
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia 
dancodavcev@gmail.com  
Carlo Ciulla 
“St. Paul the Apostle” University 
Faculty for ISVMA 
Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia 
cxc2728@njit.edu  
 
Jordan Sikoski 
State University of Tetovo 
Tetovo, Republic of Macedonia 
jordans@t-home.mk 
 
 
    
Abstract—In this work, we propose an easier and innovative 
way of calculating the salary of institutions’ employees, through 
their smartphones running the Android OS. The application is 
developed in Android Ice Cream Sandwich - the most popular 
version of Android. The specifications and features of the 
smartphones had achieved the highest level of quality, allowing 
performance of tasks concerning mobile computing. The 
application proposed in this work allows calculating the salaries 
of the employees of the institution - Universities staff, proposing 
an original, efficient way of documentation managing at 
institutions. Our approach improves the Quality of Experience 
(QoE), providing the users all necessary resources and 
performances, which refer to a user-friendly mobile application, 
using Web Services, QoE evaluated referring the quality of the 
graphical user interface, efficiency and time saving, enabling 
Cloud connected experience possibility. 
 
Keywords-Android 
application 
development; 
mobile 
computing; salary calculation; Web Services; Quality of 
Experience (QoE)  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Android, as a Linux-based operating system designed for 
touchscreen devices like smartphones and tablet computers, is 
an open source and its code is released under the Apache 
License which allows the software to be modified and 
distributed by device manufacturers, wireless carriers, as well 
as individual users [8][9]. 
The history of Android raises through some versions, from 
1.0 to 4.4.2, so far. In this work, we have chosen Android 4.0 
because it provides new graphical interface; there is a security 
concept improvement and it involves the cloud environment 
connection. One of the main features of Android 4.0 is the 
new connected Cloud experience, Android Beam, refined 
User Interface (UI), security for applications, content and 
enhancement for enterprise Virtual Private Network (VPN) 
client Application Programming Interface (API). The design 
of this application is developed consistently with the new 
refined UI which allows easier usability and easier transition 
of the salary calculation. This application is connected to the 
Web Server, which allows dynamic download of the 
necessary information for calculation of the salary. The 
features of this application are described in the third section of 
this work. 
In the next section, the performed tests and results are 
presented, continuing at the fifth section of this work with 
Quality of Experience (QoE) evaluation concerning mobile 
computing.  
Our approach for managing the documentation of an 
institution provides saving time, energy and money. It 
provides comparison to previously developed Android 
applications and gives the reasons why this application is 
more suitable for usage. This work provides the features of 
the application and how they can be used. The results of the 
tests done to the application are presented. The conclusion 
and our concept for working on this type of application are 
given. The Cloud connected experience allows users to 
synchronize: photos, e-mails, applications, and contacts [2]. 
Android 
4.0 
provides 
easier 
implementation 
of 
the 
applications to manage the authentication and the secure 
session [2]. One of the important security features is that 
Android 4.0 allows encrypted storage and remote data 
deletion [2]. This feature is the most helpful when the device 
is lost. The last feature of Android 4.0 is the enhancement for 
enterprise (VPN client API). This feature allows us to 
construct the application to configure the addresses and 
routing rules, process outgoing and incoming packets and 
establish secure tunnels to remote server. This feature allows 
the application to be configured with centric networks. The 
main point of the implementation of this application is the 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
usage of Web Services, which is going to provide better 
performance and possibility for calculation of the salaries for 
institutions having thousands of employees. By using the 
Cloud connection possibility, the application is going to result 
in saving energy, time and money of the institutions and 
numerous users stated in the conclusion and future work 
concepts of the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Nowadays, the Android market is full of applications 
giving the users greater choice, but not all of them provide 
excellent quality to the user. There are many applications that 
have great marketing characteristics, but poor performances in 
terms of usability and efficiency. On the Android market 
several applications for calculating the salary can be found:  
- Salary Bot by CAB Designs [10] 
- Paycheck by Green App Developer [11] 
- Quick Wage by CWE Software LLC [12] 
Testing and analyzing these applications, Salary Bot [10] 
has the best performances among three of them, which allows 
the results to be broken yearly, monthly, weekly, daily, and 
hourly data; so, the design is much better than the other two 
applications. The common feature of these applications is the 
calculation of the gross salary with the additional work of the 
user. The Paycheck application [11] has simple and old design 
which is not consistent with the updates of Android and it 
provides approximate calculation of the salary. Quick Wage 
[12] allows the user to calculate the salary according to the 
wager. It also has old design which is not consistent with the 
Android updates and provides yearly, monthly, weekly, daily, 
and hourly salary calculation, providing salary calculation for 
several years. The disadvantage of Quick Wage is that it has 
an approximate calculation of salary. 
The applications which are already developed allow the 
user to calculate the salary according to the user’s gross 
earnings, but the gross earnings must also be calculated. The 
application that we decided to develop allows Web integration 
which gives the user easier way to calculate the salary. The 
user does not need to have previous knowledge on how to 
calculate the salary. This application is mainly developed for 
calculating the salary of the University staff, but it can be 
easily adjusted to other institutions as well. It is user-friendly, 
web integrated mobile application and its structure is 
presented in detail in the next section. 
III. 
ANDROID APPLICATION 
UniSal Android application is created to help the 
University staff mostly to calculate the salary in a user-
friendly and efficient manner. The necessary information for 
calculating the salary is downloaded from the Web Server and 
parsed into usable information within the application (Figure 
1). The information for calculating the salary is stored into 
MySQL database [14], which is stored into the Web Server. 
For the future development this application is going to give 
the Cloud experience to the user, so the application will be 
used by thousands of employees. 
The application is calculating the gross salary based on 
monthly data for each employee in the institution, as well as 
on the basis of the prescribed rates and monthly average 
salary in our country.  
The variables for calculating the Gross Salary (GS) are given 
Figure 1. System architecture for mobile computing using Web Services. 
as follows: Net Salary (NS), Personal Income Tax (PIT), and 
Contributions (C). The equation for calculating gross salary is 
[6]:   
 
GS = NS + PIT + C 
(1) 
The category of salary is determined according to the law, 
the collective agreement and the employment contract. In 
order to calculate the salary, it is necessary to submit the data 
for its calculation to the salary referent in charge of data entry 
on the part of the authorized departments and managers in the 
firm. For calculating the salary the institution also has to 
calculate the personal income tax and the contributions. To 
calculate the amount of personal income tax and salary 
contributions starting the 1st of January 2009, the rate of the 
personal income tax in the taxation of salaries is 10% 
regardless of the amount of the employee’s salary. Thereby 
the basis for the calculation of the personal income is the 
basis for the calculation of contributions (gross salary), less 
the total amount of the contributions and the personal 
exemption determined in monthly amount [6]. The variables 
for calculating the Basis for Personal Income Tax (BPIT) are: 
Gross Salary (GS), Contributions (C) and Personal Exemption 
(PE). 
 
BPIT = GS – C – PE 
(2) 
Contributions are calculated according to the rates 
determined into the Law regulations of the country. Table I 
describes the rates for the contributions [4][5]. The total sum 
of contributions for 2013 is described as (TSC). 
 
Calculating contributions for the salary are presented in 
Table 1, as given below: 
 
 
 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
 
TABLE I. CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CALCULATING THE SALARY 
 
Contributions 
Period 
From the 1st of January 
Mandatory PDI 
18% 
Mandatory health insurance 
7.3%  
Mandatory insurance in case 
of unemployment 
1.2% 
Additional contribution for 
compulsory health insurance 
in case of injury at work and 
occupational disease 
0.5% 
 
GS = NS + ((NS – PE) x 11.111111) / 0.73 
(3) 
  *0.73 = (100 – TSC) / 100 
 
Equation (3) represents the way of calculating the GS of the 
employer [7]. 
A. 
Structure of the Application UniSal 
This Android application UniSal is connected with remote 
database (MySQL) [14] and all required information for salary 
calculation is stored into the database. The information 
retrieved from the database is JSON [15] code, which is 
parsed when it is received into the application. Before it is 
parsed, the JSON code is received as a JSON Array and then 
each Object is accessed separately. All the values that are 
received from the database are stored into the Android device 
and are used for offline calculation of the salary. The MySQL 
database is saved into Apache 2.0 Web Server with PhP 5 [16] 
installation. The PhP scripts are very important for this 
application, because the Android application does not need to 
have authentication information with the MySQL database. 
This provides secure communication between the Android 
application and MySQL database because all the information 
for authentication with the MySQL database is stored into the 
PhP scripts which can be accessed only from the server. 
When the Android application makes a Http Post request to 
the server, the server executes a specific script for returning 
the JSON code to the Android application.  
The Main screen of the application is consisting of 
ViewPager that holds the fragments which are managed with 
Section Adapter and Action Bar that holds the tabs i.e. the 
style of the Action Bar is set to “Tab Style”. On the main  
 
screen, two tabs are displayed and they represent the 
calculation of the Gross and the Net Salary. The user interface 
is user-friendly and the navigation is done with swiping right-
to-left or reverse.  
The specific salary is calculated from the mandatory PDI, 
health insurance, contribution for employment, professional 
sick leave, total contributions, total contributions and charges. 
Another important section is the Settings Panel of the 
application. The settings panel allows the user to change the 
values of the contributions according to the changes done 
according to the Law regulations.  
Once the application is launched, it checks the 
contributions on the remote server. If the Android device is 
connected on the Internet, the values for the contributions are 
downloaded automatically and stored into the device for 
offline calculation of the salary. The values are downloaded 
by sending a Http Post request to the server. The remote 
server holds PhP script for sending the values from MySQL 
database to the Android device. The script authenticates with 
the MySQL library and queries the values. Once the values are 
queried, they are parsed into JSON code and the code is sent 
to the Android device. When the Android device receives the 
JSON code it parses it and the values are saved into xml file 
for offline calculation of the salary. The Settings Panel is also 
available and allows the user to change the contribution 
values manually.  
Due to improper changes into the Settings Panel, the 
application is not going to calculate the proper value of the 
salary for the employer. For this case scenario, the application 
generates error log holding the error values for the 
contributions. The error log is displayed to the user when 
he/she wants to calculate the salary. When the user presses the 
“Calculate” button the error log is displayed. The error log 
holds the exact contribution value which has error i.e. a value 
which is not reasonable for calculating the salary of the 
employee.  
B. 
University staff salary calculation 
If the user wishes to calculate the salary based on points, 
he/she has to open the options menu on the Android device 
and tap on “Salary on points”. The application is going to 
open new activity containing the proper information for 
calculating the salary. The salary on points contains the 
following Android components: Spinner, Button, and 
Checkbox. The Spinner is used to hold the academic status; 
the Checkbox is used to determine whether the employee has 
been on a sick leave; and the Button is used to calculate the 
salary. The information into the Spinner is populated from 
Remote Web Server. When the information is downloaded 
into the device, it is stored into local database for offline 
calculation of the salary.  
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
The information from the Web Server is retrieved by 
sending a Http Post request to the Web Server. Into the web 
server a PhP script is stored for retrieving the information to 
the Android device. The PhP script authenticates with the 
database on the server and queries the information that has to 
be sent to the Android device. The queried information is 
parsed into JSON code and sent to the Android device. On the 
Android hand side the information received is parsed into 
JSON Array. The information from the JSON Array is 
processed and it is saved into the local SQLite database for 
offline calculation of the salary. When the user presses the 
“Calculate” button, the salary is calculated according to the 
information downloaded from the remote server. If the “Sick 
leave” option is marked and the “Calculate” button is pressed, 
the calculated salary amount is going to equal 70 % of the full 
amount. This is determined by the Law regulations in the 
country. 
IV. 
TESTING THE APPLICATION AND RESULTS 
The application testing is performed in a couple of steps: 
testing the Gross and Net salary, testing the Settings Panel 
and testing of University staff salary. 
A. 
Testing the gross and the net salary  
For the gross and the net salary, 
we have applied the test scenarios - 
how the application responds when 
there is no active Internet connection, 
how the application responds when 0 
is entered as a value and the last test 
is how the application responds when 
the negative button is returned as a 
value. For the first test scenario we 
have entered gross salary which is 
below the minimum gross salary 
determined by the Law regulations. 
Figure 2 gives the result when the 
application is notifying the user that 
he/she needs to enter salary greater 
than the minimum salary - the result 
is the same when the user enters 0. Of 
course, the user can enter only 
positive numbers. In the next test, we 
have left the field for the salary empty and tried to calculate 
the salary. When the “Calculate” button was pressed, the 
application responded with a message that the user has to 
enter salary. If the user is trying to download the data from 
the Web Server when there is no Internet connection, the user 
is going to receive notification that there is problem with the 
Internet connection. The same test scenarios were applied for 
the net salary. The difference between these two types of 
salaries is the minimum salary determined according to the 
Law regulations. The response of the application when the 
salary amount is below the minimum salary amount of the 
country is also presented in Figure 2.   
B. 
Testing the Settings Panel 
This test is used to determine whether the user has made 
any mistakes inserting the values for the contributions when 
there is no internet connection. The information for the 
contributions which is downloaded from the Web Server is 
updated according to the Law 
regulations and the application is 
updating accordingly. When the user 
is unable to connect to the Internet 
and there is a need for calculating the 
salary urgently, the user can enter the 
values 
for 
the 
contributions 
manually. When the application is 
performed by the user, the latest 
values for the salary contributions 
are already inserted.  
This case scenario is displaying 
the result when the user has made a 
mistake entering the contribution 
values. Figure 3 presents the result 
when the user has made a mistake 
entering the values manually. This 
type of error dialog is only generated 
if the user has entered a value below 
zero, a value above one hundred and instead of number has 
entered an alphabetic character. If the value is below zero, it 
means that the government should pay the user, which is not 
real; if the value is above one hundred that means that the 
whole salary and more should go for the government, which 
is also not real. When a character is entered as a value, the 
error dialog is also generated, because a positive number is 
required as a value.. 
C. 
Testing the University staff salary 
This test is performed to determine whether the values are 
successfully downloaded and correctly displayed into the 
application. When the user enters the application section for 
calculating the University staff salary, the values are 
automatically downloaded if there is available internet 
connection. If there is no Internet connection, the user is 
notified that he needs to connect to the internet in order to 
calculate the salary. If the “Calculate” button is pressed when 
the values are not downloaded the user is going to receive 
notification that the value cannot be zero. If no value is 
returned the application is considering that the value is zero. If 
the application is connected to the Internet the values are 
downloaded, parsed and added into the spinner. Now, the user 
can calculate the salary according to the downloaded values. 
If the checkbox “Sick leave” is marked, 70 % of the salary is 
calculated according to the Law regulations. 
V. 
QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE (QOE) OF MOBILE 
COMPUTING 
Quality of Service (QoS) refers to the technical operational 
aspects of a service, such as time to support services, capacity, 
and transport. Quality of Experience (QoE) measures the 
difference between what users expected and what they 
actually received. Using the QoE is beneficial to estimate the 
perception of the user about the quality of a particular service 
and it depends on the customer’s satisfaction in terms of 
usability, accessibility, retaining ability and integrity of using 
specific service [13]. QoE means overall acceptability of an 
application or service, as perceived subjectively by the end-
user and represents multidimensional subjective concept that 
is not easy to evaluate (Figure 4). In our work, we have used 
QoE evaluation in order to measure the quality of the mobile 
application usage. 
Figure 2. Gross Salary test 
result. 
Figure 3. Settings Panel test 
result. 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
 
The results presented in the following chart were obtained 
according the Quality of Experience evaluation performed 
with the University staff. The application is tested and 
evaluated by different scenarios. The survey questions were 
answered by a group of representatives of the University staff 
that participated in the Android application implementation 
locally (UniSal) and using Web Services (UniSal Web) as 
well. Analyzing the answers from the Mobile application 
implementation using Web Services has provided with the 
summary given in histogram presented in Figure 5. 
The first concept evaluation was the quality of the 
Graphical User Interface of the Android application. By the  
 
observation the following things can be concluded: 76 % of 
the University staff participants concluded that the graphical 
design of the Web application was Android consistent and 
easy to use; they were supportive about the design and 
suggest the idea for the colors to be according to the 
University colors. 
The second evaluation concept was Usability of the 
Android application. As presented in Figure 5, 84 % of the 
University staff concluded that the application is very 
efficient and usable because it is Web based application and 
all necessary information for calculating the salary is 
downloaded automatically. 
The third evaluation scenario was concerned with the 
Efficiency and Time Saving.  96 % of the University staff 
concluded that by using this application time is saved when 
calculating the salary, because all the information is 
downloaded from the Internet, so energy, time, and money are 
saved. It is an efficient mobile application, while 56% were 
declaring the efficiency of UniSal Android application which 
is not Web oriented.  
86 % of the University staff concluded that it is easy to 
focus to the Web-oriented Android application. The other 
66% were focusing on the UniSal, local server supported 
application. 
Most of the users were satisfied with the Web-oriented 
mobile application, its usability, efficiency and availability 
referring to the Web Services users and of course, Cloud 
connection possibility providing to the application. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The Android UniSal Web application is divided into two 
sections. These are calculating the Gross and the Net Salary 
for the University staff. The application has the functionality 
that allows the user to update the contributions if they have 
been changed according to the new Law regulations. The user 
can change the following contributions: PDI, health 
insurance, contributions, personal tax and personal income. 
If the user makes mistake inserting the contributions, the 
application generates error log so that the user can fix the 
contributions. The application allows the user of to check 
whether the employee had sick leave in order to calculate the 
salary. To ensure that the application is working according to 
the inserted parameters the application has passed couple of 
tests scenarios - tests for University staff gross and net salary 
calculation, tests for the Setting Panel and the menu of 
contributions, entering unreal numbers in order to check 
whether the application will accept the inputs or it will 
generate error log to the user.  
The mobile web application presented in this work 
proposed an original, efficient way of managing the 
documentation in an institution. Our approach improves the 
Quality of Experience (QoE); provides the users all necessary 
resources and performances, which refers to a user-friendly 
mobile application; web services oriented, evaluated by QoE, 
referring the quality of the graphical user interface, usability, 
efficiency and time saving. 
By using the mobile cloud computing connection 
possibility of this Android application, as a future work, more 
advantages would be provided, such as flexibility, portability 
and scalability that where obstacles of the mobile devices so 
far. By observing the QoE survey, the advantages from using 
this application have significantly increased users’ attention. 
Possibility of mobile computing technology has provided 
improvement in the process of Android Web application 
development in the direction of increasing the quality of 
services.  
The application presented in this work is developed by 
using the graphical components provided from the Android 
API. The key graphical components for this application are 
the Action Bar and the Fragment implementation. The user 
does not need to have a special background for salary 
calculation i.e. the salary is calculated simply by clicking one 
button. All the necessary information required for calculating 
the salary is downloaded automatically from the Web Server. 
In time, the application would require hardware with higher 
performance, and other APIs to work faster and to process the 
information. By using the cloud connection, this would not be 
Figure 4. Relation between QoS & QoE. 
Figure 5. Comparison of QoE results in %. 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
a problem since the Cloud provider allows using different 
plans Virtual Machines and APIs for the application. As part 
of our future work, we are developing an application with 
Cloud connection. The “Brain Application” which is handling 
and processing the request is Java EE application and it will 
be uploaded into the Cloud. By using this model and 
infrastructure it allows us to enlarge our work in different 
technologies and creating more complex and more useful 
options to the user, such as iOS integration, Windows Mobile 
integration, creating suitable desktop application. Some of the 
additional options are the following: Employee Management 
(adding, 
removing 
and 
updating 
employees), 
Salary 
Management (creating, removing and updating the salaries), 
Salary Calculation for certain employee.  
We believe that these Web-oriented configurations of 
mobile applications will be especially beneficial for 
universities and their academic and administrative staff, by 
promoting the advantages from using such an application in 
terms of saving energy, time, and money. 
VII. 
ADVANTAGES AND FUTURE WORK 
The Android UniSal Web application could be improved 
in terms of using Android 4.0, which has new features that are 
still upgrading and new features are coming, such as NFC 
system, which allows the smartphones’ users to unlock cars, 
pay for parking bills, pay the food into a restaurant and the 
most common usage is transferring images by just touching 
the smartphone. With this functionality, this application in the 
future can be used as a check-in card into some institutions or 
to calculate the salary by just touching the phone of the 
employer and the phone of the employee. By using the cloud 
services in the future, and the proper security issues that 
Android 4.0 delivers, the information of the employees can be 
stored on cloud database and the employer can analyze the 
work of his employees from his phone while he is on his way 
to work. An interesting Security concept for this application 
given by the unlocking the app with face recognition unlock 
system that is integrated into Android 4.0 and higher. The 
employer who is using the app can set a security lock from his 
face and he will be the only person who can load the 
application, calculate the salary or analyze the work of the 
employee and much more. This mobile application will be 
easily considered as an adjustable content for Content Centric 
Network (CCN) and Information Centric Networks (ICN) 
approach, aiming to achieve efficient and reliable distribution 
of 
the 
content 
by 
providing 
general 
platform 
for 
communication services which refers to a part of our future 
work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Morril, “Announcing the Android 1.0 SDK,” Release 1, Android 
Developers Blog, 2008, http://android-
developers.blogspot.com/2008/09/announcing-android-10-sdk-release-
1.html, [Retrieved: May, 2014] 
[2] Ice 
Cream 
Sandwich 
(n.d.) 
In 
Developers, 
http://developer.android.com/about/versions/android-4.0-
highlights.html, [Retrieved: May, 2014] 
[3] P. Alto, “Google’s Android becomes the world’s leading smart phone 
platform,” Canalys, 2011, 
http://www.canalys.com/newsroom/google%E2%80%99s- android-
becomes-world%E2%80%99s-leading-smart-phone-platform, 
[Retrieved: May, 2014] 
[4] Health Insurance Fund, “Instructions for the manner of calculating 
contributions for compulsory Health Insurance, according to the 
amendments of the Health Insurance Law,” 2007. 
[5] Ministry of Finance, “Instructions for the implementation of the concept 
for calculation and payment of the gross salary of the employees in the 
institutions - budget beneficiaries,” 2009. 
[6] Public Revenue Office of the Republic of Macedonia, “Gross salary,” 
2013. 
[7] Public Revenue Office of the Republic of Macedonia, “Calculation of 
salary,” 2013. 
[8] G. 
Allen, 
 
“Beginning 
Android 
4 
Apress,” 
2012, 
http://www.apress.com/9781430239840, [Retrieved: May, 2014] 
[9] E. 
Burnette, 
“Hello, 
Android: 
Introducing 
Google's 
Mobile 
Development 
Platform 
(Pragmatic 
Programmers),” 
Pragmatic 
Bookshelf: Third Edition, Released: August 4, 2010. 
[10] Salary 
Bot 
(n.d.) 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=salaryCalculator.salaryCa
lc, [Retrieved: May, 2014] 
[11] PayCheck 
(n.d.) 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=salary.calculat, 
[Retrieved: May, 2014]  
[12] Quick Wage (n.d.) 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.cwesoftware.salary, 
[Retrieved: May, 2014] 
[13] W. Wu, A. Arefin, R. Rivas, K. Nahrstedt, R. M. Sheppard, and Z. 
Yang, “Quality of Experience in Distributed Interactive Multimedia 
Environments: Toward a Theoretical Framework,” MM '09 Proceedings 
of the 17th ACM international conference on Multimedia, October, 
2009, pp. 481-490, DOI: 10.1145/1631272.1631338. 
[14] MySQL Official Site (n.d.) Retrieved from http://www.mysql.com/, 
[Retrieved: May, 2014] 
[15] JSON Official Site (n.d.) Retrieved from http://json.org/, [Retrieved: 
May, 2014]  
[16] PhP Official Site (n.d.) Retrieved from http://www.php.net/, [Retrieved: 
May, 2014]  
 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

