Performance Improvement of Colored Optical Packet Switching
Thanks to Time Slot Sharing
Amira Kamli
Tulin Atmaca
and Catherine Lepers
Samovar, Telecom SudParis,
CNRS, University of Paris-Saclay
Telephone: +33 (0)1 60 76 40 40
Artur Rataj
Institute of Theoretical and Applied
Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences
Email: arturrataj@gmail.com
Djamel Amar
Institut Mines-Telecom, Atlantique
Bretagne-Pays de la Loire, Brest, France
Email: djamel.amar@imt-atlantique.fr
Abstract—N-GREEN is a cost attractive optical network which
uses coloured optical packets. Its basic component is a ring of
novel overdimensioned switch/router nodes, which promises low
latency, making it interesting for applications with strict latency
requirements like 5G. Nevertheless, it suffers from a low efﬁciency
of resources usage, especially when it is used in the Unicast
mode popular in the metro aggregation. Here, we try to ensure a
better use of network resources by proposing an alternate packet
management and transmission method referred to as Ssh-time
which could be used in both the Unicast mode and the Broadcast-
and-Select (B&S) one. We show by simulation that the proposed
method improves not only the resources efﬁciency in case of a
metro-aggregation network, but also decreases the mean access
delay.
Keywords–optical
networks;
coloured
optical
packets;
N-
GREEN; Time Slot Sharing; slotted ring.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The optical packet switching technology has been identiﬁed
as substantial for an improvement of data rate, transparency of
a modulation format, ﬁne switching granularity and efﬁcient
bandwidth utilization [1]. On the other hand, such optical inter-
faces are very expensive and power-hungry which limits their
applications; this is why the N-GREEN [2] architecture is pro-
posed. It provides streamlined, cost-optimised interfaces [3][4]
which use 10 ﬁxed wavelengths yet without the expensive add-
ones like accordable lasers, a possibility of an independent
assignment or routing of the wavelengths. In applications like
the X-haul networks or 5G where the majority of trafﬁc is
real-time [5]; N-GREEN is typically overdimensioned. It can
be even more simpliﬁed by removing any substantial buffer
management as well as processing and thus guarantee a very
low latency. This is possible, for example, if there are up to
10 Ethernet cards of 10 Gbit each connected to a single N-
GREEN ring whenever the network operates in B&S mode.
Nonetheless, due to its reduced cost in terms of price and
energy, N-GREEN seems to be attractive also in a number of
other segments of network that are less demanding in latency
where resource efﬁciency is important namely in metro aggre-
gation network [6]. Some existing proposals of enhancements
of N-GREEN node use input buffers which would improve its
performance. Among them we ﬁnd Ssh-wavelength [7] which
proposes to take advantage of the network overdimensioning in
order to reduce the latency and increase the network efﬁciency.
The limit condition of this method is that it is restricted to
the B&S mode. However, in some cases, we need to use the
Unicast mode in order to not ﬂood a whole ring by a local
trafﬁc (e.g., two neighbouring nodes in a machine-to-machine
trafﬁc). On the other hand, within this mode, different queues
should be considered for each destination, which imply that
grooming at the source node is not allowed and thus not only
low efﬁciency of resources but also high latency is resulted
[7].
For all these reasons and for a further improvement of the
network, we propose a method of slot ﬁlling referred to as
Ssh-time which could be used for both the Unicast and the
B&S mode.
The article is organized as follows. Section
II discusses
basic traits of an N-GREEN ring. In Section III, Ssh-time is
elaborated and our simulation setup is presented. Section IV
and Section V show performance improvements thanks to Ssh-
time in terms of container ﬁlling and insertion delay.
II.
ARCHITECTURE
In the metro and aggregation networks [8] and also small
sized data centres, physical ring topology is often used. A
single network consists of two parallel rings, one for each
direction. It could be used both for data transmissions or
which could be used both for data transmission or one ring
for transmission and the other for protection. Let us assume
that both rings are used for data transmissions. In each ring we
dispose of x ﬁxed size slot of size S = 12500 bytes each, 1250
bytes per a wavelength. A slot passes a node in 1 µs which
gives a transfer rate of 100 Gbps. There is no arbitrariness in
the choice of a carrier wavelength in a single node since we
dispose of ﬁxed lasers. A typically 10 Gbps Ethernet card emits
or receives trafﬁc which is converted to/from an optical form
by a ﬁxed shift register. Each 10 µs of packets in the electronic
form can ﬁt into 1µs of an optical signal of all 10 wavelengths,
as illustrated in Figure 1. An additional wavelength is reserved
for network control as data and control information are sent
separately. This control channel is regenerated at each inter-
mediate node to guarantee in particular a self synchronization
of the network. A speciﬁcity of N-GREEN is that there is
only a single semiconductor optical gate/ampliﬁer (SOA) [9]
for all wavelengths (see Figure 1), which stays in contrast
to a separate SOA for every wavelength in the much more
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

expensive POADM technology [10]. This means that a slot
can only be cleared in its totality, when all the wavelengths
are either transferred or suppressed.
10μs
copper
1μs
amp
gate
10μs
1μs
Figure 1: A symbolic presentation of an NGREEN node connected
to a 10Gbps Ethernet.
An N-GREEN network includes two types of nodes: those
on the ring termed bridge nodes and the node that closes the
ring by an electrical bridge termed optical switch node. Transit
trafﬁc bypasses intermediate nodes in a transparent way, i.e., it
does not need to be demodulated inside the nodes’ electronic
structures. Indeed an optical switch node connects the ring to
other rings where Optical Electrical Optical(OEO) conversions
occur at the level of this node. The architecture in question is
shown in Figure2 We investigate the performance within the
two distribution modes: Unicast, where slots are used by data
packets sent to a single other node, and B&S where slots can
be used by packets sent to a set of other nodes. In the former
mode, a slot has a single destination and that receiver node
extracts its corresponding packets and releases the slot. In the
B&S mode, a slot may have parts with multiple destinations
and as it can only be cleared in its entirety; it may carry an
information which is no longer needed. Note that the trafﬁc
exchanged between two nodes uses the direction which does
not pass by the switch node to avoid OEO conversions and
reduce the energy consumption. As packets crossing the switch
will be dropped, a special routing is needed where node I sends
a packet to node J clockwise if J ≤ I, or counter-clockwise
if J ≥ I as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Optical ring topology.
III.
SSH-TIME AND CONSIDERED SCENARIOS
In Ssh-time, each node always sends its packets in a sub
slot over all the 10 wavelengths. A partially ﬁlled slot can
be reused by another node which will place its packets over
the 10 wavelengths but after the used part of the slot, yet a
guard time must be added in between. This margin or gap is
required for lasers and other electronic components to be re-
adjusted, and to avoid collisions with the fragment already in
the ﬁber. Technically, the guard time consists of zero bits of a
minimal duration of 32.8 ns per sub slot. In our simulation, the
slot is divided into 4 sub slots in order not to lose more than
18% of its capacity. Figure 3 presents an example of a shared
slot encoding according to the two different methods: without
and with Ssh-time. The trafﬁc is assumed to be uniformly
distributed: packets destinations are randomly chosen with
the same probability. Packet size is ﬁxed at 125 bytes which
represents an average Ethernet packet size. Packets arrival to
nodes are assumed to follow a Poisson process. Note that the
packet Loss Rate (PLR) criterion is not considered since no
packet loss is allowed in the overdimensioned network. We
simulated time division multiplexing (TDM) [11] in which
containers are sent upon a regular interval of time (e.g., 10µs)
regardless of current network state and container ﬁlling level.
As for the based-timer mechanism [12], container sending is
delayed until the expiration of a previously ﬁxed delay (timer
value in T20=20µs, T30=30µs or T40=40µs), unless it is com-
pletely ﬁlled before timer expiration. In the following we set
timer values between T20 and T40. These values were chosen
for two reasons: ﬁrstly, to avoid an excessive latency since
obviously increasing this very value increases subsequently
the latency latency, and secondly, whenever a node has enough
packets to ﬁll the slot, Ssh-time has almost no interest. Adding
to that, in our case timer values have been chosen according to
the applied transmission mode respectively 20µs, 40µs for the
Unicast mode and 10µs, 20µs for the B&S mode. Contrary
to the B&S mode, the Unicast one requires more packets to
fully ﬁll the slot hence, we attribute it bigger timer value.
Figure 3: Packet insertion methods.
IV.
RESULTS WITHIN UNICAST MODE
The results for Unicast are presented hereafter where
Figure 4 and Figure 5 show network load as a function
respectively of a mean access delay and the container ﬁlling
for all scenarios. Note that SSh T20 and SSh T40 stand
respectively for 20 and 40 µs timer based mechanism when
applying Ssh-time. We pinpoint that the container ﬁlling ratio
has a value between 0 (entirely empty) and 1 (entirely full)
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

and it is equal to the ratio between the useful data (inserted
packets) size and the container size which is in our study equal
to 12500 bytes (10 µs at 10 Gbps). While the mean access
delay represents the average waiting time of a packet before
being inserted into the ring.
The access delay of the ﬁrst inserted packet in the container
is equal to 10 µs. Within TDM insertion method, the mean
access delay has to be independent from the system load. When
ρ = 0.9, the access delay of the inserted packets follows an
arithmetic progression with common difference on packets’
duration (100 ns). The sum of an arithmetic sequence is:
Sn = (n + 1) × (U0 + Un)
2
(1)
where n is the number of terms and U0 and Un are respectively
the ﬁrst and the last terms. Let A deﬁne the mean access delay
at ρ = 0.9:
A = 101
100 × (100 ns + 10µs)
2
= 5.2µs.
(2)
As expected, the mean access delay is almost constant for
TDM insertion method, and has a value between 5.2 and 5.8
µs. Obviously, the TDM mode and one-aside timer 40 (i.e,
T40) present respectively the biggest and lowest access delay.
However, the slot ﬁlling rate remains too low mostly within
the TDM mode. It is due to the fact that the packets generated
during 10 µs will be put and transported in 9 different slots.
Therefore, in order to increase the resources use efﬁciency
by avoiding sending containers with very low occupancy rate;
different values of timer has been considered (i.e, T20 and
T40). As expected, increasing the timer value signiﬁcantly
improves the container ﬁlling yet at the expense of the access
delay. This is due to packets clustering that engenders their
waiting until the timer is elapsed. Therefore the timer duration
should be carefully chosen to achieve a good trade-off between
latency and container ﬁlling. As seen in Figures 4 and 5, the
latency and container ﬁlling problems arise mostly when the
system is not overloaded within the scenarios without Ssh-
time. This is caused by the fact that the timer expires before
the slot is fully ﬁlled even in the case of the high load.
Thanks to Ssh-time, each node sends its packets to one of
the other 9 nodes (division by (nnodes − 1)), but in addition
to the primary node to which the slot corresponds, three other
nodes can share the slot, so during a slot time, we may have
up to three emitters (multiplication by (nsubslot − 1) where
nsubslot represents the number of sub slots considered as
represented in Figure3). Thus, as pointed out in Figure 4 and
Figure 5, Ssh-time improves signiﬁcantly the container ﬁlling
and therefore the mean access delay, more particularly, for
lower and medium load cases by 20% compared to scenarios
without sharing.
It is also important to note that for Ssh-time , in the case
of a low load, we does not improve too much the latency
however we consider it a beneﬁcial method since it improves
the resources use efﬁciency by 30% as demonstrated in
Figure 5. Applying Ssh-time using larger timer values, can
improve the latency and slot ﬁlling rate for small load values
but degrades its performance when the load is big compared
with scenarios without Ssh-time. This is due to the guard
time that causes a loss of resources.
0µsec
5µsec
10µsec
15µsec
20µsec
25µsec
30µsec
35µsec
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Latency
Load
TDM unicast
T20
T40
SSh T20
SSh T40
Figure 4: Mean Access delay within Unicast transmission mode for
scenarios with and without Ssh-time
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Container ﬁlling
Load
TDM unicast
T20
T40
SSh T20
SSh T40
Figure 5: Container ﬁlling within Unicast transmission mode for
scenarios with and without Ssh-time
V.
RESULTS WITHIN B&S MODE
The results of the BS mode are presented below in Figure 6
and Figure 7 where SSh TDM and SSh T20 stands respectively
for TDM and 20 µs timer based mechanism applying for both
Ssh-time. Within TDM B&S, the packets gathered during 10µs
will be put in the worst case into two different slots which
makes the slot ﬁlling rate less than the system load, ρ. As for
the Unicast mode, an increase in the timer value increases the
slot ﬁlling ratio and does the same for the latency as shown
in Figure 6. To increase this ﬁlling without affecting latency,
we apply Ssh-time to the B&S mode, which causes the said
bandwidth loss because of the guard time and thus the slot
is considered fully ﬁlled at 0,8. At ρ = 0.9, we have almost
not only the same ﬁlling rate as in the case without Ssh-time
but also the same latency: the principal emitter node to which
corresponds the slot has sufﬁcient packets to entirely ﬁll the
container and the slot sharing does not occur. As ρ decreases,
the ﬁlling rate increases. Indeed, the principal emitter node
does not entirely ﬁll the container, as such other nodes will
be able to share the slot. A next sharing node will begin by
sending its ﬁrst buffered packets till ﬁlling the container. Since
those packets were buffered at the same time or before, their
access delay is the same compared to the mean delay of the
principal emitter packets. As a result, the mean access delay
of all the sent packets during a shared slot is a little less.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Regarding the slot ﬁlling rate, as seen in Figure 7, Ssh-time
improves the slot ﬁlling rate but not as expected since we
will have at most three nodes (nsubslot − 1) that can add their
packets in the slot.
0µsec
5µsec
10µsec
15µsec
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Latency
Load
TDM B&S
T20
SSh TDM
SSh T20
Figure 6: Mean Access delay within B&S mode for scenarios with
and without Ssh-time.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Container ﬁlling
Load
TDM B&S
T20
SSh TDM
SSh T20
Figure 7: Container ﬁlling within B&S mode for scenarios with and
without Ssh-time.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have presented the speciﬁties of the N-
GREEN architecture compared to legacy existing solutions.
We were interested in performance analysis of the metro part
of the network. Within a slotted ring architecture, we have
proposed and simulated Ssh-time approach for Unicast and
B&S distribution modes. In conclusion, our approach Ssh-
time improves the performance in terms of latency and the
utilisation of resources especially for low and medium network
loads reinforcing as such N-GREEN advantages in terms of
cost and energy consumption reductions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by ANR through the N-GREEN
project (ANR-15-CE25-0009). The authors also thank all the
partners of the N-GREEN project for their fruitful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Guillemot, M. Renaud, P. Gambini, C. Janz, I. Andonovic,
R. Bauknecht, B. Bostica, M. Burzio, F. Callegati, M. Casoni et al.,
“Transparent optical packet switching: The european acts keops project
approach,” Journal of lightwave technology, vol. 16, no. 12, 1998, pp.
2117–2134.
[2]
C. Ware and D. Chiaroni, “Towards WDM slot switching for aggre-
gation access and metropolitan applications: the anr n-green project,”
in Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), 2017 19th International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–4.
[3]
A. Triki, A. Gravey, P. Gravey, and M. Morvan, “Long-term capex evo-
lution for slotted optical packet switching in a metropolitan network,”
in Optical Network Design and Modeling (ONDM), 2017 International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[4]
D. Chiaroni and B. Uscumlic, “Potential of wdm packets,” in 2017
International Conference on Optical Network Design and Modeling
(ONDM), May 2017, pp. 1–6.
[5]
M. A. Lema, A. Laya, T. Mahmoodi, M. Cuevas, J. Sachs, J. Mark-
endahl, and M. Dohler, “Business case and technology analysis for 5g
low latency applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 5917–5935.
[6]
MEF, “Implementation Agreement, MEF 23.2 Carrier Ethernet Class of
Service Phase 3,” 2016.
[7]
D. Amar, C. Lepers, F. Gillet, M. Lourdiane, C. Ware, and D. Chiaroni,
“WDM slot sharing of colored optical packets for latency improvement
and class of service differentiation,” in Transparent Optical Networks
(ICTON), 2017 19th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp.
1–4.
[8]
C. V. N. Index, “The zettabyte era–trends and analysis,” Cisco white
paper, 2017.
[9]
M. Renaud, D. Keller, N. Sahri, S. Silvestre, D. Prieto, Dorgeuille et al.,
“SOA-based optical network components,” in Electronic Components
and Technology Conference, 2001. Proceedings., 51st.
IEEE, 2001,
pp. 433–438.
[10]
I. Popescu, “Evaluation of transparent optical multiplexing techniques in
transport networks,” Theses, T´el´ecom Bretagne ; Universit´e de Bretagne
Occidentale, Sep. 2015.
[11]
D. M. Spirit, A. D. Ellis, and P. E. Barnsley, “Optical time division
multiplexing: Systems and networks,” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 32, no. 12, 1994, pp. 56–62.
[12]
T. Eido, D. T. Nguyen, and T. Atmaca, “Packet ﬁlling optimization
in multiservice slotted optical packet switching man networks,” in
Telecommunications, 2008. AICT’08. Fourth Advanced International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 221–226.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

