MME Support for M2M Communications using Network Function Virtualization
Pilar Andres-Maldonado, Pablo Ameigeiras, Jonathan Prados-Garzon, Juan Jose Ramos-Munoz
and Juan Manuel Lopez-Soler
Department of Signal Theory, Telematics, and Communications
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
Email: pam91@correo.ugr.es, {pameigeiras, jpg, jjramos, juanma}@ugr.es
Abstract—The use of massive Machine to Machine (M2M)
communications on future mobile networks may lead to a
signaling trafﬁc explosion. Small Data Transmission (SDT) proce-
dure appears as an efﬁcient option for M2M small data transfer
in Long Term Evolution (LTE). However, this procedure entails
more processing load in the Mobility Management Entity (MME).
Moreover, the ﬁxed capacity in current LTE core hardware-
based infrastructure can limit the scalability of this solution. To
overcome this, we propose to: i) virtualize hardware dedicated
MME (vMME) using Network Function Virtualization (NFV),
ii) prioritize the vMME processing of Human to Human (H2H)
signaling messages by means of priority queues, and iii) use
the Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) ﬁeld to identify
priorities. The results show that, by increasing the number of
NFV instances, the vMME capacity can be raised to manage the
massive M2M SDT requests. Additionally, they show that the
delay increase of H2H control plane procedures, caused by M2M
communications, can be mitigated. Therefore, we conclude that
our solution eases the deployment of massive M2M communi-
cations in future mobile networks.
Keywords–NFV; 5G; LTE; Machine-to-Machine.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The foreseen increase of Machine to Machine (M2M)
communications brings a new signaling and data burden to
mobile networks. In Long Term Evolution (LTE), the trans-
mission of data from an idle User Equipment (UE) requires
the use of the Service Request procedure to allocate UE’s
network resources. This procedure implies the download of the
UE’s context to the eNodeB (eNB) and bearer establishment.
Unfortunately, most of M2M communications involve small
and occasional data transmissions. This leads to numerous
release and reallocation resource procedures which create an
excessive increase of signaling load. In the present paper, we
concentrate on massive and delay tolerant M2M communi-
cations that transmit infrequent and small data packets.
One efﬁcient option to convey this type of data packets is
Small Data Transmission (SDT), a dedicated procedure with
an optimized sequence of LTE messages [1]. SDT uses the
pre-established Non Access Stratum (NAS) security context to
transfer one IP packet as NAS signaling without establishing
Radio Resource Connection (RRC) security. At ﬁrst, the UE
and the eNB establish the RRC connection to send the small
uplink data onto the initial NAS uplink message to the Mobility
Management Entity (MME). Then, the MME uses the UE
security context previously stored to authenticate and decrypt
the message, and forms the GPRS Tunneling Protocol - User
data (GTPU) packet with the information obtained, to send it
to the Serving Gateway (S-GW), as shown in Figure 1.
The adoption of the SDT procedure to convey packet
data transmissions from M2M communications would imply
a massive increase of the signaling load processing. The
Radio Access Network (RAN) will experiment a lack of radio
resources due to the large number of simultaneous UEs trying
to establish the RRC connection with the eNB [2]. In the core,
where we focus on this paper, the MME’s capacity will need to
be increased to handle new functionalities imposed [1]. This,
combined with the current high exposition of the MME to
signaling in LTE [3], and the ﬁxed capacity of current core
LTE hardware-based infrastructure, can limit the scalability of
the SDT solution.
To overcome this limitation, Network Function Virtualiza-
tion (NFV) provides a novel framework to deploy network
services onto virtualized servers. NFV beneﬁts include, among
others, reduced CAPEX and OPEX investments, openness of
platforms, scalability and ﬂexibility or shorter development
cycles [4].
In this paper, we propose a new solution to mitigate the
incurred signaling overload on the MME. The solution is com-
posed of three points. The ﬁrst point consists of replacing con-
eNB
MME
UE
S-GW/
P-GW
b) RRC Connection Request
(S-TMSI, small data indicator)
RRC Connection Setup
c) RRC Connection Setup
Complete (NAS PDU, release
ind)
d) Initial UE message (NAS
PDU, release ind)
g) Downlink Data Notification
(Bearer ID, UDP/IP response
packet)
h) Downlink Information
Transfer (NAS PDU)
f) UE Context Release
e) GTP-U (TEID, UDP/IP packet)
small data indicator inhibits eNB sending
Measurment Configuration to the UE
h) Downlink NAS Transport
(NAS PDU)
f) RRC Connection Release
alt. A
alt. B
a) small data capability exchange
l) Downlink Data Notification Ack
Figure 1. SDT procedure sequence [1].
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

ventional hardware dedicated MME entities by NFV instances,
called virtualized MME (vMME). Our results show that, by in-
creasing the number of NFV instances, the vMME capacity can
be raised to manage the massive M2M SDT requests. However,
our results also show that, as the signaling messages treatment
of the vMME is equal for Human to Human (H2H) and M2M,
the addition of more vMME NFV instances cannot always
avoid the rise of the vMME response time for H2H procedures.
The second point consists of prioritizing the vMME processing
of H2H signaling messages over signaling messages of delay
tolerant M2M communications by means of priority queues
in the NFV instances. The third point consists of using the
Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) classes to identify
the priority of the signaling packets in the control plane. Our
results show that the increase in delay experienced by H2H
signaling trafﬁc, when M2M communications are included, can
be alleviated by adding priorities in the control plane, at the
expense of decrease M2M signaling priority, which does not
imply a critical penalty for the M2M delay tolerant applications
considered here.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the
system model. Section III describes the proposed signaling
management approach. In Section IV, we show the results of
the simulations. Finally, Section V draws the main conclusions
of the paper.
II.
SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a LTE network, with a MME, which handles
UEs control procedures requests. We assume two types of
communications: H2H and M2M. The H2H UEs have ses-
sions, which consist of activity periods separated by readings
time periods. During activity periods, the H2H UE generates
trafﬁc, according to the UE’s application running. For M2M
communications, we consider low cost/low power consumption
massive M2M communications, which we assume that send
occasional and small data transmissions, and that are delay
tolerant [5]. For simplicity, we consider only two types of
M2M UEs: M2M high priority (HP) devices and M2M low
priority (LP). This could be generalized for more types of
M2M UE devices.
The H2H and M2M UEs data transmissions trigger control
procedures in the network. Each control procedure involves
several signaling messages between different control plane
entities. From all control procedures of LTE, we focus on the
ones which generate more signaling load on MME entities [6],
see Table I. For each procedure and message, we model the
processing tasks to be performed by the MME. We assume
that M2M UEs small data transmissions are handled by SDT
procedure, as shown in Figure 1. For simplicity, we focus on
M2M uplink small data transmissions, since SDT procedure
is similar in downlink transmissions. We assume H2H UEs
move following a ﬂuid-ﬂow mobility model, while M2M UEs
are stationary devices.
III.
PROPOSAL
Our solution is composed by three main points, explained
in the following subsections.
A. Virtualized MME
The ﬁrst point of our proposal consists of replacing hard-
ware dedicated MME entity by virtualized NFV instances of
MME and scale the number of instances according to the MME
TABLE I. CONSIDERED CONTROL PROCEDURES
Com.
Type
Control
procedure
MME pkts
processed
Used to
H2H
UE Triggered
Service request
3
Send new data from the idle UE
to the network and the UE does
not have available resources.
eNB Triggered
S1 Release
3
Release UE’s resources due to
its inactivity. UE’s state changes
from connected to idle.
X2-Based
Handover
2
Switch the bearers end point
from the source to the target
eNB due to UE’s mobility.
M2M
SDT procedure
1
Send small data packets from
the idle M2M UE to the network
and the M2M UE does not
have available resources.
Figure 2. Architecture reference model for 1:N mapping [7].
load. Our solution is based on the 1:N architecture extracted
from [7], represented in Figure 2. This mapping option is based
on the web services paradigm and decomposes each LTE core
entity into multiple elements, which combined form a virtual
component pool. These elements are classiﬁed in three types: i)
the front end (FE), which is responsible of the communication
between entities, ii) a stateless virtual component (W), which
implements the virtualized network functions, and iii) the
state database (SDB), which stores all UE’s session state and
allows a stateless design. External entities will see the virtual
component pool as a single node. This enables scale out/in of
elements of the pool without impacting other nodes. However,
synchronization issues appears due to the communication
between the SDB and the different virtual elements inside the
entity, which can be solved serializing the access to the SDB,
or between different nodes of the core to perform the control
procedure, which could increase processing delay [7].
We model the architecture of the virtualized MME as
shown in Figure 3. This model is based on [8][9] and it is
composed of the following entities:
•
Arrival process of signaling messages: H2H or M2M
devices which generate trafﬁc that triggers control
procedures requests in the network. The signaling
messages needed to perform these procedures are
processed by vMME NFV instances.
•
Distributor: Acts as a load balancer between vMME
NFV instances. It distributes signaling messages de-
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

pending on the average workload of each instance.
•
Database: Shared database for vMME NFV instances
which is accessed during each transaction. The
database stores protocol and UE’s state.
•
vMME NFV instances: NFV instances which virtu-
alize MME functionalities. We suppose that vMME
NFV instances are identical. Each control procedure
needs a different number of messages, which can
involve other core entities not considered here to
perform it. To improve NFV processing, the con-
trol procedures are splitted into request and response
transactions. The protocol and UE’s context is kept
in the shared database. This allows the vMME NFV
instances to retake the state of a procedure after the
reception of a new signaling message and continue
with it.
•
Egress switch: Signaling messages output switch.
We model the distributor, the shared database and the
egress switch as single processor queues, and the vMME NFV
instances as a M/G/m queueing systems.
We denote S the service time needed for each vMME
NFV instance to process the signaling message. S is a random
variable that depends on the transactions needed to process
the message. The average service time for the messages of
the procedures in Table I are extracted from [8]. For SDT
procedure, we assume an average service time of 1.05 · 10−4s.
The shared database is accessed during each transaction with
a probability p, as we consider every request processed by the
MME will need an access to the shared database, p = 1.0.
Let us deﬁne the mean vMME response time T as the time
required by the vMME to process a message and generate
the corresponding reply. The mean vMME response time is
composed of several factors: T D denote the mean response
time of the distributor node, T N FV denote the mean response
time of vMME NFV instances, T DB denote the processing
time of the shared database and TOS denote the egress switch
node processing time. So, T can be calculated as
T = T D + T N FV + T DB + TOS
(1)
In order to scale the capacity of the vMME according to the
load it has to process, we assume that the number of vMME
NFV instances m, used as a dimensioning criterion in our
results, is selected as expressed in (2), where T max represents
Figure 3. Virtualized MME model [8].
the maximum permitted mean vMME response time
m = min{M : T ≤ T max, M ∈ N}
(2)
An increase of signaling load on the MME caused by
M2M trafﬁc is to be compensated with an increase number
of vMME NFV instances. However, T is equal for H2H and
M2M, which implies that in certain situations, the addition
of more vMME NFV instances cannot avoid the rise of T
compared to scenarios without M2M trafﬁc involved.
B. Priority Queue Discipline
We propose to prioritize H2H signaling messages over
M2M signaling messages. The goal is mitigating the rise of
the mean vMME response time suffered by H2H procedures
due to the signaling overload generated by massive M2M
communications. For this purpose, we propose to organize
the signaling messages received by the vMME through non-
preemptive priority queues inside vMME NFV instances.
Messages belonging to same priority obey the ﬁrst-come
ﬁrst-served discipline. Then, signaling messages with higher
priority are served in the vMME NFV instance before others
with low priority. The corresponding vMME model is repre-
sented in Figure 4.
C. Priority Management
In LTE, signaling messages between a UE and a MME are
secured with NAS security context. To transfer these signaling
messages over the radio interface, the RRC protocol is used
between the UE and the eNB. When a UE wants to send a
NAS signaling message to the MME, the message is delivered
to the eNB as included in a RRC signaling message. Then, the
eNB sends the NAS signaling message contained in a S1AP
signaling message to the MME. Figure 5 shows the control
plane protocol stacks for mentioned LTE entities. As the eNB
cannot know the content of a NAS message, which holds useful
information to sort signaling messages sent to the MME, we
propose to use RRC Establishment cause in the eNB to discern
signaling messages priorities.
Current signaling trafﬁc over eNB-MME interface is
marked as high strict priority [11]. Therefore, it is mapped to
the Expedited Forwarding (EF) class in the DSCP ﬁeld of the
IP packet transporting the signaling message. As all signaling
trafﬁc is marked equally, the vMME cannot apply prioritized
queuing of the signaling messages before being processed by
the vMME NFV instances. We propose to use the DSCP ﬁeld
of the IP packet transporting the signaling message to discern
Figure 4. Proposed vMME system model.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 5. LTE control plane protocol stacks [10].
signaling trafﬁc from different types of communications. This
IP header ﬁeld is easier to analyze by FE elements due to it
is not required a deep packet inspection. By adding priorities
to the signaling trafﬁc, the vMME distributor can schedule the
control messages taking into account their priority. The DSCP
classes used in this paper are summarized in Table II.
Since the eNB is responsible for uplink packet marking,
the eNB will mark the IP datagram of the signaling messages
according to the UE’s RRC Establishment cause. Specially
for M2M communications, which use SDT procedure, the
RRC Establishment cause reported by the M2M UE when the
RRC connection is established in the SDT procedure will be
analyzed by the eNB to determine the DSCP class for the
M2M UE SDT signaling. For this, it will take advantage of
the possible values "small data" or "low priority small data",
as described in [1]. Other possible RRC Establishment cause
value to differentiate priorities in the signaling messages can
be "delay tolerant access", introduced within the release 10
version of the 3GPP speciﬁcations [12], and currently used if
the UE has been conﬁgured for "low priority NAS signalling".
IV.
EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the impact of using the SDT
procedure on the vMME mean response time. As authors of
[8], we generate procedure requests using NS-3 simulator [13].
The queue model presented in Section III is simulated using
the Matlab Simulink framework.
A. Experiment Setup
We evaluate three scenarios:
•
Scenario 1: M2M data trafﬁc is not conveyed by
the SDT procedure. The vMME processes signaling
messages generated only by H2H UEs.
•
Scenario 2: M2M data trafﬁc is conveyed by the SDT
procedure with no priorities. The vMME processes
signaling messages generated by H2H UEs and by
M2M UEs.
TABLE II. PRIORITY TREATMENT
Type of
signaling trafﬁc
RRC
Establishment Cause
DSCP class
Priority
H2H
Mo-signaling
EF
1
M2M HP devices
Small data
AF41
2
M2M LP devices
Low priority small data
AF31
3
•
Scenario 3: Similar to Scenario 2 but with prior-
ities. The vMME applies the prioritization scheme
presented in Section III.
1) H2H trafﬁc models: H2H communications use three
possible applications along their sessions: web browsing [14],
HTTP progressive video [15] and video calling [16]. At the
beginning of the session, one of these applications is selected.
Web browsing application download time of a session depends
on the web page size, the link data rate, and the time needed
for the web browser to parse the embedded objects of the web
page. HTTP progressive video application follows the Youtube
trafﬁc model, in which the download rate ranges from a initial
period of high downloading rate, to a constant limited rate after
this initial period. The number of downloaded video clips per
session is set to follow a geometric distribution [17]. Video
calling application generates a constant bit rate trafﬁc at 1.5
Mbps during the activity period duration.
2) M2M trafﬁc models: The M2M HP devices follow a
trafﬁc model extracted from [18], which is modeled as a
Markov Modulated Poisson Process, but without taking into
consideration the coordinated behavior for M2M devices. The
M2M LP devices follow a trafﬁc model based on [19], which
sends infrequent report transmissions.
Scenarios 2 and 3 have three M2M devices per each
H2H UE. We assume T max
= 3 ms. The main vMME
characteristics, and details of the trafﬁc models shown in Table
III, are extracted from [8].
B. Experimental Results
To show the impact of the inclusion of M2M communi-
cations, Figure 6 depicts the mean vMME response time versus
the number of H2H UEs for Scenarios 1 and 2. According to
Figure 6, the mean vMME response time increases exponen-
tially with the number of H2H UEs. When T = T max, a new
vMME NFV instance is added to the system, represented as a
new curve. The results for Scenario 2 show that, by increasing
m, the vMME’s capacity rises to manage the massive M2M
SDT requests. However, as T is equal for H2H and M2M UEs,
there are some ranges where the addition of more vMME NFV
instances cannot avoid the rise of T compared to Scenario 1
in which the M2M trafﬁc is not involved.
Figure 7 depicts the mean vMME response time versus
the number of H2H UEs for Scenarios 1 and 3. For almost the
entire considered range of the number of H2H UEs, the mean
vMME response time of H2H signaling messages in Scenario
3 is lower than in Scenario 1. That is, for almost the entire
considered range of the number of H2H UEs, the proposed
prioritized treatment of the signaling messages manages to
prevent the increase of the mean vMME response time in H2H
signaling trafﬁc caused by the processing of the M2M trafﬁc.
Furthermore, this prioritized treatment allows H2H UEs and
M2M HP devices signaling trafﬁc to reduce their exponential
signaling delay growth, at the expense of increase M2M LP
devices signaling trafﬁc delay, which reach a mean value of
9.65 ms. For delay tolerant M2M applications, this assumed
increase of the mean vMME response time for M2M LP
devices signaling trafﬁc does not imply a critical penalty.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we propose a new approach to handle
the foreseen increase of signaling trafﬁc in MME entities
due to massive M2M communications deployment, with no
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

TABLE III. TRAFFIC MODELS CHARACTERIZATION
Com. Type
Trafﬁc Type
Parameters
Statistical Characterization
H2H
(I AST =
1200 s
[20])
Web
browsing
(HTTP)
Papp = 0.74
Main Object Size
Truncated Lognormal Distribution:
µ=15.098
σ=4.390E-5
min=100Bytes max=6MBytes
Embedded Object Size
Truncated
Lognormal
Distribution:
µ=6.17
σ=2.36
min=50Bytes max=2MBytes
Number of Embedded Objects per Page
Truncated Pareto Distribution: mean=22 shape=1.1
Parsing Time
Exponential Distribution: mean=0.13seconds
Reading Time
Exponential Distribution: mean=30seconds
Number of pageviews per session
Geometric Distribution: p=0.893 mean=9.312
HTTP
progressive
video
Papp = 0.03
Video Encoding Rate
Uniform
distribution
with
ranges:
(2.5, 3.0)Mbps
/
(4.0,4.5)Mbps /
(12.5, 16.0)Mbps /
(20.0, 25.0)Mbps, for
equiprobable itags: 137 / 264 / 266 / 315 respectively.
Video Duration
Distribution extracted from [15]
Reading Time
Exponential Distribution: mean=30seconds
Number of videoviews per session
Geometric Distribution: p=0.6 mean=2.5
Video calling
Papp = 0.23
Call Holding Time
Pareto Distribution: k=-0.39 s=69.33 m=0
Number of calls per session
Constant = 1
M2M
M2M HP
Discretization time interval
∆T = 1 sec
Markov chain state transition matrix
P = *
,
1 − p
q
p
1 − q
+
-
where p = 6.75 × 10−5 and q = 1.47 ×
10−4
Markov chain state rates
λ1 = 0.0015 packets/s; λ2 = 0.065 packets/s
Packet Size
100 b
M2M LP
Mean arrival rate
Poisson Distribution: λ = 0.0167 packets/s
Packet Size
8 b
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
x 10
5
10
0
Number of H2H UEs
Mean vMME response time (ms)
 
 
Scenario 1: 
H2H
Scenario 2: 
H2H+M2M
Figure 6. vMME response time in Scenarios 1 and 2 (three M2M devices
per each H2H UE).
signiﬁcant penalty in H2H. Particularly, we propose to re-
place conventional hardware dedicated MME entities by NFV
(vMME) instances, as well as to prioritize the control plane
signaling trafﬁc with different DSCP classes. The reported
results have shown that giving priority to H2H trafﬁc can
mitigate the increase in delay experienced by H2H signaling
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x 10
5
10
0
10
1
Number of H2H UEs
Mean vMME response time (ms)
 
 
Scenario 1:
H2H
Scenario 3:
H2H+M2M w/ prio
  Priority 1:
  H2H traffic
  Priority 2:
  M2M HP devices
  Priority 3:
  M2M LP devices
Figure 7. vMME response time in Scenarios 1 and 3 (three M2M devices
per each H2H UE).
trafﬁc in H2H and M2M scenarios when delay tolerant M2M
communications are included. Therefore, we can conclude that
the proposed solution facilitates the massive deployment of
M2M communications in future mobile networks.
For the future work, we intend to incorporate further LTE
entities to the model. Apart from that, it could be interesting
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

to analyze priorities with bound queues, or possible NFV
overheads in the vMME instances proposed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially supported by the Spanish Ministry
of Economy and Competitiveness and the European Regional
Development Fund (project TIN2013-46223-P), and the Span-
ish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport (FPU grant
13/04833).
REFERENCES
[1]
Study on Machine-Type Communications (MTC) and other mobile data
applications communications enhancements, 3GPP TR 23.887 Rel 12
v12.0.0, 2013.
[2]
P. Andres-Maldonado, P. Ameigeiras, J. Prados-Garzon, J. J. Ramos-
Munoz, and J. M. Lopez-Soler, “Reduced M2M Signaling Communi-
cations in 3GPP LTE and Future 5G Cellular Networks,” Wireless Days
Conference (WD), March 2016.
[3]
Nokia
Siemens
Networks,
“Signaling
is
growing
50%
faster
than
data
trafﬁc,”
White
Paper,
2012,
URL:
http://networks.nokia.com/system/ﬁles%20/document/signaling
_whitepaper_online_version_ﬁnal.pdf [Retrieved: 2016-04-04].
[4]
ETSI, “Network Function Virtualization: An Introduction, Bene-
ﬁts, Enablers, Challenges, & Call for Action,” 2012, URL: por-
tal.etsi.org/NFV/NFV_White_Paper.pdf [Retrieved: 2016-04-04].
[5]
Service requirements for Machine-Type Communications (MTC), 3GPP
TS 22.368 Rel 13 v13.1.0, 2014.
[6]
Alcatel-Lucent,
“Managing
the
signaling
trafﬁc
in
packet
core,”
Application
note,
2012,
URL:
http://resources.alcatel-
lucent.com/asset/155160 [Retrieved: 2016-04-04].
[7]
T. Taleb et al., “EASE: EPC as a service to ease mobile core network
deployment over cloud,” Network, IEEE, vol. 29, no. 2, 2015, pp. 78–
88.
[8]
J. Prados-Garzon, J. J. Ramos-Munoz, P. Ameigeiras, P. Andres-
Maldonado, and J. M. Lopez-Soler, “Latency Evaluation of a Virtualized
MME,” Wireless Days Conference (WD), March 2016.
[9]
J. Vilaplana et al., “A queuing theory model for cloud computing,” The
Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 69, no. 1, July 2014, pp. 492–507.
[10]
NMC
Consulting
Group,
“LTE
Network
Architecture:
Basic,”
Netmanias
Technical
Document,
July
2013,
URL:
http://www.netmanias.com/en/post/techdocs/5904/architecture-lte/lte-
network-architecture-basic [Retrieved: 2016-04-04].
[11]
E. M. Metsala and J. Salmelin, Eds., LTE Backhaul: Planning and
Optimization.
Wiley, 2015.
[12]
Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Radio Resource
Control (RRC); Protocol speciﬁcation, 3GPP TS 36.331 Rel 12, 2015.
[13]
G. Riley and T. Henderson, The ns-3 Network Simulator.
Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 15–34.
[14]
NGMN, “NGMN Radio Access Performance Evaluation Methodology,”
NGMN Alliance, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[15]
P. Ameigeiras, J. J. Ramos-Munoz, J. Navarro-Ortiz, and J. M. Lopez-
Soler, “Analysis and modelling of youtube trafﬁc,” Transactions on
Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, vol. 23, June 2012, pp.
360–377.
[16]
T. D. Dang, B. Sonkoly, and S. Molnar, “Fractal analysis and modeling
of voip trafﬁc,” in 11th International Telecommunications Network
Strategy and Planning Symposium. NETWORKS 2004.
IEEE, June
2004, pp. 123–130.
[17]
P. Gill, M. Arlitt, Z. Li, and A. Mahanti, “Characterizing user sessions
on Youtube,” SPIE 6818, IEEE Multimedia Computing and Network-
ing, vol. 6818.
[18]
C. Anton-Haro and M. Dohler, Machine-to-Machine (M2M) Communi-
cations: Architecture, Performance and Applications.
Woodhead
Publishing, 2015.
[19]
Machine-to-Machine
(M2M)
Evaluation
Methodology
Document
(EMD), IEEE 802.16p-11/0014, May 2011.
[20]
I. Tsompanidis, A. H. Zahran, and C. J. Sreenan, “Mobile network
trafﬁc: a user behaviour model,” in 7th IFIP Wireless and Mobile
Networking Conference (WMNC).
IEEE, May 2014, pp. 1–8.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

