 
 
 Layered Network Domain Resource Management in Multi-domain 5G Slicing 
Environment  
Eugen Borcoci, Andra Ciobanu, Cosmin Contu  
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest - UPB 
Bucharest, Romania 
Emails: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro, andratapu@elcom.pub.ro, cosmin.contu@elcom.pub.ro
Abstract – Multi-domain and end-to-end (E2E) capabilities are 
major objectives in 5G slicing. A split is needed of the multi-
domain slice capabilities between several technological and/or 
administrative domains while still preserving their individual 
independency. Admission control is also necessary when a new 
multi-domain slice is requested by an user/tenant, i.e., during 
the slice preparation and instantiation phase or at run-time 
when slice instances scaling is needed. The above tasks are 
solved by the Management and Orchestration (M&O) system 
for services, slices and resources (physical or virtual). The 
M&O is performed at two scopes (global and local in each 
domain) and can be organized using several layers depending 
on the business model (actors) considered. This paper 
contribution consists in the proposal and analysis of several 
architectural 
solutions 
to 
organize 
the 
domain-level 
management for a network segment of a multi-domain slice. In 
particular, the functions splitting and interactions among the 
layers of the domain management are studied in the context of 
Network Function Virtualization (NFV) and Software Defined 
Networks (SDN), technologies used in the system architecture. 
 
Keywords — 5G slicing; Multi-domain; Management and 
Orchestration; 
Resource 
management; 
Software 
Defined 
Networking; Network Function Virtualization.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
  
The slicing concept applied to 5G networks (based on 
virtualization and softwarization) enables the system to serve 
in a dedicated way various verticals/use-cases. It also allows 
programmability and modularity for network resources 
provisioning, 
adapted 
to 
different 
vertical 
service 
requirements (in terms of bandwidth, latency, etc.) [1-9]. A 
Network Slice (NSL) is a managed logical group of subsets 
of 
resources, 
Physical/Virtual 
network 
functions 
(PNFs/VNFs) in the architectural Data Plane (DPl), Control 
Plane (CPl) and Management Plane (MPl) [1][2].   
Network Function Virtualization [6-8][10-12]  and 
Software Defined Networks [13] architectures are used in 
cooperation [14-16],  to manage and control in a flexible and 
programmable way  the 5G sliced environment. Note that the 
general topics of the NFV framework and SDN are not 
detailed in this study; they are just used here in the 5G slicing 
architecture. 
The layered structure of the M&O 5G sliced systems 
depends on the definition of business model and actors. 
Several business models aim to support multi-tenant, multi-
domain end-to-end (E2E) and multi-operator capabilities. A 
basic and flexible model (see A. Galis, [9]) can be 
composed of four main actors: 
Infrastructure Provider (InP) – owns and manages the 
physical infrastructure (network/cloud/data centre). It could 
lease its infrastructure (as it is) to a slice provider, or it can 
itself construct slices and then lease the infrastructure in 
network slicing fashion. An InP may include several 
technological domains (e.g., Radio Access Network (RAN), 
Core network, Transport network) and could be represented 
by a single Administrative domain.  
Network Slice Provider (NSLP) – can be typically a 
telecommunication service provider. It could be the owner 
or tenant of the infrastructures from which network slices 
can be constructed. Generally, the NSLP can construct 
multi-domain slices, on top of infrastructures offered by 
different InPs. It should also support multiple tenants. 
Slice Tenant (SLT) – is the generic user of a specific 
slice, 
including 
network/cloud/data 
centres, 
hosting 
customized services.  The SLTs can request from a NSLP 
creation of new slices.  The SLT can lease virtual resources 
from one or more NSLPs in the form of a virtual network, 
where the tenant can realize, manage and provide Network 
Services (NS) to its individual end users. A network service 
is a composition of Network Functions (NFs); it is defined 
in terms of the individual NFs and the mechanism used to 
connect them. A single tenant may have one or several 
slices in its domain. 
End User (EU) - consumes (part of) the services 
supplied by the tenant, without providing them to other 
business actors. 
The business model is recursive (see Ordonez et. al., 
[3]), i.e., a tenant can, in turn, offer parts of its sliced 
resources to other tenants. Other variants of business 
models are presented in [9]. 
The actual running slices are Network Slice Instance(s) 
(NSLI), i.e., specific, logically isolated, but full virtual 
networks created by the NSLP (based on NSL templates) at 
the request of an SLT or at NSLP's initiative. A 
blueprint/template is a logical representation of NFs and the 
resource 
requirements. 
It 
describes 
the 
structure, 
configuration and work flows for instantiating and 
controlling a NSLI. It   includes particular network 
characteristics (e.g., bandwidth, latency, reliability) and 
refers to the required physical or logical resources and the 
sub-networks. A NSLI may be dedicated or shared across 
multiple Service Instances.  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
The 5G sliced networks M&O sub-system is usually 
organized in a hierarchical fashion on several layers [7]. The 
management can include the traditional functions; the 
orchestration consists in a coordinated set of activities to 
automatically select and control multiple resources, services 
and systems [14].  
The Life-Cycle Management (LCM) of a NSLI comprises 
several phases performed by the Slice Provider: (1) 
instantiation, configuration and activation, (2) run-time and 
(3) decommissioning [6]. Actually, the LCM is preceded by a 
preparation phase (0) of the network for the future 
instantiation and support of a NSLI. Phase (1) is split into the 
instantiation/configuration 
sub-phase 
(the 
necessary 
shared/dedicated resources, including NFs, are configured 
and instantiated but not yet used) and the activation sub-
phase (the NSLI handles traffic). The run-time phase focuses 
on data traffic transport, reporting the network service 
performance and possible NSLI re-configurations or scaling, 
if dynamic conditions impose that. Phase (3) includes the 
deactivation and termination of the NSLI and release of the 
allocated resources. 
The specific contribution of this paper is the proposal and 
analysis of several architectural solutions, to organize the 
domain-level (InP) management for a network segment 
(controlled in SDN style) of a multi-domain slice (see 
Section IV). In particular, the function splitting and 
interactions among the SDN controller with an upper 
management layer (Virtual Infrastructure Manager – VIM or 
Wide area Infrastructure Manager – WIM) of the domain 
management are studied. The business model adopted will 
influence these interactions. 
The paper structure is described below. Sections II and III 
are preliminary. They serve to introduce and clarify the 5G 
management and control framework, where the solutions of 
the main Section IV will be applied, in the context of NFV-
SDN technologies. In particular, Section II presents a few 
relevant examples of related architectural work to emphasize 
the M&O elements for resources, slices and services in 
multi-domain context. Section III details the slice creation 
phase M&O interactions. Section IV proposes and compares 
several architectural variants for the interface between the 
domain controller (SDN-IC) and higher layer manager 
(V/WIM). This interface determines how the mapping can be 
done of the required slice segment resources upon the 
network domain owned by the InP. The work is still 
preliminary - at architectural level. Section V presents 
conclusions and a future work outline. 
II. 
5G MULTI-DOMAIN SLICING  ARCHITECTURES 
This section presents a few examples of relevant 5G 
slicing architectures, in order to outline the M&O entities 
roles in a multi-domain environment and locate the 
individual domain levels as a zone of interest for this study. 
Many studies, projects, pilots, define variants of 5G slicing 
multi-domain architectures in various contexts [4][6][7][14 -
17][18]. In all of them, the M&O functions are crucial for 
coordination of the components. 
The document (The European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute (ETSI) NFV Evolution and Ecosystem 
(EVE) 012 [6]) and The 3rd Generation Partnership Project 
(3GPP) Technical Report (TR) 28.801 document [7] 
consider the ETSI NFV framework to which they added 
three new management functional blocks dedicated for slice 
management: 
Communication 
Service 
Management 
Function (CSMF) - to translate the service requirements 
into NSL ones; Network Slice Management Function 
(NSMF) - to manage (including lifecycle) the NSLIs (it 
derives network slice subnet requirements from the network 
slice 
related 
requirements); 
Network 
Slice 
Subnet 
Management Function (NSSMF) -  to manage the Network 
Slice Subnet Instances NSLSIs. These three elements 
interact with the upper entity of the NFV Management and 
Orchestration (MANO), i.e., with NFV Orchestration of the 
NFV (NFVO). 
The 5G Infrastructure Public Private Partnership 
(5GPPP) Working Group details the architecture by 
defining four planes [1]: Service, M&O, Control and Data 
planes. The architecture also includes a Multi-Domain 
Network Operating System containing different adaptors 
and network abstractions above the networks and clouds 
heterogeneous fabrics. It is responsible for allocation of 
(virtual) network resources and maintains network state to 
ensure network reliability in a multi domain environment.  
The Service plane comprises the Business Support 
Systems (BSSs) and business-level Policy and Decision 
functions as well as applications and services operated by 
the tenant. This plane includes an end-to-end orchestration 
system.  
The 
M&O 
plane 
includes 
a 
general 
Service 
Management, the Software-Defined Mobile Network 
Orchestrator (SDMO) and the ETSI NFV lower level 
managers (i.e., VNF Manager - VNFM and Virtualized 
Infrastructure Manager - VIM). The SDMO is composed of 
a domain specific application management, an Inter-slice 
Resource Broker and NFV-NFVO. The SDMO performs the 
E2E management of network services; it can set up slices by 
using the network slice templates and merge them properly 
at 
the 
described 
multiplexing 
point. 
The 
Service 
Management intermediates between the upper service layer 
and the Inter-slice Broker; it transforms consumer-facing 
service 
descriptions 
into 
resource-facing 
service 
descriptions and vice versa. The Inter-slice Broker handles 
cross-slice 
resource 
allocation. 
The 
domain-specific 
application management functions could be, e.g., for 3GPP: 
Element Managers (EM) and Network Management (NM) 
functions, including Network (Sub-) Slice Management 
Function.   
The Control plane is “horizontally” separated in two 
parts: intra and inter-slice control functions. “Vertically”, it 
is organized in SDN style, i.e., with three planes: Control 
applications (inter and intra-slice); SDN controllers; SDN 
nodes (these are actually slicing control function blocks    
realized as PNF/VNFs.  Note here the flexibility of the 
SDN-NFV cooperation: some slicing control functions are 
seen and realized as SDN nodes.  The SDN controllers are 
two types: Software-Defined Mobile Network Coordinator 
(SDM-X) and Software-Defined Mobile Network Controller 
(SDM-C). The SDM-C and SDM-X take care of dedicated 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
and shared NFs, respectively; following the SDN principles, 
they translate decisions of the control applications into 
commands to SDN nodes, i.e., VNFs and PNFs. Note that 
also SDM-X and SDM-C, as well as other possible control 
applications could be implemented as VNFs or PNFs.  
 
 
NSL Instance 1 
Tenant SDN 
controller 
 
 
Multi-domain NSL Orchestrator 
 
Catalogs 
NS, VNF 
VNF 
chain,  
config 
VNF LCM 
NSL Provider 
 Domain 
NSL Instance n 
VNF 
VNF 
VNF 
Multi-domain Resource Orchestrator 
 
NSL 
 Tenant 
 n 
domain 
NSL Manager 
NS Orchestrator 
 
VNFM 
VIM 
InP 1 Domain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PoP 1 
VNF 
VNF 
VNF 
VM 
Virtualisation 
layer 
SDN-IC 
HW Resources 
VIM 
InP 4 Domain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PoP 3 
VNF 
VNF 
VNF 
VM 
Virtualisation 
layer 
SDN-IC 
HW Resources 
InP 2 Domain 
WAN 1 
SDN-WAN IC 
VNFs running 
on orange VMs 
Instantiated 
for each slice 
instance  
InP 3 Domain 
WAN 2 
SDN-WAN IC 
WIM 
WIM 
Area of interest of this paper 
NSL 
 Tenant 
1 
domain 
 
Figure 1. Run-time image of a multi-domain slicing architecture - example 1 (adapted from ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012 [6] and Ordonez-Lucena [3][18]) 
 
NS – Network Service; NSL - Network Slice; VNF – Virtualized Network Function; VNFM – VNF Manager; SDN Software Defined Networking; LCM –
Life Cycle Management; VIM – Virtual Infrastructure Manager; WIM – WAN Infrastructure Manager; SDN-IC- Infrastructure SDN controller; HW- 
Hardware; WAN – Wide Area Network 
 
The Data plane comprises the VNFs and PNFs needed to 
carry and process the user data traffic.  
A relevant multi-domain slicing architecture, viewed at 
run-time phase, is presented in Figure 1 (adapted from ETSI 
GR NFV-EVE 012 [6] and J.Ordonez-Lucena et. al. [3][18]).  
The specific contribution of this paper (Section IV) will 
be focused on the lower functional parts of such an 
architecture or a similar one. 
 A multi-domain slice instance can span several InPs 
and/or administrative or technological domains belonging to 
different providers. Figure 1 shows several domains upon 
which multi-domain slices can be constructed. Note also that 
this architectural picture focuses on the transport and core 
network domains, omitting the RAN domain.  
The NSLP rents infrastructure resources owned by the 
underlying InPs to construct NSL instances. The Resource 
Orchestration (RO) manages the set of resources offered by 
different INPs (the resources are supplied under the control 
of the underlying VIMs/WIMs), and optimally dispatches 
them to the NSLIs aiming to satisfy their requirements but 
preserving their logical isolation. The RO should have 
information on resource availability in each domain whose 
resources will enter the multi-domain NSLI. To construct a 
multi-domain slice, some inter-domain interactions are also 
necessary.  
The highest layer NSL Orchestrator (NSLO) has a main 
role in the creation phase of slices and also in the run-time 
phase. In the creation phase, NSLO receives the order to 
deploy a NSLI for a tenant (or the NSLP decides to construct 
a slice). The NSLO should have enough information 
(including on multi-domain resource availability) in order to 
check the feasibility of the order. To accomplish this, it 
interacts with RO (which aggregates resource information 
from several domains (InPs)), and also accesses the VNF and 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
NS catalogues. These catalogues contain VNF and NS 
descriptors, exposing the capabilities of all the VNFs and 
NSs that an NSL provider can select for the NSLs. If the 
slice is feasible, then NSLO triggers its instantiation.  
At run-time, the NSLO performs policy-based inter-slice 
operations, e.g., it analyzes the performance and fault 
management data received from the operative NSLIs to 
check the fulfilment of their Service Level Agreements 
(SLAs). In case of SLA violations, the NSLO decides which 
NSLIs need to be modified and, if this is possible, sends 
corrective management actions (e.g., scaling, healing, etc.) to 
some specific NSL Managers. 
Each NSLI has its own management plane (to get slice 
isolation) composed of: NSL Manager, NS Orchestrator 
(NSO), Tenant SDN Controller and VNF Manager (VNFM). 
The VNFM(s) and the NSO perform the life cycle operations 
(e.g., instantiation, scaling, termination, etc.) over the 
instances of the VNFs and NS(s), respectively. Interactions 
between these functional blocks and the RO are necessary. 
The 
NSL 
Manager 
coordinates 
the 
operations 
on 
management data obtained from Tenant SDN Controller and 
the NS Orchestrator, to perform the fault, configuration, 
accounting, performance, and security management within 
the NSLI. Each tenant operates its NSLI instance (within the 
limits agreed with the NSL provider) through the NSL 
Manager.  
Both in the preparation phase and at run-time the RO 
should interact with each domain management entities (e.g., 
VIM or WIM) in order to apply Admission Control (AC) 
before deciding on a new NSLI construction or later, on 
NSLI possible modification. Naturally, each domain should 
decide upon its resources availability. The specific 
contributions of this paper are focused on a domain resource 
management. 
An SDN control is supposed to exist at domain level. The 
SDN - Infrastructure Controller (SDN-IC) manages and 
controls connectivity in its domain, under the directives of 
the corresponding VIM/WIM.  The VIMs and WIMs can act 
as SDN applications, delegating the tasks related to the 
management of networking resources to their underlying ICs. 
III. 
NETWORK SLICE CREATION  
This section summarizes the general slice creation steps 
in order to clearly identify the scope and role of the 
management actions proposed in Section IV. 
 Before slice instantiation, preparation activities are 
necessary. Catalogues of available services and resources 
must be constructed in advance, usable by the tenants in 
order to select a slice model fitted to their needs.  
The general typical set of steps coordinated by the NSLO 
and RO (see Figure 1) for a slice instance creation are 
[7][17][18]: a. Service ordering; b. Network slice resource 
description; c. Admission control; d. Optimization and 
Resource Reservation; e. Network slice preparation. 
Service ordering: the NSLP should construct a Service 
Catalogue (business-driven), containing service offering 
(service 
templates). 
The 
catalogue 
contains 
NSLs 
specifications, optimized for different usage scenarios, like:  
enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), massive Machine 
Type Communications (mMTC), ultra Reliable Low Latency 
Communications 
(uRLLC), 
or 
other 
vertical-specific 
applications. A service template includes all the information 
required to drive the NSL deployment, e.g., the NSL 
topology 
(technology-agnostic), 
NSL 
requirements 
(functional, performance, security), temporal, geo-location 
and other operational requirements [18]. The NSL provider 
offers application programming interfaces (APIs) to tenants,  
giving them access to the Service Catalogue, where the 
tenant can select the service template that best matches its 
requirements. Some parameters and attributes can be 
customized by the tenant. The result of this dialogue is a 
catalogue-driven NSL service order containing information 
to be mapped on technological segments (Radio Access 
Network (RAN), transport, and core network) and also over 
several administrative domains. The NSLO should process 
such information. 
Network Slice Resource Description: this step creates a 
resource-centric view of the ordered NSL. For a higher 
flexibility and better adaptation to the tenant needs, different 
Levels of Implementations (NSL-IL) can be defined [18].  
The NSLO extracts the relevant content from a resource 
viewpoint (e.g., the NSL topology, network requirements, 
etc.) and constructs an NSL-IL for the NSL instance. The 
NSL topology serves to identify which NS(s) need to be 
deployed for the NSL, retrieving the corresponding NS 
descriptor(s) from the NS Catalogue;  the deployment option 
is selected for each descriptor (NS descriptor ID, NS 
FlavorID, NS-IL ID), that best matches the features and the 
performance level required for the NSL;  an  NSL-IL is  
constructed by referencing the selected triplet(s).  
 Admission Control (AC): the target NSL-IL specifies the 
resources needed for the tenant’s demands. Now, the AC will 
be enforced on the ordered NSL-IL, from a resource 
viewpoint, to decide acceptance/rejection for deployment. 
Several types of information are needed in this process: 
 (1) NSLI resource requirements (resources to be 
allocated for each VNF instance and virtual link, 
affinity/anti-affinity rules applicable between VNF instances, 
reliability requirements for each VNF instance and virtual 
link);  
(2)  geographical region(s) where each VNF is needed;  
(3)  time intervals for activation of the NSL instance; 
(4) information of the Points of Presence (PoPs) (and the 
WAN network(s) connecting them) to which the NSLP is 
subscribed. Such information is partially available at the 
NSLO and partially at RO; therefore, these two functional 
blocks need to interact within the AC actions. 
Note that AC should be actually enforced at several 
levels: at a global multi-domain level and at each domain 
management level. This last aspect will be further analysed 
in Section IV. 
Optimization and Resource Reservation: if several 
variants of NSL-ILs are found feasible by the AC, then RO 
can run an algorithm to select an optimal solution (note that 
this is a multi-criteria optimization problem). Afterwards, 
RO may proceed with resource reservation; it sends resource 
reservation requests to the underlying VIM(s)/WIM(s). The 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
hard/soft nature of this reservation depends on the use case 
and NSL provider’s policies. 
Network Slice Preparation:  it consists of setting up all 
that is required to manage the NSLI throughout its life cycle, 
i.e., from commissioning (instantiation, configuration, and 
activation) 
to 
decommissioning 
(de-activation 
and 
termination) (see for details, 3GPP TS 28.801 V.15.1.0 [7]). 
The preparation comprises: a. preparation of the network 
environment and b. designing and on-boarding the NSL 
descriptor. 
For the step a., the NSLO (see Figure 1) performs the 
following tasks: 
- 
negotiation with RO a priority level for the NSLI (this 
allows the RO to manage the cases when several 
NSLIs compete for the same resources, or to manage 
the case of resources shortage); 
- 
instantiation of a NSLI specific management plane 
(NSL 
Manager, 
Tenant 
SDN 
Controller, 
NS 
Orchestrator, VNFM(s)); it configures these functional 
blocks, making them ready for the run-time phase.  
In parallel to the network environment preparation, the 
NSLO builds up the NSL descriptor, which is a deployment 
template used by the NSL Manager to operate the NSLI 
during its life cycle. This descriptor includes the following 
parts: a set of policy-based workflows; the set of NSL-ILs 
available for use, constructed in the Network Slice Resource 
Description phase; VNF configuration 
primitives at 
application 
level 
and 
VNF 
chaining 
management 
instructions; information about management data, used for 
performance management. 
IV. 
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AT DOMAIN LEVEL 
This section contains the specific contribution of the 
paper. The focus will be on network segments of a multi-
domain NSL (e.g., InP2 and InP3 domains in Figure 1). 
However, the framework proposed could be applied also 
(with some modifications) for cloud-like segments like PoP1 
or PoP3. The business model considered here will be 
flexible.  The domain manager and controller (here it will be 
the SDN-IC) and the Virtual Infrastructure Manager 
(VIM/WIM) could belong to the same administrative entity 
of a domain. In this case, there is a clear separation between 
administrative domains and the InP could offer virtualized 
resources due to VIM/WIM capabilities. However, is it 
possible that an InP keeps the classical functions as 
equipment/infrastructure provider while virtualization tasks 
and management could be delegated to a third-party 
provider. 
A. Function splitting between VIM/WIM and SDN-IC 
An important architectural choice related to the slice 
mapping onto network resources in a network domain is the 
functional split among SDN-IC and WIM and consequently 
the interface/relationship between WIM and SDN-IC with 
respect to:  
(1) the style used by SDN-IC to upload information 
to VIM/WIM, about its available resources: on demand (OD) 
or in proactive (P) style (at SDN-IC initiative);  
(2) the amount and depth of information uploaded 
by SDN-IC on the network resources (graph, capacities, 
etc.). Table I presents the resulting architectural variants of 
the functional split and WIM/SDN-IC interface and Figure 2 
presents architectural variants for mapping a slice on InP 
domain network resources. 
It is assumed that the network domain resources can be 
represented by topology and Resource Availability Matrix 
information, collected by the SDN-IC from the domain 
network (e.g., ingress and egress points/routers, available 
paths and network resources per path, supported traffic 
classes to allow Quality of Services (QoS) enabled transport, 
etc.).  
Note that for each variant, and depending on monitoring 
information at network level, a Resource Availability Matrix 
RAM can be uploaded to VIM/WIM and also adjusted by 
SDN-IC to improve the traffic engineering performances. 
In turn, the VIM/WIM can express the requirements for 
this network domain in the form of a Service order (or, 
equivalent, Server Level Specification - SLS) request. The 
generation of this request is actually done by the RO 
(wanting to construct a new slice), after splitting the multi-
domain slice requirements in sets of requirements for   
participating domains to the multi-domain slice. The details 
of such a split at RO level is out of scope of this paper. An 
example of connectivity set of requirements known by the 
VIM/WIM (to be mapped onto domain resources) is a matrix 
of Traffic Trunks (TT). Each VIM/WIM may have an 
abstract view of its network and output links towards 
neighbors in a form of a set of virtual pipes (called TTs). A 
set of such pipes can belong to a given QoS class; so, this 
approach allows a given multiple domain slice to belong to a 
specific QoS class.  
To simplify the notation, in the following, only the WIM 
notation will be used. 
Several variants of interactions and function splitting 
between WIM and SDN-IC are proposed and discussed 
below in terms of pros, cons and trade-off. 
Proactive style:  at the initiative of the SDN-IC, 
(periodically or event triggered) the information that is 
uploaded to WIM is: the Resource Availability Matrix 
(RAM), i.e., full connectivity graph and capacities, or only a 
summary called Overlay Network Topology – ONT [19]. 
• Pros: the SDN-IC is the most qualified to know when 
to deliver network information to WIM, e.g., every time 
when network re-dimensioning is performed; WIM has 
at every moment all the information about network 
resources. 
• Cons: WIM can be overloaded with information that it 
does not really need at a given time; it may keep or 
discard some information, depending on its local policy 
at WIM level; signaling overhead appears. 
On demand style:  WIM asks the domain RAM from the 
SDN-IC when needed, in order to answer appropriately to 
service order requests. 
• Pros: the WIM decides when it wants RAM 
information; this could lead to a better usage of WIM 
Data 
Base 
space; 
SDN-IC 
doesn’t 
need 
to 
systematically inform the WIM anymore. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
• Cons: higher delay in servicing the RO requests, 
because WIM should first acquire RAM in order to 
respond appropriately to RO, based on updated RAM 
information. 
 
High WIM role (HR): SDN-IC uploads to WIM its full 
connectivity graph.  
• Pros: WIM has deep control on the network resources. 
It becomes in this way a major factor in assuring 
efficient allocation and exploitation of network 
resources 
in 
the 
future 
slice; 
more 
seamless 
deployment, given the fact that mapping of the slice 
onto network resources is outsourced to WIM; 
therefore, not many changes have to be done in the 
traditional networking SDN-IC functionalities;SDN-IC 
is released of AC and mapping functions. 
• Cons: overload at WIM level: it should make both 
mapping of the slice requested resources onto network 
nodes and perform AC; less clean architecture:  actual 
network related tasks are moved at WIM layer. 
Medium WIM role (MR): SDN-IC uploads to WIM an 
overlay RAM based on traffic trunks (similar to ONT):  
• Pros: WIM has medium degree of control on the 
network resources; it is still capable to apply 
optimization techniques; routing tasks and mapping 
real-paths to TTs are done at network level (natural 
 choice), where local SDN-IC policies can be 
considered; clean architecture – WIM works at overlay 
level only, making AC, thus being compliant with 
abstraction principles. 
• Cons: AC is performed at WIM level; it is more 
difficult to consider the current status of the network 
load; optimization at WIM level is not “the best”.  
Low WIM role (LR): SDN-IC does not upload/disclose 
any topology and resources to WIM but only ingress-egress 
points IDs and answer Yes/No to an SLS request: 
• Pros: WIM has simpler task to only download the SLS 
parameters to SDN-IC and then ask SDN-IC about the 
result; sophisticated optimization techniques could be 
applied at SDN-IC level, considering local policies and 
current network status; routing tasks and mapping real-
paths to TTs are done at network level (natural choice), 
where local SDN-IC policies can be considered; clean 
architecture – WIM works at overlay level only, thus 
being compliant with abstraction principles. 
• Cons: all mapping and local AC is performed at SDN-
IC network level; SDN-IC is overloaded with 
additional functions. 
In practice, one of the six variants can be selected, 
depending on the overall design objectives of the slicing 
system, general set of requirements and business model 
adopted. 
 
TABLE I. VARIANTS OF COOPERATION BETWEEN WIM AND SDN-IC  
 
 
Amount of available information (on CND resources) from SDN-IC for V/WIM  
 
 
High WIM role 
(HR): SDN-IC 
uploads to WIM 
its full 
connectivity graph 
Medium WIM role (MR): 
SDN-IC uploads only an 
overlay availability matrix 
(similar to Overlay 
Network Topology -ONT) 
Low WIM role (LR): SDN-IC does not 
upload/disclose any topology and resources to 
WIM but only ingress-egress points Ids and 
answer Yes/No to an SLS request 
SDN-IC style to 
upload info to 
WIM about its 
available resources   
Proactive (P) style  
P-HR 
P-MR 
P-LR  
(OD) on demand 
from WIM 
OD-HR 
OD-MR 
OD-LR 
 
 
InP  level 
Interior router 
ONT (CND1) 
(CANMgr level) 
Connectivity graph (CND1) 
(known at SDN-IC level) 
BRm 
TTmn 
Offered 
ONT (CND1) 
 
BR 
CND1 
SLS request 
matrix 
? 
BRn 
Admission 
Control 
a. 
BR- Border router 
BR 
Traffic Matrix (for 
CND1) 
(CANMgr level) 
Connectivity graph (CND1) 
(known at SDN-IC level) 
Req (TM) 
 
SLS request 
matrix 
Mapping 
+ 
Admission 
Control 
BR 
CND1 
? 
b. 
Full graph 
(CND1) 
 
BR 
CND1 
SLS request 
matrix 
Mapping + 
Admission Control 
BRm 
CND1 
? 
WIM  level 
BRn 
c. 
WIM level view 
on the domain 
SDN-IC level view 
on the domain 
 
Figure 2. Architectural variants for mapping of a slice on InP domain network resources (WIM role: High, Medium, Low) 
CND1-Connectivity Domain1; TM - Traffic Matrix; ONT – Overlay Network Topology
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
B. Local Resources Mapping 
A design choice should be which entity has to perform 
the mapping of the RO requested resources (for the slice 
segment realized by this domain): WIM or SDN-IC? Two 
variants are proposed below.  
WIM determines the mapping of SLS requested resources 
on the network resource matrix uploaded by the SDN-IC: 
• 
Pros: SDN-IC does not need to run mapping 
algorithms but only to dimension its network 
conforming local policies; this way, a stronger 
control on mapping optimality is kept at the WIM 
level. 
• 
Cons: more complexity at the level of WIM (AC for 
different levels of QoS guarantees are necessary); 
periodic or event-triggered updates are necessary to 
update the WIM vision on the network resources 
matrix, for the domain to which it is associated. 
SDN-IC determines the mapping of SLS requested 
resources on its network resource matrix:  
• 
Pros: SDN-IC has full knowledge on the network 
resource matrix, so the mapping can be optimized in 
a refined solution; SDN-IC will not disclose to the 
WIM any intra-domain topology; AC is enforced by 
SDN-IC, which decides upon the actual mapping. 
• 
Cons: overloads the SDN-IC with additional 
functions.  
C. Local Negotiation 
An advanced solution could include a negotiation in the 
functionality of the WIM - SDN-IC interface. A negotiation 
protocol will be necessary here. The WIM could play the 
client role and SDN-IC the server role. Several variants can 
be considered and are discussed below in a comparative 
way: 
Basic two-step negotiation session: “proposal followed 
by yes/no answer”, started with a client proposal and then 
server accepting or rejecting it: 
• 
Pros: simplest and fastest solution. 
• 
Cons: non-optimal usage of resources; higher 
probability of negotiation failure. 
Multi-step negotiation session: initial proposal from the 
client, revisions returned by the server, another proposal 
from the client and so on, up to the termination of the 
negotiation: 
• 
Pros: higher probability of success for large 
network slices (several possibilities of SLS 
variants). 
• 
Cons: lower speed wireless router two-step 
negotiation; medium complexity solution. 
Optional enhanced negotiation based on several variants 
(alternatives) of negotiated objects values and selective 
acceptance or rejection of different alternatives: 
• 
Pros: most refined way to negotiate due to 
selectivity of acceptance. 
• 
Cons: high complexity and overhead; lowest speed. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper considered a 5G slicing system architecture 
based on NFV and SDN cooperation and selected some 
relevant layered examples, from those proposed in several 
standards and projects. The general architectural framework 
was described in Sections I-III. 
Section IV developed the specific contribution, which 
was on studying the domain-level management for a network 
segment of a multi-domain slice. 
The main management and control entities associated to 
an administrative domain were an SDN-Infrastructure 
Controller (SDN-IC) (playing also the role of an intra-
domain network manager) and a Virtual Infrastructure 
Manager (VIM) (playing the role defined in ETSI-NFV 
MANO framework, plus some slice-specific new functions). 
Six variants of splitting the resource management functions 
(related to mapping of the virtual requested resources on the 
network domain ones) between two entities above, were 
proposed in the paper and comparatively analyzed with pros 
and cons comments. It has been shown that an additional 
flexibility can be added to the above cooperation if 
negotiations (related to resource availability) are introduced 
between VIM and SDN-IC. 
Future work would be a continuation of this study, for a 
quantitative evaluation of the six variants in terms of 
complexity, performance, response time and seamless 
deployment capabilities. Also, refining the hierarchies and 
scope of admission control actions among the multi-domain 
Resource Orchestrator (higher level), VIM (middle level) 
and SDN-IC (lower level) is still an open research topic. 
REFERENCES. 
[1] 
5GPPP Architecture Working Group, “View on 5G 
Architecture”, Version 2.0, December 2017. 
[2] 
NGMN Alliance, “Description of Network Slicing Concept, 
NGMN 5G P1 Requirements & Architecture, Work Stream 
End-to-End Architecture”, Version 1.0, Jan. 2016. 
[3] 
J. Ordonez-Lucena et al., “Network Slicing for 5G with 
SDN/NFV: Concepts, Architectures and Challenges”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, 2017, pp. 80-87, Citation 
information: DOI 10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600935. 
[4] 
X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashfi, and M. K. Marina, 
“Network Slicing in 5G: Survey and Challenges”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, May 2017, pp.94-100 
[5] 
P. Rost et al., "Network Slicing to Enable Scalability and 
Flexibility in 5G Mobile Networks", IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Vol.55, May 2017, pp.72-79. 
[6] 
ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012 V3.1.1 (2017-12), Release 3 “NFV 
Evolution and Ecosystem; Report on Network Slicing 
Support with ETSI NFV Architecture Framework”. 
[7] 
3GPP TR 28.801: "Telecommunication management; Study 
on management and orchestration of network slicing for next 
generation network". Rel. 15.0.0, September 2017. 
[8] 
3GPP TS 28.530, “Management of 5G networks and 
network slicing; Concepts, use cases and requirements”, 
Rel.15, April 2018. 
[9] 
A. Galis, “Network Slicing - A holistic architectural 
approach, orchestration and management with applicability 
in 
mobile 
and 
fixed 
networks 
and 
clouds”, 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/10051374/ 
[retrieved 
January, 
2019]. 
[10] ETSI GS NFV 002, “NFV Architectural Framework”, Rel. 
1.2.1, December 2014. 
[11] ETSI GS NFV-IFA 009 “Network Functions Virtualisation 
(NFV); 
Management 
and 
Orchestration; 
Report 
on 
Architectural Options”. Technical Report, Rel. 1.1.1, July 
2016.  
[12] ETSI GR NFV-IFA 028: “Network Functions Virtualisation 
(NFV) Release 3; Management and Orchestration; Report on 
architecture options to support multiple administrative 
domains” Technical Report, Rel. 3.1.1, January 2018. 
[13] ONF TR-526, “Applying SDN Architecture to 5G Slicing”, 
April 2016.  
[14] K. Katsalis, N. Nikaein, and A. Edmonds, "Multi-Domain 
Orchestration 
for 
NFV: 
Challenges 
and 
Research 
Directions", 2016 15th Int'l Conf. on Ubiquitous Computing 
and Communications and International Symposium on 
Cyberspace and Security (IUCC-CSS), pp. 189–195, DOI: 
10.1109/IUCC-CSS.2016.034, 
ttps://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7828601 
[15] N. F. Saraiva de Sousa, D. A. Lachos Perez, R. V. Rosa, M. 
A. S. Santos and C. E. Rothenberg, "Network Service 
Orchestration: 
A 
Survey", 
2018, 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.06596 [retrieved: February, 2019]. 
[16]  I. Afolabi, T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, A. Ksentini, and H. 
Flinck, “Network Slicing & Softwarization: A Survey on 
Principles, Enabling Technologies & Solutions”, IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Mar. 2018, pp. 2429-
2453.  
[17] T. Taleb, I. Afolabi, K. Samdanis, and F. Z. Yousaf, "On 
Multi-domain Network Slicing Orchestration Architecture & 
Federated 
Resource 
Control", 
http://mosaic-
lab.org/uploads/papers/3f772f2d-9e0f-4329-9298-
aae4ef8ded65.pdf [retrieved February, 2019] 
[18] J. Ordonez-Lucena et al., "The Creation Phase in Network 
Slicing: From a Service Order to an Operative Network 
Slice", 
European 
Conference 
on 
Networks 
and 
Communications 
(EuCNC), 
2018, 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.09642 [retrieved January, 2019] 
[19] F. Verdi and M. F. Magalhaes, “Using Virtualization to 
Provide Interdomain QoS-enabled Routing”, Journal of 
Networks, April 2007, pp. 23-32. 
 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

