 
Pedagogical Design Principles Guided Integration of Social Media Concepts in a 
Hybrid Learning Environment 
Analysing and Reporting Focus Group Results
Manal Assaad 
Faculty of Information and Technology 
Hochschule Emden/Leer 
Emden, Germany 
e-mail: manal.assaad@hs-emden-leer.de 
 Tiina Mäkelä 
 Finnish Institute for Educational Research 
University of Jyväskylä 
Jyväskylä, Finland 
e-mail: tiina.m.makela@jyu.fi  
Dimitris Pnevmatikos 
Department of Primary Education 
University of Western Macedonia 
Florina, Greece 
e-mail: dpnevmat@uowm.gr 
 Panagiota Christodoulou 
Department of Primary Education 
University of Western Macedonia 
Florina, Greece 
e-mail: pchristodoulou@uowm.gr  
 
 
Abstract—The current study aims to identify trends in users’ 
wishes and requirements regarding the integration of social 
media in teaching and learning. Social media has been widely 
adopted in everyday life, facilitating communication and 
collaboration, as well as community development and 
knowledge exchange between users. Although the added value 
of social media for learning and instruction has been 
highlighted widely, still students’ and teachers’ perceptions on 
their use and implementation are incongruent with the current 
state of the art in their pedagogical exploitation. Science, 
Technology, Innovation, Mathematics, Education for the 
Young (STIMEY), a European funded project, aims at 
developing a pedagogical framework exploiting the full 
potential of social media, particularly for Science, Technology, 
Engineering 
and 
Mathematics 
(STEM) 
education. 
A 
participatory co-design methodology, with focus group 
techniques, was employed for the identification of the project 
stakeholders’ wishes, forming the basis of more concrete 
requirements regarding the use of social media in teaching and 
learning. Moreover, a qualitative approach was followed for 
their analysis. Findings are presented and discussed in terms of 
their relationship with pedagogical design principles and social 
media concepts previously identified within the project 
research.  
Keywords-E-Learning; E-Teaching; Europe; Pedagogy; 
Social Media; STEM; Technologies. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the universal adoption of social media in everyday 
life, efforts in educational research have focused on its use 
in learning, mostly in out-of-school context, where it’s often 
used. However, studies are mostly concerned with the use of 
popular social networking sites by students and teachers. 
Only very few studies investigate students’ and teachers’ 
perceptions and practices of social media use in formal 
learning environments, especially in middle and secondary 
school settings [1].  
Social media encompass technologies that facilitate 
communication and collaboration between users, enabling 
them to construct communities and exchange knowledge. 
Educational researches have also recognized them as 
valuable tools that can be used for learning and teaching 
purposes [2]. Still, using such technologies as learning tools 
can be challenging to students and teachers given the lack of 
pedagogical support [3] and the lack of understanding how 
different functions of social media tools can be used 
efficiently in learning tasks [4]. Thus, students and teachers 
need to collaborate on reconstructing their views of 
pedagogy to come to a shared vision for enabling the 
learning experience, in order to leverage the potential of 
social media technologies for broadening the learning 
context, blending information and learning resources, and 
sharing expertise [5].  
The Science, Technology, Innovation, Mathematics, 
Education for the Young (STIMEY) project, funded by 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 H2020-SEAC-2015-1 
program, with partners in Belarus, Finland, Germany, 
Greece, and Spain, aims to develop a hybrid learning 
environment that connects students and teachers, as well as 
parents and organizations. One of its main objectives is to 
create a pedagogical framework that exploits the full 
potentials of social media, especially for Science, 
Technology, 
Engineering, 
and 
Mathematics 
(STEM) 
subjects, in formal and informal learning contexts, as well as 
to develop recommendations and guidelines that can be used 
widely beyond the project [6]. To successfully integrate 
social media technologies within the STIMEY hybrid 
learning environment, their use then must be linked to the 
achievement of learning goals, following a pedagogic 
strategy. Identifying which features users already use, find 
interesting and consider important, and recognizing how 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
their use can be endogenous to learning goals is one way to 
achieve that objective [7].  
This study builds upon previous research, where key 
social media concepts and features, such as user profiles, 
status updates, and discussion, were identified for their 
potential roles as support tools that can enable and facilitate 
learning tasks and goals [8]. As part of the research, co-
design focus groups with students, teachers, parents, and 
professionals were conducted in 5 different countries. The 
participants discussed and shared their views on using social 
media in learning and teaching context, thus fulfilling the 
approach of participatory co-design of pedagogical 
principles. In this paper, the participants’ wishes related to 
the use of social media in learning and teaching context, and 
the resulting pedagogical design principles, are presented 
and discussed, for their integration in the social media 
concepts within the STIMEY platform.  
In the following background subsection, the key social 
media concepts and pedagogical design principles identified 
in the previous research are briefly reiterated. In Section 2, 
the research questions, and methodology are described in 
detail. In Section 3, the results of the focus group are 
presented, with a discussion of how the previously 
identified social media concepts fulfill the pedagogical 
design principles based on participants’ wishes and 
requirements in Section 4, and the study limitations in 
Section 5. In Section 6, a conclusion is drawn with guidance 
for future research.  
A. Background 
So far, researchers and educators have had to deal with a 
lack in the understanding and identification of the social 
media features that the youth find most appealing and 
important, and in defining and assessing learning and 
communication using social media. In the review of 24 
studies from the educational research literature that examine 
the use and perception of social network sites by learners 
and teachers in primary and secondary education, it was 
concluded that most studies focus on common uses in 
students’ informal learning outside of school. Only some 
studies investigated students’ formal learning in schools and 
classrooms. However, none of the studies researched social 
media technologies’ effectiveness at improving student 
learning and their impact on teaching pedagogy [1]. 
  Therefore, efforts in this research first focused on the 
theoretical understanding of key social media concepts, 
identified based on the common features in popular 
networking sites, and their potential role as learning tools in 
the progressive inquiry model, to demonstrate their support 
of pedagogical learning approaches [8]. The concepts 
identified in that analysis are: 
● 
User profile: the foundation of the user’s activity on the 
e-learning platform, and the digital representation of 
their personal data, which can help identify their 
personal interests to find like-minded learners based on 
their expertise areas. 
● 
Status Update: the most basic form of communication 
on the platform, which allows users to share their 
thoughts, opinions, and important information with 
others, to enable brainstorming, presenting and 
unstructured discussions. 
● 
Social Feedback: an effective tool in learning context, 
by supporting the co-creation of working theories and 
critical evaluation through likes, comments, replies, etc. 
● 
Social 
Connecting: 
a 
feature 
that 
enables 
communication, collaboration, knowledge sharing and 
network building on a social platform, with functions 
like “add friend” or “follow account”, thus driving 
multiple pedagogical frames that depend on interactions 
among the various roles in a pedagogical model (i.e., 
learners, 
tutors, 
facilitators/mentors, 
and 
group 
members/leaders). 
● 
Activity Stream: the most common method of 
displaying the list of recent activities on a platform 
from a user’s network, which supports generating 
context and receiving or providing feedback on those 
activities. 
● 
Social Messaging: rich text chatting that enables deeper 
private 
or 
group 
discussions, 
collaboration, 
brainstorming and sharing expertise, between the 
various roles. 
● 
Community: a feature that allows users to find and 
connect with like-minded people, in interest and niche-
specific private or public forums, enabling learning 
tasks, such as communicating, assimilating and 
producing information and knowledge, etc.  
● 
Discussion Forum: a common feature in most e-
learning platforms, which enables learners to cooperate 
and collaborate on constructing knowledge, by 
supporting the learning tasks’ types and techniques. 
Previous research efforts in the STIMEY project also 
focused on identifying pedagogical principles to guide the 
design of a hybrid (physical, virtual, formal, and informal) 
STEM Learning Environment (STEM LE), such as the 
STIMEY LE. In the preliminary research, design principles 
were created based on focus group discussions collecting 
the wishes of Finnish (n = 27) and Greek (n = 24) primary, 
lower, and upper secondary school students, teachers, 
school directors, parents, and STEM professionals on 
teaching, learning, assessment, and motivation both in 
general and in relation to STEM studies [9]. In that analysis, 
22 pedagogical design principles were formulated, based on 
the research literature and supported by participants’ wishes, 
in 3 areas:  
● 
General Principles, such as: 
○ 
Versatility in teaching, learning, and assessment; 
○ 
Novelty in use of methods and tools for learning; 
and 
● 
Ways of Teaching and Learning, such as: 
○ 
Reflective learning, e.g., reflection, deep thinking, 
critical thinking; 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
○ 
Learning outside the school, e.g., field trips, visits 
to workplaces; 
● 
Socio-emotional aspects, such as: 
○ 
Joy of learning referring, e.g., to the importance of 
enjoyment, learner satisfaction, and having fun; 
○ 
Justice and equity, equal treatment of all students, 
no discrimination, fair assessment, etc. 
In this paper, the pedagogical design principles that the 
participants related in their social media wishes are 
presented and considered in employing the previously 
identified key social media concepts [8].  
II. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
This paper extends on the previous research [9] to 
include the data of focus group discussions conducted in 
Belarus, Finland, Germany, Greece, and Spain, considering 
participating stakeholders’ wishes related to the use of 
social media in STEM learning environments. The main 
research question is: What are the wishes of the 
participating stakeholders concerning the social media use 
in learning and teaching context? 
The answer thus lies in recognizing which previously 
identified pedagogical design principles can be pinpointed 
in the focus group data on social media use in learning and 
teaching. 
B. Methodology 
Participatory design approach [10] and focus group 
techniques [11] [12] were combined in the focus group co-
design sessions [9].  
1) Participants 
TABLE I.  PARTICIPANTS 
Stakehold
er groups 
Countries 
 
Total  
n = 
Belar
us 
n = 
Finla
nd 
n = 
Germ
any 
n =  
Greec
e  
n = 
Spain 
 
n = 
Primary 
school 
students 
2 
4 
11 
2 
4 
23 
Lower sec. 
school 
students 
6 
6 
2 
2 
5 
21 
Upper sec. 
school 
students 
2 
2 
7 
2 
4 
17 
Teachers 
3 
3 
2 
6 
2 
16 
Directors 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
14 
Parents 
4 
5 
3 
6 
4 
22 
STEM 
profession
als  
2 
2 
- 
3 
1 
8 
University 
students 
5 
2 
2 
- 
2 
11 
Total n = 
27 
27 
30 
24 
24 
132 
Table I displays information on participants per each 
stakeholder group and each country. The largest groups of 
participants were primary, lower secondary and upper 
secondary school students. Focus group discussions 
included no STEM professionals (business or research) in 
Germany, and no university students in Greece. The number 
of participants per each country was relatively homogenous 
ranging from 24 to 30 participants. There were slightly more 
female (n = 73) than male (n = 59) participants.  
2) Materials 
Materials for the focus group sessions involving various 
stakeholders in the learning environment co-design were 
developed in collaboration with the partners participating in 
the STIMEY project, first in English, and then translated 
into local languages.  
Focus group discussions collected participants’ wishes 
related to the main topics covered in the STIMEY project: 
Teaching and learning, STEM subjects, cross-curricular 
skills, social media, games and gamification, digital 
platform, radio, social robots, gender, and safety issues. 
These topics were presented to the participants in slides, 
accompanied by images of each topic for inspiration and to 
evoke discussions. Participants’ wishes related to various 
topics were collected by using an online form with open-
ended questions. Focus groups discussions were also 
recorded.  
This paper concentrates on the analysis of the 
stakeholders’ wishes related to social media, more 
concretely with the following statements:  
● 
I wish the means of social communication… 
● 
I wish user profiles… 
● 
I wish social networking… 
Materials were designed based on the grounded theory 
approach [13]. Instead of referring to specific theories and 
pre-defining these concepts for participants, we were 
interested in their ideas and understandings related to these 
topics.  
3) Procedures 
The main focus groups’ co-design sessions were 
organized in all project countries at a primary school, lower 
secondary school, and upper secondary school during the 
school year 2016-17. Some participants, who could not be 
present 
during 
the 
main 
sessions 
provided 
their 
contributions in separate, additional sessions. Participants’ 
written consents, and in the case of minors, also their 
parents’ consents, were asked in advance. After a short 
description of the STIMEY project, researchers presented 
the topics to be discussed one by one, using the presentation 
slides. 
Sessions lasted from 90 to 120 minutes with 
approximately 5 to 10 minutes time to discuss and write 
down the wishes related to each topic. While open 
conversation enabled collaborative idea elicitation between 
stakeholder 
groups, 
writing 
wishes 
down 
enabled 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
expressing oneself without feeling constrained to voice their 
views in front of the others [11]. It also gave less extrovert 
participants chances to participate. Researchers were careful 
so as not to influence participants’ ideas. In the case there 
was a need to clarify some concepts or give some examples, 
participants were reminded that there were no right or 
wrong responses. Participants were, however, encouraged to 
think and express their wishes as representatives of their 
stakeholder group instead of thinking only personal 
preferences [9]. 
4) Data Analysis 
When analyzing what pedagogical design principles 
could be identified in stakeholders’ wishes related to social 
media, the previously formulated design principles were 
used as categories or themes to be coded in the data. For 
instance, under the principle named as connectedness, 
responses wishing that students would learn how to use 
social media tools in real-life situations, such as job search 
were coded. Under collaborative methods, responses 
referring to the use of social media in communication and 
interaction both within and outside the school community, 
were coded. 
The frequencies of wishes related to each category or 
theme were calculated. As the purpose of this paper is to 
identify the connection between the pedagogical design 
principles and the social media design, the focus is on the 
most frequent learning and social media related wishes as a 
whole (n = 132), not as an exact numeric data, but as overall 
trends and tendencies. Possible country-, gender-, group- or 
age-based differences are out of the scope of this analysis. 
Although commonly mentioned in the data, stakeholders’ 
wishes concerning social media aspects which were not 
related to teaching and learning, such as safety and privacy 
issues, are not included or discussed herein.  
III. 
RESULTS 
The results in this paper focus on the identification of 
stakeholders’ wishes and requirements with respect to social 
media concepts use in learning, and teaching. In the analysis 
of these results, seven pedagogical principles were 
identified to be relevant in the integration of social media 
concepts, as presented and discussed herein: 
● 
Teaching and learning aid was the most commonly 
cited category of wishes expressed among stakeholders 
in all countries; it was related to the use of social media 
as a Learning/Instructional aid. Wishes related to the 
use of social media concepts as supporting aids during 
learning and instruction processes were grouped under 
“Teaching and learning aid”. This refers to the 
teacher’s role in facilitating effective teaching, learning, 
and assessment, and motivating students [9] through 
social media tools. For instance, a female upper 
secondary student in Spain wished that “social 
communication becomes a tool, and not a waste. That 
is, it could, for example, bring people to answer 
questions in real time”. A teacher from upper secondary 
education in Germany highlighted in his statement that 
“social networks would provide not only superficial 
information, but deep conversations, good information 
exchange, and constructive reasoning”. Also, a female 
parent representing upper secondary education in 
Belarus suggested that social media “could offer 
information only with informative character”.  
● 
Collaborative methods were among the most commonly 
cited categories; this category included ideas and 
wishes that referred to the use of social media concepts 
in different forms of group activities in teamwork 
and/or 
group 
work 
and 
communication, 
and 
collaboration. For example, a female primary education 
student from Germany mentioned the importance of 
“having a smartphone and a group, the teacher writes 
down homework in that group”. Furthermore, a male 
student from upper secondary education in Germany 
suggested that “[when using social media], you could 
text with friends, for example, and solve tasks with 
them or discuss with them”. 
● 
Connectedness with future life and careers was outlined 
by many participants who stated that using social media 
should be connected to the user’s future life and choice 
of career as it offers an opportunity to relate with 
companies and industries. Such a wish was expressed 
by a male primary education teacher in Greece, who 
indicated that “user profile in social media should be 
restricted only to professional contexts”, as well as by a 
female director in lower secondary in Finland, who 
suggested 
that 
social 
media 
“would 
support 
professional development”. Also, a female upper 
secondary student in Germany suggested that user 
profiles “could be of interest to companies for 
subsequent 
application 
submissions. 
So 
special 
activities or accomplishments on STIMEY should be 
stored in a user profile”.  
● 
Personalization (including also aspects related to 
customization) was a category often endorsed by 
stakeholders in all countries. Personalization in 
pedagogy mainly refers to considering personal 
competence level and differences in knowledge, skills, 
rhythm, and ways of learning [9]. Under this category, 
wishes related with the ability of users to adopt and 
adjust the social media according to their preferences 
were included. For instance, a male STEM professional 
in Spain wished that a user profile is “designed [by] 
myself”, while a female parent in upper secondary 
education in Greece wished for “users to register with a 
name in their profiles, which in turn they would be able 
to control”. In some cases, personalization and 
customization were related with visibility, namely that 
users could gain more visibility by showcasing their 
interests when using social media. This attitude is 
expressed particularly in the statement of a male student 
from a primary school in Germany who stated that “[a 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
user profile should] show my interests like cars, but I 
do not want to show my grades to other students”.  
● 
Multiple representations were often highlighted by 
participants expressing their need to employ multiple 
types of media and tools in learning and instruction 
processes. Specifically, wishes which referred to 
combining any kind of digital or non-digital forms of 
presenting information including visual, multimedia, 
audio, text, simulations and animations [9] were 
included here. As a female student in lower secondary 
education in Finland suggested: “[An instant messaging 
tool] could be used in biology classes to upload images 
and discuss nature and animals”. Moreover, a male 
student from primary education in Germany stated the 
desire to “share posts about my interests, [using] 
microphone and audio because I can't type”. This desire 
is also illustrated by a female student in upper 
secondary education in Spain who hoped to use social 
media features in learning to ask questions, send photos 
or make a video call when needing help with 
homework.  
● 
Active knowledge construction was less commonly 
referred by the participants. Active knowledge 
construction is conceptualized considering learners’ 
active agency during learning and instruction processes 
[9]. Particularly, participants related to it in social 
media concepts with user-generated content. This is 
reflected in the statement of a female student in upper 
secondary education in Germany: “[In social networks], 
one could see videos that other students had created, 
aiming to instruct and facilitate knowledge learning of a 
subject, instead of having a teacher teaching the same 
subject”. Finally, a quite informative argument was 
offered by a female parent in primary education in 
Greece suggesting that “[social media] could [be used 
to] provide news, digital tools for ICT, materials in text 
form and could be used by students, parents, and 
teachers.” 
● 
Participation 
and 
Involvement 
appeared 
more 
sporadically in data, as the final category. In this 
category, items referring to participatory, interactive 
and conversational teaching-learning interaction [9] 
were included. To illustrate, a male university student 
in Belarus wished that social networking would “bring 
together all trainees and trainers into a unified whole, 
and there would be no barriers in communication 
between them.” 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
With a myriad of social media features, which are 
continuously changing and growing, it can be a difficult task 
to list and identify the ones that stakeholders find most 
interesting and crucial. This might explain the lack of 
research in this area, as pointed out earlier. To tackle this 
task, bottom-up and top-down approaches are employed in 
this study. In the bottom-up approach, the participating 
stakeholders’ wishes on the use of social media in learning 
and teaching are collected and analyzed for emerging 
themes and pedagogical design principles. These themes 
and principles then guide the selection, design and 
development of various features in the pre-identified social 
media concepts [8] within the STIMEY platform in a top-
down approach. Using various pedagogic scenarios, the 
approach examines how these social media concepts and 
features fulfill the pedagogical design principles: 
• 
User profiles and Social Connections are designed 
with functionalities that allow users to register and 
partake in the platform’s learning activities, under the 
various roles of student, tutor or facilitator/mentor, and 
connect with each other based on their roles, interests or 
expertise. Thus, user profiles are fundamental in 
facilitating 
students’ 
self-regulated 
learning 
and 
personalized learning while still being connected to 
teachers who can be present as guides (pedagogical 
design principle named as teaching and learning aid). 
Functioning as a resume, a user profile also encloses 
other functionalities, such as an e-portfolio that collects 
a student’s learning achievements on the platform and 
can then be shared with potential employers or 
educational institutions and personnel (Connectedness 
to Future Life and Careers). User profiles also give 
users the ability to personalize and customize their 
presence on the platform with text and images 
(Personalization). Users can express their individual 
identity and interests in an “About” section, as well as 
on other functionalities in the profile like the timeline 
(or the “wall” [14]) where they can post status updates 
with multiple representations of various rich media 
(text, images, videos, documents, links, etc.). Finally, in 
order to participate in (participation and involvement) 
and collaborate on (collaborative methods) the active 
knowledge construction on the platform, users need first 
to register and create profiles that give them access and 
enable them to utilize the other social media features, 
such as connecting with each other to build networks, 
by adding friends to have permission and access to 
each other’s private profiles, and timeline, or following 
users for their public profiles and timelines. In one 
pedagogic scenario, we have elaborated based on these 
considerations, an upper secondary chemistry teacher 
can search the platform for a Pharmacologist (based on 
her experience and skills, found on her user profile), 
connect with her, and message her to invite her to join a 
discussion with his students on the platform. 
• 
Status updates and Social Feedback are designed 
with functionalities that enable teachers to set up 
contexts in various pedagogic scenarios (teaching and 
learning aid), and allow students to share knowledge 
among each other, as well as with facilitators/mentors 
as experts, and provide or receive critical feedback 
(participation and involvement, collaborative methods 
and active knowledge construction). Status updates also 
enable 
self-expression 
of 
interests, 
preferences, 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
opinions, expertise, etc., (personalization)) through 
functionalities that enable posting media-rich user-
generated content containing text, images, videos, etc. 
(multiple representations). The accompanying social 
feedback functionalities, such as comments and replies, 
enable the furthering of discussions and knowledge 
sharing by providing critical feedback on users’ status 
updates. In one possible pedagogic scenario, a primary 
biology teacher can post a status update, asking 
students to list different types of summer flowers that 
they will be tasked to plant for a class project. Students 
can then comment on the teacher’s status update with 
photos, videos or links to different types of flowers that 
they’d like to grow. The teacher can then provide 
feedback by replying to students’ comments, to 
confirm or correct their selections. She can also further 
the discussion by asking the students to post 
instructional videos and links to growing their selected 
flower in their replies. She can also ask the students to 
read their peers’ comments and find a few who have 
made the same flower selection, in order to form a 
group that can be tasked with growing their selected 
flower. 
• 
Social messaging is designed with functionalities that 
enable knowledge sharing and discussions in private 
bilateral conversations, such as between two peers 
discussing classwork, or among a predefined group of 
users, such as a teacher and his/her students continuing 
an in-class discussion outside of the classroom 
(teaching and learning aid). The rich media (text, 
images, videos, links, files, etc.) that can be shared in 
one-on-one or group chat messages, also enable 
personalization with multiple representation. The 
instant nature of social messaging enables quick 
discussions and easy participation (participation and 
involvement) that are useful during the collaboration 
between two users or a group of users (collaborative 
methods). In one pedagogic scenario, two lower 
secondary students working together on a group project 
can privately message each other when out of class to 
discuss the nature and structure of the work, share text, 
images and videos that can be used in the project, and 
refer to these messages whenever necessary. The 
students can also share the project file with each other 
as a message attachment.  
• 
Communities and Discussions are designed with 
functionalities that enable teaching and learning in 
groups (collaborative methods), mirroring a classroom 
environment online. Teachers can take on a leading role 
by creating communities or discussion forum topics 
(teaching and learning aid), or a facilitating role by 
letting students create their own public or private 
communities and discussion forum topics under his/her 
supervision 
and 
guidance 
(active 
knowledge 
construction). At their fundament, communities and 
discussions are a collection of status updates with 
accompanying 
social 
feedback 
(multiple 
representations), confined to a preset list of users, who 
are members of these communities or discussions 
(participation and involvement), that is specific to an 
interest or topic, usually identified in the community 
name and description, or the discussion’s title and its 
location under a topic or a course (personalization)). In 
one pedagogic scenario, a lower secondary physics 
teacher can create a discussion topic, title it “Collision 
Examples”, under her course on crashes and collisions, 
and ask her students to create their discussions under 
that topic, listing examples of collisions from everyday 
life. The students can further their knowledge by 
researching questions and constructing hypotheses on 
how the velocity and mass of an object, and the variable 
of time can affect momentum in these different 
examples, by reading their peers’ discussion posts and 
the teacher’s feedback and providing peer evaluation. 
The teacher can also encourage the students work in 
groups. They can create their own private communities, 
personalize them with a name and photo representing 
their group, and use them throughout the duration of the 
project or the course to discuss their work and 
collaborate on an assignment. 
V. 
LIMITATIONS 
This study has statistical limitations, stemming from the 
study design. Particularly, the focus group data collected 
and analyzed may not be representative of the general 
population of European students, teachers, parents and 
professionals targeted by the STIMEY project, due to the 
small number of participants represented from the 5 
European countries. However, focus groups were used to 
provide qualitative data, that shed light on trends of 
pedagogical design principles that are in common among 
stakeholders, and to enrich the understanding of the main 
findings from the literature review and the researchers’ 
expertise with relevant examples. Moreover, the analysis of 
the results was limited to the social media concepts that 
have been previously identified, while there may be several 
other social media features that can be apt in fulfilling the 
stakeholders’ wishes and requirements, based on the 
identified pedagogical principle designs. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
Although social media has gotten increased attention in 
educational research in the recent decade, most studies focus 
on the use of popular social networks and technologies 
outside of the classroom, and how they are perceived by 
students and teachers, mostly in higher education. There is, 
however, a lack in studies that examine the perceptions and 
practices of learners and teachers in primary and secondary 
education. More research is especially required on the use of 
social media features in the classroom based on preference 
and importance, and their impact on students’ learning and 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
teacher’s pedagogy. One of the objectives of the STIMEY 
project is to research and adapt a pedagogical framework 
that exploits the full potential of social media in learning, 
especially in STEM education. Initial research was geared 
towards identifying eight key social media concepts, or 
features, based on popular social networking sites and their 
potential role as learning tools in a pedagogical learning 
model. Concurrently, research was carried out on 
identifying 22 pedagogical design principles in hybrid 
STEM learning environments, based on focus group data 
from two European countries, and literature review. In this 
study, focus group data, from all five European countries 
represented in the STIMEY project, relevant to the 
participating stakeholders’ wishes on the use of social media 
in learning and teaching were analyzed. Results from 
participants’ wishes and statements indicated trends of 
seven pedagogical design principles, such as collaborative 
methods, 
teaching 
and 
learning 
aid, 
and 
multiple 
representations. The previously identified social media 
concepts were then further examined for which features and 
functionalities they include to fulfill the stakeholders’ needs, 
based on the seven resulting pedagogical design principles. 
The study has its limitations concerning the size of the focus 
groups, and the number of social media concepts taken into 
consideration. However, these limitations have been taken 
into account for future research, where the focus is on 
identifying 
additional 
social 
media 
features 
and 
functionalities based on previously collected and emerging 
stakeholders’ 
requirements, 
and 
diverse 
pedagogical 
scenarios involving students, teachers, organizations and 
parents. Finally, user testing and feedback on the STIMEY 
platform is planned to conduct a mixed qualitative and 
quantitative study with a larger number of participants 
which aims to analyze and assess the social media concepts 
and pedagogical design principles in this study.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European 
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, 
Science Technology Innovation Mathematics Engineering 
for the Young 2016-2019, under grant agreement No 
709515.  
Any 
opinions, 
findings, 
and 
conclusions 
or 
recommendations expressed in this material reflect only the 
authors’ views and the Union is not liable for any use that 
may be made of the information contained therein. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Greenhow and E. Askari, “Learning and teaching with 
social network sites: A decade of research in K-12 related 
education,” Education and Information Technologies, vol. 22, 
no. 2, pp. 623–645, 2015. 
[2] J. Kimmerle, J. Moskaliuk, A. Oeberst, and U. Cress, 
“Learning and Collective Knowledge Construction With 
Social Media: A Process-Oriented Perspective,” Educ. 
Psychol., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 120–137, Apr. 2015. 
[3] T. Iiyoshi, M. J. Hannafin, and F. Wang, “Cognitive tools and 
student‐centred learning: rethinking tools, functions and 
applications,” EMI Educ. Media Int., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 281–
296, 2005. 
[4] B. Kim and T. C. Reeves, “Reframing research on learning 
with technology: in search of the meaning of cognitive tools,” 
Instructional Science, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 207–256, 2007. 
[5] S. Manca and M. Ranieri, “Is it a tool suitable for learning? A 
critical review of the literature on Facebook as a technology-
enhanced learning environment,” Journal of Computer 
Assisted Learning, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 487–504, 2013. 
[6] M. Assaad et al., “Attracting European Youths to STEM 
Education and Careers: A Pedagogical Approach to a Hybrid 
Learning 
Environment,” 
World 
Academy 
of 
Science, 
Engineering and Technology International Journal of 
Educational and Pedagogical Sciences, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 
1216–1222, 2017. 
[7] E. Rosenfeld Halverson, “Do social networking technologies 
have a place in formal learning environments?,” On the 
Horizon, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 62–67, 2011. 
[8] M. Assaad and T. Mäkelä, “Integrating Social Media 
Concepts as Tools in a Pedagogical Approach for a 
Technology-enhanced Learning Environment,” in AICT 2017 
: The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on 
Telecommunications, Venice, Italy, pp. 67–73, 2017. 
[9] T. Mäkelä, D. Pnevmatikos, H. Immonen, N. Fachantidis, M. 
Kankaanranta, and P. Christodoulou, “Considering Various 
Stakeholders’ Views in the Design of a Hybrid STEM 
Learning Environment - Perceptions From Finland and 
Greece,” in EDULEARN17 Proceedings, pp. 5517-5526, 
2017, doi:10.21125/edulearn.2017.2257 
[10] T. Mäkelä and S. Helfenstein, “Developing a conceptual 
framework for participatory design of psychosocial and 
physical learning environments,” Learning Environments 
Research, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 411–440, 2016. 
[11] A. Duarte, L. Veloso, J. Marques, and J. Sebastião, “Site-
specific focus groups: analysing learning spaces in situ,” 
International Journal of Social. Research Methodology, vol. 
18, no. 4, pp. 381–398, 2014. 
[12] T. Georgiadou, O. Fotakopoulou, and D. Pnevmatikos, 
Exploring Bioethical Reasoning in Children and Adolescents 
Using Focus Groups Methodology. SAGE Research Methods 
Cases, 2018, doi:10.4135/9781526445025. 
[13] J. Corbin and A. Strauss, Basics of qualitative research (3rd 
ed.): Techniques and procedures for developing grounded 
theory, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd, 2008, 
doi: 10.4135/9781452230153.  
[14] “What is a Facebook Wall? - Definition from Techopedia,” 
Techopedia.com. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/5170/facebook-wall. 
[Accessed: 09-Jul-2018]. 
 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

