Biomedical Applications of Intensity and Curvature Measures: The Case of 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Human Brain  
Carlo Ciulla, Ustijana Reckoska Shikoska, Dijana 
Capeska Bogatinoska 
University for Information Science & Technology  
“St. Paul the Apostle” 
Ohrid, Macedonia 
 e-mail: carlo.ciulla@uist.edu.mk, cxc2728@njit.edu, 
ustijana@gmail.com, dijana.c.bogatinoska@uist.edu.mk 
 
Filip A. Risteski, Dimitar Veljanovski 
Skopje City General Hospital  
Skopje, Macedonia 
e-mail: risteskifilip@bolnica.org.mk, 
dveljanovski@bolnica.org.mk  
 
Abstract—This paper intends to present a novel approach to 
the extraction of additional and/or complementary biomedical 
information from the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of 
the human brain. The extraction of the biomedical information 
is conducted through three mathematical engineering tools 
called Classic-Curvature, Intensity-Curvature Functional and 
Intensity-Curvature Measure, which are calculated through a 
model function fitted to the MRI data. The mathematical 
engineering tools require that the model function benefits of 
the property of second-order differentiability. The Classic-
Curvature, the Intensity-Curvature Functional and the 
Intensity-Curvature Measure descend from the unifying theory 
and 
the 
unified 
theory 
originally 
conceived 
for 
the 
improvement of the interpolation error. The advantage 
provided through the methodological approach is that an 
immense number of possible Classic-Curvature, Intensity-
Curvature Functional and Intensity-Curvature Measure 
images can be derived through re-sampling at the intra-pixel 
coordinate, and this fact provides the possibility to choose 
images which give the best result in diagnostic practice. The 
biomedical information might be used in telemedicine. 
Keywords-Model Function; Classic-Curvature; Intensity-
Curvature Functional; Signal-Image; Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (MRI); Human Brain. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The introduction section will describe the proposal, it 
will also describe why the theoretical basis of the present 
work differs from the state of the art and also it will outline 
the contribution of this paper. 
A. Description of the Approach 
Let us define the grid node as the location where 
sampling occurs in either one dimension (1D), two 
dimensions (2D), or three dimensions (3D). In a sequel of 
digital samples, in either 1D, 2D or 3D, let a given intra-node 
location be called the re-sampling location. The problem 
statement is given hereto: the calculation of three continuous 
math formulae from a discontinuous domain created by a 
sequel of digital samples. The requirement of the solution to 
the problem is that a model function, which embeds the 
property of second-order differentiability [1], needs to be 
fitted to the discontinuous domain.  
The solution to the herein stated problem consists in the 
calculation of the Classic-Curvature at the re-sampling 
location [1]. Specifically, given an image and fitting the 
model function to the image, it is possible to calculate the 
Classic-Curvature through the summation of all of the partial 
second order derivatives of the Hessian [1] of the model 
function [1]. The partial second order derivatives are 
calculated at the re-sampling location. The re-sampling 
location is the intra-pixel coordinate where the signal-image 
is calculated through the model function. 
The calculation of the Classic-Curvature makes it 
possible also to calculate the Intensity-Curvature Functional 
[2][3] at the re-sampling location as follows. The ratio 
between two terms: (i) the integral of the product between 
the signal intensity and the Classic-Curvature both of them 
calculated at the grid node; and (ii) the integral of the 
product between the signal intensity and the Classic-
Curvature both of them calculated at the re-sampling 
location. The calculation of the Intensity-Curvature Measure 
has been introduced in [4]. 
B. Comparison with other Solutions 
The literature shows a widespread use of approximations 
of the curvature of the signal-image through compact finite 
differences, and/or gradients and/or the Sobel operator [5] 
for the calculation of the first order derivative of the signal-
image see, for instance, the work reported in [5]-[8]. The 
necessity of having a rigorous method, which is based on 
calculus, in order to quantify the curvature of the signal-
image, makes the present paper different and unique in the 
field of biomedical signal-image processing. In fact, in this 
work, the calculation of the Classic-Curvature is made 
through all of the second-order partial derivatives of the 
Hessian of the model polynomial function fitted to the MRI 
data. The advantage is that of summing up all of the partial 
second order derivatives of the Hessian of the model 
function fitted to the image. By doing so, the covariates 
partial derivatives are included in the calculation of the 
Classic-Curvature, the Intensity-Curvature Functional and 
the Intensity-Curvature Measure. 
C. Applicability to the Life Sciences 
The proposal presented in this paper has the potential to 
contribute to life sciences because of the three novel images: 
Classic-Curvature, Intensity-Curvature Functional (see 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 1) and Intensity-Curvature Measure (see Figures 9 
and 10), which embeds biomedical information content 
having diagnostic value. For example, in human brain 
imaging, for what pertains to: (i) the demarcation of 
anatomical structures, (ii) highlighting of the difference 
between gray and white matter; both in normal and in 
pathological biomedical images, and (iii) the extraction of 
additional 
and/or 
complementary 
information 
from 
pathological MRI. The connection between the research 
here presented and the Information Communication 
Technologies is in the field of Telemedicine. Figure 1 shows 
the Original MRI in (a), which is provided by the courtesy 
of OASIS database [9]-[14][15]. Figure 1b shows the 
Classic-Curvature of the MRI seen in (a). Figure 1c shows 
the Intensity-Curvature Functional of the MRI seen in (a). 
The image in Figure 1b is calculated with the two-
dimensional Lagrange polynomial [3] when re-sampling of 
the misplacement of 0.1mm along both of x and y axis, 
whereas the image in Figure 1c is calculated with the 
bivariate linear function [16], when re-sampling of the 
misplacement of 0.01mm along the x axis and 0.01mm 
along the y axis. In Figure 1, the image in (c) shows a third 
dimension perpendicular to the imaging plane along with 
the difference between gray and white matter. Both of the 
images in (b) and (c) are contrast-brightness enhanced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The image in (a) shows the original MRI and comprises of a 
205x246 pixels matrix with 1.00mm x 1.00mm pixel size; (b) shows the 
Classic-Curvature of (a), which marks a clear difference between gray and 
white matter of the human brain and (c) shows the Intensity-Curvature 
Functional of (a).  
 
In this paper, emphasis is given to four model functions, 
specifically: (i) the bivariate quadratic B-Spline polynomial 
[3], (ii) the bivariate cubic Lagrange polynomial [3], (iii) the 
one-dimensional Sinc function [2], and (iv) the bivariate 
linear function [16]. It is evident that the aforementioned 
four model functions are capable, through the application of 
the Classic-Curvature, the Intensity-Curvature Functional 
and the Intensity-Curvature Measure, to extract information 
from the MRI images, which is not readily observable into 
the original images.  
Section II will focus on the capability of the Classic-
Curvature, the Intensity-Curvature Functional and the 
Intensity-Curvature Measure to perform feature extraction 
from the original image. In Section III, the practical 
implications of this work will be addressed placing the 
emphasis on the methodological approach and also on the 
value added to the original MRI through the use of the three 
mathematical engineering tools used in this piece of 
research. Finally, Section IV concludes the paper. 
II. 
RESULTS 
This section presents qualitative results obtained through 
fitting to the MRI data of the human brain: (i) the bivariate 
quadratic B-Spline, (ii) the cubic Lagrange polynomial, and 
also (iii) the one-dimensional Sinc interpolation function [2]. 
Figure 2 shows two of the MRI images employed in this 
piece of research, which are referred here as to be the 
original MRI. Some of the Classic-Curvature and the 
Intensity-Curvature Functional reported in this section have 
been calculated on the basis of the images shown in Figure 2. 
The MRI image shown in Figure 2a is provided by the 
courtesy of Casa di Cure Triolo - Zancla, Palermo – Italy [3]. 
The MRI image shown in Figure 2b is provided by the 
courtesy of the OASIS database [15]. In Figure 2, the image 
in (a) has been scaled to enhance the visual appearance of the 
picture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Figure 2. Original Magnetic Resonance Imaging data: (a) the image is 
made of a 176 x 234 pixels matrix with pixel size of 1mm x 1mm; (b) the 
image is made of a 176 x 208 pixels matrix with pixel size of 1mm x 1mm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The image in (a) shows the Classic-Curvature and the image in 
(b) shows the Intensity-Curvature Functional. The brain structures 
highlighted in (a) are those of the sulci and the brain ventricles (see white 
contours). In (b) the emphasis is still on the sulci of the human brain and 
the depth is highlighted.  
 
Figure 3 shows the Classic-Curvature image in (a) and 
the 
Intensity-Curvature 
Functional 
image 
in 
(b). 
Specifically, since it is the objective of this piece of research 
to assess the capability of two of the mathematical 
engineering tools to provide complementary information 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
(b) 
(b) 
(a) 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

through feature extraction from the original MRI, the reader 
should compare the appearance of the Classic-Curvature and 
the Intensity-Curvature Functional images with the original 
MRIs shown in Figure 2. Both of the images in Figure 3 
were obtained when fitting to the signal-data the bivariate 
quadratic B-Spline re-sampling of 0.01mm along the x 
direction and 0.01mm along the y direction. Both of the 
images in Figure 3 are contrast-brightness enhanced. Figure 
4 shows two Intensity-Curvature Functional images 
obtained when fitting the bivariate quadratic B-Spline to the 
human brain data and when re-sampling was performed at 
the misplacement (x, y) ≡ (0.01mm, 0.001mm) with the 
value of the ʽaʼ constant parameter set to 7 in both of (a) and 
(b). The difference observable between (a) and (b) is 
attributable to the pre-processing step, which standardizes 
(see (a)), and scales (see (b)) the pixel intensity respectively.  
In Figure 4, the image in (a) shows a neat distinction 
between the gray and the white matter of the human brain, 
whereas the image in (b) shows the same distinction 
however with a third dimension visible in the direction 
perpendicular to the image plane. Both of the images are 
contrast-brightness enhanced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 4. The images in (a) and (b) are both Intensity-Curvature Functional 
of the original MRI shown in Figure 2b and they were obtained when 
fitting the bivariate quadratic B-Spline to the signal data.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 5. The image in (a) is the original MRI and the images in (b) and (c)  
are Intensity-Curvature Functional with visible and well demarcated brain 
anatomical structures.  
 
Figure 5 shows two Intensity-Curvature Functional images 
in (b) and in (c) obtained from the original MRI shown in 
(a). The original MRI is provided by the courtesy of the 
OASIS database and was collected on a subject classified 
positive to the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) [10][12]. In 
Figure 5, the pixels matrix size is 256 x 256 with pixel size 
1mm x 1mm. The Intensity-Curvature Functional images 
were obtained when fitting the bivariate quadratic B-Spline 
to the signal-image, specifically when using the ʽaʼ constant 
parameter set to 3.54 (b) and -3.54 (c). The misplacement 
used for re-sampling is (x, y) ≡ (0.01mm, 0.01mm) in both 
of (b) and (c). What is remarkable in Figure 5 is the fact that 
the shrinkage of the human cortex, which is well visible in 
(a), is also visible in (b) and (c) where the value of the 
Intensity-Curvature Functional is comparable to the noise 
level of the rest of the image (see inside the white ellipses).  
 
In Figure 5, the human cortex is distinguishable in both 
images (b) and (c). The images were cropped to highlight 
the regions of interest and they are contrast-brightness 
enhanced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Figure 6. The image in (a) shows the Classic-Curvature and the image in 
(b) shows the Intensity-Curvature Functional. The two images were 
obtained when re-sampling with the bivariate cubic Lagrange polynomial 
with a misplacement of (x, y) ≡ (0.01mm, 0.01mm) in (a) and a 
misplacement of (x, y) ≡ (0.95mm, 0.95mm) in (b).  
 
Figure 6 shows results obtained when fitting the 
bivariate cubic Lagrange polynomial to the brain image 
data. While the Classic-Curvature demonstrates faithful 
reproduction of the original MRI therefore showing all of 
the human brain features, the Intensity-Curvature Functional 
places the emphasis on the small features of the human 
brain such as the sulci showing well demarcated anatomy. 
The same can be said for the brain ventricles. In other 
words, the image depicted in (b) performs feature extraction 
from the image seen in (a), therefore showing details that 
are not readily seen in (a), neither in the original MRI. A 
similar behavior of both the Classic-Curvature and the 
Intensity-Curvature Functional was already observed in 
Figure 3. In Figure 6, likewise indicated in Figure 2, the 
images comprise of a 176 x 234 pixels matrix with pixel 
size of 1mm x 1mm and they are contrast-brightness 
enhanced. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The image in (a) shows the Classic-Curvature and the image in 
(b) shows the Intensity-Curvature Functional. The original MRI is provided 
by the courtesy of the OASIS database [15].  
(a) 
(b) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) 
(b) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 7 shows the Classic-Curvature in (a) and the 
Intensity-Curvature Functional in (b). The images were 
obtained when fitting the bivariate cubic Lagrange 
polynomial and re-sampling with a misplacement (x, y) ≡ 
(0.01mm, 0.01mm) in (a) and a misplacement (x, y) ≡ 
(0.95mm, 0.95mm) in (b). The behavior of the two 
mathematical engineering tools is similar to the one showed 
in Figure 6. The Classic-Curvature of Figure 7a shows 
remarkable reproduction of the original MRI image features 
overall all of the anatomical structures. The Intensity-
Curvature Functional seen in Figure 7b performs feature 
extraction, showing details of the MRI, which are not 
visible otherwise. And specifically, in both of (a) and (b) is 
highlighted the distinction between gray and white matter of 
the human brain. Figure 7b shows similarities with Figure 
4b (also an Intensity-Curvature Functional image), with the 
exception that the third dimension seen as perpendicular to 
the image plane is not visible in Figure 7b. However, the 
level of details is more pronounced in Figure 7b than it is in 
Figure 4b, notwithstanding the contrast enhancement of the 
two images. Likewise the images in Figure 4, the images in 
Figure 7 have a pixels matrix size of 176 x 208 with pixel 
size of 1mm x 1mm. In Figure 7, the images in (a) and (b) 
are contrast-brightness enhanced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
Figure 8. The image in (a) shows the original MRI, and (b) and (c) show 
the Classic-Curvature and the Intensity-Curvature Functional respectively. 
The effect of the Intensity-Curvature Functional is not as accentuated as the 
one seen in Figure 5c, and it is similar to the effect seen in Figure 5b. 
 
Figure 8 shows the Classic-Curvature (see (b)) and the 
Intensity-Curvature Functional (see (c)) of the pathological 
MRI shown in (a). The subject was classified positive to the 
Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) [10][12]. The Classic-
Curvature image reproduces the original MRI shown in (a) 
with high level of details for what pertains to all of the 
anatomical structures and therefore highlights the shrinkage 
of cortical surface that can be seen in the regions inside the 
white ellipse in (b). As far as regards to the shrinkage of the 
cortical surface, the Intensity-Curvature Functional image 
seen in (c) shows that the intensity level is comparable to 
the noise level (see regions inside the black ellipse in (c)), 
thus adding confirmation to the observation made through 
the Classic-Curvature image. Both of the Classic-Curvature 
and the Intensity-Curvature Functional were obtained when 
fitting the bivariate cubic Lagrange polynomial and re-
sampling of a misplacement (x, y) ≡ (0.01mm, 0.01mm). 
The pixels matrix size is 256 x 256 with pixel size 1mm x 
1mm. The images were cropped to highlight the regions of 
interest and were contrast-brightness enhanced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 9. The images in (a) (contrast-brightness enhanced) and in (c) show 
the original MRI. The images in (b) and in (d) show the Intensity-Curvature 
Measure obtained fitting the data with the one-dimensional Sinc 
interpolation function.  
 
Figure 9 shows in (a) and in (c) the original MRI with the 
tumor. Also, Figure 9 shows in (b) and in (d) the Intensity-
Curvature Measure [1] obtained with the one-dimensional 
Sinc function. The interesting feature of the Intensity-
Curvature Measure (see (b)) is the capability to highlight the 
tumor when extracting information from the original MRI 
seen in (a). Changing the brightness-contrast enhancement 
of Figure 9b yields an image, which is clearer than the one 
shown in (a), and which is the highlight of the tumor in its 
full spatial extent. The comparison between Figure 9a and 
9b makes a clear and direct point, which is that the behavior 
of the mathematical engineering images is capable to add 
additional information to the original MRI (see Figure 9b: 
clearer contour line of the tumor and the dark spot indicated 
by the white arrow, which is presumably blood). In Figure 
9b (contrast-brightness enhanced), the Intensity-Curvature 
Measure shows the capability to reveal the tumor with a 
perspective, which is different from the original image seen 
in Figure 9a. The tumor region is more clearly demarcated 
in (b) than it is in (a), whereas Figure 9d (contrast-
brightness enhanced) demonstrates the capability of the 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(a) 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Intensity-Curvature Measure to focus on the fluids of the 
tumor as it is indicated through the arrows. The matrix size 
in Figures 9a and 9b is 512x512 pixels with 0.55mm x 
0.55mm pixel size. The matrix size in Figures 9c and 9d is 
512x512 pixels with 0.39mm x 0.39mm pixel size. The 
images in Figures 9a, 9b, 9c and 9d were cropped so to 
focus on the regions of interest. Similar behavior is 
observable in the mathematical engineering images shown 
by this piece of research. Figure 9d shows the contour line 
of the tumor and the fluids such as water and blood (see 
arrows). Both of the images seen in Figures 9b and 9d 
where obtained when re-sampling of 0.1mm along the x axis 
alone. The lesson learned is that the three mathematical 
engineering tools are able to extract additional and/or 
complementary information from MRI images. Future work 
should address the biomedical value of the information 
extracted from the MRI images through the methodology 
presented in this paper. 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
This Section discusses on the effect of the contrast-
brightness enhancement and also offers insights about the 
contribution of the works herein presented to the biomedical 
imaging processing literature stressing on the use of the 
mathematical 
engineering 
tools 
used 
to 
extract 
complementary 
and/or 
additional 
information 
from 
Magnetic Resonance Images of the human brain. 
A. The Effect of the Brightness-Contrast Enhancement 
The mathematical engineering images resulting from the 
original MRI: (i) Classic-Curvature, (ii) Intensity-Curvature 
Functional and (iii) Intensity-Curvature Measure have been 
object of brightness-contrast enhancement, whereas the 
original MRI brain images were not object of brightness-
contrast enhancement (except for Figure 9a).  
It can be argued that using the aforementioned 
enhancement in both the original MRI and the mathematical 
engineering images yields the same (or similar) result and 
thus the mathematical engineering images are not capable to 
add additional information to the original MRI (such 
possibility is explored in Figure 10). However, the 
capability of the mathematical engineering images of adding 
additional and/or complementary is supported in: (i) Figures 
3, 4, 7 and 9b, and (ii) the following facts.  
The first fact is that the mathematical engineering 
images, as widely observed in both of the cases herein 
reported and the cases that were reported elsewhere 
[1][3][17], present the characteristic of having pixel 
intensity values, which is quite different from the original 
brain images. Even with the large difference in pixel 
intensity values it is possible to set the same level of 
brightness-contrast enhancement for both of the original 
MRI and the mathematical engineering images. However, 
when the level of brightness-contrast enhancement is set the 
same, in the vast majority of the cases, different 
demarcation and appearance of the overall anatomical 
structure of the brain images was observed (see Figure 9a 
versus Figure 9b). Also, the aforementioned pixel intensity 
value difference makes it necessary the brightness-contrast 
enhancement of the mathematical engineering images so to 
view the content.  
The second fact is consequential to the first one and is 
that the brightness-contrast enhancement is necessary to 
highlight the content of the mathematical engineering 
images so to reveal the additional and/or complementary 
information to the MRI. Indeed, through the mathematical 
engineering images it is possible to see: (i) the depth of the 
brain sulci (see Figure 3), (ii) the anatomical structure (see 
Figure 6a), (iii) the difference between gray and white 
matter (see Figure 1b and Figure 3a), (iv) the presence of 
fluids such as blood and water (see Figure 9d: the 
pathological image) and also the third dimension (see Figure 
1c). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. The image in (a) shows the original MRI with a tumor, whereas 
(b) shows the Classic-Curvature image, (c) shows the Intensity-Curvature 
Functional, and (d) shows the Intensity-Curvature Measure.  
 
In order to investigate what happens when the contrast-
brightness enhancement is set the same for both of the 
mathematical engineering images and the original MRI the 
following experiment was performed. Figure 10 reports the 
results of the experiment, which show that the Classic-
Curvature (see Figure 10b) and the Intensity-Curvature 
Measure (see Figure 10d) images present almost the same 
characteristics of the original MRI, except for some 
blurring, which is visible because of the mathematical 
processing. Instead, the Intensity-Curvature Functional (see 
Figure 10c) shows details that are not observable in the 
original MRI (see inside the white ellipses). The images in 
Figure 10b and Figure 10c were obtained when fitting to the 
MRI data the bivariate cubic Lagrange model function when 
re-sampling of 0.1mm along both x and y directions, 
whereas the image in Figure 10d was obtained when fitting 
(a) 
(b) 
(d) 
(c) 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

the one-dimensional Sinc model function when re-sampling 
of 0.1mm along the x direction. The matrix size of the 
images in Figure 10 is 512x512 with pixel size of 0.49 mm 
x 0.49 mm. The images in (a), (b) and (d), have been set to 
the same brightness-contrast adjustment. In (d) the 
Intensity-Curvature Functional shows a complementary 
perspective to the images seen in (a) and (b), highlighting 
the structure of the tumor fluids such as blood and water. 
The images were cropped to highlight the regions of interest 
and are all contrast-brightness enhanced. 
The significance of Figure 10 is that the mathematical 
engineering images are capable to show the anatomical 
structure of the human brain likewise the original MRI does. 
This fact is positive to the research question of the herein 
presented 
work, 
which 
investigates 
whether 
the 
mathematical engineering images add complementary 
information to the MRI. Also, Figure 10c shows that the 
Intensity-Curvature Functional presents details which are 
not visible in the original MRI. Such fact is in favor to the 
aforementioned research question. Hence, the contrast-
brightness enhancement, is not a confounding factor, it is 
indeed a requirement for the extraction of additional and/or 
complementary information from the MRI of the human 
brain because at the least the mathematical engineering 
images can reproduce the same level of details of the MRI 
of the human brain (see Figure 10). 
B. The Contribution to Biomedical Image Processing 
A well-defined novel formulation of three specific 
mathematical engineering instruments has been conceived 
[2]-[4]. The novel formulation provides the solution of the 
biomedical signal processing problem, which consists in 
extracting additional information from the Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) signal of the human brain.  
The three mathematical engineering instruments are 
called: 
(i) 
Classic-Curvature, 
(ii) 
Intensity-Curvature 
Functional and (iii) Intensity-Curvature Measure. The three 
math instruments make use of the second order derivatives of 
the model function fitted to the data. The aforementioned 
instruments makes it possible to re-image the Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) image data of the human brain 
into three novel domains where there exists features that 
would not be otherwise observable in the original MRI 
images.  
The research herein presented has significance in the 
field of biomedical signal processing and more generally in 
diagnostic radiology because brings to the attention of the 
reader the existence of three novel domains. The novel 
domains have been revealed through the use of conceptual 
forms descending from one main signal processing 
technique, which is that of the calculation of the Classic-
Curvature [1]-[3]. In fact, the calculation of the Classic-
Curvature enables also the calculation of the Intensity 
Curvature Functional and the Intensity-Curvature Measure. 
The work herein presented demonstrates the feasibility of the 
calculation of the Classic-Curvature, the Intensity-Curvature 
Functional and the Intensity-Curvature Measure from the 
two-dimensional MRI of the human brain both in normal and 
pathological cases. The calculation of the Intensity-
Curvature Functional in three dimensions is also possible 
[17].  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper considered the problem of the three 
mathematical engineering tools that are used to provide 
useful information, which is not readily observable into the 
original MRI images. This research also provides results 
which 
evaluate 
the 
performance 
of 
the 
proposed 
mathematical engineering tools. The results show that the 
Classic-Curvature image reproduces the original MRI image 
with high level of details and both of the Intensity-Curvature 
Functional and the Intensity-Curvature Measure performs 
feature extraction showing details of the MRI which are not 
visible otherwise. The advantage provided through the re-
sampling process is indeed a fact which gives an immense 
number of possible Classic-Curvature, Intensity-Curvature 
Functional and Intensity-Curvature Measure images. Also, it 
provides the freedom to choose images which give best 
result in diagnostic practice. The mathematical models rely 
on software code implementing complex math formulas. Due 
to the originality of the research here presented it is not 
possible to compare our results with previous research 
findings. However, since we provide the software free of 
charge, the mathematical engineering tools are easily 
available to the scientific community.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Hereto reporting findings that benefit from OASIS data 
[16], we are due to mention the following grant numbers: 
P50 AG05681, P01 AG03991, R01 AG021910, P50 
MH071616, U24 RR021382 R01 MH56584 [16]. The MRI 
images shown in Figure 1a (© IGI Global Publisher) and 
Figure 2b (© IGI Global Publisher) are reprinted from [2]. 
The MRI image shown in Figure 2a (© Carlo Ciulla) is 
reprinted from [3].  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Ciulla, “On the calculation of the signal-image classic-
curvature: A second order derivatives based approach”, 
International Journal of Emerging Trends & Technology in 
Computer Science (IJETTCS), vol. 2, no. 4, 2013, pp. 158-
165. 
[2] C. Ciulla, “Improved signal and image interpolation in 
biomedical applications: The case of magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) ”, Medical Information Science Reference - 
IGI Global Publisher, Hershey, PA, U.S.A., 2009. 
[3] C. Ciulla, “Signal resilient to interpolation: An exploration on 
the approximation properties of the mathematical functions”, 
CreateSpace Publisher, U.S.A., 2012. 
[4] C. Ciulla, “On the signal-image intensity-curvature content”, 
International Journal of Image, Graphics and Signal 
Processing, vol. 5, no. 5, 2013, pp. 15-21. 
[5] Y. Cha and S. Kim, “The error-amended sharp edge (EASE) 
scheme for image zoomingʾ, IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing”, vol. 16, no. 6, 2007, pp. 1496-1505. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[6] J. Prewitt, “Object enhancement and extraction”, In: Picture 
Processing and Psychopictorics, B. Lipkin and A, Rosenfeld, 
Eds. New York: Academic, 1970, pp. 75-149. 
[7] S.K. Lele, “Compact difference schemes with spectral-like 
resolution”, Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 103, 1992, 
pp. 16-42. 
[8] H. Farid and E.P. Simoncelli, “Differentiation of discrete 
multidimensional signals”, IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing, vol. 13, no. 4, 2004, pp. 496-508. 
[9] R.L. Buckner et al., “A unified approach for morphometric 
and functional data analysis in young, old, and demented 
adults using automated atlas-based head size normalization: 
Reliability and validation against manual measurement of 
total intracranial volume”, Neuroimage, vol. 23, no. 2, 2004, 
pp. 724-738. 
[10] A. F. Fotenos, A. Z. Snyder, L. E. Girton, J. C. Morris, and R. 
L. Buckner, “Normative estimates of cross-sectional and 
longitudinal brain volume decline in aging and AD”, 
Neurology, vol. 64, 2005, pp. 1032-1039. 
[11] D. S. Marcus et al., “Open access series of imaging studies 
(OASIS): Cross-sectional MRI data in young, middle aged, 
nondemented, and demented older adults”, Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, vol. 19, no. 9, 2007, pp. 1498-1507. 
[12] J. C. Morris, “The clinical dementia rating (CDR): current 
version and scoring rules”, Neurology, vol. 43, no. 11, 1993, 
pp. 2412b-2414b. 
[13] E. H. Rubin et al., “A prospective study of cognitive function 
and onset of dementia in cognitively healthy elders”, Archives 
of Neurology, vol. 55, no. 3, 1998, 2001, pp. 395-401.  
[14] Y., Zhang, M. Brady, and S. Smith, “Segmentation of brain 
MR images through a hidden Markov random field model and 
the expectation maximization algorithm”, IEEE Transactions 
on Medical Imaging, vol. 20, no. 1, 2001, pp. 45-57. 
[15] OASIS database <http://www.oasis-brains.org/> 2014.05.15 
[16] C. Ciulla and F. P. Deek “The Sub-Pixel Efficacy Region of 
the Bivariate Linear Interpolation Function”, International 
Journal of Computer Applications in Technology, vol. 49, 
nos. 3/4, May, 2014, pp.270–281. 
[17] C. Ciulla, “The intensity-curvature functional of the trivariate 
cubic Lagrange interpolation formula”, International Journal 
of Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, vol. 5, no. 10, 
2013, pp. 36-44. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-360-5
AICT2014 : The Tenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

