Performance Study in Multi-rate Switching Networks
with Additional Inter-stage Links
Michał Stasiak
Chair of Communications and Computer Networks
Poznan University of Technology
ul. Polanka 3, room 110, 60-965 Poznan, Poland
E-mail: michal.m.stasiak@doctorate.put.poznan.pl
Piotr Zwierzykowski
Chair of Communications and Computer Networks
Poznan University of Technology
ul. Polanka 3, room 231, 60-965 Poznan, Poland
E-mail: piotr.zwierzykowski@put.poznan.pl
Abstract—The paper presents the results of a simulation
study on multi-rate three-stage Clos switching networks with
additional inter-stage links. Switching networks in which a
system of overﬂow links was provided for the ﬁrst, second and
the third stage are investigated. Additionally, different struc-
tures of connections between inter-stage links are discussed.
The investigation has proved that an application of overﬂow
systems is followed by a substantial decrease in the internal
blocking probability in the switching network. An appropriate
capacity of overﬂow links can even result in a virtually complete
elimination of internal blocking. This paper proves that the best
results are obtained with the introduction of overﬂow links to
the ﬁrst stage of the network, both in the case of point-to-point
and point-to-group selection.
Keywords-switching networks, inter-stage links
I. INTRODUCTION
Switching networks form a base for the operation of many
systems and devices, including that of exchanges or routers
that constitute nodes in telecommunications networks. It
is their effectiveness in performance that is decisive in
enabling the maximum amount of trafﬁc that a network can
carry. Most of switching networks used in network nodes
are blocking networks. This means a loss to performance
with regard to part of trafﬁc offered to network nodes.
Constructions that eliminate the phenomenon of blocking in
the switching network (the so-called non-blocking networks)
are also known [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. These networks, how-
ever, require a large number of switches, which translates
directly into a substantial increase in the ﬁnancial outlays
for the construction of such switching networks. There
exist techniques for reducing blocking states in switching
networks. The three fundamental techniques include: the
application of additional inter-stage (overﬂow) links [6],
call rearrangement or repacking and re-switching [5]. Call
repacking and re-switching do not interfere with the actual
architecture of a switching network. These are based on the
introduction of special algorithms for executing procedures
related to setting up connections in a required way. Due
to computational complexity, solutions of this type tend to
overload controlling devices while setting up connections to
a much higher degree that the most commonly used random
algorithms and sequential algorithms, which is a drawback
and a considerable limitation. The application of overﬂow
links is accompanied with a slight interference into the phys-
ical architecture of a switching network and is based on an
application of switches with an appropriately higher number
of inputs and outputs. In the past, switching networks with
overﬂow links were used on an industrial scale in analogue
telephone exchanges manufactured by Pentaconta [6]. The
exchange of the Pentaconta system was composed of two-
stage switching networks in which switching devices of
the ﬁrst stage were connected with one another by special
inter-stage links. The application of overﬂow links made
it possible to reduce substantially (by several percent) the
internal blocking probability of the exchange [7]. Later,
a possibility of introducing overﬂow links in electronic
exchanges was also considered [8], [9]. No analysis of
the effectiveness of the introduction of overﬂow trafﬁc has
been carried out so far for multi-stage switching networks
with multi-rate trafﬁc. This paper presents the results of
a simulation study of multi-rate three-stage Clos networks
to which different architectures of overﬂow systems were
applied.
The paper has been divided into 5 sections. Section 2
introduces the reader to the issues of modelling blocking
and non-blocking switching networks. Section 3 discusses
the architecture and the routing algorithms in the proposed
switching structures with inter-stage links, while Section
4 presents the obtained results of the study. A conclusion
follows in Section 5 of the paper.
II. BLOCKING AND NON-BLOCKING
SWITCHING NETWORKS
Consider the Clos three-stage switching network pre-
sented in Figure 1. The switching network is composed
of n symmetrical switches n × n of links in every stage.
Each link has the capacity of f BBUs (Basic Bandwidth
Units [10]). The switching network is offered multi-rate
trafﬁc composed of a number of trafﬁc streams called trafﬁc
classes. Each trafﬁc class is deﬁned by parameters: call
intensity, service intensity and the number of BBUs required
141
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

Figure 1.
Three-stage Clos network v(m,n,r)
to set-up a connection. Our further assumption is that a
stream of offered trafﬁc of each class can be either an Erlang
or Engset stream [11]. The Basic Bandwidth Unit is deﬁned
as the greatest common divisor of all bit rates allocated to
calls of particular classes:
RBBU = GCD⌊R1, ..., RM⌋,
(1)
where Ri is the bit rate allocated to each call of class i.
The number of BBUs corresponding to a call of class i is
deﬁned by the following formula:
ti =
⌈
Ri
RBBU
⌉
,
(2)
The capacity of one free link of a switch can be also
determined in BBUs:
f =
⌊
C
RBBU
⌋
,
(3)
where C is the total bitrate in one link. The process of a
determination of the parameters of individual call classes
and the capacity of the component elements of the system in
BBUs, on the basis of Equations (1)–(3), is called bandwith
discretization [10]. The process makes the analysis and
modelling of multi-stage switching networks and many other
switching systems much more easy [14], [15].
Two basic types of selections are commonly used in
switching networks: point-to-point selection and point-to
group selection [12], [13]. With the point-to-point selection,
the controlling algorithm determines the input stage switch
at which a call of class i appeared. Then, the controlling
algorithm deﬁnes a switch for the output stage that has at
least one free outputs, i.e. an output link that has at least
ti free BBUs. In the next step, the algorithm tries to ﬁnd a
free connection path between these switches. If this is not
possible, then the call is lost due to internal blocking. If
the controlling algorithm indicates the absence of just one
switch in the last stage with a free output, then the call is lost
as well due to internal blocking. With the application of the
point-to-group selection, the outputs of the switches of the
last stage are divided into link groups called directions. The
controlling algorithm for the network ﬁrst determines the
input switch at which a call of a given class appears. Then,
the controlling algorithm chooses an output switch that has
a free output in the required direction. In the next step, the
controlling algorithm tries to set up a connection between
a given switch of the ﬁrst stage and a selected switch of
the outgoing stage. If there is no possibility of setting up a
connection path between these switches, then the controlling
algorithm determines another switch of the last stage of the
network that has a free output in the demanded direction.
If, again, the connection between the switches of the ﬁrst
and the last stages cannot be set up, then the controlling
algorithm determines next switch with free outputs in the
direction and another attempt at setting up a connection is
made. If, during one of such attempts, a connection can be
successfully set up, then the controlling algorithm proceeds
to execute the connection. If, in turn, all possible attempts
fail to set up a connection, then the connection is lost due
to internal blocking. The occupancy of all links in a given
direction is followed by a loss of a call due to external
blocking.
There are two basic methods for dividing outputs of
the last stage in direction [12], [14]. The ﬁrst method
assumes that all outputs for a given switch represent just
one direction. The other method is based on a selection of
one (or more) output links with the same number in each
of the switches of the last stage. This paper considers the
latter method for the execution of the output direction.
A measure for the number of events of blocking is the
blocking probability, which can be deﬁned as a ratio of
the number of blocked connections to the total number
of demands for setting up connections in the switching
network. The total blocking probability ET is the sum of the
internal blocking probability Ein and the external blocking
probability Eex:
ET = Ein + Eex.
(4)
In non-blocking networks, internal blocking probabilities are
equal to zero. Thus, in non-blocking networks, the following
equality takes place:
ET = Eex.
(5)
Equation (5) means that in non-blocking networks the block-
ing event occurs solely in output groups of the network and
depends exclusively on their capacity and offered trafﬁc.
Hence, the internal structure of a non-blocking network is
"transparent" for offered trafﬁc and the whole network can
be treated - from the trafﬁc engineering perspective - as a
single-stage system, i.e. as an output group of the network.
Structures of non-blocking networks are constructed based
on strictly deﬁned rules and theorems [1], [2], [3], [5]. A
transformation of a given structure of a blocking network
into a structure of a non-blocking network may be based on
an increase in the number of switches of appropriate stages
or, additionally, an increase in the number of stages in a
142
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

switching network. Special control algorithms that manage
the procedures of setting up connections are also known.
These algorithms lead eventually to a non-blocking property
of the network [5]. From the economic point of view, non-
blocking networks are far more expensive than blocking
networks. Therefore, in engineering practice most solutions
employ much cheaper blocking networks in which the
phenomenon of internal blocking is handled in such a way
as to guarantee its maximum limitation. Switching networks
with a low value of the internal blocking probability (that
deliver at least one order of magnitude lower than the
external blocking probability) are called quasi-non-blocking
networks. One of the most effective ways of diminishing the
internal blocking in the switching network is the application
of overﬂow links. Switching networks with overﬂow links
are described in the following section.
III. SWITCHING NETWORKS
WITH ADDITIONAL INTER-STAGE LINKS
Consider any example of a stage of the switching network
shown in Figure 1, in which additional inter-stage links
have been introduced. Figure 2 presents two ways of setting
up overﬂow connections in a given stage of the switching
network. In the ﬁrst case (Figure 2a), the presented system of
overﬂow links (called system I) is based on an application of
switches with one additional input and one additional output
in a given stage. An overﬂow link connects a given switch
with another switch, whereas the last switch is connected
with the ﬁrst switch. The second example (Figure 2b) shows
a system of overﬂow links (further on called system II). In
this system, switches with two additional inputs and outputs
are used. Each switch is connected by one inter-stage link
with a neighbouring switch. The second overﬂow link leads
to the next switch in a row. Thus, i-switch of a given stage
is connected with i + 1 switch and i + 2 switch of the
same stage. Each of the presented two overﬂow systems can
be applied in each stages of a three-stage Clos network. If
System I is applied to the second stage of the network, then
thus obtained structure will be labelled as System 1.2 (the
number of system, the number of the stages).
The algorithm for setting up a connection always tries to
set up a connection without overﬂow links ﬁrst. When the
connection cannot be executed, an attempt is made to effect
the connection with the help of overﬂow links. Assume that
the 1.3 structure is introduced to the switching network with
point-to-point selection, i.e. a system with overﬂows in the
third stage. If in a given state of the network a point-to-point
connection with a given output of the second switch of the
third stage cannot be set up, then the controlling algorithm
tries to set up this connection with the ﬁrst switch of the
third stage that has a connection (through the overﬂow link)
with the second switch of the third stage.
The following general algorithm for setting up connections
is applied to the considered switching networks with inter-
Figure 2.
Overﬂow systems in a selected stage of the Clos network.
stage links. In the ﬁrst step, the controlling device determines
the input on which a new call appeared, as well as a required
output in a given direction (point-to-point selection), or a
demanded direction (point-to-group selection). In the next
step an attempt is made to set up a point-to-point connection
(or, alternatively, a point-to-group connection) without the
application of overﬂow links. If setting up of a connection
without overﬂow links fails to be executed, the controlling
device proceeds to step three, in which all possible connec-
tion paths executed by the switches of a given stage to which
the considered switch has access to through free overﬂow
links are checked. If there are any free connection paths
that use overﬂow links, then, on the basis of the random
algorithm, one path is chosen and a connection of given type
(point-to-point or point-to-group) is set up. Otherwise, a call
is rejected. In order to diminish the amount of the volume
of occupied resources and the complexity of the controlling
algorithm for setting up a connection, one overﬂow link is
used at the maximum. This means that if an attempt at setting
up a connection with the use of overﬂow links is failed, then
no attempts with the application of next overﬂow links will
be made. It is assumed then, that in each attempt to set up
a connection only one overﬂow link can be used.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
To determine trafﬁc effectiveness of switching networks
with additional inter-stage links, a simulation tool that
enables to determine trafﬁc characteristics of the networks
with the required conﬁdence interval was developed for the
purposes of the study. An event planning method was used
to construct the simulator [16]. Thus constructed simulator
allows you to study three-stage Clos switching networks
with point-to-point selection and point-to-group selection.
Either of the overﬂow links systems described in Section
2 can be introduced to each of the stages. The network is
143
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

offered a mixture of Erlang trafﬁc of various classes (a call
stream of each of the trafﬁc classes is a Poisson stream,
whereas the service time of each class of calls is described
by an exponential distribution).
The investigation involved a simulation of a three-stage
Clos switching network composed of symmetrical switches
4 × 4 links, each with the capacity of f=30 BBUs. The
number of switches of each of the stages is equal to 4
switches. A network is offered three classes of calls that de-
mand respectively t1=9 BBUs, t2=6 BBUs, and t3=2 BBUs.
It is assumed that appropriate trafﬁc classes are offered in
the following proportions: a1 : a2 : a3 = 2 : 3 : 6. The
simulations were carried out for such a number of series
(each series includes 100,000 calls of the class with the
highest demands) that guarantees 99% conﬁdence interval
deﬁned on the basis of the t-Student distribution. This
interval in the simulation experiments in question is lower
by at least one order of magnitude than the average value
of the simulation result. The results of the simulation are
presented in relation to the volume of trafﬁc offered to one
BBU of an output link (a). Figure 3 shows a comparison
of the internal point-to-point blocking probabilities for the
calls of class i in the networks 0.0 (without overﬂow links)
and 1.1 (overﬂow system I in the ﬁrst stage of the network).
An introduction of a simple system of overﬂow links
leads to a decrease in the internal blocking probability in
a switching network.
Figure 4 shows the changes in the internal blocking
probability of a call of class 1 in the network 1.1 in relation
to the changes in the capacity of the overﬂow link for a=1
Erl/BBU. The ﬁgure indicates the exponential nature of these
changes. With the capacity of the overﬂow link equal to the
capacity of a link used in the switching network (f=30), the
internal blocking probability does not continue to decrease.
It emerges from the study that for a < 1 Erl/BBU, the
internal blocking probability stabilizes earlier f < 30. These
results are of practical signiﬁcance since the conclusion that
follows indicates that an application of overﬂow links with
identical capacity as the remaining links of a switching
network are sufﬁcient for constructing effective quasi-non-
blocking switching network.
Figure 4 presents the changes in the internal, external and the
total blocking probability for calls of class 1 in relation to
the capacity of overﬂow links in the network 1.1. Along with
the increase of the capacity of overﬂow links, the internal
blocking probability decreases. A decrease in the probability
leads to an increase in the external blocking probability.
This phenomenon can be explained in the following way.
A decrease in the internal probability blocking is equivalent
to an increase in call access of a given class to output groups
(directions) of the switching network. Increased trafﬁc at the
outputs of the switching network results in an increase in
the external blocking probability. Since the decrease in the
internal blocking probability is higher than the increase in
the external blocking probability, then, as a result, we obtain
a decrease in the total blocking probability.
A system of overﬂow links can be applied in any stage
of the three-stage Clos network. A choice of a stage of the
network and an overﬂow system in the switching network
has a substantial inﬂuence on the internal blocking probabil-
ity. Hence, the study included an analysis of System I and
System II used in each of the stages of the switching net-
work. Relevant investigations were carried out for the point-
to-point selection and the point-to-group selection. Figure 5
shows exemplary juxtaposition and comparison of the point-
to-point internal blocking probability for different structures
of switching networks with overﬂow in line with the notation
adopted in Section 2. The probability is expressed as a
percentage of the value of the internal blocking probability
in a network without overﬂow links, with the assumption that
the average trafﬁc for a BBU is equal to a=1 Erl. Figure 5
presents the results ordered according to the level of the
decrease in the blocking probability.
Figure 5.
Internal blocking probability in a three-stage Clos network for
the point-to-point selection: a) class 1, b) class 2, c) class 3
As the results of the study show, the introduction of
overﬂow links in the ﬁrst stage of the switching network
144
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 1.1
 1.2
 1.3
Internal blocking probability
Traffic offered per BBU [Erl]
Class 1 Structure 0.0 (without overflow links)
Class 2 Structure 0.0 (without overflow links)
Class 3 Structure 0.0 (without overflow links)
Class 1 Structure 1.1 (with overflow links)
Class 2 Structure 1.1 (with overflow links)
Class 3 Structure 1.1 (with overflow links)
Figure 3.
Internal blocking probability in a three-stage Clos network for the point-to-point selection with and without overﬂow links
10-3
10-2
10-1
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
Blocking probability
Overflow links BBU
Internal blocking probability
External blocking probability
Total blocking probability
Figure 4.
Dependence between internal, external and the total blocking probability and the capacity of overﬂow links in the network of System 1 for the
ﬁrst trafﬁc class (t1 = 10 BBUs), point-to-point selection
is the most effective. This phenomenon can be described
and interpreted combinatorially. The application of overﬂow
links in the ﬁrst stage is followed by the highest number
of potentially possible connection paths for connections,
whereas an increase in the number of potentially possible
connection paths in the third stage, resulting from the
application of overﬂow links, is the lowest. The presented
results constitute only a small fragment of the more complex
study carried out by the authors. Due to the limited space of
the paper, the ﬁgures show only the results yielded for the
point-to-point selection. With the case of the point-to-group
selection, however, similar changes occur in the blocking
probability and can be compared to those obtained for the
point-to-point selection, though the extent of these changes
is slightly lower. The phenomenon is related to the particular
way of operation of the point-to-point selection, in which
there are more potential connection paths for a point-to-
direction (a number of points) to be set up than in the case
of setting up a point-to-point connection.
The results presented in the paper were limited to switch-
ing networks 4 × 4. The authors also examined switching
networks with a much larger size, i.e. 16×16. The obtained
results conﬁrm that an introduction of overﬂow links in the
ﬁrst stage of the switching network also in that case is the
most effective.
145
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

V. CONCLUSIONS
The paper discusses the results of a simulation study of
Clos networks with the application of inter-stage links. On
the basis of the obtained results it can be unequivocally
stated that the most optimal solution is the application of
overﬂow structures in the ﬁrst stage of the network. All the
simulations carried out by the authors conﬁrm the highest
percentage decrease in the blocking probability recorded in
this particular conﬁguration.
The paper also includes the results of an investigation into
the dependencies between the internal blocking probability
and the capacity of overﬂow links. It is then proved that the
value of the capacity of an overﬂow link that is equal to
the capacities of links in a switch of the switching network
can virtually eliminate internal blocking. It emerges from
the studies carried out by the authors that in switching
networks with higher capacities the actual operation of the
system of overﬂow links is even more effective, i.e. a lower
number of overﬂow links (with lower capacities) appears
to be sufﬁcient to eliminate the phenomenon of internal
blocking in the network. Given the low cost of constructing
a system of overﬂow links, i.e. ﬁrst stage switches with an
increased number of input and output links, the application
of the solution in practice (in construction of quasi-non-
blocking networks) seems to be justiﬁed and well-grounded.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Clos, A study of non- blocking switching networks, Bell
System Technical Journal, vol. 32, No. 2, 1953, pp.406-424.
[2] F.K. Hwang, Three-stage multiconnection network which are
nonblocking in the wide sense. Bell System Technical Journal,
vol. 58, No. 10, 1979, pp. 2183-2187.
[3] A. Jajszczyk ,On nonblocking switching networks composed
of digital symmetrical matrices. IEEE Transactions on Com-
munications, vol. 31, No. 1, 1983, pp. 2-9.
[4] W. Kabaci´nski, On nonblocking switching networks for multi-
channel connections. IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 43, No. 2/3/4, 1995, pp. 222-224.
[5] W. Kabaci´nski, Nonblocking Electronic and Photonic Switch-
ing Fabrics, Springer, 2005.
[6] R. Fortet Ed. ,Calcul d’organe, Systeme Pentaconta, L.M.T
Paris, 1961.
[7] M. Stasiak, Computation of the probabilisty of losses in
commutation systems with mutual aid selectors. Rozprawy
Elektrotechniczne, Journal of the Polish Academy of Science,
Vol. XXXII, No. 3, 1986, pp. 961-977 (in polish)
[8] H. Inose, T. Saito, M. Kato, Three-stage time-division switch-
ing junctor as alternate route. Electronics letters, vol 2, No.
5, 1966, pp.78-84
[9] L. Katzschner, W. Lorcher, H. Weisschuh, On a experimental
Local PCM Switching Network, Proc. International Seminar
on Integrated System for Speech, Video and Data Communi-
cation, Zurich, 1972, pp. 61-68.
[10] J. Roberts, V. Mocci, and I. Virtamo, Eds., Broadband Net-
work Teletrafﬁc, Final Report of Action COST 242,
Berlin:
Commission of the European Communities, Springer, 1996.
[11] V.B. Iversen, Engineering Handbook, ITU-D, SG-2, Geneva,
2002.
[12] A. Eldin, Automatic telephone exchanges based on the link
connection principle, L. M. Ericsson, Stockholm, 1969.
[13] A. Lotze, A. Roder, G. Thierer, PCM- charts, Published
by Institute of Switching and Data Technics, University of
Stuttgart, 1979.
[14] M. Stasiak, Combinatorial considerations for switching
systems carrying multi-channel trafﬁc streams. Annals of
Telecommunications, vol. 51, No. 11-12, 1996, pp. 611-625.
[15] M. Stasiak, Effective availability models for switching net-
works. Published by Pozna´n Universty of Technology, Poz-
na´n, 2005, pp. 1-260 (in polish)
[16] J. Tyszer, Object-Oriented Computer Simulation of Discrete-
Event Systems, Springer, 1999.
146
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

