Radio Access Scheme using Super Pilot Channel 
in Reconfigurable Multi RAT-based Wireless Communication System 
 
Woogoo Park 
Wired & Wireless Convergence Research Department 
ETRI 
Daejeon, KOREA 
wgpark@etri.re.kr 
 
Hoyoung Song 
Wired & Wireless Convergence Research Department 
ETRI 
Daejeon, KOREA 
hsong@etri.re.kr 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new radio access 
method using super pilot channel in reconfigurable multi 
Radio 
Access 
Technology 
(RAT)-based 
wireless 
communication system. The goals of the proposed method 
are directed to a system and a process for radio access 
having compatibility with existing systems, being capable of 
increasing frequency efficiency, and being capable of 
increasing the transmitting rate. The intermediate results of 
the paper lay the ground for designing a new 5G air 
interface beyond LTE-A, which suits the diverse needs of 
future applications, like interference coordination between 
small cells and macro cells. 
 
Keywords-reconfigurability; 
wireless 
communication; 
pilot channel; super pilot channel; micro-band; macro-band; 
dynamic spectrum allocation; flexible spectrum management 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Various standards for wireless communication 
technologies have been established. Global wireless 
network operators have been taking steps to advance 
throughput of their mobile networks as part of the fourth 
generation LTE (Long-Term Evolution) communications 
technology. An important factor in radio access is the 
interference among cells [1]. By a very dense deployment 
of low-cost, low-power base stations, both the spatial 
reuse of radio resource and transmit power efficiency can 
be potentially improved.  It is envisioned that the next 
generation wireless networks will consist of macro-cells 
and a high density of small-cells with different 
capabilities including transmit power and coverage range 
[2]. Also, to improve spectrum efficiency, the D2D 
(Device-to-Device) communication is one of the 
solutions in heterogeneous networks [3]. The interference 
between macro-cells and small-cells as well as the 
interference between adjacent small cells is always a 
serious concern. The widely used inter-cell interference 
(ICI) mitigation techniques in homogeneous networks are 
soft frequency reuse [1] and interference self-cancellation 
scheme [4]. Although small cells can help reduce data 
traffic density, complexity should be improved in using 
ICI. Especially ICI mitigation techniques in D2D should 
be applied to both small and wide area cells; to both low 
and high frequency bands; to both high and low mobility 
scenarios; and also it could improve the effective SINR 
(Signal-to-Interference and Noise Ratio). The core 
concept of the fourth generation network is as follows: 
every (Signal-to-Interference and Noise Ratio). The core 
concept of the fourth generation network is as follows: 
every device uses an IP address, and the proposed 
network of a convergence type includes an IP-based core 
network and access networks based on various existing 
standards. The fact that these various standards operate in 
different bands restricts any approach to accommodate 
all future standards. In most cases, existing sensing 
frequency bands have a too wide range of 400MHz to 
6GHz [5].  Therefore, it takes a long sensing time to use 
a different system, and a large amount of power is 
consumed. The advantage of this paper is that it allows 
tight coordination features such as interference in D2D. It 
also provides potential for spectrum gains like easier 
deployment and other site cost. The rest of this paper is 
organized as follows: Section II describes the related 
works. In Section III, the system description and the 
proposed frequency structure of a cell are presented. 
Then in Section IV, the radio access scheme with access 
method of macro-band and micro-band SPC (Super Pilot 
Channel) in RAS is considered. Conclusion is shown in 
Section V. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Small cells in heterogeneous network are typically 
overlaid on the existing macro cells and installed in the 
dense area close to small cell users [2]. It is noted that 
small cell users need sensing time for avoiding 
interference from macro cell. Compared to the 
interference management of D2D communication on the 
different frequencies in the previous work [3], we 
propose interference management not only D2D but also 
general mobile users by allocating SPC-based channel 
over macro cell area including small cells. In an attempt 
to reduce sensing time among heterogeneous networks, 
E2R is currently developing concepts and solutions for a 
Cognitive Pilot Channel (CPC), encompassing both in-
band/out-band and downlink/uplink functionalities [6]. It 
focuses on the network selection strategy according to the 
information which could be brought by CPC, whereas 
our key ideas are reconfigurable and broadcast-based 
SPC assignment by designing of frequency structure of 
macro and micro cells. Another works is that a novel 
homogeneous mesh grouping scheme based broadcast 
CPC mode is designed to improve the efficiency of 
broadcast CPC mode in the Cognitive Wireless Networks 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[7]. However the CPC is based on broadcasting 
technology and each access station is provided with 
multiple RAT information. This requires a supervising 
CPC control station for managing the RAT overall. J. R. 
Moorman presented the development and implementation 
of a software radio designed for a 3G system that 
expands upon the notion of the physical layer software 
radio to encompass upper layer processing capabilities 
[8]. 
To realize the structure of device with a high 
mobility, flexibility and reconfigurability, software 
Defined Radio (SDR) is one of possibilities. It provides 
the seamless shifting between existed air-interface 
standards. Extending the flexibility further, a system 
capable to sense the spectrum space available for 
communication and adapt to it is Cognitive Radio (CR). 
Obviously SDR in CR should be configured not only to 
independent standards, protocols and services but also to 
the extensively dynamic nature of bandwidth allocation 
[9]. In [10], a low-cost reconfigurable antenna array was 
implemented for SDR-based Communication Systems.  
In this paper, we propose a prototype of a 
reconfigurable radio access for microcells as well as 
macro cell, based on SPC that will be integrated with 
multi-RAT networks and shown operation of a micro-
band based on a micro-band SPC between a RAS and its 
RMS. SPC is used through interworking   with   a   
Reconfigurable   Mobile   Station (RMS) to provide an 
optimum radio access environment satisfying Dynamic 
Spectrum Allocation (DSA) and Flexible Spectrum 
Management (FSM). The first RAS, which evolves to 
enable SPC-based multi-access, shares corresponding 
SPC information through broadcasting (macro-band) to 
support radio environment sharing and reconfiguration of 
the RMS based on the sharing (micro- band).  As  used  
herein,  “reconfigurable”  means  that  a number  of 
RATs  are  supported,  and  RMSs  can  be configured in   
conformity   with   each   RAT.   Such technology 
includes CR/SDR technology, etc. In practice, a large 
number of CPC control stations are expectably necessary 
on a global scale, and a considerable amount of cost and 
time will be incurred. In this paper, we focus on inter-cell 
interference between the macro cell and the small cell as 
well as frequencies allocation under heterogeneous 
networks. 
 
III. PROPOSED MODEL 
A 
system 
for 
radio 
access 
in 
a 
wireless 
communication system in which a number of RATs exist 
includes RAS configured to share radio environment 
information and the RATs with an adjacent RAS using a 
macro-band SPC. The RAS being reconfigurable in 
conformity with RATs and a RMS configured to transmit 
and receive the radio environment information and the 
RATs to/from the RAS using a micro-band SPC and 
access the RAS using the micro-band SPC, the RMS 
being reconfigurable in conformity with RAT of the 
accessed RAS. 
A. System Description 
Fig. 1 briefly depicts a method for radio access based 
on a SPC in a reconfigurable multi-RAT mobile 
communication system.  It  shows  RASs  in  RAT-i  to 
handle  RATs  supported  in  respective  cells.  RMSs in 
RAT-j access the RASs and receive a service using the 
RATs. The macro-band SPCs (red arrows) in RAT-1 
exchange information regarding the RATs between the 
RASs. The micro-band SPCs (blue arrows) in RAT-j 
perform access and control between the RASs and the 
RMSs. Each RAS supports RAT, which is supported by a 
cell, managed by the RAS itself. Respective RASs 
configured to transmit the macro-band SPCs may be 
configured in a mesh type. Various RATs are used in Fig. 
1 and RATs have different cell radius.  In the 
overlapping cell environment using RAT-1, respective 
RASs belonging to RATs (RAT-2, RAT-3, RAT-4, 
RAT-i, and RAT-j) use their own RATs. In a cell using 
RAT-2, the current RAT-1 can be used simultaneously 
(i.e. overlapping cell). For example, a WiBro cell 
capable of managing a wide range of networks may 
include a WLAN cell capable of managing small-scale 
networks. A RMS  in  RAT-j  transmits  an  access  
request  to  an accessible   RAM   in   RAT-i   using   
micro-band   SPC between RAS-j and RAM in RAT-j 
and, when the access request   is   acknowledged,   
communication   becomes possible. In order to enable 
this process, the RAS in the center cell broadcasts RAT 
and radio environment information to RASs in adjacent 
cells using a macro-band SPC between center RAS and 
RAS-j in RAT-j to share the radio environment 
information. Based on the information broadcasted using 
the macro-band SPCs between RAS-j and RAM in RAT-
j, when the access is acknowledged, communication 
becomes possible. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Super pilot channel-based cell configuration  
 
B. Arrangement of Frequencies 
In Fig. 2, single center cell is surrounded by six 
adjacent cells and it communicates with RMSs using 
same frequency. For example, a cell managed by RAS1 is 
surrounded by six adjacent cells managed by six 
RASs{2,3,4,5,6,7}. Furthermore, a cell managed by 
RAS3 is surrounded by six adjacent cells managed by six 
RASs{1,2,4,8,9,10}. The RASs of such center cells 
broadcast radio environment information using the 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

macro-band SPCs to share the radio environment 
information. For example, RAS3 is an adjacent cell of 
RAS1 and receives radio environment information 
through the macro-band SPC. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Arrangement of frequencies among RASs 
 
However when RAS3 acts as a center cell, it 
broadcasts radio environment information to RASs of its 
six adjacent cells through the macro-band SPC to share 
the radio environment information. Each unit cell has a 
first layer of cells, where influence is limited to an 
adjacent cell by adjusting power intensity without using 
different frequencies, and a second layer of cells, where a 
single frequency band is used to communicate with 
adjacent cells to avoid interference with cells beyond the 
adjacent cells. For example, the first layer of RAS1 
includes RASs{12,3,4,5,6,7} and second layer thereof 
includes RASs{8,9,10}. 
 
C. Frequency Structure of a Cell 
Fig. 3 shows a RAS with an antenna belonging to the 
RAS and capable of transmitting a micro-band SPC and a 
macro-band SPC. The ith RAS has two antennas and two 
frequency bands corresponding to the two antennas. One 
frequency band is used to broadcast radio environment 
information to the jth(j>i) RAS in an adjacent cell using 
the antenna which belongs to the RAS and which can 
transmit a macro-band SPC. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Frequency structure of RAS 
 
 In addition, RMSs inside the ith RAS are provided 
with radio environment information regarding the center 
cell and adjacent cells using the antenna, which can 
transmit a micro-band SPC. The two antennas are 
configured to transmit/receive two different frequency 
bands respectively, i.e. a macro-band as a frequency band 
for broadcasting each radio environment information to 
the jth(j>i) RAS in an adjacent cell and a micro-band as a 
frequency band for providing RMSs inside the ith RAS 
with radio environment information regarding the center 
cell and adjacent cells. 
IV. RADIO ACCESS SCHEME 
To cope with the huge demand for capacity in ultra-
dense network, next-generation networks rely on densely 
deployed RAS between macro and small cells. To expand 
capacity and minimize interference, we used macro-band 
SPC on between RASs and micro-band between RAS 
and its RMSs. 
A. Access Method of Macro-band & Micro-band SPC in 
RAS 
Figs. 4 and 5 show access method of macro-band and 
micro-band SPC, which transmits and receives radio 
environment information between RASs. The RAS in Fig. 
4 transmits radio environment information, which has 
been measured and stored in its storage space, to adjacent 
RASs including the RAS-2 using the macro-band SPC.  
The RAS-2 stores the radio environment from the RAS-1 
in its storage space, acting as center RAS, and transmits 
the information from the RAS-1 to RASs including the 
RAS-3 using the macro-band SPC. In a similar manner, 
the RAS-3 receives the radio environment information 
from the RAS-1 and stores the information in its storage 
space. The RAS-2 similarly transmits its radio 
environment information to RASs in adjacent cells, i.e. 
RAS-1 and RAS-3, which then stores the radio 
environment information from the RAS-2, acting as 
center RAS, and transmits radio environment information 
regarding the RAS-1 to RASs in adjacent cells. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Access method of macro-band SPC between RASs 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Fig. 5 shows operation of a micro-band based on a 
micro-band SPC between a RAS and its RMS and also 
represents a process of accessing RAS-i by RMS using 
micro-band SPCs (REQ & ACK). It is assumed that 
RAS-1 supports RAT-1. 
 
 
Figure 5. Operation of micro-band SPC between RAS and its RMS 
 
B. Handover Mchanism in SPC Operation 
It is assumed that in Fig. 6, RAT-1 is supported by 
RAS-i, and RAT-2 is supported by RAS-j. The RMS 
existing inside a cell of RAT-1 transmits a micro-band 
SPC REQ message, which is an in-band signal, to the 
RAS-i.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Operation of handover by exchanging adjacent channel 
information 
 
The RAS-i 
transmits 
its 
radio 
environment information as shown in Fig. 5, when the 
radio environment is available. However, when the radio 
environment is not available, the RAS-i checks the radio 
environment information of an adjacent cell to see which 
is more available. Then the RAS-i loads frequency of an 
adjacent cell, which is the most available, onto a micro- 
band SPC ACK message and transmits it to the RMS that 
has made the request. The RMS receives the frequency 
regarding the RAS-j and changes it into RAT. The RMS 
moves   to   the   RAS-j   and   performs   a   typical   call 
procedure. In Table I, we provide an overview of the 
structure of radio environment information believed to be 
closely related to the radio environment information 
frame of a RAS considered in this paper. Each cell has its 
radio environment information map data including a self-
RAS id field containing its own RAS id and an adjacent 
RAS id field containing information regarding operators 
to which RASs belong. In addition, the frequency, radio 
access specification, channel status, and traffic status are 
stored for respective operators to which RASs belong. 
Fig. 7 illustrates the structure of a macro-band SPC. 
 
 
TABLE I.  RADIO ENVIRONMENT INFORMATION FRAME 
Self 
RAS id 
Adjacent 
RAS is 
Operator 
Frequency 
RAT 
Channel 
Status 
Traffic 
RAS1 
RAS1 
O1 
f1 
RAT1 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
f2 
RAT2 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
O2 
f3 
RAT3 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
f2 
RAT2 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
RAS2 
O1 
f1 
RAT1 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
f2 
RAT2 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
O2 
f3 
RAT3 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
f2 
RAT2 
ch_sts 
traffic_sts 
 
A macro-band is similar to an out-of-band signal of a 
CPC. And radio environment information between RASs 
includes a REQ message and an ACK message. The REQ 
message includes a RAS id field and a null field. The 
ACK message of the receiving RAS corresponds to an 
ACK signal in response to the REQ signal of the 
transmitting RAS, and includes self-RAS id and its radio 
environment information. Fig. 7 illustrates an overview 
of a macro-band SPC, which is similar to an out-of-band 
signal of a CPC. It refers to a signal for sharing RAS 
radio environment information between RASs, and 
includes an RAS and its radio environment information 
transmitted between RASs. Fig. 7 illustrates an overview 
of a macro-band SPC, which is similar to an out-of-band 
signal of a CPC. It refers to a signal for sharing RAS 
radio environment information between RASs, and 
includes an RAS and its radio environment information 
transmitted between RASs. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Message of macro-band SPC  
 
The radio environment information includes a REQ 
message and an ACK message. The REQ message 
consists of a RAS id and a null. The ACK message 
consists of RAS id and radio environment information. 
The RAS REQ message of a transmitting RAS 
corresponds 
to 
a 
REQ 
signal 
requesting 
radio 
environment information regarding the receiving RAS, 
and includes its self-RAS id and null data for 
compatibility with an ACK signal. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
Figure 8. Message of micro-band SPC 
 
Fig. 8 is shown as an overview of a micro-band SPC, 
which is similar to an in-band signal of a CPC. It refers to 
a signal for transmitting/receiving optimum radio 
environment information between a RAS and a RMS 
when RASs share radio environment information, which 
includes a REQ message and an ACK message.  The 
REQ message refers to a message transmitted from a 
RMS to a RAS through an uplink, and includes a RMS id 
field and a null field. The ACK message refers to a 
message transmitted from the RAS to the RMS. 
 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
To expand capacity and minimize interference among 
macro and small cells, we proposed radio   access   
scheme   using   super   pilot   channel   in reconfigurable     
multi       RAT-based wireless communication system,   
in   which   includes   a   RAS configured to share radio 
environment information and the multi RATs with an 
adjacent RAS using a macro- band SPC, the RAS being 
reconfigurable in conformity with the RATs. The RMS is 
configured to transmit and receive the radio environment 
information and the RATs to/from the RAS using a 
micro-band SPC and access the RAS using the micro-
band SPC, the RMS being reconfigurable in conformity 
with RAT of the accessed RAS. For further study, we 
will set up the simulation model using our proposed radio 
access scheme with super pilot channel and then evaluate 
its result. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. L. Qian, W. Hardjawana, Y. H. Li, B. Vucetic, J. L. Shi, and 
X.   Z.   Yang,   “Inter-cell   interference   coordination   through 
adaptive soft frequency reuse in LTE networks,” IEEE Wireless 
Commun. and Networking Conf., Apr. 2012. 
[2] 
J. Hoydis, M. Kobayashi, and M. Debbah, “Green small-cell 
networks,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Mag., vol. 6, no.1, pp. 
37~43, 2011. 
[3] 
Z. Liu, T. Peng, H. Chen, and Wenbo Wang, “Optimal D2D 
User Allocation over Multi-Bands under Heterogeneous 
Networks,” GLOBECOM., pp. 1339 – 1344, Apr. 2012. 
[4] 
K.  H.  Kim  and  B.  W.  Seo,  “Efficient  ICI  Self-Cancellation 
Scheme for OFDM Systems,” ETRI Journal, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 
537-544, Aug. 2014. 
[5] 
P.  Sebastian,  K.  Marius,  J.  Martin  and  K.  Thomas,  "Ultra 
broadband indoor channel measurements and calibrated ray 
tracing propagation modeling at THz frequencies," Journal OF 
Communications and Networks, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 547-558, Dec. 
2013. 
[6] 
Y. Ji, K. Zhang, Z. Feng, C. Chi, P. Zhang, “CPC-assisted 
Network 
Selection 
Strategy,” 
Mobile 
and 
Wireless 
Communications Summit, pp. 1-5, 2007 
[7] 
Q. Zhang, Z. Feng and G. Zhang, “A Novel Homogeneous Mesh 
Grouping Scheme for Broadcast Cognitive Pilot Channel in 
Cognitive Wireless Networks,” IEEE International Conference 
on Communications (ICC), pp. 1-6, 2010 
[8] 
J. R. Moorman, “Implementation of a 3G W-CDMA Software 
Radio,” ICC, vol. 4, pp. 2494-2499, 2003. 
[9] 
R. D. Raut and K. D. Kulat, “SDR Design for Cognitive Radio,” 
International Conference on Modelling, Simulation and Applied 
Optimization, pp.1-8, 2011 
[10] M. Donelli and C. Sacchi, “Implementation of a Low-Cost 
Reconfigurable Antenna Array for SDR-based Communication 
Systems,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, pp. 1-7, 2012 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

