Position Estimation of RFID based Sensors using Surface Acoustic Wave Devices
M. Brandl, K. Kellner
Center for Integrated Sensor Systems
Danube University Krems
Krems. Austria
e-mail: martin.brandl@donau-uni.ac.at
Abstract—A lot of all-day products are equipped with radio
frequency identification (RFID) tags to enable a wireless
identification, payment etc. For a lot of applications, especially
for sensor based applications, location information of the RFID
based sensor tag would be helpful. In this paper an accurate
and robust method for position estimation of RFID tags based
on
time
of
arrival
(ToA)
calculation
of
a
transmitted
broadband spread spectrum signal is described. The used
spread spectrum waveforms are broadband chirp signals
which are generated by passive surface acoustic wave devices
(SAW). The performance of RFID position estimation under
additive
white
Gaussian
noise
(AWGN)
conditions
was
simulated.
Keywords-RFID
tags;
position
measurement;
chirp
modulation; surface acoustic wave devices; correlation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Radio frequency identification devices (RFIDs) are used
in numerous applications like wireless sensors. For advanced
applications the actual position and the tracking of RFID tags
is from importance. Therefore for battery operated devices a
method for RFID position estimation with low power
consumption is needed.
The principles of position estimation of RFID devices
can be separated into two groups. First, the RFID device is
detected by its ID response if it is powering up in the vicinity
of a base station. If a RFID device is supplied with energy
from an external device, the standard ISO/IEC 14443 [1]
defines that the RFID’s ID will be periodically transmitted.
Based on this principle, the position of a RFID device can be
roughly estimated from the maximum transmission distance
of the base station [2]-[4]. A second principle for position
estimation is given by base station connected to a directional
antenna. RFID tags are located on known position and if the
base station irradiates one of the RFID tags, it powers up and
transmits its ID. From the angle of the directional antenna
and the known position on the RFID tags, the position of the
base station can be estimated [5][6]. This principle is
commonly used for moving objects like robots. In general,
the performance of position estimation can be improved by
using the received signal strength (RSS) as an additional
indicator [7]-[9].
II.
SYSTEM DESIGN
In this study, a principle for wireless position estimation
of RFID devices based on time of arrival (ToA) and phase of
arrival
calculation
of
a
transmitted
broadband
spread
spectrum signal is described (Figure 1).
Figure 1.
Transmission of linear chirp signals for ToA measurement.
The used spread spectrum waveforms are broadband
chirp signals which are generated by passive surface acoustic
wave devices (SAW). The impulse response of the used
SAW filters is a linear chirp signal with center frequency
f0=250MHz and a bandwidth of B=80MHz (Figure 2). The
chirp signal is generated by exciting the SAW chirp-filter
with a short pulse which is delivered by the RFID unit on the
tag. To transmit a powerful chirp signal from the RFID tag to
the base stations a pulse generator based on an avalanche
transistor was developed. With this method, high energy
pulses with rise times below 3ns are generated for exciting
the SAW chirp filter. The chirp signal is transmitted via a RF
antenna to RFID base-stations which are located within the
transmission range.
Base-
station #2
Base-
station #1
Base-
station #3
RFID device
Pulse
generator
SAW chirp filter
RFID
link
RF-
antenna
RFID chip
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

a)
b)
Figure 2.
a) Linear frequency modulated signal (chirp signal), b)
compressed chirp signal after matched filter detection (autocorrelation
function ACF).
The RFID is not continuously in the active mode but will
normally be set in the low-power sleep state and powered up
only at scheduled time points or on request by a received
wake-up signal. After wake-up, the RFID unit starts a
periodic transmission of chirp signals to receivers within the
transmission range. To gain a high signal to noise ratio
(SNR) at the receiver a signal matched filter having the time
inverse impulse response of the transmitted signal is used
which generates in the matched filter case the chirp-
autocorrelation function at the output with a compression
gain proportional to the time-bandwidth product of the chirp
(Figure 2b).
The position estimation is done by trilateration [1-3]
where the time of arrival differences of the chirp signals at
the receivers is calculated (Figure 3). If the position of more
than none RFID tag should be estimated, each RFID
transmits its unique code for separation. The coding of the
transmitted
chirp
signals
is
done
by
pulse
position
modulation where the chirps are located in different time
slots.
Figure 4.
Mean accuracy of the RFID position estimation under
AWGN conditions. N = 100.
The localization accuracy of the proposed method was
determined under the assumption of an AWGN (additive
white Gaussian noise) transmission channel where the
received signal is corrupted with noise. The accuracy of
position estimation based on chirp signals under LOS
conditions is mainly given by the peak amplitude of the chirp
ACF and the noise on the transmission channel. The
simulation results for the accuracy of position estimation for
different SNR values are depicted in Figure 4. It is shown
that for SNR values above 10dB the position can be
estimated with an error below 2%.
III.
CONCLUSION
An accurate and power-saving principle for wireless
position estimation of RFID devices was proposed. For
correlative signal processing with a high immunity against
interference in the transmission channel, linear chirp signals
for locating RFID devices are used. The signal generation is
carried out on the RFID tag by triggering a SAW-based chirp
filter with short and broadband pulses. Several simulations of
the chirp-based position estimation method under AWGN
conditions underlie the accuracy and robustness of the
proposed principle. Further simulations will be done under
AWGN
and
indoor
situations. The proposed
position
estimation principle should also be compared to different
existing methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the government of Lower Austria for
funding this work and the European Commission (EFRE) for
supporting our activities under project ID no. WST3-T-
91/026-2012.
BS1
(x1,y1,z1)
BS2
(x2,y2,z2)
BS3
(x3,y3,z3)
RFID
݀1 = ܿ∆ݐଵଶ = ඥ(ݔଵ −ݔ)ଶ + (ݕଵ −ݕ)ଶ + (ݖଵ −ݖ)ଶ
݀2 = ܿ∆ݐଶଷ = ඥ(ݔଶ −ݔ)ଶ + (ݕଶ −ݕ)ଶ + (ݖଶ −ݖ)ଶ
݀3 = ܿ∆ݐଷଵ = ඥ(ݔଷ −ݔ)ଶ + (ݕଷ −ݕ)ଶ + (ݖଷ −ݖ)ଶ
d1
d2
d3
Figure 3.
Trilateration principle for 3D RIFD position estimation.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

REFERENCES
[1]
ISO14443.
Available:
http://www.openpcd.org/ISO14443,
accessed: 08 March 2016.
[2]
M. Bouet, and L. A. dos Santos, “RFID tags: Positioning
principles and localization techniques,” In Wireless Days,
2008. WD '08. 1st IFIP, pp. 1–5.
[3]
C. Wang, H. Wu, and N.F. Tzeng, “RFID-based 3-D
positioning schemes,” In IEEE INFOCOM 2007. 26th IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communications, pp.
1235–1243.
[4]
N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “GPS-less low-cost
outdoor localization for very small devices,” IEEE Personal
Communications, 7(5), pp. 28–34, 2000.
[5]
P. Youngsu, W. L. Je, and K. SangWoo, “Improving position
estimation on RFID tag floor localization using RFID reader
transmission power control,” In Robotics and Biomimetics,
2008. ROBIO 2008. IEEE International Conference on, pp.
1716–1721.
[6]
M. Bouet, and G. Pujolle, “L-VIRT: A 3-D range-free
localization method for RFID tags based on virtual landmarks
and mobile readers,” In Consumer Communications and
Networking Conference, 2009. CCNC 2009. 6th IEEE, pp. 1–
5.
[7]
F. Manzoor, H. Yi, and K. Menzel, “Passive RFID-based
indoor positioning system: an algorithmic approach,” In
RFID-Technology and Applications (RFID-TA) 2010. IEEE
International Conference on, pp. 112–117.
[8]
H. Koyuncu, and S. H. Yang, “A survey of indoor positioning
and object locating systems,” IJCSNS International Journal of
Computer Science and Network Security, 10(5), pp. 121–128,
2010.
[9]
H. Liu, H. Darabi, P. Banerjee, J. Liu, “Survey of wireless
indoor
positioning
techniques
and
systems,”
IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part C
(Applications and Reviews), 37(6), pp. 1067–1080, 2007.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

