Optimal Bandwidth Consumption for IPTV Services over WiMAX 
Multihop Relay Networks 
 
Mohamed-el-Amine Brahmia, Abdelhafid Abouaissa and Pascal Lorenz 
University of Haute Alsace – MIPS-GRTC, 34, Rue de Grillenbreit 68000 Colmar – France 
{mohamed-el-amine.brahmia, abdelhafid.abouaissa, pascal.lorenz}@uha.fr 
 
Abstract—The quick evolution in technologies has allowed 
IPTV video stream delivery over IP networks. For that 
reason consumers have anticipated predictions in which the 
evolution of IP-based next-generation networks may be 
eventually driven by video service delivery requirements. An 
IEEE 802.16j mobile WiMAX relay network is a next-
generation mobile wireless broadband network. Compared 
to IEEE 802.16e which also supports mobility, IEEE 802.16j 
introduces relay stations to the network to offer improved 
coverage and capacity over multihop radio systems. 
However, to supply different IPTV services (HD-TV, SD-TV, 
Web-TV and Mobile-TV) to consumers, providers must have 
a video server for each IPTV service type, which increases 
network resource consumption. In this paper, we present a 
new mechanism for Multicast Broadcast Service (MBS). In 
particular, the proposed solution allows a provider to offer 
different IPTV services to varied users requests via WiMAX 
multihop relay access network. Results show that the 
proposed scheme ensures network load optimization and 
reduces bandwidth consumption. 
Keywords—Multihop WiMAX Relay; IEEE 802.16j; 
Bandwidth consumption; IPTV services; Mulitcast tree. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
WiMAX (Worldwide inter-operability for Microwave 
access) or IEEE 802.16 is communication technology used 
for wirelessly delivering high-speed internet service to a 
wide geographical zone [1]. In Metropolitan Area 
Networks (MANs), it is typically considered as the most 
reliable wireless access technology. Moreover, emerging 
Multihop relay (MR) wireless networks provide additional 
coverage or performance advantage in an access network 
[2]. It also provides a low-cost and flexible infrastructure 
that can be simultaneously utilized by multiple users for a 
variety of applications. However, the bandwidth and range 
of this wireless infrastructure make it suitable to support 
QoS constraints required by applications, like providing 
data, telecommunications (VoIP) and IPTV. 
Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) is gaining 
recognition as a viable alternative for the delivery of video 
by video streaming providers [3]. The mobile IPTV 
technology enables users to transmit and receive 
multimedia traffic including television signals, video, 
audio, text and graphic services through IP-based wireless 
networks with not only full support of service quality but 
also with a quality experience (QoE), and security, 
mobility, and interactive functions [4]. 
Even though there are many advantages for using the 
IP based mobile WiMAX networks there are also some 
challenges. Due to the high quality IPTV services, it is 
impossible to guarantee the sufficient amount of the 
limited mobile WiMAX bandwidth for the mobile IPTV 
services each and every time. A Service Level Agreement 
(SLA) [5]-[6] between the mobile IPTV service provider 
and mobile WiMAX network operator in order to reserve 
sufficient bandwidth for the IPTV calls can increase the 
satisfaction level of the mobile IPTV users. For inequality 
between mobile WiMAX network capacity and bandwidth 
required by non-IPTV services and IPTV services, some 
requested mobile IPTV calls are blocked and some 
ongoing IPTV calls are dropped or quality is degraded. 
WiMAX Multihope Relay technology is the adequate 
technology to provide IPTV services for heterogeneous 
user requests or their devices, because it supports QoS 
based multicasting functionality [7]. However, at the 
moment to provide varied IPTV services, providers 
transfer several copies of the same video content 
(channel), one copy for each video stream service (HD-
TV, SD-TV, Web-TV and Mobile-TV). This causes 
increases in: bandwidth consumption and therefore 
influence provider video channel offering. To address this 
problem, we propose a solution whose objective is to 
reduce bandwidth consumption and supports varied 
services. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents 
an overview of the proposed solution. In section III, we 
look at the related work and background of the mechanism 
used. The proposed mechanism is presented in Section IV. 
In Section V, we present the simulation results for the 
proposed scheme. Finally, we conclude our paper in 
Section IV. 
II. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
In this paper, we are interested in IPTV (internet 
protocol television), which is an application which is 
currently increasing. Over the course of the next few years, 
the number of global IPTV subscribers is expected to grow 
from 28 million in 2009 to 83 million in 2013[8]. 
Depending on the network architecture of the service 
provider, it is possible to have varied services for the same 
video content (HD-TV, SD-TV, Web-TV and Mobile-
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

TV). Today, providers' video server architecture model is 
relatively simple and easy to manage. This is because 
providers use one server for each IPTV video service as is 
shown in Fig. 1. But, this increases bandwidth 
consumption when providers send each IPTV service flow 
separately.  
 
 
Figure 1. Traditional network architecture for IPTV services.  
 
To solve this problem, we propose a new multicast 
mechanism for IPTV application over WiMAX multihop 
relay network, which would make it possible to reduce 
bandwidth 
consumption 
while 
satisfying 
QoS 
requirements. The main idea of our solution is to use only 
one video streaming server for all IPTV services as is 
shown in Fig. 2. We use Scalable Video Coding ‘SVC’ to 
extract video to different IPTV services. Furthermore, we 
propose a new multicast tree construction method by 
introducing MT-CID (Multicast Tunnel CID) and 
Transmission Identity (TxId). The TxId is attributed for 
each IPTV services (HD-TV, SD-TV, Web-TV and 
Mobile-TV) to extract video contents towards its 
destination with the requested quality. 
 
 
Figure 2. Proposed network architecture for IPTV services. 
 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Several 
references 
have 
examined 
real 
time 
applications and more precisely IPTV in WiMax networks. 
For example in [7], an IGMP proxy is proposed to send 
Leave/Join/Report to the upstream router on behalf of the 
wireless sub-network. The proposal can save power 
consumption caused by asynchronous IGMP Query 
messages and improves the uplink throughput. In [4], the 
authors propose a SLA negotiation procedure for mobile 
IPTV users over mobile WiMAX networks. The 
Bandwidth Broker controls the allocated bandwidth for 
IPTV and non-IPTV users. The proposal dynamically 
reserves bandwidth for the IPTV services and increases the 
IPTV user’s satisfaction level. 
In [9], He et al. have proposed a standard-based cost-
effective solution in order to support MBS services in 
WiMAX multi-hop relay network. They define a BS-
oriented source-routing protocol to automatically discover 
relay network topology where the mobile relay station 
forms an ad hoc topology. They have used IGMP snooping 
protocol on the BS to automatically track the MBS group 
membership and service activation. 
To address the optimal routing and bandwidth 
provisioning problems for survivable multicast in 
networks supporting IPTV services. Network-coding-
based approaches and two tree-based approaches are 
formulated by integer linear programming in [10]. 
In [11], the invention relates to a multicast router of a 
content distribution system and a associated method 
adapted for receiving an upper level of a network 
multiplexed; in scalable video compression encoded and 
television video stream ,this in hand . On the other hand, it 
adapts the output video content to the allowed bandwidth 
of the lower level of the network. The authors in [11], do 
not take into account the constraints of QoS required by 
users. However, in our proposal we adapt the video stream 
to the user’s requests while reducing bandwidth. 
IV. 
PROPOSED IPTV MULTICAST MECHANISM 
A. Scalable Video Coding 
D Traditional digital video transmission is based on 
H.222.0 MPEG-2 systems for broadcasting services over 
satellite, cable, and wireless transmission channels, or on 
H.320 for conversational video conferencing services. 
These channels are typically characterized by a fixed 
spatio-temporal format of the video signal (SDTV or 
HDTV or CIF for H.320 video telephone) [12]. 
Scalable video coding (SVC) allows a single data 
stream to contain multiple speeds and resolutions. Solving 
the problem with applications that stutter, skip and crash 
when they cannot keep up with bit rates. SVC enables a 
single encoder to create a video bitstream that contains 
several bitstreams which can be separately decoded by 
dropping packets to down-sample for lower spatial 
resolution, lower temporal resolution or a lower quality, or 
a combination of the three, as required for specific client 
viewing hardware [13]. 
In the proposed mechanism, we use Scalable Video 
Coding to adapt the data size to the changes in video 
stream parameters. SVC is a highly attractive solution to 
the problems posed by the characteristics of modern video 
transmission systems [12]. In our solution, we integrate 
SVC functionalities for each RS in order to extract IPTV 
video stream to various format (e.g., HD-TV, SD-TV, etc). 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 3. The Scalable Video Coding (SVC) principle [13]. 
 
B. Multicast in WiMAX Multihop Relay 
MBS (Multicast Broadcast Service) in WiMAX is 
based on the ability of the WiMAX network to provide 
flexible and efficient mechanisms to send common content 
to multiple users sharing the same radio resources [9]. To 
support consumer’s heterogeneity in WiMAX multihop 
relay technology, we propose a new multicast solution 
which is based on SVC and Transmission Identity. We 
attribute a Transmission Identity (TxId) for each IPTV 
service, as it is shown in the Table I. TxId enables BS and 
RS to transfer only one copy of IPTV video stream with 
high quality. 
TABLE I.  
IPTV SERVICE TRANSMISSION IDENTITY MAPPING 
IPTV Service 
Transmission Identity 
High definition (HD-TV) 
TxId=1 
Standard definition (SD-TV) 
TxId=2 
Web-TV 
TxId=3 
Mobile-TV 
TxId=4 
 
In this context, our intention is to propose a new 
multicast tree construction strategy that reduces bandwidth 
consumption by sending only one copy of IPTV video 
stream, supporting various IPTV services through the use 
of SVC and TxId. 
C. Multicast Tree Construction 
As mentioned on IEEE 802.16j standards, the multicast 
traffic will be transmitted from the MAC layer. Since, the 
multicast traffic will have been transmitted from the ASN-
GW or other multicast [9]. A capable network which uses 
the IP network layer must use a mapping table to address 
the traffic transmission problem. Table II shows an 
example of mapping tables. 
TABLE II.  
IP MULTICAST ADDRESS TO MULTICAST CID MAPPING 
IP Multicast Address 
MCID 
224.0.0.100 
MCID1 
224.0.0.200 
MCID2 
 
In WiMAX MR Networks, it is necessary for MR-BS 
to control and manage all RSs at the same time. Compared 
to unicasting identical control messages are required for 
every RS, the use of multicasting control message by MR-
BS to RSs is more efficient. In the proposed mechanism, 
we perform multicasting along a tunnel by using the MT-
CID (Multicast Tunnel CID) which allows identifying a 
single link between two RS’s or an RS and the MR-BS. 
With this solution, we can achieve multicasting for IPTV 
delivery along tunnel connection with less bandwidth 
consumption. 
As 802.16j networks are comprised of multihop paths 
between the MR-BS and MS, routing and path 
management issues then arise. Although routing in such 
systems is tree based, there can be decisions to be made 
regarding which RS a particular MS should be associated 
with. To create paths, MR-BS makes centralized 
computation for the path between the MR-BS and an 
access RSs for both the uplink and downlink direction. 
After building up the path information to the destination 
MS, MB-RS create or update an information table that 
contains the mapping between a MCID and one given 
path. The MR-BS selects a path to carry the traffic for the 
new connection, and informs all the RSs on the path of the 
binding between the path-ID and the supported CIDs by 
sending a DSA-REQ message to all the RSs on the 
specified path [2]. Fig. 4 shows an example of Multihop 
relay WiMAX network by introducing MT-CID, when we 
have one MR-BS and five RSs. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Multihop relay WiMAX network example 
 
For MBS (Multicast Broadcast Service), MR-BS may 
initiate a multicast tree construction. When a MS wants to 
demand a MBS, it sends a DSA-REQ message to MR-BS 
to specify that it wants the MBS [14]. The procedures for 
establishing multicast tree are below. 
When a MR-BS initiates a MBS or receives a MBS 
request from a MS, it verifies whether the requested MBS 
has been created. If not, the MR-BS creates a multicast 
tree for this MBS and allocates a multicast CID (MCID) to 
it. The MR-BS also determines the path(s) to carry this 
multicast 
service 
flow, 
attributes 
the 
adequate 
Transmission Identity (TxId) for each MS IPTV video 
stream request. In the case of our network example shown 
in Fig. 4, MR-BS creates paths as is illustrated in Table III, 
thereafter it creates the mapping between the determined 
path and the MT-CID like is shown in Table IV. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

TABLE III.  
RELAYS BELONGING TO A PATH 
Path-ID 
Relay 
Path-ID1 
RS1, RS3 
Path-ID2 
RS1, RS4 
Path-ID3 
RS2, RS5 
TABLE IV.  
MULTICAST TUNNEL CID WITH PATH-ID MAPPING 
MT-CID 
Path-ID 
MT-CID1 
Path-ID1,  Path-ID2 
MT-CID2 
Path-ID3 
MT-CID3 
Path-ID1 
MT-CID4 
Path-ID2 
MT-CID5 
Path-ID3 
 
The MR-BS saves all information in its diffusion table. 
To inform all RSs with which quality (TxId), they must 
extract and transfer video steam content. However, MR-
BS sends a DSA-REQ to indicate to RSs on the path of the 
binding between the path-ID, MCID and the TxId. Each 
RS along the path stores this information for sending 
multicast video stream with the appropriate quality (TxId). 
The MR-BS adds this path to the multicast tree that may 
consist of multiple paths.  
If the multicast tree has been created and an MCID has 
been allocated to this MBS, the MR-BS would determine 
the path to carry this multicast service flow. Also, if the 
path is already in the multicast tree, the MR-BS updates its 
diffusion table and informs all RSs of accomplishing this 
change. When the parameters for a multicast service flow 
change, an MR-BS or MS may also send a DSC-REQ 
message to update these changes. All the RSs in the 
multicast tree of the MBS are informed of these changes.  
When an MS needs to leave the multicast service, the 
MS sends a DSD-REQ to the MR-BS to request deleting it 
from the MBS. MR-BS may remove the path from a 
multicast tree. When an MS needs to leave the MBS, the 
MR-BS determines whether the path can be removed from 
the multicast tree. If no more MSs use this path for the 
MBS, the path may be removed from the multicast tree. 
Otherwise, the path would not be removed from the 
multicast tree. If the path is removed from the multicast 
tree, the MR-BS removes the binding between the path-ID 
and the MCID, it updates its diffusion table and informs all 
RSs in the correspond path. 
In WiMAX IPTV system, when the MS selects a TV 
program, in addition to sending IGMP join message, it 
must establish a multicast connection with a MCID. 
However, MR-BS determines the various parameters of 
the requested TV flow. In order to attribute the adequate 
Transmission Identity to this video flow which will be 
used during forwarding process when a RS will send the 
same video stream via the same MT-CID, it would be 
based on the TxId. In this case, the RS sends only one 
copy of the video stream with the highest quality (TxId) 
requested by the neighbors RS’s. We apply this procedure 
for all IPTV multicast sessions, so to support consumers’ 
heterogeneity and to better manage the consumption of 
resources. Taking this into consideration, RS ensures video 
extraction towards all required qualities by using SVC 
(Scalable Video Coding). 
To better understand the proposed solution, we use the 
topology shown in Fig. 4 for an example application. If we 
assume that, initially, MR-BS diffusion table is empty and 
the user U1 request MCID1 video stream with HD quality 
(TxId=1), MR-BS creates a first line: 
TABLE V.  
DIFFUSION TABLE (A) 
Path-ID 
MCID 
MR-BS & Relays 
Path-ID1 
MCID1 
MR-BS(1), RS1(1), RS3 (1) 
 
In the diffusion table above, the number in parenthesis 
reflects the quality of the stream (TxId) to be transmitted 
to the next RS in the list (or broadcast to the terminals in 
the case of access relay). 
If afterwards the user U2 requests MCID2 video 
stream flow with Mobile-TV quality (TxId=4), MR-BS 
adds a second row to its diffusion table which is then: 
TABLE VI.  
DIFFUSION TABLE (B) 
Path-ID 
MCID 
MR-BS & Relays 
Path-ID1 
MCID1 
MR-BS(3), RS1(3), RS3 (3) 
Path-ID1 
MCID2 
MR-BS(4), RS1(4), RS3 (4) 
 
Then, if the user U3 requests MCID1 video stream 
with SD quality (TxId=2), MR-BS notes from the first row 
of the diffusion table, the flow MCID1 is already 
transmitted in HD quality from MR-BS to RS1 via MT-
CID1 tunnel.  At the same time as shown in Table IV, the 
path to the user U4 borrows also MT-CID1 tunnel. Thus, it 
is not necessary to send MCID1 video stream flow also 
with SD quality via MT-CID1. The MR-BS adds a third 
row to diffusion table, indicating the highest quality to 
MCID1 flow between MR-BS and RS1, which is to say 
the Transmission Identity TxId = 1. The diffusion table 
therefore reads as follows: 
TABLE VII.  
DIFFUSION TABLE (C) 
Path-ID 
MCID 
MR-BS & Relays 
Path-ID1 
MCID1 
MR-BS(1), RS1(1), RS3 (1) 
Path-ID1 
MCID2 
MR-BS(4), RS1(4), RS3 (4) 
Path-ID2 
MCID1 
MR-BS(1), RS1(2), RS4(2) 
 
In the diffusion table above, the TxId indicates the 
transmission quality of MCID1 stream to U3 user, the MT-
CID1 tunnel is listed in bold to highlight this factor. 
Similarly, if the user U4 requests MCID2 video stream 
flows with Web-TV quality (TxId=3), MR-BS finds that 
MCID2 flow has already transmitted with Mobile-TV 
quality from MR-BS to RS1. Thus, MR-BS updates the 
diffusion table by adding a new line to requested flow and 
changing the second line to indicate the highest quality: 
TABLE VIII.  DIFFUSION TABLE (D) 
Path-ID 
MCID 
MR-BS & Relays 
Path-ID1 
MCID1 
MR-BS(1), RS1(1), RS3 (1) 
Path-ID1 
MCID2 
MR-BS(3), RS1(4), RS3 (4) 
Path-ID2 
MCID1 
MR-BS(1), RS1(2), RS4(2) 
Path-ID2 
MCID2 
MR-BS(3), RS1(3), RS4 (3) 
 
Finally, after each, diffusion table update, MR-BS 
informs RSs to update their forwarding table. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

D. Forwarding Process 
In our mechanism, the RS forwarding table contains 
three columns, the multicast flow identifier (MCID), the 
transmission identity (TxId) that represents transmission 
quality (ITPV service) and the tunnel MT-CID in which 
the identified flow must be sent. For the above example 
application, RS1 relay create its forwarding table as shown 
in Table IX. 
In general, the forwarding table contains p entries, 
where p is the number of multicast sessions (MCID). 
When an intermediate RS receives a multicast packet, it 
first extracts a multicast session address (MCID), then the 
corresponding transmission identity from its forwarding 
table. Second, for each entry in the forwarding table, the 
algorithm F is executed to decide via which MT-CID 
tunnel video stream packets will then be transmitted. 
Algorithm F 
Begin 
for (i=1; i< p; i++;) 
   if ( RS forwarding table TxId = Packet header 
TxId)then  
       Send packets; 
   else  
       SVC extraction; 
       Send packets; 
   endif 
end 
TABLE IX.  
RS1 FORWARDING TABLE 
MCID 
TxId 
MT-CID 
MCID1 
1 
MT-CID3 
MCID1 
2 
MT-CID4 
MCID2 
4 
MT-CID3 
MCID2 
3 
MT-CID4 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULT 
We performed simulations to evaluate the performance 
of the proposed multicast mechanism using Matlab, and 
compared it with the traditional mechanism of sending one 
copy of each video stream service, which requires four 
IPTV video servers. Contrary to our solution, we used a 
single IPTV streaming video server. We assume that the 
number of subscribers and IPTV channel requests are 
assigned randomly. We suppose that multihop WiMAX 
network capacity is greater than 256 Mbps. Table X 
recapitulates the simulation configurations. 
TABLE X.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
value 
Subscriber IPTV services request 
Random 
Maximum  number of  IPTV channels 
60 
Channels request 
Random 
Maximum allowable bandwidth for the IPTV 
services [Mbps] 
256 
IPTV services 
Random [1, 4] 
Requested bandwidth by a IPTV service 
[Mbps] 
HD-TV 
6 
SD-TV 
2.5 
Web-TV 
0.650 
Mobile-TV 
0.350 
To compare the proposed mechanism with the 
traditional approach, we developed several scenarios based 
on bandwidth metrics. 
Fig. 5 compares bandwidth consumption for the 
proposed mechanism and traditional mechanism. We 
assume that subscribers request IPTV channels until 
maximum allowable bandwidth. Fig. 5 shows that, the 
proposed mechanism can reduce bandwidth consumption 
by sending only one copy of video stream. Hence, our 
solution can provide the same services but it requires less 
bandwidth and only a single video server. When the 
number of subscribers or the number of IPTV channels 
increased the proposed mechanism gives the best 
performance. 
Fig. 6 shows that when all IPTV channels are 
requested with all qualities (60 in our simulation), with the 
proposed mechanism there is no more bandwidth 
consumption. This means that we do not need the use of 
more bandwidth. However, in the traditional mechanism 
the bandwidth consumption continues to increase to 
provide all IPTV services. 
In Fig. 7, we change the maximum number of IPTV 
channels to 20, in order to show that with the proposed 
mechanism bandwidth consumption quickly becomes 
constant due to all IPTV services requested and served 
before. On the other hand, bandwidth consumption of the 
traditional mechanism always increases. 
 
 
Figure 5. Average bandwidth consumption in 802.16j zone when the 
maximum number of IPTV channels = 60 
 
 
Figure 6. Average subscriber bandwidth consumption 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 7. Average bandwidth consumption in 802.16j zone when the 
maximum number of IPTV channels = 20. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. The average number of IPTV channels. 
 
In Fig. 8, we further compare the number of IPTV 
channels that the provider could offer with the same 
allowable bandwidth (512 Mbps). Results show that the 
number of channels provided by the proposed mechanism 
is greater than those with the traditional mechanism for 
each IPTV service. This means that we have more 
bandwidth, so providers can offer more IPTV channels. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In 
this 
work, 
we 
have 
addressed 
bandwidth 
consumption problems for IPTV applications. Also, we 
have proposed a new multicast mechanism to support 
several IPTV services in WiMAX multihop relay 
networks. Results have shown that with the proposed 
mechanism significant gains can be made to enhance the 
multicast 
data 
routing, 
in 
particular 
bandwidth 
consumption. For construction of trees, our solution has 
introduced MT-CID (Multicast Tunnel CID) which maps 
the relay paths to form a MBS tree in 802.16j MAC layer 
to support MBS services. By using MT-CID approach and 
Scalable Video Coding, RSs will only need to transfer one 
copy of video stream content through each tunnel which 
reduces network load. In addition our solution, supports 
various IPTV video stream services while reducing 
bandwidth consumption. Furthermore, it allows providers 
to offer more IPTV channels, rather than with only a single 
video server. The next challenge will be to adapt our 
solution to a new scheduling algorithm. We will also 
propose a connection admission control (CAC) mechanism 
to efficiently manage the resources among existing and 
new flows. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project is funded by France Telecom-
Orange R&D and MIPS-GRTC laboratory at university of 
Haute Alsace. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Chung-Wei Lin, Yu-Cheng Chen and Ai-Chun Pang, “A 
New Resource Allocation Scheme for IEEE 802.16-based 
Networks”, 3rd IEEE VTS Asia Pacific Wireless 
Communications Symposium (AWPCS 2006), Aug, 2006. 
[2] IEEE Std 802.16j™-2009 Part 16: “Air Interface for Fixed 
and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems”, 
Multihop Relay Specification, 13 May 2009. 
[3] F. E. Retnasothie, M. K. Ozdemir, T. Yiicektt, H. Celebitt, 
J. Zhang, and R. Muththaiah, “Wireless IPTV over 
WiMAX: Challenges and Applications”, In Proc. of 
Wireless 
and 
Microwave 
Technology 
Conference 
(WAMICON), Dec, 2006, Pp. 1-5. 
[4] M.Z. Chowdhury, B.M. Trung, Y.M. Jang, Y. Kim,  and 
W. Ryu,  “Service Level Agreement for the QoS 
Guaranteed Mobile IPTV Services over Mobile WiMAX 
Networks”,  journal CoRR, May, 2011, abs/1105.4431. 
[5] D. C. Verma, “Service Level Agreements on IP Networks”, 
In Proc. of the IEEE, Sept, 2004, pp. 1382 - 1388. 
[6] J. Sommers, P. Barford, N.G. Duffield,  and A. Ron,  
“Multiobjective 
monitoring 
for 
SLA 
compliance”,  
presented at IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 2010, pp.652-665. 
[7] Ning Liao, Yuntao Shi, Jianfeng Chen and Jun Li, 
“Optimized Multicast Service Management in a Mobile 
WiMAX TV System”, Consumer Communications and 
Networking Conference, Jan, 2009, pp. 1 - 5. 
[8] International 
Television 
Expert 
Group, 
http://www.international-television.org/tv_market_data/ 
-
global-iptv-forecast-2009-2013.html 
[9] Chengxuan He, Oliver Yang and GuoQiang Wang, 
“Performance Evaluation of Multicast Routing Protocol 
and MBS Service Architecture in WiMAX Multi-Hop 
Relay Environment”, Future Networks: Cross-Layer 
design, April, 2008, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
[10] Lee S.S.W,  Chen A and  Po-Kai Tseng, “Optimal routing 
and 
bandwidth 
provisioning 
for 
survivable 
IPTV 
multicasting 
using 
network 
coding”, 
Consumer 
Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), 
Jan, 2011 IEEE, pp. 771 – 775. 
[11] Leprovost Yann and Sayadi Bessem, “Multicast router, 
distribution system, network and method of a content 
distribution”, European Patent Application, Alcatel Lucent 
April 2009: EP2046041.  
[12] Heiko Schwarz, Detlev Marpe and Thomas Wiegand, 
“Overview of the Scalable Video Coding Extension of the 
H.264/AVC Standard”, IEEE Transactions On Circuits And 
Systems For Video Technology, VOL. 17, NO. 9, Sept, 
2007, pp. 1103 - 1120.  
[13] http://nextgenlog.blogspot.com/2010/09/freescale-dsp-
tackles-scalable-video.html 
[14] Hang Liu and Mingquan Wu, “Connection Management for 
Multicast and Broadcast Services (MBS)”, IEEE C802.16j-
07/272, 2007-04-05. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

