A Mobile API Solution for Localised Weather Forecast Representation
Paul Dayang and Rebecca Siafaka
Universität Bremen
Dept. of Mathematics / Computer Science
D-28334 Bremen, Germany
{pdayang, rsiafaka}@informatik.uni-bremen.de
Abstract—  In  Cameroon,  especially  in  some  rural  areas, 
weather forecasting is essential for the everyday activities of 
the population. Since mobile phones are being extensively used 
in those areas, the population should be able to acquire the 
appropriate  weather  information  through  such  devices. 
However, most rural populations, such as the Tupuri (Tpuri), 
use native terms to refer to the weather conditions, mainly 
based on  calendar references.  Our paper  aims to  combine 
international  weather  forecast  with  the  local  weather 
description of rural populations in Cameroon, enabling the 
locals  to  have  fast  access  such  information  evolving  their 
everyday activities. We propose an API framework, for mobile 
development, to extract and present combined and localised 
weather  forecast,  showcasing  the  Tpuri  population  of 
Cameroon. 
Keywords-Mobile  API;  hybrid  application  development; 
weather  forecast;  weather  localisation;  Cameroon;  Tupuri;  
Tpuri
I.
 INTRODUCTION
In our era, climate conditions are changing, making the 
weather  forecast  an  increasingly  challenging  process. 
Disasters can be prevented,  livestock productivity can be 
increased,  and  populations  can  be  prepared  for  adverse 
weather conditions, when a forecast is available. Nowadays, 
especially with the evolution of the Internet, local weather 
forecasts are widely available through websites that either 
present  related information, or provide with widgets and 
APIs to retrieve the forecasts from other sources. At the 
same time, with the development of mobile communications, 
the users can receive, at any time and anywhere, weather 
forecasts on their devices.
Considering the popularity the Internet and the mobile 
communications have gained the last years, we can assume 
that  most  of  the  population  worldwide  have  access  to 
weather forecasts. However, there are populations, especially 
in rural areas, that have limited access to such information, 
fact  that  limits their ability to adjust their activities and 
protect their lives. One such rural population is the Tupuri 
(Tpuri), which lives in some areas of Cameroon and Chad. 
The Tpuri have their own local languages and use their own 
symbols  and  rules,  to  communicate  and  perform  their 
everyday activities. They also use this language for weather 
prediction. Although being mostly a rural population, the 
Cameroonian  Tpuri  have  developed  the  communication 
through mobile phones and their mobile network consists a 
medium that may support the improvement of their everyday 
activities. 
In this paper, we focus on combining the international 
weather forecasts with the local weather description of the 
Tpuri population in Cameroon. In order to do so, we suggest 
an  API,  for  mobile  development,  which  receives  local 
weather forecasts from international resources and presents 
the  information  adjusted  to  the  Tpuri  native  weather 
reference. 
The sections of this paper are divided as follows. In 
Section  2,  we  describe  the  current  situation  of  weather 
prediction  and  mobile  communications  in  Cameroon.  In 
Section 3, we give details on the method that the Tpuri 
people  use  for  weather  references.  Section 4  includes  a 
description of the selected weather forecast API that we use 
for our approach. In Section, 5 we present our API solution, 
giving details on the system architecture and the technology. 
Finally, in Section 6, we discuss our approach and conclude 
with our intended future work on the topic.
II.
 WEATHER PREDICTION AND MOBILE 
COMMUNICATION IN CAMEROON
Weather forecasts are of a great importance especially for 
rural  populations.  However,  having  access  to  accurate 
weather  forecasts  is  not  easy  for  the  populations  in 
Cameroon. The Cercle de Concertation de la Société civile 
Partenaire du MINFOF/MINEP (Dialog Group of the Civil 
Society Partner of Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife, and 
Ministry of  Environment  and  Protection  of  Nature) 
diagnosed the case of meteorological data in Cameroon. The 
report  published in February 2012 [16] stipulates that out of 
the 58 existing weather stations in Cameroon, only 3 operate. 
The deteriorated infrastructure is not the only challenge. The 
lack of technical personnel makes the situation worse. The 
same report declared that out of the 59 meteorologists in 
Cameroon (in 2010), 9 went to retirement during 2011 and 
15 others will retire between 2012 and 2015. 
In Cameroon, the meteorological services are managed 
by  the  National  Meteorological  Service  (NMS)  of 
Cameroon, which is under the supervision of the Ministry of 
Transport. The tasks assigned to this service are, among 
others, the gathering of climate information, the composition 
of weather forecasts, the dissemination of meteorological 
information etc. Except for the air transport, for which the 
weather data are essential, no more data are available, for 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

example,  for  planning  the  agricultural  activities.  Indeed, 
many  Cameroonian  (e.g.  farmers)  face  the  challenge  of 
accessing understandable weather data, because they rely on 
traditional weather knowledge and, if any, on some forecasts 
from worldwide weather systems. Providing, as possible, a 
more accurate weather forecast, requires the collection and 
analysis of a large amount of data. Hence, the data should be 
collected over the years in order to generate accurate weather 
forecasts.
In Cameroon, as in many Sub-Saharan countries, extreme 
weather and climate events have often various consequences 
[12], which include loss of lives and livelihoods, damage to 
infrastructure, increased risk of disease outbreaks, lack of 
food/water/pasture,  mass  migration,  degradation  of  the 
environment, retardation of socio-economic growth, etc. 
For example, in August 2012 [9], in the far north region 
of Cameroon, a sudden flood caused various disasters and 
victims. Crops were destroyed, cattle disappeared, citizens 
were forced to leave the flooding areas and people perished 
under the massive inundations. This disaster might have been 
prevented, or hindered, if a weather forecaster was available 
to  dispatch  information  and  warn  the  population  in  the 
affected areas. Furthermore, if traditional weather knowledge 
was used systematically, the population might have been 
helped to predict and prevent, or at least limit risk related to 
extreme weather conditions. 
If  we  consider the impact  of  the livestock  sector  in 
Cameroon, the gross domestic product (GDP) in this sector, 
in 2005, was estimated at 132.8 billion FCFA francs per year 
(10.36% of GDP) in the primary sector, which corresponds 
to 2.1% of the national GDP. This sector provides income 
for  about  30%  of  the  rural  population  (80%  of  the 
Cameroonian population lives in rural areas). In 2009, the 
agricultural sector was estimated for approximately 75.6% of 
the primary sector with 68.8% for subsistence farming and 
6.8% for export crops [17]. As temperature and precipitation 
are important to agriculture, unexpected weather and climate 
changes have direct impacts on the livestock productivity. 
However, the NMS of Cameroon is poor. It does not 
provide dynamic data accessible to the users via the  Internet, 
or other medium, like radio or TV, but instead, only static 
and out of date information on its website. This lack is also 
followed by the lack of related APIs for data exchange, 
which  could  at  least  enable  the  acquisition  of  weather 
forecast information from other resources. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  Cameroon,  the  mobile  phone 
market has potential for the development of diversified areas. 
In fact, a lot of effort has been done to improve the mobile 
network, making it the most reliable communication network 
in  Cameroon.  The  situation  is the  same  for  many  Sub-
Saharan countries as well [4]. Mobile operators, which are 
CAMTEL,  MTN  and  ORANGE,  have  invested  in 
infrastructural mobile facilities throughout the territory. The 
mobile  network  covers  over  the  80%  of  the  land  area. 
According  to  the  Telecommunications  Regulatory  Board 
(TRB) [6], the structure for regulating telecommunications in 
Cameroon, mobile phone subscribers increased from 0.66% 
(103279  subscribers)  to  44.07%  (9,6  million  subscribers 
whereas  6,27%  CAMTEL,  50,72%  MTN  and  43,01% 
ORANGE) from 2000 to 2010. In July 2012, the first Mobile 
Virtual Network Operator (MVNO) in Cameroon and also in 
Sub-Saharan  countries,  called  Set’mobile,  has  started  its 
activities with an offer for 50,000 subscribers. Thus, we 
identify  a  great  potential  for  development  in  the  field. 
Especially  important  is  the  development  of  tailored 
applications that aim to support the particular activities of the 
Cameroonian population and those of other  Sub-Saharan 
countries.
Having  considered  the  current  situation  of  mobile 
infrastructure and the need for weather prediction in the rural 
regions of Cameroon, we were further motivated to suggest a 
model that combines both fields, and gives an important tool 
for the indigenous populations. 
III.
NATIVE WEATHER FORECAST TECHNIQUES
Tpuri  is  one  of  the,  around,  250  tribes  existing  in 
Cameroon. They live in the northern part of Cameroon and 
southern part  of Chad, and extend on both sides of the 
borders  between  the  two  countries.  The  latitude  and 
longitude of the area where the Tpuri live (Tpuriland), in 
Cameroon, is 10° north and 15° east. The majority of the 
population lives in rural areas, therefore have agriculture as 
their main activity to make their living. In this region, the 
agricultural  activity  encompasses  crops  such  as  millet  / 
sorghum, peanuts, onions, beans and rice. The farming of 
such crops is highly sensitive to climate changes (drought, 
flood,  etc.).  Therefore,  weather  prediction  is  of  high 
importance for those populations.
In order to predict the climate changes and give details 
on the weather conditions, the Tpuri folk rely on indigenous 
weather knowledge, which is oral and descriptive. In general, 
the terminology for weather and climate uses words such as 
dry, wind, rain, humidity, tornadoes etc. Also, the Tpuri rely 
on such words to describe the weather and climate changes. 
In  order  to  understand  the  way  this  folk  describes  the 
weather, we shall consider their calendar description. The 
Tpuri's calendar is seasonal, therefore, it is based on the local 
sequence of natural and agricultural events. Referring to the 
Gregorian calendar, for the Tpuri folk, the new year starts in 
October. Table I, below, indicates the months in English, as 
those referred to the Tpuri language [14]. In this table, few 
means “month” or “moon”. For example, few burgi means 
“month of dust”.
TABLE I. 
MONTH CORRESPONDENCE OF TPURI AND ENGLISH
few 
kage
few duugi
few 
baare
few 
daa
few 
darge
few 
ka'arang
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Jan.
Feb.
March
few 
mene
few burgi
few baa
few 
yaale
few  jon fen 
sõore wa
few waŋ
April
May
June
July
August
Sept.
Table II provides the meaning of each month, and some 
related  seasonal  activities.  Furthermore,  classified  as  an 
event calendar, the table shows the association of  natural 
phenomena, including meteorological events to each month, 
and the temperatures, which are described orally according 
to each few. The Tpuri only describe the way they feel the 
weather, i.e. the sensation of the temperature, but not the 
degrees. They do not use a unit to measure the temperature. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

TABLE II. 
CALENDER OF ACTIVITIES ADAPTED FROM [14]
few
explanation
meteorological 
events
reference
ancoo
months of cold 
season, harvest 
season: peanuts, 
peas potatoes
cold
October to 
November
ceere
moon of cool
cold, very cold
December  to 
January
hissi
period of high heat
dry, hot, sun
February to 
March
burgi
moon of dust
light to heavy 
wind, dust
April
jo’ge, 
kabge, 
mulum
months of sowing, 
begin for rainy 
season
light rain
May
baa, yaale
moon of rain / rainy 
season
rain, humidity
June to July
gumugi, 
musgware
people are weak and 
easily catch diseases 
/ outbreak of 
diseases due to 
heavy rain
heavy rain, 
humidity
July to August
hoole 
gara
red millet harvested 
at the end of rainy 
season
rain, humidity
August to 
September
twale
months when the 
sun burns
light rain, sun, 
very hot and 
humid
September to 
October
In this table, ceere, which means “cold”, is the period in 
which temperatures range between 15° and 20° C, and hissi, 
which means “hot”, is the period when temperatures start 
from 40° C. Consequently, the table builds data records that 
use, for example, month or temperature, as reference, to 
match the traditional weather description with those from the 
existing weather systems. In our API suggested solution, we 
will use these records, in a database, to describe the weather 
and climate as the indigenous populations in Cameroon do. 
But, let us first see what the existing weather APIs provide.
IV.
WEATHER FORECAST APIS
Various weather APIs are available online. Mostly, they 
use  the  Representational  State  Transfer  (REST),  which 
leverage  the HTTP protocol  to provide weather  data, in 
JSON or XML format, to other related systems. 
In this paper, we use the API provided by World Weather 
Online [8] (WWO) to showcase our approach. We chose this 
API only as an example, due to the features it provides, and 
the detailed weather information for the area of our study, 
namely the Tpuriland. The provided features are free of 
charge (for personal and commercial use), therefore suitable 
for prototyping.  
The WWO  API  provides, for  a chosen area,  current 
weather information, as well as for the next 10 days, and the 
past, up to the 1st July 2008. Some of the information 
available through this API, is the date/time of the observed 
weather  conditions,  the  temperature,  element  description 
(such as precipitation, humidity, wind speed/direction and 
atmospheric pressure) and weather description with text and 
images.
To retrieve information using WWO API, developers 
shall  build  simple  HTTP  requests,  including  specific 
keyword variables that refer to specific requested weather, 
location  or  data/time  attributes.  Such  attributes  are  city 
(filtered  by  country),  town  name  (filtered  by  country), 
latitude and longitude, or IP address. Furthermore, they shall 
specify the API key (which specifies the licence for its use), 
the format (XML, JSON or CSV) for the results, and the 
number of the days for the forecast.  The country is an 
optional value. 
An example of an HTTP request, for the region of Kolara 
in Cameroon, where the Tpuri population lives, looks as 
follows:
http://free.worldweatheronline.com/feed/weather.ashx
?key=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
&q= 10.272019,14.650269
&date=2013-02-14&format=json
For the aforementioned query, a portion of the result in 
JSON format for the 14th February 2013, would look like 
this:
{
   "data": {
      "current_condition": [
         {
            "cloudcover": "0",
            "humidity": "6",
            "observation_time": "12:19 PM",
            "precipMM": "0.0",
            "pressure": "1006",
            "temp_C": "38",
            "temp_F": "100",
            "visibility": "10",
            "weatherCode": "113",
            "weatherDesc": [
               {
                  "value": "Sunny"
               }
            ],
            ....
         }
      ],
      "request": [
         {
            "query": "Kolara, Cameroon",
            "type": "City"
         }
      ],
      "weather": [
         {
            "date": "2013-02-14",
            "precipMM": "0.0",
            "tempMaxC": "39",
            "tempMaxF": "102",
            "tempMinC": "24",
            "tempMinF": "74",
            "weatherCode": "113",
   
....     
            ]
     }
}
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The following figure depicts a screenshot of a weather 
forecast, requested with the aforementioned query, for the 
Kolara region,  as represented in the website of the API.
Figure 1. Weather Forecast for Kolara in Tpuriland (14th February 2013)
V.
API SOLUTION FOR COMBINED WEATHER FORECAST
Based on the weather forecast that the World Weather 
Online  API  provides,  we  suggest  an  API  model  that 
combines  those  data  with  the  traditional  and  indigenous 
climate  knowledge that  the Tpuri  use, for  local  weather 
reference. In our solution, we receive the weather forecast 
from the selected API, we match the information with the 
information the Tpuri use to describe the weather conditions, 
based on the aforementioned calendar, and we then extract 
combined data.
In the next section, we explain the system architecture for 
the  model.  We  also  give  details  for  the  technology  to 
implement the model, as well as the way this can be used 
later as a mobile application.
A.
System Architecture
As already mentioned in Section 3, the selected API 
offers the forecast data in three formats, namely XML, JSON 
and CSV. Our model, we choose to explain the approach 
using the provided JSON format, due to the tools we suggest 
for the implementation. 
The following figure gives an overview of the system 
architecture.
Figure 2. API System Architecture
As the figure shows, the model consists of the following 
parts:
World Weather Online Data
This  part  consists  of  data  derived  from  the  World 
Weather  Online API. The data are being retrieved  upon 
demand, for specific date, in JSON format, when Internet 
connection is available.
Indigenous Weather Data (IWD)
Those data are stored in a database. They  reflect, in our 
case, to the descriptive terms that the Tpuri use for weather 
reference. Those data are being extracted in JSON format 
through  a  related  API.  The  extraction  does  not  require 
Internet connection.
View Generator
This part is an API that matches the weather forecast data 
with the Tpuri descriptive data. The view generator receives 
the JSON input from the aforementioned APIs, and produces 
a combined JSON file. The weather forecast data include 
date details that are being matched with the month reference 
details in the descriptive data. The data process is being 
performed offline.
Views
The views are representations of the result that the view 
generator produces. The view generator extracts a JSON file 
with the combined weather forecast. This file can be then 
used by a mobile application to print the results in several 
formats, namely the views.
Since the proposed model uses an Internet connection 
and a web-based API, it is suitable for a hybrid mobile 
application. Concerning the bandwidth in the area where the 
Tpuri live, the download speed goes up to around 0.36 Mbps, 
and it is sufficient for downloading the appropriate weather 
information. Once the hybrid app has been installed on the 
user's mobile device, the typical weather synchronisation 
process would look like this: 
1.
The user goes online, when Internet connection is 
available. 
2.
Data  in JSON format  are  downloaded from  the 
WWO via the respective API.
3.
Indigenous  data,  in  JSON  format,  are  extracted 
from the IWD via the API.
4.
Data from WWO and IWD are combined in JSON 
output.
5.
The JSON format is used from the hybrid app to 
present the weather forecast in several views with 
different images, symbols, text, etc..
B.
Technology
Here we suggest an implementation approach, describing 
which technologies may be used to implement an app that 
makes use of our API framework.
While  native  apps  are  implemented  in  a  high 
programming language (Java or Objective-C etc.),  hybrid 
apps are basically Web applications specifically optimised 
for use on mobile devices. Hybrid apps provide a good 
World  Weather 
Online Data
Indigenous  
Weather Data
View Generator 
(Software Layer)
View 2
(images, 
colours, text, 
images, audio/ 
video)
APIs
APIs
View 1
(images, 
colours, text, 
images, audio / 
video)
View n
(images, 
colours, text, 
images, audio / 
video)
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

compromise between native and Web apps to build platform-
independent apps. They are Web apps packed as native apps, 
creating , therefore, a combination of the important features 
of the native approach and those of the Web. 
To  implement  an  app  with  the  aforementioned 
conceptual approach, we rely on hybrid mobile development 
using HTML5 and technologies that pertain to it. 
Related to the HTML5 technologies, some  software 
developers  of  the  World  Wide  Web  insist  that  these 
technologies are revolutionising the Web and its use [1][2]. 
In fact, HTML5 offers new possibilities to develop Web 
apps that, although running offline, can process persistent 
data locally, using Web SQL Database and data in JSON 
format, through the JQuery library. In order to implement the 
to implement the conceptual approach, the tool PhoneGap is 
suitable. PhoneGap [18] is an open source tool that provides 
a simple and lightweight way for packing Web apps, to 
operate  as  native  apps,  for  diverse  mobile  platforms.  It 
implements  a  full  access  to  device  APIs,  such  as 
accelerometer, camera, geolocation, network, alert etc.
This entire approach uses flexible and easy-to-use, web 
and mobile based technologies, which, by providing weather 
forecasts,  improve  the efficient  use  of   Internet  through 
mobile devices, in Sub-Saharan countries like Cameroon, 
where the Internet connection is still slow and unreliable.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In  this  paper,  we  provided  a  model  for  combining 
international  weather  forecast  with  traditional  weather 
reference information. We consider this model as a threefold. 
One of the main benefits of this model is that it supports the 
preservation of the traditional knowledge of Tpuri, which 
passes orally from  one generation to the next, and it is 
threatened  with  extinction.  The  model  also  allows  the 
integration of both indigenous knowledge and knowledge 
from  well  established  systems,  introducing  mobile 
technologies and supporting the development in this field. 
Moreover, it provides useful and region-adjusted weather 
forecast information, assisting the local populations in their 
everyday activities. The model considers the instability of 
Internet  connection,  in  most  areas  in  countries  like 
Cameroon (by performing offline, with stored data, when 
necessary),  and  exploits  the  benefits  of  mobile 
communications for supporting the locals. 
Since  most  of  the  Sub-Saharan  countries,  such  as 
Cameroon, bear similar cultural characteristics, we believe 
that this solution could be adjusted to other populations, and 
help to the further development of mobile communications 
further,  for  improving the  quality of life.  Therefore,  we 
intend to continue the research on this field in order to 
implement, test and adjust our solution to the needs of those 
populations. 
REFERENCES
[1] G.  Anthes,  “HTML5  leads  a  Web  Revolution”  in 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 55, pp. 16-17, 2012.
[2] M. Pilgrim, HTML5: Up and Running. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 
1st ed., Sebastopol CA, 2010.
[3] M.  Rao,  Mobile  Africa  Report  2011:  Regional  Hubs  of 
Excellence and Innovation. Extensia, 2011.
[4] A. Mugoya, African Apps in a Global Marketplace: ideas, 
observations, tips and some gripes about the African app 
industry. Asilia, 2011.
[5] Cameroun : 4% de taux de pénétration d‘Internet et 9 millions 
d’abonnés
 
à
 
la
 
téléphonie
 
mobile, 
http://www.nextafrique.com/sciencestech/technologie/1192-
cameroun-4-de-taux-de-penetration-dinternet-et-9-millions-d-
abonnes-a-la-telephonie-mobile (January 2013).
[6] Telecommunication  Regulatory  Board.  Informations 
statistiques  sur  le  marché  de  la  téléphonie  (premier  et 
deuxième trimestre 2011), 2011.
[7] Etoo  Telecom:  C’est  finalement ce  21  juillet  2012. 
http://cameroon-info.net/stories/0,36134,@,eto-o-telecom-c-
est-finalement-ce-21-juillet-2012.html  (January 2013).
[8] World Weather Online.  http://www.worldweatheronline.com 
(January 2013)
[9] J  eune Afrique. Innondaions meurtrières au Cameroun et au 
Nigéria. 
http://www.jeuneafrique.com/Article/ARTJAWEB201209131
22017/ (January 2013)
[10] L. Fortnow and R. V. Vohra, “The Complexity of Forecast 
Testing,”  ACM  SIGecom  Exchanges,  vol.  7,  pp.  1-5, 
November 2008.
[11] A. Kignaman-Soro, “International Cooperation and Role of 
THORPEX in the Developing World”, the First THORPEX 
International  Science  Symposium;  Montreal,  Canada, 
December 2004.
[12] INS Cameroun, “Annuaire Statistique du Cameroun 2010,” 
Institut National de la Statistique, 2010.
[13] Kolyang, Parlons Tpuri. L'Harmattan, October 2010.
[14] ACDI
 Scandale  au  Ministère  des  Transports. 
http://www.acdic.net/ACDIC/component/k2/itemlist/tag/comi
ce%20agropastoral   (January 2013).
[15] Direction  de  la  Métérologie  Nationale. http://www.meteo-
cameroon.net/ (January 2013).
[16] CCSPM La Météo de la météorologie camerounaise : La 
météorologie
 
au
 
Cameroun
 
est
 
morte. 
https://groups.google.com/group/sgp-cmr-
network/attach/58832513b5bf6241/Communiqu
%C3%A9_CCSPM_M%C3%A9t%C3%A9o_Cameroun.pdf?
part=4 (January 2013).
[17] Cameroon's
 
National
 
Institute
 
of
 
Statistics. 
http://www.stat.cm/downloads/CSS/Note_analyse_comptes_n
ationaux_trimestriels_decembre_2012.pdf (January 2013).
[18] PhoneGap.  http://phonegap.com/ (February 2013).
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

