Securing Perception System of Autonomous Vehicle
Abstract—The sophisticated internal communication of the
autonomous
vehicle
together
with
the
various
external
communications will greatly increase the attack surface and
widely open the door for even more security threats as
compared to the non-autonomous vehicle.
This requires
further strict security measures and protection.
This paper
attempts to secure the communications within the Perception
System. It aims to protect both the Environment and Location
Perception
modules.
Both
symmetric
and
asymmetric
cryptography will be used depending on the size of the
exchanged
messages.
Cryptographic
protocols
will
be
provided.
Keywords— Autonomous vehicle; Cryptography; Perception
system security; Security protocol.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Vehicle accident statistics showed about six million
average car accidents per year occurring in the United States
[1]. Those that resulted in death were caused by driver’s
faults, such as alcohol drinking (40 %), speeding (30 %) and
reckless driving (33 %). According to the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), the financial cost
of crashes reached 242 billion dollars in 2010 [2]. For this
reason, scientists nowadays are more oriented towards how
to minimize the role of the driver. As a result, it should be
no surprise that the autonomous vehicle idea became a
reality. The autonomous vehicles are divided into five levels
of autonomy ranging from level 1 (low level driver
assistance) to level 5 (full automation) [3]. The autonomous
vehicle provides various benefits including reduced human
stress, improved productivity and mobility, traffic safety,
and reduced accidents costs [4]. In 2007, about six
autonomous vehicles (level 3) completed 90 Km test drives
[5]. The improvements resulting from these tests will
definitely contribute to having even more autonomous
vehicles on the roads during the years to come.
Autonomous vehicles are anticipated to provide safer
transportation with well-planned techniques to avoid these
large numbers of accidents. Undoubtedly, they will improve
human safety and reduce the accident costs. The way that
the autonomous vehicle functions could be compared to the
way humans analyse the environmental signals. In other
words, humans possess an action-perception reaction to the
environment. This process is handled by three systems: the
perception system (sensing the environment), the cognition
system (analysing the data and making decisions) and
finally the action system (implementing the decisions
resulted from the cognitive system) [6]. An autonomous
vehicle is supposed to function in a similar pattern.
The
work
of
the
autonomous
vehicle
is
basically
dependent on three technologies: the embedded processors,
the sensors, and the communication systems [7]. The
communication technologies can be categorized into inter-
and intra-vehicle. The first category allows for outside com-
communications, and inter-vehicle communications.
munications
and
the
second
is
defined
by
different
communication
techniques
allowing
data
transmission
within
the
vehicle
[8].
These
increased
levels
of
communications of the autonomous vehicle make it more
vulnerable to security attacks [9].
In the past, vehicles were initially made to be isolated
mechanical devices [10]. This means that the attacks were
targeted to a specific vehicle because every vehicle was
operating independently. However, with the introduction of
connected
and
autonomous
vehicles,
inter-vehicle
communication increases the risk over multiple vehicles.
Hence, part of autonomous vehicle safety relies in providing
deterministic techniques to improve cybersecurity and
prevent cyber-attacks. Physical safety is the other part of the
autonomous
vehicle’s
security
which
ensures
that
pedestrians and people in the vehicle are safe [11]. This is
achieved through well-designed navigation algorithms.
The
use
of
various
processors
and
networks
by
autonomous vehicles opened the door wide for several
possible
vulnerabilities.
These
include
spoofing,
sender/receiver related errors, segmented network related
errors,
and
communication
corruption
[12]
–
[15].
Weaknesses of the Control Area Network (CAN), such as
the susceptibility to Denial of Service attacks (DoS), and the
absence of authentication, contribute to the majority of these
vulnerabilities. To avoid security attacks based on these
vulnerabilities, security requirements should have been
enforced prior to the actual design of these vehicles [16].
Message encryption techniques alone do not impose data
integrity
and
confidentiality
[17].
To
help
with
the
protection efforts, researchers have introduced a number of
tools to enrich the security of data transmission in both
inter-vehicle and intra-vehicle communications [18]. To this
end, Schlatowe et al. [19] suggested relying on trust
management and control. In a similar fashion, the use of
polices to govern the access to these resources was proposed
in [20]. Further attempts to enrich the security of the
autonomous vehicles included relying on the tamper proof
microkernel, proxy, and network stack to augment the
security of the vehicle networks [21]. Others suggested
adding more sensors to the autonomous vehicle to monitor
the chips’ performance to provide integrity and availability
[22].
As detailed in Section II, the autonomous vehicle relies
on three major components: Perception, Planning and
Control Systems. This paper aims at securing the Location
and Environment Perception subsystems of the Perception
System. Both symmetric and asymmetric cryptography will
be employed. The proposed security protocols will be
discussed. The reminder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II briefly presents an overview of the autonomous
vehicle. Section III introduces the proposed Perception
Mariam Faied, Kevin Daimi, Samar Bayan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Computer Science
University of Detroit Mercy
Detroit, Michigan, USA
Email: {faiedma, daimikj, bayansa}@udmercy.edu
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

System Security (PSS), and Section IV gives the security
requirements of the proposed protocol. Finally, the paper is
concluded in Section V.
II. AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE OVERVIEW
Autonomous
vehicles
are
intended
to
transport
passengers
to
their
destinations
without
any
human
interference. The function of an autonomous vehicle is
modelled by three major systems: Perception, Planning and
Control [8] [23]-[26]. These components are illustrated in
Figure 1.
Figure 1. Major Systems of an Autonomous Vehicle.
Figure 2. Architecture of the Perception System of Autonomous Vehicle.
The Perception System consists of the Localization and
Environmental Perception Subsystems. The Environment
Perception Subsystem collects information from the external
environment to pilot the detection and identification of the
vehicle surroundings. Its function is aided by four types of
smart sensors: Camera, Light Detection and Ranging Device
(LIDAR), Radio Detection and Ranging Device (Radar),
and Ultrasound. Cameras execute detections of lane lines
marking, road surface, and on-road objects. The LIDAR
constructs a map of the environment to discover obstacles,
and the Radar employs radio waves to detect obstacles.
Together,
LIDAR
and
Radar
grant
more
accurate
positioning
of
the
obstacles
on
the
road
than
each
functioning alone. The Ultrasound Sensor perceives objects
through ultrasound acoustic waves. The main purpose of the
Perception Module is to blend data coming from the four
sensors and prepare them for the next phase [24] [26].
The Localization Subsystem is in charge of determining
the autonomous vehicle's position and planning the global
path to the destination. An autonomous vehicle's location
can be relative, absolute, or hybrid [23]. Relative location
represents the location of the autonomous vehicle in relative
to its initial position and the absolute location is determined
by the Global Positioning System (GPS). The hybrid
location refers to the combination of both relative and
absolute
locations
for
a
more
accurate
position
determination. This is the technique currently pursued in
autonomous vehicles testing [23]. Once the hybrid location
is identified by the Location Module, the Map Matching
Module intermixes it with High Definition Mapping (HD).
The HD map is a high resolution map [27] acting as a
storage space within the Location Subsystem that saves
various types of information including information about
roads, traffic conditions, and traffic signs. This map is
updated constantly by the manufacturers. Note that this
reliance on high accurate maps stems from the fact that an
autonomous vehicle operates precisely in 3D space [28].
The final step in the Localization Subsystem is carrying out
global planning to the vehicle’s final destination. The
architecture of the overall perception system is illustrated in
Figure 2.
The Planning System employs artificial intelligence to
merge and analyse the data from the Environmental
Perception Subsystem, Location Subsystem and the outer
environment. It is similar to the way the cognitive system of
human beings functions. Planning is divided into three
stages:
Mission
Planning,
Behavioural
Planning,
and
Motion Planning. The mission planning is accomplished by
implementing a search over the roads network connectivity.
Behavioural planning deals with the behaviour of the
autonomous
vehicle
based
on road signs
and traffic
conditions, and the motion planning stamps the most
important role that artificial intelligence plays in studying
the local positioning and making decisions on driving the
autonomous vehicle [26]. The control system of the
autonomous
vehicle
receives
decisions
made
by
the
planning system and implements them through many
Electronic Control Units (ECUs) [8] [23]. An overall
architecture of the autonomous vehicle is presented in
Figure 3.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 3. Overall Internal Architecture of Autonomous Vehicle.
III. PROPOSED PSS SECURITY APPROACH
The
proposed
security
protocol
will
handle
the
communication between the components of the perception
system in the autonomous vehicle. The perception system is
made up of two subsystems: Location Subsystem and
Environment Perception Subsystem. The parties involved in
this protocol and the notations used are illustrated in Tables
I and II. As mentioned above, the Environment Perception
Subsystem includes the
Camera, LIDAR,
Radar, and
Ultrasound sensors.
TABLE I. COMMUNICATION PARTIES
Party
Meaning
Si
Environment Perception Sensors
GPS
Global Positioning System Module
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
iPM
Front/ Surround Perception Module
MMM
Map matching Module
LM
Location Module
TABLE II. NOTATION USED IN PROTOCOLS
Party
Meaning
PUS, PRS
Public and private keys of sender
PUR, PRR
Public and private keys of receiver
PUS-old, PRS-old
Old public/private key of sender
PUR-old, PRR-old
Old public/private key of receiver
KOld
Old symmetric master key
K
Master key (symmetric)
KSn
Session key (symmetric)
KSn-old
Old session key (symmetric)
H
Hash
MAC
Message Authentication Code
KMAC
MAC key
E
Encryption
D
Decryption
TSi, where i=1 to 5
Time stamps
Ni
Nonce generated by sensor i
Mi
Message generated by sensor i
C
Cipher text
A. Localization Subsystem Communication
The
communications
between
the
modules
in
the
Localization Subsystem of the Perception System (LSPS)
are unidirectional (one-way communication). These include
communication
between
GPS/IMU
modules
and
the
Location
Module
(LM),
communication
between
the
Location Module (LM) and the Map Matching Module
(MMM), and communication between the Map Matching
Module (MMM) and the Global Path Module (GPM).
In the GPS/IMU and LM communication, the GPS
module sends the coordinates of the autonomous vehicle,
known as GPS coordinates, to the Location Module. GPS
coordinates represent unique identification of the location of
the vehicle. They are expressed as a combination of latitude
and longitude. GPS coordinates embody the absolute
location of the autonomous vehicle. The IMU unit sends the
velocity, altitude and the position of the vehicle. However,
these represent the relative location of the autonomous
vehicle. The LM will then calculate the hybrid location of
the autonomous vehicle, which is the most accurate location
based on the absolute and the relative locations. LM sends
this hybrid location to the MMM. The MMM will match the
location of the autonomous vehicle with the electronic map
EM data. This matched location is sent to the GPM. The
GPM is responsible for planning the global path from the
starting point to the destination point. Hence, the message
transmitted within the above three communications is
converted into the real-time location of the autonomous
vehicle. Table III lists the different types of messages that
are exchanged between various components of the Location
Subsystem in the Perception System.
The exchanged
messages, as represented in Table III, are small. This
justifies the use of asymmetric encryption. In other words,
since these messages are small, the communications within
the Location Subsystem lead themselves efficiently to
public key cryptography.
TABLE III. MESSAGES WITHIN LOCALIZATION SYSTEM
Operation
Message Type
GPS to LM
GPS coordinates (Absolute location)
IMU to LM
Altitude, Velocity (Relative location)
LM to MMM
Hybrid location
MMM to GPM
Hybrid location
Since the approach is similar for all of the above
communications, this protocol will adopt S for sender and R
for receiver. If LM is sending data to MMM, S is LM, and R
is MMM, and if MMM is sending data to GPM, S is MMM,
and R is GPM. The details of this protocol are presented
below.
1) Initialization and Key Distribution Stage
Each component in the Location Subsystem has its own
built-in public and private keys. In addition, components
also have built-in public keys of the receivers. To clarify this,
Figure 4 depicts the initialization phase once the vehicle
starts. The built-in keys will be referred to as old keys
because they will be replaced immediately with fresh new
keys for security purposes. Therefore, ‘old” will be added to
suffix to denote that.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 4. Initialization Stage of LSPS
The
sender
first
generates
a
random
number
N1,
concatenates it with the ID of the receiver and its ID,
encrypts the concatenated message with the built-in private
key and then with the receiver’s public key. This represents
a request for communication. Note that || stands for
concatenation.
S R: E (PUR-old, E (PRS-old, N1||IDS || IDR))
(1)
Let X= E (PUR-old, E (PRS-old, N1||IDS || IDR))
(2)
The receiver decrypts X with its private key. It then
decrypts the resulting message with the sender’s public key.
This is done to extract the nonce N1.
R: D (PUS-old, D (PRR-old, X)) = N1 || IDS || IDR
(3)
The
receiver
generates its random
number N2
and
concatenates it with N1, IDS, and IDR. The resulting message
is encrypted with its private key, then with the sender’s
public key to confirm the request received.
R  S: E (PUS-old, E (PRR-old, N1 ||N2||IDS || IDR))
(4)
Upon receiving the message, the sender decrypts it with its
private key. The resulting message is then decrypted with
the receiver’s public key to get the concatenated nonce. The
sender extracts the second nonce N2 and generates its new
public key (PUS) and private key (PRS). Furthermore, it
concatenates the public key, hash of the public key, the time
stamp TS1, and the nonce N2. The concatenated message is
encrypted with its private key and then with the receiver’s
public key. Note that time stamp is used because S and R are
synchronized.
S  R: E (PUR-old, E (PRS-old, N2|| PUS || H(PUS)||TS1)) (5)
The receiver decrypts the received message with its
private key. It then decrypts it with the sender’s public key.
R then verifies the hash, ensure the time of the message is
still valid, and extracts the sender’s new public key (PUS).
The receiver follows the same procedure as the sender did to
create its public (PUR) and private (PRR) and sends its new
public key (PUR) to the sender. It uses new time stamp TS2.
R  S: E (PUS, E (PRR-old, N1 || PUR|| H(PUR) ||TS2))
(6)
The sender follows similar decryption steps to extract the
receiver’s new public key (PUR).
2) LSPS Message Exchange
The sender first encrypts a message (Table III) with the
receiver’s public key and applies the hash function to the
resulting message. Then, it encrypts it with its private key.
S  R: E (PUR, E (PRS, M || H(M) ||TS3)))
(7)
The receiver, R, decrypts the received message with its
private key. What is left from the original message is then
decrypted with the sender’s public key. The receiver, R,
verifies the hash and the time, and extracts the message M.
M could be the absolute location, relative location or hybrid
location of the autonomous vehicle.
3) LSPS Keys Update
After exchanging a fixed number of messages or after a
certain time, both parties will update their keys in a fashion
similar to (1) above. The current key will be the old key.
B. Environment Perception Subsystem Communication
The protocol for the Environment Perception Subsystem
of the Perception System (EPSPS) below is applied to the
messages sent by perception sensors (Camera, LIDAR,
Radar and Ultrasound) to the Perception Modules. There are
two types of perception modules: Front Perception Module
(FPM) and Surround Perception Module (SPM). The
encryption details will be similar for both. For this reason,
iPM will be used to refer to both.
The type of messages that are transmitted within the
Environment Perception Subsystem depends on the smart
sensor (LIDAR, Radar, Ultrasound or Camera) that sends
the message. Table IV identifies the messages transmitted
within this subsystem.
TABLE IV. MESSAGES WITHIN ENVIRONMENT PERCEPTION
Source
Message Type
Camera
Images
LIDAR, Radar, US
Vector of Distances to Obstacles
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Since these messages are large, the communications
within the Environment Perception Subsystem demands
symmetric
encryption.
The
protocol
for
these
communications is as follows.
1) Initialization Stage
The
components
of
the
Environment
Perception
Subsystem have built-in master keys. They are preinstalled
at manufacturing time. This means that the Front and
Surround Perception Modules will have N built-in master
keys, where N is the number of smart sensors connected to
the
Perception
Module,
whether
front
or
surround
perception module. Once the system becomes in service, the
master keys need to be updated and the session keys need to
be generated.
2)
Master Key Management
The approach begins with a handshake procedure followed
by key exchange. The detailed steps are represented in
Figure 5.
Each smart sensor generates a nonce, N1. This nonce with
IDSi and IDiPM are encrypted with the old master key and
sent to the corresponding perception module. Note that,
initially, the old master key is the built in key. Once the new
keys are created, the current keys will be old.
Si  iPM: E (Kold, N1|| IDSi||IDiPM)
(8)
The iPM confirms the request for communication. It
generates another nonce, N2, and concatenates it with N1.
The resulting value is encrypted with its master key.
Figure 5. Initialization Stage of EPSPS
iPM  Si: E (Kold, N1|| N2|| IDSi||IDiPM)
(9)
The smart sensor extracts the second nonce by decrypting
the received message with the old master key. iPM then
generates a new master key and concatenates it with the
hash of this key, its nonce, N2, and a time stamp. The
resulting expression is encrypted its old master key.
iPM  Si: E (Kold, K|| H(K) || N2 || TS3|| IDSi || IDiPM)
(10)
The smart sensor decrypts the received message with the
old master key, verifies the hash and time, and then extracts
the new master key. The master key is changed periodically.
3)
Session Key Generation
Once the master key is generated, the Perception Modules
(whether front or surround) will generate the session key,
concatenate it with its hash and time stamp, all encrypted
with the old session key. The resulting message is encrypted
with the master key.
iPM  Si: E (K, E (KSn-old, KSn|| H(KSn) ||TS4))
(11)
The message is decrypted by the smart sensor using the
master key. The resulting message is decrypted using the
current session key. Having done that, the smart sensor then
verifies the hash and extracts the new session key. The iPM
then generates the MAC key, KMAC.
4) EPSPS Message Exchange
The smart sensor generates the MAC of the message. It
then concatenates the message, MAC of the message and the
timestamp. The resulting message is encrypted with the
session key and sent to the Perception Module.
X = E (KSn, Mi || MAC (KMAC, Mi) || TS5|| IDSi || IDiPM) (12)
Si  iPM: X
(13)
The received message (cipher text C) is decrypted using
KS.
The
result
of
this
decryption
represents
the
concatenation of the message, Mi, and its MAC, timestamp,
IDSi, and IDiPM. The time stamp is checked to ensure that the
message is current. The IDs are verified and the MAC of the
message Mi is found and compared to the received MAC. If
they are the same, the message will be considered by the
Perception Module.
IV. AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
Within the LSPS, the message integrity is ensured through
hashing the message. The hash typically provides integrity
of the exchanged data. If the data is changed by even one bit,
the hash will be invalid. This makes it hard for an attacker to
disturb the data. To ensure that only the receiver will
recover the exchanged message, messages are encrypted by
the public key of the receiver to achieve confidentiality so
that no one except the receiver can decrypt it. Message
authentication is ensured by encrypting the overall result
with the sender’s private key. This authenticates the sender.
For
the
EPSPS,
the
message
integrity
and
the
authentication are
enforced
by applying
the
message
authentication code. The use of the MAC confirms that the
message received is coming from the sender without being
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

modified [20]. Through this part of the protocol, symmetric
key encryption guarantees the confidentiality of the message
since no one, but the sender and receiver, know the
symmetric key used within each session. Moreover, the use
of the master key enhances the security level.
V. CONCLUSION
Autonomous vehicles are no more just ideas but are
finding their way to implementation. The autonomous
vehicle should be secured so that people can trust the use of
these technologies. The autonomous vehicle is considered
part of the Internet of Things (IoT). It works in a similar way
to the human being, but with much more focus. Enforcing
the security of the Perception System of the autonomous
vehicle was the focus of this paper. Both Environmental
Perception and Localization Subsystems were protected via
cryptographical protocols to secure the data transmission
within both subsystems of the perception system. The first
subsystem, the Localization Module, consisted of short
messages
that caused the
employment
of
public
key
cryptography, while the long messages of the Environment
Perception Module necessitated private key cryptography.
This work concentrated on the security of the Perception
System. Future work will include securing the Planning and
Control Systems in addition to securing the communication
between the three systems.
REFERENCES
[1]
Driver Knowledge, "Car Accidents in the United States," [Online].
Available: https://www.driverknowledge.com/car-accident-statistics/.
Retrieved June 2019.
[2]
N. H. T. S. Administration, "Traffic Safety Facts," Department of
Transportation,
United
States,
2016,
[online].
Available:
https://cdan.nhtsa.gov/tsftables/tsfar.htm. Retreived June 2019.
[3]
SAE, "Taxonomy and definitions for term related to on-road motor
vehicle automated driving systems," Standard J3016, 2014, [online].
Available:
https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_201401/.
Retreived June 2019.
[4]
T. Litman,Victoria Transport Policy Institute, "Autonomous Vehicle
Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning,"
Victoria Transport Policy Institute, March 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://www.vtpi.org/avip.pdf, Retreived May 2019.
[5]
A. Hars, "Autonomous cars: The next revolution looms," inventivio
Innovative
Briefs,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.inventivio.com/innovationbriefs/2010-01/index.html.
Retreived June 2019.
[6]
R. Shiffrar and M. Blake, "Perception of Human Motion," Annu. Rev.
Psychol, 2007, [online]. Available: http://psych.annualreviews.org.
Retreived June 2019.
[7]
A. M. Wyglinski, X. Huang, T. Padir, L. Lai, T. R. Elsenbarth, and K.
Venkatasbramanian, "Security of Autonomous Systems Employing
Embedded Computing and Sensors," in Proc. IEEE Computer
Society, 2013, pp 80-86.
[8]
J. Wang, J. Liu, and N. Kato, "Networking and Communications in
Autonomous Driving, A Survey," in Proc. IEEE Communication
Surveys and Tutorials, Dec. 2018, pp. 1-1.
[9]
V. L. L. Thing and J. Wu, "Autonomous Vehicle Security: A
taxonomy
of
Attacks
and
Defences.,"
in
IEEE
International
Conference on Internet of Things (iThings); IEEE Green Computing
and Communications (GreenCom); IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social
Computing (CPSCom), IEEE SmartData (SmartData), 2016, pp. 534-
539.
[10] S. Abuelsamid, “ Autonomous Vehicle Cybersecurity, The Need to
Protect
Automated
and
Connected
Vehicles”,
2016,
https://www.karambasecurity.com/static/pdf/Autonomous-
Automotive-Cybersecurity-Report.pdf. Retrieved June 2019.
[11] S. Brame, “The safety and Security of Autonomous Cars”, August
2018,
https://restechtoday.com/safety-security-autonomous-cars/.
Retrieved June 2019.
[12] M. Gerla and P. Reiher, “Securing the Futurre Autonomous Vehicles:
A Cyber-Physical Systems Approach," in Securing Cyber-Physical
Systems, Ed. K. P. Al-Sakib, London, CRC Press, 2015, pp. 197-217.
[13] U. E. Larson and D. K. Nilsson, “Securing Vehicles Against Cyber
Attacks”, in Proc. The 4th Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and
Information Intelligence Research CSIIRW’08, New York, USA,
2008, pp. 1-3.
[14] P. Thom and C. MacCarley, “A Spy Under the Hood: Controlling
Risk and Automotive EDR”. Risk Management Magazine, Feb. 2008;
pp. 22–25.
[15] M. Wolf, M. Weimerskirch, and C. Paar, “Security in Automotive
Bus Systems,” in: Proc. the Workshop on Embedded Security in Cars,
Bochum, Germany, 2004, pp. 1-13.
[16] E. Yagdereli, C. Gemci, and A. Z. Aktas, “A Study on Cyber-Security
of Autonomous and Unmanned Vehicles,” in Proc. Journal of
Defense Modeling and Simulation: Applications, Methodology,
Technology, 2015, Vol. 12, pp. 369-381.
[17] J. Yoshida, EE Times, “CAN Bus Can Be Encrypted, Says Trillium,”
[online]. Available:
http: //www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc
id=1328081, Oct. 2015. Retrieved: May 2019.
[18] A. Lima, F. Rocha, M. Volp, and P. Esteves-Verissimo, “Towards
Safe and Secure Autonomous and Cooperative Vehicle Ecosystems”,
in Proc. the 2nd ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems Security
and Privacy CPS-SPC’16, Vienna, Austria, Oct. 2016, pp. 59-70.
[19] J. Schlatow, M. Moestl, and R. Ernst, “An Extensible Autonomous
Reconﬁguration 
Framework 
for 
Complex 
Component-Based 
Embedded Systems,” in Proc. 12th International Conference on
Autonomic Computing (ICAC), Grenoble, France, July 2015, pp.
239–242.
[20] V. Prevelakis and M. Hammad, “A Policy-Based Communications
Architecture for Vehicles,’ in Proc. International Conference on
Information Systems Security and Privacy, Angers, France, 2015, pp.
155-162.
[21] M.
Hamad,
J.
Schlatow,
V.
Prevelakis,
and
R.
Ernst,
“A
Communication
Framework for Distributed
Access
Control in
Microkernel-Based Systems.” In Proc. the 12th Annual Workshop on
Operating Systems Platforms for Embedded Real-Time Applications
(OSPERT16), Toulouse, France, July 2016, pp. 11–16.
[22] E. Villani, N. Fathollahnejad, R. Pathan, R. Barbosa, and J. Karlsson,
“Reliability
Analysis
of
Consensus
in
Cooperative
Transport
Systems,” In Proc. 32nd International Conference on Computer Safety,
Reliability and Security, SAFECOMP 2013 - Workshop ASCoMS
(Architecting Safety in Collaborative Mobile Systems) of the,
Toulouse, France, Sept. 2013, pp. 1-8.
[23] J. Zhao, B. Liang, and Q. Chen, "The key Technology toward the
self-driving car," in Proc. The International Journal of Intelligent
Unmanned Systems, vol. 6, issue 1, pp. 2-20, 2018.
[24] M. Mody et al., "Understanding Vehicle E/E Architecture Topologies
for
Automated
Driving:
System
Partitioning
and
Trade-off
Parameters,"
in
Proc.
Autonomous
Vehicles
and
Machine
Conference, 2018, pp. 358-1-358-5(5).
[25] S.
Behere
and
N.
Torngren,
"A
Functional
Architecture
for
Autonomous Driving," in Proc. WASA’15, Montereal, Canada, 2015,
pp. 1-7.
[26] S. D. Pendleton, H. Andersen, X. Du, X. Shen, M. Meghjani, Y. H.
Eng, D. Rus, and M. H. Ang, "Perception, Planning, Control, and
Coordination for Autonomous Vehicles," Machines, Vol. 5, issue 1,
2017, pp. 1-54.
[27] Nanalyze, “5 Startups Doing HD Mapping for Autonomous Vehile”,
November
2018,
https://www.nanalyze.com/2018/11/hd-mapping-
autonomous-vehicles/. Retrieved June 2019.
[28] H. Verdhan, “HD Maps: New age maps powering the autonomous
vehicles”,
September
2017,[online].
Available:
https://www.geospatialworld.net/article/hd-maps-autonomous-
vehicles/. Retrieved June 2019.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

