PAPR and Spectral Control Procedure for OFDM Wireless Systems 
Using CAZAC Equalization 
 
Yoshitsugu Sugai, Yushi Shirato, Tomotaka Kimura and Masahiro Muraguchi 
 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science 
6-3-1 Niijuku, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo, Japan 
E-mail: 4317614@ed.tus.ac.jp, yshirato@sea.plala.or.jp, kimura, murag@ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— A major drawback of Orthogonal Frequency 
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) signals is extremely high 
Peak-to-Average Power Ratio (PAPR). The CAZAC 
equalization scheme makes the PAPR of M-array 
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (M-QAM) OFDM 
signals into the PAPR of M-QAM single-carrier signals. 
Therefore, it dramatically improves the PAPR of OFDM 
signals. However, severe bandpass filtering of CAZAC-
OFDM signal lead to unacceptable degradation of the 
PAPR. The paper provides available control procedure 
for PAPR and spectrum managements. It is confirmed 
that the CAZAC-OFDM signal controlled by our 
procedure maintains enough low PAPR and can clear the 
spectrum mask specifications in IEEE802.11 standard.  
Keywords-OFDM; CAZAC; spectrum mask; PAPR. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex (OFDM) 
systems that attain high speeds and high capacity have 
recently been attracting attention in wireless applications, e.g., 
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs), third Generation 
Partnership Project Long-Term Evolution (3GPP LTE), and 
the Digital Video Broadcasting-Terrestrial (DVB-T) standard 
[1][2]. However, the main drawback of OFDM is its high 
Peak-to-Average Power Ratio (PAPR), which decreases the 
efficiency of Power Amplifiers (PAs) and increases 
transmitter power consumption [3][4]. Therefore, a number 
of techniques have been proposed to reduce the PAPR [3]. 
Well-known techniques are clipping-and-filtering, Partial 
Transmit Sequences (PTSs), and Selected Mapping (SLM). 
Clipping-and-filtering limits the peak amplitude of the 
transmission signal. However, non-linear distortion causes 
BER to degrade. PTS partitions input data into disjoint sub-
blocks. Moreover, each sub-block are weighted by a phase 
factor. This technique chooses the phase factor to minimize 
the PAPR of combined signals. SLM generates multiple 
candidate data blocks. All data blocks represent the same 
information. Although PTS and SLM can be expected to 
create a certain reduction in PAPR, both techniques need side 
information in the receiver, which decreases spectral 
efficiency. The most practical solution to improving PAPR is 
to introduce Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiplexing 
Access (SC-FDMA). The 3GPP LTE system adopts SC-
FDMA for uplink multiple access systems [2][5]. However, 
SC-FDMA has not been considered to be suitable for next-
generation high-speed communications. 
A new PAPR reduction technique with Constant Amplitude 
Zero Auto-Correlation (CAZAC) equalization was recently 
proposed [6][7]. The CAZAC equalization scheme makes the 
PAPR of M-array Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (M-
QAM) OFDM signals into the PAPR of M-QAM single-
carrier signals [8]. Therefore, it dramatically improves the 
PAPR of OFDM signals. However, severe bandpass filtering 
of CAZAC-OFDM signal lead to unacceptable degradation 
of the PAPR.  
The paper provides available control procedure for PAPR 
and spectrum managements for the CAZAC-OFDM system. 
One simplest approach of improving the PAPR is to clip the 
amplitude of the signal to a fixed level. An accurate clipping 
boundary is easily defined, because we can manage the 
amplitude of the time-domain signal of CAZAC-OFDM like 
a single-carrier signal. As the correct demodulation of 
CAZAC-OFDM signals requires only values of the original 
signal points, we can improve the PAPR without any 
degradation of BER and spectrum performances by clipping. 
We have confirmed that the CAZAC-OFDM signal 
controlled by our procedure maintains enough low PAPR and 
can clear the spectrum mask specifications in IEEE802.11 
standard. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, 
we describe the CAZAC-OFDM system. In Section 3, we 
describe the proposed spectral control. In Section 4, we 
describe the PAPR reduction method. Finally, we conclude 
this paper in Section 5. 
II. 
CAZAC-OFDM SYSTEM 
In this section, we describe the CAZAC-OFDM System. 
We first describe the OFDM system, and then we explain the 
CAZAC equalizing technique. 
A. OFDM system 
In OFDM system, the frequency domain symbol 𝑿 =
[𝑋0, 𝑋1, …, 𝑋𝑁−1]𝑇  is modulated by 𝑁  size inverse Fast 
Fourier Transform (IFFT). The discrete-time OFDM signal 
with 𝑁 subcarriers is represented as 
 
𝑥𝑛 = ∑ 𝑋𝑘𝑒𝑗2𝜋𝑘𝑛/𝑁
𝑁−1
𝑘=0
, 
(1) 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

where 𝑗 = √−1 and 𝑛 is discrete time index. On the other 
hand, receiver acquires frequency domain symbol 𝒀 by 
applying FFT to received signal 𝒚.  
 
𝑌𝑘 = ∑ 𝑦𝑛𝑒−𝑗2𝜋𝑘𝑛/𝑁
𝑁−1
𝑛=0
 
= ∑
𝑁−1(𝑥𝑛 + 𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒)𝑒−𝑗2𝜋𝑘𝑛/𝑁
𝑛=0
.  
 
(2) 
The PAPR of the OFDM signal (1) can be expressed as 
 
𝑃𝐴𝑃𝑅 =
max
0≤𝑛≤𝑁−1|𝑥𝑛|2
E[|𝑥𝑛|2]
, 
(3) 
 
where E[∙]  is expectation operator. PAPR represents 
amplitude fluctuation of each symbol. In order to improve the 
accuracy of PAPR, the OFDM signal 𝑥𝑘 is converted to 𝐿-
times oversampled time domain signal [1]. 
As shown from (2), the OFDM signal is composed of a 
plurality of subcarrier signals, which causes an increase in 
amplitude fluctuation. A high PAPR signal increases the Input 
Back Off (IBO) at the power amplifier in order to amplify the 
transmit signal without distortion. In general, increasing in 
IBO causes decreasing the efficiency of PA. 
 
P/S
FFT
S/P
GI
remove
Output 
Data
IQ
DEM
LNA
CAZAC
Decoder
PA
IFFT
P/S
GI
insert
Input 
Data
IQ
MOD
CAZAC
Equalizer
S/P &
QAM map
(a) Transmitter
(b) Receiver
Figure 1. CAZAC-OFDM system. 
 
B. CAZAC equalizing technique 
Figure 1 shows a transmitter and receiver block diagrams 
for a CAZAC-OFDM system. The CAZAC sequence is an 
orthogonal sequence and the autocorrelation function is a 
delta function. In addition, the CAZAC sequence has a 
characteristic that the amplitude exhibits a constant value in 
both time and frequency domain. Zadoff-Chu (ZC) sequences 
is one of the CAZAC sequence. The ZC sequence 𝐶𝑘  of 
length 𝐿 is defined as 
 
 
𝐶𝑘 =
{  
  𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝑗𝜋𝑘(𝑘 − 1)𝑟
𝐿
) (𝐿 is odd)
𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝑗𝜋(𝑘 − 1)2𝑟
𝐿
) (𝐿 is even) 
 , 
(4) 
 
where 𝐿 is the length of the CAZAC sequence and 𝑟 is the 
sequence number, 𝑘 = 1, 2, ⋯ 𝐿. 𝐿 is a natural number, and 
𝑟 is a prime integer with respect to 𝐿. CAZAC sequences are 
generated by cyclic shift of the original CAZAC sequence. 
The periodic cross-correlation function 𝜌 is defined as 
 
 
𝜌(𝑚) = ∑ 𝑐𝑛𝑐(𝑐−𝑚) 𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝐿
∗
 
𝐿−1
𝑛=1
  
 
 
= {𝐿 (𝑚 = 0)
0 (𝑚 ≠ 0)   , 
(5) 
 
where m is integer variables. 
CAZAC equalization uses a square matrix 𝑀 generated 
from the equation in the case where L in equation (4) is an 
even number. The matrix equation is defined as 
 
 
𝑀 = 1
√𝑁 [
𝑐1
𝑐𝑁+1
𝑐2
𝑐𝑁+2
⋮
𝑐(𝑁−1)𝑁+1
⋮
…
⋯
⋯
𝑐𝑁
𝑐2𝑁
⋱
…
⋮
𝑐𝑁2
], 
(6) 
 
where matrix 𝑀 is the rearrangement of in equation (4) in the 
row direction, and 𝑁 is the number of subcarriers and 𝐿 =
 𝑁2,  𝑟 = 1. 𝑁 is an even number, so 𝐿 is also an even number. 
Multiply the signal before IFFT by the matrix as shown in 
Figure 1 calculate the product of the transposed the frequency 
domain symbol 𝑋 = [𝑋1, 𝑋2,⋯ , 𝑋𝑁] and the matrix 𝑀, and 
create a CAZAC equalized signal 𝑋 '. 𝑋 ' is represented as 
 
 
𝑋′ = 𝑀 ∙ 𝑋𝑇                          
 
 
= 1
√𝑁 [
𝑐1
𝑐𝑁+1
 
⋮
𝑐(𝑁−1)𝑁+1
 
⋯
⋯
𝑐𝑁
𝑐2𝑁
⋱
…
⋮
𝑐𝑁2
] ∙ [
𝑋1
𝑋2
⋮
𝑋𝑁
]. 
(7) 
 
An IFFT operation is performed on this signal. The OFDM 
time domain signal 𝑥𝑛 of the sample is represented as 
 
 
𝑥𝑛 = 1
𝑁 ∑ 𝑋𝑘
′ 𝑒𝑗2𝜋𝑘𝑛/𝑁
𝑁−1
𝑘=0
 
 
 
       
= ∑ { ∑ 𝑒𝑗𝜋(𝑚+𝑘𝑁)2/𝐿𝑋𝑚 
𝑁−1
𝑚=0
}  𝑒𝑗2𝜋𝑘𝑛/𝑁      
𝑁−1
𝑘=0
   
 
 
       
= ∑ 𝑒𝑗𝜋𝑚2/𝑁2𝑋𝑚 { ∑ 𝑒𝑗2𝜋𝑘(𝑚+𝑛)/𝑁𝑒𝑗𝜋𝑘2 
𝑁−1
𝑘=0
}
𝑁−1
𝑚=0
, 
(8) 
 
where 𝑘 is an integer not less than 0, so the following 
equation is developed. 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
exp(𝑗𝜋𝑘2) = {  1     (𝑘：even)
 −1    (𝑘：odd ). 
(9) 
 
To lead (10) from (9). 
 
 
exp(𝑗𝜋𝑘2) = (−1)𝑘. 
(10) 
 
Substituting (10) into (8) leads to (11). 
 
 
𝑥𝑛 = ∑ 𝑒𝑗𝜋𝑚2/𝑁2𝑋𝑚 { ∑{−𝑒𝑗2𝜋(𝑚+𝑛)/𝑁}
𝑘 
𝑁−1
𝑘=0
}
𝑁−1
𝑚=0
. 
(11) 
 
The inside of {} in equation (11) is the sum of the 
geometric progression. Therefore, equation (12) is derived. 
 
 
 
∑{−𝑒𝑗2𝜋(𝑚+𝑛)/𝑁}
𝑘
𝑁−1
𝑘=0
= {𝑁 (−𝑒𝑗2𝜋(𝑚+𝑛)/𝑁 = 1)
0  (−𝑒𝑗2𝜋(𝑚+𝑛)/𝑁 ≠ 1)
. 
(12) 
 
When 2 π (𝑚 + 𝑛) / 𝑁 = 1, 2(𝑚 + 𝑛)/𝑁 is an integer and 
odd number. Also, 𝑛 and 𝑚 are 0 ≤ 𝑛 ≤ 𝑁 − 1, 0 ≤ 𝑚 ≤
𝑁 − 1 . These relationships satisfy the relationship of 
equation (13). 
 
 
𝑚 = N
2 − 𝑛 (𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑁). 
(13) 
 
Equation (14) is derived from equations (11), (12) and (13). 
 
 
𝑥𝑛 = 𝑒𝑗𝜋{N/2−𝑛 (𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑁)}2/𝑁2𝑋𝑁
2−𝑛(𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑁) 
 
 
= c𝑁
2−𝑛(𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑁)𝑋𝑁
2−𝑛(𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑁),       
(14) 
  
Equation (14) shows that CAZAC equalization converts the 
PAPR of the OFDM time domain signal into the PAPR of a 
single-carrier signal. Figure 2 shows the image diagram of the 
CAZAC-OFDM time domain signal. Among the components 
of the coefficient 𝑋 , only one was reinforced, all others 
cancel each other. 
Figures 3 (a) and (b) show the constellation of CAZAC-
OFDM, which shows time-domain signal points at the IQ-
MOD input in Figure 1. The discrete-time signal points of 
QPSK CAZAC-OFDM line up on the unit circle orbit as 
shown in Figure 3 (a), and the discrete-time signal points of 
16QAM CAZAC-OFDM signal are on the three concentric 
circle orbits as shown in Figure 3 (b).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. The time domain signal of CAZAC-OFDM 
 
(a) QPSK
(b) 16QAM
 
Figure 3. Constellation examples of the CAZAC-OFDM Signals. 
 
III. 
SPECTRAL CONTROL 
In this section, we explain the proposed spectral control 
method. We first describe the procedure of the proposed 
method, and then we evaluate the performance of the spectral 
control method through simulation experiments.  
A. Procedure of Spectral Control 
The CAZAC-OFDM signal at the IQ-MOD output in 
Figure 1 is an analog signal wave, which deals with the 
passband signal with a carrier frequency of fc in the 
continuous time domain. Since fc in general is much higher 
than 1/Ts, a continuous-time baseband OFDM signal with the 
symbol period Ts and the corresponding passband signal with 
the carrier frequency fc have almost the same waveform. 
However, in general, the waveform for the discrete-time 
baseband signal may not be the same as that for the 
continuous-time baseband signal. In practice, the PAPR for 
the continuous-time baseband signal can be measured only 
after implementing the actual hardware, including Digital-to-
Analog Convertor (DAC). In other words, measurement of 
the PAPR for the continuous-time baseband signal is not 
straightforward. Therefore, there must be some means of 
estimating the PAPR from the discrete-time signal. 
Fortunately, it is known that the discrete-time baseband signal 
can show almost the same PAPR as the continuous-time 
baseband signal if it is four times interpolated (oversampled). 
To make the discrete-time OFDM signal with the proper 
passband characteristics which satisfy the IEEE 802.11 
specifications, we set the subcarrier allocation as shown in 
Figure 4. Here, we set the FFT size of CAZAC-OFDM to 64. 
Therefore, four times interpolated (oversampled) FFT size 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

becomes 256. 
The first task to consider is that the CAZAC-OFDM 
spectrum of 64 subcarriers with the bandwidth (BW) of 
16MHz is centered on the carrier frequency of fc, 24MHz 
bandwidth to the left, i.e., the space of 96 null subcarriers, and 
in the same way 24 MHz bandwidth to the right. Figure 5 
shows a block diagram of the generation of CAZAC-OFDM 
symbols. The second step to produce the signal is to apply a 
transmit filtering with proper roll-off by an FFT-window 
processing, and to avoid aliasing by low-pass filtering. Figure 
6 shows a block diagram of the reproduction of CAZAC-
OFDM symbols. In receiver side, multiply the received 
symbol in frequency domain and the inverse matrix 
 
after FFT shown by figure 6. 
 
…
CAZAC Subcarriers
N=64
(BW=16MHz)
…
Null Subcarriers
N=96
(BW=24MHz)
…
Null Subcarriers
N=96
(BW=24MHz)
frequency
  
Figure 4. Subcarrier allocation based on four times interpolated 
(oversampled) FFT processing. 
 
PA
P/S
GI
insert
Input 
Data
IQ
MOD
CAZAC
Equalizer
S/P &
QAM map
IFFT
N=64
..
..
N=96
..
N=64
N=96
..
null
..
N=256
null
Window
&
LPF
 
Figure 5. The CAZAC-OFDM transmitter based on four times interpolated 
(oversampled) FFT processing. 
 
LNA
Output 
Data
IQ
DEM
P/S
FFT
N=64
..
..
N=96
..
N=64
N=96
..
discard
..
N=256
discard
S/P
GI
remove
CAZAC
Decoder
 
Figure 6. The receiver block diagram for spectral comtroled CAZAC-
OFDM signal. 
 
B. Simulation results 
We carried out our simulation with the MATLAB/ Simulink 
to evaluate the performance of the system. Table I 
summarizes the simulation parameters.  
Figure 7 shows the spectrum for the 16QAM CAZAC-
OFDM system. It is confirmed that the spectrum satisfied the 
spectrum mask standardized by the 
IEEE 802.11 
specifications [1]. 
 
TABLE I. MAJOR SIMULATION RAMETERS 
Number of CAZAC 
Subcarriers 
64 [Data: 60, Pilot: 4] 
 
IFFT & FFT size 
256 
Sampling Rate 
16MHz 
Symbol Period Ts 
5μsec 
Guard Interval 
1μsec 
Modulation of 
Subcarriers 
QPSK, 16QAM 
 
Channel Model 
AWGN 
 
Flat Rayleigh Fading 
- Doppler Frequency(fDTs): 7.5×10-5 
18-Ray Rayleigh Fading 
 with Exponential Decay Profile 
- Doppler Frequency(fDTs): 7.5×10-5 
- Delay Spread(𝜏/Ts): 2×10-2 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The spectrum comtroled 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM signal. 
 
IV. 
PAPR CONTROL 
This section describes the proposed PAPR control method. 
We first explain the procedure of the PAPR control method, 
and then we present simulation results to discuss the 
performance of the proposed PAPR control method. 
A. Procedure of PAPR control 
The CAZAC equalization scheme makes the PAPR of M-
array Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (M-QAM) OFDM 
signals into the PAPR of M-QAM single-carrier signals. 
Therefore, it dramatically improves the PAPR of OFDM 
signals.  However, severe bandpass filtering of the CAZAC-
OFDM signal lead to unacceptable degradation of the PAPR.  
Figure 8 shows the amplitude of bandpass and four times 
oversampled QPSK CAZAC-OFDM signal with subcarrier 
allocation shown in Figure 4. The original sample points of 
QPSK are on the line of unity amplitude. However, many of 
the interpolating points go above the line of unity amplitude. 
This means obvious degradation of the PAPR. 
One simplest approach of reducing the PAPR is to clip the 
amplitude of the signal to a fixed level. Fortunately, correct 
demodulation of CAZAC-OFDM signals requires only 
values of the original sample points, and it is possible to skip 
out the values of the interpolating points. Therefore, we can 
clip amplitude of the interpolating points at the unity 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

amplitude level as the clipping boundary in case of the QPSK 
CAZAC-OFDM signal. 
 
Samples (No.1 – No.256) in the time domain
IFFT Output Amplitude (Normalized)
Original sample point of QPSK signal
Interpolation point 
 
 
Figure 8. Amplitude of bandpass and oversampled QPSK CAZAC-OFDM 
signal in the time domain. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. The constellation of bandpass and oversampled 16-QAM 
CAZAC-OFDM signal. 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  The constellation of bandpass and oversampled 16-QAM 
CAZAC-OFDM signal with clipped amplitude processing. 
B. Simulation results 
Figure 9 shows the constellation of bandpass and four 
times oversampled 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM signal with 
subcarrier allocation shown in Figure 4. The original sample 
points of 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM signal are on the three 
concentric circle orbits as shown in Figure 3 (b). However, 
many of the interpolating points overfly to outer side of the 
largest circle orbit. This means obvious degradation of the 
PAPR. 
As noted previously, correct demodulation of CAZAC-
OFDM signals requires only values of the original sample 
points, which are all in the inner-side of the largest circle orbit 
of 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM signal, and it is possible to clip 
amplitude of the interpolating sample points. Figure 10 
shows the constellation of bandpass and oversampled 16-
QAM CAZAC-OFDM signal with clipped amplitude 
processing.  
We first considered the Complementary Cumulative 
Distribution Function (CCDF) of PAPR to evaluate the 
performance of PAPR, which is the probability that PAPR 
will be higher than a certain PAPR value PAPR0, i.e., 
Pr(PAPR > PAPR0). Figure 11 plots the CCDF of PAPR of 
16QAM CAZAC-OFDM system with and without clipping, 
as well as the conventional 16QAM OFDM and single-carrier 
16QAM systems. We found that the PAPR of the 16QAM 
CAZAC-OFDM system with clipping was almost equal to 
that of the single-carrier 16QAM system. Moreover, the 
PAPR of the 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM system with clipping 
was improved by 5 dB at the CCDF of 10-3 compared with 
the conventional 16QAM OFDM system.  
Figure 12 shows spectrum for the 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM 
system with clipping. It is confirmed that the spectrum also 
satisfied the spectrum mask standardized by the IEEE 802.11 
specifications. The result indicates the clipping does not bring 
serious effect to the spectrum.  
We next examined the Bit Error Rate (BER) of the 
proposed system. We considered three channels: Additive 
White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) and tow type of Rayleigh 
fading with AWGN.  
Figure 13 shows the BER performances of the QPSK and 
the 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM systems with clipping which 
are applied for AWGN channels. The results indicate that the 
CAZAC-OFDM system with clipping does not degrade BER 
performances.  
Figure 14 shows the BER performances of the 16QAM 
CAZAC-OFDM system with clipping which are applied for 
fading channels. We found that the BER of the system was 
comparable to that of the conventional OFDM system under 
the Flat Rayleigh Fading channel. In contrast, under the 18-
Ray Rayleigh Fading channel, which is a type of frequency 
selective fading channel, the BER of the 16QAM CAZAC-
OFDM system with clipping is improved because the 
influence of fading is spread to all sub-carriers. This indicates 
that the CAZAC-OFDM system has excellent capabilities to 
resist frequency selective fading. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The paper provides available control procedure for PAPR 
and spectrum managements for the CAZAC-OFDM system. 
One simplest approach of improving the PAPR is to clip the 
amplitude of the signal to a fixed level. An accurate clipping 
boundary is easily defined, because we can manage the 
amplitude of the time-domain signal of CAZAC-OFDM like 
a single-carrier signal. As the correct demodulation of 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

CAZAC-OFDM signals requires only values of the original 
signal points, we can improve the PAPR without any 
degradation of BER and spectrum performances by clipping. 
We have confirmed that the 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM signal 
controlled by our procedure maintains enough low PAPR of 
6dB and can clear the spectrum mask specifications in 
IEEE802.11 standard. Moreover, under the 18-Ray Rayleigh 
Fading channel, which is a type of frequency selective fading 
channel, the BER of the 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM system 
with clipping is improved, compared with the conventional 
OFDM system, because the influence of fading is spread to 
all sub-carriers. This indicates that the CAZAC-OFDM 
system has excellent capabilities to resist frequency selective 
fading. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] IEEE, “Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) 
and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications,” IEEE Std 802.11-
2012 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.11-2007), Mar. 2012, pp. 1-
2695. 
[2] A. Ghosh, R. Ratasuk, B. Mondal, N. Mangalvedhe, and T. 
Thomas,“LTE-advanced: Next-generationWireless 
Broadband Technology,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 
17, no. 3, June 2010, pp. 10–22. 
[3] H. Seung, Hee and L. Jae, Hong, “An Overview of Peak-to-
average Power Ratio Reduction Techniques for Multicarrier 
Transmission,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 12, no. 2, 
Apr. 2005, pp. 56–65. 
[4] J. Joung, C. K. Ho, K. Adachi, and S. Sun, “A Survey on 
Power-Amplifier-Centric Techniques for Spectrum- and 
Energy-Efficient Wireless Communications,” IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, Jan. 
2015, pp. 315–333. 
[5] H. Myung, J. Lim, and D. Goodman, “Single Carrier FDMA 
for Uplink Wireless Transmission,” IEEE Vehicular 
Technology Magazine, vol. 1, no. 3, Sep. 2006, pp. 30-38. 
[6] I. Baig and V. Jeoti, “PAPR Reduction in OFDM Systems: 
Zadoff-Chu Matrix Transform Based Pre/Post-Coding 
Techniques,” in Proc. of the 2nd International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence, Communication Systems and 
Networks, July 2010, pp. 373-377. 
[7] Z. Feng, et al., “Performance-Enhanced Direct Detection 
Optical OFDM Transmission With CAZAC Equalization,” 
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 27, no. 14, July 2015, 
pp. 1507-1510. 
[8] R. Ishioka, T. Kimura, and M. Muraguchi, “A Proposal for a 
New OFDM Wireless System using a CAZAC Equalization 
Scheme,” Proc. AICT 2017, June 2017, pp. 47-51. 
 
 
 
Figure 11. PAPR of the proposed CAZAC-OFDM. 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Spectrum of the 16QAM CAZAC-OFDM Signal with clipping. 
 
 
 
Figure 13. BER performances of the systems under AWGN channels. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. BER performances of the systems under fading channels. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

