A Testbed Concept for Cognitive Radio Prototyping
Alexander Viessmann, Christian Kocks, Andrey Skrebtsov, Guido H. Bruck, Peter Jung
University of Duisburg-Essen
Department of Communication Technologies
Duisburg, Germany
Email: info@kommunikationstechnik.org
Abstract—Future wireless systems are evolving towards a
broadband and open architecture for efﬁcient multi-service oper-
ation. This has a great impact on the terminal and infrastructure
component design methodology for supporting multiple radio
schemes. Cooperation in wireless networks, requiring cognitive
radio implementations, will facilitate a new dimension in the
evolution of multimedia communications. The growing price
pressure requires ever increasing levels of integration efﬁciency,
ﬂexibility and future proofness at the same time, setting out in
the digital baseband domain. In this manuscript, the authors will
illustrate a platform based prototyping process, which combines
the advantages of the ﬂexibility of a digital signal processor with
the efﬁcient parallelization capabilities of a ﬁeld-programmable
gate array. The primary purpose of this platform is to allow a
real-time capable implementation of cognitive radio systems. It
allows the integration of the entire communication chain from
the antenna to the decoded bit stream. Since the increasing
computational complexity complicates the dimensioning of such
platforms, scalability is a crucial design constraint for the
presented concept.
Index Terms—Cognitive Radio, Digital Signal Processor (DSP),
Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), Prototyping Platform,
Testbed
I. INTRODUCTION
Reconﬁgurability of transceivers for wireless access net-
works such as IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.16, 3GPP LTE (Long
Term Evolution) and various digital video broadcasting stan-
dards will become increasingly important in the forthcom-
ing decade. An appropriately ﬂexible and reliable software
architecture allowing the concurrent processing of different
controlling tasks for wireless terminals will hence be an
important asset.
The hardware manufacturers are required to accelerate the
development of new products to keep up with the decreasing
product life cycles. Research activities in the last two decades
showed that software-deﬁned radio helps to overcome this
problem [1], [2]. A transceiver can be considered as a software
radio (SR) if its communication functions are realized as pro-
grams running on a suitable processor [1]. An ideal SR directly
samples the antenna output which does not seem feasible with
respect to e.g. power consumption and linearity as well as
resolution requirements for ADCs (Analog-to-Digital Convert-
ers). A software-deﬁned radio (SDR), however, is a practical
and realizable version of an SR [1]: The received signals are
sampled after a suitable band selection ﬁlter, usually in the
baseband or a low intermediate frequency (IF) band. With the
availability of software-deﬁned radio based transceivers, the
architecture can be used to implement multiple communication
systems running on a common hardware platform by a simple
reconﬁguration process. Reconﬁgurability is not a new tech-
nique [1]. Already during the 1980s, reconﬁgurable receivers
were developed for radio intelligence in the short wave range.
However, reconﬁgurability became familiar to many radio
developers with the publication of e.g. the special issues
on software radios of the IEEE Communication Magazine
[3]. Core part of such reconﬁgurable software-deﬁned radio
transceivers is a digital processor running the software. This
software can be divided into a signal processing part and a
scheduling part [4]. One major advantage of such a solution
is the ease of implementation combined with very efﬁcient
debugging methods. Nevertheless, the computational capacity
is insufﬁcient for modern communication systems. Since the
utmost goal for the design of new communication systems is
a higher spectral efﬁciency, in particular the complexity of
the channel decoding algorithms increases signiﬁcantly. As a
result, the requirements on the signal processing performance
grow steadily. Hence, even the availability of multi-core digital
signal processors does not allow real-time implementations of
modern communication systems. To circumvent this limitation,
hardware-based implementations of the digital signal process-
ing blocks are favorable. Therefore, ﬁeld-programmable gate
arrays (FPGA) are suitable devices which allow the integra-
tion of highly parallelized algorithms on the one hand and
reconﬁgurability on the other hand. However, one considerable
disadvantage of the deployment of FPGAs is the effort for
debugging the implemented signal processing algorithms.
A cognitive radio (CR) is an SDR that additionally senses its
environment, tracks changes, and reacts upon its ﬁndings [5].
A CR is an autonomous unit in a communications environment
that frequently exchanges information with the networks it is
able to access as well as with other CRs. From the authors´
point of view, a CR is a reﬁned SDR. SDR and CR transceivers
differ from conventional transceivers by the fact that they
can be reconﬁgured via control units. Such control units
need information about the type and standard of the radio
communications link and software modules for the signal
processing path in order to reconﬁgure the receiver properly.
The platform presented in this document takes advantage of
both concepts. Its core components are a powerful triple-core
digital signal processor (DSP) in combination with an FPGA.
This platform can be used as a prototyping platform for Cog-
nitive Radio implementation as well as during standardization
67
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

Power supply 
subsystem
CLOCK
TMS320
C6474
3-core, 1GHz DSP
XC5VSX50T
Virtex-5 family
88E1111
Gigabit 
Ethernet 
PHY
EXP1 connector
USB 2.0 Interface
8 bit bus
Platform 
Flash
DDR2 SODIMM
200pin connector
OBSAI (3.072Gbps)
256MB DDR2 
RAM
32 bit 
DDR2
SGMII
(64Mx16 
DDR2 
device)
(64Mx16 
DDR2 
device)
3 Rx, 3 Tx external 
OBSAI lanes
64 bit DDR2 bus
34 Single-Ended I/Os
19 Differential I/O Pairs
1 Multigigabit Lane
2 clock inputs, 2 outputs  
1 Rx, 1 Tx OBSAI 
lanes
SRIO
SATA 
connector
SRIO (3.125Gbps)
EXP2 connector
CY7C68013A
USB controller
EEPROM
I2C
16 bit bus 
Clock 
Subsystem 
Reset logic 
and power 
monitoring,
Including 
CPLD
USB 
connector
EEPROM 
programming 
capability 
+12V DC,
5A max
Reset logic
OBSAI (3.072Gbps)
SATA 
connector
88E1111
Gigabit 
Ethernet 
PHY
SGMII
OBSAI (3.072Gbps)
SATA 
connector
34 Single-Ended I/Os
19 Differential I/O Pairs
1 Multigigabit Lane
2 clock inputs, 2 outputs  
EEPROM
Fig. 1.
eFalcon block diagram
processes and can be considered to ﬁll the gap between the
theoretical considerations for the algorithm design and the ﬁnal
system implementation. Due to its scalability this platform
can be used even for next generation communication systems
with multi-antenna features. In what follows, the prototyping
platform developed by the authors is referred to as eFalcon.
The present document is organized as follows. After this
brief introduction, Sect. II gives an overview of eFalcon. Since
clock generation and distribution is a critical factor in platform
design, Sect. III primarily addresses this aspect. In order to
increase the computational performance of eFalcon, it exhibits
interfaces for the interconnection of multiple platforms. This
scalability aspect is discussed in Sect. IV. Sect. V presents a
testbed concept for a Cognitive Radio. Finally, a conclusion
is given in Sect. VI.
II. PLATFORM OVERVIEW
As discussed in Sect. I, a prototyping platform consisting
of a combination of a DSP and an FPGA is desirable. A
block diagram of eFalcon is shown in Figure 1. Core part
of this platform is the Texas Instruments triple-core DSP
TMS320C6474 running at 1 GHz system clock. The DSP
has 256 MB of DDR2 Random Access Memory (RAM) at-
tached which enables the implementation of memory intensive
applications. The interfaces to external components consist
of a Gigabit Ethernet link, three full duplex OBSAI (Open
Base Station Architecture Initiative) or CPRI (Common Public
Radio Interface) lanes, commonly referred to as antenna inter-
face, and a Serial RapidIO (SRIO) link. The clock generation
and distribution network described in Sect. III provides a
reference clock which is used to generate the system clock by a
processor-internal phase-locked loop (PLL). The DSP supports
several boot modes using either I2C, Ethernet or SRIO.
Besides the top-level scheduling functionality, the DSP is
the central signal processing unit. Depending on the hard-
ware/software split carried out between DSP and FPGA, the
DSP ﬁrstly carries out the synchronization on the incoming
data signal received from the antenna interface. After a suc-
cessful synchronization, a channel estimation is performed. In
what follows, the incoming signal is equalized and demodu-
lated. In general, the output of the demodulator is a likelihood
information, which is fed into the channel decoder. The DSP
contains very ﬂexible hardware accelerators for Viterbi and
Turbo decoding since convolutional and turbo codes can be
found in a large number of communication standards. In
case of channel codes like LDPC (Low-Density Parity-Check)
codes employed e.g. in various modern video broadcasting
standards [6], the DSP’s signal processing capability is not
sufﬁcient to decode the incoming signal stream in real-time.
In that case, the FPGA which is directly attached to the
DSP can be used to design a DSP co-processor dedicated
to a speciﬁc signal processing task. Besides the potential
DSP co-processing capability, the FPGA, namely a Xilinx
68
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

SMA
CDCE62005
Programmable 
PLL / Jitter Cleaner
XC5VSX50T
Xilinx Virtex-5 FPGA
TMS320
C6474
3-core, 1GHz DSP
CDCE62005
Programmable 
PLL / Jitter Cleaner
CDCE62005
Programmable 
PLL / Jitter Cleaner
CDCE62005
Programmable 
PLL / Jitter Cleaner
40/50/66MHz 
DDR2 clock
50MHz alternative core 
clock
61.44MHz OBSAI 
reference clock
30.72MHz FSYNC and 
reference clock
153.6MHz OBSAI 
reference clock
30.72MHz OBSAI reference clock
CPLD
30.72MHz FSYNC clock
30.72MHz FSYNC clock
Programmable clock
DDR2 50Mhz 
reference clock
OBSAI Clock 
Domain
DSP system clocks
25MHz
24.576MHz
25MHz
Recovered OBSAI clock
External 
reference clock
SMA
SMA
SMA
SMA
SMA
Programmable clock outputs 
connected to SMA connectors
FPGA DDR2 clocks
Low-Jitter 
Crystal 
Oscillator + 
LVDS Buffer 
125 MHz Serial RapidIO
Reference Clock
125 MHz Serial RapidIO
Reference Clock
Serial RapidIO domain
SYNTH#1
SYNTH#3
SYNTH#2
SYNTH#4
IP core reference 
200MHz ckock
Programmable
 spare clock
Fig. 2.
eFalcon clock subsystem
XC5VSX50T, implements additional interfaces to external
peripheral devices. Besides Gigabit Ethernet, a USB 2.0
interface is attached to the FPGA which can be used to
communicate with conventional PC hardware. The connection
to the DSP is realized using OBSAI, CPRI or SRIO. The
FPGA offers the capability of attaching a DDR2 SODIMM
which can be used to extend the memory capability of the
platform signiﬁcantly. Spare high-speed serial ports are routed
to proprietary connectors which can be used with a variety of
protocols.
One major task of the FPGA is to act as a bridge between
the high-speed serial interfaces of the DSP and the parallel
interfaces of analog-to-digital (A/D) or digital-to-analog (D/A)
converters. Therefore, the FPGA offers a full implementation
of the Avnet EXP Expansion Connector Speciﬁcation [7]
consisting of two connectors with 34 single-ended and 19
differential I/O pairs each. In addition, this interface consists
of lines for clock inputs and outputs as well as high-speed
serial connectivity. The FPGA can be used to post-process
baseband data calculated by the DSP and submit it to the
D/A conversion process. Digital up-conversion, up-sampling
and ﬁltering algorithms are applied in this step. In the A/D
conversion process, the FPGA pre-processes the incoming data
before transmitting it to the DSP. Signal statistics, which act as
an input for an automatic gain control (AGC), are calculated.
These statistics consist of long-term averages as well as fast
detect features to enable over-range indication and can also
be used to remove DC offsets. Further processing consists of
digital down-conversion in case of intermediate frequency (IF)
sampling, sampling rate adaptation and ﬁltering. The FPGA
is also ideally suited for the application of synchronization
blocks which usually consist of autocorrelation or cross-
correlation based algorithms.
In case the signal processing capability of one platform is
not sufﬁcient to operate a communication standard in real-
time, additional platforms can be easily attached to increase
the performance, cf. Sect. IV.
Due to the large number of different devices, a complex
power supply design is mandatory. eFalcon works with an
input voltage of 12 V. Switching regulators are used to gen-
erate voltages less than this input voltage at a high efﬁciency
and directly supply the multitude of digital devices. Voltages
which are used to supply analog parts of devices, especially the
PLLs, are generated using linear low-dropout regulators. All
voltages are monitored and reported to a central glue logic,
which is implemented in a CPLD (Complex Programmable
Logic Device). This device is the ﬁrst device which is properly
conﬁgured after applying power and, hence, coordinates the
start-up procedure.
III. CLOCK GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION
Modern digital systems have strict requirements on the
clock references. Both the DSP and the FPGA contain on-
chip PLLs which need to be supplied with a suitable reference
frequency. These signals are required to derive the core clocks
as well as the reference clocks for the high-speed serial links.
Figure 2 shows a general block diagram of the platform clock
subsystem. Most of the reference clocks in the system are
generated by a Texas Instruments CDCE62005 device which is
a fully integrated PLL including a voltage controlled oscillator
69
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

(VCO). A programmable loop ﬁlter is also integrated on
the chip. All platform clocks generated by the CDCE62005
devices can be split into two general classes. The ﬁrst class
contains the 30.72 MHz derivatives which are used in the
OBSAI and CPRI clock domain. The second clock class
includes all other clocks which are derivatives of 25 MHz.
The reference clock of 125 MHz which is necessary for SRIO
is generated by a dedicated crystal oscillator. Both Ethernet
PHY chips contain an internal PLL and a 25 MHz crystal
resonator as frequency reference. The USB controller uses a
24 MHz external crystal resonator to generate the necessary
clock for the FPGA-to-USB data transfer. Besides an internal
generation of the PLL reference frequency, all devices have the
capability to be fed by an external reference. These external
references are routed to coaxial connectors which can be used
by an external clock distribution network to synchronize an
arbitrary number of platforms. This is an important feature
for the case that multiple platforms are connected to work on
a single signal processing task.
IV. SCALABILITY
eFalcon is based on a ﬂexible architecture which paves the
way towards a rapid implementation of algorithms deployed
in modern communication systems. It offers the opportunity
to directly attach two daughter cards following the Avnet EXP
Expansion Connector Speciﬁcation. One possible scenario is
the implementation of a full transceiver chain so that one EXP
interface is used for attaching an A/D converter board and
the second one is used for attaching a D/A converter board.
Furthermore, it is possible to establish a multi-antenna system
with two receive or two transmit antennas.
One crucial aspect during the concept phase of eFalcon was
scalability in order to be prepared not only for current com-
munication systems but also for next generation systems with
increased complexity requirements. On the one hand, eFal-
con consists of multiple serial high-speed interfaces such as
OBSAI, CPRI and SRIO to allow intra-board communication
but also board-to-board communication with data rates beyond
1 GBit/s. On the other hand, the elaborate clock distribution
concept of this platform allows an accurate synchronization
of multiple platforms. Thus, the interconnection of two or
more prototyping platforms by a combination of serial high-
speed interfaces and a clock synchronization enables the
implementation of multi-antenna systems with even more than
two antennas. In that case, one platform acts as a master device
which is responsible for the clock generation and distribution
to the attached platforms acting as slaves as well as for the
main scheduling parts of the signal processing chain.
V. COGNITIVE RADIO IMPLEMENTATION ASPECTS
Figure 3 shows the Cognitive Radio demonstrator concept
implemented using the eFalcon platform.
The concept consists of a transmitter branch which is
intended for the real-time generation of arbitrary signal wave-
forms. The baseband signal in either complex inphase and
quadrature (I/Q) or real valued intermediate frequency (IF)
Power Amplifier
I/Q
Demodulator
I/Q
Modulator
LO
Synthesizer
eFalcon
LNA
DGA
fref
LOin,out
LOin
D
A
A
D
Expansion Interface
Clock 
Generation & Distribution
fref
Expansion Interface
Fig. 3.
eFalcon Cognitive Radio demonstrator concept
representation is generated using the eFalcon platform and
is fed into a D/A converter. After a suitable reconstruction
ﬁlter, the resulting analog signal is upconverted to a carrier
frequency using an I/Q modulator. The local oscillator (LO)
signal which is used in the up-conversion process is generated
by an LO synthesizer and ranges from 300-4800 MHz. The
synthesizer accepts external reference signals which can be
used to synchronize the LO phase in case of multi-antenna
applications. In addition, the LO signal can be externally fed
in or distributed to other platforms. The I/Q up-converter is
followed by an optional power ampliﬁer branch which can be
used to obtain signal levels up to +30 dBm. Optionally, the
up-converter can also be driven by an IF signal.
The receiver branch consists of a gain stage implemented
by a combination of a low noise ampliﬁer (LNA) and multiple
digitally controlled ampliﬁers (DGA) which allow the ampli-
ﬁcation of signals at very low input levels. The gain vectors
which lead to an optimal behaviour in terms of noise ﬁgure
and linearity are calculated in the eFalcon platform according
to the signal level detectors implemented at several positions
within the ampliﬁer chain. The resulting signal is fed into
an I/Q demodulator which converts the signal to complex
baseband using an external LO signal. The down-converter can
also be conﬁgured for IF applications where the I/Q branches
can be used for the implementation of a Hartley image reject
receiver [8]. The baseband signal is sampled and the resulting
signal samples are transferred to the eFalcon platform using
the expansion interface. The eFalcon platform performs the
desired cognitive operation and reports the results to a data
sink.
70
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

VI. CONCLUSION
Within this document, the authors presented a Cognitive Ra-
dio demonstrator concept. Besides powerful digital baseband
processing capabilities, the demonstrator concept consists of
analog transmitter and receiver branches which allow signal
sensing applications in the range of 300-4800 MHz. The
architecture based on a combination of a triple-core digital
signal processor and a ﬁeld-programmable gate array paves the
way towards rapid implementation of arbitrary communication
systems and Cognitive Radio concepts accompanying the
standardization process. Thereby, the advantage of both digital
processors running software and programmable logic allowing
massive parallelization to guarantee real-time operation has
been merged to one single platform. The basic ideas during
the concept phase were a high ﬂexibility, modularity and
scalability to even allow the integration of multi-antenna
systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Texas Instruments for their
continuous support throughout the recent years.
REFERENCES
[1] F. K. Jondral, “Software-Deﬁned Radio: Basics and Evolution to Cog-
nitive Radio,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Net-
working, vol. 2005, no. 3, pp. 275–283, 2005.
[2] FP6 - Integrated Project, “E2R - End-to-End Reconﬁgurability.”
[3] J. Mitola, “The Software Radio Architecture,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 26–38, 1995.
[4] A. Viessmann, A. Burnic, C. Spiegel, G. H. Bruck, and P. Jung, “Petri
Net Based Controller Concept for Cognitive Radios in Wireless Access
Networks,” Journal of Communications, vol. 2, no. 2, 2007.
[5] J. Mitola, “Cognitive radio - an integrated agent architecture for software
deﬁned radio,” Ph.D. dissertation, Royal Institute of Technology, Kista,
Sweden, 2000.
[6] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Frame Structure Channel Coding
and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television
Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Std. DVB Document A122 Draft,
June 2008.
[7] Avnet, “EXP Expansion Connector Speciﬁcation Revision 1.4,” Septem-
ber 2007.
[8] B. Razavi, RF Microelectronics. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-
Hall, Inc., 1998.
71
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

