 
 
 
 
Ustijana Rechkoska. Shikoska 
University for Information Science & Technology, “Sv. 
Apostol Pavle” 
Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia 
e-mail: ustijana@t-home.mk 
 
 
Abstract - Wireless sensor networks (WSN) are an increasingly 
attractive means to bridge the gap between the physical and 
virtual world. WSNs are envisioned to be used to fulfill 
complex monitoring tasks. Space and time play a crucial role in 
wireless sensor networks, since sensor nodes are used to 
collaboratively monitor physical phenomena and their space-
time properties. A number of techniques and distributed 
algorithms for location estimation and time synchronization 
have been developed specifically for sensor networks. There 
are many similarities in space and time domains. This affects 
the location estimation and time synchronization, ranging from 
applications and requirements to basic approaches and 
concrete algorithmic techniques. An improved approach for 
space and time localization in WSNs is given in this paper. The 
main aspect of the algorithm is the use of a mobile beacon for 
both localization and synchronization. A mobile beacon is a 
node that moves around the sensor’s field and it is aware of its 
time and position, equipped with a Global Positioning System 
(GPS) receiver. The synchronization component uses the 
packets required by the positioning component to improve its 
performance. The positioning component beneﬁts from the 
communication, required by the synchronization component to 
decrease errors. A set of experiments and simulations are 
presented to evaluate the performance of the algorithm in 
order to reduce communication and processing resources and 
save energy and network resources. 
 
Keywords - space localization; time synchronization; 
mobile beacon; delay measurement; wireless sensor networks; 
global positioning system 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Enabled by technological advancements in wireless 
communications and embedded computing, wireless sensor 
networks were first considered for military applications, 
where large-scale wireless networks of autonomous sensor 
nodes would enable the unobtrusive observation of events in 
the real-world. The use of sensor networks has also been 
considered for various civil application domains.  
The categories time and location are fundamental for many 
applications of sensor networks, due to the close integration 
of sensor networks with the real world. Interpretation of 
sensing results or coordination among sensor nodes are 
some of the implementations, time synchronization and 
sensor node localization are fundamental and closely related 
services in sensor networks. 
In the synchronization problem [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 
25], the nodes’ local clocks must be synchronized based on 
a reference node or in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). 
 
 
Ilinka Ivanoska, Danco Davcev 
“Sv. Kiril i Metodij” University, Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering and Information Technologies” 
 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia 
ilinkai@feit.ukim.edu.mk 
etfdav@feit.ukim.edu.mk 
  
On the other hand, in the positioning problem [11, 
12, 13], the concept of a reference system between sensor 
nodes is performed by identifying the physical location 
(e.g., latitude, longitude, and altitude) of these nodes. In 
general, traditional solutions such as the Network Time 
Protocol (NTP [26]) and Global Positioning System (GPS) 
are not suitable for sensor networks due to resource 
limitations. 
Furthermore, 
current 
solutions 
for 
the 
synchronization [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25] and positioning [11, 
12, 13] problems are independent from each other and 
consequently, these problems are solved separately. As a 
result, the independent execution of these algorithms leads 
to lower efﬁciency regarding cost and accuracy. As it is 
demonstrated in this paper, by jointly solving these two 
problems, both synchronization and positioning errors can 
be reduced and energy can be saved.  
In some previous work [4, 14, 15], algorithms for 
time-space localization are proposed. In this paper, an 
improved algorithm for solving this problem using a mobile 
beacon is proposed. A mobile beacon is a node that is aware 
of its time and position (e.g., equipped with a GPS receiver) 
and that has the ability to move around the sensor ﬁeld. This 
beacon can be a human operator, an unmanned vehicle, an 
aircraft, or a robot. A mobile beacon has been successfully 
applied to solve the positioning problem. To the best of our 
knowledge, the current work is the ﬁrst to address the use of 
a mobile beacon in synchronization and time-space 
localization problems. The proposed time-space localization 
algorithm can synchronize nodes by using the packet delay 
measurement [23, 24]. Synchronization can be improved by 
the extra packets required for location discovery. The 
algorithm is implemented for different network topology. 
Existing solutions for time synchronization and node 
localization do not cover all important parts. Here, an 
integrated solution to jointly solve the localization and data 
routing problems in sensor networks is proposed, using a 
mobile beacon equipped with GPS, for grid, but also for 
randomly 
chosen 
network 
topology, 
reducing 
communication and processing resources, also saving 
energy and network resources.   
In the next section, the related work is described. 
Section 3 presents an overview and definition of the 
positioning and synchronization problems in WSNs. Section 
4 is presenting different types of topologies for wireless 
sensor networks used in our work. Section 5 describes the 
Space and Time Localization in Wireless Sensor Networks 
12
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 
 
proposed algorithm, which is evaluated in Section 6. 
Section 7 presents the conclusions and future work. 
II. RELATED WORK 
There are different ways of classifying general 
space and time localization algorithms, they can be 
classified according to the measurement assumptions as four 
types: 1) connectivity-only 2) range-based 3) angle-based 4) 
hybrid. A comparison between the well - known algorithms 
such as DV-Hop (Distance and Euclidean), Euclidean and 
Multi-lateralization can be obtained from [3]. The 
comparison is done in the context of specific constraints of 
sensor networks, such as error tolerance and energy 
efficiency, results indicate that there is no single algorithm 
that performs "best" and that there is possibility for further 
improvement. 
A number of localization methods rely on 
connectivity information only. These types of methods are 
also referred to as "range-free" methods. The Centroid 
method [5] estimates the location of an unknown node as 
the average of its neighbors' locations. The APIT method 
(Ad Hoc Positioning [6] estimates the node location by 
isolating the area using various triangles formed by beacons. 
The DV-Hop method [7] counts the hop numbers to beacons 
and uses them as crude estimates for distances. Range-free 
methods require no additional hardware, but they generally 
only work well when networks are dense. Sparse networks 
by nature contain less connectivity information, and thus 
they are more difficult to localize accurately. 
Range-based methods include the Ad Hoc 
Positioning System (APS) methods such as DV-Distance 
and Euclidean proposed in [7, 8]. In [9], ranging data are 
exchanged between the neighbors to refine the initial 
location guess. While those methods compute the absolute 
node locations, the GPS-Free method [10] calculates the 
relative node locations from the distance measurements. 
Compared to range-free methods, range-based methods give 
more accurate location estimates when ranging data is 
reliable. 
However, 
depending 
on 
the 
deployment 
environment, ranging techniques based on RSSI-Received 
Signal Strength Indicator tend to be error-prone and strong 
filtering is required. The ranging error could ultimately 
destroy the localization accuracy if it is allowed to 
propagate through the network unbounded. 
Different methods generally exploit the trade-off 
between the estimation accuracy and the estimation 
coverage. For instance, given the same network scenario, 
the Euclidean method is capable of generating more 
accurate location estimates of a smaller subset of nodes, 
whereas the DV-Hop method has better coverage but worse 
accuracy. 
Regardless 
of 
the 
tradeoff, 
a 
common 
characteristic shared by distance-based algorithm is that 
they require a relatively high network density in order to 
achieve better results. Based on the extensive simulation of 
DV-Distance, Euclidean and multilateration methods 
performed in [16], it can be concluded that those distance-
based GAHLAs “require an average degree of 11-12 nodes 
within the ranging neighborhood in order to achieve 90% 
localization coverage with 5% accuracy [16]." 
Even though the future of AoA sensing devices is 
still unclear, some works have been published on 
localization using angle information. Simulation studies in 
[16] also show that when AoA (angle of arrival) of the 
signals is used in addition to the distance measurement, the 
localization accuracy and coverage can be drastically 
improved. 
A combination of the above techniques can be 
employed to form a hybrid method. For instance, a hybrid 
method is proposed in [17] that uses both APS and Multi-
dimensional Scaling (MDS). 
The probabilistic method and particle filters have 
been used in visual target tracking and computer vision 
location systems [18, 19] in the context of robotics. The 
particle filter method is also used to obtain the mobile node 
location based on received signal strengths from several 
known-location base stations in wireless cellular networks. 
The probability grid system in is a centralized probabilistic 
localization algorithm that updates the distribution based on 
a grid system. 
Some recent researches [27, 28, 29] have proposed 
the use of mobile beacons to assist the nodes of a WSN in 
estimating their positions. A mobile beacon is a node that is 
aware of its position (e.g., equipped with a GPS receiver) 
and that has the ability to move around the sensor ﬁeld. This 
beacon can be a human operator, an unmanned vehicle, an 
aircraft, or a robot. The localization algorithm proposed by 
Sichitiu and Ramadurai [27] uses mobile beacons to allow 
nodes to compute their positions by using range-based 
distance estimations. A similar but range-free positioning 
system is proposed by Ssu et al. [29]. In Pathirana et al. 
[28], the mobile beacon itself computes the positions, 
instead of the nodes. Mobile beacons have also been used to 
localize nodes in underwater WSNs [30]. In these networks, 
a boat equipped with a GPS receiver can be used as a 
mobile beacon or can send GPS position information to 
submerged equipment. These solutions address only the 
spatial localization problem, ignoring the need for time 
localization. 
In the Flooding Time Synchronization Protocol 
(FTSP) [23], all delays in the packet transfer time are 
computed to synchronize precisely both sender and receiver 
using only one broadcast. An accuracy of about 1.5 µs is 
reported. The multihop synchronization algorithm includes 
a leader selection (root node) and a ﬂooding-like algorithm 
to propagate the timing information. Multiple ﬂoodings can 
be used to compute the clock drift. A similar algorithm is 
Delay Measurement Time Synchronization (DMTS) [24], 
which reports a single hop accuracy between 2 µs and 32 
µs. These synchronization solutions solve only the time 
synchronization problem, ignoring the need for a common 
spatial reference system.  
Global Positioning System (GPS) [1] is a good 
example of a time-space localization system that can both 
localize and synchronize sensor nodes; however, to equip 
all the sensors in a WSN with a GPS receiver is not a good 
13
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 
 
solution because it increases their cost, size and energy 
consumption. Romer [31, 32] also addressed and solved 
these two problems separately. Then, Romer and Mattern 
[33] presented both problems as related to each other, but 
no integrated solution was proposed. The Synapse algorithm 
is proposed [14], a time-space localization algorithm that 
computes the average multi-hop time of a packet to 
synchronize the nodes. Also, the Lightness algorithm [15] 
had been proposed, a novel and lightweight time-space 
localization algorithm that is able to localize and 
synchronize all nodes in a WSN with the communication 
cost of a single ﬂooding.  
In this paper, an improved algorithm for 
localization in time-space, using a mobile beacon, referring 
different network topologies is proposed to solve this 
problem.  
III. WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS 
Sensor 
networks 
consist 
of 
sensor 
nodes, 
computing devices that include a power source, a 
transceiver for wireless communication, a processor, mem-
ory, sensors, and potentially also actuators. Although the 
exact properties and capabilities of these components may 
vary, a common property of sensor nodes is their resource 
scarcity. 
Multiple sensor nodes form a wireless network, 
whose topology and other properties do also depend on the 
application context. A large class of sensor networks can be 
characterized as multi-hop ad hoc networks, where sensor 
nodes do not only act as data sources, but also as routers 
that forward messages on behalf of other nodes, such that no 
additional communication infrastructure is required for 
operating the network. 
The output of the sensor network may be used for 
various purposes. The output is delivered to a human user 
for further evaluation. It may be used to control the 
operation of the sensor network without human intervention 
by enabling/disabling sensors, or by controlling operation 
parameters 
of 
sensors 
(sampling 
rate, 
sensitivity, 
orientation, position). Using the output of the sensor 
network to control sensors or actuators can effectively 
create a closed-loop system that strives to achieve a 
particular nominal condition in the sensor network or in the 
real world.  
The characteristics of wireless sensor networks can 
present a number of major challenges to the development of 
algorithms, protocols and systems. The main technical 
challenges are resource and energy constraints, network 
dynamics, network size and density, unattended and un-
tethered operation.  
It is important to ensure that resource usage and 
energy consumption are equally spread among the nodes of 
the network. If some nodes exhaust their battery quickly and 
fail early, resulting permanent network partitions may 
render the network in-operational. Usage of resources may 
lead to bottlenecks such as network congestions. Sensor 
nodes send sensor readings along a spanning tree to a base 
station for evaluation. Nodes close to the base station will 
run out of power since they forward messages from nodes 
further away.  
Depleted batteries and corruptive environmental 
conditions 
(e.g., 
pressure, 
humidity, 
temperature, 
destructive chemicals) often lead to node failures. 
Temporary environmental obstructions may influence the 
communication range of nodes. Nodes may be mobile, new 
nodes may be added to replace failed ones. All these issues 
may lead to frequent topology changes in sensor networks. 
Temporary network partitions are likely to exist in sparse 
networks. 
Despite intermittent connectivity, messages can be 
forwarded across partitions by mobile nodes as illustrated in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Message transport across partition boundaries through node 
mobility. 
 
The delay of the message flow can be arbitrarily 
high and is hardly predictable unless the mobility pattern of 
node 2 in the figure 1 is known in advance. Ensuring robust 
operation of a sensor network in such setups can be a very 
challenging task. 
A.  The Positioning Problem 
To define the positioning problem in Wireless 
Sensor Networks, we take a WSN composed of p nodes, 
with a communication range of c units, and distributed in a 
two-dimensional squared sensor field S = [0, q] × [0, 
q].The network is presented by a graph P = (L,M) with L = 
{l1, l2, . . . ,ln} like a set of sensor nodes; hi, ji ∈ M iff li 
reaches lj , i.e., the distance between; li and lj is smaller than 
c; u(e) ≤ c is the weight of edge e = hi, ji, i.e., the distance 
between li and lj . We also consider only two dimensions for 
a node’s location, but the methods presented here can be 
extended to accommodate three dimensions. P is Euclidean 
graph in which every node has a coordinate (xi, yi) ∈ R2 in a 
two-dimensional space, which represents the location of 
node i in S. Here there are: the unknown node, which is a 
node that doesn’t know its position, then settled node which 
was initially an unknown node, but has managed to estimate 
its position by using a positioning system. Also, there is a 
beacon node or anchor, which is always aware of its 
physical position and helps to locate other nodes. Its 
position is obtained by manual placement or by external 
means such as a GPS receiver. This node forms the basis for 
most positioning systems in WSNs. The positioning problem 
is stated as finding the position of as many unknown nodes 
as possible, referring to a given multihop network, 
14
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 
 
represented by a graph, and a set of beacon nodes and their 
positions.  
An example of a positioning system is localization 
with a mobile beacon proposed by Sichitiu and Ramadurai 
[27]. Once the nodes are deployed, the mobile beacon 
travels through the sensor ﬁeld broadcasting messages that 
contain its current coordinates. When an unknown node 
receives more than three messages from the mobile beacon, 
it computes its position being based on the received 
coordinates and on the RSSI (Received Signal Strength 
Indicator) distance estimations. The communication cost for 
the WSN is null, since the nodes do not need to send any 
packets. 
An advantage of this mobile beacon approach is 
that the nodes’ positions are computed based on the same 
node -mobile beacon, keeping the mean localization error 
low and preventing the propagation of this error. It avoids 
the use of nodes equipped with GPS, except for the mobile 
beacon. 
An important aspect that inﬂuences the position 
estimates is the trajectory of the mobile beacon. The less 
rectilinear the trajectory, the better the estimates will be. 
Rectilinear trajectories must be avoided. Two possible 
trajectories are evaluated in this work: sinusoidal and spiral 
trajectory. 
B.  Time synchronization 
The significance of physical time for sensor 
networks has been reflected by the development of a 
number of time synchronization algorithms in the recent 
past. Most computer systems in use today are based on 
clocked circuits and hence contain so-called digital clocks. 
Such hardware clocks are a valuable tool for time 
synchronization, since they can be used to maintain 
synchronization over time [2].  
A typical hardware clock consists of a quartz-
stabilized oscillator and a counter that is incremented by 
one every oscillation period. If the periodic time T of the 
oscillator is known, the counter h can be used to obtain 
approximate measurements of real-time intervals in 
multiples of T. 
The clock counter displays value h(t) at real time t 
and is incremented by one at a frequency of f. The rate of 
the counter is defined as f(t) = dh(t)/dt. An ideal digital 
clock would have a rate of 1 at all times. The periodic time 
of the oscillator and hence the clock rate depend on various 
parameters such as age of the quartz, supply voltage, 
environmental temperature and humidity. This clock drift is 
formally defined as the deviation of the rate from 1 or: 
 
ρ(t) = f (1) – 1 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
Since sensor nodes are typically operated under a 
well-defined range of the above parameters, it is reasonable 
to assume a maximum possible drift ρmax, such that: 
 
|ρ(t)| ≤ ρmax 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
Obtaining 
temporal 
constraints 
is 
typically 
implemented by communication among sensor nodes. In 
practice, the relationship between synchronized time and 
hardware clock is often not linear. By repeating the line 
fitting procedure frequently, a linear approximation of that 
nonlinear relationship can be achieved. The hardware clock 
can be considered a time sensor, calibrated using the 
observed past behavior of synchronized time. The precision 
of the chosen approach should be evaluated and the 
imprecision of time synchronization algorithm should be 
decreased, depending on the age of time marks and hop-
distance between nodes of the sensor network, providing 
accuracy ordered in milliseconds. 
In this work, the actual time of the network is 
considered, in which the nodes must be synchronized (e.g., 
UTC), is represented simply by t. The hardware clock of 
node i is deﬁned as ti(t), since it is a monotonically non-
decreasing function of t. Because no hardware clock is 
perfect, ti(t) has two components: ti(t) = dit + oi, where oi is 
the offset, i.e., the difference between t and ti at that instant, 
and di is the drift, i.e., how the local clock gradually 
deviates from t due to conditions such as temperature or 
battery voltage. The unsynchronized node is a node whose 
clock is not synchronized with the reference; synchronized 
node is a node which was initially unsynchronized, but 
managed to synchronize its local clock by using a 
synchronization system; the beacon node is the node that 
already has a synchronized clock (e.g., by using GPS) and it 
is called a beacon node. The synchronization problem is 
stated in finding the offset and drift (oi, di) of as many 
unsynchronized nodes i ∈ N as possible, by a given 
multihop network, represented by a graph, a set of beacon 
nodes and their synchronized clocks. In the packet delay 
measurement, all delays in the packet transfer time are 
estimated to synchronize precisely both sender and receiver 
by using only one packet. The packet delay measurement 
synchronization technique has been used in a number of 
synchronization protocols for WSNs [23, 24]. 
C. Localization in Time and Space 
In a wireless sensor network, most of the 
applications that require position information also require 
time information. Number of similarities can be identified 
[14, 15]. 
The need of both time and space information and 
the similarities between them, have shown the importance of 
combining these two problems into a single one: 
localization in time and space. Doing so, energy and 
network resources could be saved, also the opportunity to 
improve time and position estimations in contrast to the 
scenarios in which these problems are solved separately is 
given. Synchronization algorithms can take advantage of the 
greater number of beacon nodes required by the positioning 
algorithms, while positioning algorithms can take advantage 
of the techniques and additional communication resources 
used to synchronize nodes. 
The time-space localization problem can be stated 
as finding the position (xu, yu) and time tu(t) for all 
15
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 
 
unsynchronized and unknown nodes, by a given multihop 
network, represented by a graph and a set of beacon nodes, 
their positions (xb, yb) and synchronized clocks tb = t, where 
u and b belong to the sets of unknown nodes and beacon 
nodes, respectfully.  
IV. WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORK TOPOLOGIES 
Several wireless sensor networks topologies are 
considered in our work and they are presented on Figure 2. 
The first network topology presented here is C – random 
network topology (Figure 2 (a)). Together with the 
presented H – random topology (Figure 2 (d)) are irregular 
network topologies, as well as the random topology, shown 
in Figure 2 (e).  
 
 
                        (a)                                         
 (b) 
 
 
                        (c)                                           
(d) 
 
 
(e) 
 
Figure 2: Network topologies - (a) C – random topology (b) Disturbed grid 
topology (c) Disturbed hexagonal topology (d) H – random topology (e) 
Random topology 
 
The C and H – random topologies are random 
topologies, but irregular ones, because only a part of the 
square of the surface is considered.  
Disturbed grid topology and disturbed hexagonal 
topology shown on Figure 2 - (b), (c) are more regular 
network topologies than previous mentioned ones. 
V. A MOBILE BEACON APPROACH FOR 
LOCALIZATION IN TIME AND SPACE ALGORITHM 
An improved approach for space and time 
localization, for different network topologies, is presented 
in this section. The positioning component is essentially the 
mobile 
beacon 
localization 
algorithm 
[27]. 
The 
synchronization component obeys the same principle as the 
positioning algorithm, but it is extended to deal with time 
estimations [4]. These two components are combined in the 
algorithm. The delay measurement technique is used to 
synchronize nodes. 
Different network topologies are employed, 
generated by our algorithm. 
Once nodes are deployed, the mobile beacon 
travels through the sensor ﬁeld broadcasting messages that 
contain its current coordinates and timestamp. When an 
unknown node receives a packet from the mobile beacon, it 
can estimate the packet travel time and, based on the times 
tamp stored in the packet, its own offset. Also, when an 
unknown node receives more than three messages from the 
mobile beacon, it can estimate its position based on the 
received coordinates and on the RSSI distance estimates. 
Since the nodes will require at least three packets for 
positioning, synchronization can be improved by computing 
the average offset of all packets. An advantage of this 
algorithm is that the communication cost of localizing and 
synchronizing regular nodes is null, since these nodes do 
not need to send any packets. 
Set of position information is given as a variable, 
also, set of received timestamps. Timer to send packets is 
put, position and time information through variables is 
given. After that, the nodes’ GPS info is returned, packets’ 
travel distance estimation is given, the nodes’ position is 
computed. Later, packets’ travel delay estimation is given 
and also the nodes’ offset is computed. Case if this node is a 
beacon node is explored and number of references is tested, 
if there are three received messages from mobile beacon, it 
confirms enough references and proceeds with the 
algorithm. 
The running application of this algorithm is 
presented on figure 3. The red color point is the mobile 
beacon which is moving through the sensor network, 
marked with blue color on the figure 3. The options for 
choosing five types of sensor networks is put here whether 
the user wants to choose grid oriented network, randomly 
chosen network, hexagonal network topology, or H and C 
random network topologies, presented in the previous 
section. Also, information about the parameters used and 
display options are given. Choice by the user, according to 
the parameters and network topology, is enabled.   
Running the sensors, the energy, which the mobile 
beacon is spending on moving itself and sending messages, 
is overviewed. This energy is much bigger than the one 
which is spent on local calculations for each sensor in the 
WSN. This is very low energy consumption. 
 
16
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The running application of the algorithm 
VI. EVALUATION 
The evaluation of our algorithm is done, by 
performing simulations, parameters used and their values 
are given in the next table.  
An experiment was done within the sensor field 92 
x 92 m2. 256 nodes are employed, for different network 
topologies, we have chosen five types of network topology, 
explained previously, for this evaluation. The density of a 
sensor network is picked to be 0,03 nodes/m2 and the 
communication range is 15 m. 
 
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS AND THEIR VALUES 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Sensor ﬁeld 
92 × 92 m2 
Number of nodes 
256 
nodes 
(different 
network 
topologies) 
Density 
0.03 nodes/m2 
Communication range 
15 m 
Number of beacons 
1 - mobile beacon 
RSSI inaccuracy 
10 % of communication range 
 
The evaluation is done by taking two types of 
trajectories for the mobile beacon: sinusoidal and spiral 
trajectories, presented on figure 4. 
 
 
a) 
                                             b) 
Figure 4. Evaluated trajectories for the mobile 
beacon: a) sinusoidal; b) spiral trajectory. 
 
On 
the 
next 
figure, 
localization 
error, 
synchronization error and also impact of RSSI inaccuracy 
are presented, in different color, for two evaluated 
trajectories of the beacon, sinusoidal an spiral ones, and for 
five types of network topologies: C – random topology, 
disturbed grid topology, disturbed hexagonal topology, H – 
random topology and random topology.  
Localization Error - the distribution of position 
errors among the sensor nodes is depicted in Figure 5 (a). 
The cumulative error identiﬁes the percentage of nodes (y-
axis), with a positioning error, smaller than a parameterized 
value (x-axis). A sharp curve means that the majority of 
nodes has a small error. This graph also shows that spiral 
trajectories result in better positioning than sinusoidal ones, 
since these trajectories are less rectilinear. 
Synchronization Error - the distribution of 
synchronization errors among the sensor nodes is depicted 
in Figure 5 (b). In this case, the cumulative error identiﬁes 
the percentage of nodes (y-axis) with a synchronization 
error smaller than a parameterized value (x-axis). Again, a 
sharp curve means that the majority of nodes have a small 
error.  
Impact of RSSI Inaccuracy – since the fact that the 
distance estimations using RSSI measurements are not 
accurate, depending on the environment, such an inaccuracy 
may lead to greater errors in the estimated positions. The 
evaluation of this impact is done by adding some noise to 
the real distances. This noise is generated by a normal 
distribution, with the actual distance as the mean and a 
percentage of this distance as the standard deviation. The 
comparison between the increase of the standard deviation 
of the normal distribution and the actual distance for the 
algorithms is presented on Figure 5(c). 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
17
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 5. (a) Positioning cumulative error (b) Synchronization cumulative 
error (c) Impact of RSSI inaccuracy 
 
It can be noticed that the positioning part takes 
advantage of the synchronization part to improve its 
performance, which shows the significance of solving both 
positioning and synchronization problems at the same time. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Due to the close integration of sensor networks 
with the real world, the categories time and location are 
fundamental for many applications of sensor networks, to 
interpret sensing results or for coordination among sensor 
nodes. Time synchronization and sensor node localization 
are fundamental and closely related services in sensor 
networks. 
Existing solutions for these two basic services have 
been based on a rather narrow notion of a sensor network as 
a large-scale, ad hoc, multi-hop, un-partitioned network of 
largely homogeneous, tiny, resource-constrained, mostly 
immobile sensor nodes that would be randomly deployed in 
the area of interest. However, recently developed 
prototypical applications indicate that this narrow definition 
does not cover a significant portion of the application 
domain of wireless sensor networks. 
Existing solutions for time synchronization and 
node localization do not cover all parts of space and time in 
wireless sensor networks problem. Different, proposed 
approaches should be implemented to support these 
concepts adequately.  
In this paper, we have proposed and evaluated an 
improved algorithm for the time-space localization, a 
mobile beacon approach, for different network topologies. 
By using a mobile beacon, all sensor nodes are able to 
localize themselves both in time and space. The beacon 
node sends packets and all regular nodes are able to 
synchronize and compute their positions with a zero 
communication cost algorithm. The proposed algorithm 
shows the importance of combining both positioning and 
synchronization into a single uniﬁed problem: localization 
in time and space. By doing so, the proposed algorithm 
manages to improve synchronization in the algorithm, 
comparing to the previous implemented approaches. In this 
case, communication and processing resources can be 
reduced, thus saving energy and network resources. 
REFERENCES 
[1] U. R. Shikoska and D. Davcev, “Sensitivity Analysis for GPS in land 
vehicle navigations”, IEEE International Conference on Wireless and 
Mobile Computing, Networking and Communcations, WiMob' 2008, pp. 
221 – 222, Paris, France, October 2008. 
[2] U. R. Shikoska and D. Davcev, “Time Synchronization in Wireless 
Sensor Networks,” PCO' 2010, Kucing Borneo, Sarawak, December 2010, 
in press.  
[3] K.Langendoen and N. Reijers. "Distributed Localization in Wireless 
Sensor Networks: a Quantitative Comparison," Computer Networks, vol 
43(4), pp. 499-518, Nov. 2003. 
[4] A. Boukerche, H. Oliveira, E. F. Nakamura, and A.F. Loureiro, 
“Localization in Time and Space for Wireless Sensor Networks: A Mobile 
Beacon Approach,” IEEE ISCC 2008, 04594838, pp. 1-8, August 2008. 
[5] N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin. "GPS-less Low Cost Outdoor 
Localization for Very Small Devices," IEEE Personal Communications 
Magazine, vol. 7/5, pp. 28-34, October 2000. 
[6] T. He, C. Huang, B. M. Blum, J. A. Stankovic, and T. F. Abdelzaher. 
"Range-Free Localization Schemes in Large Scale Sensor Networks," in 
Proc. of ACM MOBI-COM'03,pp. 81-95, 2003. 
[7] D. Niculescu and B. Nath. "Ad Hoc Positioning System (APS)," in 
Proc. of IEEE GLOBECOM'01, vol. 5, pp. 2926-2931, San Antonio, 
2001. 
[8] D. Niculescu and B. Nath. "DV Based Positioning in Adhoc 
Networks," Telecommunication Systems, vol. 22, no. 1-4, pp. 267-280, 
January-April 2003. 
[9] C. Savarese, J. Rabay, and K. Langendoen. "Robust Positioning 
Algorithms for Distributed Ad-Hoc Wireless Sensor Networks," in Proc. 
of USENIX Technical Annual Conference, pp. 317-327, Monterey, CA, 
June 2002.  
[10] S. Capkun, M. Hamdi, and J.-P. Hubaux. "GPS-Free Positioning in 
Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks," in Proc. of 34th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, vol. 9, pp. 9008, 2001. 
[11] H. A. Oliveira, E. F. Nakamura, A. A. Loureiro, and A. Boukerche. 
“Directed position estimation: A recursive localization approach for 
wireless sensor networks,” In IC3N’05, pp. 557–562, San Diego, USA, 
October 2005. 
[12] A. Boukerche, H. A. Oliveira, E. F. Nakamura, and A. A. Loureiro, 
“A voronoi approach for scalable and robust dv-hop localization system 
for sensor networks,” In IC3N’07, pp. 497 – 502, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 
Aug 2007. 
[13] A. Boukerche, H. A. Oliveira, E. F. Nakamura, and A. A. Loureiro, 
“Towards an integrated solution for node localization and data routing in 
sensor networks,” In ISCC’07, pp. 449 – 454, Aveiro, Portugal, July 2007. 
[14] H. A. Oliveira, E. F. Nakamura, A. A. Loureiro, and A. Boukerche, 
“Localization in time and space for sensor networks,” In AINA’07, pp. 
539-546, Niagara Falls, Canada, May 2007. 
[15] A. Boukerche, H. A. Oliveira, E. F. Nakamura, and A. A.Loureiro, 
“A novel lightweight algorithm for time-space localization in wireless 
sensor networks,” In MSWiM’07, pp. 336-343, Chania, Crete Island, 
Greece, October 2007. 
[16] K. Chintalapudi, R. Govindan, G. Sukhatme, and A. Dhariwal. "Ad-
Hoc Localization Using Ranging and Sectoring," in Proc. of IEEE 
INFOCOM '04, pp. 2662-2672, April 2004. 
[17] A. A. Ahmed, H. Shi, and Y. Shang. "SHARP: A New Approach to 
Relative Localization in Wireless Sensor Networks," in Proc. of 25th IEEE 
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops 
(ICDCS 2005), pp. 892-898, June 2005.  
[18] D. Fox, W. Burgard, F. Dellaert, and S. Thrun. "Monte Carlo 
Localization: Efficient Position Estimation for Mobile Robots," in Proc. of 
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Orlando, FL, pp. 343-349, 
July 1999. 
[19] S. Thrun. "Particle Filters in Robotics," in Proc. of 18th Annual 
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-02), pp. 511, 
San Francisco, CA, August 2002. 
[20] F. Sivrikaya and B. Yener, “Time synchronization in sensor 
networks: a survey,” IEEE Network, 18(4), pp. 45–50, 2004. 
18
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 
 
[21] K. Romer, P. Blum, and L. Meier, “Time synchronization and 
calibration in wireless sensor networks,” In I. Stojmenovic, editor, 
Handbook of Sensor Networks: Algorithms and Architectures, pp. 199–
237. John Wiley & Sons, Sept. 2005. 
[22] J. Elson, L. Girod, and D. Estrin, “Fine-grained network time 
synchronization using reference broadcasts,” SIGOPS Oper.Syst. Rev., 
36(SI), pp. 147–163, 2002. 
[23] M.Maroti, B. Kusy, G. Simon, and A. Ledeczi, “The ﬂooding time 
synchronization protocol,” In SenSys’04, pp. 39–49, Baltimore, MD, 
USA, 2004. ACM Press. 
[24] S. Ping, “Delay measurement time synchronization for wireless 
sensor networks,” Technical Report IRB-TR-03-013, Intel Research, June 
2003. 
[25] S. Ganeriwal, R. Kumar, and M. B. Srivastava, “Timing-sync 
protocol for sensor networks,” In SenSys’03, pp. 138–149, New York, 
NY, USA, 2003. ACM Press. 
[26] D. L. Mills, “Network time protocol version 4 reference and 
implementation guide,” Technical Report 06-06-1, Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Delaware, 2006. 
[27] M. L. Sichitiu and V. Ramadurai,”Localization of wireless sensor 
networks with a mobile beacon,”, In MASS’04, pp. 174–183, Florida, 
USA, October 2004. 
[28] P. Pathirana, N. Bulusu, S. Jha, and A. Savkin, “Node localization 
using mobile robots in delay-tolerant sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. on 
Mobile Comput., 4(4), pp. 285 – 296, August 2005. 
[29] K.-F. Ssu, C.-H. Ou, and H. Jiau, “Localization with mobile, anchor 
points in wireless sensor networks,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE 
Transactions on, 54(3), pp. 1187–1197, 2005. 
[30] V. Chandrasekhar,W., K. Seah, Y. S. Choo, and H. V. Ee, 
“Localization in underwater sensor networks: Survey and challenges,” In 
WUWNet’06, pp. 33–40, New York, NY, USA 2006. ACM Press 
[31] K. Romer, “Time and location in sensor networks,” GI/ITG 
Fachgespr¨ ach Sensornetze, Berlin, pp. 57–60, July 2003. 
[32] K. Romer, “Time Synchronization and Localization in Sensor 
Networks,” PhD thesis, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, June 2005. 
[33] K. Romer and F. Mattern, “Towards a uniﬁed view on space and time 
in sensor networks,” Computer Communications, 28(13), pp. 1484–1497, 
August 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
19
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

