Complexity and Fairness Analysis of a new Scheduling Scheme for VoIP in 3G LTE 
 
    
                    
                                                                      Richard Musabe, Hadi Larijani 
                                                                             Glasgow Caledonian University 
                                                                                       Glasgow, Scotland, UK 
e-mail: richard.musabe@gcu.ac.uk, h.larijani@gcu.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— 3G Long Term Evolution is an emerging and 
promising technology that aims at providing broadband 
ubiquitous internet access and improving multimedia 
services. This is achieved through streamlining the 
system for packet services since long term evolution is an 
all Internet protocol based network. The fact that 3G 
long term evolution is a packet based network brings 
along some improvements in the form of higher bit rates, 
lower latencies, and a variety of service offerings. 
However, some technical challenges are expected to arise 
when voice traffic is transmitted over a long term 
evolution network. This has become an interesting area 
of research and different types of resource management 
schemes 
have 
been 
developed 
which 
are 
quite 
challenging and complex. In this paper, we analyze the 
complexity and fairness of our proposed scheduling 
scheme for voice over internet protocol in 3G long term 
evolution 
called 
voice 
over 
internet 
protocol 
optimization scheduling algorithm. We compare it with 
other algorithms in literature. There is second order 
complexity in the number of users based on quality 
feedback, queue length metrics, and there is linear 
complexity in resource blocks using voice over internet 
protocol optimization scheduling algorithm. Simulation 
results also showed approximately 10 – 20 percent 
improvement in fairness and performance based on the 
fairness index and throughput.   
 
Keywords-LTE; Scheduling Schemes; VoIP; Complexity; 
Fairness. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
       3G Long Term Evolution (LTE) was identified by the 
third generation partnership project (3GPP) as the 
preliminary 
version 
of 
next 
generation 
wireless 
communication systems because of its high data rates [1]. 
This mobile cellular communications technology provides a 
maximum 100Mbps downlink and 50Mbps uplink when 
using 20 MHz bandwidth [2]. In the downlink physical 
layer, LTE uses Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple 
Access (OFDMA) radio technology to meet the LTE 
requirements for spectrum flexibility and enables cost-
efficient solutions for wide carriers with high peak rates. In 
the uplink, LTE uses a pre-coded version of OFDMA which 
is Single-Carrier Frequency-Division Multiple Access 
(SCFDMA) in order to compensate for a drawback with 
normal OFDMA which has a high Peak-to-Average-Power 
Ratio (PAPR) [3].   
      Wireless technology has expanded from voice only to 
high-speed data, multimedia applications, and wireless 
internet [4]. LTE requirements for high data rates are 
achieved by the fact that this technology is only designed 
for packet switched networks (PSN); hence, there is no need 
for the circuit switched mode. However, this design brings 
with it more technical challenges especially for voice 
services. Voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services are 
both delay and packet loss sensitive. The biggest challenge 
of VoIP over LTE is the delivered Quality of Service (QoS).  
Normally, users would expect voice with the same quality 
as that provided by circuit switched networks. However, 
traffic delivered over PSNs is subject to delay and packet 
loss [5]. A major issue with VoIP over LTE is that 3G LTE 
adopts a different method of resource transmission from 
other cellular systems like Code Division Multiple Access 
(CDMA). It uses Physical Resource Blocks (PRB) as its 
transmission unit. PRBs can be defined as the basic unit 
with both frequency and time aspects [6]. Basically, the base 
station of 3G LTE, known as eNodeB has a fixed number of 
available PRBs according to their allocated bandwidth and it 
is supposed to assign PRBs repeatedly at every 
Transmission Time Interval (TTI)  [2].  
      Different techniques have been introduced in the 
literature to over come the challenges faced when real time 
traffic is trasmitted over an LTE network. In [7], Yaacoub, 
Al-Asadi, and Dawy proposed two low complexity heuristic 
algorithms. The complexity of both algorithms was 
analysed. The first algorithm had a linear complexity in the 
number of users and a quandratic complexity in the number 
of resource blocks. The second algorithm had a linear 
complexity in both the number of user and resource blocks. 
It was shown that good results could be achieved by the 
proposed linear complexity algorithm (second algorithm). It 
was also shown through simulations that the maximization 
of sum throughput leads to a higher cell throughput, 
although considering the logarithm of throughput as a utility 
function ensures proportional fairness, and thus constitutes a 
tradeoff between throughput and fairness. 
      In [8], Zhao et al. investigated two fairness criterias with 
regards to adaptive resource allocation for uplink OFDMA 
systems. These two criteria were Nash bargaining solution 
(NBS) fairness and proportional fairness (PF). These two 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

criterias can provide attractive tradeoffs between total 
throughput and each user’s capacity. Using Karush-Kuhn-
Tucker (KKT) condition and iterative method, two effective 
algorithms were designed to achieve NBS fairness and 
proportional fairness respectively. Through simulation 
results, NBS fairness criteria shows better performance in 
total capacity but the BS cannot control the rate ratio 
because it only depends on the channel state of the users. PF 
Criteria can provide a controllable rate ratio regardless of 
the channel condition for each user. However, to achieve the 
hard fairness, the system capacity degrades sharply. 
      In [9], Piro et al. proposed a new open-source 
framework to simulate LTE networks. In this simulator, 
different scheduling algorithms were developed, these 
include; proportional fair (PF), exponential proportional 
fair(EXP-PF), and modified largest weighted delay first (M-
LWDF). We will consider the first two algorithms since 
their fairness and complexity context constitues an 
extension to algorithms described in [7][8]. We will also 
compare the performance of these two algorithms to our 
proposed scheduling algorithm VOSA. we will refer to 
these two algorithms in the simulations as PF and EXP-PF. 
Our involvement in [7] is that we only compared the 
complexity and fairness of our algorithm to algorithm 1 in 
[7]. Since algorithms in [7] are extension to the algorithms 
proposed in [9], we also compared the performance of our 
algorithm to those proposed in [9]. 
      PF: This scheduler was developed in [9] and its main 
aim is to maximize the total network throughput and to 
guarantee fairness among flows. It assigns radio resources 
taking into account both the experienced channel quality 
and the past user throughput [10]. This scheduler uses the 
metric which is defined as the ratio between the 
instantaneous available data rate and the average past rate 
with reference to the i-th flow in the j-th flow subchannel. 
This can be depicted in equation 1 obtained  from [9]. 
 
j
i
j
i
i j
R
r
W
,
,
,
                                                            (1) 
where Wi,j is the scheduler metric, Ri,j  is the estimated 
average data rate, and  ri,j is the instantaneous available data 
rate which is computed by the AMC module, considering 
the channel quality indicator (CQI) feedback that the UE 
hosting the i-th flow have sent for the j-th subchannel. It 
should be also noted that i and j are sub channel flows. 
      EXP-PF: This scheduler was also developed in [9] and it 
basically aimed at increasing the priority of real-time flows 
with respect to non-real-time flows, where their head-of-line 
packet delay is very close to the delay threshold [11]. Its 
metrics were computed in [9] using the following equations. 
 
 
j
i
i j
HOL i
i
i j
R
r
X
X
D
W
,
,
,
,
1
exp
      (2) 
 
and  
 
r t
N
i
HOL i
i
t
r
D
N
X
,
1
,
,
1
                                (3) 
 
 
with Nrt being the number of active downlink real-time 
flow. Considering a packet delay threshold Ti, the 
probability  
i is defined as the maximum probability that 
the delay DHOL,I of the head-of-line packet delay exceeds the 
delay threshold. 
Therefore,
i is given by; 
i
i
i
T
log
                                                     (4) 
 
      Equations 3 and 4 proposed in [9], calculates the 
average summation of the entire down link real time flows 
based on the probability that the first packet to be 
transmitted in the queue exceeds the delay threshold.  This 
helps to prioritize down link real time flows. 
      With all these techniques introduced in the literature, 
there are still some challenges when real-time traffic like 
voice is transmitted over an LTE network. This is mostly 
due to the fading channels of wireless links and the delay 
and packet loss sensitive voice characteristic. Another issue 
is that, most of the proposed solutions in the literature are 
found to be more complex and do not grant fairness between 
VoIP users. Users which are very close to the base station 
are assigned more PRBs than those far from the base station.  
      So, in this work, we analyze the complexity and fairness 
of our proposed scheduling scheme for VoIP in 3G LTE 
called VoIP Optimization Scheduling Algorithm (VOSA) 
[12]. Then compare it with other scheduling algorithms in 
[8], which are PF and EXP-PF, in order to analyze its 
performance based on user throughput. The main 
contribution in this paper that was not discussed in our 
previous publication is that we analyzed the complexity, 
fairness, and throughput of our model presented in [12]. 
      The simulation results were generated using the open 
source LTE system simulator called LTE-SIM [9]. It models 
different uplink and downlink scheduling strategies in 
multicell/multiuser environments; taking into account user 
mobility, radio resource optimization, frequency reuse 
techniques, the adaptive modulation, and coding (AMC) 
module. It also includes other aspects that are relevant to the 
industrial and scientific communities.  
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Our contributions in this paper are: 
    Complexity and fairness analysis of our proposed 
scheduling algorithm VOSA and compared it with 
algorithm 1 in [7]. 
    Performance analysis of VOSA and compared it 
with algorithms in [9]. 
      The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II 
discusses 
the 
VOSA 
Scheduling 
algorithm, 
metric 
maximization, and describes in summary VOSA algorithm. 
Section III describes the simulation. Section IV presents  
complexity and fairness analysis, as well as performance 
simulation results. Section V reviews the main conclusions. 
 
II. 
VOSA SCHEDULING ALGORITHM 
 
      Our proposed scheduling algorithm and its details can be 
found in [12]. The main aim of this proposed scheduling 
algorithm is to improve the QoS of voice traffic when 
transmitted over an LTE network. At the same time it 
reduces the negative impact, which may be caused by the 
introduction of the new algorithm on the entire system’s 
performance. This algorithm is activated at every TTI by 
considering if there is a VoIP call and if the duration period 
of the new algorithm has not exceeded the limit. To 
determine the duration of our new algorithm, we use the 
adaptive method proposed in [2]. This method provides 
limits to the VOSA which is adaptively changed between a 
pre-specific minimum and maximum value according to the 
ratio of dropped packets. Higher drop ratio means that there 
are many ongoing VoIP calls, and hence, it is necessary to 
increase the limits to allow more consecutive TTIs to be 
dedicated to VoIP calls. On the other hand, a low drop ratio 
implies that QoS of VoIP calls are satisfied at decent levels, 
and thus, it is safe to reduce the duration of the algorithm 
and serve other service in the network. 
      Our scheduling scheme is designed by making 
modification to the algorithm in [2]. VOSA allocates PRBs 
to VoIP calls based on the arrival time metric. Once the 
PRBs allocation is done, the scheduling order of the calls is 
determined by the size of the following factors: Quality 
feedback (QF) and Queue length (QL) of each call. The 
better the factor values are, the earlier the corresponding call 
is scheduled. 
 
A. Metric Maximization 
      Let NRB,K be the number of resource blocks allocated to 
the number of users K, Tk be the arrival time associated to k 
user and QL(k) be the length of k’s queue. Every user k 
sends back the quality feedback value QF(k) Є {1,……, 
QF(max)}k*1 containing supported values for the user k. The 
maximization of user utility metrics can be formulated as 
follows: 
 
K
n
k
RB
k
k
N
QF QL
U
MAX
1
,
                                (5) 
 
where QL(k) ≥ 1  
 
U (QF(k) QL(k)) is the user utility as a function of two main 
metrics (QF and QL), given the allocation of resource block  
HRB,N to user k. 
 
1. Quality Feedback: 
      In order to obtain quality feedback metric, we used the 
Time-domain proportional fair method [TD-PF] [13] and it 
is obtained from the equation below. 
 
]
[
[ ]
]
[
,
,
,
t
Th
t
R
t
QF
j
k
j
k
k j
                                (6) 
 
where: 
QFk, j[t] - Quality feedback Metric for user ‘k’ in the channel 
’j’ in the instant‘t’ 
Rk,j[t]  -  Shannon Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) of user 
‘k’ in the channel ‘j’ in the instant ‘t’ 
Thk[t] - Average delivered user throughput, it is calculated 
based on the transmitted signal’s SINR 
 
2. Queue Length: 
       In order to obtain Queue length metric, we adopted the 
queuing method in the LTE-SIM simulator. Different traffic 
generators were developed, these generated packets that are 
transported by a dedicated radio bearer at the application 
layer. Using the application class, we were able to generate 
the packets and deliver them to the network. Once the 
packets reach the network, they are forwarded to the user-
plane protocol stack to add protocol headers.  
      Then, the packets are placed in the queue by the MAC 
queue class at the MAC layer before being sent to the 
destination. The MAC queue object have got a counter 
which increases or decreases when the packet is inserted or 
removed from the queue respectively. Based on the counter 
in the MAC queue object, the queue length metric is 
determined. It should be noted that different MAC queue 
objects can be created in order to facilitate different traffic 
types.  
 
QLk = m_queuesize+N_datapackets*8                              (7) 
where 8 is the packet overhead due to, Radio Link Control 
(RLC) (2bytes), MAC headers (3 bytes) and Cyclic 
Redundancy Check (CRC) (3 bytes). 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

B. Summary of VOSA Algorithm  
      This algorithm performs the scheduling operation based 
on the user utility metrics and the better the metrics are, the 
earlier the call is scheduled. Its operation includes the 
following steps: 
 
 Indentify the traffic type whether voice or any other 
traffic 
 Determine the user utility metrics (QF,QL) 
 Find the user with the highest user utility metric as 
defined in equation 5 
 Consider the set of available resource blocks RBs 
Navail_RB, at every start of the algorithm , Navail_RB  = 
{1,2,…….., NRB} 
 Assign the resource block N* to the user k* with the 
highest user utility metrics value such that  NRB,k* 
= NRB,k* U {N*} 
 Schedule the user k* first 
 Delete the user k* and resource block N* from their 
respective lists 
 Repeat all the steps until all users are scheduled and 
if more resource block exists then allocate them to 
other traffic types 
 
III. 
SIMULATION SETUP 
A. PRB Characteristics 
      In this sub-section, we introduce the characteristics of 
PRBs, which are the transmission resources. LTE systems 
consists of both a time and a frequecy  planes. The time 
plane is divided into 1 ms TTI, which consists of two slots 
of 0.5 ms  to form 1 ms sub frames, where each sub frame 
contains 7 OFDMA symbols.   
      In each TTI, there are 14 OFDMA symbols, where  2 
symbols out of 14 are reserved for uplink pilot transmission, 
while the other 12 symbols are used for data and control 
information transimission. TTI can be defined as the 
minimum allocation unit in the time domain [12]. If we 
consider the frequency plane, the minimum allocation unit is 
the PRB, where each PRB contains 12 subcarriers of 15 Khz 
bandwidth  each.  
      The number of OFDMA symbols in a resource block 
depends on a cyclic prefix being used. All these can be 
depicted in  Fig. 1. It must be noted that VoIP packets must 
be transmitted per TTI and they can occupy one or more 
PRBs [5]. The amount of data bits that can be transmitted by 
one PRB depends on the link between the eNodeB and the 
user mobile terminal. This is due to the fact that 3G LTE 
uses adaptive modulation and coding (AMC), which 
changes modulation and coding schemes depending on the 
wireless link conditions. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The structure and allocation of the eNodeB 
transmission resources symbols.  
B. Scenario Setup 
      Our network topology is made up of a set of cells and 
different network nodes which include; the EnodeB, 
mobility management/gateway (MME/GW), and user 
equipements (UEs). All the simulations were run in a three 
tier diamond-pattern macro scenario with 19-3-sector sites 
which totaled to about 57 cells. Most of the simulation 
parameters are presented in the table 1 below. VoIP flows 
are generated by the traffic generator in LTE-SIM called 
VoIP application which generates G.729 voice flows. The 
voice flow has been modelled with an ON/OFF Markov 
chain. The ON period is exponentially distributed with a 
mean value of 3s and the OFF period  has a truncated 
exponential probability density function with an upper limit 
of 6.9s as well as an average value of 3s [9].  
      During the ON period, the source sends 20bytes sized 
packets every 20 ms which implies that the source data rate 
is 8 kb/s, on the other hand during the OFF period the rate is 
zero because the presence of voice activity detector is 
assumed. Three different scheduling algorithms were used 
in all simulation scenarios, these are: our proposed VOSA 
as well as  EXP-PF and PF developed in [9].   
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
A. Complexity Analysis 
      Our proposed algorithm performs the scheduling 
operation after searching the user with highest utility 
metrics based on QF and QL. Therefore, the complexity to 
schedule the first user is O(KN), this will be the complexity 
for the first iteration. The complexity to schedule the second 
user is O((K-1)N) and so on.  
      In our algorithm, the number of iterations depends on 
the number of users K. As there are K iterations, the overall 
algorithm complexity can approximately be expressed as 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

O(K2N). This implies that there is a second order 
complexity in the number of users based on QF, QL metrics 
and there is also linear complexity in resource blocks N. 
This is due to the fact that there is no search done on the 
resource blocks, any available resource block is assigned to 
the user with highest metric. 
      If we compare our algorithm to algorithm 1 in [7] that 
has a linear complexity in the number of user and quadratic 
complexity in the number of resource block, i.e., ‘O(N2K)’, 
it is clear that our algorithm will only outperform it when 
the number of users are few since it will perform less 
iterations however when the number of users increases, 
algorithm 1 in [7] performs better. 
 
 
TABLE 1.  SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
 
B. Fairness Analysis 
      The fairness aspect is introduced mainly to solve the 
resource starvation problem, where users close to the base 
station are allocated more resources and edge users 
generally suffer from resource starvation [7]. Fairness can 
be describes as a loose concept which implies that all users 
are allocated equal amount of resources in order to meet the 
QoS requirements. From the fairness point of view, we 
compared our algorithm with PF and EXP-PF developed in 
[9].  Their fairness and complexity context constitues an 
extension to algorithms described in [7][8] and they are also 
the bench mark schedulers in the simulator that we used. We 
measured the fairness index of all the scheduling schemes. 
As seen in Fig. 2, fairness index decreases as the number of 
users increases. The fairness index of VOSA is higher than 
that of PF but lower than EXP-PF.  
      It should be noted that the main advantage of VOSA 
scheduling algorithm is to improve the QoS of voice traffic 
when transmitted over an LTE network. At the same time it 
reduces the negative impact which may be caused by the 
introduction of the new algorithm on the entire system’s 
performance. However, when we consider fairness and 
performance analysis, EXP-PF out performs VOSA due to 
the following reasons;  
      EXP-PF employs the fairness concept in [7],  which uses 
the algorithmic utility function that is associated with 
proportional fairness of the utility based optimization. This 
helps in achieving a better fairness factor. Also, during the 
allocation scheme, EXP-PF erases all the packets belonging 
to the real time flow from the MAC queue if they are not 
transmitted before their deadline expiration. This helps to 
improve its performance by avoiding the waste of resources 
such as bandwidth. 
 
5
10
15
20
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4
VoIP Users
Fairness
Fairness-Index
 
 
EXP-PF
PF
VOSA
 
Figure 2.  Fairness Index Comparison 
C. Performance Analysis 
      Performance analysis was made by measuring user 
throughput for all three schedulers. As it can be seen in 
Fig.3, throughput decreased as the number of VoIP users 
increased in all algorithms.This is mainly due to the fact that 
some VoIP packets were being dropped as the number of 
users were being increased which resulted in the less 
utilisation of all assigned PRBs. 
      It is well known that VoIP packets are small packets; 
hence, many packets are needed to fully utilize the available 
PRBs. However, as congestion increased in the network, it 
led to VoIP packets to be dropped which led to less 
utilization of the available PRBs. 
5
10
15
20
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16 x 10
4
VoIP Users
Throughput (bps)
VoIP Throughput
 
 
EXP-PF
PF
VOSA
 
Figure 3.  Throughput Comparison 
Simulation Parameters 
Values 
Bandwidth 
5MHZ 
PRB Structure 
12subcarriers,2subframes 
TTI 
1msec 
Number of available 
PRBs 
25 
Modulations for AMC 
QPSK 
Number of sectors 
3 
Simulation time 
1000 TTIs 
Cyclic prefix 
Normal 
Scheduling algorithms 
VOSA,EXP-PF, and PF 
Cell radius 
1 km 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

V. 
 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      In this paper, we analyzed the complexity and fairness 
factor of our proposed scheduling algorithm VOSA. 
Through simulations, we were able to compare it with 
other scheduling algorithms in literature. It was analyzed 
that VOSA performs better when the number of users is 
small since it schedules users after searching the user with 
highest utility metrics based on QF and QL and the search 
goes on for all available users. So the small the number of 
users, the few search iterations done and hence the better 
performance. However, VOSA performed better than PF 
but slightly lower than EXP-PF. 
      In future work, we will try to employ different tests 
such as real life scenarios in order to analyze the 
practicability of our results and to make them more 
reasonable. We are also working on the way of optimizing 
our scheduling algorithm such that we lower its 
complexity by just performing one main search 
throughout all the available users and store the data for 
each user separately. This would make it more scalable 
since a single iteration is performed. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Y. Kim, “An Efficient Scheduling Scheme to Enhance the 
Capacity of VoIP Services in Evolved UTRA Uplink,” 
EURASIP 
journal 
of 
Wireless 
Communications 
and 
Networking, 
vol 
2008, 
Mar. 
2008, 
pp.1-9, 
doi:10.1155/2008/732418. 
[2] S. Choi, K. Jun, Y. Shin, S. Kang, and B. Choi, “Mac 
Scheduling Scheme for VoIP Traffic Services in 3G LTE,” 
IEEE 66th Vehicular Technology Conference, pp. 1441-1445, 
Oct. 2007, doi: 10.1109/VETECF.2007.307. 
[3] Rohde and Schwarz, “UMTS long term evolution (LTE) 
Technology introduction,” A report by Rohde and Schwarz, 
pp. 1-30, Mar. 2007. 
[4] M. C. Chuah, and Q. Zhang, Introduction to Wireless 
Communications, US: Springer, 2006. 
[5] S. Saha and R. Quazi, “Priority-Coupling- A Semi-Persistent 
MAC Scheduling Scheme for VoIP Traffic on 3G LTE,”  
ConTEL,10th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications, pp. 325-329, Aug. 2009. 
[6] 3GPP, Physical layer aspects for Evolved UTRA, 3GPP 
Technical report 25.814, version7.1.0, pp. 1-135, Sep. 2006. 
[7] E.Yaacoub, H. Al-Asadi, and Z. Dawy, “Low Complexity 
Scheduling  Algorithms for LTE Uplink,” Computers and 
Communications, ISCC 2009, IEEE Symposium, pp. 266 - 
270,  July 2009 doi: 10.1109/ISCC.2009.5202296. 
[8] Y. Zhao, L. K. Zeng,  G.Xie, Y.A. Liu, and F. Xiong,“ 
Fairness based    resource allocation for uplink OFDMA  
systems,” Journal of China universities of post  and 
telecommunications, vol. 15, No. 2, June 2008, pp. 50 – 55. 
[9] G. Piro, L. A. Grieco, G.  Boggia, F. Capozzi, and P. Camarda, 
“Simulating 
LTE 
Cellular 
Systems: 
An 
Open-Source 
Framework,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 
vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 1-16, Feb. 2011. 
[10] G. J. Choi and S. Bahk, “Cell-throughput Analysis of the 
proportional fair scheduler in the single-cell environment,” 
IEEE Transaction Vehicular Technology, vol. 56, no. 2, April 
2007, pp. 766-778, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2006.889570. 
[11] R. Basukala, H. M. Ramli, and K. Sandrasegaran, 
“Performance analysis of EXP/PF and M-LWDF in downlink 
3GPP LTE systems,” 1st AH-ICI . Kathmandu, Nepal, Nov. 
2009, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/AHICI.2009.5340336. 
[12] R. Musabe, H. Larijani, B. Stewart, and T. Boutaleb, “A New 
Scheduling Scheme for Voice Awareness in 3G LTE,” IEEE 
Computer 
Society, 
Sixth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Broadband and Wireless Computing, Communication and 
Applications, 
Dec. 
2011, 
pp. 
1-8, 
doi: 
10.1109/BWCCA.2011.46. 
[13] J. A. Rodriguez, “Radio Resource Management Centralized for 
Relayed  Enhanced LTE-Networks,” A report by the   
department of electronics and information   systems, Aalborg 
University, pp. 1 – 40, June, 2009. 
  
 
 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

