Security Issues and Threats in Cognitive Radio Networks 
 
Yenumula B. Reddy 
Department of Computer Science, Grambling State University 
Grambling, Louisiana, USA 
ybreddy@gram.edu  
 
Abstract—Cognitive radio technology is the vision of 
pervasive wireless communications that improves the 
spectrum utilization and offers many social and individual 
benefits. The objective of the cognitive radio network 
technology is to utilize the unutilized spectrum by primary 
users and fulfill the secondary users’ demands irrespective 
of time and location (any time and any place). Due to their 
flexibility, the cognitive radio networks are vulnerable for 
numerous threats and security problems that will affect the 
performance of the network. Little attention was given to 
security aspects in cognitive radio networks that include 
spectrum sensing (sensing primary user), attacks that 
threaten the network at various layers and adversary effects 
on performance due to the security threats. In this survey, 
we discuss the cognitive radio networks, problems involved 
in sensing and management, attacks on cognitive radio 
networks, attacks on various network layers, threats on 
cognitive radio networks, and the current security and 
privacy solutions available. Further, we illustrate the need of 
careful engineering with security checks while designing the 
cognitive radio networks.  
 
Keywords: 
Cognitive 
Networks; 
security; 
threats; 
frequency sensing; spectrum mobility; spectrum holes. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The novel approach of cognitive radio (CR) in wireless 
communications was coined by Joseph Mitola III in 1998, 
in a seminar at Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm. 
The work was later published by Mitola and Maguire [1] 
in IEEE personal communications. The aim was to provide 
appropriate intelligence (an intelligent agent) to portable 
devices (for example – personal digital assistants) so that 
they fulfill the common user communication needs [2]. 
The intelligent agent in the device detects available 
channels in the wireless spectrum band and automatically 
changes its parameters (transmission or reception) to meet 
user needs. The process of detecting unused or available 
channels from the wireless spectrum band at any place is 
called dynamic spectrum access (DSA). The DSA and 
DSM (dynamic spectrum management) concepts are 
derived from the principles of artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, and cross-layer optimization. The game 
theory applications are examples of DSM that improves 
the performance of cognitive radio networks (CRN).   
The main functions of cognitive radios are spectrum 
sensing, spectrum management, spectrum mobility and 
spectrum sharing. The main goal of the cognitive radio is 
to detect the white spaces (unused spectrum or spectrum 
holes) in the primary spectrum and efficient use of that 
detected unused spectrum without harming the primary 
user. Detection of a transmitted signal can be done by 
using one or more of techniques including matched filter, 
energy 
detection, cyclostationary 
feature detection, 
cooperative 
detection (sensing 
spectrum 
with 
the 
cooperative effort of multiple cognitive radios), and 
interference based detection method. The spectrum 
management (analysis and decision) includes the selection 
of the best spectrum suitable to the cognitive users. 
Spectrum mobility is the process of allocating the best 
possible spectrum during mobility of cognitive user. 
Finally, the spectrum sharing is a fair scheduling method 
in spectrum usage.   
Today more than 5 billion devices are in use, expected 
to increase 10 billion by 2017 and approximately 100 
billion by 2025.  This number includes high-end handsets, 
tablets, and laptops on mobile networks. These devices 
generate serious traffic on the communications. The 
anticipated 
demand 
in 
communications 
forces 
to 
incorporate compact devices, new features, and more 
battery life. Future cognitive radios offer the new 
technology 
with 
nanotechnology 
featured 
compact 
devices. Building flexible cognitive radio technology with 
large-scale deployment of cognitive radio networks is a 
complex task. The features include smart antennas, new 
hardware (Nano components incorporated) with software 
defined radio, spectrum sensing, spectrum measurement, 
medium access control, routing, self-organizing, adaptive 
control mechanisms, learning, policy definition and 
monitoring. Developing and introducing new technology 
requires appropriate security measurements and policies. 
Therefore, security at each step of cognitive wireless 
networks is a challenging job.  
Berkeley wireless research center [3] shows that 2GHz 
to 10GHz spectrum is underutilized. To utilize the 
underutilized spectrum, the cognitive radio must detect the 
presence of primary signal (PS), and use that spectrum 
without interfering with primary signal. Security involves 
in misdetection and false detection of the primary user. 
False detection is that the primary signal presence is 
recorded when the signal was absent (falsely detecting the 
primary user). Further, false detection includes that a 
malicious user pretends as the primary user (PU) by 
sending a strong signal to other cognitive users. 
Misdetection is the presence of the primary user which is 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

not detected by the cognitive user through matched filter, 
energy detection, and cyclostationary feature detection. To 
eliminate such false detection and misdetection of the 
primary user, a spectrum sensing mechanism must be 
created to enhance the trust worthiness of the primary 
signal detection. 
In wireless networks, hacking and malicious attacks 
are inevitable. Further, security threats are unavoidable, 
and incorporating security facilities are challenging in 
cognitive radio networks due to its nature of openness. 
Therefore, more care and research need to be done to 
provide security mechanisms in cognitive radio networks. 
Better security mechanisms ensure the trustworthiness of 
the spectrum sensing. The detection problems arise when 
operating in a hostile environment. In a hostile 
environment, it is possible to mimic the incumbent signal 
characteristics and pretend (emulate the primary user 
characteristics) as the primary user. In such cases, 
integrating legitimate transmitters for primary and 
secondary users in spectrum sensing will improve the 
trustworthiness 
of 
the 
detection 
process. 
Further, 
embedded signature in PU or interactive protocol between 
an incumbent transmitter and verifier cannot be used due 
to FCC’s document requirements [4].  
 In conventional radio technology, signals emitted by 
wireless devices were predictable (approved by FCC). 
Since the creation of a wide range of authorized and 
unauthorized signals are possible using low-cost consumer 
devices, it is relatively easy to create denial-of-service 
(DoS) attacks that can affect the critical applications such 
as traffic control or health care. Therefore, future FCC 
regulations need to be aware of these DoS attacks [6]. The 
issues to be considered in cognitive radios are: 
 Type of security attacks 
 Security implication in implementing software defined 
radio 
 Trusted cognitive radio design with security concerns 
 Requirement of authentication protocols in cognitive radio 
networks 
 Ensuring the functionality of security mechanisms and 
 Requirement in encryption mechanisms  
This survey report focused on the above six problems. 
Further, the survey identifies and presents the new 
capabilities to defend against intrusions and denial of 
service attacks. More work is needed to develop better 
security models in spectrum sensing, emulation of denial 
of service, physical layer security enhancements, geo-
location for improved wireless network security, and 
cooperative methods for isolating the intruders. Since the 
CRN is in a developmental stage, it is an opportunity to 
incorporate these security capabilities as part of the 
implementation.  
The remaining part of the paper discusses the related 
work in Section II, cognitive radio network environment in 
Section II and threats and attacks in section IV. Section 5 
provides the type of attacks on a network layer and counter 
measures. Section VI concludes the work and future 
requirements in CRN security 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Most of the survey papers in cognitive radio networks 
(CRN) discussed the security problems in specific aspects 
of the network. The surveys on CRN show the state of the 
art research in specific or few general aspects. 
Fragkiadakis et al [7] discussed the security threats and 
detection techniques in CRN. The paper includes the 
challenges that cognitive radios and cognitive radio 
networks along with the current state-of-the-art to detect 
the corresponding attacks.  
Wassim et al [3] discussed the security attacks along 
with the mitigation techniques in CRN. This paper 
provides the category of attacks at MAC layer, data-link 
layer, and transport layer. Further, they discussed the 
jamming attack, false detection of PU, and objective 
function attack which are common in most of the surveys. 
Their evaluation shows that the combination of the counter 
measures will produce better security. 
The survey paper by Parvin et al [8] addresses the 
CRN architecture and security issues. The spectrum 
mobility threats, jamming counter measures, spectrum 
sensing challenges, and attacks on protocol layers are 
outlined in this survey. Further, attacks on protocol layer 
are listed in this survey paper. Leon et al discussed the 
attacks on cognitive radios including PU emulation 
attacks, objective function attacks, common control data 
attack, lion attack, false feedback attack, jamming 
countermeasures, and vulnerabilities inherent to those 
systems [9].  They further discussed mitigation of lion 
attack based on periodic PS emulation attacks. The 
document is the over view of some of the attacks on 
cognitive networks. Clancy et al [10] discussed the threats 
and mitigation of security in cognitive radio Networks. 
They outlined the policy radio threats, learning radio 
threats, and self-propagating behavior. Various classes of 
attacks including dynamic spectrum access (DSA) attacks, 
objective function attacks, and malicious attacks are part 
of this document. The authors felt that the earning the trust 
in cognitive radio networks is extremely important. 
Newman and Clancy [11] discussed the security threats 
in signal classifiers. They discussed the signal classifier 
model, threat analysis, and threats on feature extractions. 
They claimed that signal classification algorithm opens a 
new area of security research related dynamic spectrum 
access and signal classification. They used the signal 
classification algorithm to distinguish the primary user 
(PU) and secondary user signals. Chen et al [12] designed 
a defense scheme to identify the malicious users by 
estimating location information and observing the signal 
strength.  Spectrum sensing is also discussed by Chen et al 
in [13, 14].  In [13], the authors discussed the primary user 
emulation problem and demonstrated the disruptive effects 
in cognitive radio networks. They discussed the transmitter 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

position 
for 
detecting 
the 
attacks. 
Further, 
they 
demonstrated the effect of the location verification with 
respect to the attacks. Chen et al [14] discussed the 
distributed spectrum sensing and incumbent emulation 
attacks. The sensing and management attacks are: 
 Defending against incumbent emulation attacks 
 Spectrum sensing data falsification attacks  
 Defending against spectrum sensing data falsification 
(SSDF) attacks 
Primary user emulation attack is one of the common 
security threats in CRN. Chen et al [15] proposed a 
transmitter verification scheme called LocDef (localization 
based defense) that verifies the received signal based on 
location and characteristics. They concluded that the signal 
disruptive process will be eliminated by incorporating the 
LocDef process into spectrum sensing processes. They 
showed through simulations that LocDef scheme is an 
effective program and can be employed in a hostile 
environment. 
 Common control channel security is vital in cognitive 
radio networks. Safdar and O’Neill [16] discussed the 
common control channel security for cooperatively 
communicating cognitive radio nodes. The authors 
presented an algorithm and demonstrated that low cost 
hash or message authentication code algorithm achieves 
information integrity.  
The key challenges and evaluation approaches in CRN 
were presented in [17]. The paper discusses the current 
security posture of emerging IEEE 802.22 cognitive radio 
standard and identifies the potential vulnerabilities along 
with potential mitigation approaches. The features of 
cognitive radio from the perspective of an attacker were 
briefly presented. The author identifies that the CR must 
incorporate 
the 
ability 
to 
authenticate 
the 
local 
observations 
in 
perceived 
environments, 
strong 
collaboration of CR elements related to security, validity 
of observations between CR elements, and have self-
analysis behavior. He further noted that security in CRN is 
a multi-disciplinary problem. 
Implementation issues of spectrum sensing in cognitive 
radios were discussed by Cabric et al in 2004 [18]. The 
authors identified cyclostationary feature detection has 
more advantage among matched filtering and energy 
detection due to its ability in differentiate modulated 
signals, interference, and low signal  noise ratio. The 
energy detection technique to detect the primary signal 
became the central issue of security threats and work on 
security was concentrated at later years in primary signal 
emulation analysis. Chen et al [12-15] used various 
techniques including LocDef for primary signal emulation 
to eliminate the false detection and misdetection. 
III. 
COGNITIVE RADIO NETWORK ENVIRONMENT 
AND SECURITY  
The 
increase 
in 
communication 
requirements, 
difficulties to meet the emergency communication 
connections and more effective communication services 
lead the idea of introduction of software defined radio. 
Cognitive radio is the improvement of software defined 
radio coined by Mitola [1, 2]. If the demand for spectrum 
increases continuously, additional radio resources are 
required to meet customer requirements. Further, we need 
an agent component that is intelligent enough to adjust 
transmission 
parameters 
with 
respect 
to 
location, 
environment, and serve the customer needs. This 
intelligent resource called cognitive radio that operates 
effectively and use the unused bands (spectrum holes) 
without disturbing the licensed user. The definitions from 
National Telecommunications and Intelligent Agency 
(NTIA), the position statement of IEEE-USA Board of 
Directors in 2003, and Scientific American conclude that 
‘cognitive radio is a smart radio that has the ability to 
sense external environment, learn from history, adjust its 
parameters to the current state and take intelligent 
decisions’ [19-22].  The statements conclude that CR 
adapts to the current environment, reasons, learns, 
collaborates with other radios, and support future 
decisions. Further, the CRN nodes sense the current radio 
frequency spectrum environment, contains policy and 
configuration databases, have self-configuration, mission-
oriented 
configuration, 
adaptive 
nature, 
distributed 
collaboration and security (authenticate, authorize and 
protect) of customers. 
Due to the nature of CRN, security became a problem 
at every step (Spectrum Sensing, Spectrum sharing, 
Location Identification, etc.) of its functionality. The 
security problems will occur in different ways. For 
example: 
 False detection (sensing) and misdetection of primary 
signal may happen due to denial of service or malicious 
user pretends as the primary signal. 
 Environment could be controlled by a malicious user. 
 An attacker could prevent the cognitive user from using 
available spectrum (primary signal sensing mechanism). 
 An attacker could access the data unauthorized way or 
modify/inject the false data (integrity of data is required). 
Therefore, we need to find the potential threats, 
potential attacks, likelihood of these threats and attacks, 
and potential consequences of these attacks. After finding 
these security risks, we will specify the basic security 
services 
such 
as 
confidentiality, 
privacy, 
and 
authentication similar to wireless networks. Little attention 
was given to location privacy threats which are a unique 
challenge in CRNs. Further, the encryption and mutual 
authentication techniques will help the data confidentiality.  
Figure 1 shows the general architecture of cognitive 
radio.  The security problems are in location identification, 
the cognitive radios contesting for free spectrum, spectrum 
sensing, spectrum analysis, and spectrum management. 
The external threats include hacking the information, 
incorporating the malicious nodes, corrupting the 
information at any level shown in the figure 1. Further, the 
security at the protocol level that interact various layers of 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

the network is an essential issue to discuss in the study of 
securing cognitive networks.  
Once the spectrum holes are detected, the available 
spectrum will be allocated as soon as possible. Therefore, 
cognitive radios are competent among themselves at each 
node to gain spectrum access. Due to these reasons, the 
design of CRs requires security and threat procedures. 
Further, the CRs are vulnerable to the threats and attacks 
while detecting the primary signal due to their localization 
and adaptive nature. The malicious attackers are common 
in wireless networks as well as CRs. The general 
requirements of security in CRs are discussed in [7-20]. 
 
Figure 1. General architecture of cognitive radio 
 
The security requirements in CRNs vary from location 
to location. Along with security requirements, we will 
discuss the current state of algorithms for protection in 
cognitive radio networks and security provisions through 
IEEE 802.22. The basic security requirements in CRN are 
confidentiality, integrity and availability. The other 
security issues include: 
 Sensing and emulation of primary signal (detecting and 
verifying the signal). 
 Spectrum 
management 
(detecting, 
verifying 
channel 
capacity, and allocating appropriate channel to cognitive 
user). 
 Checking interference level, signal strength, and energy 
detection. 
 Secure communication. 
The motivations vary depending upon the attacker. The 
selfish nature of a cognitive user projects he/she as the 
primary user to use the spectrum with higher priority. 
They modify the spectrum sensing parameters for selfish 
advantage. The selfish user can prevent other users from 
using the spectrum by jamming or with DoS. The DoS can 
be created using various authorized and unauthorized 
waveforms with a low-cost consumer device. The selfish 
users can be controlled through access permissions and 
authentication. Further, by using channel sensing 
algorithms we can control the cognitive users from 
interference. We will discuss various threats, attacks and 
the counter measures in Section 4. 
To minimize these selfish attacks it is necessary to 
identify the type of DoS attacks on CRN and possible 
hardware improvements, improve the weaknesses of 
Internet to implement software-based radio, trusted CR to 
address the security issues, and develop the algorithms and 
mechanisms to address the cooperative methods to detect 
and isolate intruders.  
IV. 
THREATS AND ATTACKS IN COGNITIVE RADIO 
NETWORKS 
Threat is a constant danger through persons, objects, or 
any resources where as an attack is an act of or event that 
exploits 
the 
vulnerability. 
The 
policies, 
learning 
mechanisms, and self-propagation in cognitive radio 
architecture prevents the threats (cannot escape the 
threats).  In CR, a threat can happen while sensing of 
information (due to involvement of a malicious user). This 
information will then feed for learning and decision 
making. The results produced will lead to inappropriate 
decisions (unacceptable decisions) due to a malicious user 
injected the faults. The threat analysis in unsupervised 
learning and signal sensing was discussed by Clancy et al 
[10, 11]. 
Attacks on spectrum management were briefly 
explained by Parvin et al [8] and Mathur and 
Subbalakshmi [23, 24]. They suggested strong encryption 
mechanism is required at physical and MAC layer level. 
The attacks were classified depending upon the protocol 
layers. The Table 1 provides the attack types, network 
layers involved, and reason for attacks. 
TABLE 1. ATTACK TYPES, LAYER INVOLVED AND REASON FOR ATTACKS 
Attack 
type 
Network 
Layer 
Reason 
Countermeasures 
Primary and 
secondary 
user 
Jamming 
Physical 
Lack of 
knowledge 
about location 
and unclear 
access rights 
to cognitive 
user 
 Location Consistency 
Checks 
  Compare signal strength 
and noise level 
Primary 
signal 
sensing 
Phycal 
Low level 
primary signal 
will be missed 
 Energy-based sensing 
 Waveform-based sensing 
 Cooperative detection of PU 
Overlapping 
secondary 
users 
Physical 
Location 
based. Hard to 
prevent 
 Use game models and Nash 
equilibrium techniques to 
detect transmission power 
of SUs 
SUs  
unauthorized 
gain in 
bandwidth 
by pretends 
as primary 
user or False 
feedback 
MAC 
 
Malicious SU 
tweaks with 
higher power 
bandwidth, 
and  feed false 
information to 
gain signal 
 Trust management on 
secondary users for resource 
hungry and collaborative 
trust 
 Management of systems 
objective function by 
controlling the radio 
parameters 
Increase 
interference 
by malicious 
node 
Network 
Compromisin
g with 
malicious 
node 
 Appropriate local spectrum 
sensing controller 
 Eliminating internal hidden 
parasite nodes 
Ripple effect 
Network 
False 
information 
about 
spectrum 
assignment 
 Continuous trust 
management process on 
SUs 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Key 
duplication 
Transport 
Breaks the 
cypher system 
 Reinvestigate the protocol 
activity in the context of 
sessions 
 Use secure protocols with 
robust distribution of key 
management 
Jelly fish 
Transport 
Effect on 
throughput 
 Trust of node by verifying 
the packet loss 
Cross-layer attacks are possible in CRN. There is a 
need to be given individual attention for such attacks. 
Jamming on routing information happens due to lack of 
common control channels. Traffic analysis attack on data 
privacy and location privacy will be avoided by 
authentication and controlling the access rights of 
cognitive user. 
The defense mechanisms were discussed in [10-20]. 
The other attacks include false feedback of information 
from one group of cognitive users to mislead the different 
group of cognitive users. This consequence ends to 
mislead the detection of primary signal. Network Endo-
Parasite (NEP) attack avoids the selection of the right 
channel by the other cognitive users. The NEP attack is 
played by a different group of cognitive users. The 
objective function attack controls a large number of radio 
parameters. According to Clancy and Georgen [10] secure 
communication with low or high power has provided the 
weights. The channel gain depends upon the weight rate. 
The dishonest users will mislead the other users to gain 
access. Further, they mislead the honest user to 
misdetection of the primary signal with the introduction of 
extra noise. 
V. 
CHALLENGES AND DEFENDING MALICIOUS 
ATTACKS 
Spectrum sensing, Spectrum management, spectrum 
sharing, and spectrum mobility are some of the challenges 
in CRN security. Ensuring trust worthy spectrum sensing 
is one of the essential mechanisms in CRs. The primary 
signal analysis is suggested in the current survey. Trust on 
spectrum sensing happens if the primary signal is emulated 
and recognized correctly. For example, a malicious user or 
hacker can interpret the primary user signal and occupy the 
spectrum for selfish use. The attack can be detected 
through transmitter verification procedures and location 
verification procedures. Further, a cognitive user simulates 
the primary user for personal gains. That means, a 
cognitive user crosses its user access limits. These 
activities can be controlled using the various privacy 
procedures and access limits. This problem can be fixed 
using a honey pot database to mislead the malicious user. 
The primary signal cannot be detected because of 
interferences at location devices. Primary user signal 
detection gets difficult if it uses the spread spectrum 
signaling or altering the parameters by a malicious user. 
These problems can be eliminated using the cloud 
application. Further, the cloud application to eliminate the 
hidden terminal problem was discussed in [25, 26]. The 
solution for interference problem was proposed in [27] and 
spectrum sensing can be detected efficiently through 
multiple users in a cooperative manner. Once the free 
spectrum is detected, the best available band will be 
detected 
using 
local 
observations 
and 
statistical 
information. 
The common control problem involves the exchange of 
security keys between the nodes. The authentication 
among the nodes provides confidentiality and integrity of 
the transactions. This technique provides the security and 
the hidden terminal problem still remain. The jamming 
problem, hidden terminal problem, exchange of keys 
between the nodes and malicious user acts can be 
eliminated by using the cloud application. The security to 
cloud still remains an open problem. 
Malicious activity can be from outside or among the 
cognitive users. Detecting the malicious activity among 
the cognitive users can be done using the intruder 
detection procedures and incorporating honey pot 
database. Further, cross-layer technique with appropriate 
defense mechanism in communication protocol will help 
the 
attacks 
on 
upper 
layers. 
Incorporating 
the 
cryptographic techniques or digital signature based 
primary signal identification may help in distinguishing 
the malicious users. More work is required in this 
direction.  
Spectrum mobility involves common control channel, 
operating frequency range, and location information. It 
requires the current location of the primary user and 
operating range so that the secondary user can vacate the 
occupied spectrum as soon as PU enters. Spectrum 
mobility depends upon the primary user entry and 
secondary user relocation. The cloud application will solve 
many attacks and hidden terminal problems in cognitive 
networks similar to problems like sudden entry of the 
primary user [26]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The literature shows that the spectrum management 
sachems are lack of formal security models. The 
conventional authentication models for wireless security 
need to be modified to CRNs. The cooperative sensing 
models improves the sensing capability with overhead of 
jamming. In multi-user environment, the attackers have 
opportunities for malicious activities. Intrusion detection 
models are required in such situations. Cryptographic 
techniques are useful with the additional burden of 
computing time. The trust models are more appropriate 
than to cryptographic techniques due to their simplicity 
and computational efficiency. Cloud application helps to 
eliminate hidden terminal problem. But, cloud security is 
another open problem in CRNs.  
  The overview of the CRN shows that security is an 
essential at all levels (sensing, location, and management). 
Security mechanisms through protocols at different layers 
were discussed in this paper. The study shows that 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

implementation at the protocol level is very important at 
each network layer (Physical, MAC, Network, and 
transport). Few authors stressed the need of security 
models at cross-layer design. The current research shows 
that future security on cross-layer design will get special 
attention.  
Finally, we conclude that threat proof mechanism is 
difficult and impossible. The threat detection mechanisms 
can be developed for cognitive radio networks in the same 
lines of intrusion detection mechanisms. The threat 
detection and protection of information are serious issues 
in wireless networks as well as cognitive radio networks. It 
is recommended that threat detection mechanisms must be 
developed and incorporated as part of the design as and 
when need arises. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research work was supported by the Minority Leaders 
Program through contract number GRAM 11-S567-0017-02-
C2. The author wishes to express appreciation to Dr. Connie 
Walton, Provost and Vice President, Academic Affairs, 
Grambling State University for her continuous support.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Mitola and G. Q. Maguire, “Cognitive Radio: Making 
software 
radios 
more 
personal”, 
IEEE 
personal 
Communications, 1989, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 13-18. 
[2] J. Mitola, "Cognitive Radio – An Integrated Agent 
Architecture 
for 
Software 
Defined 
Radio", 
Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Royal Institute of Technology, Kista, Sweden, 
May 8, 2000, ISSN: 14035286, 313 pages.. 
[3] E. Wassim, S. Haidar and G. Mohsen, “Survey of Security 
Issues in Cognitive Radio Networks”, Journal of Internet 
Technology, 2011, vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 181-198. 
[4] FCC, “Notice for Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM 03-322): 
Facilitating Opportunities for flexible, Efficient, and 
Reliable Spectrum Use Employing Cognitive Radio 
Technologies,” ET Docket, No. 03-108, 2003. 
[5] D. Sicker and R. Dhillon “Security of Cognitive Radio 
Networks (Synthesis Lectures on Communications)”, 
Morgan & Claypool Publishers (January 30, 2013), ISBN-
13: 978-1608451005. 
[6] Federal 
Communication 
Commission, 
“Unlicensed 
operation in the TV broadcast bands and additional 
spectrum for unlicensed devices below 900 MHz in the 
3GHz band,” ET Docket, No. 04-186, May 2004. 
[7] A. G. Fragkiadakis, E. Z. Tragos and I. G. Askoxylakis, “A 
Survey on Security Threats and Detection Techniques in 
Cognitive Radio Networks”, IEEE Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials, 2013, vol. 15 , issue: 1 , pp. 428 -445. 
[8] S. Parvin, F. K. Hussain, O. K. Hussain, S. Han, B. Tian, 
and E. Chang, “Cognitive radio network security: A 
survey”, Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 
2012, vol. 35, pp. 1691–1708. 
[9] O. León, J. Hernández-Serrano, and M. Soriano, “Securing 
cognitive radio networks”, Int. Jr. of Communication 
Systems, 2010, vol. 23, Issue 5, pp. 633-652. 
[10] T. C. Clancy and N. Goergen, “Security in Cognitive Radio 
Networks: Threats and Mitigation”, CrownCom 2008, 3rd 
International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented 
Wireless Networks and Communications, 2008, pp. 1 – 8. 
[11] T. R. Newman and T. C. Clancy, “Security threats to 
cognitive radio signal classifiers”, Proceedings of the 
Virginia 
tech 
wireless 
personal 
communications 
symposium, 2009, pp. 1-9. 
[12] K. C. Chen, Y. J. Peng, N. Prasad, N., Liang, Y. C. and S. 
Sun “Cognitive radio network architecture: part I. general 
structure”, 2nd international conference on ubiquitous 
information management and communication,  2008, CRs. 
pp.114–119. 
[13] R. Chen and J. Park, “Ensuring Trustworthy Spectrum 
Sensing in Cognitive Radio Networks”, 1st IEEE workshop 
on Networking Technologies for Software Defined Radio 
Networks,( SDR '06), 2006, pp. 110 – 119. 
[14] R. Chen, J. Park, Y. T. Hou and J. Reed, “ Toward Secure 
Distributed 
Spectrum 
Sensing 
in 
Cognitive 
Radio 
Networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine, 2008,vol. 
46, issue. 4, pp. 50-55. 
[15] R. Chen, J. Park and  J. H. Reed, “Defense against Primary 
user Emulation Attacks in Cognitive Radio Networks”, 
IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications, vol. 26, 
no.1, 2008, pp. 25-37. 
[16] G. A. Safdar and M. O’Neill, “Common Control Channel 
Security Framework for Cognitive Radio Networks”, 69th 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 2009, pp. 1-5. 
[17] J. L. Burbank, “Security in Cognitive Radio Networks: The 
Required Evoluation in Approaches to Wireless Network 
Security”, CrownCom 2008, pp. 1-7. 
[18] D. Cabric, S. M. Mishra and R. W. Brodersen, 
“Implementation Issues in Spectrum Sensing for Cognitive 
Radios”, 38th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems 
and Computers, 2004, pp. 772-776.  
[19] “IEEE 802 Tutorial: Cognitive Radio”, Scott Seidel, 
Raytheon, presented at IEEE 802 Plenary, 18 July 2005. 
[20] T. 
R. 
Shields, 
"SDR 
Update," 
Global 
Standards 
Collaboration, Sophia Antipolis, France, Powerpoint 
Presentation GSC10_grsc3 (05)20, 2005. 
[21] R. W. Thomas, L. A. DaSilva and A. B. MacKenzie, 
"Cognitive networks," IEEE International Symposium on 
New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, 
November, 2005, pp. 352-360.  
[22] FDR 
Forum, 
Cognitive 
Radio 
Definitions 
and 
Nomenclature, Approved Document SDRF-06-P-0009-
V1.0.0, 10 September 2008. 
[23] C. N. Mathur and K. P. Subbalakshmi, “Security issues in 
cognitive radio networks”, Cognitive networks: towards 
self-aware networks. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd; 2007. 
[24] C. N. Mathur and K. P. Subbalakshmi, “Digital signatures 
for centralized DSA networks”, 4th IEEE conf. on 
consumer comm. and networking, 2007, pp. 1037–1041. 
[25] Y. B. Reddy, “Solving Hidden Terminal Problem in 
Cognitive 
Networks 
Using 
Cloud 
Application”, 
SENSORCOMM 2012, pp. 235-240.  
[26] Y. B. Reddy and S. Ellis, “Modeling Cognitive Radio 
Networks for Efficient Data Transfer Using Cloud Link”, 
ITNG 2013, April 2013, Las Vegas, USA.  
[27] M. Shahid and J. Kamruzzama, “Agile spectrum evacuation 
in 
cognitive 
radio 
networks”, 
IEEE 
international 
conference on communications (ICC), 2010, pp. 1–6. 
 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

