A New Cell Selection and Handover Approach in Heterogeneous LTE Networks 
Additional Criteria Based on Capacity Estimation and User Speed 
 
Edinaldo João Costa de La-Roque, Carlos Patrick Alves da Silva, Carlos Renato Lisboa Francês 
High Performance Networks Planning Laboratory – LPRAD 
Federal University of Pará - UFPA 
Belém, Brazil 
e-mail: {elaroque, patrickalves, rfrances}@ufpa.br 
 
 
Abstract–Long Term Evolution (LTE) heterogeneous networks 
represent an interesting approach to the ever increasing 
demand for coverage and Quality of Service (QoS) by the 
mobile users. Small cells play an important role in dealing with 
this demand by providing a means for the mobile user to 
overcome the problem of lack of mobile network resources or, 
when these resources are available, a way to dodge their poor 
quality in certain scenarios. However, the cell selection and 
handover procedures found in LTE Release 8 are inefficient in 
heterogeneous scenarios, since they are based only on 
Reference Symbol Received Power (RSRP) for cell selection 
and handover, and Reference Symbol Received Quality 
(RSRQ) for handover only parameters. In this paper, the 
implementation of two additional criteria is proposed as an 
improvement for the cell selection and handover procedures: 
base station capacity estimation and user speed. As the results 
show, the proposed algorithm has the benefit of contributing to 
the macrocell offloading, network load balancing, and user 
QoS. 
Keywords-LTE; Handover; Load Balancing; Capacity 
Estimation; User Speed. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The explosion in the use of mobile devices and 
applications in recent years has led to an overload of the 
network infrastructure responsible for handling this traffic 
flow, affecting both the network performance and the user 
experience. To meet this growing demand for more 
resources, Long Term Evolution (LTE) networks are 
introduced as a radio access solution that provides a smooth 
migration path to fourth generation networks (4G), being 
designed to increase the capacity, coverage and speed when 
compared to earlier wireless systems [1]. Meanwhile, the cell 
selection and handover processes of the 3GPP LTE Release 
8, which are based only on Reference Symbol Received 
Power (RSRP) and Reference Symbol Received Quality 
(RSRQ) [2], are inefficient because they ignore one of the 
main requirements demanded by the user, which is the 
Quality of Service (QoS) guarantee. 
This paper proposes the development of additional 
criteria for cell selection and handover procedures in order to 
improve load balancing and, as a consequence, the QoS for 
user applications, as well. The effectiveness of these criteria 
is based on the ability of the base stations to send both their 
utilization rate estimation and base station type. Also, both 
User Equipment (UE) for cell selection and base station 
(eNodeB) for handover should be able to compute the 
average user speed, as this is part of the algorithms proposed 
in this paper.  
The motivation that drives this research is the pursuit for 
alternative solutions for the problem of uneven load 
distribution over mobile networks, which leads to issues, 
such as call blocking and poor QoS, for example. Even 
though many studies have been carried out about this 
problem, our work brings one more contribution to the 
community by modeling a straightforward solution that 
results in macrocell offloading and network load balance by 
enabling low power nodes (picocells and femtocells) to take 
on  more traffic. 
In summary, our proposal has the objective of improving 
the overall system capacity, as well as reducing congestion 
by introducing a new cell selection and handover approach 
for LTE heterogeneous networks. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents some works that are related to the solution proposed 
in this paper. Section III introduces the basics of LTE 
networks with topics that are related to this paper. Section IV 
details the additional criteria proposed for our new cell 
selection and handover approach. Section V shows the main 
configurations adopted for the simulation environment used 
to validate and evaluate the proposed algorithm. In Section 
VI, results are discussed. Section VII presents the conclusion 
of the work, as well as points out to future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section presents some works relating to the 
objectives of this research. 
Becvar and Mach [3] presented an algorithm to mitigate 
the problem of redundant handovers to femtocells by 
estimation of throughput gain. It is stated in the paper that 
the gain in throughput is derived from the estimated 
evolution of the signals levels of all involved cells measured 
by the User Equipment (UE) and from an estimated time 
spent by the users in the Femtocell Access Point (FAP). The 
core of the proposed solution (estimation of throughput gain) 
seems to follow the idea of a kind of mapping of an RSRP 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

value to a Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) index 
value, which in turn would be translated into a maximum bit 
rate value that would be granted by a candidate eNodeB. The 
solution tries to promote user satisfaction by trying to 
provide throughput values as high as possible based on 
mitigation of redundant handovers to femtocells. 
The validation of the proposal is carried out by system 
level simulations in MATLAB [4]. 
Zhang et al. [5], whose paper is referenced by [3] 
mentioned above, proposed a new handover algorithm based 
on the UE speed and QoS with the purpose of reducing 
unnecessary handovers. 
As for the UE speed parameter, that solution classifies 
the speeds as: 
• 
Low mobile state (0 to 15 km/h); 
• 
Medium mobile state (15 to 30 km/h); 
• 
High mobile state (above 30 km/h). 
Thus, in the algorithm proposed, the handover decision 
process does not perform any handover to femtocells if the 
UE is in the high mobile state. If the UE is in the medium 
mobile state and the user application is not so sensitive to 
delay and packet loss, in contrast to applications like IPTV, 
VoIP, and real time games [5], then handover to femtocell is 
allowed. Finally, if the UE is in the low mobile state, 
handover to femtocell is performed. 
Further, regarding the QoS parameter, that proposal 
basically checks if the bandwidth requirement is satisfied in 
order to decide if a handover will be performed or not, 
mainly based on cell maximum capacity and its current load. 
No simulation tool was used for the validation of the 
proposal. 
Ulvan et al. [6] presented a handover decision policy 
based on mobility prediction, where the position of the UEs 
should be known in advance. The movement prediction of 
the UEs is based on Markov chain transition probabilities.  
Reactive and proactive handover strategies are proposed 
with the purpose of mitigating the frequent and unnecessary 
handovers in a heterogeneous mobile network scenario 
caused by the short coverage radius of femtocells. 
Basically, the proactive handover strategy tries to 
estimate the characteristics of a specific position before the 
UE reaches that position, and that information is used so that 
the system can decide if it triggers a handover process or not, 
before a normal handover takes place. According to the 
authors, this strategy is expected to minimize packet loss and 
high latency during handover. 
As for the reactive handover strategy, the handover 
procedure tends to be postponed as long as possible, even 
though a new candidate base station is discovered. The 
handover process is triggered only when the UE is almost 
losing the serving base station signal. According to the 
authors, this strategy is a potential mechanism to mitigate the 
unnecessary handovers. 
The results are based on MATLAB simulation. 
Compared to those works, ours promote both a relief on 
the network load on the system side and an improvement on 
the quality of service on behalf of the user by optimizing not 
only the handover procedure, but also the cell selection 
procedure, as well, by taking into account both base station 
capacity estimation and user speed.   
Our capacity estimation method is based on the average 
resource  availability within a period of time, as described in 
Section IV, while our UE speed calculation method is based 
on average speed in order to reduce the possibility that 
sudden shifts in UE speed may lead to a wrong cell selection 
and handover process decision making. Moreover, our 
solution uses a discrete event LTE simulator (OPNET 
Modeler), as described in Section V, which favors a more 
complete and realistic validation environment for the 
proposed algorithm. 
It is worth mentioning that the use of the OPNET 
Modeler 17.5.A (Educational Edition) [7] forced us to adopt 
LTE Release 8, instead of a more up-to-date version of the 
mobile environment specification, which, however,  does not 
affect the usefulness of our solution. 
In short, none of the related works take into consideration 
average base station capacity estimation and average user 
speed in conjunction, so that femtocells can be dealt with 
accordingly, since vehicular user speed is of special 
importance in avoiding LTE home base stations (HeNB) 
from being selected or handed over to, which may contribute 
to service degradation for femtocell users. So, in addition to 
dealing properly with short radius coverage femtocells, our 
solution gives preference to base stations that, by estimation, 
have more available bandwidth resources. 
 These two additional criteria, adopted as proposed in 
Section IV, promote better load balancing by avoiding 
overloaded base stations from being chosen, as well as by 
avoiding that outdoor high speed users drain network 
resources from HeNB users. The result is an improvement 
both in the distribution of network load and user QoS, as 
shown in Section VI. 
III. 
BACKGROUND 
This section presents the basics of LTE networks with 
the topics most related to the proposal of this work. 
A.  LTE Heterogeneous Networks 
According to Dahlman et al. [8], heterogeneous networks 
are a mix of cells that use different downlink transmit power, 
operating (partially) with the same set of carrier frequencies 
and with geographic coverage that overlaps, as shown in 
Figure 1, being also referred to as HetNets. A typical 
example is a picocell or a femtocell placed within the 
coverage area of a macrocell, as shown in Figure 1. As found 
in [9], in heterogeneous environment, UEs may move along 
the different access networks, benefitting from the different 
characteristics of each of them as coverage, bandwidth, 
latency, power consumption, costs, etc. Besides, according to 
4G Americas' Board of Governor [10], in LTE networks 
femtocells may be office or home stations, and in the latter 
case they are known as Home eNodeBs (HeNB). 
B. Cell Selection 
As found in [11], the cell selection mechanism 
determines the base station that provides service to a mobile 
station, and this process is executed whenever the mobile 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

station joins the network (cell selection) or when the mobile 
device moves around in idle mode (cell reselection), as 
illustrated in Figure 2. 
C. Handover 
As it can be understood from [9], handover is an essential 
mechanism that guarantees mobility in a LTE network and 
its main function is to keep traffic flowing as the UE moves 
along the network. The idea behind this is simple: when a 
UE loses radio coverage from the serving eNodeB as it 
draws near another eNodeB radio coverage, a new 
connection has to be established to this new base station and 
the connection with the old one has to be undone. Therefore, 
handover usually happens when the serving eNodeB signal 
deteriorates, causing poor communication quality between 
the UE and the network. 
Further, handover may be needed in order to promote 
network load balancing even if the current serving base 
station signal strength and quality are good. Other potential 
reasons to trigger a handover process is the need of the UE 
for better QoS, lower costs, more bandwidth, etc, which can 
cause the UE to search for base stations that offer better 
service conditions. 
D. Quality of Service (QoS) 
According to Sesia et al. [2], many applications may be 
running at the same time on the UE, each of them with its 
own QoS requirement. QoS is mainly about priority, packet 
delay, and packet loss error rate, in accordance with Table I. 
For instance, a UE may be on a Voice Over Internet Protocol  
(VoIP) phone call while navigating the Internet with a web 
browser and/or downloading files via File Transfer Protocol 
(FTP), all at the same time. While VoIP has more critical 
QoS requirements, such as delay and jitter, FTP file transfer 
requires a much lower packet loss error rate. 
With 
the 
purpose 
of 
supporting 
multiple 
QoS 
requirements, different Evolved Packet System (EPS) 
bearers - logical channels that are bound to specific QoS 
Class Identifiers (QCIs) - are configured in the system. These 
EPS bearers are classified into two categories: Guaranteed 
Bit Rate (GBR) bearers, used for applications like VoIP, to 
which resources are allocated by the network in a permanent 
fashion, usually performed by the admission control process 
of an eNodeB as long as there are available system resources 
to establish them, and Non-Guaranteed Bit Rate (Non-GBR) 
bearers, which do not guarantee any particular bit rate for 
user applications, no permanent allocation scheme, and they 
are more appropriate for best effort style services like 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and FTP. 
Still according to [2], every bearer has a QCI and an 
Allocation and Retention Priority (ARP) bound to it. The 
ARP parameter is used for admission control and it decides 
if a certain bearer should be admitted or not, and in the case 
it should, it is also used to decide if a lower priority level 
bearer should be dropped to make room for the new one in 
case of network congestion. 
According to Holma and Toskala [12], as part of the 
connection procedure of the UE to the network, an Internet 
Protocol (IP) address is assigned by the Packet Data Network 
Gateway (P-GW) to the UE and at least one bearer is 
established: the default bearer, which is always of Non-GBR 
type. 
This bearer remains established for all the time period of 
the connection to the Packet Data Network (PDN), and it has 
its initial values assigned by the Mobile Management Entity  
(MME), a component of the Evolved Packet Core (EPC). 
Meanwhile, additional bearers, known as dedicated bearers, 
may also be established at any moment during or after the 
connection process is accomplished. A dedicated bearer may 
be a GBR or Non-GBR one. 
E. Resource Allocation Mechanisms 
LTE radio access makes use of a set of technologies that 
assures high spectral efficiency (data capacity) in its wireless 
interface with the UE. The main technologies adopted by 
LTE features high data flow in the downlink direction [12]. 
LTE makes use of Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple 
Access (OFDMA) in the downlink direction, whereas Single 
Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access (SC-FDMA) is 
adopted in the uplink direction. These two technologies 
provide orthogonality for their subcarriers, thereby reducing 
interference, as well as improving network capacity. For 
LTE Release 8, the maximum bandwidth occupied in the 
frequency spectrum is 20 MHz. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Example of heterogeneous network [12] 
 
 
Figure 2. Cell selection and reselection [13] 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

TABLE I. LTE QCI TABLE, ADAPTED FROM [2,12] 
QCI 
Bearer 
Type 
Priority 
Packet 
Delay 
(ms) 
Packet 
Loss 
Error 
Rate 
Services 
1 
GBR 
2 
100 
10-2 
Voice conversation (VoIP) 
2 
4 
150 
10-3 
Video conversation (live 
streaming) 
3 
5 
300 
10-6 
Video without conversation 
(buffered streaming) 
4 
3 
50 
10-3 
Real time gaming 
5 
Non-
GBR 
1 
100 
10-6 
IMS Signaling 
6 
7 
10-3 
Voice, video (live 
streaming), and interactive 
gaming 
7 
6 
300 
10-6 
Video (buffered streaming) 
8 
8 
Applications based on TCP 
protocol like www, e-mail, 
chat, FTP, p2p file sharing, 
progressive video, etc. 
9 
9 
 
Resource allocation in frequency domain happens with a 
resolution of 180 KHz per Resource Block (RB) both in 
downlink and uplink directions. Each RB is composed of 12 
subcarriers with 15 KHz bandwidth each (15 KHz subcarrier 
spacing). That is, 1 RB = 12 subcarriers x 15 KHz = 180 
KHz, and it fits into a time slot duration of 0.5 ms, which is 
also equivalent to 1 Physical Resource Block (PRB). As 
found in [9], the resource allocation happens in every 
Transmit Time Interval (TTI), which corresponds to a pair of 
RBs (or PRBs) time interval of 1 ms. Thus, for the minimum 
allocated bandwidth of 1.4 MHz, 6 RBs are provided, while 
with the maximum allocated bandwidth of 20 MHz, 100 RBs 
are provided, reaching a maximum of up to 1,200 
subcarriers. Table II summarizes bandwidth capacities for 
LTE Release 8 [14]. 
The data throughput that can be obtained from RBs 
depends on the modulation scheme, which can be Quadrature 
Phase Shift Keying (QPSK), 16 levels Quadrature Amplitude 
Modulation (16QAM) or 64 levels Quadrature Amplitude 
Modulation (64QAM), as well as the channel coding rate. 
Regarding the coding rate, as the radio condition 
deteriorates, the system increases the coding rate thus 
reducing the allocated transport block size (TBS). 
Throughput also depends heavily on the number of 
antennas used to obtain independent transmission streams by 
using Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) schemes. It is 
worth noting that for MIMO operations, two other 
parameters are used, the Rank Indicator (RI) and the 
Precoding Matrix Index (PMI), which will not be covered 
here due to lack of space. 
In summary, for LTE Release 8 with a 20 MHz 
frequency division duplexing (FDD) bandwidth, it is 
possible to obtain a 150 Mbps data rate in the downlink 
direction when using MIMO 2x2. In the case of MIMO 4x4, 
LTE can provide up to 300 Mbps data rate. For the uplink 
direction, the peak data rate can reach up to 75 Mbps. 
 
TABLE II. OCCUPIED BANDWIDTH, ADAPTED FROM [14] 
Bandwidth (MHz) 
1.4 
3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
No. of RBs 
6 
15 
25 
50 
75 
100 
 
 
F. Physical Downlink Shared Channel (PDSCH) 
According to [2], the PDSCH is the main data-bearing 
downlink channel in LTE, and it is used for all user data, as 
well as for the broadcasting of system information. The 
PDSCH channel carries data in units known as Transport 
Blocks (TBs), each of them corresponding to one Protocol 
Data Unit (PDU) from the Medium Access Control (MAC) 
layer. The data transmission is done during the subframe 
duration of 1 ms, which corresponds to 1 TTI. When the 
PDSCH channel is used for data transmission, one or two 
TBs can be transmitted per UE per subframe. For details 
about the PDSCH channel, please refer to [2]. 
IV. 
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL CRITERIA 
This section presents the methodology adopted to 
perform user speed calculation and eNodeB capacity 
estimation, as well as it describes how cell selection and 
handover decision processes work, according to our 
proposed algorithm.  
A. Overview 
The purpose of the additional criteria is to promote a 
condition in which signal strength + quality and capacity 
availability, in certain proportions, may affect the cell 
selection and handover decision processes in such a way that 
preference may be given to the capacity availability 
parameter when choosing a serving cell, without sacrificing 
the connections quality. For that end, a weight of 25% for the 
signal strength + quality parameter against 75% for the 
capacity availability parameter is adopted. These weights (or 
proportions) 
were 
chosen 
from 
various 
empirical 
experiments and, then,  they were manually assigned. Please, 
notice that further investigation is suggested in Section VII 
regarding the adoption or development of a more elaborate 
calculation method for the weights. 
The proposed additional criteria have implied modifying 
the C++ source code of the UE and eNodeB models of the 
OPNET simulator at the LTE access stratum layer, where 
cell selection and handover events take place. 
As highlighted in the algorithm flowchart in Figure 3.a, 
the cell selection process had two more decision steps added: 
the check for UE average speed compatibility with candidate 
eNodeB type and the check for the enodeB with the highest 
capacity availability value. Regarding the handover process, 
as highlighted in Figure 3.b, two more steps were added: the 
check for UE average speed compatibility with candidate 
eNodeB type and the ranking of the capacity availability 
estimation value, as calculated from the PDSCH channel.  
B. UE Speed Calculation 
A software function and a data structure were created at 
the UE model to calculate user speed at 1s intervals, then 
storing the last 10 speed samples in UE´s memory. The 
Euclidean distance method was used to calculate the distance 
traveled (in meters) for every 1 second interval, based on the 
(x,y) coordinates variables present in the OPNET's 
development environment for each UE device model (in the 
real world, maybe GPS coordinates would be used).  
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
Figure 3. Flowchart of the proposed algorithm: (a) New proposed cell 
selection process run on UE; (b) New proposed handover process run on 
eNodeB 
 
Then, the speed is obtained by dividing the calculated 
distance by the time spent to travel it, resulting in a speed 
sample expressed in m/s. Then, the arithmetic mean is 
calculated to obtain the average speed for the last 10 second 
interval, and that is the UE speed adopted by our algorithm. 
Also, another software function was created to be 
invoked both by UE and eNodeB to calculate the average 
speed based on the last 10 speed samples stored on the 
mobile device. 
C. eNodeB Capacity Estimation via PDSCH Channel 
A software function and a data structure were created at 
the eNodeB model to calculate the available amount of 
bandwidth resources at the moment the eNodeB is 
assembling its radio subframes, which happens at 1 ms 
intervals (1 TTI). Basically, the calculation is based on the 
free system resources against the busy ones, as read from the 
PDSCH data channel. So, the last 6,000 samples (6 seconds 
of information) of this calculation are stored on the 
eNodeB´s memory and that happens for every eNodeB 
present on the network. So, at the moment a handover event 
is triggered, the serving eNodeB accesses this information 
from the candidate eNodeB and calculates the arithmetic 
mean of its available bandwidth resources for the last 6 
seconds, and that information is used to decide if a handover 
will happen or not. 
D. New Cell Selection and Handover Decision Processes 
Besides the highest RSRP value for cell selection and 
RSRP (50% weight) plus RSRQ (50% weight) normalized 
value for handover procedures, as adopted by LTE Release 
8, the proposed improvements in this paper takes into 
consideration UE average speed and eNodeB capacity 
estimation as calculated from PDSCH data traffic channel, as 
shown in the flowchart depicted in Figure 3. 
For the handover process, according to OPNET´s source 
code inspection, the RSRP and RSRQ weights are 
normalized and applied to the normalized measurements of 
the RSRP and RSRQ parameters, resulting in a priority index 
for each neighbor eNodeB. Then, the serving eNodeB will 
initiate handover to the eNodeB with the highest priority 
index. Thus, following this idea, the capacity estimation 
information is also assigned a weight of 75% against the 
25% weight for the eNodeB priority index (cell_pref_index 
in the flowchart) for handover. The purpose of assigning a 
75% weight for the capacity estimation value is to make the 
base station resource availability value to prevail over base 
station signal strength and signal quality values. Then, both 
capacity information and its corresponding weight are 
normalized together with the eNodeB priority index 
(cell_pref_index), 
resulting 
in 
a 
new 
index 
(new_cell_pref_index) which is more influenced by the 
eNodeB capacity estimation value than by the signal strength 
and signal quality values. Then,  this new index value is 
stored in the candidade eNodeB´s priority list for upper layer 
decision making relating to the handover process. 
Therefore, user speed and eNodeB capacity estimation 
additional criteria are used in the cell selection decision 
process in order to avoid any UE from selecting a femtocell 
whenever it is in vehicular speed (above 5 km/h, for 
example), as it will cause another almost immediate cell 
reselection or handover procedure to be invoked, since the 
UE will soon get far from the femtocell coverage radius. 
These information are also used to avoid the UE from being 
handed over to an overloaded eNodeB whenever possible. In 
conjunction, both user speed and capacity estimation 
parameters can improve network load balancing, as well as 
QoS for the mobile user. 
V. 
LTE SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT 
This section presents the configuration of the LTE 
network scenarios used for the purposes of this work. 
A. Simulated Scenarios 
In order to validate our algorithms, three scenarios with 
the same LTE simulation parameters, as depicted in Figure 4, 
as well as detailed in Table III, were deployed on the 
OPNET simulator, with the following characteristics: 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

• 
Baseline Scenario (REF): Reference LTE scenario 
based on the standard 3GPP Release 8 specification. 
• 
Capacity Algorithm Scenario (CAP): The same as 
the REF scenario, but with the capacity estimation 
algorithm enabled. 
• 
Capacity and Speed Algorithms Scenario (C&S): 
The same as the REF scenario, but with both the 
capacity and the user speed algorithms enabled. 
Figure 4 depicts the layout of the LTE network devices 
as configured in the simulator. 
As for the user devices, UEs are randomly dropped, with 
some of them strategically placed near small cells, which is 
the case for femtocell users (1 stationary UE per femtocell). 
The mobility profile used is random waypoint for 50 UEs 
with average pedestrian speed of 4.9 km/h and vehicular 
speed of 18 km/h. 
Regarding the network traffic load, 4 stationary UEs are 
placed near the macrocell coverage radius in order to 
maintain heavy load traffic on the macrocell (4 Mbit/s high 
quality videoconference and 1.6 Mbit/s on-demand traffic) 
with the purpose of making the algorithm to give preference 
to less overloaded base stations (small cells) against the 
overloaded macrocell. Besides, 6 UEs are configured with 
specific trajectory, forcing the crossing of the 3 femtocells 
coverage radius to guarantee femtocell traffic flow, as well 
as to test the user speed dependency behavior of the 
algorithm. 
Concerning the remaining user devices and their 
applications and QoS profile, 44 UEs run VoIP plus 3 UEs 
with VoIP and videoconference, all of them with bronze QoS 
class, 11 UEs run VoIP with silver class, and 2 UEs run 
VoIP and videoconference with gold class. On-demand 
traffic is configured as streaming multimedia of 1.6 Mbit/s in 
best effort mode and it is run bidirectionally between 2 UEs 
and the macrocell. 
 
 
TABLE III. LTE SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Macrocell 
Picocell 
Femtocell 
No. of Base Stations 
1 
3 
3 
No. of User Devices 
60 UEs Randomly Dropped 
No. of Femto Users 
N/A 
N/A 
3 
Antenna Gain 
15 dBi 
15 dBi 
15 dBi 
Max Tx Power 
31 dBm 
21 dBm 
18 dBm 
Base Station Radius 
250 m 
N/A 
10 m 
No. of Tx/Rx Antennas 
2 
1 
1 
Pathloss 
Outdoor to Indoor and 
Pedestrian Environment 
(ITU-R M.1225) 
UMi 
– 
Outdoor-
to-indoor 
(ITU-R 
M.2135) 
PHY Profile 
LTE 3 MHz FDD 
Handover Type 
Intra-Frequency 
Frequency Reuse 
1 (2.1 GHz Carrier) 
X2 Capability 
Enabled 
N/A 
eNodeB Selection Policy 
Best Suitable eNodeB 
UE Mobility 
Random Waypoint, trajectory, and fixed. 
UE Speed 
4.9 km/h and 18 km/h 
User Applications 
VoIP with PCM quality speech (64 
Kbit/s), high quality videoconference 
(4 Mbit/s), and on-demand traffic (1.6 
Mbit/s) . 
EPS Bearer 
Configuration 
Bronze (QCI=6): 44 UEs with VoIP 
and 
3 
UEs 
with 
VoIP 
and 
videoconference. Silver (QCI=4): 11 
UEs with VoIP, 2 of which with on-
demand traffic.  Gold: 2 UEs with 
VoIP and videoconference. 
Simulation Time 
150 s with warm up time of 90 s. 
 
The simulation time has the duration of 150 seconds, 
with a warm up time of 90 seconds approximately, resulting 
in an effective simulation time of about 60 seconds for 
results collection. This simulation time is due to hardware 
and software constraints when simulating this realistic heavy 
weight LTE setup, and it was used to guarantee a stable 
environment at runtime, since a huge amount of events were 
generated during each simulation run (about 60 million 
events per scenario). However, after extensive work on 
planning and deploying variations of the given scenarios on 
OPNET, we concluded that the 150 s simulation time does 
not compromise both the algorithms behavior and the results.  
B. Simulation Assumptions 
In this paper, it is assumed that macro and femtocells 
send their respective eNodeB types, even though we 
implement this behavior by means of memory variables 
which are shared between eNodeB and UE  devices. In 
conjunction with UE speed (vehicular or pedestrian), the 
eNodeB type is used to decide if a UE is allowed or not to 
connect to a HeNB. 
Also, since OPNET Modeler 17.5.A (Educational 
Edition), which was used for the simulations, does not have 
LTE femtocell models, eNodeB models were used with 
femtocell parameters, instead. 
Figure 4. OPNET LTE simulated scenario layout 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this paper, the cell selection and handover procedures 
were identified as key points to be worked on in order to 
enhance mobile network load balance and user QoS 
perception, as stated in Section I. So, as an improvement 
proposal, besides RSRP and RSRQ parameters, two 
additional criteria were introduced in Section IV: capacity 
estimation and user speed. Then, to validate the proposed 
solution, the algorithms depicted in Figure 3 were developed 
in C++ programming language and implemented on the 
OPNET discrete event simulator, as well as three LTE 
scenarios (REF, CAP, and C&S) were planned and deployed 
on the simulator both for testing and statistics collection. 
Thus, 
after 
extensive 
testing 
through 
multiple 
experiments performed in the realistic LTE simulation 
environment presented in Section V, the following metrics 
were chosen to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
algorithms: 
• 
LTE PHY PDSCH Utilization (%); 
• 
Total Admitted GBR Bearers; 
• 
Total Rejected GBR Bearers; 
• 
Downlink Dropped Packets/sec; 
• 
LTE Delay. 
The rest of this section presents the performance 
evaluation of the proposed solution. 
A. Network Load Balance 
From the PDSCH Utilization metric, which shows the 
percentage of the base stations resource utilization, as 
depicted in Figure 5.a, as well as numerically detailed in 
Tables IV and V, the load balance effect on the simulated 
network is clearly shown. 
 
 
TABLE IV – REF SCENARIO - LTE PHY PDSCH UTILIZATION (%) 
Base Station 
Minimum 
Average 
Maximum 
Std Dev 
Macro 
0.53603 
25.465 
45.059 
8.6903 
Pico3 
       
0.37603         
2.391 
7.756 
1.6539 
Femto1 
0.37603 
1.937 
6.572 
1.6153 
Femto3 
0.35826 
1.657 
4.218 
1.0533 
Femto2 
0.35826 
1.380 
3.969 
0.9652 
Pico1 
0.35826 
1.002 
3.689 
0.8392 
Pico2 
0.35826 
0.749 
2.828 
0.6769 
 
TABLE V – C&S SCENARIO - LTE PHY PDSCH UTILIZATION (%) 
Base Station 
Minimum 
Average 
Maximum 
Std Dev 
Pico1 
0.47758 
9.8548 
37.542 
10.136 
Pico3 
0.37603 
5.3946 
16.077 
3.830 
Macro 
0.53603 
4.4292 
11.908 
2.426 
Femto3 
0.35826 
2.9768 
11.703 
2.719 
Pico2 
0.42525 
2.8224 
6.273 
1.279 
Femto1 
0.37603 
2.0015 
9.813 
1.706 
Femto2 
0.35826 
1.8528 
4.964 
1.258 
 
Figure 5.a reveals that the low power base stations 
(picocells and femtocells) are underutilized, while the 
macrocell takes on most of the network traffic in the REF 
scenario (standard behavior in LTE Rel-8). In contrast, in the 
C&S scenario (with the proposed algorithms implemented), 
the network traffic is offloaded from the macrocell to the low 
power base stations, indicating a more efficient load 
distribution among all the base stations.  From Tables IV and 
V, for example, it can be seen that the macrocell had its 
average resource utilization decreased from 25.46 % (REF 
scenario) to 4.43 % (C&S scenario), which, for this specific 
case, represents a significant relief for the macrocell, which 
will have more available bandwidth for better serving UEs. 
Figure 5.b highlights the macrocell traffic offloading, 
while the curves in Figure 5.c give an idea about the user 
speed influence on the cell selection and handover processes. 
Figure 5. Load balancing effect of the proposed algorithm: (a) Network load balancing 3D visual effect; 
(b) Macrocell offloading effect; (c) Femto1 PDSCH utilization algorithms comparison 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

B. QoS Improvement 
In LTE networks, the QoS guarantee for user 
applications is managed by the use of different EPS bearer 
types, as explained in Section III, item D, and it is mainly 
about priority, packet delay, and packet loss error rate, as 
shown in Table I. So, the higher the priority, as well as the 
lower the packet loss and the lower the network delay, the 
better the user QoS level. 
Thus, the behavior of EPS bearers, dropped packet rate, 
and delay metrics is herein presented as an evidence of user 
QoS perception, as follows. 
 
1) Total Admitted GBR Bearers and Total Rejected GBR 
Bearers 
By inspecting Table VI, some conclusions can be drawn: 
• 
There was an increase of 24.62 % (788 against 
982 total bearers) in the admittance of GBR 
bearers, when comparing REF and C&S 
scenarios, which is an indication of QoS level 
improvement. 
• 
There was a huge decrease in the rejection of 
GBR bearers (19,338 bearers from the REF 
scenario against 653 bearers from the C&S 
scenario), which is another indication of QoS 
level improvement. 
• 
The huge amounts of EPS bearers (6,253, 
19,338, and 26,628 bearers in the summation 
columns), appearing in the REF and CAP 
scenarios, are partially due to the excessive 
number of tries to establish connections to short 
coverage radius base stations (femtocells). An 
evidence of this is the lack of the user speed 
algorithm in the REF and CAP scenarios. 
 
TABLE VI - GUARANTEED BIT RATE BEARERS 
 
Scenarios 
 
Total Admitted GBR 
Bearers 
Total Rejected GBR 
Bearers 
Base 
Station 
REF 
CAP 
C&S 
REF 
CAP 
C&S 
Macro 
434 
5,355 
560 
495 
24,975 
275 
Pico1 
170 
189 
152 
17,204 
9 
14 
Pico2 
44 
209 
135 
860 
350 
0 
Pico3 
0 
65 
35 
0 
0 
9 
Femto1 
0 
14 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Femto2 
135 
377 
65 
779 
1,175 
350 
Femto3 
5 
44 
35 
0 
119 
5 
Total 
788 
6,253 
982 
19,338 
26,628 
653 
 
Figure 6 simplifies the analysis on the user QoS 
improvement evidence, where the best QoS case is 
highlighted, as shown in the graphics region corresponding 
to the C&S scenario, where both capacity estimation and 
user speed algorithms are enabled, promoting the benefit of 
an overall performance improvement of the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The best QoS case is the region where 982 admitted 
GBR bearers meet 653 rejected GBR bearers, as highlighted 
in Figure 6. 
 
2) Downlink Dropped Packets/sec 
Table VII summarizes the packet loss rate for the three 
simulated scenarios, where it can be verified that there was a 
decrease of 25.35 % in the downlink packet loss rate when 
comparing the summations of REF and CAP scenarios, 
against a decrease of 24.46 % when comparing the 
summations of REF and C&S scenarios. 
In contrast to the admitted GBR bearers versus the 
rejected GBR bearers analysis, conducted in B.1, where 
capacity 
estimation 
and 
user 
speed 
algorithms 
in 
conjunction were responsible for an optimum result (best 
QoS case), the  results in Table VII indicate that the 
capacity estimation algorithm enabled both in CAP and 
C&S scenarios was indeed the responsible for the decrease 
in packet loss error rate, while the user speed algorithm 
showed a small influence of 0.89 % on this metric. 
 
TABLE VII - DOWNLINK DROPPED PACKETS/SEC 
 
Scenarios 
Base Station 
REF 
CAP 
C&S 
Macro 
2,945.90 
320.68 
511.55 
Pico1 
17.80 
726.67 
575.01 
Pico2 
12.50 
544.91 
475.89 
Pico3 
96.80 
717.15 
637.54 
Femto1 
55.00 
105.97 
128.78 
Femto2 
75.40 
95.11 
132.11 
Femto3 
64.50 
96.49 
164.85 
Total 
3,267.90 
2,606.98 
2,625.73 
 
3) LTE Delay 
Table VIII summarizes the LTE delay, which is the delay 
of all the traffic that flows between eNodeBs and UEs 
arriving at the LTE layer. 
The data show that a better result was achieved with the 
CAP scenario (capacity estimation algorithm only), which 
presented an LTE delay of 1.87 seconds, against the result of 
2.87 seconds for the C&S scenario (both capacity estimation
Figure 6. Best QoS case 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

TABLE VIII - LTE DELAY (IN SECONDS) 
 
Scenarios 
Base Station 
REF 
CAP 
C&S 
Macro 
3.54 
1.20 
1.83 
Pico1 
0.08 
0.16 
0.11 
Pico2 
0.09 
0.08 
0.12 
Pico3 
0.14 
0.09 
0.15 
Femto1 
0.38 
0.11 
0.38 
Femto2 
0.09 
0.09 
0.09 
Femto3 
0.10 
0.14 
0.16 
Total 
4.42 
1.87 
2.84 
 
and user speed algorithms enabled). However, considering 
the overall system performance, as well as the other already 
presented metrics, the LTE delay of 2.84 seconds found in 
the C&S scenario still represents a significant reduction of 
55.63 % (4.42 s against 2.84 s) in the LTE delay. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This section summarizes the impact of our algorithms on 
the simulated LTE network, as well as give directions for 
future work. 
The simulation results, with the adoption of the 
developed algorithms proposed here, showed that significant 
load balancing gains, as well as user QoS improvement can 
be achieved if the two additional criteria are adopted. 
The load balancing effect of our algorithm is based on 
the adoption of these two additional criteria in conjunction: 
user speed to avoid short radius cells to be selected when 
user is in vehicular speed (moving too fast to benefit from a 
HeNB connection), as well as eNodeB capacity estimation to 
avoid overloaded base stations from being selected. As a 
consequence, QoS improvement can be achieved with our 
proposed solution, since the macrocell is freer to accept 
connections from more users. Also, femtocell users will not 
be impacted by users in vehicular speeds, which makes their 
home femtocells more available to themselves, while 
picocell take on more traffic load, despite of their low 
transmit power when compared to the macrocell. 
It was demonstrated that the small cells took on more 
traffic flow, since the small cell users could benefit from 
higher modulation orders, such as 64QAM (and hence higher 
throughput values) for being closer to a base station with 
higher probability of good radio link quality. Besides, users 
that are closer to macrocell had more available resources at 
their disposal. 
Femtocells had their workloads reduced mainly due to 
the user speed check algorithm, which caused vehicular users 
not to “notice” the presence of femtocells on the network. 
This could be seen from the reduced number of admitted 
GBR bearers, when the C&S scenario (capacity estimation + 
speed check algorithms) was compared to the REF scenario. 
As future work suggestions, it is desirable to: 
• 
Endeavour a deeper study on the weights 
calculation method used both for RSRP/RSRQ and 
capacity estimation value, so that load balancing 
effect can be fine tuned. 
• 
Have a more detailed insight on the effect of 
outdoor UE speed on the quality of mobile service 
for the indoor femtocell users. 
• 
Experiment with different path loss models and 
longer distances. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by National Council for 
the Improvement of Higher Education (CAPES), Federal 
University of Pará (UFPA), and Postgraduate Programme in 
Computer Science (PPGCC) at UFPA, Brazil. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Lin, K. Sandrasegaran, H. A. M. Ramli, and R. Basukala, 
"Optimized Performance Evaluation of LTE Hard Handover 
Algorithm with Average RSRP Constraint", International Journal of 
Wireless & Mobile Networks, Vol.3, No. 2, 2011, pp. 1-16. 
[2] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, “LTE – The UMTS Long Term 
Evolution: From Theory to Practice”. 2ed. United Kingdom: John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2011. 
[3] Z. Becvar and P. Mach, “Mitigation of redundant handovers to 
femtocells by estimation of throughput gain”, Mobile Information 
Systems 9, 2013, pp. 315-330. 
[4] MATLAB - The Language of Technical Computing. Available at 
http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/index-b.html. 
[Retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[5] H. Zhang, X. Wen, B. Wang, W. Zheng, and Y. Sun, “A Novel 
Handover Mechanism between Femtocell and Macrocell for LTE 
based Networks”, IEEE Second International Conference on 
Communication Software and Networks, 2010, pp. 228-231. 
[6] A. Ulvan, R. Bestak, and M. Ulvan, "Handover Scenario and 
Procedure in LTE-based Femtocell Networks", UBICOMM 2010, 
The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous 
Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies, 2010, pp. 213-218. 
[7] Riverbed Modeler - The fastest discrete event-simulation engine for 
analyzing and designing communication networks. Available at 
http://www.riverbed.com/products/performance-management-
control/network-performance-management/network-simulation.html. 
[Retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[8] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Sköld, “4G LTE/LTE-Advanced for 
Mobile Broadband”, United States of America: Academic Press, 
2011. 
[9] T. Ali-Yahiya, “Understanding LTE and its Performance”, France: 
Springer, 2011. 
[10] 4G Americas' Board of Governor, “Mobile Broadband Explosion: 
The 3GPP Wireless Evolution”, Electronic Publication, August 2013. 
Available 
at 
http://www.4gamericas.org/en/resources/white-
papers/2013/. [Retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[11] D. Amzallag, R. Bar-Yehuda, D. Raz, and G. Scalosub, "Cell 
Selection in 4G Cellular Networks", Mobile Computing, IEEE 
Transactions on (Volume:12,  Issue: 7), 2013, pp. 1443-1455. 
[12] H. Holma and A. Toskala, “LTE for UMTS: Evolution to LTE-
Advanced”, 2ed. Nokia Siemens Networks, Finland: John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd., 2011. 
[13] Apparatus 
and 
Methods 
of 
Cell 
Reselection 
in 
Wireless 
Communication 
System. 
Available 
at 
http://www.strutpatent.com/patent/08200232/apparatus-and-method-
of-cell-reselection-in-wireless-communication-system#!prettyPhoto. 
[Retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[14] A. M. Ghaleb, D. Chieng, A. Ting, and A. Abdulkafi, “Throughput 
Performance Insights of LTE Release 8: Malaysia's Perspective”, 
Wireless Communication Cluster, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia, IEEE, 
2013, pp. 258-163. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

