Driver Assistance System Towards Overtaking in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
Antonio S. S. Vieira, Joaquim Celestino Jr.
State University of Ceara (UECE)
Computer Networks and
Security Laboratory (LARCES)
Fortaleza, Ceara
Email: {sergiosviera, celestino}@larces.uece.br
Ahmed Patel, Mona Taghavi
Faculty of Information Science and Technology
University Kebangsaan Malaysia
Software Technology and
Management Research Center (SOFTEM)
Selangor, Malaysia
Email:{winchat2010, mona.taghavi}@gmail.com
Abstract—The large number of accidents caused by unsuccess-
ful motor vehicle overtaking manoeuvres on roads is a signiﬁcant
problem with much public debate and concerns. In addition, one
accident might cause another follow on accident when there is
no signalling/reporting of it occurring, thus causing obstructions
and further accidents in the vicinity. This can seriously affect
the trafﬁc ﬂows, generating trafﬁc jams and sometimes resulting
in more unwarranted accidents, which can be avoided with the
application of technology. The emergence of wireless ad hoc and
sensor technologies and their adoption in vehicular networks can
provide smart solutions to mitigate the probability of accidents
and avoidance of dangerous trafﬁc ﬂow situations. This paper
presents some important concepts for an application development
to assist the driver in overtaking manoeuvres with prior knowl-
edge of oncoming trafﬁc, even when the road curvature has blind
spots. In order to do that, the application must indicate whether
it is safe or not to perform the overtaking manoeuvre. To propose
this application, concepts of kinematics techniques are used to
model the overtaking manoeuvres and the successful simulation
results show this technique to be promising as expounded in this
paper.
Keywords-Driver Assistance System; Overtaking; VANET;
Kinematics
I. INTRODUCTION
Vehicular Ad Hoc Network (VANET) [1] is a new mobile
communication system which promises many possibilities for
a new range of applications in road trafﬁc systems. Although
VANETs are a newly introduced breed of innovative network
concepts and technology application, many articles have been
published about them, mainly from the point of view of
safety applications [2], entertainment [3] and driver assistance
applications [4].
These kind of applications can facilitate the human environ-
ment interaction in avoiding unwarranted mishaps/accidents.
The driver assistance applications may be used, for example,
to ﬁnd parking spaces [5] and report on car accidents [6].
In the entertainment area, the human environment interaction
application can quickly conﬁgure and harness players within
a vicinity to join a multi-player on-line game [7].
In this paper, we present a driver assistance system for over-
taking using VANET. We analyse the overtaking behaviour
scenarios found in the literature [8] in order to capture our
fundamental requirements to deﬁne our proposed maneuvering
and overtaking model based on kinematic principles. This
model decides through various algorithmic conditions when
the overtaking manoeuvre is safe to be performed by a driver.
This analysis is a very important cornerstone for designing a
smart overtaking assistant, and it is the starting point of the
ﬁrst step for a complete and comprehensive VANET Driver
Assistance System (VANET-DAS).
We also propose an intelligent message transmission tech-
nique in order not to overload the transmission medium since
time is of the essence in VANET-DAS real-time activities
with very tight threshold conditions and values. The decision-
making for overtaking and maneuvering must be performed
only in a real situation and the application must be able to
identify a real overtaking situation as and when the events
unfold. We also developed a rapid report message protocol
which exchanges coordinates within the VANET vicinity for
the surrounding vehicles to be context-aware of what is
happening in a near instantaneous manner.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II discusses the related work, Section III gives the theoretical
analysis of the overviews the overtaking manoeuvre scenarios,
Section IV describes the message broadcast system used
by the applications within the VANET-DAS. In Section V,
the experimental environment and the simulations results are
presented and discussed; and ﬁnally, the conclusion and future
works are given in the last section.
II. RELATED WORK
Nowadays, there are several proposed vehicular ad hoc
network applications for safer driving and road trafﬁc man-
agement, particularly concerning overtaking [9][10][11]. How-
ever, most of them related to overtaking do not consider the
entire overtaking and maneuvering process. These applications
mainly focuses on vehicular lane changing process, which in
our work we regard as one of the many phases in an overtaking
manoeuvre. Besides, not all of these related works do this in
VANET environments.
Toledo et al. [9] developed a federated cooperative system
to assist in overtaking on a cellular network. The overtaking
is predicted after passing through ﬁlters that have applied
kinematic information based on the vehicles and road topology
format. The main purpose of Toledo’s work is to estimate the
risk in the overtaking manoeuvre. Similarly, our work also
uses kinematics to predict a favourable overtaking manoeuvre
situation, but with much more precision an explicitly in
VANET environments and scenarios.
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The main advantage of using VANET is that it can be
formed either with or without physical infrastructure other
than the air waves and frequency spectrum. Furthermore, in
the application developed [9], vehicles exchange messages
so that the manoeuvre can be authorized to be safe. During
this operation many problems can arise such as sending
replying messages transfer/transmission failure; lost message
updates due to time-outs and vehicle trafﬁc reconﬁguration;
loss of vehicle identiﬁcation; and lack of updated management
information about the VANET vicinity area in question. In this
developed application, the messages are transmitted through
broadcasting in a non-periodic manner and also when there is
a change in the speed of the vehicle.
Ruder et al. [10] developed a system using wireless sensors
in vehicles to assist the lane changing process in overtaking
manoeuvres. The overtaking model in this system considers
two lanes ﬂowing in the same direction and an approximat-
ing vehicle system algorithm developed for predicting safe
versus unsafe overtaking manoeuvres. Different from Rude’s
approach, we developed a coordinated positioning message
broadcast protocol among the vehicles without the use of
approximating wireless sensors. In our proposed VANET-
DAS, there is the advantage of knowing the position of
adjacent vehicles in advance even if they are a relatively long
distance away since distance is deﬁned by the transmission
range.
Hrri et al. [11] developed an overtaking maneuvering ap-
plication system which handles three different ways of area
information recording and maintenance:
1) Constant Degree Detection: Every node tries to keep a
constant number of neighbours. When a node detects
that a neighbour actually left its neighbourhood, it tries
to acquire new neighbours by sending a small advertis-
ing message.
2) Implicit Detection: A node i entering node j′s trans-
mission range has a high probability to have a common
neighbour with j.
3) Adaptive Coverage Detection: Every node sends an
advertising message when it has moved a distance equal
to a part of its transmission range.
In our proposed VANET-DAS, we developed a modiﬁed
version of the Adaptive Coverage Detection technique. In Hrris
scheme [11], it works by sending area messages reports at each
2
3 (two thirds) [11] of the transmission range from the focal
point. In our VANET-DAS version, the application checks in
advance if an updated positioning message is necessary to
be sent while comparing the real distance travelled and the
predicted one. The calculations of the predicted distance is
based on the last positioning message sent.
III. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND ANALYSIS
According to Olsen [12], a lane change is deﬁned as a
deliberate and substantial shift in the lateral position of a
vehicle, that is, when the vehicle leaves its original lane to
manoeuvre towards another lane. According to Winsum et
al. [13], a lane change happens in three sequential phases,
considering the direction of the vehicle:
1) In the ﬁrst phase, the car’s steering wheel is turned to
a maximum angle so that car can perform the the lane
change.
2) The second phase starts when the wheel is turned in
the opposite direction and ends when that angle reaches
zero (always ahead).
3) During the third phase, the steering wheel is turned to
a maximum angle in the opposite direction to establish
the vehicle in the former lane.
Given the above deﬁnitions we can conclude that at least a
minimum of two lane changes are involved in an overtaking
manoeuvre. The ﬁrst one shifts to one side to avoid colliding
with the vehicle straight in front of it and the second one
returns to the car’s original lane.
According to Hegeman et al. [8] and Wilson et al. [14], an
overtaking manoeuvre can be classiﬁed as:
1) Normal: The overtaker follows a vehicle and waits for a
safe sufﬁcient gap to perform an overtaking manoeuvre.
2) Flying: The overtaker does not adjust its speed to the
speed of the vehicle that is to be overtaken but continues
at its current speed during the overtaking manoeuvre.
3) Piggy backing: The overtaking vehicle follows another
vehicle that overtakes a slower vehicle.
4) 2+: The overtaker performs the overtaking manoeuvre
of two or more vehicles.
In our VANET-DAS, the overtaking scheme is based on the
ﬂying overtaking method. In the ﬂying overtaking method (see
Figure 1), the overtaking vehicle is travelling faster than the
vehicle (leader) being overtaken. The faster vehicle changes
lane, passes the leader and returns to its original lane without
changing its speed except to ensure any distant vehicle coming
from the opposite direction has sufﬁcient distance to travel to
avoid a collision (accident).
Figure 1.
Overtaking using ﬂying method
A. Kinematic-based Decision-Making
The overtaking decision takes into account the various com-
binations of collision possibilities with surrounding vehicles.
That is, there is an appropriate and inappropriate scenario
for performing the overtaking when the manoeuvre should or
should not be performed according to a set of safety measures
and criteria. Two characteristics of surrounding cars must be
identiﬁed:
1) Position: The current position of the vehicle.
2) Mobility: The direction and speed of the vehicle.
The ﬁrst characteristic, position, allows us to obtain a brief
view on the network topology of the surrounding cars. In the
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

second characteristic, mobility, it is possible to go beyond
the area knowledge of the topology, so that a network actor
can predict a more precise topology conﬁguration with more
detailed information.
The task of mobility prediction is a challenge that has been
solved through several techniques over time:
1) Adaptive Strategy: The predictions are corrected at the
end of the average predictability interval.
2) Reactive Strategy: The node notiﬁes the neighbourhood
when a criterion changed (maximum predicting error).
Hrri et al. [11] details the evolution of such mobility pre-
diction techniques and presents several schemes/models which
are currently used nowadays in overtaking and maneuvering
vehicle transport systems.
1) Deterministic Models: Only considers the position and
a ﬁxed velocity.
2) Stochastic Models: They do not aim at obtaining an
exact prediction, but rather a correct one with high
probability.
In our VANET-DAS, the trajectory of the car is obtained
through a deterministic model, which is basically ﬁrst order
kinetics. Our application, having knowledge of a car, at the
time (t), and in the present position (x,y) can show the vehicles
future position using (1) [11].
Posi(t) =
 xi + vi
x.t
yi + vi
y.t

(1)
This equation (1) calculates the distance between a vehicle
and every other surrounding vehicle in the vicinity at an
arbitrary time t, as given in (2):
Dij
= Dji
= ∥Posj(t) − Posi(t)∥
(2)
The development of a high mathematical ﬁdelity model can
be very complex, depending on the various variables/coefﬁ-
cients involved, such as speed, acceleration, air resistance,
weather condition, road condition, other drivers behaviour
patters and the driver’s reaction time. In a real, practical,
overtaking manoeuvre scenario, several factors must be con-
sidered. In our work we focus on a few essential variables
and conditions namely, position and mobility, resulting in a
simpliﬁed model but with equally valid outcomes.
The scenario in which the overtaking model was developed
involved three vehicles, C1, C2 and C3 as shown in Figure 2.
(x1, y1)
(x2, y2)
(x3, y3)
Figure 2.
Scenario used in the simpliﬁed overtaking model
C1 is travelling faster than the speed of C2 and C3, and
their individual speeds are non-zero values. Looking at Figure
2, q, w and e are constants, and given the relative speeds, they
refer to the safe distances of the respective vehicles, while
h refers to the average length of an arbitrary vehicle. The
current position of each vehicle is typically represented by
(xi, yi) as shown in Figure 2 and their velocity is represented
by (vxi, vyi), with the index i identifying each vehicle.
For overtaking decision making, it is necessary to calculate
the travelled distance of the whole overtaking manoeuvre. At
the end of the manoeuvre, the current car position is validated
for its position and veriﬁed to identify if the manoeuvre can
take place successfully within the time constraints or threshold
value bounds.
As previously mentioned, in the ﬂying model, the vehi-
cle does not accelerate for overtaking, although in practice
this would be deemed necessary if either the vehicle being
overtaken decides to accelerate or the oncoming vehicle is
travelling faster than expected/predicted. In our scenario, the
overtaking car has a higher maximum speed than the leader
and performs the overtaking manoeuvre with a constant speed.
The manoeuvre itself is performed in two stages.
First Stage: there are four steps in this stage. The ﬁrst
step is when the C1 vehicle is behind the leader and its ﬁrst
manoeuvre is positioning itself to perform lane shifting as they
travel in tandem. In other words, it must travel l distance on
y-axis in a somewhat diagonal lane shift manoeuvre as shown
in Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Distance travelled on lane shift
The second step is to move up for overtaking, C1 needs
to rotate the vehicle steering wheel making a relative angle
θ between the wheels and the x-axis as shown in Figure 4.
The vehicle drifts to shift into the adjacent lane. Knowing
this information, the velocity components vc1
x
and vc1
y
are
calculated using equations 3 and 4 respectively:
Figure 4.
Angle between the wheels and x-axis on lane shift
vc1
x
= vc1 · cos(θ)
(3)
vc1
y
= vc1 · sin(θ)
(4)
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The 3rd step is to calculate the time (t1) and distance
travelled (s1) by C1 during the lane shift. This is calculated
using 5 and 6 respectively:
t1
=
l
vc1
y
(5)
s1
= vc1
x · t1
(6)
In the ﬁnal step, it is necessary to calculate the remaining
C1 vehicle’s distance (r) so that the C1 vehicle’s front is
paired with the C2 vehicle’s back as shown in Figure 5. This
is calculated using 5.
Figure 5.
Remaining distance of C1 so that C1’s front is paired with the
back of C2
r = ∥Posc2(t1) − Posc1(t1)∥ − h
(7)
Second Stage: C1 must pass C2. In order to achieve this,
C1 has to travel a minimum of 2 · r + 2 · h distance as shown
in Figure 6.
Figure 6.
Distance travelled by C1 to safely pass C2
The time spent in the second stage overtaking manoeuvre
(t3) is calculated using (8):
t3 = 2 · r + 2 · h
∥⃗vc1 − ⃗vc2∥
(8)
and the travelled distance (s3) is calculated using 9:
s3 = ⃗
vc1 × t3
(9)
For C1 to return to its original lane side, the same values are
used (time and travelled distance) that are calculated during
the ﬁrst stage overtaking manoeuvre move (Figure 7).
After obtaining s1 and s3, the total travelled distance by
C1 during the overtaking manoeuvre is calculated by using
st = 2 · s1 + s3.
To check if the overtaking can be performed safely, the time
must be calculated so that C1 will be in a safe position with
Figure 7.
Travelled distance for C1 returns to its original lane
Figure 8.
Desired position of C1 after it complete the whole overtaking
manoeuvre
sufﬁcient leeway to move into the original side of its lane with
a drift of θ degrees as shown in Figure 8.
To achieve this drifting position in a safe manner with
collision avoidance, the following equation (10) must be
solved:
t4 = ∥Posc2(0) − Posc3(0)∥ − w − h − e
∥ ⃗
vc2 + ⃗
vc3∥
(10)
such that the distance travelled by vehicle C1 is calculated
(s4) during the overtaking manoeuvre in t4 seconds.
For making the kinematic-decision for safe collision-free
overtaking manoeuvre, st and s4 are compared. If the st value
is lower than the s4 value, overtaking is allowed to proceed
safely within the threshold bounded values of all the other
related variables/parameters.
B. Overtaking Situation Detection
The detection of the overtaking situation is important in
our VANET-DAS. It is a trigger for the calculating process
to validly detect the overtaking situation using the kinematic
decision-making principle based on three conditions:
1) Overtaking intention.
2) Passing vehicle is really behind the leader at a safe
distance.
3) Check if the vehicles are travelling in the same direction.
The ﬁrst condition refers to the overtaking intention value
represented by γ (gamma). For each vehicle in our VANET-
DAS, there is an associated value for the overtaking intention
over a period of time. The γ value is represented by a real
number in the interval [0, 1], where 0 denotes null overtaking
intention and 1 denotes maximum overtaking intention.
A vehicle overtaking intention γi at time t is calculated
using (11).
γi(t) =
E
Dij(t) + E
(11)
where Dij(t) refers to the distance of vehicle i to the closest
vehicle j and E refers to the sum of the safety distances q
and the length h of a vehicle, in other words, E = q + h.
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 9.
Range of values for overtaking intention
This condition is true when
E
E+E ≤ γ ≤
E
h+E holds, and it is
equal to the line in bold represented in 9.
When the vehicle i is at a safety distance of E meters from
vehicle j, the overtaking intention will be
E
E+E =
E
2E = 0.5
and when i is at h meters of j the overtaking intention will
be the maximum safety limit allowable. For example, when
when h = 8.0 and q = 33.3, γ =
33.3+8.0
8.0+33.3+8.0 = 0.83.
The second condition is used to ensure that the overtaking
is really behind the leader at a relatively safe distance. For
this condition, it is necessary to calculate the angle between
the vehicles as shown in Figure 10.
Figure 10.
Angle between direction vector of j and vector w
In Figure 10, ⃗u and ⃗v are positioning vectors of vehicles i
and j respectively and ⃗w (vector difference) is derived from
⃗w = ⃗u−⃗v. Therefore, to ensure that vehicle i is behind vehicle
j, the angle between ⃗w and ⃗d should be in the 90 to 270 degree
range, i.e., 90 ≤ θ ≤ 270.
The third (last ﬁnal) condition is used to check if the vehicle
i and j are travelling in the same direction. For this condition,
it is sufﬁcient to check the angle between the direction vectors
of i and j as illustrated in 11.
Figure 11.
Angle between vector direction of vehicle i and j
If the angle between direction vectors of i and j is between
the interval [θ, 360 − θ], as shown in Figure 12, the last
condition is satisﬁed.
Finally, it can be stated that if all three of the above
mentioned conditions are fulﬁlled, then a valid safe overtaking
maneuvering situation holds true.
Figure 12.
Interval for identifying when two vehicles are travelling in same
direction.
C. Positioning Messages
In a vehicular safety application in a VANET environ-
ment, the message exchange among vehicles is an important
operation, which itself must be very explicit to avoid any
misrepresentations and misinterpretations. Each device within
the vehicle must be able to predict a safe situation for an
overtaking move. For this to happen without overloading the
network with unnecessary network transmission trafﬁc, it is
necessary to ensure that the transmission medium is used in a
smart and efﬁcient manner. In other words, the application
should use the transmission medium only when necessary
within very stringent/tight command and response round-trip
delay threshold value bounds. For this, we are using a scheme
in which the predicted position is compared periodically to the
real-life position. If there is a signiﬁcant difference between
these values, a new message is broadcasted to all surrounding
vehicles with in its vicinity range.
When a vehicle is moving, the distance to be covered before
broadcasting a mobility message (since vehicles are typically
dynamically moving) is deﬁned how
2
3 (two thirds) of the
transmission range. With this distance and the vehicle speed,
one can easily predict the time during which a new broadcast
should be performed (that is predicting t). The interval between
the initial time and the predicted time is divided into seven
equal time intervals as shown in Figure 13.
Figure 13.
Intervals of time for checking if it is necessary to send a new
positioning message.
After each interval ti, a comparison between each vehicle’s
real position (Pa) and its predicted position (Pp) is performed,
and if the absolute difference between Pa and Pp is greater
than a sufﬁciently small value, ϵ (epsilon, ϵ = 0.5), a new
message is broadcasted to all the vehicles in the vicinity.
This scheme of the broadcasting method has been devised to
ensure that our VANET-DAS does not broadcast unnecessary
messages by consuming transmission and device processing
capacities. In overall system and network management terms
remain efﬁcient within the constraints of the dynamic real-time
environment of a VANET.
IV. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
The experiments were performed using Network Simulator
ns2, version 2.34 [15] using an Intel Core i3 CPU 2.13 GHz
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

computer with GNU-Linux Ubuntu 11.04 [16]. Our VANET-
DAS application was modelled and developed as a set of
mobile agents to reﬂect the vehicles in a transport environment
as shown in Figure 14. Each device in then simulation used
Nakagami propagation model [17] and 1, 000m transmission
range.
Figure 14.
Simulated real-life like environment
The surrounding vehicles data is stored in an optimized
table-lookup data structures, which provide both rapid searchs
and update using C++ programming with the Standard Tem-
plate Library (STL) [18] functions for it.
The mobile agents representing the vehicles (devices of
a VANET) were established through a common higher-level
controlling meta-agent which generates a log ﬁle that provides
data about safe and unsafe overtaking situations for each of the
vehicles in the experiment. This log ﬁle is ﬁltered to identify
the devices in each vehicle during the overtaking maneuvering
and inter message exchange operations being simulated.
We analyse and evaluate the data collected from the simu-
lation runs to assess the vehicles’ behaviour for two function-
alities of our VANET-DAS:
1) Broadcasting
2) Overtaking Situation Detection
And ﬁnally, we also analyse the reliability of the VANET-
DAS application itself. The results are given below.
A. Broadcasting Results
As shown in Figure 15 it is possible to identify that the
VANET-DAS application works well, for example, when a
vehicle moves with a constant 20 m/s speed during 100 s and
1, 000 m transmission range, the application sends a report
message at each 666.67 m.
In this case, three messages are sent when the vehicle is at
666.67 m, 1, 333.33 m and 2, 000 m respectively, stating from
an initial position and a single last message is sent in the initial
simulation point, totalling four messages. Similarly, behaviour
is also identiﬁed in our other simulation runs. Therefore, the
VANET-DAS application has an expected behaviour because
it sent positioning messages at expected positions.
B. Overtaking Situation Detection Results
In this experiment, we observed and checked the overtaking
detection operation using our VANET-DAS simulated scenario
where a vehicle (C1) is 155 m from another vehicle (C2)
and they are 32 m/s and 14 m/s apart respectively. C1 is
approaching C2 position and is approximately 41.3m behind
when C1 starts the overtaking manoeuvre in three stages:
Figure 15.
Amount of sent messages as a function of vehicle’s speed and
transmission range
1) Lane shift;
2) Overtaking; and
3) Returning to the original lane
Figure 16 shows the detection of time of the overtaking
manoeuvres. At x-axis, its pointed is determined as 0 when
the method does not detect an overtaking, and it will be 1
when an overtaking is detected.
Figure 16.
Instants which has detected overtaking situation
In order to demonstrate and validate if the results obtained
in the experiment are consistent, as illustrated in Figure 16,
we used 14 to calculate the instant (horizontal axis) when the
vehicle C1 is q meters close to vehicle C2:
SC1(T) = SC2(T) − q − h
(12)
x1 + vx1T = x2 + vx2T − q − h
(13)
T = x2 − x1 − q − h
vx1 − vx2
(14)
Deﬁning q = 33.3 and h = 8.0, we get T = 6.31 seconds,
we notice in Figure 16 that at this point an overtaking situation
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

was detected.
C. Reliability of the Application
The main goal in this experiment is to validate the applica-
tion operation in different scenarios of our VANET-DAS. In
each scenario, the vehicle C1 is placed randomly behind C2
and C3 placed randomly in front of C2 as shown in Figure
17.
Figure 17.
A random placement of vehicles simulation scenario
The vehicle’s speed is chosen randomly as follow:
1) C2’s speed is chosen between the range of 16 m/s and
25 m/s.
2) C1’s speed is chosen between the range of C2s speed
plus 5 m/s and 30 m/s.
3) C3’s speed is chosen between the range of 16 m/s and
30 m/s range.
Using these parameters, 1, 000 different scenarios were
created and in each scenario the time in which C1 passes
C3 (tc) is checked. To conﬁrm the application accuracy, two
times are identiﬁed in the overtaking manoeuvre. The ﬁrst time
detection happens when C1 is behind C2 at a distance of q+h
meters (t1) and the second time detection when C1 is in front
of C2 at the distance of h + q meters (t2) as shown in Figure
18.
Figure 18.
The times t1 and t2 times in overtaking manoeuvre
Thus, we can safely conclude that the VANET-DAS appli-
cation should work correctly when any one of the following
conditions are met:
1) If tc is lower than t1 it is expected that the application
will not send any message because it has not detected
an overtaking situation.
2) If tc is between t1 and t2 the application is expected to
indicate that an overtaking cannot be performed safely.
3) If tc is greater than t2 one can expect that the application
indicates that overtaking can be safely performed.
At each iteration of the experiment, we compared the
instant tc with times which the application generates alerts
of overtaking permission or prohibition. We found that the
application returned the expected messages in 99% of the cases
in our experiments.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
The research work discussed in this paper presented some
fundamental concepts for an application development in the
VANET environment to assist drivers in overtaking manoeu-
vres safely. Using kinematics and a positioning mechanism
with an efﬁcient messaging communication protocol, it is
possible to develop a real-life application system capable of
predicting safe overtaking manoeuvres with minimum near
collision or no accident risk and without overloading the
VANET data transmission medium.
Despite using controlled scenarios and without considering
the driver’s unpredictable behaviour pattern, the application
has promising characteristics for an actual application develop-
ment to assist overtaking in real-life systems for modern trafﬁc
systems. In particular, as shown from the result, the application
can detect an ongoing overtaking manoeuvre operating in an
efﬁcient message data transmission VANET environment with
a near 99% reliability.
As shown from the result, the application can detect an
ongoing overtaking manoeuvre saving CPU processing. More-
over, the system could predict 99% of simulated situations.
In our future research work, we intend to improve the
broadcast mechanism analysing the balancing act between
position checking interval and the positioning errors in which
the checking intervals are not constant but dynamically set
according to the vehicle positioning and vehicle space pre-
diction error margins and travelled distance between message
broadcast periods. It is considered a difﬁcult problem to solve
because it is desirable to increase the travelled distance by
the vehicle before sending a new message report to save on
transmission overheads. This requires a critical balancing act
between the two conﬂicting goals of safe distance between
vehicles and active communication (without loss of message
communication) in the VANET vicinity transmission range. It
is also necessary to reduce the positioning error between the
predicted and real vehicle positions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Morris, J. Jannotti, F. Kaashoek, J. Li, and D. Decouto, “CarNet:
A scalable ad hoc wireless network system,” in Proceedings of the 9th
workshop on ACM SIGOPS European workshop: beyond the PC: new
challenges for the operating system.
ACM, 2000, pp. 65.
[2] W. Chen and S. Cai, “Ad hoc peer-to-peer network architecture for vehicle
safety communications,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 43, no. 4,
pp. 100-107, 2005.
[3] H. Yoon, J. Kim, F. Tan, and R. Hsieh, “On-demand video streaming
in mobile opportunistic networks,” in Proceedings of the 2008 Sixth
Annual IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications.
IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 80-89.
[4] L. Wischoff, A. Ebner, H. Rohling, M. Lott, and R. Halfmann, “SOTIS-
a self-organizing trafﬁc information system,” in Vehicular Technology
Conference, 2003. VTC 2003-Spring. The 57th IEEE Semiannual, vol. 4,
2003.
[5] M. Caliskan, D. Graupner, and M. Mauve, “Decentralized discovery of
free parking places,” in Proceedings of the 3rd international workshop
on Vehicular ad hoc networks.
ACM, 2006, pp. 39.
[6] S. Rahman and U. Hengartner, “Secure crash reporting in vehicular ad
hoc networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Security and Privacy in Communication Networks (SecureComm2007).
Citeseer.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

[7] O. Tonguz and M. Boban, “Multiplayer games over VANET: a new
application,” Ad Hoc Networks, 2010.
[8] G. Hegeman, K. Brookhuis, S. Hoogendoorn et al., “Opportunities of
advanced driver assistance systems towards overtaking,” EJTIR, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 281-296, 2005.
[9] R. Toledo-Moreo, J. Santa, and M. Zamora-Izquierdo, “A cooperative
overtaking assistance system,” Planning, Perception and Navigation for
Intelligent Vehicles (PPNIV), pp. 50-56, 2009.
[10] M. Ruder, W. Enkelmann, and R. Garnitz, “Highway lane change
assistant,” in Intelligent Vehicle Symposium, 2002. IEEE, vol. 1.
IEEE,
pp. 240-244.
[11] J. H¨arri, “Modeling and predicting mobility in wireless ad hoc net-
works,” Ph.D. dissertation, l´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne
(EPFL), 2007.
[12] E. Olsen, “Modeling slow lead vehicle lane changing,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Citeseer, 2003.
[13] W. Van Winsum, D. De Waard, and K. Brookhuis, “Lane change
manoeuvres and safety margins,” Transportation Research Part F: Psy-
chology and Behaviour, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 139-149, 1999.
[14] T. Wilson and W. Best, “Driving strategies in overtaking.” ACCID.
ANALY. & PREV., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 179-185, 1982.
[15] S. McCanne, S. Floyd, K. Fall, K. Varadhan et al., “Network simulator
ns-2,” 2000.
[16] M. Shuttleworth, “Ubuntu: Linux for human beings,” 2011.
[17] M. Nakagami, K. Tanaka, and M. Kanehisa, “The m-Distribution As the
General Formula of Intensity Distribution of Rapid Fading,” Memoirs of
the Faculty of Engineering, Kobe University, vol. 4, pp. 78-125, 1957.
[18] D. Musser and A. Saini, The STL Tutorial and Reference Guide: C++
Programming with the Standard Template Library.
Addison Wesley
Longman Publishing Co., Inc. Redwood City, CA, USA, 1995.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

