Plasmonics in Optical Communications: Optimization of Coupling Efficiency 
 
Djafar K. Mynbaev 
Electrical and Telecommunications Engineering 
Technology Department 
New York City College of Technology  
of the City University of New York 
New York, USA 
dmynbaev@citytech.cuny.edu 
Vitaly Sukharenko 
Electrical Engineering Department 
City College of New York  
of the City University of New York  
New York, USA 
vsukhar00@ccny.cuny.edu
 
 
Abstract—Modern optical communications technology requires 
miniaturization of the end equipment to micro- and even 
nanoscale. At this scale, interaction of light with this 
equipment becomes difficult due to diffraction limit. This 
problem can be solved by the use of plasmonics, which confines 
light into subwavelength dimension and, additionally, create a 
strong field enhancement. One of the major plasmonic 
problems for our application is the efficiency of coupling of 
light into a metal-dielectric interface, which is mainly 
determined by the properties of a metal. In this paper, we 
presenting the results of our search for an optimal (ideal) metal 
whose properties provide the best coupling efficiency at 
1550nm — the main transmission wavelength in optical 
communications.  
Keywords- Optical communications; plasmonics; coupling 
efficiency 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The volume of global telecommunications traffic keeps 
increasing at the exponential rate and to carry this traffic, 
the optical networks, which deliver the vast majority of it, 
exponentially increase its transmission capacity. One of the 
major technological means to achieve this increase is 
wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), in which many 
transmitters and receivers are used to send and receive many 
signals over a single optical fiber. Modern WDM 
technology, however, requires such density of packaging of 
all components that these components must be in micro- and 
even nanoscale. Working with light at this scale becomes 
problematic due to the diffraction limit, the problem that can 
be overcome by the use of plasmonics.  
Plasmonics [1],[2] is about coupling of photons to free 
electron oscillations at the interface between the thin film of 
a conductor and a dielectric.  This coupling creates two-
dimensional electromagnetic waves called surface plasmon 
polaritons (SPPs) that propagate along this interface. The 
result is confinement of light into subwavelength dimension, 
which enables breaking the diffraction limit and creating a 
strong field enhancement.  
Plasmonics has the potential to combine the best properties 
of both electronic and photonic worlds; in addition, 
plasmonics allows for reducing light manipulation from 
three to two dimensions. All these features might lead to 
creation of integrated photonic circuits, in which optical 
communications is in dire need.  
From the optical-communications standpoint, the most 
important feature of plasmonics is that the SPPs can be seen 
as a new optical carrier of information that allows signal 
manipulation at the scale below diffraction limit. This is 
why application of plasmonics in optical communications 
has attracted a significant interest of a research community 
[3]–[5]. One of the main problems of application of 
plasmonics in optical communications is the efficiency of 
coupling of light into a metal because of tremendous loss 
that light experiences in a metal film. Clearly, the coupling 
efficiency shapes the total efficiency of any plasmonic 
device. The coupling efficiency is determined by the 
properties of the metal; for visible light, which is mostly 
used in current research, the best coupling has been 
achieved with silver and gold due to their beneficial 
permittivity in this range of wavelengths.  Optical 
communications, however, operates in infrared segment of 
the spectrum, and the range of wavelengths around 1550nm 
is most widely used. There are no experimental or 
theoretical results indicating which metal could provide the 
optimum coupling in this range. In this work, we present the 
results of our search for an optimal material providing the 
best possible coupling efficiency at 1550nm.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, 
we evaluate the coupling efficiency of the metals mostly 
used in plasmonics and find their optimal thickness; in 
Section III, we apply Occam inversion method to find the 
most efficient optimal material; in Section IV, we present 
the summary and directions of the future work. 
II. 
COUPLING EFFICIENCY AND OPTIMAL THICKNESS OF 
AL, CU, PB, AU, AND AG 
In this section, we investigate plasmonic properties of Al, 
Cu, Pb, Au and Ag, the metals mostly used in experimental 
research. Some of their properties have been studied for 
visible light; we, however, need to know these properties at 
the 
main 
transmission 
wavelength 
of 
optical 
communications, λ = 1550nm.  
Figure 1 illustrates how light is coupled at the metal-
dielectric interface; to optimize this process, we need to 
achieve the maximum penetration of light from the outside 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

(not shown) material into a metal and obtain the maximum 
energy of the filed penetrated into a dielectric. Penetration 
of light into the metal is evaluated by reflection and 
transmission coefficients; the latter determines the strength 
of a resonance field, the field penetrated into a dielectric. 
This strength is crucial because it determines the length the 
excited light can propagate within the dielectric, which in 
turn determines the efficiency of the whole plasmonic 
process in our application.  
 
Figure 1.  Coupling of light in plasmonics: Electron charges and excited 
electric waves. (Reprinted with permission [6]) 
In this section, we consider the setup composed from three 
media: glass-metal-air. The refractive indexes of glass and 
air are given by ng = 1.5 and na = 1, respectively. For this 
setup we determine the coupling efficiency by finding the 
reflection and transmission coefficients for arbitrary 
thickness of each metal. Analysis of these results leads us to 
the necessity of search of optimal thickness of a metal, 
which we do as follows. 
The Drude model [7] defines dielectric function of free 
electron plasma and the electric permittivity,    of a metal to 
the optical response as 
      
   
        
          
 
(1) 
where    is the plasma,   is the incident, and    is the 
damping frequencies and    is the high-frequency dielectric 
constant. Using the values of plasma frequency and 
damping factor from the study conducted by Ordel [7], we 
calculate the electric permittivity of each metal at λ = 
1550nm; the results are shown in Table I. 
Using Maxwell's equations and appropriate boundary 
conditions for our setup, one can derive the formulas 
(Equations 2, 3 and 4 [2]) that allow for evaluation of 
reflection and transmission of each metal as a function of 
incident angle. 
 
TABLE I.  
ELECTRIC PERMITIVITY OF ALUMINUM, COPPER, LEAD, 
GOLD AND SILVER 
Material                            Permittivity at 1550nm 
   Al                              -335.83+33.779i 
   Cu                              -96.6111 + 4.2061i 
   Pb                              -91.3055 + 2.0746i 
   Au                              -125.14+4.2232i 
   Ag                              -125.22+2.8367i 
 
    
    (  )      (  )
    (  )      (  )   
 
 (2) 
    
    (  )      (  )
    (  )      (  )   
 
 (3) 
     
           (      )
           (       ) , 
 
 (4) 
where          are the electric permittivity's of glass, metal 
and air, respectively;          are the wave numbers of 
glass, metal, and air;    is the metal thickness. We have 
taken electric permittivity of each metal from Table 1 and 
perform simulations.  
Plots in Figure 2 present the results of our calculations of 
reflection and transmission coefficients of all mentioned 
metals at arbitrary 55nm thickness for each of them. Our 
results show that the thickness of a metal is the second major 
factor determining the coupling efficiency. We investigated 
this factor for each material; the samples of such a search for 
gold are shown in Figures 3 and 4. This example shows that 
the minimum reflection and the maximum transmission for 
gold are achieved at 35nm. 
Based on the results of our search, we calculated the 
reflection and transmission coefficients for each metal at 
their appropriate optimal thickness. Figure 5 show the 
coupling efficiency of 70% for aluminum at 20nm thickness, 
100% for copper at 40nm thickness, 95% for lead at 48nm 
thickness, 95% for gold at 34nm thickness, and 80% for 
silver at 32nm thickness.  
Comparison of the intensity of the field penetrated into a 
dielectric (see Figure 5, transmission) shows that the strength 
of a penetrated field varies significantly for each metal; for 
example, silver exhibits the strongest resonance field, 375 
a.u., at slightly less than 80% coupling (Figure 5, reflection), 
whereas lead exhibits 100% of coupling, but its resonance 
field is only 25 a.u. strong. Therefore, when searching a 
metal, which provides the best coupling, we need to consider 
its reflection and transmission coefficients at its optimal 
thickness. Only combination of all three parameters provides 
the optimal coupling efficiency evaluated by reflection, 
transmission, and the strength of resonance (penetrated) 
field. 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The summary of these results are presented in Table II. 
 
TABLE II.  
STRENGTH OF A PENETRATED FIELD FOR ALUMINUM, 
COPPER, LEAD, GOLD AND SILVER 
 
Material        Thickness      Field Strength       Coupling 
   Al              20nm         20a.u.               70%        
   Cu             40nm         55a.u.               100% 
   Pb             48nm         60a.u.                95% 
   Au            34nm         120a.u               95% 
   Ag            32nm         375a.u.              80% 
III. 
OCCAM INVERSION AND IDEAL (DESIRED) MATERIAL 
In this section, we describe our search of electric 
permittivity of an ideal material that has high coupling ratio 
and generates strong resonances on its surface due to the 
incident radiation at 1550nm. We consider the setup 
composed from three media, as in the previous section, but 
instead of the metal we place an ideal material. Using 
Occam inversion technique [8] and Maxwell's equation with 
appropriate boundary conditions, we can calculate electric 
permittivity of a material that generates high resonances on 
its surface and satisfies above criteria: 100% coupling and 
long range propagation of excited field.  
Occam inversion algorithm, (5), searches for optimal 
electric permittivity by employing angular scattering, Rgma, 
(4). The algorithm minimizes the difference between the 
modeled, Rgma, and a desired scattering pattern. With each 
iteration, the obtained solution,     , is closer to the optimal 
permittivity; the process stops when the difference between 
the obtained and previous solutions becomes less than     .  
Desired scattering pattern exhibits 100% coupling at a given 
metal thickness. For these calculations we use least-squares 
method and assume 65nm metal thickness. 
       (  )  (  )           (  )  .    
 (5) 
Here  (  ) is the Jacobian of  (  ), L - laplacian operator, 
  is the regularization parameter, and R is the desired 
reflection pattern. Using initial estimation     which can be 
arbitrarily chosen, we found the following ideal permittivity 
                            . 
 
 (6) 
It is worth mentioning that choosing the initial estimation, 
    closer to the perfect value will essentially reduce the 
number of iterations and minimize the simulation process. 
Reflection and transmission patterns of an ideal material at 
thickness 65nm and that of Ag and Pb at their optimal 
thicknesses plotted in Figure 6. Ag and Pb are chosen as 
control metals to contrast reflected and transmitted patterns 
of the optimal material; Ag has highest transmitted patterns 
at optimal thickness and Pb requires larger thickness for 
optimal coupling. 
The optimal material shows the maximum coupling (0% 
reflection), but very weak penetrated field, about ten times 
smaller than that of silver. Thus, there is a need to optimize 
the thickness of this metal. The results of this search are 
presented in Figures 7 and 8, where we plot all reflection and 
transmission coefficients of above mentioned metals at 55nm 
thickness (Figure 7) and at 35nm thickness (Figure 8). One 
can clearly see that at 55nm an optimal material has about 
85% of coupling efficiency but the strength of penetrated 
field is only 160 a.u., whereas at 35nm this material exhibits 
almost 7000 a.u. of the resonance field at the expense of 
coupling, which is reduced to 30%. Thus, these two 
processes contradict each other. Recalling that for ideal 
material we need 100% of coupling (0% of reflection) and 
the highest energy of penetrated field (e.g., 10,000 a.u.) to 
provide the longest propagation of the excited field in a 
dielectric, we come to the conclusion that required 
optimization is not an easy task.  
IV. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
We can summarize the results presented in this paper as 
follows: 
1. We have found out the reflection coefficients, the 
strengths of resonance fields and optimal thickness 
of a set of natural metals widely used in plasmonics. 
To our knowledge, we did this the first time at λ = 
1550nm, the main transmission wavelength in 
optical communications. The importance of these 
results 
cannot 
be 
overestimated 
they 
have 
determined the fundamental limitations imposed on 
the application of these metals in plasmonic devices 
in optical communications.  
2. We have searched for the desired (optimal) material, 
which could provide the optimal coupling efficiency. 
We have determined its desired characteristics+, 
such as electric permittivity, reflection coefficient 
and the strength of a resonance field; we have 
proven that this material could achieve the increase 
of the strength of its field by an order of magnitude 
at 1550nm , as compared with Ag and Pb. 
Our results lead us to the following directions of the 
future work: 
1. Considering the characteristics of the desired 
(optimal) material, we note that the real part of its 
electric permittivity is close to that of silver and 
gold, but its imaginary part is tenfold less than the 
proper parts of these natural metals. It means that 
such a desired (optimal) material does not exist in 
nature and we need to artificially create a material 
with the required electric permittivity. This is one 
direction of the future work. 
2. Our simulations have shown that the requirements of 
simultaneously maximizing both the coupling and 
the strength of penetrated field contradict each other. 
Therefore, we need to either optimize the properties 
of the desired material or find the different approach 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

to satisfy these mutually contradictory requirements. 
This work would be the other direction of our future 
research. 
3. We will need to find out how our desired (optimal) 
material would work not only at a single 1550nm 
wavelength, but also in both C- and L-bands used in 
modern DWDM optical transmission networks. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partly supported by PSC-CUNY grant 
#65115-00 43. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. A. Maier, “Plasmonics: Fundamentals and 
Applications,” Springer Science+Business Media LLC, 
2007. 
[2] D. Sarid and W. Challener, “Modern Introduction to 
Surface Plasmons,” Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
[3] H. A. Atwater et al, “Novel Plasmonic Devices for 
Nanophotonic Networks,” See 
www.plasmonmuri.caltech.edu/news/PosterAFOSR.pdf,
2011 (accessed February 2, 2013). 
[4] D. K. Mynbaev and V. Sukharenko, “WDM 
Demultiplexing by Using Surface Plasmon Polaritons,” 
International Journal of High Speed Electronics and 
Systems, Vol. 20, No. 1, March 2011, Pp. 51-61.  
[5] D. K. Mynbaev and V. Sukharenko, “Plasmonic-based 
devices for optical communications,” International 
Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems, Vol. 21, 
No. 1, March 2012. 
[6] I. Zozoulenko, “Surface plasmons and their applications 
in electro-optical devices,” Solid State Electronics, 
Department of Science and Technology, Linköping 
University, 
Sweden, 
2006. 
See 
http://www.itn.liu.se/meso-phot (accessed January 12,  
2013). 
[7] A. Ordal  et al, “Optical properties of the metals Al, Co, 
Cu, Au, Fe, Pb, Ni, Pd, Pt, Ag, Ti and W in the infrared 
and far infrared,” Applied Optics Vol. 22, No. 7 1, April 
1983. 
[8] R. C. Aster, B. Borchers, and C. H. Thurber, “Parameter 
Estimation and Inverse Problems,” Elsevier Academic 
Press, 2005. 
 
Figure 2.  Reflection and transmission patterns of aluminum, copper, lead, gold and silver at equal thicknesses of 55nm. 
 
Figure 3.  Optimal thickness of gold providing the minimum of reflection. 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
Figure 4.  Optimal thickness of gold providing the maximum of transmission. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Reflection and transmission patterns of aluminum at thickness of 20nm, copper at thickness of 40nm, lead at thickness of 48nm, gold at thickness 
of 34nm, and silver at thickness of 32nm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
Figure 6.  Reflection and transmission patterns of lead at thickness of 48nm, silver at thickness of 34nm and optimal material at thickness of 65nm. 
 
Figure 7.  Reflection and transmission patterns of silver, lead, and optimal material at thicknesses of 55nm. 
 
Figure 8.  Reflection and transmission patterns of silver, lead, and optimal material at thicknesses of 35nm. 
 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

