A wireless mesh network solution based on WiMAX technology with smart 
antennas support 
 
Şerban Georgică Obreja,  
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: serban@radio.pub.ro 
Irinel Olariu,  
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: irinel.olariu@elcom.pub.ro 
Alexey Baraev 
Create-Net 
Trento, Italy 
e-mail: alexey.baraev@create-net.org 
Eugen Borcoci 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
Abstract—Wireless Mesh Networks represent a good solution 
to offer Internet access in sparse population areas. The latest 
wireless technologies, such as WiMAX, offer high data rates 
services, but they are not designed for wireless mesh 
architectures. This paper proposes a wireless mesh solution 
based on WiMAX nodes equipped with smart antennas, and 
presents some tests for performance evaluation of the proposed 
solution. 
The 
WiMAX 
mesh 
node 
is 
emulated 
by 
interconnecting, via Ethernet, a Base Station and a Subscriber 
Station. To avoid interference between the two radio 
interfaces, they are configured to operate on different 
frequency bands. The WiMAX mesh node is simulated in 
OPNET and its performance is compared with a real life 
implementation of such a hybrid mesh node. The performance 
evaluation was done using an experimental platform, 
consisting of both a simulated and a real life part, which are 
interconnected through the System in the Loop OPNET 
function.  
Keywords-mesh network; WiMAX; Smart Antennas; OPNET 
simulator; System in the Loop. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX) was developed for broadband wireless networks, 
and it offers high data rate over long distances [1]. An 
application suitable for WiMAX technology is its usage in 
wireless backhaul networks, to provide coverage over low 
density areas or as alternative solutions to wired networks. 
Such a solution offers resilience in disaster scenarios 
obtained through self healing property facilitated by the 
wireless communication. [2]. 
Wireless Mesh Networks are the solution for wireless 
backhaul (WMN). On one side, the WMNs share common 
features with ad hoc networks (MANET), on the other side, 
the WMNs, being used for backbone, have minimal mobility 
and no constraint on power consumption. The WMN routing 
protocols can be generally adapted from those used in fixed 
networks and also from ad hoc networks, but, due to the 
specific conditions of WMN routers (limited mobility and no 
power constraints), the protocols like in fixed networks can 
be more appropriate.  
The work presented in this paper was done in the 
framework of the SMART-Net FP7 project, which aimed to 
investigate the use of smart antennas in Wireless Mesh 
Networks, mainly based on WiMAX technology. A solution 
for WiMAX mesh networks based on hybrid WiMAX mesh 
nodes is investigated. This hybrid node was obtained by 
linking a Base Station with a Subscriber Station via Ethernet. 
Both stations include layer three capabilities, mainly routing 
capabilities. A node with relay properties is obtained, which 
has also routing capabilities. This solution was implemented 
and simulated in the OPNET simulator. A similar approach 
was 
developed 
by 
Thales 
Company 
for 
the 
real 
implementation of such a hybrid node [3]. Here, the 
Subscriber Station functionalities were implemented on a 
Base Station platform. Special timing synchronization 
between the uplink and downlink intervals for Base Station 
and Subscriber Station was introduced, in order to avoid 
interference between the two wireless interfaces, by not 
allowing them to transmit and receive simultaneously.  
There are several works on wireless mesh networks 
based on WiMAX, but they focus on multihop relay 
networks built with WiMAX relay stations, built based on 
the IEEE 802.16j [1]. A spanning tree rooted at Base Station 
is built, with Subscriber Stations as leaf nodes. Usually, these 
works approach scheduling and channel assignment 
algorithms to optimize the resource allocation in multihop 
relay networks [4][5]. There are also approaches which 
consider multihop relay networks with smart antenna 
support, and which try to find solutions for joint resource 
allocation and beam scheduling in order to reduce the 
interference and increase the overall throughput [6][7]. Most 
of the proposed algorithms are based on centralized 
solutions. In this paper, due to the way the WiMAX mesh 
node is build, the solution is completely distributed, without 
any correlation between the scheduling or channel 
assignment at each node.  
This paper is organized as follows. The second section is 
dedicated to Smart-Net system presentation. The third 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

section presents the experimental platform setup, while the 
fourth section presents the test scenarios and the results. The 
last section contains the conclusions and some suggestions 
for future work. 
II. 
SMART-NET  SYSTEM COMPONETS 
A. SMART-Net system  
As it was mentioned in the previous section, this solution 
was proposed in the SMART-Net project, which focused on 
introducing the smart antennas support in WiMAX 
technology and on developing a wireless mesh network for 
backhaul access, based on WiMAX nodes with multiple 
radio interfaces. To validate it, an experimental platform was 
developed during the project [8]. This test platform consists 
of a simulated part and a part realized with real WiMAX 
nodes, equipped with smart antennas. The WiMAX 
equipments used in the testbed are produced by Thales 
Company, while the smart antennas are produced by Plasma 
Antennas Company. Both are members of the Smart-Net 
project. The simulation platform was developed using the 
OPNET network simulator. The smart antennas were 
modeled in the OPNET, based on the real antennas 
measurement data, and integrated with the simulated 
WiMAX nodes. Also, the beam selection and tracking 
algorithms were implemented in OPNET and included in the 
WiMAX radio pipeline stages for the Smart Antennas 
control. The interconnection of the two test platform 
components was realized using the System-in-the-Loop 
(SITL) function provided by OPNET. The real part was 
developed at France Telecom premises located in Lannion, 
France, while the simulated part was developed at University 
Politehnica of Bucharest (UPB) in Romania. The two 
testbeds were interconnected through a VPN tunnel via 
GEANT network. The interconnection setup is illustrated in 
Fig. 1. With such an approach, the capability of the proposed 
backhaul network to operate over large areas was tried to be 
proved. 
Some initial results of this work are presented in [9]. 
There, only the simulated network was evaluated. In this 
paper, both simulated and real network were integrated in an 
experimental platform. A similar approach is presented in 
[10], where SITL is used to evaluate WiFi wireless networks 
performances with real time traffic injected in the simulated 
network.  
B. Smart Antenna features 
One of the main topics of SMART-Net project was the 
introduction of smart antenna support in WiMAX. Smart 
antennas define antennas which are capable of adapting the 
radiation and reception pattern automatically. They provide a 
higher gain on the main beam direction and much smaller 
gains on the secondary beams, which will ensure a lower 
interference noise.  
 
Figure 1.  
Testbeds interconnection setup 
In practice, one can have two types of smart antennas. 
One is represented by adaptive smart antennas, which are 
capable of adapting its beam in every direction, by 
adaptively combining the signal from multiple antenna 
elements. They have the advantage of being able to adapt the 
beam in every direction, but with the drawback of higher 
switch time and increased complexity. The second type is 
represented by switched beam antennas, which has several 
fixed beams and can be selected individually. They have 
only a limited number of directions which can be obtained, 
but they are rapid and with a simpler implementation. 
For the SMART-Net project, two types of switched 
multi-beam antennas, capable of WiMAX operation, have 
been designed and implemented [3] [11]. An active, 12 beam 
cylindrical array antenna with omnimode and a passive 9 
beam planar array antenna with sectoral mode. The active 
12-beam cylindrical antenna with 360° coverage is suitable 
for mesh and nomadic Point to Multipoint operation. It has 
typical ranges of up to 20 km, depending on the modulation 
rate. The passive 9 beam planar antenna, has narrower 
beams, and is suited for medium range backhaul and relay 
operations. A representation of both antennas in OPNET has 
also been provided as simulated data. 
A switching algorithm is used to choose the appropriate 
beam. This algorithm is based on a learning interval in 
which, based on SINR, the best beam is chosen for each 
destination. Based on the decision taken by the selection 
algorithm, when a smart node (a node equipped with smart 
antennas) needs to communicate with another smart node, 
the beam with the best SINR is used. Because the best beam 
is decided in the learning phase, the switch operation is very 
fast, a few nanoseconds. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL PLATFORM SETUP 
The experimental platform infrastructure consists of a 
simulated WiMAX network, which is interconnected with 
real devices in order to introduce real time traffic in the 
simulation, Fig.1. 
The System-in-the-Loop OPNET function allows real 
time traffic to be exchanged between real and simulated parts 
of the networks during the simulation. The actual OPNET 
version works only with an Ethernet network adaptor for 
SITL interconnection. The requirement of using Ethernet 
link between the real devices and the SITL gateway 
introduces limitation in developing joint real and simulated 
wireless network scenarios. For the SITL scenarios, the 
simulation must run in real-time. This requirement 
introduces an additional limitation for the SITL scenarios: it 
limits the number of nodes, which can be used in the 
simulation. 
A. Real Life testbed infrastructure 
The Real Life testbed was developed at the France 
Telecom Lannion premises. Its structure is presented in Fig. 
2. Its main part consists of a WiMAX network with one Base 
Station, three Subscriber Stations and one Relay Station. The 
Relay Station [3] is built by combining a Subscriber Station 
and a Base Station together and synchronizing them in terms 
of uplink and downlink mapping: the scheduling for the 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

uplink and downlink transmission intervals for both WiMAX 
links, given by the UL and DL MAP fields from the 
WiMAX frame generated by the main Base Station and the 
Relay Base Station, must be synchronized in order to reduce 
the interference at the relay node. 
 
 
Figure 2.  
The real life testbed infrastructure 
The WiMAX nodes were equipped with two antennas: 
the smart antenna having a beam gain of 16.5 dBi (beam 
mode) / 12.5 dBi (omni mode) and, for comparison reasons, 
a classic sector antenna of 17 dBi. They worked in the 5470 - 
5725 MHz band at constant Equivalent Isotropic Radiated 
Power (EIRP) of 30 dBm. Consequently, the transmission 
power of the base station was set to 24 dBm and those of the 
subscriber node to 14 dBm (smart antenna beam mode) or 18 
dBm (smart antenna sector mode). More details about the 
performance of the Lannion real life WiMAX network can 
be viewed in [12][13]. 
The WiMAX BS is connected with the Lannion Internet 
gateway.  This gateway is used to host the VPN client which 
in used to connect to the VPN server located at UPB 
premises. The VPN tunnel is a layer 3 tunnel. From a logical 
point of view the Lannion test bed consists of a direct 
WiMAX link (a BS-SS link) and a relay based link (BS-
SS_relay-BS_relay-SS) – Fig. 2. A stream flowing through 
the real life testbed will cross one or two WiMAX links, 
depending where it generates/ends (user 1 or user 2). 
B. Simulation testbed infrastructure 
For the simulated network the main WiMAX physical 
parameters are: 20MHz bandwidth, 2048 subcarriers, 10.94 
kHz subcarrier frequency spacing,  symbol duration of 
102,86 ms, frame duration of 5ms [9]. Adaptive modulation 
and coding is configured on the subscriber stations. Receiver 
sensitivity is set to -100 dB for both the SS and BS stations. 
 
Figure 3.  
Simulated testbed infrastructure 
As shown in Fig. 3, our approach is based on the real-to-
real SITL interconnection scenario. Real packets are injected 
in the simulated network through the SITL interface, flows 
through the simulated network, are sent outside the 
simulation through another SITL interface, and are received 
on a real device. In this way, we can measure the effects of 
the simulated network on the real packets, obtaining a more 
accurate evaluation tool for the proposed solutions. The 
results presented in this paper are obtained by using the 
following configurations for the simulated network: direct 
WiMAX links interconnecting the SITL gateways or a 
double WiMAX link obtained by interconnecting the Base 
Station with the Subscriber Station through a hybrid mesh 
node, similar with the relay node used in the real life testbed 
for the relay based link. As already mentioned, the simulated 
hybrid mesh node (relay node) was obtained by linking a 
WiMAX Base Station with a Subscriber Station via Ethernet. 
The performance of this simulated hybrid mesh node was 
compared with that of the real hybrid relay node 
implemented by Thales Company.  
IV. 
TESTS SCENARIOS AND RESULTS 
In this section, the test scenarios, used to evaluate the 
hybrid node performance, and the test results are presented. 
For these tests, all the real nodes are equipped with smart 
antennas; while for the simulated nodes both standard and 
smart antennas were used. The benefits of using smart 
antennas on WiMAX nodes in static or nomadic 
configurations are also shown. A first set of experiments was 
used to evaluate the delay and jitter introduced by the hybrid 
node, the real one and the simulated one also. A second set 
of experiments was used to evaluate the performances of the 
implemented WiMAX network when the smart antennas 
were used on the WiMAX nodes.  
A. Delay and jitter evaluation for the WiMAX network 
based on hybrid node 
The tests performed focused on delay and jitter 
estimation for different segments of the end to end link 
between Lannion users and UPB users. Round trip time 
(RTT) value was determined using the ICMP protocol to 
estimate the delay. The jitter was evaluated using iperf 
application. Standard iperf algorithm was used to calculate 
the jitter. In the experiments presented in this paper only 
passive 9 beam planar array antennas with sectoral mode 
were used for smart antennas. 
For the RTT and jitter figures, the time in milliseconds is 
represented on the y-axis, and the packet number on the x-
axis. For figures obtained with OPNET simulator, on x-axis 
the time in minutes is represented. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 4.  The end to end RTT for standard antennas on the simulated 
nodes 
 
Figure 5.   The end to end RTT for plasma antennas on the simulated 
nodes  
The tests were performed for both the standard antennas 
and smart planar antennas on WiMAX nodes. For the 
simulated WiMAX link, adaptive modulation and coding 
was used, and best effort service flows were considered for 
uplink and downlink. 
A first test suite was performed using one WiMAX link 
in the simulated network and one WiMAX link in the real 
network. To evaluate the round trip time ICMP packets were 
sent from UPB laptops situated behind the simulated 
networks. The packets traveled via the simulated WiMAX 
link, through the VPN tunnel, via the real WiMAX link and 
then the way back. The RTT obtained for the cases when the 
simulated nodes were equipped with standard and smart 
planar antennas were presented in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. As it 
was expected the results are similar. One can see that the 
mean RTT was around 150ms. This value for mean RTT was 
obtained by taking values for long time intervals. 
 
 
Figure 6.  End to end jitter from Lannion to UPB for emulated VoIP traffic 
To evaluate the interconnected testbeds behavior for 
VoIP communications, traffic emulating four VoIP channels 
was generated using the iperf application. The data rate used 
was of 320 kbps and the packet size was set to 120Bytes. 
The jitter measured with iperf is shown in Fig. 6. The jitter 
value is around 6 ms which is acceptable for VoIP 
communications. 
The jitter was measured also by sending with iperf a 
5Mbps UDP data stream from Lannion to UPB. The packet 
size was set in this case to 512Bytes. In this case the mean 
jitter was about 5ms. 
In order to determine the components of the RTT delay, 
the individual RTT delays for the links that make up the end 
to end path were evaluated. The results are presented in 
Fig.7, Fig. 8, and Fig. 9. The RTT mean delay of the 
simulated WiMAX link is around 45ms, while the RTT 
delay for real WiMAX link is around 35 ms. For the 
simulated WiMAX network the RTT variance is very high 
because of the variable time it takes for a packet to be 
translated to the simulation and back. Also, the extra delay 
for the simulated network is given by the packet conversion 
time.  
 
Figure 7.  RTT delay for the simulated WiMAX link 
 
Figure 8.  RTT delay for the real WiMAX link 
 
Figure 9.  RTT delay for the VPN tunnel 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 10.  RTT delay for the second test suite 
A second test suite was performed using the relay link in 
the real network and the simulated network. The traffic will 
travel end to end via two simulated WiMAX links, two real 
WiMAX links, and via the VPN GEANT tunnel. The RTT 
delay is shown in the Fig. 10. The mean end to end RTT 
delay is about 300 ms. This value is obtained by adding the 
delay introduced by the two additional WiMAX links and by 
the additional delay introduced by the hybrid simulated node 
and the relay node. 
The jitter obtained in this second scenario is similar with 
the one obtained in the first scenario. This shows that the 
jitter introduced by the WIMAX equipments is small 
compared with the one introduced by the VPN tunnel. This is 
because the WiMAX link was used at a medium load, 
5Mbps, which keeps the jitter at small values. 
These measurements showed that the proposed WiMAX 
hybrid mesh nodes performs well in terms of delay and jitter 
introduced on the data streams. Such hybrid nodes having 
routing capabilities can be used to build backhaul 
infrastructure based on WiMAX technology. 
B. Smart antennas benefits evaluation  
Using the flexibility of the OPNET simulator, several test 
scenarios were developed in order to evaluate the gain added 
by the use of Smart Antennas in such a WiMAX backhaul 
network. The topology used for these experiments is 
presented in Fig. 11. The focus was on the simulated section 
of the network, the obtained results being gathered from the 
simulations outputs. The simulated part consists of a 
WiMAX network with one Base Station, BS1, connected to 
one of the SITL interfaces, one Subscriber Station, SS2, 
connected to the other SITL interface, and two WiMAX 
nodes, BS2 and SS1, connected together via Ethernet, which 
compose the hybrid mesh/relay node. The same WiMAX 
configuration parameters are used, as the ones in the 
scenarios presented in section A. The only change is that the 
same frequency band was used on all the simulated WiMAX 
nodes. 
 
Figure 11.  The topology used for smart antenna benefits evaluation 
 
Figure 12.  Traffic received by BS2: planar and standard antennas 
 
Figure 13.  Uplink SINR at BS2: planar and standard antennas 
This scenario will illustrate the spatial separation 
obtained using directional smart antennas. One stream of 
around 2.5Mbps was sent from the UPB laptop at the 
Lannion laptop. The traffic will flow through the path SS2-
BS2-SS1-BS1 in the simulated network. The simulation was 
run twice: once with standard antennas on the WiMAX 
nodes, and once with the WiMAX nodes equipped with 
smart antennas. 
The results are presented in Fig. 12 13 and 14. As it was 
expected, the results in the case when the directional smart 
antennas were used on the WiMAX nodes are much better 
than the ones obtained with standard omnidirectional 
antennas. This is mainly caused by the fact that the BS1 and 
SS2 are close to each other and they operate in the same 
frequency band. For the omnidirectional antennas, the 
interference level was significantly higher compared with the 
case when the beam switched smart antennas were used, 
because of the spatial separation between the BS1 and SS2 
provided by the smart antennas. For the real hybrid relay 
station, due to its timing synchronization, this interference is 
avoided. The hybrid node used in the simulation, is based 
only on the spatial separation due to directional smart 
antennas and to the frequency separation. 
std - standard antenna 
pa - planar antenna  
pa - planar antenna  
std - standard antenna 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Figure 14.  Packets dropped at BS2: planar and standard antennas 
In figure 14, the packets dropped at BS2, for the cases 
when the simulated WiMAX nodes, are equipped 
omnidirectional standard antennas and directional smart 
antennas, are shown. The packets dropped by BS2, when 
omnidirectional antennas are used - red curve, are mainly the 
consequence of the interference between the nodes 
composing the hybrid node, BS1 and SS2. The packets 
dropped by BS2, in the directional smart antenna case- blue 
curve, are the consequence of the interference generated by 
the BS1 station and also by the interference generated from 
the secondary beams of the SS1 directional antennas. 
Another advantage of using directional smart antennas is 
given by the higher gain on the beam direction compared 
with 
the 
equivalent 
omnidirectional 
antenna. 
Other 
simulation scenarios were used to illustrate this feature. The 
results showed higher throughput and bigger SINR obtained 
when the nodes were equipped with smart antennas [9].  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper presents an evaluation of a mesh network 
based on WiMAX, with nodes equipped with smart 
antennas. 
An 
experimental 
platform 
based 
on 
interconnection between an OPNET simulated WiMAX 
network and a real WiMAX network was built. A hybrid 
WiMAX mesh node, with routing capabilities, is proposed to 
be used for building a WiMAX network with mesh topology. 
An evaluation of the behavior of this hybrid node in a 
minimal mesh topology is performed. The simulations 
results presented in this paper illustrate that such an approach 
can be used for backhaul wireless networks. Also, by using 
smart antennas for fixed or nomadic WiMAX nodes, a 
significant performance gain, expressed in terms of capacity 
and coverage can be obtained for such networks. The 
proposed WiMAX mesh network with smart antennas is 
designed only for backhaul network. For mobile users access 
another radio should be used, or the Base Station should 
switch to omnidirectional mode to communicate with the 
mobile users. The smart antenna usage for mobile WiMAX 
nodes is still under research. The main issue for mobility is 
to develop a tracking algorithm capable of detecting in real 
time the best beam to be used to reach the mobile node.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the EU FP7 project 
SMART-Net, no 223937, by the Romanian UEFISCSU PN-
2 RU-TE Project no. 18/12.08.2010 and by the EU and 
Romanian 
Govern 
EXCEL 
project 
- 
POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557. 
REFERENCES 
[1] IEEE 802.16 Working Group. IEEE 802.16 working group, 
part 16: Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless 
access systems|multihop relay specification. IEEE Standard, 
2007. 
[2] S. Wendt, F. Kharrat-Kammoun, E. Borcoci, B. Selva, A. 
Tonnerre, and E. Hamadani, “D2.1 - Requirements and 
Specifications of SMART-Net Target Scenarios", ICT 
European 
FP 
7 
SMART-Net 
project, 
May 
2010, 
https://www.ict-smartnet.eu. 
[3] S. Wendt, F. Kharrat-Kammoun, E. Borcoci, R. Cacoveanu, 
R. Lupu, and D. Hayes, “D2.4 - Network Architecture and 
System Specification", ICT European FP 7 SMART-Net 
project,Oct. 2010,  https://www.ict-smartnet.eu. 
[4] C. Cicconetti, I. F. Akyildiz, and L. Lenzini. "Bandwidth 
balancing in multi-channel IEEE 802.16 wireless mesh 
networks", 
InfoCom'07: 
the 
26th 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on Computer Communications, Anchorage, AK, 
USA, May 6-12 2007, pp. 2108-2116. 
[5] D. Ghosh, A. Gupta, and P. Mohapatra. "Scheduling in 
multihop WiMAX networks", ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile 
Computing and Communications Review, Volume 12 Issue 2, 
April 2008, pp. 1-11. 
[6] Y. Xu, S. Wan, J. Tang, and R. S. Wol, "Interference aware 
routing and scheduling in WiMAX mesh networks with smart 
antennas". SeCon'09: 6th Annual IEEE Communications 
Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc 
Communications and Networks, June 2009. 
[7] S. Wan, "Resource Allocation in WiMAX Relay Networks", 
PhD Thesis, Montana State University, USA, April 2010. 
[8] E. Borcoci, M. Constantinescu, S.G. Obreja, A.Baraev, 
T.Rasheed, and D. E. Meddour. Project Deliverable, “D4.4: 
System level simulation analyses and performance measures,” 
ICT FP7 SMART-Net project, May 2011. 
[9] S.G. Obreja, I. Olariu, A. Baraev, and E. Borcoci, 
“Performance Evaluation of a WiMAX Network Using Smart 
Antennas Through System in the Loop OPNET Simulations” 
The 
Eighth 
Advanced 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications, AICT 2012, Sttutgart, Germany, 
27May-1June, 2012,  pp. 81-86. 
[10] J. Mohorko, M. Fras, and Ž. Čučej, ”Real time “system-in-
the-loop” simulation of tactical networks,” 16th International 
Conference on Software, Telecommunicati ons and Computer 
Networks,  SoftCOM 2008, 25-27 Sept. 2008, pp. 105-108. 
[11] http://www.plasmaantennas.com/products/selectabeam-
portfolio/selectabeam-sc-1000.html [retrieved January, 2013]. 
[12] S. Wendt, A. Chicot, and M. Skrok “D5.4b Experimental 
results of real-life Testbed”, ICT European FP7 SMART-Net 
project Deliverable. 
[13] S.G. Obreja, I. Olariu, E. Borcoci, B. Selva, D. Medour, and 
A. Baraev, “D5.5 - Experimental Results of the Combined  
Real and Virtual Testbed”, ICT FP7 SMART-Net project, 
August 2011. 
 
std - standard antenna 
pa - planar antenna  
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-279-0
AICT 2013 : The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

