 
 
Control Plane Design for a Content Streaming System with Dual Adaptation
Eugen Borcoci, Cristian Cernat, Radu Iorga 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
emails: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro, cristian.cernat@elcom.pub.ro, radu.iorga@elcom.pub.ro  
 
 
Abstract — Content streaming delivery has been recently 
considered as an attractive solution for media distribution, 
based on light architectures, working on top of the current 
Internet Protocol (IP) technologies. Such a system is 
considered here, integrating functionalities such as content 
server initial selection based on multi-criteria algorithm and 
then media adaptation (using dynamic adaptive streaming) 
and/or server switching - during the media session. This work-
in-progress contributes to identify the main design concepts for 
the Control Plane of the architecture and in particular for the 
monitoring of  Quality of Services (QoS) and Quality and 
Experience (QoE),  aiming to support both the server selection 
and in–session adaptation actions.  
Keywords — Content delivery,  Dynamic Adaptive Streaming 
over HTTP, Monitoring, Server and Path selection. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recently, over-the-top (OTT) solutions are proposed and 
developed, for media/content delivery, where the services are 
delivered over the current Internet by an entity called Service 
Provider (SP) that is not directly responsible for the quality 
of the flows transmission to the end-user; users access is 
done via the “public Internet”. The OTT SP could exist as a 
separate entity from traditional Internet Service Provider 
(ISP). Also, combined solutions exist, with OTT Service 
Providers using the Content Delivery Network (CDN) 
Providers’ infrastructure to improve the quality of delivery.  
A light (OTT-like) novel architecture for content 
streaming systems over the current Internet is proposed by 
the European DISEDAN Chist-Era project [3], (service and 
user-based DIstributed SElection of content streaming 
source and Dual AdaptatioN, 2014-2015). The business 
actors involved are: Service Provider (SP) - an entity/actor 
which delivers the content services to the users and possibly 
owns and manages the transportation network); End Users 
(EU) consumes the content; a Content Provider (CP) could 
exist, owning some Content Servers (CS). However, 
DISEDAN 
does 
not 
deal 
with 
contractual 
CP-SP 
relationships; therefore one may assume that CSs are also 
owned by the SP. A solution is proposed for the (multi-
criteria-hard) problem of best content source (server) 
selection, considering user context, servers’ availability and 
requested content. The solution novelty consists in:  (1) two-
step server selection mechanism (at SP and at EU) using 
algorithms that consider context- and content-awareness and 
(2) dual adaptation mechanism consisting of media 
adaptation (also called media flow adaptation) and content 
source adaptation (by streaming server switching) when the 
quality observed by the user suffers degradation during the 
media session. The solution could be rapidly deployed in the 
market since it does not require complex architecture like 
Content Oriented Networking or CDNs [1] [2]. 
The Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over Hypertext 
Transfer Protocol- HTTP (DASH) technology has been 
selected for in-session media adaptation. The DASH was 
recently adopted as multimedia streaming standard, to 
deliver high quality multimedia content over the Internet, by 
using conventional HTTP Web servers [4] - [8]. It uses the 
HTTP protocol, minimizes server processing power and is 
video codec agnostic. Its basic concept is to enable automatic 
switching of quality levels according to network conditions, 
user requirements, and expectations. A DASH client 
continuously selects the highest possible video representation 
quality that ensures smooth play-out, in the current 
downloading conditions. This selection is performed on-the-
fly, during video play-out, from a pre-defined discrete set of 
available video rates and with a pre-defined granularity 
(according to video segmentation). The DASH  offers 
important advantages (over traditional push-based streaming), 
like: significant market adoption of HTTP and TCP/IP 
protocols to  support the majority of the today Internet 
services; HTTP-based delivery avoids NAT and firewall- 
related issues; the HTTP-based (non-adaptive) deployment 
of progressive download existing today, can be conveniently 
be upgraded to support DASH; the ability to use 
standard/existing HTTP servers and caches instead of 
specialized streaming servers allows reuse of the existing 
infrastructure.  
This work-in-progress is dedicated to take design 
decisions for a light Control Plane (CPl) and especially for 
its Monitoring subsystem (MON). The MON components are 
developed at SP, CS and optionally at EU Terminal (EUT). 
The 
MON 
is 
an 
essential 
DISEDAN 
component, 
contributing to the evaluation of the QoS and QoE. It is able 
to support both the initial server selection and then in-session 
actions.  
Note that our main purpose here is not to essentially 
innovate in monitoring tools (a lot of implementations are 
available), but to integrate different components, aiming  to 
develop a monitoring subsystem appropriate for DISEDAN 
light architecture.  
Section II is a short overview of related work. Section III 
outlines the overall architecture and problem description. 
Section IV contains the paper main contributions, focused on 
defining CPl (Monitoring included) design decisions and 
implementation-related implications. Section V contains 
conclusions and future work outline. 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
The real-time adaptation in content streaming is a 
powerful and dynamic technique, adopted to solve the 
fluctuations in QoE/QoS. One can classify adaptation as 
acting on Media (flow) and/or on CS. The Media adaptation 
is a significant technique and main research innovation area 
in media streaming applications [6][7][13]. CS adaptation 
means a new content server selection (during the media 
session) and switching (handover), depending on the 
consumer device capabilities, consumer location, content 
servers state  and/or network state [9][10].  
A so-called  “dual adaptation” is a process that integrates 
the above adaptation methods. The DISEDAN novel 
architecture [3] combines the initial server selection (result 
of cooperation between SP and EU) with session-time dual 
adaptation, in a single solution. 
The initial server selection is based on optimization 
algorithms like Multi-Criteria Decision Algorithms (MCDA)  
[9][10], or Evolutionary Multi-objective Optimization 
algorithm (EMO) [11], modified to be applied to DISEDAN 
context. In these works several scenarios are proposed, 
analyzed and evaluated. In particular, the availability of 
different static and/or dynamic input parameters for 
optimization algorithms is considered. The result of this 
variability is that several CPl designs are possible, different 
in terms of performance and complexity. The dynamic 
capabilities for the initial CS selection and then for 
adaptation decisions depends essentially on the power of the 
DISEDAN monitoring system. It is the objective of this 
paper to analyze these variants, and define the monitoring 
subsystem. 
The challenge in DISEDAN is to combine the DASH-
related functionalities with additional monitoring in order to 
finally realize the dual adaptation. 
The standard ISO/IEC 23009-1, "Information technology 
-- Dynamic adaptive streaming over HTTP (DASH)” [6], 
defines the DASH-Metrics client reference model, composed 
of DASH access client (DAC), followed by the DASH-
enabled application (DAE) and Media Output (MO) module. 
The DAC issues HTTP requests (for DASH data structures), 
and receives HTTP request responses. Consequently three 
observation points (interfaces – I/F) can be identified:  
- O1 at network-DAC I/F: a set of TCP connections, each 
defined by its destination IP address, initiation, connect and 
close times; a sequence of transmitted HTTP requests, each 
defined by its transmission time, contents, and the TCP 
connection on which it is sent; and for each HTTP response, 
the reception time and contents of the response header and 
the reception time of each byte of the response body. 
- O2 at DAC-DAE I/F: consists of encoded media 
samples. Each encoded media sample is defined as: media 
type; decoding time; presentation time; the @id of the 
Representation from which the sample is taken; the delivery 
time.  
- O3 at DAE-MO I/F: consists of decoded media samples. 
Each decoded media sample is defined as: the media type; 
the presentation timestamp of the sample (media time); the 
actual presentation time of the sample (real time); the @id of 
the Representation from which the sample is taken (the 
highest dependency level if the sample was constructed from 
multiple Representations). 
A summary of the metrics semantic defined in ISO/IEC 
23009-1 [6], is: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) 
connections, 
HTTP 
request/response 
transactions, 
Representation switch events, Buffer level, Play list. A 
similar list of QoE metrics standardized by 3GPP defined in 
3GPP in 26.247, applicable for DASH, [8][13], contains: 
HTTP request/ response transactions; Representation switch 
events; Average throughput; Initial play-out delay; Buffer 
level; Play list; MD information. 
 
III. 
DISEDAN SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  
A. General framework and  assumptions  
The definition and some details of the system 
architecture are already given in [3][9][10][12]. In this 
section, a summary only will be presented to support 
understanding of the CPl design decisions. 
The main business entities/ actors are those mentioned in 
Section I: SP, EU, CS. The SP and CP entities are not seen 
as distinct in DISEDAN system. Also, a full CS management 
is out of scope of this system. The connectivity between CSs 
and EU Terminals (EUT) is assured by traditional Internet 
Services Providers (ISP) / Network Providers (NP) - 
operators. The ISP/NPs do not enter explicitly in the business 
relationships set considered by DISEDAN, neither in the 
management architecture (DISEDAN works in OTT style). 
However, the DISEDAN solution can be also applied in 
more complex business models, e.g., involving Cloud 
Providers, CDN providers, etc. The relationships between SP 
and such entities could exist, but their realization is out of 
scope of this study. While Service Level Agreements (SLAs) 
might be agreed between SP and ISPs/NPs, related to 
connectivity services offered by the latter to SP, such SLAs 
are not directly visible at DISEDAN system level. 
The system can work over the traditional TCP/IP mono 
and/or multi-domain network environment. The EUTs might 
not have explicit knowledge about the managed/non-
managed characteristics of the connectivity services.  No 
reservation for connectivity resources, neither connectivity 
services differentiation at network level are explicitly 
supposed (but they are not forbidden). This proves the 
system flexibility: it can work both in OTT style, or over a 
managed connectivity service offered by the network. 
Therefore, the SP does not commit to offer strong QoS 
guarantees for the streaming services provided to EUs. 
Consequently, DISEDAN does not suppose, but does not 
exclude, establishment of a SLA relationships between EUs 
and SPs management entities. However, it is assumed that a 
Media Description Server exists, managed by SP, to which 
EUT will directly interact. 
The media streaming actions are independent on the 
transport networking technology. The EUT part (client side) 
works as a standalone client application, without any 
mandatory modifications applied to the SP; however, SP 
should  provide some basic information to EUT, to help it in 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
making initial server selection (and optionally to help in-
session CS switching). The decision about dual adaptation 
(media flow adaptation and/or CS switching will be taken 
mainly locally at EUT, thus assuring User independency and 
avoiding complex signaling between user and SP during the 
session.  
Several CSs exist, known by SP (geographical location, 
server availability level, access conditions for users), among 
which the SP and/or EUs can operate servers selection and/or 
switching. The proposed architecture does not treat how to 
solve failures inside the networks, except attempts to do 
media flow DASH adaptation or CS switching.  
The proposed system does not explicitly treat or innovate 
in the domain of content protection, Digital Rights 
Management (DRM), etc., but might use currently available 
solutions. Billing, financial aspects and other business 
related management of the DISEDAN high level services are 
out of the project scope.  
The work [12], elaborated also in DISEDAN framework, 
has defined all requirements coming for EU, SP and out of 
them derived the general and specific System requirements, 
together with some assumptions and constrains imposed to 
such a system. The resulting high level architecture has been 
determined by such requirements. This work is based on the 
assumption of fulfillment of those requirements. 
B. General Architecture   
Figure 1 shows a simplified high level view of the 
general architecture.  
The SP includes in its Control Plane:  
• MPD File generator – dynamically generates Media 
Presentation 
Description 
(MPD) 
XML 
file, 
containing media segments information (video 
resolution, 
bit 
rates, 
etc.), 
ranked 
list 
of 
recommended CSs and, optionally - current CSs state 
information and network state (if applicable). 
• Selection algorithm –runs Step 1 of server selection 
process. It exploits MCDA [9][10], modified to be 
applied to DISEDAN context, or EMO [11],  etc., to 
rank recommended CSs and media representations, 
aiming to optimize servers load as well as to 
maximize system utilization.  
• Monitoring 
module 
– 
collects 
monitoring 
information from CSs and performs the processing 
required to estimate the current state of each CS. 
Note that if some EU information should go to SP, 
then this information is transited (and aggregated) 
from EUT via CS towards SP.  
The End User Terminal entity includes the modules: 
• Data Plane: DASH (access and application) – parses 
the MD file received from SP and handles the 
download of media segments from CS; Media Player 
– playbacks the downloaded media segments. 
• Control Plane: Content Source Selection and 
Adaptation engine –implements the dual adaptation 
mechanism; Selection algorithm –performs the Step 
2 of server selection process. It can also exploit 
MCDA, EMO, or other algorithms to select the best 
CS from the set of candidates recommended by SP; 
Monitoring module – monitors changing (local) 
network and server conditions.  
 
 
. 
 
Data segment Request 
DB 
Monitoring 
End UserTerminal 
Selection 
Algorithm 
Content source  
Selection  and  
Adaptation engine 
Monitoring 
Content Server 1 
Media  
Player 
DASH 
appl. 
Streaming 
Module  
Content Server 
switching 
Media  
adaptation 
Monitoring 
Media  
Description 
Generator 
Service  
Provider 
Selection Algorithm 
Data segment  
MPD File 
Request 
. 
 . 
 
Content Server n 
MPD File 
 
DB 
MON 
signaling 
 
 
Control Plane 
blocks 
DASH 
Access  
client  
O1 
O2 
O3 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Figure 1.  DISEDAN general architecture; DASH - Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP; MD – Media Description; DB – Data Base ; O1, O2, O3 – 
DASH Observation Points [ISO/IEC 23009-1] 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
The CS entity includes the modules: 
• Data Plane: Streaming module – sends media 
segments requested by End Users; Monitoring 
module – monitors CS performance metrics (CPU 
utilization, network interfaces utilization, etc.). In a 
complex implementation of the CS, the monitoring 
can evolve from a simple probe to an advanced 
monitoring module, capable to supervise not only the 
active 
sessions 
but 
also 
some 
connectivity 
characteristics from this CS to different groups of 
users. 
The following functional steps are performed (simplified 
description): (1) EUT issues to SP a media file request. (2) 
SP analyzes the status of the CSs and runs the selection 
algorithm (optionally the SP could make first, a current 
probing of the CSs); for each user request the SP could 
consider also the user profile, the policies of the SP for this 
user’s class and other information at the SP side (e.g., state 
of the servers and possibly network-related information).  (3) 
SP returns to EUT a ordered list of candidates CS (SP 
proposal) embedded in a MD- xml) file. (4) The EUT 
performs the final CS selection, by running its own selection 
algorithm and (5) starts asking segments from the selected  
CS. During media session the EUT makes quality and 
context measurements. Continuous media flow adaptation is 
applied using DASH technology, if necessary, or (6) CS 
switching is decided. From the EU point of view, the steps 1-
2-3 composed the so-called Phase1 and steps 4-5-6 the Phase 
2. 
During the receipt of consecutive chunks, the user’s 
application can automatically change the rate of the content 
stream (internal DASH actions- which are out of scope in 
this paper) and/or also can switch to another CS. When EU 
receives requested segments, it performs measurements to 
monitor parameters of download process. Note that the 
system is flexible in terms of monitoring procedures to 
follow. For instance if EU detects deterioration of 
downloading rate, it can use SP information about alternate 
CSs and/or it can start probing CSs. When the probing 
process finished, EU starts dual adaptation process to decide 
: media or server adaptation. If the first is selected, then EU 
downloads (via DASH) next segments with reduce rate, 
otherwise switches to another CS.  
IV. 
MONITORING SUBSYSTEM 
The architecture of the DISEDAN CPl is flexible. Several 
variants/versions of designs can be considered, i.e., a basic 
one or more complex, essentially depending on the roles of 
the business entities and their capabilities, interactions and 
also on SP and EU policies. The selection algorithms 
MCDA/EMO might work with different sets of static and/or 
dynamic input parameters. An important component of the 
CPl is the Monitoring (MON@DISEDAN). 
A. Monitoring Architecture  
Three MON modules have been identified in Figure 1: 
MON@SP, MON@CS, MON@EUT. However, not all 
these entities must participate to all phases of functioning. 
The variety of solutions determine the system overall 
performance but with additional cost for the more complex 
solutions. The monitored data are used to accomplish the 
following macro objectives : 
- 
guide the initial server selection at SP and 
(optionally) at EU, 
- 
guide the media adaptation and/or CS switching. 
From the EUT point of view, two phases are 
distinguished:  
Phase1 in which the EUT is not connected 
to any CS, but it just tries to do this, by contacting the SP; 
Phase2 in which the EUT is currently served by a CS (media 
session time). The monitored data at EU level are different in 
Phase 1 w.r.t. Phase 2. 
Note also that during media session, the DASH 
subsystem performs its own evaluation of the QoE and based 
on this, decides upon requested rate of the next video 
segment. The implementation of this type of monitoring is 
out of MON scope. However, the data collected from such 
on-line monitoring can be combined with other values 
delivered by MON@EU and delivered to other entities in the 
hierarchy (CS, SP). Actually, we adopted the approach 
described in [13] where it is recalled that in the 3GPP DASH 
specification TS 26.247 [7-8], QoE measurement and 
reporting capability is defined as an optional feature for 
client devices. If the EUT supports the QoE reporting 
feature, the DASH standard also mandates the reporting of 
all of the requested metrics at any given time; that is, the 
client should be capable of measuring and reporting all of 
the QoE metrics specified in the standard.  
The standard TS 26.247 also specifies two options for the 
activation or triggering of QoE reporting: a. via the Quality 
Metrics element in the MPD; b. via the OMA Device 
Management (DM) QoE Management Object. In both cases 
a and b, the trigger message from the CS would include 
reporting configuration information such as the set of QoE 
metrics to be reported, the URIs for the server(s) to which 
the QoE reports should be sent, the  format of the QoE 
reports, information on QoE reporting frequency and 
measurement interval, percentage of sessions for which QoE 
metrics will be reported, and access point names to be used 
for establishing the packet data protocol (PDP) context to be 
used for sending the QoE reports. 
The selection algorithms MCDA/EMO might work with 
different sets of static and/or dynamic input parameters.  
To achieve scalability of the monitoring system an 
important design decision is to avoid direct signaling 
between EUT and SP, except the initial request issued by 
EUT towards SP, in order to get the MPD xml file. Apart 
this phase, any monitored information obtained in EUT 
premises will be sent to the current CS serving that EUT.  
We define three control bi-directional channels (see 
Figure 1) : 
EUT-SP to generate the EU request to SP and to get the 
MD file from SP. This is performed in Phase 1 of the 
DISEDAN functional cycle, i.e., at CS selection time.  
EUT–CS triggered by the serving CS, to report, the 
monitored data about current EU status and media session 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
data. This signaling is performed during Phase 2 time life for 
this EUT (i.e., media session).  
CS-SP- to report: CS status data (capacity occupied, 
number of connections currently served, etc.); status data 
received from EUT (such data can be related to some 
individual users or aggregated at the CS level. The 
communication on this channel is triggered by the SP. 
B. 
Typical Scenarios 
Figure 2 presents a simplified Message Sequence Chart 
(MSC) illustrating the activities, communication in Data 
Plane (DASH) and the associated signaling executed in the 
Control Plane. One can see the Phase 1 and Phase 2 sets of 
actions, performed by EUT1. 
Several types of monitoring activities are performed, 
described below. 
Proactive monitoring: executed in some continuous 
mode (at SP level and possibly at EUT level- see the “loop” 
notations in Figure 2); such information is input for the CS 
selection algorithm (Phase 1), when some new content 
requests arrive from a given EU to SP. At SP, this means 
supervision of different servers, maybe networks, and user 
communities, depending on its policies. SP/CS cooperation 
on this purpose is envisaged. Such data can be also used to 
construct a history and updated status of the environment 
envisaged by the SP. The CSs could be involved in proactive 
monitoring, provided they are capable to probe the 
connectivity characteristics towards different groups of users 
(indicated by the SP). 
At EU side, proactive monitoring might be performed, 
depending on capabilities of the EUT and its SW. In some 
more complex scenarios the EU can construct history, 
dedicated to its usual content connections (if they are 
estimated to be repeated in the future). The terminal context 
can be evaluated by such measurements, including its access 
network status. 
In-session monitoring: monitoring is performed on a flow 
and data are collected in real time, to  assess the level of 
QoS/QoE observed at EU side. These actions are basically 
performed by the EUT. Note that two kind of information are 
produced:  
- 
collected by the DASH mechanisms, to serve 
internally as real time inputs to adaptation decision 
engine at EU, 
- 
collected by the MON@EUT, which can be 
consolidated with those produced by the DASH, thus 
offering a more complete view not only about the 
reception of he media flow but also on general status 
and environment of the EUT. 
  In more complex DISEDAN variants, the SP and/or CS 
can be involved in such  monitoring, at least in being aware 
of  results (note that no SLA concerning mutual obligations 
of SP/EUs, related to QoE are established in DISEDAN 
system): for all active users or subsets; for all monitored data 
or summaries; full or summary monitored values. 
Opportunity 
related 
monitoring: 
measurements 
essentially performed by the EUT to test the opportunity of 
switching the CS that delivers the content to EU. An 
example of such category is the Probing of some CS 
candidates if a CS switching action is prepared.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Typical activity and signaling diagram 
C. Metrics and MON versions 
Apart from DASH defined metrics (in-session observed), 
the MON subsystem may collect information on: 
MON@EUT: CS accessibility (probing); EUT local 
dynamic context; historical and prediction data on servers 
and paths utilization. 
MON@SP:CS status (collected from CS); active Users 
status; current load on some paths (here the network 
monitoring of the NP should cooperate); other dynamic, 
characteristics of some paths (e.g., loss, jitter); historical and 
prediction data on servers and paths utilization.  
MON@CS:CS status (load); CS environment data 
(network paths, connectivity paths dynamic characteristics  -
evaluated at overlay level - from CS to different groups of 
users; EUTs data, active user groups data. 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
Therefore the overall MON system design is flexible, 
since it can combine different features of the above 
components.  
D. Implementation aspects 
SP and CS will have an internal database that will 
contain monitored and/or post-processed data. Also these 
two entities will be capable to send and receive JSON 
messages embedded in simple HTTP calls. EU might not 
have any internal database; it will just have the basic 
capability to send only simple HTTP calls to either SP or CS. 
For Database is proposed to use PostgreSQL, technology 
[16]. The PostgreSQL is a powerful, open source object-
relational database system. It runs on all major operating 
systems, including Linux, UNIX, and Windows. 
SP and CS must be able to receive and send simple 
HTTP messages to each other. For this reason it is needed 
need a web server and a programming language to 
implement these features. Web server of choice is Node.js 
[17]. 
The Node.js [17] is an open source, cross-platform 
runtime environment for server-side and networking 
applications. The Node.js applications are written in 
JavaScript, and can be run within the Node.js runtime on OS 
X, Microsoft Windows, Linux and FreeBSD.  
Currently the system is under implementation phase, 
performed by the DISEDAN consortium. A pilot system has 
been constructed having a core network (three IP network 
domains, independently managed, a SP entity and several 
CSs and EUTs distributed onto the local area networks 
linked to the core. Preliminary tests showed that MCDA 
applied at server level [10][12], produces the best trade-off  
selection of the server-path  pair offering a good QoE to the 
EU in rather loaded network conditions.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the design concepts and decisions 
for the CPl of a media delivery system having a light-
architecture and working on top of the current Internet 
connectivity.  
The work focus is on the Monitoring subsystem, seen as 
a main component to provide dynamic information,  to 
support the two major functional phases:  initial CS selection 
and then in-session actions for media adaptation and/or CS 
switching. The architectural specification and then the design 
of the monitoring system have been  proposed, combining 
the DASH - embedded monitoring features (to evaluate 
QoS/QOE) with external-to -DASH monitoring functions, 
thus completing the updated image of the DISEDAN 
environment (End User, Content Servers, network).   
Future experimental results of the implementation will 
be reported in another paper. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the Research 
Project DISEDAN, No.3-CHIST-ERA C3N, 2014- 2015. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Choi, J. Han, E. Cho, T. Kwon, and Y. Choi, “A Survey on 
Content-Oriented Networking for Efficient Content Delivery”, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011, pp. 121-127. 
[2] ***, “Information-Centric Networking-3”, Dagstuhl Seminar, 
July 13-16 2014, 
http://www.dagstuhl.de/en/program/calendar/semhp/?seminar
=14291, [retrieved: February, 2015].   
[3] *** http://wp2.tele.pw.edu.pl/disedan/ [retrieved:May, 2015]   
[4] T. Dreier, "Netﬂix sees cost savings in MPEG DASH 
adoption," 
15 
December 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.streamingmedia.com/Articles/ReadArticle.aspx?A
rticleID=79409. [retrieved: October, 2014]. 
[5] I. Sodagar, "The MPEG-DASH Standard for Multimedia 
Streaming Over the Internet," MultiMedia, IEEE, vol. 18, no. 
4, 2011, pp. 62 - 67.  
[6] ISO/IEC 23009-1, "Information technology -- Dynamic 
adaptive streaming over HTTP (DASH) -- Part 1: Media 
presentation description and segment formats," ISO/IEC, 
Geneve, second edition, 2014.  
[7] 3GPP TS 26.247 v10.1.0, “Transparent End-to-End Packet 
Switched Streaming Service (PSS); Progressive Download 
and Dynamic Adaptive Streaming Over HTTP (3GP-
DASH),” Release 10, June 2011. 
[8] ETSI TS 126 247 V11.7.0 (2014-07)  (UMTS); LTE; 
Transparent end-to-end Packet-switched Streaming Service 
(PSS); Progressive Download and Dynamic Adaptive 
Streaming over HTTP (3GP-DASH), (3GPP TS 26.247 
version 11.7.0 Release 11, 2014). 
[9] A. Beben, J. M. Batalla, W. Chai  and J. Sliwinski, “Multi-
criteria decision algorithms for efficient content delivery in 
content networks”, Annals of Telecommunications - annales 
des telecommunications, Springer, vol. 68, Issue 3, 2013, pp. 
153-165. 
[10] E. Borcoci, M. Vochin, M. Constantinescu, J. M. Batalla, and 
D. Negru, “On Server and Path Selection Algorithms and 
Policies in a light Content-Aware Networking Architecture”, 
ICSNC 2014 Conference, 
http://www.elcom.pub.ro/disedan/docs/ICSNC%202014%20
Conf.pdf. 
[11] J. M. Batalla, C.X. Mavromoustakis, G. Mastorakis, D. Négru 
and E. Borcoci, “Evolutionary Multiobjective Optimization 
algorithm for two-phase content source selection process in 
Content Aware Networks”, submitted to Springer 4OR - A 
Quarterly Journal of Operations Research. 
[12] E. Borcoci, ed.,  et al., D2.1 “System requirements and 
comparative analysis of existing solutions for media content 
server 
selection 
and 
media 
adaptation”, 
July 
2014, 
http://wp2.tele.pw.edu.pl/disedan . 
[13] O. Oyman and S. Singh,"Quality of Experience for HTTP 
Adaptive 
Streaming 
Services", 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, April 2012, pp.20-27. 
[14] C. Alberti, D. Renzi, C. Timmerer, C. Mueller, S. Lederer, S. 
Battista and  M. Mattavelli, “Automated QoE Evaluation of 
DASH”, 2013 Fifth International Workshop on Quality of 
Multimedia 
Experience 
(QoMEX),  
http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/188813/files/p20-Alberti.pdf, 
[retrieved: February, 2015].   
[15] C. Müller, S. Lederer and C. Timmerer, “An Evaluation of 
Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP in Vehicular 
Environments” , www-itec.uni-klu.ac.at/dash/?p=517. 
[16] ***, http://www.postgresql.org,  [retrieved: March, 2015].   
[17] ***, http://nodejs.org, [retrieved: March, 2015].   
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

