Snap or Point and Click? 
Realizing the Potential of a Teacher Education Self-Study 
Lorayne Robertson, Dianne Thomson, Lori May & Jim Greenlaw  
Faculty of Education, UOIT 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology 
Oshawa, Canada 
Lorayne.robertson@uoit.ca 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—This research work-in-progress centers on the views 
of participants in a higher education self-study as they 
compare the web-centric self-study environment with the 
opportunities and challenges of the traditional written self-
study format. Participants include approximately 100 faculty; 
preservice teachers; district school board personnel; and the 
reviewers.  Through this process, we seek to identify their 
perceptions of most productive use of professionals’ time in a 
self-study process. The research methodology is mixed and 
involves the use of a survey mechanism within the web-enabled 
self-study 
environment. 
Several 
key 
questions 
focus 
participants’ attention on the levels of their awareness of the 
mission, vision and higher education program outcomes.  
Participants also compare the helpfulness of the written self-
study and the web-enabled self-study for purposes of 
continuous improvement of the overall student learning 
experience, and engagement. This study is underway and 
anticipates initial findings by March, 2011 to be presented at 
the conference.     
Keywords - education, digital technologies, self-study, 
preservice education, technology affordances, new literacies.        
I. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The context for this study is the self-study 
of a teacher education program at a designated 
University of Technology, with a laptop-enabled 
program.  All teacher candidates in the one-year 
post baccalaureate program are assigned a laptop 
imaged with educational curriculum policy 
documents and educational software. Technology 
is almost ubiquitous in the program: WebCT is 
the learning management system (LMS), Adobe 
Connect is used for teaching some of the live, 
synchronous classes, and teacher candidates learn 
a wide range of technology-supported teaching 
and learning methodologies.  Some of these 
include: the construction and deconstruction of 
digital media; the application, construction and 
critical analysis of web-based learning objects 
(WBLO’s); and the educational applications and 
potential of graphic design programs, blogs, 
wikis, and other similar learning platforms.  
A self-study of the teacher education 
program is required every 5 years by the 
government 
regulatory 
board 
for 
teacher 
certification, and the university’s regulatory board 
for planned quality assurance review.  Both 
boards require the teacher education program to 
provide evidence to demonstrate compliance with 
established 
standards 
by 
providing 
written 
analytical self-study documents.  Although the 
teacher education program is technology-centric, 
this descriptor does not necessarily apply to the 
accrediting agencies. The licensing board, the 
Ontario College of Teachers (OCT) requires a 
somewhat traditional lengthy narrative (in the area 
of five or more heavy binders) while the higher 
education board requires a somewhat more 
concise 100 page analytical written report. This, 
for us represents the “snap” aspect of the review. 
Once the binders snap shut, the self-study is sent 
to the reviewers.  
Both accrediting agencies require the 
submission of the self-study document to the 
external reviewers several months before the site 
visits of the external review teams; site visits 
include both interviews with stakeholders the 
reviewers identify and the establishment of an 
evidence room.  For the self-study that is the 
focus of this research, the faculty of education is 
experiencing both external reviews in one 
semester. A lengthy narrative for the self-study 
has been provided to both agencies but both have 
83
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

allowed the use of a virtual evidence room for the 
site visits. 
While it is generally acknowledged that the 
purpose of a self-study is for improvement, 
research 
on 
self-studies 
identifies 
that 
improvement and faculty engagement are not 
necessarily generated through the traditional form 
of an externally-mandated self-study mechanism 
within an external review (Van Kemenade & 
Hardjono, 2010). To date, little research has been 
undertaken on a potential further source of 
association or disassociation for a faculty - that of 
requiring the accreditation self-study reporting 
through a written narrative script that is no longer 
the central communication norm in a technology-
centric university. This study focuses on the 
participant perceptions of gains or affordances 
from the traditional self-study narrative (the snap 
of the binder) compared to participant perceptions 
of the gains from a point and click web-enabled 
self-study environment.   
II. 
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
Self-evaluation or a self-study in the 
context of an external review is a mechanism that 
is intended to engage a faculty in the examination 
of itself in order to demonstrate that the faculty 
merits 
recertification. 
 
Whether 
or 
not 
improvement is an outcome of the self-study 
depends on many factors such as whether or not 
the study actually reflects the demonstrated 
outcomes of the faculty’s efforts (veracity); 
whether 
or 
not 
the 
evidence 
is 
valid 
(trustworthiness of the data); if the external 
reviewers have the requisite expertise and context 
to suggest relevant improvements (helpfulness); 
or whether or not the faculty actually engage in 
the self-improvement aspect of the self-study 
(engagement).   
There is a field of research on self-study in 
education.  There are, for example, findings 
regarding the most effective mechanisms for 
sufficient faculty engagement for an effective 
self-study (Kollenberg, 2003).  Other research 
identifies tensions in the self-study research field 
such as disagreement as to what constitutes valid 
research in a self-study (e.g, Craig, 2009).  
Another tension surrounds whether or not the 
most productive self-studies have an external 
focus and control, or an internal focus and control 
(Van Kemenade & Hardjono, 2010).  In addition 
to the tensions identified, we sought studies that 
address 
the 
potential 
of 
“new 
literacies” 
(Lankshear & Knobel, 2006) to improve the self-
study experience and we find little evidence of 
work in this field.  In the section that follows, we 
will briefly touch upon identified self-study 
tensions and then introduce “new literacies” as a 
potentially promising theoretical framework to 
investigate the efficacy of the self-study as a 
mechanism for improvement. 
 The field for self-study research concerns 
itself with several distinct fields of interest. One is 
the practical side of self-study - mechanisms for 
gathering self-study data and faculty engagement, 
meeting timelines, organizing for the site visit, 
reporting mechanisms to survive the ordeal, and 
inviting 
faculty 
engagement 
(e.g., 
Van 
Kollenburg, 2003).  A second aspect of self-study 
research concerns itself with identification - 
wrestling with distinctions between self-study and 
action research (e.g., Samaras & Freese, 2009) or 
self-study and teacher-as-researcher (e.g., Turner, 
2010).   Another tension is around the definition 
of what constitutes robustness or acceptable 
evidence in self-studies. Craig (2009) reminds us 
that “signs of struggle abound” in the field of self-
study, which she identifies as a struggle to accept 
the trustworthiness of reports from the field of 
practice and reflection, noting that “the hegemony 
of the dominant research paradigm” brings into 
question the validity of “self-study research 
contributions” (p.21) as a relatively new field of 
study.   
A further tension in the research appears to 
focus around the helpfulness of the study. For 
example, is an externally-regulated self-study 
more likely to engage a faculty in self-
improvement than a study that is internally-
generated?  Are self-studies a legitimate means of 
assuring quality in tertiary education?  Van 
Kemenade and Hardjono (2010) remind us that it 
is critically important for a self-study to involve 
and engage the participants or it may result in 
84
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

something that resembles a window-dressing 
exercise or one that could potentially decrease the 
motivation of the participants in their work 
efforts.  Their extensive two-year study identifies 
that, in most European countries, self-study in 
accreditation is compulsory and designed for 
accountability – in Norway, Finland, Denmark 
and Sweden, self-study is also compulsory but is 
designed for self-improvement.  The methods are 
somewhat similar in both processes: a self-
evaluation followed by a peer review.  Their 
findings indicate that while accreditation is not a 
key focus of faculty in general, there are factors 
that can influence their support of the process.  
They are more willing to contribute to a process if 
they see that it has an added value for their 
organization (i.e., out of loyalty) or if the process 
has value for their key interests (their students and 
their disciplines).  They are also more likely to 
contribute if the focus is not control and if the 
processes are simple and supported by the 
management.  They are also more likely to 
contribute if an internal quality assurance 
mechanism already exists.  Van Kemenade and 
Hardjono conclude that professionals will be 
careful in writing down the truth and showing 
their vulnerability in an accreditation system that 
is compulsory and has serious consequences.  
There appear to be benefits to a system that is not 
compulsory, invites participation, is less formal, 
and occurs frequently (e.g., annually).  
There is some interest in the literature in 
how digital technologies can support the self-
study process. Askins (2003) identifies some of 
the advantages of the use of a learning 
management system 
(LMS), in this case, 
Blackboard, for a self-study.  These include: the 
fluid nature of documents; ease of holding 
synchronous online meetings despite distance 
between participants and weather conditions; ease 
of collecting files through a digital drop box 
system; virtual access to faculty policies and 
procedures; and ease of managing requests for 
information to faculty through email.  Challenges 
with an LMS-enabled self-study process include; 
a need for technical support person; faculty 
resistance to technology; and faculty comfort with 
the LMS (Askins, 2003).  She sees the potential 
that a web-enabled environment holds for 
supporting a self-study, but finds that a web-
enabled environment may not be needed in 
smaller self-studies.    
There appears to be a gap in teacher 
education self-study research to address issues 
that are of central importance to us in our study, 
that is, matching the needs of a review system that 
was designed for an earlier era with the skill set 
and communication practices of a faculty that 
works with web-enabled technologies.  Our study 
explores the potential and affordances of “new 
literacies” (Lankshear & Knobel, 2006) to address 
previously-identified challenges with the self-
study process: logistics; faculty engagement;  
trustworthiness of data; and the potential of a self-
study to lead toward improving the program under 
review. 
 
III. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Lankshear and Knobel identify new 
literacies as “practices that are mediated by post-
typographical forms of text” and identify these 
practices as the “technical stuff” and the “ethos 
stuff” (2006, p. 25).  Extrapolating from the 
dichotomy they present, some of the technical 
practices for the purposes of a self-study might 
include: 
using 
and 
constructing 
hyperlinks 
between documents; pointing and clicking to 
access text; providing evidence with movie files; 
using sound with images for digital stories; and 
building a website environment for the self-study.  
Some of the ethos practices might include: more 
participation, collaboration and shared authoring; 
less presentation of text in a final form and single-
authored; 
more 
immediate 
distribution 
of 
information to constituents; and a format that 
reflects contemporary literacies.  
 
IV. RESEARCH STUDY 
 
The research in progress involves the 
systematic examination of participant perceptions 
between the traditional written self-study binder 
submissions and opportunities and challenges 
85
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

presented 
by 
the 
web-centric 
self-study. 
Participants include approximately 100 faculty, 
key stakeholders and reviewers. We seek to find 
the most respectful use of participants’ time 
toward a process that is both engaging and 
produces results. The research methodology is 
mixed but essentially qualitative and involves the 
use of a survey mechanism within a web-enabled 
self-study environment.  Within a password-
protected web-based environment, participants 
identify themselves as faculty, members of the 
internal review team, stakeholders, or members of 
the external review team.  They are invited but not 
required to participate in an online survey.  
The survey asks them to consider past 
experiences with self-studies – to identify the 
types of self-studies in which they have 
participated in the past; the most important things 
learned from past processes; and challenges 
encountered (Atnip, Vasquez and Kahn, 2003). 
The survey then asks them to identify aspects of 
the web-enabled self-study that have helped them 
to learn or have created challenges for them.  
Several key questions focus participants’ self-
assessment of their awareness of the mission, 
vision and program outcomes during both the 
written self-study submission process and the 
web-enabled self-study process. Other questions 
ask the participants to compare the helpfulness of 
the written self-study and the web-enabled self-
study for purposes of continuous improvement of 
the overall student learning experience, as well as 
perceptions regarding the factors identified by 
research that affect the strength of faculty 
engagement in the self-study process.  
This study is presently underway and 
anticipates some early findings by March, 2011 to 
be presented at the conference.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Atnip, M. Vasquez, and S. Kahn. “Deciding how to approach the 
self-study: Three campuses, three choices.”  A Collection of Papers 
on Self-Study and Institutional Improvement, Chicago: North Central 
Association of Colleges and schools, 2003. 
[2] C. Beck  and C. Kosnik, Innovations in Teacher Education: A Social 
Constructivist Approach. Albany, NY: State Univ of New York Pr. 
2006.  
[3] S.Dixon and R. Moorse, Self-assessment for improvement [and] 
preparing 
for 
accreditation: 
Colleges 
and 
self-
assessment.London,UK:Further Education Development Agency,  
2000. 
[4] T. Friedman. The world is flat: The globalized world in the twenty-
first century . London, Penguin, 2006.  
[5] P.L.B. Kohl and V. Gomez. Reaccreditation self-study: A tool for 
curricula improvement. Paper presented at the annual meeting for the 
association of teacher educators. St. Louis, MO, 1996. 
[6] C. Lankshear and M. Knobel. New literacies: Everyday practices and 
classroom learning. Berkshire, UK:Open Univ Pr, 2006 
[7] A. Samaras and A. Freese. “Looking back and looking forward: An 
historical overview of the self-study school,” In Self-study research 
methodologies for teacher educators ,  C. A. Lassonde, S. C. Galman 
& C. M. Kosnik, Eds.,Rotterdam, The Netherlands:Sense Publishers, 
2009 
[8] I. Silver, C. Campbell, B. Marlow, and J. Sargeant. “Self-assessment 
and continuing professional development: The canadian perspective.” 
Journal of Continuing Education in the Health Professions, vol. 
28(1), pp. 25-31, 2008. 
[9] B. Trilling and C. Fadel. 21st century skills: Learning for life in our 
times, San Francisco, CA:Jossey-Bass, 2009. 
[10] E. Van Kemenade and T.W. Hardjono. “A critique of the use of self-
evaluation in a compulsory accreditation system.” Quality in Higher 
Education,  vol. 16(3), 2010,  pp. 257-268.  
[11] S.E. Van Kollenburg. A collection of papers on self-study and 
institutional improvement. Volume 4. The self-study process for 
commission evaluation. Chicago: North Central Association of 
Colleges and schools, 2003. 
[12] B.M. Whitehead, D. Jensen, and F. Boschee. Planning for technology: 
A guide for school administrators, technology coordinators, and 
curriculum leaders. Thousand Oaks, CA:Corwin Press, 2003. 
86
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

