Extending the Protocol Interference Model Considering SINR
for Wireless Mesh Networks
Gyeongyeon Kang
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
Osaka University, Japan
Email: g-kang@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Yoshiaki Taniguchi, Go Hasegawa, Hirotaka Nakano
Cybermedia Center
Osaka University, Japan
Email: {y-tanigu, hasegawa, nakano}@cmc.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—Radio interference should be taken into account
to assign time slots to links in time division multiple access
(TDMA)-based wireless mesh networks. In many graph theory-
based time slot assignment algorithms, the protocol interference
model is widely used to obtain radio interference information,
although this model is considered to be inaccurate when
compared with actual radio interference. On the other hand,
the signal-to-interference-plus-noise-ratio model (SINR model)
is a well-known and accurate model of radio interference.
However, the SINR model requires time slot information to
obtain radio interference relationship, and thus it is difﬁcult
to apply the SINR model to graph theory-based time slot
assignment algorithms. In this paper, we extend the protocol
interference model to represent radio interference more accu-
rately for wireless mesh networks. To do this, we adjust the
interference ratio parameter of the protocol interference model
by considering SINR. We propose three methods for adjusting
this parameter. Through simulation, it is shown that higher
accuracy of the protocol interference model can be achieved
by adjusting the interference ratio parameter for each node.
Keywords-wireless
mesh
networks,
protocol
interference
model, signal-to-plus-noise-ratio model, time slot assignment.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless mesh networks have attracted a great deal of
attention for providing wireless broadband access because
of their expandability and cost efﬁciency [1]. Wireless mesh
networks consist of a gateway node which is connected to
a wired network and mesh nodes which relay the messages
between the gateway node and client terminals as shown in
Fig. 1. A mesh node is connected with another node through
a wireless link when they are within transmission range of
each other. A mesh node provides wireless broadband access
service to client terminals within its service area.
In wireless networks, when closely located links are
simultaneously used, a receiver node cannot correctly receive
radio signals from the corresponding sender node due to
radio interference. That is why it is necessary to avoid
radio interference in wireless networks. In the time division
multiple access (TDMA) protocol, time is divided into
frames, each of which consists of time slots of constant
duration. Different time slots are then assigned to links that
interfere with each other. The performance of the wireless
mesh networks highly dependent on the time slot assignment
algorithms, and graph theory-based time slot assignment
algorithms for wireless mesh networks have been studied
Backhaul network
Gateway node
Mesh node
Client terminal
Wireless upward link
Wireless downward link
Wired link
Figure 1.
Wireless mesh network
[2, 3, 4] since time slot assignment algorithms can be
regarded as the graph coloring in graph theory.
Graph theory-based time slot assignment algorithms re-
quire information on the interference relationships among
links before assigning time slots to links. In these algorithms,
the protocol interference model (a.k.a. uniﬁed disk graph
model) [5, 6] has been widely used to obtain radio interfer-
ence information. In the protocol interference model, a radio
interference range is deﬁned as a circle centered on a sender
node. Since the interference relationships among links are
deﬁned according to the location of nodes, the protocol
interference model can be easily used in theoretical analysis.
However, the protocol interference model is not accurate
in comparison with physical radio interference [6]. For
example, closely located links can be used simultaneously
when each receiver node can receive signals of sufﬁcient
strength from the corresponding sender node, even if the
protocol interference model indicates that the links interfere
with each other [7]. In addition, there is a situation in
which a receiver node cannot correctly receive radio signals
from the corresponding sender node when many links are
simultaneously used and interfere with the receiver node,
even if there are no interference relationships among the
links in the protocol interference model.
On the other hand, the signal-to-interference-plus-noise
ratio (SINR) model [6, 7] is known for accurate radio
interference representation. In the SINR model, when the
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio of a link is beyond a
threshold value, the receiver node of the link can success-
fully receive the radio signal from the sender node of the
26
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

link. The SINR model can handle features of wireless radio
propagation such as Rayleigh fading, shadowing effects and
capture effects[8]. However, to obtain interference relation-
ships among links, the SINR model requires information
not only on the location of nodes, but also on sender nodes
which simultaneously emit radio signals. Therefore, it is
difﬁcult to apply the SINR model to the graph theory-based
time slot assignment algorithms.
To apply the graph theory-based time slot assignment
algorithms to actual wireless mesh networks, accurate in-
formation on interference relationships is needed in order to
avoid interference among links and to assign time slots to
links efﬁciently. In other words, accurate radio interference
models are needed that can be applied in graph theory-
based time slot assignment algorithms. For this purpose,
in this paper we extend the protocol interference model
considering SINR. This is accomplished by adjusting the
interference ratio parameter of the protocol interference
model. The overview of our proposal is as follows. For
a wireless mesh network, interference relationships are at
ﬁrst determined based on the protocol interference model.
Then, time slots are assigned for all links based on the
information on the interference relationships. These steps
are repeated by adjusting the interference ratio parameter
until all links satisfy certain SINR criteria. We propose three
heuristic methods for adjusting the parameter. The accuracy
and effect of our proposed radio interference models are
evaluated through simulation experiments.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we introduce some related studies. In Section III, we
describe the network model and radio interference models.
Then in Section IV, we propose three methods for adjusting
the interference ratio parameter of the protocol interference
model, considering the SINR; these methods are evaluated
through simulation in Section V. Finally, we conclude this
paper and discuss future work in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
To assign time slots to links in TDMA-based wireless
networks, information on interference relationships among
links is needed. There are a variety of radio interference
models for wireless networks, and these radio interference
models have been compared in previous studies [6, 9, 10].
Maheshwari et al. have investigated the accuracy of radio
interference models in IEEE 802.15.4-based wireless sensor
networks [9]. They conducted experiments using 20 TelosB
commercial sensor nodes, and evaluated the accuracy of the
protocol interference model, the SINR model, the hop-based
interference model, the link quality-based interference model
and the range-based interference model. As a result, they
found that the SINR model is the most accurate among the
radio interference models when compared with actual radio
interference. Furthermore, they evaluated the throughput of
the wireless sensor network using a time slot assignment
algorithm based on each radio interference model. For the
SINR model, the authors used one-shot scheduling [11].
Through experimentation, they demonstrated that the time
slot assignment based on SINR model achieves the highest
throughput.
Zhu and Lu have compared the physical radio interference
model and the hop-based interference model, which is used
in IEEE 802.16 wireless mesh networks [10]. Through
simulation evaluations using a QualNet simulator, it was
shown that about 7% of links cannot be used due to radio
interference when we assume that there are interference
relationships among links within 3-hop links in the hop-
based interference model.
Shi et al. have compared the protocol interference model
and the SINR model for multi-hop multi-channel wireless
networks [6]. They ﬁrst show that blind use of the protocol
interference model is not adequate. They then show that the
link capacity of wireless networks based on the protocol
interference model can be close to that based on the SINR
model by using appropriate parameter settings for the pro-
tocol interference model.
In the present study, we extend the protocol interference
model in order to use it in graph theory-based time slot
assignment algorithms for wireless mesh networks. Taking
the SINR as an accurate measure of the actual radio inter-
ference, we propose methods for adjusting the interference
ratio parameter of the protocol interference model.
III. MODELS
In this section, we explain the wireless mesh network
model and the time slot assignment algorithm which are used
in this paper. We then introduce the protocol interference
model and SINR model.
A. Wireless Mesh Network
In this paper, we consider the same wireless mesh network
that is used in [3]. We assume that there is a set of n
mesh nodes Vc = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} deployed in a plane. We
consider the directed communication graph Gc = (Vc, Ec)
which indicates the communication relationship in each
node. Ec is the set of directed communication links li,j,
representing a link directed from mesh node vi
∈ Vc to
mesh node vj
∈ Vc. The existence of directed communi-
cation link li,j in the directed communication graph Gc is
determined according to the radio interference model. We
assume one of the mesh nodes is the gateway node that is
connected to a wired network. Without loss of generality, let
mesh node v1 be the gateway node.
There are two types of communication, namely, upward
communication and downward communication. In upward
communication, data is transferred from mesh nodes toward
the gateway node. Conversely, data is transferred from the
gateway node toward mesh nodes in downward communica-
tion. Communication between the gateway node and mesh
nodes is achieved through intermediate mesh nodes in a
multi-hop fashion. The communication path is determined
by a routing algorithm. In this paper, we consider a tree-
based routing algorithm which constructs the transmission
27
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

graph Gt = (Vt, Et) as a tree graph. Here, Gt ⊂ Gc，
Vt = Vc and Et ⊂ Ec. In the transmission graph, root
is the gateway node and each node is connected to the
gateway node through minimum hop and minimum distance
links. We call the link li,j ∈ Et in Gt a transmission link.
In addition, a link that is on the path directed toward the
gateway node is called an upward link, and a link that is on
the path directed away from the gateway node is called a
downward link.
B. Time Slot Assignment
In this paper, TDMA is adopted as the MAC protocol of
the wireless mesh networks. In TDMA, time is divided into
time slots T = {t1, t2, . . . , tm} , and different time slots are
assigned to the links which have an interference relationship.
In this paper, the total number of time slots m is called the
frame length. The interference relationships of the links are
determined by the radio interference model. For the time
slot assignment algorithm at the transmission link li,j ∈ Et,
we adopt the greedy algorithm that is used in [2, 3]. In
this time slot assignment algorithm, the order of time slot
assignment for each transmission link is ﬁrst determined,
and then time slots are assigned to the transmission links in
a greedy manner. The frame length m becomes the number
of time slots, depending on the deployment of mesh nodes
and the interference relationship among transmission links.
C. Radio Interference Models
1) Protocol Interference Model: In the protocol interfer-
ence model [5, 6], the existence of links and interference
relationships between links are determined according to the
location of node vi, transmission range ri and interference
ratio αi as follows. When two nodes vi, vj
∈ Vc are
satisﬁed with ||vi − vj|| < ri, the communication from
sender node vi to receiver node vj is successful, and the
directed communication link li,j ∈ Ec is set. Here, ||vi−vj||
stands for the distance between node vi and node vj. In
addition, sender node vi interferes with a link whose receiver
node vk satisﬁes ||vi − vk|| < αiri. The interference
ratio αi is usually set between 2 and 4 depending on the
environment [12].
2) SINR Model: Let sender node and receiver node be vi
and vj. In addition, let Vint
i,x be the set of sender nodes that
use the same time slot with link li,j except node ni. In the
SINR model [6, 7], the existence of links and interference
relationships among links are determined according to the
SINR, which is deﬁned as follows:
si,j,x =
pi,j
pnoise + ∑
vk∈Vint
i,x pk,j
.
(1)
Here, pnoise is the signal strength of noise, which is deter-
mined depending on the environment. pi,j is the received
signal strength from sender node vi at receiver node vj, and
is described as follows:
pi,j =
ptr
i
||vi − vj||η .
(2)
Here, ptr
i
is the transmission power of wireless signal at
sender node vi. η is the parameter for considering power
decay due to distance, and is usually set between 2 and 4
depending on the environment [12].
In the SINR model, when SINR si,j,x from Eq. (1)
satisﬁes si,j,x ≥ B, receiver node vj can successfully receive
radio signals from sender node vi at time slot tx. B is called
the capture threshold which is determined depending on the
wireless devices used. On the other hand, when SINR si,j,x
is less than threshold B, communication from sender node
vi to receiver node vj fails. This means that the set of sender
nodes Vint
i,x interferes with link li,j.
IV. METHODS FOR ADJUSTING THE INTERFERENCE
RATIO PARAMETER OF THE PROTOCOL INTERFERENCE
MODEL CONSIDERING SINR
In this section, we propose SINR-based methods for
adjusting the interference ratio αi parameter of the protocol
interference model. Although the SINR dynamically changes
in actual environments depending on fading, varying noise,
etc., we assume static situation for simplicity in this paper.
A. Overview
Figure 2 shows the ﬂowchart of our methods for adjusting
the interference ratio. In our methods, transmission graph
Gt is at ﬁrst generated based on the protocol interference
model. Information on interference relationships among
transmission links are then determined based on the protocol
interference model, where the interference ratio of all nodes
is set to the initial interference ratio α0. Next, a set of
SINR S = {si,j,x|li,j ∈ Et, tx ∈ T } for all links which
are used in all time slots is calculated. When the minimum
SINR smin = min S is less than the capture threshold B,
it means that there is a link which cannot be used in the
SINR model. In this case, we adjust the interference ratio
α, and then again determine the relationship of interference
among transmission links and assign time slots based on the
protocol interference model. This process is repeated until
smin ≥ B is satisﬁed. In the following, we propose three
methods for adjusting the interference ratio.
B. Interference Ratio Adjustment Methods
1) All Nodes Adjustment (ANA) Method: In the ANA
method, the interference ratio αi of all nodes is adjusted
by adding δ. Figure 3 shows an example transmission graph
for the case of eight nodes and seven transmission links.
Let transmission link l7,4 have the minimum SINR in time
slot tw. In addition, let the time slot tw be assigned to
transmission links l8,1, l7,4, l6,5 and l3,2. In the ANA
method, the interference ratio of all nodes, that is, v1–v8,
are adjusted.
However, the ANA method is simple and increases the
interference ratio of all nodes even if there is no difference
28
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

smin  ≥  B
Interference relationship decision
（by protocol interference model）
Defining order to time slot assignment
(by greedy algorithm[2][3])
SINR calculation
(by SINR model)
YES
NO
Topology  construction 
（by protocol interference model）
Interference ratio adjustment
(ANA, AINA, NINA)
End
Start
Figure 2.
Flowchart for adjusting interference ratio
： Node
： Transmission link
： Link assigned time slot at tw
v1
v2
v3
v4
v7
v5
v6
v8
smin = s7,4,w
Figure 3.
Example of transmission graph
in the result of the determined radio interference between
the protocol interference model and the SINR model in a
local region. If the interference ratio is increased more than
necessary, more links are considered to have interference
relationships, and the number of time slots is increased.
2) All Interference Nodes Adjustment (AINA) Method:
In the AINA method, the interference ratio is adjusted
locally. Let the SINR of transmission link lg,h in time
slot tw become the minimum SINR smin, and the set of
sender nodes which give interference to transmission link
lg,h be Vint
g,w. At transmission link lg,h, there is the largest
difference in the resulting interference relationship between
the protocol interference model and SINR model. The AINA
method adjusts the interference ratio of all nodes in Vint
g,w by
adding δ. In the example of Fig. 3, the interference ratio
of sender nodes v3, v6 and v8, which are assigned the same
time slot with transmission link l7,4, are adjusted.
The AINA method adjusts the interference ratio of all
sender nodes within Vint
g,w. Therefore, it may increase the
interference ratio of a node more than necessary when
the node is far enough from a receiver node that has the
minimum SINR.
3) Nearest Interference Node Adjustment (NINA) Method:
In the NINA method, the interference ratio of the node that
is the closest to the receiver node vh, among the set of nodes
Vint
g,w, is adjusted by adding δ. In Fig. 3, node v6 is the nearest
from receiver node v4, and the interference ratio of node v6
is adjusted.
V. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our
interference ratio adjustment methods through simulation
experiments. We use a self-developed IEEE 802.16j mesh
network simulator which is developed by Visual C. In the
simulations, one gateway node is placed at the center and
n − 1 nodes are randomly distributed in a 1 × 1 square
area. We exclude the cases of a disconnected graph. In
the protocol interference model, transmission distance ri
is set to 0.18. In the SINR model, transmission power ptr
i
and the parameter of power decay η are set to 1 and 3.0,
respectively. Environment noise pnoise is set to 32, which is
set when there are four nodes within a distance of 0.5 from
the receiver node. Capture threshold B is set to 3 dB. In
our proposed model, the initial interference ratio α0 and the
incremental ratio δ are set to 0 and 0.01, respectively.
A. Evaluation of Accuracy
We ﬁrst evaluate the accuracy of the protocol interference
model using our proposed methods through a compari-
son with the SINR model. For all combination sets of
transmission link Et, we evaluate whether a set of links
has interference relationships for each radio interference
model. Here, we exclude sets of transmission links where
neighboring links are simultaneously selected. When both
the SINR model and the proposed protocol interference
model agree on whether or not a set of transmission links can
be successfully used simultaneously, the proposed model’s
result is classiﬁed as a true positive or a true negative. When
the SINR model produces the result that a set of transmission
links can be used simultaneously and the proposed model
produces the result that the set of transmission links cannot
be used simultaneously, the proposed model’s result is
classiﬁed as a false negative. In the opposite case, its result
is classiﬁed as a false positive. We adopt the false positive
rate and false negative rate as measures of the accuracy of
the radio interference model. False positive rate is deﬁned as
the number of false positives divided by the number of true
negatives and false positives. False negative rate is deﬁned
as the number of false negatives divided by the number of
true positives and false negatives. For comparison purposes,
we also show the results for the protocol interference model
where α is set to 2, 3 and 4. We refer to this as the
conventional method.
Figure 4 shows the average of false positive rate and false
negative rate with 99% conﬁdence intervals from results
for 100 topologies when n = 50. As shown in Fig. 4(a),
the false positive rate for our proposed methods are larger
than that for the conventional method. However, all of the
false positive rate are quite low and are less than 0.22%.
On the other hand, the false negative rate for the proposed
methods decreases between 5% and 15% compared to that
for conventional method as shown in Fig. 4(b). Among our
proposed methods, the NINA method achieves the lowest
false negative rate, while the ANA method has the highest
29
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

 0
 0.0005
 0.001
 0.0015
 0.002
 0.0025
 0.003
Upward link
Downward link
False positive rate
Conv. (α=2)
Conv. (α=3)
Conv. (α=4)
ANA
AINA
NINA
ձ
ղ
ճ
մ
յ
ն
ձղճ
մ
յն
ձղճ
մ
յ
ն
(a) False positive rate
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
Upward link
Downward link
False negative rate
Conv. (α=2)
Conv. (α=3)
Conv. (α=4)
ANA
AINA
NINA
ձ
ղ
ճ
մ
յ
ն
ձ ղ ճ
մ
յ
ն
ձ ղ ճ
մ յ
ն
(b) False negative rate
Figure 4.
Accuracy for all combinations of
transmission link sets
 0
 40
 80
 120
 160
 200
 240
 280
Upward link
Downward link
Number of time slots
SINR coloring
Conv. (α=3)
Conv. (α=4)
ANA
AINA
NINA
ձ
ղ
ճ
մ
յ
ն
ձ
ղ
ճ
մ յ
ն
ձ
ղ
ճ
մ յ
ն
(a) Number of time slots
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Upward link
Downward link
Gateway throughput
SINR coloring
Conv. (α=3)
Conv. (α=4)
ANA
AINA
NINA
ձ
ղ
ճ
մ
յ
ն
ձ
ղ
ճ
մյ
ն
ձ
ղ
ճ
մ յ
ն
(b) Gateway throughput
Figure 5.
Performance of a wireless mesh
network
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
 1.8
 2
 2.2
 2.4
 40  50  60  70  80  90 100 110 120 130
 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 0.14
 0.16
 0.18
 0.2
Interference ratio
Deviation
Number of nodes
Average
Deviation
Ave.+4σ
Ave.+5σ
(a) Interference ratio
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90  100  110  120  130
Number of time slots
Number of nodes
SINR coloring
ANA
Prac. (4σ)
Prac. (5σ)
(b) Number of time slots
Figure 6.
Practical interference ratio and its
performance
false negative rate. Since the NINA method is designed
not to increase the interference ratio more than necessary,
the number of false negatives decreases and the number of
true positives increases. As a result, the false negative rate
for the NINA method becomes lower. However, the false
negative rate for the NINA methods is still high, and is about
84% for upward links. This is due to the limitation of the
protocol interference model which employs a binary decision
of existence of radio interference based on a circular region.
When we compare the false positive rate and the false
negative rate between upward links and downward links,
the values are slightly different. In this paper, since we
assume a tree topology whose root is the gateway node
of the wireless mesh network, the number of sender nodes
in upward communication is larger than that in downward
communication. For example, leaf nodes become sender
nodes in the case of upward communication. Therefore,
the interference relationships among links become more
complex in upward communication, and the results between
upward links and downward links become slightly different.
B. Evaluation of the Network Performance
We next evaluate the performance of wireless mesh
networks when the protocol interference model with our
proposed methods is used. As evaluation metrics of per-
formance, we use the number of time slots and gateway
throughput. The former metric is the number of time slots
required by the greedy algorithm [2, 3], and indicates the
efﬁciency of spatial reuse. The gateway throughput is the
number of assigned time slots to the gateway node in a
frame, and it represents communication efﬁciency between
the wireless mesh network and the external wired network.
For comparison, we also conduct simulations where a SINR-
based time slot assignment algorithm is used (hereinafter,
SINR coloring). SINR coloring checks to assign a time slot
to a transmission link in an order that is determined by
the greedy algorithm. If the SINR of all transmission links
are over the capture threshold by assigning the time slot
to the transmission link, the time slot is assigned to the
transmission link. Otherwise, a new time slot is assigned to
the transmission link. Although SINR coloring is a time slot
assignment algorithm, we use it as a method to achieve an
upper bound of performance.
Figure 5 shows the average number of time slots and the
average gateway throughput with 99% conﬁdence intervals
from results for 100 topologies when n = 100. Since there
are links that cannot be used simultaneously under the SINR
model but can be assigned based on the conventional method
with α = 2, we only show results for the conventional
method where α is set to 3 and 4. As shown in Fig. 5, both
the number of time slots and the gateway throughput of our
proposed methods are closer to the results for SINR coloring
than of the results for the conventional method. Among our
proposed methods, the results for the NINA method are
the closest to the results for SINR coloring. Because the
accuracy of the interference model of the NINA method is
the highest as described in the previous subsection, time
slots are efﬁciently assigned to the links and communication
efﬁciency becomes higher. When we compare the number
of time slots and the gateway throughput between upward
links and downward links, the results are almost same.
C. Discussion of Practical Interference Ratio
When we consider the usefulness of radio interference
models, the models should be used without the calculation
30
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

of SINR and time slot assignment. In particular, the inter-
ference ratio of the protocol model should be determined
in advance. We call such previously decidable interference
ratio the practical interference ratio. In this subsection, we
investigate the practical interference ratio when all nodes use
the same interference ratio, and evaluate the performance
of wireless mesh networks with the practical interference
ratio. Because the results for upward and downward links
are similar, we only show the results for upward links.
We ﬁrst conduct simulations of the ANA method and
investigate the distribution of the adjusted interference ratio
from 1000 topologies. The number of nodes n is set to
50, 70, 100, and 120. Although ﬁgures are not shown
because of space limitations, the distribution of interference
ratio becomes a normal distribution. The average and the
standard deviation σ of the normal distributions are shown
in Fig. 6(a). The maximum interference ratio is considered
to be the average interference ratio plus kσ. The maximum
interference ratio where k = 4 and k = 5 are also shown in
Fig. 6(a). As shown in Fig. 6(a), the maximum interference
ratio has a similar value for any number of nodes. Therefore,
we use the average of the maximum interference ratios as
the practical interference ratio in the following. In particular,
we use 2.1 and 2.2 as the practical interference ratio in the
case of k = 4 and k = 5, respectively.
Figure 6(b) shows the average number of time slots from
the results for 100 topologies when the protocol interference
model with the practical interference ratio is used. For
comparison, we also show the results for the ANA method
and SINR coloring. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the number of
time slots using the practical interference ratio is greater than
that of SINR coloring and the ANA method. In addition, the
number of time slots using the practical interference ratio is
16% and 20% higher than that of ANA method when k = 4
and k = 5, respectively. This means that the accuracy of the
protocol interference model using the practical interference
ratio is less than that of the ANA method. However, by
using the practical interference ratio, it is not necessary to
calculate SINR or time slot assignment.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
To devise an accurate radio interference model, we pro-
posed three methods, namely, ANA, AINA and NINA, for
adjusting the interference ratio parameter of the protocol
interference model, taking into consideration SINR. Through
simulations, we showed that the NINA method achieves the
highest accuracy. In addition, we found that the performance
was highest in the case of a wireless mesh network based
on the NINA method, among the proposed methods and
the conventional method. Furthermore, we discussed the
practical value of the interference ratio, which can be set
without calculation of SINR and time slot assignment.
In future work, we plan to consider heterogeneous and
dynamic cases where the transmission power of nodes is
different and SINR is affected by Rayleigh fading and
shadowing effect. In addition, we should take into account
hop-based interference models, which are widely used in
practical wireless networks, such as IEEE 802.16j networks.
We plan to compare and investigate the relationships among
the protocol interference model, the SINR model and the
hop-based interference model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This
work
was
partly
supported
by
KAKENHI
(21700075) of MEXT, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, “Wireless
mesh networks: a survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 47,
pp. 445–487, Mar. 2005.
[2] W. Wang, Y. Wang, X.-Y. Li, W.-Z. Song, and
O. Frieder, “Efﬁcient interference-aware TDMA link
scheduling for static wireless networks,” in Proceed-
ings of ACM MobiCom 2006, pp. 262–273, Sep. 2006.
[3] R. Ishii, G. Hasegawa, Y. Taniguchi, and H. Nakano,
“Time slot assignment algorithms in IEEE 802.16
multi-hop relay networks,” in Proceedings of ICNS
2010, pp. 265–270, Mar. 2010.
[4] Z. Tao, A. Li, K. H. Teo, and J. Zhang, “Frame struc-
ture design for IEEE 802.16j mobile multihop relay
(MMR) networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE GLOBE-
COM 2007, pp. 4301–4306, Nov. 2007.
[5] P. Gupta and P. R. Kumar, “The capacity of wireless
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 46, pp. 388–404, Mar. 2000.
[6] Y. Shi, Y. Hou, J. Liu, and S. Kompella, “How to cor-
rectly use the protocol interference model for multi-hop
wireless networks,” in Proceedings of ACM MobiHoc
2009, pp. 239–248, May 2009.
[7] D. Son, B. Krishnamachari, and J. Heidemann, “Ex-
perimental study of concurrent transmission in wireless
sensor networks,” in Proceedings of ACM SenSys 2006,
pp. 237–250, Nov. 2006.
[8] A. Chockalingam, M. Zorzi, L. B. Milstein, and
P. Venkataram, “Performance of a wireless access pro-
tocol on correlated Rayeigh fading channels with cap-
ture,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 46,
pp. 644–655, May 1998.
[9] R. Maheshwari, S. Jain, and S. R. Das, “A measure-
ment study of interference modeling and scheduling in
low-power wireless networks,” in Proceedings of ACM
SenSys 2008, pp. 141–154, Nov. 2008.
[10] H. Zhu and K. Lu, “On the interference modeling
issues for coordinated distributed scheduling in IEEE
802.16 mesh networks,” in Proceedings of BROAD-
NETS 2006, Oct. 2006.
[11] O. Goussevskaia, Y. A. Oswald, and R. Wattenhofer,
“Complexity in geometric SINR,” in Proceedings of
ACM MobiHoc 2007, pp. 100–109, Sep. 2007.
[12] M. Zorzi and R. R. Rao, “Capture and retransmis-
sion control in mobile radio,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 12,
pp. 1289–1298, Oct. 1994.
31
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

