Mitigating Distributed Denial-of-Service Attacks in Named Data Networking
Vassilios G. Vassilakis
Institute for Communication Systems
University of Surrey
Guildford, United Kingdom
e-mail: v.vasilakis@surrey.ac.uk
Ioannis D. Moscholios
Dept. of Informatics and Telecommunications
University of Peloponnese
Tripolis, Greece
e-mail: idm@uop.gr
Bashar A. Alohali
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences
Liverpool John Moors University
Liverpool, United Kingdom
e-mail: b.a.alohali@2012.ljmu.ac.uk
Michael D. Logothetis
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
e-mail: mlogo@upatras.gr
Abstract—Named Data Networking (NDN) is a novel networking
approach that aims at overcoming some of the limitations of the
current Internet. In particular, NDN aims at providing better
privacy and security by focusing on the data items themselves
rather than on the location of data. This is achieved by using
soft states at the routers, which record the requests/interests for
data from users in the Pending Interest Table (PIT). However,
this new networking concept opens up avenues for launching
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks on PITs. That is,
an attacker may ﬂood the network with a large number of
Interest packets that would overﬂow the PITs at the routers,
thus preventing legitimate users from receiving the requested
data. This type of DDoS attack is known as the Interest Flooding
Attack (IFA) and, if not adequately dealt with, may severely
disrupt the normal operation of an NDN system. In this paper,
we ﬁrst show that the basic NDN mechanism is vulnerable to
IFA even when the attacker has very limited resources. Next,
we propose a mitigation technique that allows routers to quickly
identify and block such DDoS attempts, by detecting anomalous
user behaviour. We also introduce an additional security layer
by using public-key based router authentication. We evaluate
our proposed scheme by means of computer simulations and
show that a sufﬁcient level of security can be achieved with little
processing and storage overhead.
Keywords–Named Data Networking; Distributed Denial of Ser-
vice; Interest Flooding Attack.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As it has been observed by numerous studies, today the
Internet is mainly used for data dissemination to interested
users, rather than for connecting hosts. The user is interested
in data itself, while the location of data is usually of minor
importance. However, the Internet was originally designed
and has evolved according to the host-centric communication
paradigm. Recent studies have shown that the poor perfor-
mance of the traditional Internet, in the areas of security,
efﬁcient content dissemination, etc., lies in its host-centric
nature [1].
Information Centric Networking (ICN) [2] is a new effort
that aims at eliminating the traditional Internet's limitations.
Named Data Networking (NDN) [3] is one of the proposed
ICN approaches. Data dissemination in NDN is achieved by
using soft states at the routers, which record the interests for
data from users in the Pending Interest Table (PIT) [4]. When
the requested data is received by the router and forwarded to
the user, the corresponding PIT entry is removed. In contrast
to the current Internet, where the security measures have been
added after its conception, NDN's key target is to embed
security and privacy features at the very early design stages.
In particular, for protecting user privacy, no source address
is carried in the packets [5]. The routers record in PIT the
incoming interface for the Interest packet and use it to forward
the data to the user. NDN also inherently provides protection
against unsolicited data by adopting the receiver-driven data
retrieval model [6].
However, in spite of the aforementioned security advan-
tages of NDN, new types of distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attacks are possible [7]. In particular, one of the most
challenging is the DDoS attack on PITs, where an attacker
ﬂoods the network with a large number of bogus Interest
packets. Each such packet causes the router to create and
maintain an entry in its PIT, thus wasting router's storage
resources and even creating the possibility of PIT overﬂows.
This type of attack is known as the Interest Flooding Attack
(IFA) [8] and, if not adequately dealt with, may severely
disrupt the normal operation of an NDN system.
In this paper, we ﬁrst show that the basic NDN mechanism
is vulnerable to IFA even when the attacker has very limited
resources. Next, we propose an IFA mitigation technique at
the router, that detects anomalous user behaviour and also
notiﬁes other routers. To secure from bogus notiﬁcations by
malicious/compromised routers, we propose an authentication
scheme that is based on public-key cryptography.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we brieﬂy
describe the considered NDN architecture and introduce the
necessary notations. In Section III, we deﬁne the IFA and
brieﬂy discuss other types of DDoS attacks in NDN. In Section
IV, we present our IFA mitigation scheme. In Section V, we
present our router authentication method. In Section VI, we
study the performance of the proposed approach by means of
computer simulations. In Section VII, we present the related
work on DDoS attacks and countermeasures in NDN and in
other ICN mechanisms. We conclude and discuss our future
work in Section VIII.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 1. Basic NDN communication model.
II.
NDN ARCHITECTURE AND BASIC CONCEPTS
In this section, we brieﬂy describe the NDN architecture
and its basic concepts [3]. Contrary to the traditional host-
centric network architectures (e.g., the Internet), the basic
abstraction in NDN is the named content. Content sources
advertise/publish their available content items in the network
by issuing the Publication packets, which usually include
preﬁx-based content name or some other form of content
identiﬁer (ID) [9]. Each router, upon receiving such packets,
records the incoming interface and the content name in its
Forwarding Information Base (FIB) [10].
ICN also natively supports quality-of-service [11] and
content caching. The caching approach could be either op-
portunistic and transparent to the content resolution function
(i.e., not recorded in the FIB) or proactive and similar to
the Content Delivery Network (CDN) approach [12]. The
latter approach essentially transforms caches into alternative
content sources and enables joint optimization of forwarding
and caching functions [13].
Users interested in receiving a particular content item, issue
the Interest packets. These packets are then forwarded via
a sequence of routers towards the content source or cache,
according to the FIB entries for the requested content. In case
that multiple sources (and/or caches) are holding the same
content, some kind of mediated topology management function
could be used to select the best source [14] or even to enable
multi-chunk content delivery [15].
When the source/cache receives the Interest packet it
replies with the Data packet, which contains the requested
content. The Data packet is forwarded via the reverse path
towards the user. A simple illustrative example is shown
in Figure 1. This is the so-called pull-based communication
model and it ensures that the user receives only explicitly
requested content.
In order for the routers to be able to deliver Data packets
to the users, each router is equipped with a PIT [4]. The latter
contains entries for all “not yet satisﬁed” Interest packets and
their incoming interface. Note that this communication scheme
does not require any user address (e.g., IP address) carried in
the Interest and Data packets. These packets are required to
carry only the content name of some other kind of content ID.
Figure 2. Interest Flooding Attack on NDN.
III.
DDOS IN NDN
A. Interest Flooding Attack
Malicious/compromised users may exploit the PIT-based
forwarding mechanism of NDN to launch the IFA, which is
considered as one of the most serious types of DDoS attacks
on NDN [16]. According to IFA, the malicious user (or a group
of users) will issue a large number of bogus Interest packets.
Each router, upon receiving each of these packets, will create
an entry in its PIT and will forward the packet to the next-hop
node (router or content source). According to the NDN rules,
an entry is removed from the PIT in the following two cases:
•
Entry expired (e.g., a typical expiry time is 1s [17]).
•
Router received the corresponding Data packet before
the entry expiration.
According to the above, the best attacking strategy is to
issue Interest packets for non-existent content. In this case, the
bogus entries will stay in the PIT as much as possible. The
goal of the attacker is to quickly ﬁll in the PIT and to keep
it full, so that the Interest packets originated from legitimate
users will eventually be dropped.
In Figure 2, we illustrate a simple example of IFA in
NDN. Assume that the PIT capacity in each router is 3
entries. The attacker's strategy is to send 3 bogus Interest
packets for (different) non-existent content. These packets will
ﬁll in the PITs of both routers. The source will drop these
packets, since they request non-existent content. However, the
corresponding entries will stay in the PITs until they expire.
After the expiration, the attacker will issue 3 new Interest
packets, aiming at keeping the PITs always full. This way,
some, or even all, Interest packets of legitimate users will be
dropped. Later, in Section VI, we evaluate the packet dropping
probability of legitimate users and show that it could be very
high even when the attackers employ limited resources.
B. Other DDoS Attacks
In this subsection, we brieﬂy discuss other possible types
of DDoS attacks in NDN, which, however, are out of the scope
of this paper.
1) cache poisoning/pollution attack: The attacker is trying
to reduce the cache efﬁciency by ﬁlling in the cache with non-
popular or even fake content. This can be done by repeatedly
requesting the same unpopular content. This aims at increasing
the cache misses and forcing the Interest packets to reach the
content source. This type of attack is not easy to mitigate,
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

because the malicious user may appear as a legitimate one for
a very long time.
2) mobile interest ﬂooding attack: The attacker may peri-
odically visit different routers and issue bogus Interest packets.
This attack is harder to detect and mitigate than the classic IFA.
The reason is that retransmission of Interest packets in case of
mobility is a normal procedure in NDN. So, to detect a mobile
attacker, a complex scheme that involves a large number of
cooperating routers would be required.
3) attack on forwarding mechanism: A potentially com-
promised router may severely degrade the performance of the
network by re-directing the Interest packets in wrong direction.
In case of cooperating attackers, this could even be exploited
for creating forwarding loops in the network.
IV.
IFA MITIGATION MECHANISM
In this section, we describe our proposed mitigation mech-
anism for IFA in NDN. The aim of this approach is to quickly
detect anomalous user behaviour and to restrict, or even block,
such user at an early stage of the attack. We distinguish two
types of routers:
•
Edge routers: directly connected to one or more users.
•
Core routers: directly connected only to other routers
or sources.
The edge routers will provide an additional security layer
by detecting any anomalous user behaviour and will notify
other routers if such an event takes place. The latter is done
by sending the attack notiﬁcation packets, that contain the user
ID. Core routers will be involved in forwarding the attack
notiﬁcation packets to other routers, but will not themselves
contribute in the attack detection process.
Our mitigation mechanism comprises three phases:
•
Attack detection phase: the edge router detects anoma-
lous user behaviour and identiﬁes the user either as
suspicious or as an attacker.
•
Rate reduction and blocking phase: the edge router
reduces the data rate of suspicious users and blocks
the attackers.
•
Attack notiﬁcation phase: the edge router notiﬁes other
edge routers about the detected attack.
In the following, we provide more details about these three
phases.
A. Attack detection phase
The set of all users in the network is denoted by U. During
the detection phase, the edge router keeps statistics about the
expired PIT entries per each user u ∈ U. Two thresholds
are used to classify users into: legitimate, suspicious (possible
attackers), and malicious (attackers). If the number of expired
PIT entries per time unit, Nexp(u), of a user u is below the
low threshold, Tlow, user u is considered legitimate. If Nexp(u)
is above Tlow but below the high threshold, Thigh, user u is
considered suspicious. Finally, if Nexp(u) > Thigh, user u is
considered malicious. The sets of legitimate, suspicious, and
malicious users are denoted by L, S, and M, respectively.
B. Rate reduction and blocking phase
During this phase, any user that has been classiﬁed as
malicious, will be blocked, whereas the suspicious users will
receive reduced data rate. In particular, the rate adaptation is
performed as follows:
Rnew(u) =





Rold(u),
if u ∈ L
aRold(u)
Thigh−Tlow ,
if u ∈ S
0,
if u ∈ M
(1)
where Rold(u) and Rnew(u), are the old and new data rate of
user u, respectively; a is some optimization parameter, such
that a + Tlow < Thigh.
C. Attack notiﬁcation phase
If an edge router detects an ongoing attack, after blocking
this user, it will notify other routers about the identity of the
malicious user, by sending the attack notiﬁcation packet. This
is done to prevent the Mobile Interest Flooding Attack (MIFA)
[7], where a mobile user periodically visits different routers
and ﬂoods them with Interest packets. In this context, the
notion of router is extended and refers to any data-forwarding
network element, such as a WiFi Access Point (AP) or a Base
Station (BS) in a cellular network.
V.
ROUTER AUTHENTICATION METHOD
We consider a scenario where edge routers may be de-
ployed by home users or other non-trusted parties. That will
most likely be the case in future ﬁfth generation (5G) cellular
networks [18], in future generation Internet [19], and in
smart grid networks [20]. Also, edge routers may join and
leave the network or change their location (e.g., vehicular
communications). This introduces new security threats and a
good authentication method is needed.
In this section, we propose a public-key based router
authentication method (similar to [21]) to protect against bogus
attack notiﬁcation packets that could be sent by potentially
compromised routers. Our method makes the reasonable as-
sumption that there will be at least one trusted network entity
that can act as Certiﬁcate Authority (CA). We consider the
following two cases:
•
Direct authentication: Performed when the new router
has a direct connection with CA.
•
Indirect authentication: Performed when the new
router has no direct connection with CA. In that case,
the authentication of a new router is facilitated by
another, already authenticated router, referred to as
mediator.
A. Direct authentication
Initially, the new router will send the authentication request
message to CA (see also Figure 3).
This message is encrypted using CA’s public key, PK-CA,
and includes the following information:
a) identity number of the new router, R-ID,
b) timestamp, TS,
c) symmetric key of new router, SK-R.
CA responds with the authentication response message.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 3. Direct router authentication.
This message is encrypted using the received SK-R and
includes the following information:
a) identity number of CA, ID-CA,
b) timestamp, TS.
Next, the router sends the acknowledgement message,
which also contains routers serial number, SN-R, so that CA
may validate this router as a legitimate one (we assume that
CA holds a list of all valid SN-Rs).
This message is encrypted using the SK-R and includes the
following information:
a) serial number of new router, SN-R,
b) timestamp, TS.
Finally, CA responds with the authentication conﬁrmation
message. This message is encrypted using the received SK-R
and includes the following information:
a) identity number of CA, ID-CA,
b) timestamp, TS,
c) serial number of new router, SN-R.
B. Indirect authentication
Initially, the new router will send the authentication request
message to the mediator (see Figure 4).
This message is encrypted using mediator’s public key, PK-
M, and includes the following information:
a) identity number of new router, ID-R,
b) timestamp, TS,
c) symmetric key of new router, SK-R.
The mediator will decrypt the message using its private
key. Next, it will encrypt the message using CA’s public key,
PK-CA, and will send it to CA.
CA responds to mediator with the authentication response
message. This message is encrypted using mediator’s public
key, PK-M, and includes the following information:
a) identity number of CA, ID-CA,
Figure 4. Indirect router authentication.
b) timestamp, TS,
c) serial number of new router, SN-R.
The mediator will decrypt this message using its private
key. Next, it will remove the SN-R from the message, will
store it and will re-encrypt the remaining message using the
previously received SK-R and will send the message to the
new router. The serial number, SN-R, will be used later by the
mediator to verify that the new router is legitimate.
Next, new router sends to mediator the acknowledgment
message that contains its serial number, SN-R, to be used for
validation by mediator.
This message is encrypted using SK-R and includes the
following information:
a) serial number of new router, SN-R,
b) timestamp, TS.
Finally, if the authentication is successful, the mediator
responds to both new router and CA with the authentication
conﬁrmation message. This message is encrypted for new
router using SK-R and for CA using PK-CA, and includes
the following information:
a) identity number of CA, ID-CA,
b) timestamp, TS,
c) serial number of new router, SN-R.
VI.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the DDoS vulnerability of the
basic NDN mechanism [3] described in Section II. To this
end, we have developed an NS-3 based simulator for NDN
and implemented our proposed attack mitigation scheme for
a randomly generated network topology. We have simulated
1,000 legitimate users generating trafﬁc at a rate of 20 pack-
ets/sec. We have also simulated a DDoS attack scenario on PIT,
where 50 attackers generate bogus Interest packets at a rate of
1,000 packets/sec. The packet size is selected to be 1KB, so
that the attacking capability of each attacker is 1Mbps.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The duration of our simulation is 50s. The attack starts
at t = 5s and lasts until t = 40s. In Figure 5, we show the
required size of the PIT of the edge router, as it grows over
time due to the launched attack. The results are shown for three
different PIT entry expiration times, texp = 200ms, 500ms,
and 1s. As discussed in Section III, texp = 1s is the currently
adopted value in NDN. The value texp = 200ms is certainly
too optimistic (in terms of PIT size requirements) and is shown
only for comparison, as the best case scenario for the victim
router. With such small texp, a large number of legitimate
requests will not be satisﬁed, since the corresponding PIT
entry of each request will expire before the content arrives. In
Figure 5, we observe that during the ﬁrst 5 seconds, when only
legitimate users are active, the required PIT size is relatively
small (≈ 20MB). However, shortly after the attack starts, the
PIT size increases rapidly and almost reaches 2GB by t = 40s,
for texp = 1s. These results show that it is relatively easy even
for attacking nodes of limited capabilities to quickly occupy
large amounts of router's storage and processing resources.
In the second phase, to show the negative impact of the
IFA, we evaluate the packet dropping probability of legitimate
users due to PIT overﬂow. We consider the PIT capacity equal
to 1GB and use texp = 500ms (with texp = 1s the negative
impact on victims would be even worse). The rest of the
simulation parameters remain the same as described in the
previous paragraph. In Figure 6, we present the results for the
basic NDN mechanism and for our threshold-based mitigation
scheme of Section IV. In the latter, the attack detection
thresholds are chosen to be Thigh = 0.5 and Tlow = 0.25.
We consider two cases with different optimization parameters:
a = 1/8 and a = 1/12. When a = 1/8, the mitigation scheme
reduces the data rate to 50%. That is, Rnew(u) = 1
8
Rold(u)
0.5−0.25 =
0.5Rold(u). Similarly, when a = 1/12, the mitigation scheme
reduces the data rate to 33%. In Figure 6, we observe that when
no mitigation scheme is used (i.e., basic NDN mechanism is
assumed), 80% of the Interest packets of legitimate users are
dropped between around t = 25s and t = 40s. This is due to
the fact that by t = 25s the PIT size has reached its capacity
of 1GB. When the mitigation scheme is used, the worst-case
dropping probability is reduced to 60% and 40%, for a = 1/8
and a = 1/12, respectively. Also, the negative impact of the
PIT overﬂow is time shifted (by 5s when a = 1/8 and by 8s
when a = 1/12). We have also tried a = 1/16 which results
in 25% data rate reduction for malicious users and completely
eliminates the packet dropping of legitimate users.
VII.
RELATED WORK
A number of works study DDoS attacks in NDN. In
[16], various types of attacks and possible countermeasures
are discussed. It is argued that the most difﬁcult to mitigate
are the IFA and the cache poisoning attacks. However, no
evaluation or assessment is presented. In [22], the token bucket
method is proposed to mitigate the IFA. According to this
method, the routers are restricted in forwarding Interest packets
based on the load of their outgoing interfaces. To enable such
behaviour, the routers need to keep track of the requested
data volume from each interface. The proposed approach
has been evaluated using the ndnSIM simulator [23] and
shows satisfactory performance in cases of moderate attacking
capability. In [24], to alleviate the negative impact of the IFA
on PIT, the Disabling PIT Exhaustion (DPE) mechanism is
Figure 5. PIT size for different PIT entry expiration times. The attack
window is 5-40s.
Figure 6. Packet dropping probability of legitimate users for the basic NDN
and two threshold-based mitigation schemes.
proposed. Interest packets are dynamically diverted out of the
PIT if their preﬁxes are detected as malicious. However, this
introduces extra overhead on routers for marking packets and
for maintaining a malicious list to be used when the PIT is
exhausted. In [25], some attack scenarios similar to [16] are
presented and a DDoS attack mitigation technique based on
Interest traceback is proposed. According to this technique,
when the content source receives a bogus Interest packet, it
will send the traceback message on the reverse path to notify
the involved routers. The proposed solution is effective when
the round-trip time (RTT) is relatively small and if the attacker
does not change location (i.e., the solution is not effective
against the MIFA). In [17], the Poseidon scheme is proposed,
which focuses on early detection of IFA and its subsequent
mitigation. The IFA mitigation is performed by reducing the
data rate of the incoming interfaces. However, this approach
may also degrade the performance of legitimate users and
needs further enhancements in terms of user differentiation.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Other ICN approaches, e.g., such as PURSUIT [26], are
also vulnerable to DDoS attacks but not to IFA. Contrary to
NDN, PURSUIT adopts stateless data forwarding mechanism
[27] and, therefore, does not suffer from attacks (such as IFA)
that target soft states. In PURSUIT, the content delivery path
is included in the packet header, in the form of a Bloom ﬁlter
(BF). The latter, although provides time- and space-efﬁcient
path representation, suffers from the effect of false positives
during the packet forwarding [28]. False positives can be
exploited to launch DDoS on both network infrastructure and
end users. Some of the proposed solutions include advanced
encryption [29] and authentication techniques [30], in-packet
BF size optimization [31], and false positives reduction [32].
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we evaluate the DDoS vulnerability of
NDN through simulations. In particular, we consider the IFA,
where malicious users are trying to saturate the PIT and to
disrupt the normal network operation. We show, that, if no
adequate countermeasures are taken, it is relatively easy to
cause PIT overﬂow and to achieve an 80% packet dropping
rate. Next, we propose an IFA mitigation scheme that is based
on anomalous user behaviour detection. If a user exceeds a
predeﬁned threshold it is forced to reduce its data rate or
may even be blocked. This scheme is shown to be able to
signiﬁcantly reduce the PIT size, in terms of bogus entries,
and to improve the QoE of legitimate users, in terms of packet
dropping probability. Finally, we present a public-key based
authentication scheme to protect the network against malicious
notiﬁcation messages from compromised routers. In our future
work, we are planning to develop a stochastic model for PIT
and to analytically determine the PIT size and the packet
dropping probability.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Feldmann, “Internet clean-slate design: What and why?,” ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Commun. Review, vol. 37, 2007, pp. 59-64.
[2]
G. Xylomenos, et al., “A survey of information-centric networking
research,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 2,
2014, pp. 1024-1049.
[3]
V. Jacobson, D. Smetters, J. Thornton, M. Plass, N. Briggs, and R.
Braynard, “Networking named content,” Proc. CoNEXT, Rome, Italy,
Dec. 2009, pp. 11-18.
[4]
H. Yuan and P. Crowley, “Scalable pending interest table design: From
principles to practice,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, 2014, pp. 2049-2057.
[5]
S. Arianfar, T. Koponen, B. Raghavan, and S. Shenker, “On preserving
privacy in content-oriented networks,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Work-
shop on Information-Centric Networking, 2011, pp. 19-24.
[6]
C. Ghali, G. Tsudik, and E. Uzun, “Network-layer trust in named-data
networking,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol.
44, no. 5, 2014, pp. 12-19.
[7]
M. W¨ahlisch, T. Schmidt, and M. Vahlenkamp, “Lessons from the past:
Why data-driven states harm future information-centric networking,”
IFIP Networking Conference, 2013, pp. 1-9.
[8]
S. Choi, K. Kim, S. Kim, and B. Roh, “Threat of DoS by interest
ﬂooding attack in content-centric networking,” Proc. IEEE International
Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), 2013, pp. 315-319.
[9]
F. Li, F. Chen, J. Wu, and H. Xie, “Longest preﬁx lookup in named
data networking: How fast can it be?,” Proc. 9th IEEE NAS, 2014, pp.
186-190.
[10]
C. Yi, A. Afanasyev, I. Moiseenko, L. Wang, B. Zhang, and L. Zhang,
“A case for stateful forwarding plane,” Computer Communications, vol.
36, no. 7, 2013, pp. 779-791.
[11]
M. F. Al-Naday, A. Bontozoglou, V. G. Vassilakis, and M. J. Reed,
“Quality of service in an information-centric network,” Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM, Austin, USA, December 2014, pp. 1861-1866.
[12]
A. Vakali and G. Pallis, “Content delivery networks: Status and trends,”
IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 7, no. 6, 2003, pp. 68-74.
[13]
V. G. Vassilakis, et al., “A cache-aware routing scheme for information-
centric networks,” Proc. 9th IEEE/IET CSNDSP, 2014, pp. 721-726.
[14]
B. A. Alzahrani, M. J. Reed, J. Riihij¨arvi, and V. G. Vassilakis,
“Scalability of information centric networking using mediated topology
management,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 50,
April 2015, pp. 126-133.
[15]
L. Wang, S. Bayhan, and J. Kangasharju, “Optimal chunking and partial
caching in information-centric networks,” Computer Communications,
vol. 61, May 2015, pp. 48-57.
[16]
P. Gasti, G. Tsudik, E. Uzun, and L. Zhang, “DoS and DDoS in
named data networking,” Proc. 22nd IEEE International Conference on
Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN), 2013, pp. 1-7.
[17]
A. Compagno, M. Conti, P. Gasti, and G. Tsudik, “Poseidon: Mitigating
interest ﬂooding DDoS attacks in named data networking,” Proc. 38th
IEEE Conf. on Local Computer Networks (LCN), 2013, pp. 630-638.
[18]
P. Demestichas, et al., “5G on the horizon: Key challenges for the radio-
access network,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 8, no. 3,
2013, pp. 47-53.
[19]
J. Pan, S. Paul, and R. Jain, “A survey of the research on future Internet
architectures,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 7, 2011, pp. 26-36.
[20]
J. S. Vardakas, N. Zorba, and C. V. Verikoukis, “Performance evaluation
of power demand scheduling scenarios in a smart grid environment,”
Applied Energy, vol. 142, 2015, pp. 164-178.
[21]
B. A. Alohali and V. G. Vassilakis, “Secure and energy-efﬁcient
multicast routing in smart grids,” Proc. 10th IEEE Conference on Intel-
ligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP),
Singapore, April 2015, pp. 12-17.
[22]
A. Afanasyev, P. Mahadevan, I. Moiseenko, E. Uzun, and L. Zhang, “In-
terest ﬂooding attack and countermeasures in named data networking,”
Proc. IFIP Networking Conference, 2013, pp. 1-9.
[23]
A. Afanasyev, I. Moiseenko, and L. Zhang, “ndnSIM: NDN simulator
for NS-3,” NDN Project, Tech. Rep. NDN-0005, 2012.
[24]
K. Wang, H. Zhou, Y. Qin, J. Chen, and H. Zhang, “Decoupling
malicious interests from pending interest table to mitigate interest
ﬂooding attacks,” Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
2013, pp. 963-968.
[25]
H. Dai, Y. Wang, J. Fan, and B. Liu, “Mitigate ddos attacks in ndn
by interest traceback,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM NOMEN Workshop, NJ,
USA, 2013, pp. 22-29.
[26]
N. Fotiou, P. Nikander, D. Trossen, and G. C. Polyzos, “Developing
information networking further: From PSIRP to PURSUIT,” Proc. 7th
BROADNETS, Oct. 2010, pp. 22-27.
[27]
P. Jokela, A. Zahemszky, C. E. Rothenberg, S. Arianfar, and P. Nikander,
“LIPSIN: line speed publish/subscribe inter-networking,” Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication, Barcelona, Spain,
2009, pp. 195-206.
[28]
L. Carrea, A. Vernitski, and M. Reed, “Optimized hash for network path
encoding with minimized false positives,” Computer Networks, vol. 58,
2014, pp. 180-191.
[29]
B. A. Alzahrani, M. J. Reed, and V. G. Vassilakis, “Resistance against
brute-force attacks on stateless forwarding in information centric net-
working,” Proc. ACM/IEEE Symposium on Architectures for Network-
ing and Communications Systems (ANCS), Oakland, California, USA,
May 2015.
[30]
C. E. Rothenberg, P. Jokela, P. Nikander, M. S¨arel¨a, and J. Ylitalo, “Self-
routing denial-of-service resistant capabilities using in-packet Bloom
ﬁlters,” Proc. European Conference of Computer Network Defence
(EC2ND), 2009, pp. 46-51.
[31]
B. A. Alzahrani, V. G. Vassilakis, and M. J. Reed, “Selecting Bloom-
ﬁlter header lengths for secure information centric networking,” Proc.
9th IEEE/IET CSNDSP, 2014, pp. 628-633.
[32]
B. A. Alzahrani, V. G. Vassilakis, and M. J. Reed, “Mitigating brute-
force attacks on Bloom-ﬁlter based forwarding,” Proc. Conference on
Future Internet Communications (CFIC), 2013, pp. 1-7.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

