Routing and Spectrum Allocation Method to Avoid the Generation of Crosstalk
and the Blocking of Lightpath Establishment in Multi-Core Fiber Networks
Tomotaka Kimura∗, Keita Goto†, Kai Morita†, Kouji Hirata†, Yutaka Fukuchi‡, and Masahiro Muraguchi‡
∗ Faculty of Science and Engineering, Doshisha University, Kyoto 610-0321, Japan
Email: tomkimur@mail.doshisha.ac.jp
† Faculty of Engineering, Kansai University, Osaka 564-8680, Japan
Email: {k698542, k009696, hirata}@kansai-u.ac.jp
‡ Faculty of Engineering, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo 125-8585, Japan
Email: {fukuchi, murag}@ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper proposes a dynamic routing and spectrum
allocation method that avoids the generation of crosstalk and the
blocking of lightpath establishment in elastic optical networks
with multi-core ﬁbers. In the elastic optical networks with multi-
core ﬁbers, crosstalk occurs when the same frequency band is
used for signals of adjacent cores. The proposed method provides
a routing and spectrum allocation strategy, which suppresses the
generation of crosstalk by avoiding using the same frequency
band in adjacent cores and blocking of lightpath establishment
by selecting appropriate routes. Through simulation experiments,
we show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Keywords–Elastic optical network; multi-core ﬁber; crosstalk;
routing and spectrum allocation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, elastic optical networks have attracted much
attention because they can accommodate rapidly increasing
network trafﬁc by utilizing network resources ﬂexibly [1][2].
In the elastic optical networks, frequency spectrum is divided
into small pieces named frequency slots and data are trans-
mitted on lightpaths, which are routes allocated frequency
slots. Furthermore, the elastic optical networks use multilevel
modulation such as Quadrature Phase Sift Keying (QPSK) and
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM) according to the
transmission distance, instead of using on-off pulses in con-
ventional Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) optical
networks. By doing so, the elastic optical networks further
enhance the utilization efﬁciency of frequency resources.
In order to design elastic optical networks, we should con-
sider a Routing and Spectrum Allocation (RSA) problem [3]
[4][5], which is one of most important technical issues. The
RSA problem determines a route and frequency slots for a
lightpath to transmit data. The RSA problem is categorized into
two problems: static and dynamic. The static RSA problem
assumes that trafﬁc demands of all sender and receiver pairs
(i.e., trafﬁc matrix) in a network are known in advance. Routes
and frequency slots for established lightpaths are determined
by solving optimization methods such as mathematical pro-
gramming and meta-heuristic, based on the trafﬁc matrix.
On the other hand, the trafﬁc matrix is not available for
the dynamic RSA problem. In the dynamic RSA problem,
lightpath-setup requests are stochastically generated with the
time elapsed and the lightpaths are dynamically established
accordingly. After the holding time of the lightpaths, they are
released. This paper focuses on the dynamic RSA problem.
Generally, the performance metric of the dynamic RSA
problem is the blocking probability of lightpath establishment.
A lightpath must use successive frequency slots. Moreover,
the lightpath must use common frequency slots in all links
along its route. Lightpaths are established by RSA under these
constraints. When there are no available frequency slots that
meet these constraints on candidate routes for a lightpath to be
established, the lightpath establishment is blocked. Therefore,
the performance of elastic optical networks strongly depends
on RSA.
In order to enhance the performance of elastic optical net-
works, multi-core ﬁbers have been developed in the past [6][7].
The multi-core ﬁbers have multiple cores and different optical
signals can be simultaneously transmitted through the cores.
By using multi-core ﬁbers in elastic optical networks, we
can reduce the blocking probability of lightpath establishment
because multi-core ﬁbers can relax the above-mentioned con-
straints. Speciﬁcally, multiple lightpaths can simultaneously
use the same frequency slots in the same ﬁber when they pass
through different cores. However, when the same frequency
slots are used in neighboring cores, crosstalk occurs between
them. The crosstalk generates noise in the neighboring cores
and thus degrades the quality of the optical signals. Therefore,
in order to design high-quality multi-core ﬁber networks, we
need to consider the crosstalk in addition to the blocking of
lightpath establishment.
In this paper, we propose a dynamic RSA method that
aims at avoiding the blocking of lightpath establishment and
the generation of crosstalk in elastic optical networks with
multi-core ﬁbers. The proposed method balances the usage of
frequency slots by selecting a route and frequency slots for a
newly established lightpath according to available frequency
slots. By doing so, the proposed method avoids the blocking
of lightpath establishment. Furthermore, the proposed method
selects frequency slots and cores in such a way that the same
frequency slots are not used in neighboring cores, which avoids
the generation of crosstalk. Through simulation experiments,
we show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we explain elastic optical networks with multi-core ﬁbers.
Section III discusses our proposed method. In Section IV,
the performance of the proposed method is discussed with the
results of the simulation experiments. Finally, we conclude the
paper in Section V.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 1. Elastic optical network.
Figure 2. Single-core and multi-core ﬁbers.
II.
ELASTIC OPTICAL NETWORKS WITH MULTI-CORE
FIBERS
In elastic optical networks, the unit of frequency slots is
12.5 [GHz] or less, which is smaller than that in conventional
WDM networks. Lightpaths are established with multiple
frequency slots and the number of frequency slots used for the
lightpaths can be changed according to their trafﬁc demands
as shown in Figure 1. Thus, frequency resources are efﬁciently
utilized. Furthermore, by using multilevel modulation accord-
ing to the length of the lightpaths, the elastic optical networks
enhance the utilization efﬁciency of frequency resources. For
example, when the length of a lightpath is short, we can
use modulation schemes such as 16-QAM and 64-QAM,
whose frequency utilization efﬁciency is high, because of high
Optical Signal-to-Noise Ratio (OSNR). On the other hand, for
a lightpath whose length is large, modulation schemes with
low frequency utilization efﬁciency, such as Binary Phase Sift
Keying (BPSK) and QPSK are used because OSNR is low.
In order to communicate in elastic optical networks, light-
paths are established between senders and receivers by select-
ing routes and frequency slots. When we establish a lightpath,
we should consider two constraints about frequency slots.
The ﬁrst constraint is that successive frequency slots must
be assigned to the lightpath as shown in Figure 1. Frequency
slots that are not adjacent to each other cannot be used for
the lightpath. The second constraint is that common frequency
slots must be assigned to all links used in the lightpath. We
cannot use different frequency slots for different links through
which the lightpath passes. We need to consider a RSA method
to meet these constraints.
For multi-core environments, we should further consider
the generation of crosstalk. In the multi-core ﬁber networks,
a ﬁber consists of multiple cores as shown in Figure 2.
Different lightpaths can be established in different cores in
the same ﬁber, and thus the transmission capacity of elastic
optical networks is enhanced according to the number of cores.
However, crosstalk occurs when the same frequency slots are
used in different cores in the same ﬁber as shown in Figure 3.
The crosstalk degrades the quality of optical signals. The effect
of the crosstalk exponentially decreases with the increase in the
distance between cores. Therefore, the effect of the crosstalk
Figure 3. Crosstalk in a multi-core ﬁber.
becomes the strongest when the same frequency slots are used
in adjacent cores. For simplicity, in this paper, we assume that
the crosstalk occurs only when the same frequency slots are
used in adjacent cores. We also assume that the impact of the
crosstalk is the same for each frequency slot.
In the past, several RSA methods that aim at suppressing
the generation of crosstalk and/or the blocking of lightpath es-
tablishment have been proposed. In [8], the authors proposed a
RSA method that considers immediate reservation and advance
reservation of network resources for elastic optical networks.
This method allocates frequency slots to lightpaths according
to the required number of frequency slots of the lightpaths, so
that blocking probability of lightpath establishment is reduced.
Furthermore, in [9] the authors have proposed a spectrum
and core/mode assignment method that aims at reducing the
blocking probability of lightpath establishment. This method
prioritizes frequency slots and lightpaths are allocated to the
frequency slots according to the number of frequency slots
required by them. In [9], [10], the authors have proposed
a dynamic spectrum allocation method that considers both
the blocking of lightpath establishment and crosstalk. This
method prioritizes cores in such a way that non-adjacent cores
are preferentially used to avoid the generation of crosstalk.
Furthermore, lightpaths are allocated to the cores according
to the number of frequency slots required by them to avoid
the blocking of lightpath establishment. Speciﬁcally, lightpaths
with different number of frequency slots use different cores. By
doing so, this method reduces the blocking probability of light-
path establishment and the number of crosstalk occurrences.
However, this method cannot ﬂexibly accommodate ﬂuctuating
trafﬁc demand because it needs to determine cores to which
lightpaths are allocated according to the required number of
frequency slots in advance. Furthermore, this method does not
consider routing. On the other hand, our proposed method
adaptively selects routes, frequency slots, and cores for estab-
lished lightpaths based on current network status, and thus it is
expected to ﬂexibly accommodate ﬂuctuating trafﬁc demand.
III.
PROPOSED RSA METHOD
In this section, we ﬁrst explain the overview of our
proposed method in Section III-A, and then we detail the
procedure in Section III-B.
A. Overview
Our proposed RSA method provides a route, frequency
slot, and core selection strategy that considers not only the
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

blocking of the lightpath establishment owing to the depletion
of the frequency resources but also the generation of crosstalk
due to multi-core ﬁber environments. In the proposed method,
a route, frequency slots, and cores of each ﬁber along the
route for a newly established lightpath is selected based on two
policies. Note that the proposed method selects a route from
the pre-deﬁned candidate routes constructed by the K-shortest
path algorithm because multilevel modulation schemes used
for the lightpath are determined according to the length of the
routes. The two policies a) and b) are described as follows:
a)
In order to avoid the blocking of lightpath establish-
ment, we should balance the usage of frequency slots
in each link. A bottleneck link is generated when
trafﬁc concentrates in a certain link and there are
no available frequency slots in all the cores of the
link. In this case, new lightpaths cannot be established
further in the link. In order to distribute the load and
avoid the generation of bottleneck links, the proposed
method selects a route, frequency slots, and cores
according to the number of available frequency slots
in each core of each link along candidate routes.
b)
In order to avoid the generation of crosstalk, we
should not use the same frequency slots in adjacent
cores. The crosstalk decays the communication qual-
ity of lightpaths. The crosstalk generated in each link
accumulates along a lightpath as noise at a receiver
node. When the effect of crosstalk is large, it is
highly possible that data transmission fails even if the
lightpath is correctly established. In order to avoid
this situation, the proposed method also selects a
route, frequency slots, and cores according to the
usage of frequency slots in adjacent cores.
B. Procedure of the proposed method
In what follows, we describe the detailed procedure of
the proposed method. Note that we assume that the usage of
frequency slots, which is needed for lightpath establishment,
is known in advance by periodically collecting it.
1) Construction of candidate routes: The proposed method
selects a route from a set of candidate routes. In this paper,
we use the K-shortest path algorithm to make the set Pi,j =
{p[i,j]
1
, p[i,j]
2
, . . . , p[i,j]
K } of candidate routes for each sender i
and receiver j pair. Let G = (V, E) denote a directed graph,
where V and E denote sets of nodes and links, respectively.
The K-shortest path algorithm ﬁrst ﬁnds the shortest path from
i ∈ V to j ∈ V on G, where the cost of each link is set to be
1, using a general shortest path algorithm such as Dijkstra’s
algorithm. It then adopts the path as a candidate route and
doubles the cost of each link along the route. We ﬁnd the new
shortest path on the resulting graph and the path is adopted
as a new candidate route. The procedure is repeated until
K candidate routes are found. Modulation schemes used for
lightpath along routes are determined according to the length
of the routes.
2) Lightpath establishment: Let F = {1, 2, . . . , |F|} de-
note a set of frequency slots supported by each ﬁber. In order
to establish a lightpath for a pair of sender i and receiver j,
we use the cost Cp,f of each frequency slot f ∈ F along each
route p ∈ Pi,j, based on the current usage of frequency slots
on each link l on the route. The cost Cp,f is deﬁned by
Cp,f =
∑
l∈p


 min
m∈Ml
f+Bp−1
∑
f ′=f
Ul,m,f ′


 ,
(1)
where Ml denotes a set of cores in link l’s ﬁber, Ul,m,f
denotes the cost of the frequency slot f of core m in link l, and
Bp denotes the required number of frequency slots to establish
the lightpath along the route. Note that ∑f+Bp−1
f ′=f
Ul,m,f ′
indicates the total cost when the frequency slots from f to
f +Bp −1 are used for the lightpath. Speciﬁcally, the starting
frequency slot is f and the number of frequency slots for the
lightpath is Bp, the value of which is determined according
to modulation schemes and trafﬁc demands. The proposed
method uses the smallest ∑f+Bp−1
f ′=f
Ul,m,f ′ among cores in
order to calculate Cp,f.
Let ul,m,f be 1 if frequency slot f of core m in link l
is already used; otherwise, 0. If the frequency slot f of core
m in link l is available (i.e., ul,m,f = 0), the cost Ul,m,f of
frequency slot f of core m in link l is given by
Ul,m,f =
∑
f ′∈F:f̸=f ′
ul,m,f ′ + β
∑
m′∈Ml:m̸=m′
am,m′ul,m′,f;
(2)
otherwise (i.e., ul,m,f = 1),
Ul,m,f = ∞,
(3)
where β is a parameter (β > 0). am,m′ is a variable that is
equal to 1 if core m is adjacent to core m′; otherwise, 0. In (2),
the ﬁrst term derives from policy a) described in Section III-A.
Speciﬁcally, the cost Ul,m,f increases as the number of used
frequency slots in the same core increases. Also, the second
term derives from policy b) and the cost Ul,m,f increases with
the number of frequency slots used in adjacent cores. We can
adjust the impact of policies a) and b) with the parameter β.
(3) means that the lightpath cannot be established with the
frequency slot of the core in the link.
Whenever a new lightpath-setup request arrives, the pro-
posed method calculates the cost Cp,f with (1) for each
frequency slot f along each route p. Then, the proposed
method selects a combination of a route and frequency slots
with the smallest cost Cp,f. If the cost Cp,f is inﬁnity for
all the combinations, the lightpath-setup request is blocked. If
there are two or more combinations with the minimum cost,
the proposed method selects the combination with smaller
number of hops. Furthermore, the proposed method selects
one randomly if the numbers of hops among them are the
same. After selecting a route and frequency slots, the proposed
method selects a core in each link along the selected route.
Speciﬁcally, the proposed method uses core m given by
arg min
m∈Ml
f+Bp−1
∑
f ′=f
Ul,m,f ′,
the cost of which is used for Cp,f in (1).
Figure 4 shows an example of the proposed method. In
this ﬁgure, we assume that node 1 is a sender and node 3 is a
receiver and there are two links 1 and 2 along a route between
them. Each link consists of 3 cores and each core supports 6
frequency slots. Core 2 is adjacent to both core 1 and core 3.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 4. Example of the proposed method.
(a) JPN network
(b) USA network
Figure 5. Network model.
Core 1 and core 3 are not adjacent to each other. Red cells
(e.g., frequency slot 2 of core 3 in link 1) indicate that the
cells are already used by other lightpaths. The number in each
cell indicates the value of Ul,m,f, where β is set to be 3. For
instance, the value for frequency slot 2 of core 2 of link 1
is 5 because two frequency slots 4 and 5 are already used in
core 2 and frequency slot 2 of adjacent core 3 is already used
(i.e., U1,2,2 = 2 + 3 × 1 = 5). In this case, we calculate Cp,f
as follows, where Bp = 2. For frequency slot 1 in link 1,
∑2
f ′=1 U1,1,f ′ = 2, ∑2
f ′=1 U1,2,f ′ = 7, and ∑2
f ′=1 U1,3,f ′ =
∞, and thus min{2, 7, ∞} = 2. Similarly, for frequency slot
1 in link 2, ∑2
f ′=1 U2,1,f ′ = ∞, ∑2
f ′=1 U2,2,f ′ = 7, and
∑2
f ′=1 U2,3,f ′ = 0, and thus min{∞, 7, 0} = 0. Therefore,
the cost Cp,1 is 2 + 0 = 2. We can also calculate Cp,f for
other frequency slots and other routes. After calculating Cp,f
for all the combinations, the proposed method selects a route
and frequency slots with the smallest Cp,f.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We ﬁrst describe the simulation model in Section IV-A,
and then we show the results of the simulation experiments in
Section IV-B.
A. Model
To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we
conduct simulation experiments with two network models: JPN
network and USA network shown in Figures 5(a) and (b),
respectively. In the networks, each link consists of a multi-
core ﬁber. We assume that each node ﬁlls the role of an
intermediate switch, a sender node, and a receiver node. We
use three types of multi-core ﬁbers that has 7, 12, and 19 cores
shown in Figures 6(a), (b), and (c), respectively. The number
|F| of frequency slots supported by each ﬁber is equal to 320.
݂
बഀ਼ηϫρφ
αΠ̐
݂
बഀ਼ηϫρφ
αΠ̏
αΠ̐
αΠ̑
έϫηφʖέ൅ਫ਼
έϫηφʖέ൅ਫ਼͵͢
݂ଵ
݂ଵ
݂ଶ
݂ଶ
݂
݂
݂
(a) Core 7
݂
बഀ਼ηϫρφ
αΠ̐
݂
बഀ਼ηϫρφ
αΠ̏
αΠ̐
αΠ̑
έϫηφʖέ൅ਫ਼
έϫηφʖέ൅ਫ਼͵͢
݂ଵ
݂ଵ
݂ଶ
݂ଶ
݂
݂
݂
(b) Core 12
݂
बഀ਼ηϫρφ
αΠ̐
݂
बഀ਼ηϫρφ
αΠ̏
αΠ̐
αΠ̑
έϫηφʖέ൅ਫ਼
έϫηφʖέ൅ਫ਼͵͢
݂ଵ
݂ଵ
݂ଶ
݂ଶ
݂
݂
݂
(c) Core 19
Figure 6. Three types of multi-core ﬁbers
TABLE I. REQUIRED NUMBER OF FREQUENCY SLOTS (JPN
NETWORK)
# of hops
required # of frequency slots
1 - 4
1
5 - 9
2
10 -
3
Lightpath-setup requests are generated according to a Poisson
Process with rate λ [1/sec] at each node and the destination
of each request is independently chosen equally likely among
all the possible nodes. The holding time of each lightpath
follows an exponential distribution with mean H [sec]. After
the holding time, the lightpath is released. The parameter β
in (2) is set to be 200. The number K of candidate routes
constructed by the K-shortest path algorithm described in
Section III-B1 is set to be 3. For simplicity, we assume that the
length of each link is identical and the trafﬁc demand of each
lightpath-setup request is also identical. Therefore, the required
number of frequency slots for each lightpath establishment
is determined based on the number of hops of the lightpath
as shown in Tables I and II. This means that the required
number of frequency slots becomes small when a high-level
modulation scheme is used for the established lightpath. We
deﬁne ρ as the offered load per frequency slot in a core:
ρ =
λH
|F||M|,
where |M| denotes the number of cores in each ﬁber. We
obtain an average of 10 independent samples from each
simulation experiment.
For the sake of comparison, we use a ﬁrst-ﬁt method. The
ﬁrst-ﬁt method prepares K candidate routes as well as the
proposed method. It preferentially selects the shortest path in
terms of the number of hops from among the candidate routes
with available frequency slots whenever a new lightpath-setup
request arrives. Then, the ﬁrst-ﬁt method looks for available
frequency slots on the selected route in a ﬁrst-ﬁt manner. If
there are no available frequency slots meeting the requirement
of the lightpath in the route, then the ﬁrst-ﬁt method looks
for available frequency slots on the next route. If there are no
available frequency slots on all the routes, the lightpath-setup
request is blocked.
B. Results
Figure 7(a) shows the blocking probability of lightpath
establishment as a function of the offered load ρ in the JPN
network, where the number |M| of cores in each ﬁber is 7.
We deﬁne the blocking probability of lightpath establishment
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

(a) |M| = 7
(b) |M| = 12
(c) |M| = 19
Figure 7. Blocking probability of lightpath establishment in the JPN network.
(a) |M| = 7
(b) |M| = 12
(c) |M| = 19
Figure 8. Average number of crosstalk occurrences in the JPN network.
TABLE II. REQUIRED NUMBER OF FREQUENCY SLOTS (USA
NETWORK)
#of hops
required # of frequency slots
1, 2
1
3 - 5
2
6 - 9
3
10 -
4
as follows:
blocking probability of lightpath establishment
= number of blocked lightpath-setup requests
total number of lightpath-setup requests
.
As we can see from Figure 7(a), the blocking probability of
lightpath establishment in the ﬁrst-ﬁt method is very high. This
is because the usage of frequency slots in each link is uneven in
the ﬁrst-ﬁt method and bottleneck links are often generated. By
contrast, our proposed method efﬁciently reduces the blocking
probability of lightpath establishment because the proposed
method considers wavelength availability in each link.
Figures 7(b) and (c) show the blocking probability of
lightpath establishment as a function of the offered load ρ
in the JPN network, where |M| = 12 and 19, respectively.
As we can see from these ﬁgures, the blocking probability
of the proposed method is smaller than that of the ﬁrst-ﬁt
method, similar to the result of |M| = 7. From these ﬁgures,
we also observe that the blocking probability of lightpath
establishment decreases with the increase in the number |M|
of cores because of the large-scale effect.
Figure 8(a) shows the average number of crosstalk occur-
rences per frequency slot as a function of the offered load ρ
in the JPN network, where |M| = 7. We count the number of
crosstalk occurrences every time a new lightpath is established
and the average number of crosstalk occurrences is deﬁned by
average number of crosstalk occurrences
= total number of crosstalk occurrences
number of established lightpaths
.
As we can see from this ﬁgure, the proposed method greatly
reduces the crosstalk effect in lightly loaded situations while
the ﬁrst-ﬁt method is severely affected by crosstalk. The
average number of crosstalk occurrences increases with the
offered load ρ because it is highly possible that there are no
available frequency slots that are not used in adjacent cores in
heavily loaded situations.
Figures 8(b) and (c) show the average number of crosstalk
occurrences per frequency slot as a function of the offered
load ρ in the JPN network, where |M| = 12 and 19. From
these ﬁgures, we observe that the proposed method efﬁciently
reduces the average number of crosstalk occurrences as well as
the case of |M| = 7. Note that values of the average number
of crosstalk occurrences depend on the placement of cores
shown in Figure 6, so that the average number of crosstalk
occurrences in the case of |M| = 12 is smaller than those in
the other cases.
Figures 9(a)-(c) show the blocking probability of lightpath
establishment as a function of the offered load ρ in the
USA network, where |M| = 7, 12, and 19, respectively.
Also, Figures 10(a)-(c) show the average number of crosstalk
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

(a) |M| = 7
(b) |M| = 12
(c) |M| = 19
Figure 9. Blocking probability of lightpath establishment in the USA network.
(a) |M| = 7
(b) |M| = 12
(c) |M| = 19
Figure 10. Average number of crosstalk occurrences in the USA network.
occurrences per frequency slot as a function of the offered
load ρ in the USA network, where |M| = 7, 12, and 19,
respectively. As we can see from these ﬁgures, the proposed
method dramatically reduces both the blocking probability of
lightpath establishment and the average number of crosstalk
occurrences, regardless of the number |M| of cores in each
ﬁber, similar to the results in the JPN network.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a dynamic RSA method that avoids
the generation of crosstalk and the blocking of lightpath estab-
lishment in elastic optical networks with multi-core ﬁbers. The
proposed method provides a routing and spectrum allocation
strategy, which suppresses both the generation of crosstalk
and blocking of lightpath establishment. Through simulation
experiments, we showed the effectiveness of the proposed
method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by Grant-in-Aid for
Scientiﬁc Research (C) of the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science under Grant No. 18K11282.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Jinno, H. Takara, B. Kozicki, Y. Tsukishima, Y. Sone, and S. Mat-
suoka, “Spectrum-efﬁcient and scalable elastic optical path network:
Architecture, beneﬁts, and enabling technologies,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 66–73, 2009.
[2]
M. Jinno, B. Kozicki, H. Takara, A. Watanabe, Y. Sone, T. Tanaka,
and A. Hirano, “Distance-adaptive spectrum resource allocation in
spectrum-sliced elastic optical path network,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 138–145, 2010.
[3]
K. Christodoulopoulos, I. Tomkos, and E. Varvarigos, “Elastic band-
width allocation in ﬂexible OFDM-based optical networks,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1354–1366, 2011.
[4]
Y. Wang, X. Cao, and Y. Pan, “A study of the routing and spectrum
allocation in spectrum-sliced elastic optical path networks,” in Proc.
IEEE INFOCOM’11, pp. 1503–1511, Apr. 2011.
[5]
Z. Zhu, W. Lu, L. Zhang, and N. Ansari, “Dynamic service provisioning
in elastic optical networks with hybrid single-/multi-path routing,”
Journal of Lightwave Thechnology, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 15–22, 2013.
[6]
J. Sakaguchi, B. J. Puttnam, W. Klaus, Y. Awaji, N. Wada, A. Kanno,
T. Kawanishi, K. Imamura, H. Inaba, K. Mukasa, R. Sugizaki,
T. Kobayashi, and M. Watanabe, “19-core ﬁber transmission of 19 ×
100 × 172-Gb/s SDM-WDM-PDM-QPSK signals at 305 Tb/s,” in Proc.
OFC/NFOEC’12, pp. 1–3, May 2012.
[7]
D. Richardson, J. Fini, and L. Nelson, “Space-division multiplexing in
optical ﬁbers,” Nature Photonics, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 354–362, 2013.
[8]
S. Sugihara, Y. Hirota, S. Fujii, H. Tode, and T. Watanabe, “Dynamic
resource allocation for immediate and advance reservation in space-
division-multiplexing-based elastic optical networks,” Journal of Op-
tical Communications and Networking, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 183–197, 2017.
[9]
H. Tode and Y. Hirota, “Routing, spectrum, and core and/or mode
assignment on space-division multiplexing optical networks,” Journal of
Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. A99–A113,
2017.
[10]
S. Fujii, Y. Hirota, H. Tode, and K. Murakami , “On-demand spectrum
and core allocation for reducing crosstalk in multicore ﬁbers in elastic
optical networks,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and
Networking, vol. 6. no. 12, pp. 1059–1071, 2014.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

