Design of Network Resource Federation towards Future Open Access Networking 
Michiaki Hayashi, Nobutaka Matsumoto, Kosuke Nishimura and Hideaki Tanaka 
KDDI R&D Laboratories Inc. 
Saitama, Japan 
{mc-hayashi, nb-matsumoto, nish, hide}@kddilabs.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Various network applications, such as virtual 
private network, cloud computing and Internet protocol 
television, are often provided across multiple network 
operators. One difficulty in managing quality of service 
across operator domains is the barrier for adoption 
especially to service level agreement-sensitive and mission-
critical 
cases. 
Federating 
network 
resources 
among 
operators is necessary to manage quality of service across 
operators. To manage network resources of other operator 
domains, network operator’s federation mechanisms aiming 
at future of open access network model is designed. 
Mechanisms of the signaling process as well as the capability 
of the bandwidth broker are proposed for the open access 
networking, where multiple operators are connected via a 
common access network operator. Considering both next 
generation network and non-next generation network 
architectures coexist in the open access network, the design 
identifies functional extensions to existing bandwidth broker 
implementations for the federation signaling. The proposed 
design is prototyped and the demonstration results show 
that the federation mechanism can assure the bandwidth of 
targeted live data stream on demand across trunk and access 
network operators even under congestion.  
Keywords- QoS; federation; NGN; open access. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Network applications, such as virtual private network 
(VPN), cloud computing and Internet protocol television 
(IPTV) are often provided across multiple networks 
operators, such as telecom operators or ISPs. Those 
applications sometimes have difficulty in ensuring the 
quality of service (QoS) because of uncertainty condition 
of networks. Therefore, adoptions of the network 
applications to SLA-sensitive or mission-critical cases are 
difficult, which may also block the growth of future 
network applications. To ensure QoS across operators, 
network resources across multiple domains must be 
managed, which requires the capability of federating 
network resources among operators. The network resource 
federation denotes the mechanism to negotiate and 
coordinate network resources, such as bandwidth for a 
typical example, among operators for inter-operator 
connections. The bandwidth broker (BB) concept [1] and 
several solutions for Internet applications [2, 3] and also 
mobile applications [4] have been proposed as the 
federation enabler. However, rolling out the federation 
mechanism to the whole Internet is not likely because of 
the huge meshed structure inducing also complicated 
pricing model [5, 6]. Another possible scenario is an open 
access network (OAN) [7, 8] where the access network 
operator (i.e., typically incumbent telecom operator) 
provides access infrastructure to the trunk network 
operator (i.e., typically competitive telecom operator). 
Since the OAN has a relatively simple structure, the QoS-
managed federation is more feasible than the Internet. 
Indeed, telecommunication standardization organizations, 
such as ETSI and ITU-T, have established the architectural 
framework of the next generation network (NGN) [9], 
where the capability of the OAN is incorporated in its 
network to network interface (NNI). A bandwidth broker 
called the resource and admission control function 
(RACF) can have NNI for the inter-operator network 
resource federation. Based on the QoS requests from 
adjacent NGN, RACF controls an NGN edge router called 
the border gateway function (BGF) to ensure QoS within 
the NGN domain. This means that a QoS-managed 
federation in NGN architecture requires BGFs to be 
installed in the transport network. Hence, the NGN-based 
approach cannot be simply applied to the OAN, since BGF 
has not been widely rolled out yet. Even in the case of 
inter-NGN domain federation, the signaling procedure has 
not been discussed yet. 
To design a network resource federation for future 
OAN, this paper proposes a design of signaling 
mechanisms for QoS-managed multi-domain networks 
where both NGN and non-NGN operators can coexist. 
Non-NGN operator assumes to be conventional IP-based 
transport network, or the other architectures having the BB 
that is different from the RACF. The design identifies 
functional extensions to existing BB implementations for 
the federation signaling. The design is prototyped and the 
demonstration results show the feasibility of bandwidth-
assured services for QoS sensitive cases in the OANs. 
Section II describes structures of the network resource 
federation using the open access network model. Section 
III introduces existing technical approaches related to the 
network resource federation. Considering the remaining 
issues of the related works, Section IV proposes design of 
network resource federation. Based on the proposed 
framework, Section V demonstrates basic signaling 
procedure of the network resource federation. 
II. 
SERVICE MODEL OF NETWORK FEDERATION 
As an example, users of VPN, cloud computing and 
IPTV services connect to remote offices, data centers and 
application servers, respectively. In the OAN-based 
130
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

service model, ethose services  are provided via a common 
access network operator and multiple trunk network 
operators, as shown in Fig. 1.  
 
Access network operator
(NGN)
BB
Data
Stream 1
Data
Stream 2
IPTV
VPN
Cloud
Trunk network operator
(non‐NGN)
Trunk network operator
(NGN)
Figure 1. An example scenario involving multiple network operators 
based on the open access network (OAN) model. 
 
In those scenarios, data streams passes across multiple 
network operators, as shown in data stream 1 and 2 in Fig. 
1. To ensure QoS of those network applications, the BB of 
each network operator needs to cooperate with each other 
for managing end-to-end bandwidth resources of the 
relevant data streams. Several cases must be considered to 
address network resource federation. Aiming at future 
OAN scenarios, we focus on two federation cases, that are 
the federation between NGN operators and the federation 
between NGN and non-NGN operators. The latter case is 
indispensable to migrate into the future OAN environment. 
In Fig. 1, data Stream 1 requires the federation between 
two NGN operators, while Data Stream 2 requires the 
federation between NGN and non-NGN operators. 
III. 
RELATED WORKS 
Several BB implementations have been proposed for 
the Internet architectures as we discussed in Section I. On 
the other hand, BB solutions recently developed for NGN 
[10] and future Internet architectures [11] may also be 
applicable to the OAN. In the NGN architecture defined 
by ETSI TISPAN and ITU-T, BB called RACF has a 
standard inter-NGN federation interface, shown as “Ri” 
interface, as shown in Fig. 2. NGN architecture has been 
developed especially for telecom operators, and thus is 
suitable for the OAN. Policy decision functional entity 
(PD-FE) is responsible for federating resources with other 
NGN, as well as resource reservation based on the 
availability information residing in the transport resource 
control functional entity (TRC-FE). Although the Ri 
federation interface has been defined, the resource 
reservation procedure (i.e., signaling mechanism) has not 
been defined yet. Moreover, interworking with a non-
NGN domain or resource reservation of a non-NGN by 
RACF is currently beyond the scope of standardizations. 
 
Figure 2. RACF as a BB for inter-NGN resource federation via “Ri”
signaling interface [10]. 
 
While in the current Internet architecture it is difficult 
to ensure end-to-end network resources, research testbeds 
towards the future Internet architecture are developing 
several control frameworks incorporating a BB mechanism 
called as “clearinghouse” for resource reservations of both 
intra- and inter-domains [11]. Although the architectural 
design of the clearing house is based on the existing BB, 
the clearing house handles both network and computing 
resources. However, there are a few demonstrations 
showing its feasibility of multi-domain resource federation 
[12]. Since the standardization of the federation interface 
has not been sufficiently discussed, the control framework 
often requires complicated interface wrappers (i.e., 
converters of interface protocols) as shown in Fig. 3. 
Hence, 
the 
applicability 
of 
standardized 
resource 
federation interfaces needs to be assessed to simplify the 
signaling design. Especially for the OAN case, the 
applicability of the telecom federation standard (i.e., “Ri” 
interface) is attractive not only for the NGN operator but 
also for the non-NGN operator. 
 
Figure 3. Inter-domain resource federation involving interface wrappers
(i.e., protocol converters) [12]. 
 
IV. 
DESIGN OF RESOURCE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
A universal BB implementation both for NGN and 
non-NGN domains has been proposed [13]. That concept 
extends the standardized RACF architecture to scope not 
only NGN resource (i.e., BGF in transport network) but 
also non-NGN resources (e.g., PON, MPLS, etc.), and 
Ri 
interface 
131
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

such the implementation can be an enabler of the federated 
signaling operation proposed in this Section. However, to 
find resources residing in other domains, two functional 
extensions are required in addition to the existing works. 
As the first extension, the capability of finding BB for 
the federating domain must be added. For inter-domain 
operation, the function that judges whether the request can 
be processed within own domain or the request needs 
federation with other domains is defined, but such 
functionality has not been defined in the current RACF 
[10] and BB [13]. To identify an appropriate federating 
BB requires address resolution capability, such as domain 
name system (DNS) function, when receiving incoming 
requests. In the NGN control framework, addressing 
information is incorporated in the network attachment 
control function (NACF). However, the standard NACF 
has only knowledge of its own domain.  
As the second extension, the capability of resolving 
hidden addresses must be added. Considering inter-
operator federation scenarios, a connection termination 
point specified by an IP address in other domains may be 
hidden by the peer BB (e.g., using NAPT) for concealing 
its topology. Therefore, termination points of the service 
may be specified using terminal ID, which is a relative 
value specifying a termination point rather than specifying 
an absolute IP address value. Ri protocol [14] has 
introduced “user identifier” to describe media flow, and 
the parameter can be identical to the terminal ID. Using 
the terminal ID, the BB must resolve the IP address inside 
own domain in order to control relevant resource 
accordingly. The resolution may be done by the user 
profile database such as NACF, and thus NACF is 
required to have a table of correspondence between 
terminal ID and IP address.  
Considering the aforementioned extensions with the 
basis of the Ri interface, the federation signaling is 
designed using Diameter protocol [15], which provides 
authentication, authorization and accounting framework 
for roaming, network access and IP mobility applications. 
To cover scenarios based on Fig. 1, both cases are 
discussed. The first case is federating inter-NGN domains, 
and the second case is federating NGN and non-NGN 
domains. As for the interface between the service control 
function (SCF) and BB, standardized “Rs” interface, 
which is depicted in Fig. 2, is used as a candidate of the 
common interface. SCF may be a cloud provisioning 
system, application server, and so forth. 
Fig. 4 shows the proposed signaling procedure of the 
first case (i.e., federation between NGN domains), and the 
procedure describes the BB of Domain 1 receives a 
resource request from SCF and negotiates with BB of 
Domain 2 to reserve resources between two terminals. 
Two domains are inter-connected by border BGFs, and 
two end terminals are connected to access BGFs in each 
domain. In the reservation phase, based on the standard 
procedure of Rs interface, SCF sends Diameter AA 
request (AAR) for two ends of the stream with upstream 
and downstream, and thus totally 4 AAR messages are 
sent from SCF to BB. In accordance with the AAR sent 
from SCF, 4 AAR messages are sent from BB of Domain 
1 to BB of Domain 2. This AAR messaging process plays 
the role of reserving the TCP/UDP port resource as well as 
bandwidth resources at the termination point of BGF. AA 
answer (AAA) message informs the result of resource 
assignment with the information of the assigned TCP/UDP 
port resource at BGF. Since the standard Rs procedure is 
designed for one domain and SCF has no knowledge of 
other domains, the inter-NGN process must be masked by 
BB of Domain 1, whose process is not defined in 
standards. BB of Domain 1 conceals the existence of 
TCP/UDP port termination points at two BGFs in Domain 
2. From the SCF’s perspective, terminal in Domain 2 can 
be understood as the one accommodated to the border 
BGF of Domain 1. When receiving AAR, the BB of 
Domain 1 needs to perform the capability of finding BB of 
the federating domain, and the process is depicted as (1). 
The capability of resolving hidden address also needs to be 
performed by the BB of Domain 2 when controlling BGF, 
as depicted (2). BBs also reserve resources of standard 
BGFs using the Megaco protocol [16], which is designed 
to control transport equipment for managing gateway of 
each media stream. To finalize the federation, the BB of 
Domain 1 sends AAR messages to indicate the 
commitment of the federation. Extending the signaling 
procedure only of the BB with Ri interface, SCF and BGF 
do not have to be aware of the existence of the inter-NGN 
operation. 
 
SCF
BB of NGN
domain 1
BB of NGN
domain 2
Access-
BGF
Reservation
of downlink
Reservation
of uplink
AAR
AAR
AAR
AAR
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAA
[Megaco] Modify
Border-
BGF
[Megaco] Add (reserving TCP/UDP port)
Border-
BGF
Access-
BGF
[Megaco] Add
AAR
AAA
AAR
AAA
[Megaco] Modify (reserving bandwidth)
[Megaco] Modify
NGN domain 1
NGN domain 2
(1)
(1)
(for upstream)
AAR
AAA
AAR
AAA
[Megaco] Add
(for downstream)
Commitment
[Megaco] Modify
(as optional for activation)
(2)
(2)
Figure 4. Signaling procedure of resource federation between NGN-
domains. 
 
Next, Fig. 5 shows the proposed signaling procedure of 
the second case (i.e., federation between non-NGN and 
NGN domains). Although the base procedure for SCF and 
Ri interface are not dramatically changed, the internal 
process of BB needs to be modified deriving from non-
NGN does not have the TCP/UDP port reservation 
mechanism. BB operation within the non-NGN domain 
follows the existing procedure [13] using SOAP protocol 
message “NetResourceReservation” to reserve bandwidth 
132
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

resources of logical links at passive optical network (PON) 
and MPLS segments, etc. SOAP [17] is a protocol for 
exchanging extensible makeup language (XML)-structured 
information of Web services. To manage multiple segment 
resources, the non-NGN domain has multiple network 
resource managers (NRMs) that locally manage the 
resources of each segment. For the purpose of 
synchronizing reservation states of the resource segments, 
two-phased commitment is effective for the reservation. In 
addition, since non-NGN equipment does not have the 
capability of reserving any TCP/UDP port resource at the 
equipment. The BB of the non-NGN domain proxies 
BGF’s role supplying terminal port values of the stream 
since any network address port translation (NAPT) [18] is 
performed within the non-NGN domain. The port proxy 
function is performed at Diameter AAA messages marked 
as (3). Hence, the two-phased SOAP operation and the 
port proxy function is the third additional extension to BB. 
Based on those mechanisms, SCF, BB in the NGN domain 
and BGF do not have to be aware of inter-domain 
operation. 
 
SCF
BB of Non-
NGN domain
BB of NGN
domain
NRMs
Reservation
of downlink
Reservation
of uplink
AAR
AAR
AAR
AAR
AAA 
AAA
AAA
AAA
AAR
AAA
AAR
AAA
[SOAP] NetResourceReservation
Border-
BGF
Access-
BGF
[Megaco] Add
(2)
[Megaco] Add
(1)
AAR
AAA
AAR
AAA
[Megaco] Modify
[Megaco] Modify
Non-NGN domain
NGN domain
(2)
(2)
(2)
Tentative reservation
[SOAP] Commit
(controlling 
equipment)
Commitment of reservation
(1)
(3)
(3)
Commitment
Figure 5. Signaling procedure of resource federation between non-NGN 
and NGN domains. 
 
V. 
DEMONSTRATION OF FEDERATION SIGNALING 
As a proof of concept of the signaling design described 
in Section IV, federation-capable BBs for NGN and non-
NGN are developed, respectively. The prototype BBs are 
installed to the OAN testbed, and QoS-managed federation 
service across trunk operator (i.e., non-NGN) and access 
operator (i.e., NGN) is demonstrated. Bandwidth-assured 
content transfer across domains is evaluated using the 
testbed configuration shown in Fig. 6. A contents server is 
located in an non-NGN domain, and identical 30 Mbps 
unicast contents are sent to Terminal X and Y in the NGN 
domain, respectively. Based on the Rs protocol-based 
request from a content server, the BB in each domain 
communicates with each other using the Ri signaling 
procedure. The BB in the NGN domain controls BGFs 
using the Megaco protocol, and the BB in the non-NGN 
domain control NRM for the MPLS router using the 
SOAP protocol, as described in Fig. 5. NRM performed 
the call admission control to ensure the bandwidth 
reservation of the MPLS network. The link capacity of 
each link is 1 Gbps. Using the federation signaling 
between the BBs, the bandwidth of only the content stream 
to Terminal X is reserved, while a bandwidth of the stream 
to Terminal Y is not reserved. In addition, for both content 
streams, the background stream of 1.5 Gbps is periodically 
generated between traffic generator ports within the access 
operator domain. The background traffic shares an 
outgoing link of BGF with the content streams, and 
induces the congestion. 
 
Access network operator
(NGN)
Trunk network operator
(Non‐NGN)
Traffic generator
BGF
Contents
server
BB
Router
Diameter (Ri)
NRM
Term.
Y
Term.
X
Diameter (Rs)
Megaco
SOAP
Switch
Figure 6. Configuration of concept-proof demonstration for the network 
federation using proposed signaling method. 
 
Fig. 7 shows the throughput of the content streams and 
the amount of the generated background traffic. Before 
activating the federation process, the throughputs of two 
streams were both affected by the background traffic. Next, 
the federation signaling was activated to reserve 35 Mbps 
only for the stream to Terminal X, and then the throughput 
was stably maintained at 30 Mbps after the federation 
process. This signaling mechanism assured the targeted 
live stream on demand without any significant disruption 
to the targeted traffic.  
 
30
20
10
0
Throughput of content [Mbps]
Generated background traffic  [Gbps]
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
Content without 
federation
(for term. Y)
Background
traffic
1:20
1:00
Elapsed time [mm:ss]
Content with resource federation
(for term. X)
Federation
activated
Figure 7. Throughput of contents and generated background traffic.
 
133
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

The signaling operation was captured as Fig. 8. The 
completion 
time 
was 
about 
2.46 
sec 
including 
configuration of the network equipment. 
 
Figure 8. Snapshot of Ri-based signaling part for the federation process.
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
To design the network resource federation for future 
open access networking, signaling mechanisms are 
proposed for multi-domain networks where both NGN and 
non-NGN operators coexist. The design has been 
identified 
functional 
extensions 
to 
existing 
BB 
implementations for the federation signaling. The design is 
prototyped and the demonstration has shown that the 
federation mechanism can assure bandwidth of targeted 
live stream on demand across trunk and access network 
operators even under congestion. With the proposed 
federation mechanisms, QoS sensitive services are 
expected to be provided across multiple domains in future 
open access environments.  
In the next steps of this study, our BB prototype needs 
to be extended considering scalability of network 
resources and transaction volume. For the future roll out of 
the federated OAN model, the federation operations 
simulating various operators’ policies, such as usage of 
terminal ID, notifying event, and charging, must be 
examined in the testbed. The proposed OAN model also 
needs to be discussed in the future Internet communities 
for the better compatibility with the access infrastructure 
providers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is partially supported by National 
Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
(NICT) under the Research and Development of Dynamic 
Network Technology Project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Nichols, V. Jacobson, and L. Zhang, “A Two-bit Differentiated 
Services Architecture for the Internet,” RFC 2638, July, 1999. 
[2] 
X. Xiao and L. M. Ni, “Internet QoS: A Big Picture,” IEEE 
Network, pp. 8-18, March/April, 1999. 
[3] 
M. Günter, T Braun, and I. Khalil, “An Architecture for Managing 
QoS-enabled VPNs over the Internet,” in Proceedings of LCN ’99, 
pp. 122-131, Oct., 1999. 
[4] 
R. Aguiar, D. Bijwaard, B. A. Farshchian, K. Jonas, and A. Sarma, 
“Pervasive 
Services 
for 
Next 
Generation 
Heterogeneous 
Networks,” in Proceedings of WTC ’06, May 2006. 
[5] 
K. R. Vemu, D. T Daniel, and Y. Nagappa, “Optimal Multiclass 
Internet Pricing with Game Theoretical Approach,” in Proceedings 
of ICOIN 2009, pp. 1-5, Jan., 2009. 
[6] 
S. Shelford, E. G. Manning, and G. C. Shoja, “A framework for 
quality of service control through pricing mechanisms,” in 
Proceedings of NOMS 2006, pp. 24-32, Apr., 2006. 
[7] 
M. Forzati, C. P. Larsen, and C. Mattsson, “Open Access 
Networks, the Swedish Experience,” in Proceedings of ICTON 
2010, pp. 1-4, Jul., 2010. 
[8] 
R. Battiti, R. L. Cigno, F. Orava, and B. Pehrson, “Global Growth 
of Open Access Networks: from WarChalking and Connection 
Sharing to Sustainable Business,” in Proceedings of WMASH 
2003, 2003. 
[9] 
ITU-T Recommendation Y.2012, “Functional requirements and 
architecture of the NGN,” Apr., 2010. 
[10] ITU-T Recommendation Y.2111, “Resource and admission control 
functions in next generation networks,” Nov., 2008. 
[11] GENI project office, “GENI control framework requirements,” 
GENI-SE-CF-RQ-01.3, Jan., 2009. 
[12] S. R. Thorpe et al., “G-lambda and EnLIGHTened: wrapped in 
middleware co-allocating compute and network resources across 
Japan and the US,” in Proceedings of GridNets 2007, October, 
2007. 
[13] N. Matsumoto, M. Hayashi, and H. Tanaka, “Network Middleware 
Design for Bridging Legacy Infrastructures and NGN,” in 
Proceedings of NGI 2009, pp. 1-9, Jul., 2009. 
[14] ITU-T Recommendation Q.3307.1, “Resource Control Protocol No. 
7 – Protocol at the Interface Between Inter-Domain Policy 
Decision Physical Entities (Ri interface),” Jun., 2009. 
[15] P. Calhoun, J. Loughney, E. Guttman, G. Zorn, and J. Arkko, 
“Diameter Base Protocol,” RFC3588, Sep., 2003. 
[16] ITU-T Recommendation H.248.1, “Gateway control protocol: 
Version 3,” Sep., 2005. 
[17] M. Gudgin et al., “SOAP Version 1.2 Part 1: Messaging 
Framework (Second Edition),” W3C recommendation, Apr., 2007. 
[18] P. Srisuresh and M. Holdrege, “IP Network Address Translator 
(NAT) Terminology and Considerations,” RFC2663, Aug., 1999. 
134
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

