Performance Study for End-point Links of Networks 
 
Eleftherios Stergiou, Spyridoula V. Margariti 
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications 
Technology 
ATEI of Epirus, Arta, Greece 
 ster@art.forthnet.gr , smargar@teiep.gr  
 
Gerasimos C. Meletiou, George E. Rizos and 
Dimitrios C. Vasiliadis 
Network Operations Center 
 ATEI of Epirus, 
 Arta, Greece 
 gmelet@teiep.gr, georizos@teiep.gr, dvas@teiep.gr 
 
 
Abstract—The rapid deployment of networks in various 
environments demands accurate, efficient measurement in 
order to estimate path links. In this work, we considered the 
challenges posed by broadband networks for available 
bandwidth capacity evaluation. We focused on rate, using 
token bucket in cable modem end link with non-FIFO 
scheduling, and on burstiness type of traffic applied by multi-
rate end-links in wireless network that follows the IEEE 802.11 
protocol. We used a software tool for estimating the path rate 
capacity and we found that raw links and the corresponding 
token bucket rates were calculated in a quick and accurate 
manner. The accurate prediction of the available bandwidth in 
an end-point network link can help to avoid traffic bottlenecks, 
server choice, and overlay networks.  
Keywords - end-point links; cable links; wireless links; 
throughput; performance evaluation.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As the Internet grows in size and connection complexity, 
new application and services requirements necessitate the 
performance analysis of network paths using either some 
estimation techniques or developing appropriate software 
tools for monitoring and measuring the properties of end-to-
end paths. In the context of performance evaluation the 
available bandwidth of a point-to-point path is a metric of 
crucial interest in packet switched networks and is therefore 
the key in studying network management, server selection, 
routing, and other network issues.  
At previous works in literature, some performance 
metrics which referred to end-to-end paths have already been   
estimated. Some papers assume simple models of network 
links [1]. For example, Strauss et al. [1] admits that the 
narrow links -the links with the minimum capacity among all 
links- and the tight links –the links with the minimum 
available bandwidth among all links- along a specific path 
have a well-defined raw bandwidth that shows the rate at 
which bits can be traversed via the link. However, some of 
these assumptions used by the traditional model do not work 
with access networks like cable modem and wireless 802.11 
[15], [16].  This discrepancy may be happen due to any of 
the following reasons: 
(a) A network end link is likely to appear as variable 
values of row bandwidth because of the token-bucket rate 
regulation (like cable modem links). A similar behaviour can 
be noticed in wireless 802.11 end links, which appear as 
various multi-rates schemas.  
(b) The packets may not be delivered via first input first 
output (FIFO) policy.  
(c) Wireless 802.11 links may experience interference 
from high cross-traffic. 
 
By this work, the challenges posed by broadband 
networks to existing capacity estimation techniques were 
identified. Many experiments for available bandwidth 
estimation of end-point links were done. The experiments 
demonstrated the impact of packet size on the maximum 
achievable throughput in wireless links. Finally, quantitative 
results revealed the effect of the multirate environment on 
the available bandwidth. 
The paper has the following structure. In Section II, the 
basic performance definitions are presented and some related 
work is overviewed. In Section III, different types of 
network access and their characteristics of end-points are 
explained, while in Section IV the methodology of our 
experiments is outlined. Subsequently, in Section V the 
results of our experimental testbeds are reported, while 
Section VI provides the concluding remarks and outlines the 
future work. 
 
II. 
BASIC DEFINITIONS- PREVIOUS WORK 
A. Basic Definitions 
 
Network path can be defined as any sequence of links, 
where a store-and-forward routing mechanism is used in 
order to transfer packets from one point (sender) to the other 
point (receiver). In our case study, each path is considered to 
be fixed and unique that implies no routing changes are 
applied in this path.   
Link capacity (
 in bps) at a specific link (
) is 
considered the maximum constant rate of bits that can be 
applied on this link when it is empty.  
Ci
i
End-to-end link capacity ( C  in bps) of a path p is 
defined as the maximum rate of bits that can be applied at the 
path p when no other traffic is concurrently applied on this 
path C is therefore assumed the maximum rate that path p 
38
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

can provide to a flow. Consequently, the end-to-end link 
capacity of a path p can be estimated as:   
i
i
C
C
...ν
= =1min
 
 
 
(1) 
 where v is the total number of links at the sequence of 
store-and-forward links of path p. 
Available link bandwidth [
 in bps] of a link (i) at 
the time interval (
) is defined as a fraction of the 
link capacity that has not been utilized during this time 
interval. Denoting the average utilization of a link (i ) during 
the time interval (
) as 
 the corresponding 
available bandwidth of link can be expressed as: 
A t ( 0t )
i
Δ
u( ) (
t
i
Δ
t
t
t
0 + Δ
0,
t
t
t
0, 0 + Δ
)
0t
 
( )]
1[
)
(
0
)
(
0
( )
t
u
C
t
A
t
i
i
t
i
Δ
Δ
−
=
  
(2) 
 
In the same manner, the end-to-end available bandwidth 
 of a path p can be considered as the minimum 
available rate among all links in this path. Thus, the end-to-
end available bandwidth of a path p expresses the maximum 
rate that can be provided to a flow, without shortening the 
bandwidth of the rest of the traffic in this path. Formally, it 
can be estimated as: 
( ) ( 0 )
t
A
t
Δ
 
 
 
 
(3) 
( )]}
1[
min{
)
(
0
)
(
1..
0
( )
t
u
C
t
A
t
i
i
i
t
Δ
=
Δ
−
=
ν
  
Finally, another two significant metrics in performance 
analysis are the following: 
Narrow link is the link with the minimum capacity 
among all links in a path, expressing thus the capacity of the 
whole path. 
    Tight link denotes the minimum available bandwidth 
among all links of path, which is therefore an indicator of the 
path’s available capacity. 
 
B. Previous Work 
In the last two decades many efforts have been devoted 
by researches for estimating the network capacity of access 
links. The performance calculations in [2],[3] were based on 
the packet pair principle.  Thus, various techniques have 
been designed to avoid interference; e.g., in [4] in order to 
transmit a packet subsequence with variable packet sizes like 
trains’ wagons have been proposed. Efforts like [5], [6] and 
[7] based on packet/train approach have also been addressed; 
all these efforts investigated the relationship among packet 
sizes and packet delays, as well.  
Nowadays, the available bandwidth estimations are 
distinguished into two main approach classes. The first 
bandwidth estimation class addresses the packet rate 
methods, while the other class concerns the packet gap 
methodology. Regarding the related work the first estimation 
class methodologies were applied by [8][9][10][11], while 
studies as [1], [12] conducted the second one class.  
A time based and per nodes approach for available 
bandwidth is presented by Sarr et al. in [14]. The analytical 
approach is based on some controversial assumptions. 
Moreover another new effort for available bandwidth 
estimation in IEEE 802.11 networks is presented in [19]. 
 
The first class of estimations (based on packet rate) 
watches the sequence packets’ probes. When the packet 
transmitted rate exceeds the available bandwidth then the 
receiver rate became lower (in comparison with sender rate) 
and the probe packets tend to queue up, causing an increment 
in one way delay. 
 
On the other side the second method of estimation’s class 
(based on packet gap) transmit probes with equal-sized 
packets which are spaced apart depending the transmission 
time of the probes on the specific link. The increment of the 
packets’ spacing is used for make approaching the volume of 
cross-traffic. In this case the spacing say the cross-traffic is 
subtracted from the capacity obtained by the yielded 
available bandwidth. 
III. 
TYPES AND BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF UNDER 
STUDY NETWORK ACCESS 
 
We chose two typical cases of network access for study. 
One was the case of cable modems; the other was the 
wireless 802.11 case. Both extensively use typical access 
links.  In the following paragraphs, we present four basic 
characteristics that are observed in broadband network 
access. 
(1) Link’s Bandwidth. Reversers consider that the link’s 
bandwidth is the parameter that shows the bit rates that can 
be transmitted down to the link. Nevertheless, that is not true 
when a traffic regulation schema is used. The Internet service 
provider (ISP) can distribute a physical access link into 
smaller separate parts corresponding to the customers. So, 
the bandwidth divisions reveal that the traffic regulation 
schema is applied by ISP. With a cable modem, the token 
bucket technique is used; thus, the mean packet rate and 
maximum burst size in bytes is determined.  It is noteworthy 
to distinguish the raw link bandwidth from maximum 
achievable packet rate. 
(2) Service order. In classic performance studies, all 
packets have FIFO order for service distribution. As a result, 
the packets suffer from queuing, which increases delay. 
Nevertheless, in 802.11 accesses link, the stations access to 
broadband in a distributed fashion. Also, in cable modem 
case, the Cable Modem Termination System (the cable head) 
periodically distributes control messages assigned to various 
stations, inviting them to earn in unused slots. Hence, in both 
cases, the packet waiting among various stations would not 
be serviced in FIFO order.  
(3) Links with variable values of rates. The wireless 
802.11b employee radio links can operate at 1, 2, 5.5 end 
11Mbps relative to the environmental conditions. Similarly, 
the 802.11a network operates between 6 and 54 Mbps. 
Different stations belonging to the same network can operate 
at different rates, although all stations share the same 
spectrum. This situation may cause cross-traffic to each 
station.  
39
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

For the IEEE 802.11 [15], [16] distributed medium 
access protocol used in ad hoc networks the distributed 
functions are based on Carrier Sense Multiple Access with 
Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA) principles. When an 
emitter gains access to the medium, the whole frame is 
transmitted. Collision detection by the sender is impossible 
in radio networks. Emitters are notified of good frame 
reception by the corresponding acknowledgment packet.   
Network behavior may have an impact on the available 
bandwidth estimation technique. The estimation model 
works well when the cross-traffic matches the fluid model, 
which happens when the traffic is interspersed uniformly 
with the probe packets.  
The address hidden nodes situation, an optional 
RTS/CTS mechanism, can be triggered. RTS/CTS exchange 
prior to transmission provokes a mechanism reservation in a 
one hop neighborhood of both peers. When receiving such a 
packet, a node considers the medium busy for the duration of 
the subsequent transmission. This technique is named virtual 
carrier sense.  
A. Available Bandwidth Estimation 
The available bandwidth depicts the rates at which a 
packet flow can be climbed without disturbing the existing 
traffic.  Thus, the quantity of interest remains the available 
bandwidth. In the next Section we describe the methodology 
and the experimental testbeds.    
IV. 
METHODOLOGY OF EXPERIMENTS 
A. Networks’ Cases of Study 
For our experiments, we chose two special networks. The 
first was the cable modem testbed and the other was the 
802.11 a/b/g wireless access network. 
• 
In the case of the cable modem as head-point, we 
used a CISCO universal broadband router 7200 
series; as ‘cable modem’ on the other side, a ZyXEL 
Prestige 971M – external Cable modem was used 
[17]. On the head-point side we were able to obtain 
the link’s values of traffic.  
• 
The 
second 
testbed 
equipment 
had 
seven 
802.11a/b/g stations working ad hoc in the same 
building area.  The wireless configuration consisted 
of 6 PCs (2.8GHz Pentium 4 with 1024 MB RAM). 
All PCs were equipped wtth a Linksys WPC55AG 
802.11a/g/b Wireless Adapter [18]. PC1 and PC6 ran 
the Pathrate tool in order to estimate the bandwidth 
metrics, while the other four nodes were used for 
generating cross-traffic. 
All the nodes were arranged to work in 802.11a and 
the link was set at 6 and 54 Mbps. We chose two of 
them for obtaining our measurements, as the other 
two produced cross-traffic. 
B. Estimation Tools 
We downloaded the source code from the Pathrate’s site 
[13], along with the relevant documentation.  
Pathrate is a measurement tool used for estimating the 
capacity of Internet paths. An important feature of Pathrate is 
that it is robust to cross traffic effects, meaning that it can 
measure the path capacity even when the path is significantly 
loaded. This is crucial, since the hardest paths to measure the 
heavily loaded ones. By this software tool the two most 
significant bandwidth metrics associated with end-to-end 
paths namely capacity and available bandwidth can be 
quickly estimated.  Pathrate is publicly available with source 
code, documentation, and installation instructions. 
We studied the available source code after making some 
small changes for better adaptation. We used this software 
for our experiments.  
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Here we demonstrate the results. The first figure shows 
the results of data transmitted over the cable modem, while 
the second and the third depict the results concerning the 
802.11 wireless access networks.  
A. Results of Cable Link Access 
In Fig. 1, the available bandwidth versus various levels 
of cross-traffic, which was estimated for cable modem 
downlink, is illustrated. We ran the Pathrate software, trying 
various values of cross traffic. For each value of cross traffic, 
the software returned two values of capacity, low and high.  
By performing various experiments, we obtained values 
of available bandwidth (Fig. 1). 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Cross-traffic (Mbps)
(A) Available bandwidth (Mbps)
(Low Value)
(Med Value)
(Med Value)
(High Value)
 
Figure 1.  Available bandwidth versus cross-traffic in cable modem 
downlink in Mbps  
According to Fig. 1, when the cross-traffic was absent, 
the bandwidth oscillated among the 6.6 and 8.2 Mbps.  As 
the cross-traffic increased, the values of available bandwidth 
gradually decreased. In the limiting case of 6Mbps cross-
traffic, the available traffic decreased to zero values.  
B. Results of IEEE 802.11 Wireless Network 
Like the packet transmission in 802.11, networks suffer 
when operations are significantly affected by the overhead of 
the packets. The minimum spacing among successive 
packets is considered overhead.  
Experiments revealed that the packet size affected the 
maximum achievable throughput.  Thus, the cumulative 
throughput was a little different when the payload used 300-
bytes probe packets as opposed to 1000-bytes probe packets. 
As packets became bigger, we obtained higher values of 
cumulative bandwidth. We then created a series of 
40
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

experiments with small-value sized packets (small probes) 
and another one with high value packets.    
 
Nominal channel capacity 5.5 Mbps
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
Cross-traffic (Mbps) 
(A) Available Bandwidth 
(Mbps)
S-S payload
S-L payload
L-S payload
L-L payload
 
Figure 2.  Available bandwidth versus cross-traffic in 802.11 access link 
with nominal channel capacity 5.5 Mbps 
In Fig. 2, the available bandwidth versus various levels 
of cross-traffic, estimated for IEEE 802.11b wireless 
network access link runs at 5.5 Mbps, is illustrated. 
 
The ‘S-S payload’ (‘Small-Small payload’) curve depicts 
the available bandwidth when the two nodes with 
determined available bandwidth used packages with 300-
bytes probe size, while the cross-traffic was created (by the 
remaining nodes) by packages with 300-bytes probe size. 
 
The ‘S-L payload’ (‘Small-Large payload’) curve depicts 
the available bandwidth when the two communicating nodes 
used packages of 300-bytes probe size, while the cross-
traffic was created by a larger size probe package (here 
1000-bytes probe size). 
Similarly, the ‘L-S payload’ (‘Large-Small payload’) 
curve depicts the available bandwidth when the two 
measured nodes communicated using packages with a large 
size probe, while the cross traffic was created by a load 
consisting of packages with small size probes (for our 
experiment, 300-bytes probe). 
Finally, the ‘L-L payload’ (‘Large-Large payload’) curve 
shows results when both loads of a pair of communicating 
nodes and their environmental traffic were created by 
packages with large size probes. 
 
Fig. 2 shows how two communicating nodes were 
affected by the size of packets. As the packet size increased, 
the available bandwidth also increases.  The cross-traffic of 
2 Mbps was a focal point for our experiments. When the 
cross traffic created by packages with small probes exceeded 
this point of 2 Mbps and the communicating nodes used 
packages with large size probes, then the available 
bandwidth was higher compared to the corresponding case 
created by a smaller package size. 
 
In all cases, when the cross-traffic increased, the 
available bandwidth was gradually reduced. Hence, in the 
limiting case of 5.5 Mbps cross-traffic, the available traffic 
decreased to zero values.  
 
In Fig. 3, the quantitative results reveal the effect of the 
multirate environment in two nodes communicating at 54 
Mbps.  
Nominal channel capacity 54 Mbps
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Cross traffic (Mbps)
(A) Available bandwdth 
(Mbps)
Large payload
Small  payload
 
Figure 3.  Available bandwidth versus cross-traffic in 802.11 access link 
with nominal channel capacity 54 Mbps   
More specifically, in Fig. 3, the available bandwidth 
versus various levels of cross-traffic is appeared. The 
available bandwidth was estimated for IEEE 802.11 wireless 
network access link which was working at 54 Mbps.  
  
The solid curve (‘Small payload’) depicts results 
obtained when the packages with 300-bytes probe were used; 
the two measured nodes ran at 54 Mbps, while cross traffic 
was generated by a pair of nodes running at 6 Mbps. 
On the other hand, the dotted curve (‘Large payload’) 
depicts results obtained when the packages used 1000-byte 
probes and the node system worked in the same pattern of 
running.   
 
In both cases, the available bandwidth gradually 
decreased as the cross traffic increased.   
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The effective evaluation and measurements of capacities 
along end paths are of realistic interest, especially to 
activities such as capacity planning, protocol design, 
performance analysis, and system deployment.   
We investigated broadband access networks. Focus was 
placed on the case of cable modem and the wireless 802.11 
networks. The under study links could employ mechanisms 
such as token bucket rate regulation. The packets were 
scheduled in a non-FIFO manner, and the networks were 
available to support multiple distinct rates. All experiments 
were based on actual 802.11a and cable modems links. Our 
experiments quantitatively demonstrated how the available 
bandwidth was reduced when the cross-traffic increased.  
Our future work will focus on several points. One idea is 
to study in detail the backoff periods in the estimation 
technique; another idea involves making cross traffic appear 
bursty for faster links, forcing the problem to be more 
complex.  
 
 
41
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Strauss, D. Katabi, and F. Kaashoek, “A Measurement Study of 
Available Bandwidth Estimation Tools,” In Proc. of of ACM Internet 
Measurement Conference  (IMC), pp. 27-35, 2003. 
[2] 
V. Jacobson and M. J. Karels, “Congestion Avoidance and Control”. 
In Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM, pp. 314, 1988. 
[3] 
S. Keshav, “A Control-Theoretic Approach to Flow Control,” In 
Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM, pp. 191-201, 1991 
[4] 
R. L. Carter and M. E. Crovella, “Measuring Bottleneck Link Speed 
in Packet Swicthed Networks,” Performance Evaluation, Volumes 
27-28, pp. 297-318, October 1996. 
[5] 
A. Downey, “Clink: a Tool for Estimating Internet Link 
Characteristics,” 1999. http://allendowney.com/research/clink/ (2010)  
[6] 
A. B. Downey, “Using pathchar to Estimate Link Characteristics,” In 
Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM, pp. 241-250, 1999. 
[7] 
B. Mah. “pchar: A Tool for Measuring Internet Path Charateristics”, 
1999. http://www.employees.org/˜bmah/software/pchar  (2011) 
[8] 
M. Jain and C. Dovrolis, “End-to-End Available Bandwidth: 
Measurement Methodology, Dynamics, and Relation with TCP 
Throughput,” In Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM, pp. 295-308, 2002. 
[9] 
Vinay J. Ribeiro, Rudolf H. Riedi, Richard G. Baraniuk, Jiri Navratil 
and Les Cottrell, “pathChirp: Efficient Available Bandwidth 
Estimation for Network Paths,” In Proc. of PAM Workshop,  pp. 14–
25, 2003. 
[10] N. Hu and P. Steenkiste, “Evaluation and Characterization of 
Available Bandwidth probing Techniques,” IEEE J.Selected Areas in 
Communications,  Special Issue in Interet and WWW Measurement, 
Mapping and Modeling, Volume: 21 Issue:6, pp. 879-894 , 2003. 
[11] B. Malander, M. Bjorkman and P. Gunningberg, “A New End-to-End 
Probing 
and 
Analysis 
Method 
for 
Estimating 
Bandwidth 
Bottlenecks,” In Proc. of Global Telecommunications Conference, 
vol.1, pp. 415-420, 2000. 
[12] V. Ribeiro, M. Coates, R. Riedi, S. Sarvotham, B. Hendricks, and R. 
Baraniuk “Multifractal Cross-traffic Estimation,” In ITC, pp. 481–
492, 2000. 
[13] http://www.pathrate.org (2011) 
[14] Chaikh Sarr, Claude Chaudet, Guillaume Chelius and Isabelle Guerin 
Lassous, “A node-based available bandwidth evaluation in IEEE 
802.11 ad hoc networks,” International Journal of Parallel Emergent 
and Distributed Systems Volume 21, Number 6; pp. 423-440, 
December 2006. 
[15] Jian Ni and R. Srikant, “Distributed CSMA/CA algorithms for 
achieving maximum throughput in wireless networks,” Conf. Proc. of 
Information Theory and Applications Workshop, 8-13 Feb 
2009,  ISBN: 978-1-4244-3990-4 , pp. 250 – 250,  San Diego, CA . 
[16] M.Durvy, O.Dousse and P. Thiran, “Self-Organization Properties of 
CSMA/CA Systems and Their Consequences on Fairness,” IEEE 
Transactions On Information Theory,  Issue Date: March 2009 , 
Volume: 55 Issue:3 pp. 931 – 943, ISSN: 0018-9448. 
[17] http://us.zyxel.com/upload/download_library/P971M_v1_QuickStart
Guide.pdf  (2010) 
[18] http://www.linksysbycisco.com/UK/en/support/WPC55AG/download 
(2011) 
[19] Haitao Zhao, Emiliano Garcia-Palacios, Jibo Wei and Yong Xi., 
“Accurate available bandwidth estimation in IEEE 802.11-based ad 
hoc networks,” Elsevier Computer Communications, Volume 32, 
Issue 6, pp. 1050-1057, 27 April 2009.. 
 
42
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

