A Reconﬁgurable Prototyping Platform
for Modern Communication Systems
Alexander Viessmann, Christian Kocks,
Christoph Spiegel, Guido H. Bruck, Peter Jung
University of Duisburg-Essen
Department of Communication Technologies
Duisburg, Germany
E-mail: info@kommunikationstechnik.org
Jaeyoel Kim, YeonJu Lim, Hyeon Woo Lee
Samsung Electronics
Global Standards and Research Lab
Suwon, Korea
Abstract—The increasing number of upcoming communication
systems make a reconﬁgurable platform concept inevitable. A
strict modular, software-deﬁned radio based concept allows to
interchange several components in hardware as well as in
software without affecting the residual parts of the platform
in order to adapt the underlying system to various modern
communication systems. In this paper, the authors describe a
reconﬁgurable prototyping platform developed and successfully
tested at the Department of Communication Technologies at
University of Duisburg-Essen strictly following this software-
deﬁned radio paradigm. Using the example of the upcoming
terrestrial broadcasting standard, namely DVB-T2, the necessity
of a hybrid platform concept is discussed, comprising of a digital
signal processor on the one hand and ﬁeld-programmable gate
arrays on the other hand.
Keywords-DSP (Digital Signal Processor), Digital Video Broad-
casting, DVB-T2, FPGA (Field Programmable Gate Array),
LDPC (Low-Density Parity-Check) Codes, Prototyping Platform,
Software-Deﬁned Radio
I. INTRODUCTION
The introduction of new communication systems, such as
DVB (Digital Video Broadcasting), is mostly led by the
demand for higher data rates. In order to be able to meet
the various requirements, a sophisticated platform concept
has to be developed. Within this paper, the authors present
a reconﬁgurable prototyping platform based on the software-
deﬁned radio (SDR) concept [1]. Reconﬁgurability in radio
development is not a very new technique [2]. Already during
the 1980s, reconﬁgurable receivers were developed for radio
intelligence in the short wave range. However, reconﬁgura-
bility became familiar to many radio developers with the
publication of the special issues on software radios of the IEEE
Communication Magazine [3], [4]. The author in [2] refer to a
transceiver as a software radio (SR) if its communication func-
tions are realized as programs running on a suitable processor.
Based on the same hardware, different transmitter/receiver
algorithms, which usually describe transmission standards, are
implemented in software in a cost effective manner [5]. An
SR transceiver comprises all the layers of a communication
system, in particular the physical layer, usually abbreviated
by PHY layer, and the medium access control layer, denoted
by MAC layer. Initially, the idea of software-deﬁned radio was
of academic interest only. However, due to the technological
progress, modern hardware components are capable of making
use of this concept. With the goal of implementing one
of the world’s ﬁrst DVB-T2 (Digital Video Broadcasting -
Terrestrial) receivers, a prototyping platform was developed
at the Department of Communication Technologies at the
University of Duisburg-Essen, strictly following the software-
deﬁned radio approach. DVB-T2 is the successor of DVB-T
which has established itself as the leading speciﬁcation for
terrestrial television broadcasting after being introduced in the
1990s. The increasing demand for HDTV (High-Deﬁnition
Television) paved the way towards a renovation of DVB-
T, which does not allow the transmission of high-deﬁnition
video streams. The goal of DVB-T2 was a higher spectral
efﬁciency by using more sophisticated forward error correction
techniques on the one hand and higher order modulation on the
other hand. In the meantime, the standardization of DVB-T2,
which began in 2006, has been completed [6].
In the following, the key parameters speciﬁed in the DVB-
T2 standard [6] are mentioned. DVB-T and DVB-T2 are
both based on Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing
(OFDM). While DVB-T uses a gross number of 8192 points,
the OFDM size in DVB-T2 is 32768 points. The modulation
order for each subcarrier goes up to 256 QAM (Quadra-
ture Amplitude Modulation) in DVB-T2. Furthermore, the
underlying forward error correction scheme is considerably
modiﬁed. While DVB-T employs a combination of Reed-
Solomon codes and convolutional codes, DVB-T2 makes use
of a concatenation of BCH (Bose Chaudhuri Hocquenghem)
codes and LDPC (Low-Density Parity-Check) codes with a
block length of 64800 bits. LDPC codes are used in several
modern and upcoming communication systems such as IEEE
802.16e (WiMAX) because of their near Shannon limit per-
formance on the one hand and their ability for parallelized
implementation on the other hand. Nevertheless, the real-time
implementation of the LDPC decoder is one of the most
challenging aspects when implementing DVB-T2 receivers.
The modulation scheme, the channel coding parameters and
the number of OFDM subcarriers have to be ﬂexibly adaptable
in the receiver [7]. Table I gives a brief comparison between
102
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

DVB-T
DVB-T2
FEC
Convolutional code + Reed-Solomon code
LDPC code + BCH code
Code rates
1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6, 7/8
1/2, 3/5, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6
Modulation
QPSK, 16-QAM, 64-QAM
QPSK, 16-QAM, 64-QAM, 256-QAM
Guard intervals
1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32
1/4, 19/256, 1/8, 19/128, 1/16, 1/32, 1/128
OFDM sizes
2048, 8192
1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768
TABLE I
SYSTEM PARAMETERS FOR DVB-T AND DVB-T2
the system parameters of DVB-T and DVB-T2 [6] [8].
Meeting the aforementioned requirements as well as being
able to adapt the system to other communication standards
requires a thorough investigation of state-of-the-art hardware
components. A design merely based on digital signal proces-
sors (DSPs) is not powerful enough the achieve the desired
goals. Thus, authors of this paper developed a hybrid concept
which relies on a digital signal processor on the one hand and
on ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) on the other hand.
Due to the consequent deployment of the software-deﬁned
radio paradigm, the developed prototyping platform is capable
of implementing various modern communication standard such
as DVB-T2 and is ideally suited for concept engineering in the
ﬁeld of wireless communications in general. This manuscript
is organized as follows. After this brief introduction, Section II
gives an overview over the concept of the reconﬁgurable
prototyping platform, followed by implementation aspects of
this platform in Section III. Finally, the performance of the
prototyping platform is addressed in Section IV.
II. RECONFIGURABLE PROTOTYPING PLATFORM CONCEPT
Figure 1 shows the suggested reconﬁgurable DVB-T2 re-
ceiver architecture. It consists of a ﬁxed-point DSP board,
which does not only implement major parts of the signal
processing, but is also responsible for the scheduling of all
platform components, which is an essential prerequisite for a
reliable real-time demonstrator functionality. A mixed-signal
daughter card, which implements analog signal processing and
data conversion, connects directly to the DSP. In order to fulﬁll
even very complex forward error correction requirements, such
Tuner
Thomson 
DTT732XX
ADC
FPGA 1
AD6655
IF Diversity
Receiver
FPGA 1
Xilinx XC3S400
Spartan-3
FPGA 3
Xilin
DSP
CI
MIF
6455 DSP Starter Kit
DAC
AD9957 
Quadrature
FPGA 2
Xilinx XC3S400
Xilinx
XC5VLX110
Virtex-5
TI TMS320C6455
1.2 GHz
PC
EM
Mixed-Signal Daughter Card
Quadrature 
Digital 
Upconverter
Xilinx XC3S400
Spartan-3
USB
Cypress
CY7C68013A
USB 2.0
Virtex-5 EVM
Fig. 1.
Implementation concept of the SDR multimedia HDTV receiver
as the LDPC codes in DVB-T2 with a block length of 64800,
a Virtex-5 FPGA evaluation module (EVM) is connected to
the DSP, acting as a hardware accelerator. Finally, the decoded
data is transferred to a data sink. While the DSP board and
the Virtex-5 evaluation module are commercially available, the
mixed-signal daughter card was developed by the authors of
this paper. Its concept is shown in Figure 2. It consists of
a further daughter card containing the RF (Radio Frequency)
front end. The mixed-signal daughter card shall be able to
allow processing signals in various frequency bands. There-
fore, an analog-to-digital converter with an integrated down-
conversion unit and advanced ﬁltering capabilities should be
used. Using a analog-to-digital converter with an integrated
down-conversion unit has the advantage that the incoming
intermediate frequency signal can be down-converted digitally.
In order to be suitable for several communication systems,
the sampling rate of the analog-to-digital converter should be
reasonably high. The output of the analog-to-digital converter
is fed into a Xilinx Spartan-3 FPGA for further basic signal
processing purposes, such as additional ﬁltering and sampling
rate decimation. Furthermore, it buffers the data for the DSP.
For improved ﬂexibility, the authors follow a strict modular
concept. In case of technology advances in a speciﬁc ﬁeld,
the corresponding module - in this context the mixed-signal
daughter card - can be easily replaced without affecting the
residual system. The USB (Universal Serial Bus) interface
shown in Figure 2 is designed for debug reasons only.
The core part of the prototyping platform shown in Fig-
ure 1 is a DSP board with a powerful Texas Instruments
TMS320C6455 ﬁxed-point DSP running at 1.2 GHz. The
External
Memory Interface
of TI 320C6455 DSK
ADC
AD9248
32
Connector
for A/D (RX)
Debug-
AD9248
14
TC
XO
Connector
for Radio, McBSP
Interface
16
FPGA
Xilinx XC3S400
External
Peripheral Interface 
of TI 320C6455 DSK
C
t
JTAG-
Interface
16
Xilinx XC3S400
Connector
for D/A (TX), SQ2SINE-
Filter, VariableGainAmp
DAC
AD9777
USB
FTDI 245RL
8
Fig. 2.
Implementation concept of the mixed-signal daughter card
103
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

mixed-signal daughter card described before is connected to
the DSP using a TI proprietary solution, namely the EMIF
(External Memory Interface). In case of using the hardware
accelerator for channel decoding, as it is done for the DVB-T2
implementation, the interface between the DSP and the Virtex-
5 FPGA hardware accelerator demands for a reasonable high
data rate depending on the resolution of the log-likelihood
ratios representing the soft information for the channel de-
coder. This log-likelihood ratios are typically computed within
the digital signal processor. This hardware accelerator for the
DSP, which is also depicted in Figure 1, is implemented
using an Avnet evaluation module hosting a Xilinx Virtex-
5 LX110 FPGA. The TMS320C6455 DSP and the Xilinx
Virtex-5 LX110 FPGA provide the digital signal processing
capabilities required by the DVB-T2 standard as well as by
further modern communication standards like IEEE 802.11n.
Following this hybrid concept of a software/hardware solution
has major implementation advantages. While FPGAs are ide-
ally suited for massive parallel processing, DSPs are superior
in the implementation of scheduling tasks. By combining both
techniques, the proposed system architecture exhibits both
advantages. The DSP is the heart of the prototyping platform,
controlling and reconﬁguring all further hardware components.
The Virtex-5 LX110 FPGA acts as a necessary and ﬂexibly
adjustable hardware accelerator, providing, e.g., real-time error
control decoding capabilities. The DSP is programmed in C++
language using the Code Composer Studio, and all FPGAs
are programmed in Verilog HDL (Hardware Description Lan-
guage) using the Xilinx ISE development suite. To facilitate a
high-speed interconnection between DSP and Virtex-5 LX110
FPGA, the authors developed a point-to-point variant, i.e. a
simpliﬁed version, of the well-known PCI (Peripheral Compo-
nent Interconnect) bus, allowing a maximum transmission rate
of approximately 700 Mbit/s. For the implementation of the
DVB-T2 receiver, the error control decoded bit stream is the
output of the prototyping platform developed by the authors.
To facilitate a low-cost and at the same time standardized
interface, the authors rely on a USB 2.0 connection with a
maximum achievable data rate of about 400 Mbit/s.
After describing the concept of the underlying reconﬁg-
urable prototyping platform, within this section some imple-
mentation aspects are emphasized, focusing on the implemen-
tation of the DVB-T2 receiver. The received RF signal, pre-
vailing either in the VHF or the UHF band, is ﬁrst processed
by a Thomson DTT73200 digital terrestrial tuner, generating
an IF (Intermediate Frequency) receive signal at its output. To
circumvent the impact of intermodulation distortions (IMD)
caused by I/Q imbalancing, the authors deploy a single
heterodyne analog receiver which feeds an Analog Devices
AD6655 analog-to-digital converter (ADC) with a maximum
sampling rate of 150 MSamples/s. Within the AD6655, the
IF received signal is sampled and digitally down-converted.
This conversion scheme shows a superior robustness against
analog impairments as shown in [9] especially compared to
homodyne conversion. Nevertheless, in the proposed fully
modular concept, the RF module can be easily replaced by a
homodyne solution if necessary. The digitized received signal
output by the AD6655 is decimated, digitally down-converted
and low-pass ﬁltered before being transferred to the DSP. The
digital down-conversion step allows a very efﬁcient imple-
mentation of an automatic frequency error correction (AFC)
since the integrated NCO (Numerically-Controlled Oscillator)
can be reconﬁgured very easily. Frequency offsets result from
impairments in the analog signal processing branches, in
particular in deviations of the local oscillator frequencies from
the reference value. The Xilinx Spartan-3 FPGA acts as an
interface between the parallel data output of the ADC and
TIs External Memory Interface which is used to transfer the
digital complex baseband signal to the TMS320C6455 DSP
for synchronization and demodulation. In order to reduce the
load of the digital signal processor, the data transfer between
Spartan-3 FPGA and DSP is carried out by using DMA (Direct
Memory Access) which allows data transfers without DSP
intervention. The petri-net based scheduling of the signal pro-
cessing carried out on the DSP is depicted in Figure 3. After
frame synchronization, a synchronization tracking is carried
out for compensating for potentially occurred synchronization
mismatches. The synchronization in DVB-T2 is based on
the P1 preamble. The subsequent symbol, the P2 preamble,
contains signaling information required for the demodulation
of the following data symbols. The channel estimation and
equalization is based on pilot subcarriers and is processed in
frequency domain, followed by the computation of the log-
likelihood ratios (LLRs).
The LLRs are then transferred to the Xilinx Virtex-5 LX110
FPGA for LDPC decoding. Again, DMA is used to reduce
the DSPs load. Finally, the error control decoded bit stream
is transferred to a standard host PC (Personal Computer) via
USB 2.0 carrying out the source decoding and the video dis-
playing via an HDMI (High Deﬁnition Multimedia Interface)
Synchronization (Acquisition)
Sychronization (Tracking)
FFT Computation
P2 Preamble Processing
Channel Estimation
Equalization
LLR Computation
Fig. 3.
Petri-net based DSP scheduling
104
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

KT tuner board with
Thomson DVB-T tuner
Thomson 
DVB-T tuner
KT mixed signal board with
ADC and 2 SPARTAN3 FPGAs
TI DSP board with TI 
TMS320C6455 DSP
Xilinx/Avnet Virtex-5-LX110 
FPGA board
USB interface
to host PC
PCI based high speed
connection btw. DSP and FPGA
Fig. 4.
Photograph of the implemented SDR based DVB-T2 receiver
connection to a full HD display.
III. RECONFIGURABLE PROTOTYPING PLATFORM
IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 4 shows a photograph of the reconﬁgurable proto-
typing platform developed by the authors, customized for the
reception and demodulation of DVB-T2 signals. On the left-
hand side of the photograph, a compound of three stacked
printed circuit boards (PCB) can be seen. The top is the
RF tuner board developed by the authors. This RF tuner
board hosts the aforementioned Thomson DTT73200 digital
terrestrial tuner. The RF tuner board is connected to the mixed-
signal board also realized by the authors. As described before,
this mixed-signal board hosts two Xilinx Spartan-3 FPGAs of
which one is required for the DVB-T2 receiver. The mixed-
signal board is connected to the Texas Instruments DSP board
which contains the TMS320C6455 DSP. On the right-hand
side of the photograph shown in Figure 4, the Virtex-5 LX110
FPGA evaluation module is located. The interconnection of the
FPGA board and the mixed-signal board is a proprietary PCI
solution.
IV. PERFORMANCE
The resulting constellation diagram for the most challenging
DVB-T2 mode with an OFDM size of 32768 points and 256-
QAM subcarrier modulation is shown in Figure 5. Due to
analog impairments such as local oscillator frequency and
sampling clock offsets, the degradation becomes higher for in-
creasing QAM symbol magnitudes. Nevertheless, the powerful
forward error correction scheme is able to correct the occurring
errors. Figure 6 depicts the obtained error performance of
the demonstrator in the case of a transmission via a single
path channel with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN),
assuming LDPC coding with a code rate of 3/5, a code word
length of 64800 bits, 32k FFT and 256-QAM modulated
data symbols transmitted over each subcarrier. This error
performance was measured for benchmarking. In Figure 6,
both the bit error ratio (BER) Pbit as well as the block error
ratio (BLER) Pblock are shown versus the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) 10 log10(Es/N0). Both Pbit and Pblock are determined
at the output of the BCH decoder which follows the LDPC
decoder. The LDPC decoding results was determined after
a maximum of ﬁfty decoding iterations. Both LDPC and
BCH decoders are soft-input decoders. It is found that a
Pblock of 10−3 requires an SNR 10 log10(Es/N0) of less than
16.7 dB. The corresponding BER is approximately 10−7 at the
same SNR. Furthermore, it was found that the analog single
heterodyne receiver allows a superb error vector magnitude
(EVM) of less than 2 %. The frequency offset of the RF tuner
is lower than 6 kHz without correction, corresponding to 21.5
subcarriers. This frequency offset can be easily corrected by
an automatic frequency correction (AFC) and synchronization
algorithm developed and implemented by the authors. The
implemented SDR based DVB-T2 receiver was tested using
an RF signal which was generated and transmitted through
a Rohde & Schwarz AFQ / SMIQ06 combination. The test
signal was based on a 256-QAM/32k FFT variant of the
DVB-T2 signal. It contained a multiplexed version of three
HDTV test video streams provided by the BBC. The gross
information rate was 45 Mbit/s. The signal which is generated
for the performance analysis is fed into the demonstrator and
processed. The resulting bitstream is sent to a PC where the
block error ratio is measured. Since the transmitter consists of
calibrated measurement equipment, the power level at the an-
tenna input can be controlled arbitrarily. Hence, the sensitivity
of the demonstrator can be measured easily. In addition, the
demonstrator can be put in a transparent mode which allows
to measure the modulation accuracy by calculating the error
vector magnitude.
Furthermore, the modular concept of the prototyping plat-
form allows for easily implementing other communication
systems beside DVB-T2. Due to the nature of the deployed
hardware, the functionality can be changed to support totally
Fig. 5.
Constellation diagram of a received and equalized 256-QAM signal
105
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

16.4
16.5
16.6
16.7
16.8
16.9
10
−8
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
10 log10(Es/N0) / dB
Perror
 
 
Pbit
Pblock
Fig. 6.
Error performance
different communication standards by changing the ﬁrmware.
The clock generation and distribution circuits are software
controllable and can match the speciﬁcation of a majority
of the commercially deployed communication standards. The
RF down-conversion stage is limited in the support of carrier
frequencies and baseband bandwidths, but can be exchanged
easily due to the modular concept.
V. CONCLUSION
Within this manuscript, the authors presented a system con-
cept and setup of a reconﬁgurable prototyping platform using
the example of DVB-T2. This platform combines the digi-
tal processing power of high-performance Texas Instruments
TMS320C6455 DSP and Xilinx Virtex-5 LX110 FPGA with
a single heterodyne analog receiver concept. With this system
concept the authors will ease the way towards commercial
and highly integrated implementations of communication sys-
tems. In addition, the presented platform is ideally suited for
research and development for future wireless communication
systems.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank their colleagues at Samsung
Electronics in South Korea and at the Department of Com-
munication Technologies of University of Duisburg-Essen for
fruitful discussions during the development of the prototyping
platform.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Tuttlebee, Software Deﬁned Radio: Enabling Technologies.
New
York, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
[2] F. K. Jondral, “Software-deﬁned radio: basics and evolution to cognitive
radio,” EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw., vol. 2005, no. 3, pp. 275–283,
2005.
[3] J. Mitola, “The software radio architecture,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 26–38, 1995. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/35.393001
[4] J. Mitola, D. Chester, S. Haruyama, T. Turletti, and W. Tuttlebee, “Glob-
alization of software radio,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 37,
no. 2, pp. 82–83, Feb 1999.
[5] R. Yates and N. Mandayam, “Challenges in low-cost wireless data
transmission,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 93–
102, May 2000.
[6] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); frame structure channel coding and
modulation for a second generation digital terrestrial television broad-
casting system (DVB-T2), ETSI Std. DVB Doc. A122 Draft, June 2008.
[7] L. Vangelista, N. Benvenuto, S. Tomasin, C. Nokes, J. Stott, A. Filippi,
M. Vlot, V. Mignone, and A. Morello, “Key technologies for next-
generation terrestrial digital television standard dvb-t2,” IEEE Commu-
nications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 146–153, October 2009.
[8] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Framing Structure, channel coding
and modulation for digital terrestrial television, ETSI Std. EN 300 744
V1.6.1, January 2009.
[9] B. Razavi, RF Microelectronics. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-
Hall, Inc., 1998.
106
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

