A Survey on 5G Standardization for Edge Computing and Internet of Things
Harpreet Kaur
Hughes Systique
Gurgaon, India
Email: harpreet.kaur@hsc.com
Abstract— The networking world is undergoing a radical 
change to support innovative use cases and new market 
verticals. International Telecommunication Union (ITU) has 
defined three categories of these use cases – Enhanced Mobile 
Broadband 
(eMBB), 
Ultra-Reliable 
and 
Low 
Latency 
Communications (UR-LLC) and Massive Machine Type 
Communication (mMTC). 5G is considered a harbinger for 
achieving high data rates, high connection density and ultra-low 
latency essential to realize these use cases. Emerging 
technologies, such as Software Defined Networking (SDN), 
Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) and Multi-Access 
Edge Computing (MEC), are needed to accomplish the desired 
performance, scalability and agility. Standardization bodies, 
like 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), the Internet 
Engineering 
Task 
Force 
(IETF), 
and 
the 
European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) are working in 
synergy towards defining standards around 5G and these 
supporting technologies. This survey article summarizes the key 
enablers added in 5G standards, to support the edge and 
Internet of Things (IoT) applications. The article also annotates 
standardization 
activities 
around 
the 
deployment 
of 
virtualization in all segments of the network. Finally, it explores 
standards around edge deployments and how they leverage 
these virtualized infrastructures to realize the services 
envisioned by future 5G Networks, for IoT applications.
Keywords- Edge Computing; Standardization; 3GPP; Internet 
of Things.
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
5G is proving to be the next major iteration in cellular 
technology. 5G promises to offer peak data rate of 20 Gbps in 
downlink and 10 Gbps in uplink, one way latency at the access 
side of about 1 millisecond, and connection density of the 
order of one million device per square km area to support the 
massive scale of IoT devices expected in the near future [40] 
[9].
Enterprises and service providers are offering a plethora of 
applications to end customers, e.g., IoT, Virtual Reality (VR), 
industrial control, ubiquitous on-demand coverage, as well as 
the opportunity to meet customized market needs. Each 
application differs in terms of expected data rates, latency, 
reliability and availability. Hence, they need different 
treatments by the underlying cellular networks.
This kind of network transformation involves changes at 
radio access, core and transport, how network softwarization 
at each layer helps, how emerging technologies, like Network 
Function Virtualization and Software defined Networking, 
help in network softwarization of the cellular network, how 
innovative ideas, like computing at the edge or network slicing 
can help improve  application performance. 
With the enormous number of IoT enabled devices, the 
amount of data they generate and the latency they expect, 
cloud computing is no more an option to deliver the promised 
Quality of Experience (QoE). Edge Computing brings the 
cloud resources (i.e., compute storage and networking) closer 
to the user.  Compute intensive or latency sensitive 
applications can be hosted on these edge resources to realize 
the stringent 5G requirements. 5G networks need to serve a 
diverse set of applications. Network slicing allows creating 
multiple, logically isolated, virtual networks over the same 
physical infrastructure. Each network slice can be configured 
separately as per the requirements of the application it serves.
In May 2015, the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) 
conceptualized 
the 
International 
Mobile 
Communications (IMT)-2020 standard (IMT-2020) [9], to 
analyze how emerging 5G technologies will interact in future 
networks, as a preliminary study into the networking 
innovations required to support the development of 5G 
systems. The work involved defining requirements from the 
5G network, the architecture reference models, the procedures 
and flows needed in the 5G system, adding network 
softwarization using NFV/SDN and augmentations, like Edge 
Computing to realize the desired efficiency.  
This is where multiple standardization bodies have 
stepped in – each one trying to resolve one piece of this 5G 
puzzle. ITU, 3GPP, ETSI and IETF consortiums have been 
working cohesively for developing the specifications for IMT
2020.  This article surveys specifications released by these 
consortiums and how they address some of the practical 
challenges foreseen when trying to adapt to 5G cellular 
networks and using them for emerging applications. This 
article is structured as follows: Section II covers the 
contributions from ITU and 3GPP who are focusing on the 5G 
requirements, frameworks, reference architectures, procedural 
flows, management and control planes. Section III covers the 
ETSI focus on NFV specifications, NFV being projected as a 
key technology enabler for many use cases defined in IMT-
2020. To cover the use cases from ultra-low latency services 
to massive Internet of Things, ETSI established MEC Industry 
Specification Group (ISG), contributing the edge reference 
architecture, its APIs and use cases. This is covered in Section 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

IV. Section V discusses a few open source initiatives 
conceptualized around these specifications, which will work 
as building blocks for 5G cellular networks. The article finally 
concludes on the convergence of these activities towards 
developing standards in 5G for MEC and IoT.
II.
5G STANDARDIZATION UNDER ITU, ETSI AND 
3GPP
ITU is responsible for coordinating the international 
standardization of 5G systems. In 2015, ITU shared a 
recommendation document ITU-R M.2083-0 [9] stating 
diverse usage scenarios and applications foreseen in next 
generation networks. It categorizes the usage scenarios 
broadly into three categories: Enhanced Mobile Broadband 
(eMBB), Ultra-Reliable and Low Latency Communications 
(UR-LLC) and Massive Machine Type Communication 
(mMTC). Different usage scenarios result in diverse 
requirements. This ITU recommendation further states the 
kind of capabilities required to handle these requirements 
under eight parameters – peak data rate, user experienced data 
rate, latency, mobility, connection density, energy efficient, 
spectrum efficiency and area traffic capacity. 
ITU recommendation ITU-T Y.3101 [10] states the 
general principles expected from the 5G networks in terms of 
service diversity, QoS diversity, diversity of mobility levels, 
user data types and most crucially in terms of flexibility and 
programmability 
needed 
in 
such 
networks. 
The 
recommendation, then goes into the detailed requirements 
from service point of view (eMBB, UR-LLC and mMTC) and 
from networking point of view. The networking requirements 
state the need for programmability of network functions, 
separation of control and user plane, network slicing 
requirements, interworking among multiple heterogeneous 
access networks, support the exposure of network capabilities, 
etc. 
3GPP started working on the requirements of IMT-
2020/5G and came up with a document 3GPP TS 22.261 [11] 
summarizing the complete set of requirements that define a 
5G system – these high level requirements served as guidance 
for the architectural study. The requirements focused on the 
need of network softwarization and a complete re-architecture 
of cellular networks – to support separation of control and user 
plane, to leverage SDN and NFV technologies to improve on 
operational efficiency and increase flexibility, to support 
network slicing allowing the operators to provide customized 
networks, to support network capability exposure to trusted 
3rd party applications (for instance, MEC applications) in a 
Service Hosting Environment to improve user experience, to 
allow Interoperability with legacy 3GPP systems, etc. 
The 3GPP specification on system architecture 3GPP TS 
23.501 [1], covers the 5G architecture reference models, 
interworking between 5G system and EPS, architectural 
enablers for virtualized deployments, support for end to end 
network slicing and support for Edge Computing. Further, the 
specification 3GPP TS 23.502 [2] highlights the procedures 
and Network Function services for the 5G system in terms of 
end-to-end information flows and the NF service operations 
of these flows for the communication within the 5G core.
5G system supports a service based representation, where 
network functions, e.g., Access and Mobility Management 
Function (AMF), Session Management Function (SMF), User 
Plane Function (UPF), Network Exposure Function (NEF) 
and Policy Control Function (PCF), within the Control Plane 
enable other authorized network functions to access their 
services. The specification 3GPP TS 23.501 [1] emphasizes 
on separation of user plane and control plane to allow 
independent scalability and flexible deployments (e.g., 
centralized or distributed edge) locations of the network 
functions. This feature along with the concurrent access 
support to local/centralized services, enables the flexible 
deployment of UPF for MEC use cases. 
To support virtualized deployments of 5G core, each 
instance of 5G core network functions need to be deployed as 
fully distributed, fully redundant, stateless, and fully scalable. 
The specification 3GPP TS 23.501 [1] explains the kind of 
interactions executed by the network functions to support the 
centralization of state information and statelessness of the 
network functions. 
3GPP also highlights the network slicing concepts to serve 
a particular service category or customer. This is crucial for 
the MEC and IoT use cases which have different requirements 
with respect to bandwidth, guaranteed QoS, security level and 
latency. Specification 3GPP TS 23.501 [1] introduces a new 
network function “Network Slice Selection Function” which 
helps in selection of the set of Network Slice instances for a 
User Equipment (UE). For establishing global interoperability 
for slicing, this specification introduces Standardized 
Slice/Service Type (SST) values for eMBB, UR-LLC and 
mMTC (Massive IoT). The specification also explains the 
signalling interactions among the 5G core network functions 
to configure the availability of a Network Slice in a tracking 
area, on trigger from the operator. Another 3GPP specification 
3GPP TR 28.801 [12] explains the management and 
orchestration of end-to-end network slice by demarcating the 
slice management at three levels - Communication Service 
Management Function (service instance layer), Network Slice 
Management Function (network slice instance layer), 
Network Slice Subnet Management Function (resource layer). 
The specification 3GPP TS 23.501 [1] dedicates a separate 
section to the MEC enablers in 5G. This includes concurrent 
access to centralized and local servers using multiple PDU 
session anchors, Application Function (AF) to trigger UPF 
(re)selection and traffic routing, session and service continuity 
for UE and application mobility, support for local area data 
network and lastly the NEF to provide information or accept 
configuration from external 3rd party applications (MEC 
applications or functional entities). This NEF interface can be 
used by the edge applications to provide policies or trigger 
traffic routing via the 5G core. The specification 3GPP TS 
23.502 [2] details out the procedural flows between AF and 
other 5G core network functions for handling the AF requests 
for these traffic routing scenarios. ETSI specification ETSI TS 
129 522 [6] introduces the NEF northbound interface between 
5G NEF and the AF. It specifies the RESTful APIs (e.g., 
TrafficInfluence API), leveraged by the AF to access the 
services and capabilities of the 3GPP network entities. It also 
defines the data models for each API.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

MEC use cases require de-centralization of UPF functions 
and could lead to an exponential increase in number of UPF 
instances. In addition, handling massive number of devices 
could lead to a high demand which is not evenly distributed – 
thus address allocation in response to the UE demand may 
exhaust IP Address/Prefixes allocation in one function while 
low demand elsewhere in the network may leave unused IP 
Addresses/Prefixes in other functions. Thus, basic SMF 
allocation methods will not work in these complex cases. The 
3GPP specification 3GPP TR 23.726 [13] highlights some of 
these key issues around the SMF and UPF interactions and 
suggests corresponding solutions for these issues. For 
instance, one such solution is the UPF allocating the IPv4 
address/IPV6 prefix to be used by a PDU Session over N6 
interface, instead of SMF.
III.
NFV STANDARDIZATION UNDER ETSI, IETF 
AND 3GPP
ETSI released new use cases in context of NFV relating to 
the 5G features, like network slicing and IoT virtualization in 
its existing specification ETSI GR NFV 001 [16]. The 
“Network slicing” use case in this specification states how 
network slicing can leverage virtualization – network 
functions of the slice may be virtualized, or the network 
slicing management and orchestration entities may be 
virtualized. The use case also gives explains the possible 
realization and provisioning of network slices, explaining the 
life cycle of the network slice and entities participating in this 
life cycle. Another use case that the specification introduced 
is “Virtualization of Internet of Things” – IoT is a leading use 
case of 5G as per NGMN Alliance [40]. The specification 
explains how virtualization can help in augmenting efficiency 
and achieve desired agility for the IoT applications/services. 
It explains how the IoT service providers can leverage the 
NFV infrastructure to offer services for collection, storage, 
management and processing of the IoT data and how one can 
design more services based on these processed data. It 
introduces the various actors in this complete ecosystem.
To handle the scalability, resilience and performance 
requirement of IoT and edge applications, 3GPP specification 
3GPP TS 23.501 [1] enlists some design principles for 5G 
core architecture – separation of control and user plane, 
modularity, minimal dependencies between AN and CN, 
stateless network functions, etc. These design principles push 
towards a cloud-native implementation for the 5G core, the 
5G core network functions being implemented as Virtual 
Network 
Function 
(VNFs). 
ETSI 
standardized 
the 
classification of Cloud Native VNF implementations in ETSI 
GS NFV-EVE 011 [17]. It states the non-functional 
parameters for classification of cloud-native VNFs, e.g., 
resiliency, scaling, VNF design for location independence, 
use of containers, etc. With each parameter, it states the 
requirements of that parameter to be considered while 
designing the VNF as cloud-native. Taking an example, 
parameter “VNF design for location independence” states a 
requirement that the components of the cloud-native VNF 
shall be deployed independent of location if resource 
constraints (hardware acceleration capabilities) or placement 
constraints (affinity/anti-affinity rules) are met. 
Massive deployment of virtualization technologies in the 
5G networks signifies the need of service function chaining in 
mobile networks. IETF draft [39] discusses the kinds of 
service functions expected in 4G/5G networks. It also 
mentions the varied instantiation of 5G protocol stack – 
different instances can be physically located in different 
entities of the network based on requirements of the 
implemented service, the radio characteristics and the 
transport network capacity. For example, all the VNFs 
belonging to vehicular communications should be located 
close to the transmission point to ensure low latency. But the 
broadband access users can have their network functions in 
core network. This requires the concurrent execution of 
different instantiations of the 5G protocol stack on the same 
physical infrastructure.  Service function chaining allows the 
deployment of different chains across such dynamic cloud 
infrastructure setups.
Acknowledging the importance of network slicing in 5G 
deployments handling the edge/IoT applications, ETSI 
dedicated a separate specification ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012 
[18] identifying the changes needed in the NFV systems to 
support network slicing use cases. This specification mapped 
NFV and 3GPP network slicing concepts – 3GPP 
specification 3GPP TR 28.801 [12] states a network slice to 
be a concatenation of network slice subnets, each having one 
or more network functions. The ETSI specification ETSI GR 
NFV-EVE 012 [18] deciphers these network functions as 
VNFs or PNFs. Thus, NFV defined network service could be 
regarded as a resource-centric of a 3GPP network slice – each 
instance of a slice is basically a combination of one or more 
VNFs. The specification mentions the functional requirements 
for supporting Network Services over multi-site/multi 
Network Function Virtualization Infrastructure Point of 
Presence (NFVI-PoPs), to represent the network slice 
spanning multiple administrative domains. The specification 
also mentions the need for a functional interface between NFV 
Management and Orchestration (NFV-MANO) and Network 
Slice Management function (NSMF) to support resource 
orchestration of the network service supporting the network 
slice, in virtualized deployments. As per the IETF draft 
specification IETF draft-flinck-slicing-management-00 [19], 
NSMF is a part of Operational Support Systems / Business 
Support Systems (OSS/BSS) and sits above the NFV 
orchestrator (NFVO) of ETSI NFV framework architecture.
IV.
MULTI-ACCESS EDGE COMPUTING (MEC) 
STANDARDIZATION UNDER ETSI
The core objective of Multi-access Edge Computing 
(MEC) is, to reap the IT cloud like benefits in telco 
environment, by providing cloud computing benefits within 
the radio access network. Close proximity to the user and 
receiving local radio-network contextual information aids in 
achieving extremely low latency, better QoE optimizations 
and efficient usage of the network bandwidth. ETSI has a 
dedicated ISG to develop standards around MEC, to create a 
standardized, open environment which will allow efficient 
and seamless integration of applications from vendors, service 
providers, and third-parties across multi-vendor MEC 
platforms.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

The first relevant specification around this standard, ETSI 
GS MEC 002 [20] starts with some generic principles for 
MEC. It mentions the significance of aligning the MEC 
platforms with existing NFV platforms – MEC is expected to 
use a virtualization platform for running the user applications 
at the edge and NFV already provides such a virtualization 
platform. The specification also defines the MEC framework 
requirements (MEC system leveraging NFV and its 
interoperability with the 5G core network), requirements with 
respect to application lifecycle and its runtime environment, 
and service requirements in terms of platform services offered 
to the MEC applications.
A. MEC Service scenarios & Requirements
To support the new era of services in the operator’s 
network, ETSI categorized the applications into three broad 
categories: consumer-oriented services, Operator and third 
party services, Network performance and QoE improvements. 
ETSI GS MEC 002 [20] enlists different use cases under each 
category and elaborates on the capabilities needed in the MEC 
system to support those use cases. Latest version of the 
specification has been augmented with interesting use cases, 
like ‘Factories of the future’, ‘Flexible deployment with 
containers’, 
‘Multi-RAT 
(Radio 
Access 
Technology) 
application computation offloading’, etc. One new use case 
‘MEC System deployment in 5G environment’, explores the 
requirements for interaction with the 5G core network, to 
support the applications running on a MEC system deployed 
in a 5G environment.
By providing service delivery at a closer proximity to the 
actual terminal devices MEC can significantly benefit the IoT 
applications. ETSI GS MEC-IEG 004 [21] introduces some 
service scenarios directly related to IoT. The scenario 
‘Assistance for intensive computation’, mentions the use of 
MEC servers to perform high performance computations on 
behalf of remote devices – can improve the performance and 
battery life of low processing power devices/sensors in the IoT 
domain. The specification also mentions ‘IoT gateway service 
scenario’, where the MEC servers can be used to aggregate 
various IoT device messages connected through the mobile 
network close to the devices. This will provide an analytics 
processing capability closer to the devices and a low latency 
response time.
The use cases identified in ETSI GS MEC 002 [20] and 
service scenarios defined in ETSI GS MEC-IEG 004 [21] 
expect MEC to optimize the network and services, reduce 
latency, and support creating personalized and contextualized 
services. This requires the identification of metrics for these 
services/applications which can validate the optimization 
requirements promised by MEC. The specification ETSI GS 
MEC-IEG 006 [22] identifies several key performance 
indicators for these services and applications, based on the 5G 
service requirements defined by NGMN or 3GPP. Latency, 
energy efficiency, network throughput, system resource 
footprint 
and 
objective/subjective 
service 
dependent/independent quality metrics are the key metrics 
defined in this specification. It further elaborates on the 
measurement methodology of each metric – whether it should 
be computed in a standalone or an integrated environment, 
what measurement approaches can be taken, should it be done 
using a dedicated service monitoring tool or using common 
service monitoring, etc.
B. MEC Framework
Based on the framework requirements mentioned in ETSI 
GS MEC 002 [20], ETSI defined a framework and reference 
architecture in ETSI GS MEC 003 [3], which describes a 
MEC system that enables the MEC applications to run in a 
multi-access network. It starts with the MEC framework 
dividing the MEC system into different components - MEC 
system level management, MEC host level management and 
the MEC host (containing the MEC platform services, the 
virtualization infrastructure and the MEC applications 
running on it). The specification further identifies the different 
functional elements of each component and the reference 
points between them. It also mentions the platform services 
(radio 
network 
information, 
location, 
bandwidth 
management) provided by the MEC system. These services 
are essential to fulfil the use-cases driven requirements 
defined in ETSI GS MEC 002 [20]. The message flows and 
the data models for each service is defined in its respective 
specification - ETSI GS MEC 012 [24] for Radio Network 
Information service (RNIS), ETSI GS MEC 013 [25] for 
location service and ETSI GS MEC 015 [26] for Bandwidth 
Management service.
In continuation to ETSI GS MEC 002 [20] which 
highlights the need to align the MEC deployments with 
existing NFV infrastructures, the specifications ETSI GS 
MEC 003 [3] and ETSI GR MEC 017 [23] elaborate on the 
deployment of MEC in an NFV environment. This 
deployment instantiates the MEC applications and the 
existing/new NFV VNFs on the same virtualization 
infrastructure. MEC platform and the MEC applications are 
treated as VNFs and hence the existing ETSI NFV MANO 
components can be used for MEC management and 
orchestration. ETSI introduces a functional component, MEC 
Application 
Orchestrator 
(MEAO), 
responsible 
for 
management and orchestration of the MEC applications. 
MEAO uses a NFV orchestrator (NFVO) for orchestration of 
MEC application VNFs. Likewise, ETSI GS MEC 003 [3] and 
ETSI GR MEC 017 [23] define the new reference points for 
all such interactions between the MEC functional entities and 
existing NFV MANO components. ETSI GR MEC 017 [23] 
also identifies the key architectural issues in using a NFV 
environment for MEC deployments and suggests the 
normative work required to be performed in ETSI NFV ISG 
and ETSI MEC ISG to resolve these issues. For instance, 
using a network service to model Mobile Edge (ME) platform 
VNFs and ME app VNFs, the network service concept in NFV 
ISG might require re-work to support the association between 
each ME app VNF and associated ME platform VNF. This 
will require changes to the network service descriptor formats.
C. Lifecycle Management of MEC Applications
The specification ETSI GS MEC 010-2 [5] defines the 
complete lifecycle management of the MEC applications. It 
starts with the requirements on the reference points between 
the OSS, the Mobile edge orchestrator and the mobile edge 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

platform manager. It then defines the message flows for 
application on-boarding, application instantiation and 
application termination. It defines the information model for 
application descriptors which includes the application 
requirement and rules. Based on these requirements and rules, 
the Mobile edge orchestrator can choose the optimal MEC 
host and then, the steering of traffic to this MEC host is 
triggered. 
Though the mobile edge orchestrator can choose an 
optimal host based on the application descriptor, UE mobility 
in the underlying network might require a need to move the 
MEC application instance to a different ME host, to respect 
the optimality constraints. ETSI GR MEC 018 [8] signifies the 
need to support ME service continuity in such application 
mobility cases. The specification mentions the detailed 
message flow between the MEC functional entities for the 
application instance or application context re-location. 
ETSI GR MEC 018 [8] also identifies some key issues in 
supporting ME mobility cases. For instance, MEC system 
needs to keep the connectivity between the UE App and the 
MEC application instance on the MEC host even after there is 
a change in the UE IP address since the UE is now served by 
a new UPF in the 5G network. To support this, ETSI GR MEC 
018 [8] suggests passing the UE-ID and the UE IP address to 
the mobile edge platform during the application instantiation. 
Then, the mobile edge platform can use this UE ID to bind the 
application instance to the new IP context. Another issue that 
ETSI GR MEC 018 [8] highlights is the traffic steering to the 
target mobile edge host after application re-location. ETSI GR 
MEC 018 [8] indicates multiple options to trigger this traffic 
steering update. The source mobile edge platform might 
trigger this update towards the target edge platform based on 
radio network information it receives from the platform 
services or based on the trigger from mobile edge application 
orchestrator.
D. Upcoming initiatives
ETSI Work Programme portal [27] also mentions some in-
progress specifications relevant to the MEC and IoT 
deployments. Work item ‘DGR/MEC-0027ContainerStudy’ 
explores the additional support needed in MEC for running 
applications in containers.  Work item ‘DGR/MEC-
0024NWslicing’ will work on support needed in MEC for 
network slicing. It will identify the new interfaces needed, the 
data models and changes needed in application descriptors, for 
the deployment of the MEC functions in combination with 
network slicing. Lastly, the work item ‘DGS/MEC-
0033IoTAPI’ will define the APIs and the data models needed 
for device provisioning, configuration of the associated 
components and applications requiring connection to the IoT 
and MTC devices in a MEC environment.
V.
OPEN INITIATIVES FOR 5G AND MEC AT 5G 
PPP
The 5G Infrastructure PPP (5G PPP) is a joint initiative 
between the European Commission and the European 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) industry. 
Its initiatives are divided into three phases: research, 
deployment/optimization and large scale trials. It aims to 
deploy 5G around 2020. Phase 1 [28] included 19 projects 
targeting the research around technical challenges in the 5G 
deployments to cope up with future demands by year 2020. 
Some interesting projects of this phase were – 5GNORMA, 
SEASAME and SONATA.
5G NORMA (5G NOVEL RADIO MULTISERVICE 
ADAPTATIVE NETWORK ARCHITECTURE) [29] aims 
to develop a new mobile network architecture using 
SDN/NFV concepts, leading to flexible base stations, 
software-based centralized controllers and software-based 
RAN elements. The multi-service, multi-tenancy and context 
aware network functions developed by 5G NORMA will be 
resource efficient and enable dynamic sharing and distribution 
of network resources between operators.
SEASAME (Small Cell coordination for Multi-tenancy 
and Edge Services) [32] proposes the concept of Cloud-
Enabled Small Cell (CESC), a new multi-operator enabled 
Small Cell -  Light Data Center (Light DC) with low-power 
processors and hardware accelerators for time critical 
operations, used to build a highly manageable clustered Edge 
Computing infrastructure. It leverages logically isolated 
‘slices’ to accommodate multiple operators under the same 
infrastructure, satisfying the profile and requirements of each 
operator separately.
Scope 
of 
SONATA 
(Service 
Programming 
and 
Orchestration for Virtualized Software Networks) [33] ranges 
from programmability of the networks to supporting service 
function chaining and orchestration. It aims to add a Software 
Development Kit (SDK) for service development, an 
orchestration framework and a DevOps model to integrate 
operators with external networks. Multi-access Edge 
Computing is one of the key cases focused in this project.
Phase 2 of 5G PPP [34] focused on the 5G architectures, 
pre-standardizations, applicability of SDN/NFV to Wired and 
Wireless Networks, including networking Clouds, IoT 
Services, etc. Some interesting projects of phase 2 are 5G 
ESSENCE, 5G-Transformer and MATILDA. 
5G ESSENCE (Embedded Network Services for 5G 
Experiences) [35] is particularly focused on Edge Cloud 
computing and Small Cell-as-a-Service. It defines the 
interfaces for the provisioning of a cloud-integrated multi -
tenant SC network and a programmable Radio Resources 
Management controller; development of the centralized SD-
RAN (Software-Defined Radio Access Network) controller to 
program the radio resources usage in a unified way for all the 
CESCs (Cloud-Enabled Small Cells); development of 
orchestrator’s enhancements for the distributed service 
management, etc.
5G-Transformer (5G Mobile Transport Platform for 
Verticals) [36] aims to transform the current mobile transport 
network into a SDN/NFV based Mobile Transport and 
Computing Platform (MTP). It particularly focuses on 
‘Network Slicing’ paradigm in the mobile transport networks 
– it introduces a ‘vertical slicer’ for different verticals to 
request the creation of their respective transport slices. The 
project aims to demonstrate in verticals, like Automotive, 
eHealth and Media & Entertainment.
MATILDA [37] provides a framework for the design, 
development and orchestration of the 5G-ready applications 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

and 
network 
services 
over 
sliced 
programmable 
infrastructure. It offers multi-site management of the Edge 
Computing and IoT resources using a multi -site virtualized 
infrastructure manager. It is particularly useful for Smart City 
Intelligent Lighting Systems, Remote Control and Monitoring 
of Automobile Electrical Systems, Industry 4.0 Smart 
Factory, etc. 
Phase 3 of 5G PPP is focused towards Infrastructure 
projects, automotive projects and advanced 5G validation 
trials across multiple vertical industries. One interesting 
project in the phase 3 is 5G EVE (5G European Validation 
platform for Extensive trials) [38]. The 5G-EVE end-to-end 
facility, consisting of the interconnection of four 5G-site-
facilities, will be used to conduct experiments with Mobile 
Edge Computing, backhaul, core/service technologies and 
means 
for 
site-interworking 
and 
multi-
site/domain/technology slicing/orchestration.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The 5G standardization process is complex due to its inter-
dependence on other emerging technologies, such as Multi-
access Edge Computing, Network Function Virtualization and 
Software Defined Networking. The diverse set of use-cases 
that the future networks will demand adds to the complexity 
due to the need for programmability of networks, network 
slicing and intelligent resource orchestration. Thus, there is a 
need for the various standardization bodies, as discussed in 
this paper, to work in close collaboration, to come up with 
exhaustive standards solving the challenges in future 
networks. While the scope of 3GPP Release 15 covers 
‘standalone’ 5G, with a new radio system complemented by a 
next-generation core network, Release 16 would enhance the 
existing LTE and 5G RATs towards achieving the goals of 
IMT-2020.
REFERENCES
[1]
3GPP TS 23.501 V15.5.0 (2019-03), “System Architecture for 
the 5G System; Stage 2 (Release 15) ”
[2]
3GPP TS 23.502 V15.5.0 (2019-03), "Procedures for the 5G 
System; Stage 2 (Release 15) "
[3]
ETSI GS MEC 003 V2.1.1 (2019-01), "Mobile-Edge 
Computing (MEC); Framework and Reference Architecture"
[4]
3GPP TS 23.503 V15.5.0 (2019-03), "Policy and Charging 
Control Framework for the 5G System; Stage 2 (Release 15) "
[5]
ETSI GS MEC 010-2 V1.1.1 (2017-07), "Mobile Edge 
Management; Part 2: Application lifecycle, rules and 
requirements management"
[6]
ETSI TS 129 522 V15.0.0 (2018-07), "5G; 5G System; 
Network Exposure Function Northbound APIs; Stage 3 (3GPP 
TS 29.522 version 15.0.0 Release 15) "
[7]
ETSI White Paper No. 28, "MEC in 5G networks" : 
https://www.etsi.org/images/files/ETSIWhitePapers/etsi_wp2
8_mec_in_5G_FINAL.pdf [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[8]
ETSI GR MEC 018 V1.1.1 (2017-10), "Mobile Edge 
Computing (MEC); End to End Mobility Aspects"
[9]
ITU-R M.2083-0 (09/2015), "IMT Vision - Framework and 
overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2020 
and beyond"
[10] ITU-T Y.3101 (01/2018), "Requirements of the IMT-2020 
network"
[11] 3GPP TS 22.261 V15.7.0 (2018-12), "Service requirements for 
the 5G system"
[12] 3GPP TR 28.801 V15.1.0 (2018-01), "Study on management 
and orchestration of network slicing for next generation 
network"
[13] 3GPP TR 23.726 V16.0.0 (2018-12), "Study on Enhancing 
Topology of SMF and UPF in 5G Networks"
[14] TR 21.915 V1.0.0 (2019-03), "Summary of Rel-15 Work 
Items"
[15] ITU-T Y Suppl. 44 (07/2017), "Standardization and open 
source activities related to network softwarization of IMT-
2020"
[16] ETSI GR NFV 001 V1.2.1 (2017-05), "Network Functions 
Virtualisation (NFV); Use Cases"
[17] ETSI GS NFV-EVE 011 V3.1.1 (2018-10), "Specification of 
the Classification of Cloud Native VNF implementations"
[18] ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012 V3.1.1 (2017-12), "Report on 
Network Slicing Support with ETSI NFV Architecture 
Framework"
[19] IETF draft-flinck-slicing-management-00 (July 3, 2017), 
"Network Slicing Management and Orchestration"
[20] ETSI GS MEC 002 V2.1.1 (2018-10), "Multi-access Edge 
Computing (MEC); Phase 2: Use Cases and Requirements"
[21] ETSI GS MEC-IEG 004 V1.1.1 (2015-11), "Mobile-Edge 
Computing (MEC); Service Scenarios"
[22] ETSI GS MEC-IEG 006 V1.1.1 (2017-01), "Mobile Edge 
Computing; Market Acceleration; MEC Metrics Best Practice 
and Guidelines"
[23] ETSI GR MEC 017 V1.1.1 (2018-02), "Mobile Edge 
Computing (MEC); Deployment of Mobile Edge Computing in 
an NFV environment"
[24] ETSI GS MEC 012 V1.1.1 (2017-07), "Mobile Edge 
Computing (MEC); Radio Network Information API"
[25] ETSI GS MEC 013 V1.1.1 (2017-07), "Mobile Edge 
Computing (MEC); Location API"
[26] ETSI GS MEC 015 V1.1.1 (2017-10), "Mobile Edge 
Computing(MEC); Bandwidth Management API"
[27] https://portal.etsi.org/home.aspx [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[28] The 5G Infrastructure Public Private Partnership (5G PPP): 
First Wave of Research & Innovation Projects, https://5g-
ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/5GPPP-brochure-final-
web.pdf [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[29] https://5g-ppp.eu/5G-norma/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[30] https://5g-ppp.eu/fantastic-5g/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[31] https://5g-ppp.eu/metis-ii/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[32] https://5g-ppp.eu/sesame/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[33] https://5g-ppp.eu/sonata/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[34] The 5G Infrastructure Public Private Partnership (5G PPP): 
Second Wave of Research & Innovation Projects, https://5g-
ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/5GPPP-brochure-phase2-
final-web.pdf [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[35] https://5g-ppp.eu/5G-ESSENCE/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[36] https://5g-ppp.eu/5G-Transformer/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[37] https://5g-ppp.eu/matilda/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[38] https://5g-ppp.eu/5g-eve/ [Retrieved: 06/2019]
[39] IETF draft-aranda-sfc-dp-mobile-04Service (July 01, 2017), 
"Function Chaining Dataplane Elements in Mobile Networks"
[40] https://www.ngmn.org/fileadmin/ngmn/content/images/news/
ngmn_news/NGMN_5G_White_Paper_V1_0.pdf [Retrieved: 
06/2019]
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-727-6
AICT 2019 : The Fifteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

