Dynamic Lightpath Establishment Method Based on
Maximum Spectrum Utilization for Elastic Optical Path Networks
Yuki Sato,
Tomotaka Kimura and Masahiro Muraguchi
Faculty of Engineering
Tokyo University of Science
Tokyo, Japan 125–8585
Email: {kimura,murag}@ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp
Kouji Hirata
Faculty of Engineering
Kansai University
Osaka, Japan 564–8680
Email: hirata@kansai-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a dynamic lightpath establish
method for elastic optical path networks (EONs). EONs provide
ﬂexible frequency slot allocation and signal modulation. In EONs,
a routing, modulation level, and spectrum allocation (RMLSA)
problem is one of the most important technical issues. If routes,
modulation formats, and frequency slots are appropriately de-
termined for lightpaths, the spectrum efﬁciency is enhanced and
the blocking probability of connection requests are reduced. To
solve the RMLSA problem quickly and effectively, our proposed
method focuses on the maximum spectrum utilization. The
proposed method aims at smoothing the spectrum utilization of
each link and alleviating the fragmentation of frequency slots
by selecting routes, modulation formats, and frequency slots for
new connections based on the maximum spectrum utilization.
Through simulation experiments, we show that the proposed
method effectively reduces the blocking probability of connection
requests under the dynamic situations where connection requests
dynamically are generated and released.
Keywords–Dynamic Lightpath Establishment; Spectrum Alloca-
tion Method; Elastic Optical Path Networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, the trafﬁc demands on the Internet have increased
rapidly. To cope with this increase in trafﬁc demands, op-
tical path networks using wavelength division multiplexing
(WDM) [1] have been implemented. In optical path networks,
there is no bottleneck in the communication paths because
optical signals are transmitted without optical-electrical-optical
(OEO) conversion. Moreover, using WDM, many signals of
different wavelengths are transmitted through a signal ﬁber
in parallel. To realize optical path networks, a variety of
technologies, such as device development, routing methods,
and wavelength assignment methods have been studied [1].
Currently, optical path networks are implemented with
frequency grid WDM systems that have discrete wavelength
channels with bandwidth of 50 or 100 GHz. When a connec-
tion request arrives, the corresponding lightpath is established
by allocating a wavelength channel to a path of the lightpath.
The requested data is transmitted over the lightpath. In the
optical path networks, even if the amount of bandwidth of
a requested connection is small, a wavelength channel is
allocated to the connection because of the coarse spectrum
allocation granularity. This coarse spectrum allocation causes
low spectrum efﬁciency. To improve the spectrum efﬁciency,
the elastic optical path networks (EONs) have been actively
studied [2][3].
EONs provide ﬂexible frequency spectrum allocation and
signal modulation. The frequency spectrum is divided into
narrow-band frequency grids called frequency slots (12.25 GHz
or less) as shown in Figure 1. Furthermore, ﬂexible modulation
formats (e.g., BPSK, QPSK, and QAM) are used [4][5],
unlike the traditional optical path networks that only use
intensity modulation with a low transmission rate. Because of
these ﬂexible attributes, EONs are a promising technology for
enhancing the use efﬁciency of the frequency spectrum.
We should consider a routing, modulation level, and
spectrum allocation (RMLSA) problem to efﬁciently uti-
lize the resources of EONs. A lightpath is established by
an RMLSA algorithm that selects a route, a modulation
format, and frequency slots for the lightpath. In general,
RMLSA is categorized as static RMLSA [5][6][7] and dy-
namic RMLSA [8][9][10][11]. In static RMLSA, a trafﬁc
matrix that indicates the trafﬁc volume between each sender
and receiver pair is known in advance. Accordingly, routes,
modulation formats, and frequency slots of lightpaths are deter-
mined by solving optimization problems or applying heuristic
algorithms. On the other hand, in dynamic RMLSA, a trafﬁc
matrix is not available. Connection requests are stochastically
generated and the lightpaths are dynamically established ac-
cordingly. The performance metric in EONs using dynamic
RMLSA is typically the blocking probability of connection
requests. When there are no spectrum resources along a
requested connection, the connection request is blocked. This
paper deals with dynamic RMLSA for designing EONs with
low blocking probability.
In EONs, it is preferred that the frequency slots of each
link is evenly used. If the frequency slots of a certain link is
intensively used, the link becomes a bottleneck link. In this
case, lightpaths cannot be established further through the link.
Furthermore, the fragmentation of frequency slots degrades the
performance of EONs because connection requests using many
frequency slots are often blocked. To overcome this difﬁculty,
in this paper, we propose an RMLSA method that focuses
on the maximum spectrum utilization. The proposed method
selects routes, modulation formats, and frequency slots for new
connections based on the maximum spectrum utilization. By
doing so, the proposed method aims at smoothing the spectrum
utilization of each link and alleviating the fragmentation of
frequency slots. The proposed method is expected to reduce
the blocking probability of connection requests.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Frequency
Frequency slot
Frequency grid
Figure 1. Frequency grids and slots.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we explain EONs. Section III describes the proposed method.
In Section IV, the performance of the proposed method is
discussed with the results of the simulation experiments.
Finally, we conclude this paper in Section V.
II.
RMLSA IN ELASTIC OPTICAL PATH NETWORKS
Table I summarizes the symbols used in this paper. Graph
G = (V, E) represents an elastic optical network consisting of
the set V of switching nodes and the set E of ﬁber links. Each
link e ∈ E has NFS frequency slots, which are labeled 1 to
NFS in ascending order from low frequency side, as shown in
Figure 2. Mask be denotes the NFS-bit bit-mask, and the ith
element be[i] represents the utilization of the ith frequency slot
on the link e. If be[i] = 1, the ith frequency slot is currently
used; otherwise, it is available for a new connection. As for the
link A–B in the Figure 2, be = [0011111111100] immediately
after the new connection uses the frequency slots. Guard bands
are allocated to both ends of the frequency slots, and thus each
connection needs the frequency slots used by guard bands.
Whenever a connection request arrives, the lightpath is
established by an RMLSA method. In general, an RMLSA
problem is divided to an RML problem and an SA problem.
In the RML problem, a route (path) of the new connection is
determined by a routing algorithm. An example of a routing al-
gorithm is the K-shortest path algorithm [12], in which the ﬁrst
K shortest paths are maintained for each source-destination
pair and the paths are selected in the order of the length. The
modulation format of the connection is determined according
to the transmission distance along the path selected by the
routing algorithm. When the transmission distance is short,
a multivalue modulation format (e.g., 8QAM or 16QAM) is
adopted. In contrast, for long transmission distance, a low-
value modulation format (e.g., BPSK or QPSK) is adopted to
cope with the deterioration of communication quality.
In the SA problem, frequency slots are allocated to a path
selected by an routing algorithm. When we allocate frequency
slots, we should consider three constraints: spectrum continuity
constraint, spectrum non-overlapping constraint, and spectrum
contiguity constraint [11]. Let a denote the candidate spectrum
allocation of a new connection along the path. Spectrum
allocation a is represented by an NFS-bit bit-mask, and the
ith element a[i] ∈ {0, 1} is a binary valuable. If a[i] = 1, the
ith frequency slot is allocated to the path, otherwise, the ith
frequency slot is not used for the path of the new connection.
The SA problem determines the spectrum allocation a while
satisfying the following three constraints.
TABLE I. SYMBOLS.
Symbol
Meaning
a
NFS-bit bit-mask. The spectrum allocation If the ith ele-
ment a[i] = 1, ith frequency slot on the link e is used,
otherwise it is available.
be
NFS-bit bit-mask. If the ith element be[i]
=
1, ith
frequency slot on the link e is used, otherwise it is available.
Bp
Number of frequency slots used by a connection along route
p
C
Capacity of a frequency slot in case of 1-bit transmission
per symbol
E
Set of ﬁber links
G
Directed graph
K
Number of candidate routes
NFS
Maximum number of frequency slots in each link
V
Set of switching nodes
Ps,d
Set of candidate routes between sender node s and receiver
node d
Rp
Modulation format level on the route p
Z
Number of guard band slots
Λ
Volume of the trafﬁc demand requested by a connection
•
Spectrum continuity constraint – This constraint
means that common frequency slots should be used
all the links on the path, because this paper assumes
that there is no spectrum converter in the network.
Note that a[i] = 1 indicates that the ith frequency
slots on all links along the path are allocated to the
new connection.
•
Spectrum non-overlapping constraint – The new con-
nection should use available frequency slots that other
connections do not use:
NFS
!
i=1
a[i] · be[i] = 0,
∀e ∈ p.
(1)
•
Spectrum contiguity constraint – The frequency slots
of the new connection should be successive.
NFS
!
i=1
a[i] · CRS(a)[i]
=
"Bp − 1
(Bp ∈ [1, NFS − 1])
NFS
(Bp = NFS)
,
(2)
where CRS(a) indicates a NFS-bit bit-mask that is
the circular-right-shift of a by one bit.
If there exist no spectrum allocation satisfying with these
constraints, the connection request is blocked.
The First-Fit method [9][10] is one of the simplest spec-
trum allocation methods. In the First-Fit method, the shortest
path is ﬁrst selected from candidate paths. If there exists a
spectrum allocation satisfying with the constraints, the con-
nection uses the frequency slots of the spectrum allocation
along the path. When there are several spectrum allocations,
the frequency slots with smallest indices are chosen. Other-
wise, we select the second shortest path among the candidate
paths, and then check whether feasible spectrum allocations
satisfying the constraints exist. This procedure is repeated until
a spectrum allocation is found or all the candidate paths have
been checked.
We explain the spectrum allocation of the First-Fit method
using an example where the frequency slots on a path are
allocated as shown in Figure 3. When a connection that needs
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

A
B
C
D
E
Path A-B-C
Link A-B
Link B-C
Path A-B-C
1       2      3      4      5       6      7       8     9     10     11    12    13
slot number
frequency
new request
used frequency slot
guard band 
Figure 2. Frequency slots (NFS = 13).
two frequency slots arrives, there are two feasible spectrum
allocations, i.e., a1 and a2. The First-Fit method selects
a1 because a1 includes frequency slots with smaller indices
than a2. In the First-Fit method, the spectrum fragmentation
frequently occurs, and thus the frequency slots can not be used
efﬁciently.
III.
PROPOSED LIGHTPATH ESTABLISHMENT METHOD
The proposed method aims at reducing the blocking proba-
bility of the connection requests by efﬁciently using spectrum
resources. In EONs, if the frequency slots of a certain link is
intensively used, the link becomes a bottleneck link. In this
case, lightpaths cannot be established further through the link.
Furthermore, the fragmentation of frequency slots degrades the
performance of EONs because connection requests using many
frequency slots is often blocked. Therefore, in order to reduce
the blocking probability of connection requests, the proposed
method selects a route, a modulation format, and frequency
slots for each connection while smoothing the spectrum uti-
lization of each link and suppressing the generation of the
fragmentation of frequency slots.
When a new connection request arrives, the proposed
method selects a combination of a path, a modulation for-
mat, and frequency slots. The proposed method prepares K
candidate paths Ps,d for each sender node s and receiver node
d pair in advance. The path p of the connection is selected
from among candidate paths Ps,d with feasible frequency
slots. The modulation format is then determined based on the
transmission distance of the path p. Finally, the frequency slots
are allocated to the path p.
A. Candidate paths and modulation formats
In this paper, we prepare K candidate routes using a K-
shortest path algorithm. For each sender and receiver pair
(s, d), the procedure of K-shortest path algorithm is as follows.
First, we calculate the shortest path p1 between sender node s
and receiver node d using Dijkstra’s algorithm in the topology
G, where the cost of each link is one. We adopt the path as
a candidate path. Ps,d := {p1}. We then doubles the cost of
Link A-B
Link B-C
1       2      3      4      5       6      7      8      9     10     11    12    13
slot number
frequency
used frequency slot
guard band 
candidate a1
0       0      0      1      1       1      1      0      0      0       0      0      0
candidate a2
0       0      0      0      0       0      0      0      0      0       1      1      1
Figure 3. An example of spectrum allocations.
the links e ∈ p1. We ﬁnd the shortest path p2 on the resulting
graph, and the path is adopted as a new candidate path. That
is, Ps,d is updated as Ps,d := Ps,d ∪ {p2}. Next, we double
the cost of the links e ∈ p2. This procedure is repeated until
K candidate routes are chosen and Ps,d = {p1, p2, . . . , pK}
is constructed. Figure 4 shows an example of the K-shortest
path algorithm (K = 2) on a toy topology. In the example, the
candidate routes between sender node A and receiver node C
PA,C is obtained PA,C = {p1, p2}.
The modulation format of a new connection along each
path is determined based on the transmission distance. Accord-
ingly, the number of frequency slots used by the connection is
given as follows. Let Rp denote the modulation format level
on the route p, i.e., the capacity of the sub-carrier using a
single bit per symbol (1 for BPSK, 2 for QPSK, and 3 for
8QAM). Moreover, C denotes the communication capacity of
per frequency slot in the case of 1-bit transmission per symbol.
We describe the calculation of the number of frequency slots
when a connection requests trafﬁc volume Λ. Let Bp denote
the number of frequency slots used by a connection along path
p. The value of Bp is given by:
Bp =
# Λ
CRp
$
+ Z,
(3)
where Z indicates the number of frequency slots for a guard
band.
B. Spectrum allocation
To avoid the fragmentation of frequency slots and smooth
the spectrum utilization, our proposed method focuses on
the maximum spectrum utilization. Let f(p, a) denote the
maximum spectrum utilization along path p when the spectrum
allocation a is adopted on path p in a ﬁrst-ﬁt manner. Formally,
f(p, a) is given by:
f(p, a) =
max
i∈[1,NFS]
%
i
&& !
e∈p
be[i] + a[i] ≥ 1
'
.
(4)
Note that different paths have a of different sizes because the
number Bp of frequency slots used by the paths is given by
(3).
First, our proposed method calculates the maximum spec-
trum utilization f(p, a) for each candidate route p ∈ Ps,d, and
then selects the path p and the frequency allocation a with
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

A
B
C
D
E
1
1
1
1
1
1
A
B
C
D
E
2
2
1
1
1
1
p1
p2
Figure 4. K-shortest path algorithm.
Link A-D
Link D-E
1       2      3      4      5       6      7      8      9     10     11    12    13
slot number
frequency
used frequency slot
guard band 
candidate a3
0       1     1      1      1       0      0      0      0      0       0      0      0
Link E-C
candidate a4
0       0     0      0      0       0      0      0      1      1       1      1      0
Figure 5. Path p2 and its candidate spectrum allocations.
the minimum f(p, a). In the proposed method, the frequency
slots with large indices are reserved for future connections
as much as possible, and thus the frequency slots used by
established connections are squeezed into frequency slots with
small indices, which helps to alleviate the fragmentation and
smooth the frequency utilization.
C. Spectrum allocation example
We explain the spectrum allocation of our proposed method
using an example where frequency slots on shortest path p1 and
second shortest path p2 are used by the connections shown in
Figs. 3 and 5, respectively. When a new connection that needs
two frequency slots arrives, there are four feasible spectrum
allocations a1, a2, a3, and a4. Our proposed method calculates
the maximum index of used slots: f(p1, a1) = 11, f(p1, a2) =
13, f(p2, a3) = 9, f(p2, a4) = 12. f(p2, a3) is minimum,
and thus our proposed method selects route p2 and spectrum
allocation a3.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Simulation Model
To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we
conduct simulation experiments with the network topology (24
nodes and 43 links) shown in Figure 6. For simplicity, we
assume that the length of each link is the same, and thus the
modulation format is determined in accordance with the hops
between sender and receiver pairs. We adopt 8QAM for less
than three hops, QPSK for three and four hops, and BPSK
for more than four hops are adopted. Communication capacity
C is set to be 2.5 Gbps, and Table II shows the transmission
Figure 6. Network model.
TABLE II. TRANSMISSION CAPACITY PER SLOT.
Hops
Modulation Format
Capacity [Gbps/slot]
1, 2
8QAM
7.5
3, 4
QPSK
5.0
More than 4
BPSK
2.5
capacity per frequency slot. The number NFS of frequency
slots on each link is set to be 100, the guard-band width is
one, and the number of candidate routes K is three.
The arrival of connection requests follows a Poisson pro-
cess with the rate λ. The lifetime tL of each connection request
follows an exponential distribution with parameter µ or a log-
normal distribution. The probability density function g of the
log-normal distribution is given by:
g(tL) =
1
√
2πσtL
exp
(
−(log tL − ξ)2
2σ2
)
,
(5)
where σ and ξ are parameters satisfying E[tL] = eξ+ σ2
2 . In the
following, scenarios adopting the exponential distribution and
the log-normal distribution are called the exponential lifetime
scenario and the log-normal lifetime scenario, respectively.
In the exponential lifetime scenario, µ = 10−4, and in
the log-normal lifetime scenario, ξ = 3.09, σ = 3.5. By
this setting, the mean lifetime of connections E[tL] is same
(E[tL] = 104) in both scenarios. Moreover, sender node and
receiver node are randomly chosen from among the nodes in
V. The bandwidth requirement volume Λ of each connection
is uniformly distributed between 1 and 10 Gbps.
We use two performance metrics: the blocking probability
and the network utilization. The blocking probability of the
connection requests is deﬁned as follows:
number of blocked connection requests
total number of connection requests
.
(6)
The network utilization is deﬁned as follows:
sum of spectrum utilization *
e∈E E[ue]
number of links |E|
,
(7)
where ue indicates the spectrum utilization of link e, i.e., the
number of used frequency slots divided by NFS, and E[ue]
denotes the time average of the spectrum utilization of link e.
For each setting, we collect 1,500,000 samples for calculating
these performance metrics.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Blocking Probability
Arrival rate λ
First Fit
ASU
Proposal
(a) the exponential lifetime scenario
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Blocking Probability
Arrival rate λ
First Fit
ASU
Proposal
(b) the log-normal lifetime scenario
Figure 7. Blocking probability
For the performance comparison, we show the results of the
First-Fit and the average spectrum-utilization (ASU) methods.
When a new connection request arrives, the ASU method
calculates the average spectrum-utilization for each candidate
route p, which is deﬁned as the sum of the spectrum utilization
among p (*
e∈p ue) divided by the number of hops of route p
(|p|). Next, the path with the minimum spectrum-utilization
is selected, and if the feasible spectrum allocation exists
along the path, the connection is assigned to the spectrum
allocation. When there are some feasible spectrum allocations,
the spectrum allocation with smalles indices is selected. When
there is no feasible spectrum allocation along the path, the
ASU method selects the second-minimum spectrum utilization
path, and then checks whether a feasible spectrum allocation
exists. This procedure is repeated until a feasible spectrum
allocation is found. For the example in Figs. 3 and 5, the
ASU method calculates the average spectrum-utilization for
the candidate routes, which are 4/13 = 0.30 for path p1 and
{(4+2+3)/13}/3 = 0.23 for path p2. Therefore, the route p2 and
feasible spectrum allocation a3 on the route p2 are selected.
B. Results
Figure 7 shows the blocking probability as a function of
the arrival rate λ. We observe that the blocking probability of
our proposed method is smallest for any arrival rate λ. This
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Network Utilization
Arrival rate λ
ASU
Proposal
First Fit
(a) the exponential lifetime scenario
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Network Utilization
Arrival rate λ
ASU
Proposal
First Fit
(b) the log-normal lifetime scenario
Figure 8. Network utilization
result indicates that the maximum spectrum utilization is useful
for alleviating the spectrum fragmentation. Moreover, in the
log-normal lifetime scenario, connections with large lifetime
occasionally arrive, which highly degrades the performance of
the First-Fit method and the ASU method. In contrast, the
proposed method works well even if those connections arrive.
Figure 8 shows the network utilization as a function of the
arrival rate λ. The network utilization of the proposed scheme
is larger than that of the First-Fit method. This result indicates
that the free frequency slots are large and the frequency frag-
mentation frequently occurs in the First-Fit method. Moreover,
the network utilization of the proposed method is smaller than
that of the ASU method. Therefore, the ASU method wastes
the frequency resources by allocating paths with large hops.
Based on these results, we conclude that the proposed method
effectively uses the frequency resources.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a dynamic lightpath establish-
ment method for EONs. Our proposed method focuses on
the maximum spectrum utilization. By doing so, the proposed
method aims at smoothing the spectrum utilization of each link
and alleviating the fragmentation of frequency slots. Through
simulation experiments, we showed that the proposed method
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

effectively reduces the blocking probability of connection re-
quests under the dynamic situations where connection requests
dynamically are generated and released.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Charbonneau and V. M. Vokkarane, “A survey of advance reserva-
tion routing and wavelength assignment in wavelength-routed WDM
networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 14, no. 4,
pp. 1037–1064, 2012.
[2]
B. C. Chatterjee, N. Sarma, and E. Oki, “Routing and spectrum
allocation in elastic optical networks: A tutorial,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1776–1800, 2015.
[3]
G. Zhang, M. D. Leenheer, A. Morea, and B. Mukherjee, “A survey on
OFDM-based elastic core optical networking,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 65–87, 2013.
[4]
M. Jinno, H. Takara, B. Kozicki, Y. Tsukishima, Y. Sone, and S.
Matsuoka, “Spectrum-efﬁcient and scalable elastic optical path network:
Architecture, beneﬁts, and enabling technologies,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 66–73, 2009.
[5]
M. Jinno, B. Kozicki, H. Takara, A. Watanabe, Y. Sone, T. Tanaka,
and A. Hirano, “Distance-adaptive spectrum resource allocation in
spectrum-sliced elastic optical path network,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 138–145, 2010.
[6]
K. Christodoulopoulos, I. Tomkos, and E. A. Varvarigos, “Elastic band-
width allocation in ﬂexible OFDM-based optical networks,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1354–1366, 2011.
[7]
M. Takezaki and K. Hirata, “Static lightpath establishment method
with multi-path routing in elastic optical networks,” Proc. of the
31st International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN’17),
pp. 109–111, 2017.
[8]
K. Morita and K. Hirata, “Dynamic spectrum allocation method for
reducing crosstalk in multi-core ﬁber networks,” Proc. of the 31st Inter-
national Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN’17), pp. 686–
688, 2017.
[9]
A. Rosa, C. Cavdar, S. Carvalho, J. Costa, and L. Wosinska, “Spectrum
allocation policy modeling for elastic optical networks,” Proc. of the
9th International Conference onHigh Capacity Optical Networks and
Enabling Technologies (HONET’12), pp. 242–246, 2012.
[10]
R. Wang and B. Mukherjee, “Spectrum management in heteroge-
neous bandwidth optical networks,” Optical Switching and Networking,
vol. 11, pp. 83–91, 2014.
[11]
M. Zhang, C. You, and Z. Zhu, “On the parallelization of spectrum de-
fragmentation reconﬁgurations in elastic optical networks,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2819–2833, 2016.
[12]
K. Bala, T. E. Stern, D. Simchi-Levi, and K. Bala, “Routing in a linear
lightwave network,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 3, no.
4, pp. 459–469, 1995.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-562-3
AICT 2017 : The Thirteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

