Correlation Characteristics of 2-Dimensional Antenna Array Signals
in a Multi-Cell Environment
Yoonsu Kim, Wonjin Sung
Department of Electronic Engineering
Sogang University
Email: wsung@sogang.ac.kr
Jonghyun Park
Advanced Standard R&D Lab
LG Electronics
Email: jonghyun10.park@lge.com
Abstract—In this paper, we analyze the 3-dimension spatial
channel model (3D-SCM) over time and spatial domains. SCM
is a realistic channel model for multiple-input multiple-output
(MIMO) wireless communication systems since it is known to
adequately represent the channel properties with respect to the
antenna geometry and conditions of user equipments (UEs).
We observe its autocorrelation properties over time and spatial
domains as functions of the angle spread and the effective
Doppler frequency. The results can be used for efﬁcient design
of transmission methods, such as beamforming and precoding
using codebooks to fully utilize the channel characterstics of
two-dimensional antenna arrays.
Keywords—Correlation; MIMO; 2D Arrays; SCM; Angle
spread; Doppler frequency.
I. INTRODUCTION
To further increase the bandwidth efﬁciency of mobile
wireless systems, MIMO systems which use multiple an-
tenna elements are being utilized in LTE Release 8 and
later releases [1]. It is expected that the number of antenna
elements will keep increasing for even higher data rates and
bandwidth efﬁciency. Thus it is important that we under-
stand channel characteristics for different arrangements of
antenna elements [2]. 3D-SCM is a channel model for MIMO
transmission adopted by the 3GPP Spatial Channel Ad-hoc
Group. The model contains a set of parameters, veriﬁcation
methods, and the minimum requirements. It is based on
the ray-tracing method and probability models for geometric
environments. Various parameters are deﬁned for each of
transmission scenarios [3]-[5]. Although these standardization
documents specify the setup, implementation procedures, and
key characteristics of resulting channels, related studies on
how to utilize these results to efﬁciently design the transmis-
sion schemes are not currently well known. More recently,
enhancements using full-dimensional MIMO have been dis-
cussed and related issues are summarized in [6]. Channel state
information reference signaling (CSI-RS) and its enhancement
schemes are published as 3GPP meeting documents [7],[8].
In this work, we analyze the 3D-SCM which is implemented
by the simulation tool to represent the correlation properties
over time and spatial domains. In time domain, we observe
autocorrelation of channels for different effective Doppler
frequencies of UEs based on their mobility and directions.
We compare the autocorrelation of SCM to that generated
by the Jake’s channel model which follows the zeroth order
Bessel function. In spatial domain, we observe the correlation
for vertical and horizontal antenna elements respectively, with
respect to antenna spacing. We utilize the angle spread to
represent the measure of how much beam separation among
antenna elements exist [9].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II, system model and parameters used for the channel
characteristic evaluation are described. Speciﬁc results on
correlation behavior of the channel model are given in Section
III, followed by discussion and conclusions in Section IV.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PARAMETERS
The system model with 19 cells for which each sector has
a hexagonal coverage is used, and UEs are assumed to be
uniformly distributed in each sector. Each base station (BS)
has 16 antenna elements made up of 4 vertical and 4 horizontal
antenna arrays, whereas each UE has a single antenna element.
Detailed steps of generating 3D-SCM and system parameters
used for simulation are similar to those described in [5].
First, environments and parameters are given for UMa (Urban
Macro) model, and indoor/outdoor distribution ratio is set
as 80 to 20%. Second, departure/arrival angles as well as
the pathloss values are determined. Third, delay and power
proﬁles for each cluster are calculated, followed by random
coupling among subpaths in each cluster. The fourth step is
the assignment of phase values and crosspol factors. Finally,
channel coefﬁcients are computed for SCM.
Jakes’ channel model is generated for comparison purposes
using the Doppler frequency fd determined as fd = v/λ where
v is the UE mobility and λ is the signal wavelength [10]. The
zeroth order Bessel function J0(·) is used for the autocorre-
lation function (ACF), written as R[n] = J0(2πfdT|n|) for
the time domain [11]. The ACF for the spatial domain can
be similarly described as R[mH] = J0(2πδH|mH|dH/λ) and
R[mV ] = J0(2πδV |mV |dV /λ) where mH, mV are antenna
element indices, δH, δV are angle spreads, and dH, dV are
antenna spacing. Subscripts H and V represent the horizontal
array and vertical array, respectively. We deﬁne also κ as
κH = δHdH/λ and κV = δV dV /λ. Doppler frequency value
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Comparison of ACFs: (a) φv = 0o and (b) φv = 90o.
of fd = 100Hz is used for simulation. Effective Doppler fre-
quency is determined as f eff
d
= v cos φv/λ which considers
the UEs’ direction angle φv. Also, κeff represents the effective
angle spread of each UE.
III. CORRELATION CHARACTERISTICS
The ACFs as functions of time difference τ are shown in
Figure 1. The autocorrelation values were observed by the
Monte-Carlo simulation; Channel coefﬁcients are repeatedly
generated in random locations within the sector at different
time instances, then correlation values at different time inter-
vals are measured by taking the average of those correlation
values. Angles φv = 0o and 90o represent different moving
directions of UEs, which are respectively the same as and
perpendicular to the antenna boresight. For UEs with φv = 0o,
AFCs are in good agreement to the existing Bessel function
model. On the other hand, the UEs with φv = 90o have high
correlation for small time difference values. The distribution
of f eff
d
and f eff
d
versus φv are summarized in Figure 2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Distributions for the effective Doppler frequency:
(a) Histogram and (b) feff
d
versus φLOS.
To verify the ACF characteristics of spatial domain, we ﬁrst
observe the autocorrelation of UEs with respect to vertical
and horizontal antenna elements. Then we determine κeff
V
and
κeff
H
by the curve ﬁtting method, considering four vertical and
horizontal antenna elements for cases of dH = dV = 0.5λ
and dH = dV = 2λ. The purpose of these observations is
(1) to verify the accuracy of the curve ﬁtting for horizontal
and vertical AFCs, (2) to present the amount of correlation
as the spacing between antenna element increases, and (3) to
compare the correlation behavior of horizontal and vertical
arrays, to better understand the statistical characteristics of
SCM. The observation results for these two cases are given in
Figures 3 and 4, respectively. Simulations and ﬁgure drawings
have been produced by Matlab software. The ACFs evaluated
in Figure 1 shows that the SCM model implemented produces
a reasonable autocorrelation properties needed to simulate
the mobile users, as can be seen from the comparison to
results produced using the Bessel function and Jakes’ fading
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Actual ACF and curve ﬁtting result for dH = dV = 0.5λ:
(a) Speciﬁc location and (b) the sector average.
generation [12],[13]. For the users randomly located over the
sector, the distribution for the effective Doppler frequency and
the angle-dependent values are given in Figure 2. These results
provide a guidance as to which Doppler values to be used for
transceiver signal processing.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We implemented the 3D-SCM as a realistic correlated
channel for MIMO transmission, and analyzed it in both
time and spatial domains. We observed the autocorrelation
characteristics by experimental results and compared them to
existing models. We also determined the effective Doppler
frequency in time domain and the effective angle spread
in spatial domain by curve ﬁtting. Even when the Doppler
frequency of UEs are the same, the autocorrelation function
are not the same due to the multipath effects of UEs moving
in different directions. By using the distribution results for the
effective angle spreads of UEs vertically and horizontally, we
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Actual ACF and curve ﬁtting result for dH = dV = 2.0λ:
(a) Speciﬁc location and (b) the sector average.
observe that the effective angle spreads are mainly dependent
on antenna spacing. We can utilize the statistical results of this
work for several different purposes of designing the MIMO
transmission strategies. For example, theses can be used for
channel interpolation, as well as the channel prediction in both
domains when only partial knowledge of the actual channel
is given. The results can also be applied in selecting beam-
forming strategies for the multi-antenna system. Distributions
of the channel can be exploited in designing appropriate
codebooks to be used in precoding the transmission signal.
The estimated Doppler frequency can be used to obtain the
precoding vectors in subsequent transmission frames when
the exact and full channel information is not present at those
frames, by performing extrapolation of previous channel report
results.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the MSIP (Ministry
of Science, ICT & Future Planning), Korea in the ICT R&D
Program 2014 (B0101-14-0171) and in part by LG Electronics.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Sk¨old, LTE/LTE-Advanced for Mobile
Broadband. Academic Press, 2011.
[2] S. Sesia, I. Touﬁk, and M. Baker, LTE-The UMTS Long Term Evolution:
From theory to practice, 2nd ed. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley, 2011.
[3] 3GPP TS 36.814, v9.0.0, Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access
(E-UTRA); Further advacements for E-UTRA physical layer aspects
(Release 9), Mar. 2010.
[4] 3GPP TR 25.996, v11.0.0, Technical Speciﬁcation Group Radio Access
Network; Spatial channel model for MUltiple Input Multiple Output
(MIMO) simulations (Release 11), Sept. 2012.
[5] 3GPP TR 36.873, v1.2.0, Technical Speciﬁcation Group Radio Access
Nework; Study on 3D channel model for LTE (Release 12), Sept. 2013.
[6] 3GPP TR 36.897, v1.0.0, Study on Elevation Beamforming/Full-
Dimension (FD) MIMO for LTE (Release 13), May. 2015.
[7] 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 #81 Meeting Document R1-153596, WF on CSI-
RS enhancements, Fukuoka, Japan, 25-29 May 2015.
[8] 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 #81 Meeting Document R1-152894, Discussion
on spatially sub-sampled non-precoded CSI-RS, Fukuoka, Japan, 25-29
May 2015.
[9] A. Abdi and M. Kaveh, “A space-time correlation model for multielement
antenna systems in mobile fading channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas in
Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, Apr. 2002, pp. 550–560.
[10] Y. R. Zheng and C. Xiao, “Improved models for the generation of
multiple uncorrelated Rayleigh fading waveforms,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 6, no. 6, July 2002, pp. 256–258.
[11] K. E. Baddour and N. C. Beaulieu, “Autogressive modeling for fading
channel simulation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 4, July
2005, pp. 1650–1662.
[12] G. E. P. Box, G. M. Jenkins, and G. C. Reinsel, Time Series Analysis:
Forecasting and Control, 3rd ed. New Jersey, U.S.A: Prentice Hall, 1994.
[13] S. K. Lucas and H. A. Stone, Evaluating inﬁnite integrals involving
Bessel functions of arbitrary order, J. Computational and Applied Math.,
vol. 64, no. 3, Dec. 1995.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-411-4
AICT 2015 : The Eleventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

