Active Null Forming: Coordinated MIMO Transmit Precoding for Interference
Mitigation in 5th Generation Networks
Abheek Saha
Hughes Systique Corporation,
India
Email: abheek.saha@hsc.com
Abstract—3gPP Long Term Evolution (LTE) Advanced and
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN) are both striding
towards the 5th generation wireless networks, with guaranteed
cell edge coverage and performance. To achieve this, these
networks will have unprecedented density of deployed cells,
which will actively work with each other to maximize the
link to all possible User Equipments (UEs). In this article, we
propose a method by which individual network nodes can use
additional antennae so as to transmit data to individual UEs
while limiting the interference seen by other UEs on the same
frequency and time-slot. Ideally, we should be able to have a
dense network of nodes, all transmitting simultaneously on the
same resource, without any cross-interference. We show that
our proposed algorithm shows substantial performance gains
over existing techniques addressing coordinated multipoint
transmission between multiple transmitters and receivers.
Keywords—Coordinated Multipoint; Multi-user MIMO; inter-
ference pre-cancellation
I. INTRODUCTION
The next generation of wireless networks have several
challenging objectives, one of which is to meet target
throughput numbers for the cell-edge, i.e., applicable to upto
99% of the UEs within the coverage area [1]. Consequently,
it is anticipated that next generation wireless networks will
be much denser, to improve coverage. This in turn will lead
to signiﬁcant cross node interference. Interference mitigation
is already an active area of research in wireless networks;
with the advent of newer techniques such as Inter-Cell
Interference Coordination (ICIC), further enhanced as eICIC
and feICIC) and Coordinated Multipoint (CoMP), there is an
emphasis on inter-node coordination so as to jointly improve
UE link conditions. For example, CoMP allows joint coding,
where multiple nodeBs coordinate with each other so as
to transmit to a single UE, further increasing the diversity
(and consequently rank) of the ensemble of Multiple Input
Multiple Output (MIMO) channels.
In this paper, we present an idea, ﬁrst presented in [2]
called Active-Null Forming (ANF), which allows network
nodes to work together so as to transmit to multiple UEs
in the same geographical area, while limiting cross node
interference. In ANF, each network node receives feedback
from multiple UEs in the neighbourhood, one of which
it is transmitting data to (the target UE). It then codes
the transmission in such a way that the target UE gets
the intended data-stream with no interference, whereas the
interference at other UEs (on the same frequency and time-
slot) is minimized. The key requirement is that the network
node be MIMO capable, with a large number of elements
available for transmission. The method is a modiﬁcation of
directed feedback method of broadcast MIMO [3]. In [2],
we presented a very simple initial approach to ANF, limited
to two UEs and two network nodes, with a ﬁxed template
for precoding. In the current work we have extended the
problem to multiple UEs and presented the solution of the
precoding matrix as a constrained (not necessarily convex)
optimization problem. We shall ﬁrst describe how it can be
used stand-alone and then jointly by a cluster of network
nodes acting together.
A. Organization of this paper
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II we describe the problem in more detail, including the
previous work done in this area. In Section III we present
the ANF algorithm and introduce the underlying principle.
In Section IV we formulate the interference nulling problem
as an optimization problem, using the conceptual principles
introduced in the previous section. Finally, in Section V,
we present the simulation results for a simple network node
operating on the principles of the ANF algorithm.
II. COORDINATED NODE FUNCTIONS IN DENSE HETNETS
The next generation of cellular networks will see novel
deployment architectures as a means of increasing coverage,
reducing cost and also, controlling energy consumption.
The key developments include the widespread deployment
of cloud Radio Access Networks (cRAN) with Remote
Radio Heads (RRH) [4]. This approach combines centralized
baseband processing in a cloud, in conjunction with a dense
network of RRHs, so as to create a ﬂexible, functionally
adaptive network. It is envisioned that the network nodes
(RRHs) shall be deployed densely, in overlapping coverage
with each other and the network will be able to dynamically
map functions to individual nodes as per demand. Already,
in some current networks, we see this kind of a deployment,
where there is one macro-cell with several femto-cells in
its coverage region whose primary job is to off-load local
trafﬁc from the macro. This is the kind of environment where
inter-node coordination functions such as CoMP are readily
applicable; by multiple network nodes cooperating with each
other, we can ensure that all network holes and cell-edge
points are adequately serviced.
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

However, in such a network, management of interference
(especially co-cellular interference) is a big challenge. Due
to the close proximity of the network nodes, tight restrictions
on frequency re-use are both inefﬁcient and complex. Rather,
the focus has been on time-sharing techniques like ICIC.
Such techniques are primarily based around scheduling and
not directly on interference control.
A. Multi-user MIMO, massive MIMO and remote radio-
heads
Another innovation in next generation networks is the
advent of widespread MIMO. Starting from basic single
user MIMO, we have progressed to multi-user MIMO and
CoMP. It is a fact that it is easier to add transmission
elements to a network node, as compared to a user-terminal,
especially a hand-held. As of now, the practical limit of
antenna on a user-terminal is 2-4. With the advent of RRHs
this difference shall be further increased. However, studies
have shown that additional antennae don’t usually lead to
signiﬁcant changes in throughput, since the independence
of the paths are limited. This creates the challenge of
using the larger number of antennae on the network node;
either through time-diversity schemes (which also suffers the
path independence problem), joint transmission/reception
schemes of MU-MIMO, etc. This is one of the features
of ANF; that it uses these additional network elements for
improvement of network conditions.
B. Previous work
The application of multiuser MIMO methods to the inter-
ference coordination problem in general has been introduced
in [5] [6]. Both these papers highlight the possible co-
existence between the semi-static optimization brought in by
standard ICIC techniques and the dynamic, frame by frame
optimization achievable by CoMP techniques such as Joint
Transmission (JT). However, none of these works consider
adaptation of CoMP speciﬁcally for the ICIC purpose.
In the ﬁeld of transmitter/precoder based interference
cancellation, the previous literature that we have seen on
multiple transmitter MIMO is divided into two parts. First is
joint encoding with with partial interference pre-substraction
and the other is in zero-forcing with block diagonalization
(ZF-BD). In interference pre-subtraction our principal refer-
ence derives from the decision feedback precoding approach
given in [3]. Other related work in this area has been done
using trellis precoding techniques [7]. Both of these use
special joint pre-coding of the transmitted vectors so as
to cancel out interference, taking into account the different
channel matrices. Caire and Shamai [8] consider the problem
in the context of a single transmitter and multiple single-
antenna receivers with full knowledge of the entire channel
matrix on both sides and show that for two users, the sum-
rate approaches the optimal theoretical Dirty Paper Coding
(DPC) output. While their work is based on single antenna
receivers, the idea of ordering the two users such that the
ﬁrst user is interference free, but the second user has to deal
with the ﬁrst is introduced by them.
Techniques for ZF-BD for multi-user transmission is
given in [9] [10] and others. The basic SVD technique for
extracting precoding matrices orthogonal to other users are
given in [9]. Zhang [11] describes a cooperative algorithm
for zero-forcing transmission with per network node power
constraints. Zukang Shen and his co-authors [12] extend this
to show that a signiﬁcant part of the Marton’s upper bound
can be achieved using the analytically feasible BD approach.
ZF-BD is part of a more generic problem in optimal
MIMO MAC precoding matrix design introduced in [13]
and further discussed in, for example, [14] and others. These
are global cooperative methods that require network nodes
to jointly compute the precoding matrices for all nodes
simultaneously (typically they involve solutions that require
the manipulation of the term PK
k,k̸=i log (HkQkH∗
k). In
[15], the authors provide a framework for comparing the
relative capacities of the Multiple Access Channel with
cooperative precoding and the interference presubtraction
approach and conclude that the two cover each other. In
more recent work [16] describes a method of optimal linear
precoding called ’Soft Interference Nulling’ (we found the
paper after we had already coined our own term, so any
similarity is coincidence), which is also a global technique.
In SIN, clusters of base-stations transmit a data stream to a
single UE using a jointly constructed set of linear precoding
matrices.
C. Our contribution
In this paper, we propose a new method for multi-user
MIMO operation, which we call Active Null Forming.
Our solution is designed for the multi-transmitter, multiple
receiver MuMIMO case; speciﬁcally where the number
of antennae per transmitter is larger than the number of
antennae per receiver. In this sense, it is different from
existing algorithms.
The crucial difference in our approach is the use of addi-
tional network elements; we propose to use them explicitly
for modifying the transmitted signal so as to actively cancel
interference (as opposed to the passive means suggested in
ICIC). As far as we are aware, this approach in general has
not been addressed in pre-existing work. Our algorithm is
particularly suited to use in next generation mobile networks
that are expected to use distributed antenna systems (DAS)
[17] [18] liberally to improve signal penetration and diver-
sity, since there will be likely a large number of elements
available to each network node.
Technically, our approach is derived from broadcast
MIMO; however, by the very nature of our method, it is easy
to scale it a number of transmitters. We will show our algo-
rithm achieves results close to cooperative precoding without
requiring a global optimization, due to the very nature of the
approach; each node can independently compute their own
precoding matrices. A second issue that we consider is the
power diversion problem; when we do optimal precoding
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

for interference mitigation, we are, to an extent sacriﬁcing
the immediate needs of the network node for some global
objectives. In this case, this comes to power; in a power
constrained network node, we need to decide how much
power should be diverted for the purpose of interference
mitigation at the cost of SINR for the primary signal. Both
these issues are addressed in our paper, as we shall see.
Our algorithm is hence an alternative to the ZFBD al-
gorithm and its variants. In general, ZFBD requires the
target UEs to have orthogonal channel matrices [19], i.e.,
HiQjH∗
i
≡ δij and scheduling algorithms have to take
this into account. Our algorithm is not dependent on this
condition, which gives it additional ﬂexibility, especially
when the number of UEs is relative small, i.e., the K → ∞
condition is not met.
III. ACTIVE NULL-FORMING - THE GENERAL
FRAMEWORK
A. Problem Context
The Figure 1a shows the deployment of the proposed
approach. We see a small cluster of inter-connected and
coordinated network nodes servicing a group of UEs. Each
node is assumed to have full state information of the channel
to all UEs (in TDD systems, this is easy, but in FDD sys-
tems this will require additional signaling and coordination
between network nodes for pilot transmission). There is
a central coordination and scheduling function, which, for
each transmission time slot determines the subset of UEs S
to be transmitted to and the mapping from nodes to UEs,
i.e., for a given UE u to be transmitted to, which node Nu
is going to transmit to it. For a given node, the UE to which
it has to transmit data to at a particular instant is called
the target UE. The other active UEs (which are going to
receive transmissions from any of the other network nodes)
are called co-resident UEs. This is shown in Figure 1b.
Each node then computes a precoding matrix as per the
ANF algorithm (Section IV). The objective of ANF is to
simultaneously transmit the intended signal to the target UE,
while minimizing the signal received by the co-resident UEs
as much as possible. We achieve this by using the additional
transmission elements and a speciﬁcally computed pre-
coding matrix to create ’nulls’ at the receiver, conceptually
similar to the null-forming done in beamforming systems.
The core of the algorithm is a specially selected structure
for the precoding matrix as given in Sub-Section III-D. Due
to this structure, the precoding matrix is guaranteed to make
the transmission to the target UE completely free from the
rest of the signal (as is achieved in interference subtracting
broadcast MIMO). Figure 1b shows ANF in some detail,
from the context of a single network node. Note that all the
UEs don’t need to have the same number of receive antenna
and the sum of receive antennae for the UEs may be less
than, equal to or greater than the sum of transmit antennae
Nt for the network node; the only restriction is that the
receive antennae for the target UE must be less than the
number of transmit antenna Nt.
B. Conventions and naming
The terminology used in this paper is as per conven-
tional norms. Lowercase variables z, w, etc. refer to vectors,
whereas uppercase variables V, W are complex matrices.
Ma x b is the set of matrices with a rows and b columns,
a < b having a eigen-values. If w is a vector, w∗ refers
to its conjugate form, i.e., each element is replaced by its
conjugate and wT is its transpose. If X is a matrix, Xa,b
refers to the element in its ath row and bth column, X∗
is its complex adjoint (Hermitian) form and ∥X∥P refers
to the Frobenius Norm ∥X∥P = P
i,j Xi,jX∗
i,j. The vector
norm is the square norm ∥w∥ = ⟨w, w∗⟩, unless otherwise
speciﬁed. A matrix may be partitioned columnwise into two
matrices, in which case it is designated as W = [Wi Wj].
C. Realization at each transmitter
In this section, we discuss the implementation at each
network node. We consider a single OFDM network node,
with Nt transmit antennae with several UEs in its immediate
range. As mentioned above, at each time interval, each node
receives channel state information implicitly (through uplink
reference signals in TDD mode) or explicitly (feedback on a
shared PUSCH in FDD mode). One of the UEs is selected as
the target for transmitting data to by a centralized scheduler
(which makes this selection for each network node jointly).
The network node then uses the CSI of the other UEs to code
the transmission in such a way so as to minimize interference
for all the others. In our problem, the ith UE has an antenna
count of Ni < Nt. We designate the number of antenna
available to the target UE as Nr and the total number of
antennae for all the other UEs as Nu = P
i Ni − Nr. The
channel matrix between the network node and the ith UE is
given as Hi ∈ MNi x Nt.
Each channel matrix Hi has a singular value decomposi-
tion UiΣiV∗
i , where Ui, Vi are orthonormal column matrices
and Σi is a diagonal matrix. Since Hi is a matrix with more
rows than columns, the SVD actually looks like
Hi = Ui
 Σi
0  
Vi
˜Vi
∗
(1)
D. Structure of the precoding matrix
The transmitting network node uses a precoding matrix
of the form
ΦF
=
 Vr
W  
I
−D
0
I

=

Vr
W − VrD

(2)
Φ is a diagonal power loading matrix, which is used to
scale the matrix F to meet the power constraint (see Section
III-E). We note that Vr is the sub-matrix of Vi corresponding
to the non-null eigenvalues. W is the ’null forming’ matrix
and is the key to interference minimization, as we shall
show in Sub-Section III-F. The matrix D is given by
D = V ∗
r W; this is dictated by the target UE interference
nulling requirement. The precoding matrix F is then applied
on a transmit vector
 z
˜z T , where z is the vector
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

(a). ANF - deployment diagram
(b). ANF: Single Node Case
Figure 1. ANF deployment in the network
of Nr symbols (post-modulation) to be transmitted to the
target UE. The vector ˜z of size Nt − Nr is also statistically
independent and derived from z
We ﬁrst show that the precoding matrix as shown in (2)
will ensure that the signal received at the target UE is free of
any effect of the precoding for the other UEs (speciﬁcally the
interference minimization term W). The received vector on
the target UE is given by (3). We ignore the power loading
matrix Φ temporarily, since it only has an amplifying effect.
ytgt = HrF
 z
˜z T
(3)
=
Ur
 Σr
0   V ∗
r
˜V ∗
r
  Vr
W  
I
−D
0
I
 
z
˜z

=
UrΣr

I
V ∗
r W

[
 I
−D
0
I
  z
˜z

=
UrΣr
 z
(V ∗
r W − D) ˜z 
(4)
By taking D = V ∗
r W, we ensure that the signal received
by the target UE is of the form UiΣiz, which can then be
decoded using a standard MMSE equalizer [20]. We note
that the vector ˜z has no impact on ytgt whatsoever.
E. Obeying the power constraint
Given that the transmission vector
 z
˜z 
has a con-
stant modulus, we have to designthe precoding matrix
F given in (2) so as to obey the power constraint that
Tr (FF ∗) ≤ P. It is easy to see that the power term
Tr (FF ∗) can be written in a simpliﬁed form as in (5), using
cyclic permutations
Tr

Vr
W
  I
−D
0
I
 
I
0
−D∗
I
  V ∗
r
W ∗

=
Tr
 V ∗
r
W ∗
  Vr
W   I
−D
0
I
 
I
0
−D∗
I

=
Tr (I + W ∗W − D∗D)
(5)
We note that since W and Vr are not square matrices
W ∗W − D∗D do not automatically cancel out.
In order to achieve equality with a given overall power
constraint P, it is normal to add a diagonal power loading
matrix Φ =
h
⃗φ1 ⃗φ2
i
consisting of real ampliﬁcation factors
so that Tr (ΦFF ∗Φ∗) = tr

based on other criteria, such as maintaining PAPR across the
transmission sequence. Hence, ˜z must be a known vector of
symbols chosen from the same constellation as z, with the
same statistical properties.
ι(W)
=
XΦ

Vr
W − VrD
  z
˜z

=
X

V
W − VrD

"
⃗φ1z
⃗φ2˜z
#
=
XVr ⃗φ1z + X (W − VrD) ⃗φ2˜z
(8)
We can expand and rewrite W − Vr (V ∗W) in the form
of (I − Vc)W, where I is the identity matrix and Vc is a
Nt x Nt matrix given by
Vc[i, j] =
X
k
Vr[i, k]Vr[j, k]∗
(9)
We substitute this back into (8) to get
ι(W, ˜z) = XVr ⃗φ1z + X (I − Vc) W ⃗φ2˜z
(10)
IV. CONSTRAINED INTERFERENCE MINIMIZATION
Minimizing the interference directly can be written as
minimizing ∥I(W)∥ where I is given in (10) The most direct
way to do this is to make ∥ι(W)∥ is 0. From (10), this leads
to selecting W, φ such that W = (I −Vc)−1Vr and adjusting
φ1, φ2 suitably. However, it can easily be seen that (I − Vc)
is ill-conditioned, having Nt − Nr eigenvalues near zero, so
it cannot be directly inverted. This may also be true for X
and X(I − Vc). Also, as noted in Section III-E, we have to
balance the interference with power constraints as well.
In the simplest approach, we jointly minimize both
ι(w) = ∥I(W)∥2 as well as ∥F∥P . Φ can then be scaled so
as to maximize the transmit power of entire transmission,
subject to the power constraint given in (6).
We note that the expression for ι(w) is equivalent to min-
imizing the norm of the vector sum XVrz+X (I − Vc) W ˜z.
In general, we can solve equations of this nature iteratively
by doing a linear search around the existing gradient. Since
z will change for every sub-carrier, we need to eliminate
the dependence on it. Hence, we choose an orthogonal
transformation ˜z = Mz, where M is an orthonormal matrix.
As is usual in convex optimization problems, we replace
the constraint by a log-barrier function with a multiplier µ,
which can be iteratively adjusted for each optimization step
to ensure that the power bound is met.
Minimize
∥XVr + X (I − Vc) WM∥
subject to
∥(I − Vc)W∥F P ≤ Pm
≡ Minimize
∥XVr + X (I − Vc) WM∥
−
µ log (Pm − ∥(I − Vc)W∥F P ) (11)
The gradient of an expression of the nature ∥Y +H.W.M∥
where Y, W, H, M are matrices of the appropriate dimen-
sions can be computed by noting that
∂Tr [AX∗B]
∂X
= BA,
∂Tr [AXB]
∂X
=
A∗B∗
We can expand Y as
∥Y
+
HWM∥ = Tr (Y + HWM) (Y + HWM)∗
=
Tr(Y Y ∗) + Tr (Y (HWM)∗)
+
Tr (Y ∗HWM) + Tr (HWM(HWM)∗)
Substituting, we get
⇒ ∂∥Y + HWM∥
∂W
= 2H∗Y M ∗ + 2H∗MM ∗W ∗H∗
Similarly, the derivative of the log-barrier term becomes
dW2 = −(W ∗(I − Vc)∗(I − Vc))
Pm − ∥(I − Vc)W∥F P
The optimization procedure hence consists of the follow-
ing steps. We start with the knowledge of X and Vr. For W
we do the following steps
1) Start with W = 0, which is a feasible starting point.
2) Compute the corresponding matrix D = V ∗
r W and
the interference vector ι(W)
3) Compute the gradient matrix dW = ∂|ι(W)|
∂W
+ µdW2
4) Find the maximal linear step size γ, such that W ←
W +γdW improves the interference without violating
the power constraint.
5) if γ > minimum step size, go to 2, else terminate
6) Set φ accordingingly.
It is clear that the outcome of this operation depends on
the relative orthogonality of X∗Vr. We deﬁne the normalized
metric
γ = Tr(X∗Vr)
Tr (X∗X)
If γ −→ 0, the effectiveness of interference cancellation will
correspondingly go up.
V. NETWORK WIDE PERFORMANCE - THEORETICAL
ANALYSIS
We now consider the performance of the ANF in a net-
work wide environment and present the simulation results.
We simulate a single network node transmitting to one
target UE with 2 receive antennae Nr = 2. The transmitter
has 4 antennae Nt = 4, with the remaining two antennae
dedicated to ANF. The overall maximum power available to
be diverted to the cause of ANF is an optimization variable
η. Each co-resident UE is modelled as a single antenna re-
ceiver with statistically independent channel matrix, known
to the network node. The output metric γ is the ratio of the
interference energy received at the coresident UEs divided
by the interference energy if there had been no ANF, i.e.,
W = 0.
η
=
Pm
Pt
(12)
γ
=
∥ι(W opt)∥
∥ι(0)∥
(13)
The results for η = 2dB and η = 3dB are given in
Figure 2a and 2b, respectively. It can be seen that for a single
coresident UE, 80% of the cases the interference suppression
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Interference suppression (dB)
Interference Suppression using Active Null Forming
2dB power diversion
nUEs=1
nUEs=2
nUEs=4
nUEs=6
nUEs=8
(a). Case 1: 2dB pwr diversion
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Interference suppression (dB)
Interference Suppression using Active Null Forming
3dB power diversion
nUEs=1
nUEs=2
nUEs=4
nUEs=6
nUEs=8
(b). Case 2: 3dB pwr diversion
Figure 2. Simulation Results
is better than 10dB and in the top 50% it is better than 20dB.
The cases where a single coresident UE cannot be improved
is where its channel matrix is very close that of the target UE
As the number of UEs increase, the maximum improvement
drops; however, as we can see, even in the case of 8 co-
resident UEs, we get a 10dB interference suppression by
diverting 2-3dB of power for the ANF purpose.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have demonstrated a novel technique for
utilization of multi-user and distributed antennae equipment
in the network by directed interference cancellation. Our
algorithm demonstrates large improvements in SINR and
consequently resource utilization for 1,2 4 and 8 UEs. In the
future, we shall explore more complicated network scenarios
and feedback conditions
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Spencer, C. Peel, A. Swindlehurst, and M. Haardt, “An introduc-
tion to the multi-user MIMO downlink,” Communications Magazine,
IEEE, vol. 42, no. 10, Oct 2004, pp. 60–67.
[2] A. Saha, “Active null forming,” in Advanced Technology Conference
2015, Proceedings of the, October 2015.
[3] W. Yu and J. Ciofﬁ, “Sum capacity of Gaussian vector broadcast
channels,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 50, no. 9,
Sept 2004, pp. 1875–1892.
[4] S. Zhou, T. Zhao, Z. Niu, and S. Zhou, “Software-deﬁned hyper-
cellular architecture for green and elastic wireless access,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 1, Jan 2016, pp. 12–19.
[5] Y.-N. R. Li, J. Li, W. Li, Y. Xue, and H. Wu, “CoMP and interference
coordination in heterogeneous network for lte-advanced,” in Globe-
com Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2012 IEEE, Dec 2012, pp. 1107–1111.
[6] S. Sun, Q. Gao, Y. Peng, Y. Wang, and L. Song, “Interference
management through CoMP in 3gpp lte-advanced networks,” Wireless
Communications, IEEE, vol. 20, no. 1, February 2013, pp. 59–66.
[7] W. Yu, D. Varodayan, and J. Ciofﬁ, “Trellis and convolutional
precoding for transmitter-based interference presubtraction,” Commu-
nications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 53, no. 7, July 2005, pp. 1220–
1230.
[8] G. Caire and S. Shamai, “On the achievable throughput of a mul-
tiantenna Gaussian broadcast channel,” Information Theory, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 49, no. 7, July 2003, pp. 1691–1706.
[9] Q. Spencer, A. Swindlehurst, and M. Haardt, “Zero-forcing methods
for downlink spatial multiplexing in multiuser MIMO channels,”
Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52, no. 2, Feb 2004,
pp. 461–471.
[10] V. SStankovic and M. Haardt, “Generalized design of multi-user
MIMO precoding matrices,” Wireless Communications, IEEE Trans-
actions on, vol. 7, no. 3, 2008, pp. 953–961.
[11] R. Zhang, “Cooperative multi-cell block diagonalization with per-
base-station power constraints,” Selected Areas of Communication,
IEEE Journal on, vol. 28, no. 9, 2010, pp. 1435–1445.
[12] Z. Shen, R. Chen, J. Andrews, R. Heath, and B. Evans, “Sum capacity
of multiuser MIMO broadcast channels with block diagonalization,”
Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on, June 2007.
[13] W. Yu, W. Rhee, S. Boyd, and J. Ciofﬁ, “Iterative water-ﬁlling for
Gaussian vector multiple access channels,” Information Theory, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 50, no. 1, Jan 2004, pp. 145–152.
[14] S. Serbetli and A. Yener, “Transceiver optimization for multiuser
MIMO systems,” Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52,
no. 1, Jan 2004, pp. 214–226.
[15] S. Vishwanath, N. Jindal, and A. Goldsmith, “Duality, achievable
rates, and sum-rate capacity of Gaussian MIMO broadcast channels,”
Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 49, no. 10, Oct 2003,
pp. 2658–2668.
[16] C. Ng and H. Huang, “Linear precoding in cooperative MIMO
cellular networks with limited coordination clusters,” Selected Areas
in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 28, no. 9, December 2010,
pp. 1446–1454.
[17] A. Manolakos, Y. Noam, and A. Goldsmith, “Null space learning in
cooperative MIMO cellular networks using interference feedback,”
Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 14, no. 7, July
2015, pp. 3961–3977.
[18] W. Feng, Y. Li, S. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Xia, “Downlink capacity of
distributed antenna systems in a multi-cell environment,” in Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference, 2009. WCNC 2009.
IEEE, April 2009, pp. 1–5.
[19] T. Yoo and A. Goldsmith, “On the optimality of multiantenna broad-
cast scheduling using zero-forcing beamforming,” Selected Areas in
Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 24, no. 3, March 2006, pp.
528–541.
[20] H. Sampath, P. Stoica, and A. Paulraj, “Generalized linear precoder
and decoder design for MIMO channels using the weighted mmse
criterion,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 49, no. 12,
2001, pp. 2198–2206.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

