On Techno-Economic Optimization of Non-Public Networks for Industrial 5G 
Applications 
 
Jyrki Penttinen 
Syniverse Technologies 
Atlanta, GA, USA 
email: jyrki.penttinen@outlook.com 
Jari Collin 
Telia Company 
Helsinki, Finland 
email: jari.collin@telia.com 
Jarkko Pellikka 
Nokia 
Helsinki, Finland 
email: jarkko.pellikka@nokia.com 
 
Abstract—Non-Public Networks (NPN), or Private Networks, 
are gaining traction in commercial deployments as they provide 
benefits to many verticals. The technical base of the NPN is being 
developed in 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), and the 
currently available models can already be deployed providing 
ecosystem multiple options to set up the services basing on various 
mobile communication generations. This paper discusses the 
current state of the art of the standardized NPN solutions focusing 
on Fifth Generation of mobile communications (5G), and 
evaluates their applicability to industrial applications. This paper 
also discusses the ecosystem needs and respective gaps in the 
models considering selected industrial use cases. Through 
available references on experiences and deployment scenarios, this 
paper evaluates some of the key aspects that can impact NPN 
model selection related to Industrial IoT scenarios, and proposes 
ways to assess NPN techno-economic aspects. 
Keywords—NPN; private network; 5G deployment modeling; 
NPN optimization; network planning 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A Non-Public Network (NPN), referred also to as Private 
Network, provides network services in isolated environment. It 
can base on cellular networks or other wireless technologies, and 
it does not depend on numbering of regulated Public Land 
Mobile Networks (PLMN). 5G NPN refers to a 3GPP cellular 
system to deliver its capabilities for NPN use cases, such as 
businesses and municipalities. The 5G NPN can reside partially 
or completely in physical premises of an organization using it, 
e.g., within a factory or campus area, so that an external entity 
separate from a Mobile Network Operator (MNO) assumes the 
responsibilities of the isolated part offering its services to a 
limited group. NPN does not typically allow inbound roamers, 
although the NPN users may have roaming capabilities to use 
other PLMNs. The benefits of NPN deployment include the 
possibility to control the Quality of Service (QoS) and protection 
by isolation. NPN service can include voice connectivity in 
defined geographical area, or it can focus on Internet of Things 
(IoT) and respective industrial applications; today, there are 
many test projects and commercial setups involving industrial 
devices [1]. 
This paper explores the applicability of NPNs for Industrial 
5G applications. Industrial 5G refers to Industrial Internet of 
Things (IIoT) with real-time data of networked sensors, assets, 
objects, and people, 5G network and edge computing enabling 
ultra-reliable, low-latency, and high-bandwidth communication. 
The presented model is aimed to provide means to evaluate 
the feasibility of available private network deployment models 
considering key requirements of use cases of interest. The model 
supports high-level techno-economic assessment, although its 
limitation is that it considers rather generic parameters. Along 
with practical experiences, the model and its use can be 
developed further to better reflect the realities. 
This paper introduces the standardization of private network 
landscape in Section II, and summarizes the key architectures of 
the available 3GPP models in Section III. Section IV discusses 
private network deployment models including 3GPP and other 
relevant options highlighting their key aspects. Section V 
summarizes the most important pros and cons of the presented 
private network variants, comparing their suitability in different 
scenarios. Section VI presents how techno-economic modeling 
can be applied in the selection of the most feasible variants, and 
Section VII summarizes the findings.  
II. STANDARDIZATION 
Private networks can be formed by a variety of technologies. 
To cope with the increased interest and demand, 3GPP has 
formed a set of standardized solutions based on mobile network 
technology, and industry bodies are considering guidelines for 
the actual deployment. 
A. 3GPP 
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has designed 
4G and 5G NPN specifications in Release 16 providing enablers 
for also Industrial 5G IoT. The areas include Time Sensitive 
Networking (TSN), NPN, and Local Area Network (LAN) type 
services. Release 17 and beyond evolve these aspects further. 
The 3GPP defines NPN in the Technical Specifications TS 
23.251 (architecture and functional description of network 
sharing), TS 22.104 (service requirements for cyber-physical 
control applications in vertical domains), and TS 23.501 (5G 
System architecture). 
B. Industry bodies 
The 5G-ACIA (5G Alliance for Connected Industries and 
Automation) summarizes industrial IoT deployment scenarios 
for 5G NPNs basing on 3GPP-defined 5G NPN [2]. It presents 
deployment models to complement their architectural design. 
Also, GSMA (GSM Association) considers NPN, and their 
guidelines provide overview to deploy 5G industry campus NPN 
by 3GPP definition, which is one of the key 5G concepts to 
support “to business” models (2B) [3]. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

III. 5G NPN STANDARD ARCHITECTURES 
As per the 3GPP Release 16 definitions, an NPN enables 
deployment of 5G System (5GS) for private use. The NPN can 
be deployed as a Stand-alone Non-Public Network (SNPN) or 
Public Network Integrated NPN (PNI-NPN). An NPN operator 
manages SNPN without relying on the functions of a PLMN, 
whereas PNI-NPN deployment depends on those [4]. 
Figure 1 depicts NPN variants as interpreted from [3], [2]. 
 
 
Figure 1 3GPP and 5G-ACIA NPN variants. 
A. SNPN 
The SNPN uses combined PLMN Identifier (PLMN ID) and 
Network Identifier (NID). 5G User Equipment (UE) supporting 
SNPN can attach to it based on 5G Subscriber’s Permanent 
Identifier (SUPI) and credentials. The Radio Access Network 
(RAN) of SNPN broadcasts the combined PLMN ID and NID 
in the System Broadcast Information and supports network 
selection and re-selection, load and access control, and barring. 
The NIDs can be self-assigned individually to the SNPN NIDs 
upon its deployment. The active NIDs may not be unique, but 
they use different numbering space than the other scenario, 
coordinated NID-assignment, that can have either 1) globally 
unique NID-assignment independent of the respective PLMN 
ID; or 2) globally unique NID/PLMN ID combination. 
B. PNI-NPN 
The PNI-NPN uses PLMN ID whereas Closed Access 
Group Identity (CAG ID) indicates the CAG -enabled 5G radio 
cells. Within a PLMN, a CAG cell can broadcast one or more 
CAG IDs, in which case PLMN ID is the base for the network 
selection and reselection whereas the network uses CAG ID for 
the cell selection and re-selection, as well as for the control for 
letting only CAG-enabled UEs access the network. 
C. Implementation aspects 
As depicted in Figure 1, these two options result in practical 
scenarios of isolated deployment of standalone non-public 
network (1) or non-public network in conjunction with public 
networks. The latter breaks down into three scenarios including 
the Industrial and IoT environment: Shared radio access 
network (2); Shared radio access network and control plane (3); 
and NPN hosted by the public network (4) [2]. 
• SNPN: the NPN is separated from the public network and all 
network functions reside inside the organization’s premises. 
The possible communication between the NPN and the 
public network takes place via a firewall, e.g., through Non-
3GPP Interworking Function (N3IWF). 
• Shared radio access network: the NPN and public network 
share part of the radio access network as per the 3GPP TS 
23.251. The communication stays within NPN. 
• Shared radio access network and control plane: the NPN and 
the public network share the RAN for the defined premises 
while the public network does the network control tasks, the 
NPN traffic remaining within the premises. Network slicing 
or 3GPP Access Point Name (APN) can realize this case. 
• PLMN-hosted NPN: the enterprise is served by a Network 
Slice (NS). 
IV. NPN DEPLOYMENT MODELS 
A. Standalone NPN 
Figure 2 depicts the principle of SNPN as interpreted from 
[2], [5]. In this scenario, the User Plane Function (UPF) works 
as a data router to connect Multi-access Edge Cloud (MEC) and 
possible LAN. The RAN manages the connectivity of 5G gNB 
(next generation Node B) and UE of the SNPN users on licensed 
or unlicensed band. 5G Core (5GC) houses the NFs including 
UDM (Unified Data Management for user credentials). 
In this model, the Network Functions (NF) reside within the 
operational area of related entity, such as factory, the SNPN 
being an isolated network from the PLMN. This allows 
communication between the PLMN and NPN through an 
optional firewall which isolates the NPN so that Operational 
Technology (OT) company can operate the NPN and its 
services, including the NPN IDs to have additional PLMN 
services in the NPN coverage area, NPN-subscribers to roam the 
public networks, and public networks’ subscribers to roam the 
NPN depending on roaming agreement. NPN users may also 
have dual subscription for the PLMN use. 
An example of the NPN 5G deployment on IIoT scenarios is 
the interconnection with TSN as per 3GPP TS 24.519. TSN is a 
set of new open standards that provide deterministic, reliable, 
high-bandwidth, low-latency communication [6]. 
 
 
Figure 2 Principle of a SNPN. 
The standalone private network can be built in various ways: 
by dedicated Service Level Assurance (SLA), local PLMN, 
PLMN by dedicated proportion of operator’s licensed spectrum, 
or by SNPN using unlicensed or private spectrum. 
Each deployment model has their pros and cons. As an 
example, licensed spectrum is one of the most expensive single 
items in the commercial network. Feasible way to set up this 
type of network is to construct mm-Wave radio access points in 
a limited enterprise area and virtualized cloud core functions in 
nearby edge, one option being a broker managing the NPN [7]. 
B. Shared RAN 
Shared RAN involves NPN and PLMN with certain part of 
its RAN for joint use whereas other network functions remain 
5G SNPN
5G NPN
5G PNI-NPN
NPN shared 
RAN
NPN shared 
RAN and 
Control 
Plane
Isolated 
RAN and 
CN
❶
❷
NPN hosted 
by public 
network
❸
❹
SNPN of enterprise
UDM
5GC
SNPN
SNPN
UE
MEC
gNB
a) Unlicensed RF band (enterprise-built)
or
b) Licensed RF band (MNO-built)
❶
UPF
LAN
SNPN
UE
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

separated. Figure 3 depicts the principle of this model showing 
the connectivity of the NPN RAN to PLMN core while the own 
core network of the NPN is isolated from the external world as 
interpreted from [2], [3], [8]. In this deployment model, NPN 
traffic stays internal and within the logical, defined area, such as 
factory premises. 
The 3GPP TS 23.251 details the network sharing model in 
its architectural and functional description and scenarios for 
network sharing usable also in NPN environment, which are 
Gateway Core Network (GWCN) and Multi-Operator Core 
Network (MOCN) [9]. 
 
 
Figure 3 Shared RAN NPN deployment. The grey area indicates 
the private network slice that forms the NPN. 
C. Shared RAN and Control Plane 
As depicted in Figure 4, interpreted from [2], [3], [8], in this 
deployment, both NPN and PLMN share the RAN within 
defined business area premises and PLMN takes care of the 
control plane so that the internal NPN traffic stays always within 
the logical network related to the business. Network Slicing is 
one way to set up this scenario as it creates logically independent 
networks within a shared physical infrastructure. The isolation 
of the private network portion is possible by using unique NS 
identifiers. 
 
 
Figure 4 Deployment for shared RAN with control plane. The 
grey area indicates the private network slice that forms the NPN. 
Using APN, as defined by 3GPP, is another way to 
implement this scenario. In this case, the APN indicates the 
target network with opportunity to differentiate traffic. 
In the shared RAN scenario with shared control plane, the 
PLMN hosts the NPN so that the devices are a subset of PLMN 
subscribers. This arrangement eases the contractual aspects of 
PLMN and NPN operators, and the NPN devices can connect, 
apart from the NPN itself, also to the PLMN services and 
roaming. The NPN services may connect to PLMN services, 
which requires optional interface between the NPN and PLMN 
services, so NPN devices can connect to NPN services via the 
PLMN if the device is located outside of the NPN coverage and 
still within the PLMN. Logically, if the NPN devices can access 
the PLMN services, this interface is not needed. 
D. PLMN-Hosted NPN 
In this case, as depicted in Figure 5 and interpreted from [2], 
[3], [8], thanks to the network virtualization and cloudification, 
both the PLMN and NPN traffic are external to the business area. 
This means that these traffic flows are served by different 
networks, and the NPN subscribers are in fact public network 
subscribers. The NPN-PLMN roaming implementation is 
straightforward as the traffic routes via the PLMN. 
 
 
Figure 5 PLMN-hosted NPN. The grey area indicates the private 
network slice that forms the NPN. 
E. Private network on Network Slice 
Although the differentiation between certain user types is 
possible in 4G networks, it is limited to techniques, such as the 
isolation of services in a common infrastructure; the means for 
this include APN Routing, MOCN, and Dedicated Core 
Network (DECOR) [10]. Built upon Service Based Architecture 
(SBA), which enables the use of common hardware that 
executes the Network Functions as instances, 5G has been 
designed to support also network slicing with respective QoS 
assurance. In this manner, the Network Slice Provider (NSP) can 
offer suitable characteristics within their different NSs fulfilling 
variety of different requirements for their subscribed verticals, 
also in NPN environment. NS provides means to differentiate 
the network resources and performance figures that can create 
also new business models. As an example, the operator can offer 
their customers gold, silver, and bronze categories, each having 
their personalized NS price and QoS levels [11]. The NSP can 
be either MNO or 3rd party. Technically, the NSP could be also 
enterprise taken their skillset suffices to manage slices. 
In NS-based NPN, it is important to adequately interpret the 
end-user requirements. GSMA provides guidelines for NS setup 
based on requirements [12], and clarifies how the requirements 
can be captured from the vertical field [11]. 
NSs are not yet used widely in commercial Standalone (SA) 
5G networks, despite of the forecast indicating about 25% use 
base in 5G by 2025 [13], [14]. Furthermore, the optimal NS 
functionality in practice, especially in the end-to-end scenarios, 
might require still further development to cope with the impacts 
of real-world non-idealities in synchronization, near real-time 
orchestration, and overall management of the slices. 
F. Open RAN as a Private Network 
Open RAN refers to the overall movement of the telecom 
industry to disaggregate hardware and software to create 
respective open interfaces in between [15]. O-RAN Alliance 
publishes RAN specifications, releases open software for the 
NPN of enterprise
UDM
MNO
PLMN
5GC
PNI-NPN, RAN sharing
PLMN
UE
NPN
UE
gNB
DN
UPF
MEC
UPF
UDM
5GC
MEC
LAN
PNI-NPN, RAN and control plane sharing
NPN of enterprise
UDM
MNO
PLMN
5GC
PLMN
UE
NPN
UE
gNB
DN
UPF
MEC
UPF
MEC
❸
LAN
PNI-NPN, RAN and core sharing by end-to-end network slicing
NPN of enterprise
UDM
MNO
PLMN
5GC
PLMN
UE
NPN
UE
gNB
DN
UPF
MEC
LAN
❹
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

RAN, and supports O-RAN Alliance members in integration 
and implementation testing. O-RAN Alliance works on open, 
interoperable interfaces, RAN virtualization, and big data 
enabled RAN intelligence [15], [16]. Open RAN may offer 
feasible possibility to form small-scale, isolated shared RAN 
networks also in a form of NPN. The concept is still evolving, 
though, and may not provide optimal techno-economic solutions 
soon; nevertheless, as the technology matures, Open RAN may 
offer competitive 4G and 5G NPN variants. 
G. Legacy network as a service 
Increasing number of incumbent MNOs have switched off 
their 2G and/or 3G legacy mobile communications networks, or 
are aiming to sunset them soon. Nevertheless, there will remain 
scenarios involving IoT and voice services via legacy systems 
especially in developing markets. According to GSMA 
statistics, the 2G and 3G systems represent combined still more 
than 20% of the global footprint in 2025 [14]. This can be a niche 
opportunity to manage part of this lessening infrastructure on the 
remaining spectrum, maintaining 
a minimum feasible 
infrastructure for IoT and other 2G/3G services via private 
networks for verticals needing only low capacity. 
H. Local and Fixed Wireless Access (FWA) 
The LTE-WLAN Aggregation (LWA) as per 3GPP Release 
13 allows mobile device configuring on simultaneous LTE and 
Wi-Fi links [17]. 5G can work also in parallel with non-3GPP 
accesses to comply with a light-weight private networks’ need. 
3GPP Release 15 defines Non-3GPP Interworking Function 
(N3IWF) allowing Wi-Fi access points delivered via 5G 
infrastructure as Wi-Fi hotspots or Fixed Wireless Access 
(FWA). The Release 16 defines further Residential Gateways 
(RG) to interconnect end-users’ devices via trusted access 
points. These gateways complement the N3IWF. 
FWA can provide solution to variety of use cases, such as 
tethering and Mobile Broadband (MBB), best effort FWA, and 
speed-based QoS [18]. Reflecting these use cases, the FWA 
could serve as a small-scale home office solution, too, with 
quick and economic deployment without need for optic fiber. 
I. Non-3GPP wireless private network 
Technically, it is possible to set up a simple private network 
using any wireless access beyond the 3GPP specifications on 
unlicensed, shared spectrum. An example of this is a Wi-Fi 
hotspot network using common applications within the network 
providing Over the Top (OTT) voice and messaging. Also, Low 
Power Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) can provide a feasible 
communications channel to many IIoT use cases. 
V. CONSIDERATIONS OF SCENARIOS 
The feasibility of each NPN deployment depends on the 
foreseen use cases. As an example, the roaming requirements 
impact the needed coverage and mobility of the end-users of the 
NPN. This is one of the examples that can dictate the selection 
between Standalone and PLMN-assisted scenarios. 
A. SNSP deployment 
The main aspects of the previously presented deployment 
models for SNPN scenarios are summarized in the following 
list, with statements on their suitability for selected use cases. 
5G SNPN. OT operates the NPN and its services behind a 
firewall independently. Provides good security isolation, e.g., to 
IIoT applications as data is not exposed externally. Optional 
PLMN interconnectivity via firewall. The operation and 
management of SNPN requires sufficient skillset from OT 
company. Provides the opportunity to build a very secure 
environment, but can be more expensive than only partially 
owned, or completely outsourced network. 
5G SNPN with SLA. The agreed SLA level impacts the 
business case; the higher the SLA, more costly the CAPEX and 
OPEX due to, e.g., active-active network mode and reliability 
of, e.g., 99.999% as per 3GPP Rel 15 URLLC performance, or 
up to 99.9999% as per Release 16 performance for, e.g., TSN 
interconnectivity to serve critical IIoT applications. 
PLMN with local infrastructure. This is a special case of 
PLMN that isolates part of the infrastructure and spectrum to a 
sole use of private network devices in limited geographical area. 
It can be set up technically, e.g., by barring the access from 
others than specifically defined set of subscribers. 
PLMN on part of MNO’s licensed spectrum. Spectrum is 
typically very expensive investment for the license holder, so 
dedicating part of it needs to be designed carefully applying 
techno-economic optimization, in order to adequately balance 
the cost and expected quality. 
SA NPN on unlicensed spectrum. The radio deployment and 
RAN business case are light as there is no license fee involved. 
Nevertheless, the QoS cannot be ensured due to load of shared 
spectrum with possible other users. 
B. PNI-NPN deployment 
The following list summarizes key aspects of this model. 
NPN shared RAN. NPN and PLMN share part of the RAN, 
but the NPN communications stay within the defined premises. 
3GPP defines well the technical RAN sharing options that can 
be applied in this model. 
NPN shared RAN and CP. NPN and PLMN share the RAN 
for the defined premises while the PLMN has network control; 
the NPN traffic remains within the defined premises. Network 
slicing serves this model as per 3GPP specifications, 
complemented by industry forums’ guidelines for slice template 
setup. Alternatively, the setup can be based on APN. 
NPN hosted by public network. PLMN and NPN traffic are 
external to the business area so that these traffic flows are served 
by different networks, and the NPN subscribers are effectively 
public network subscribers. 
C. Pros and Cons of deployment models 
a) SNPN 
• Pros: access for customization, independent controlling; high 
security by full isolation; RAN functions are within reduced 
geographical area favoring low-latency applications. 
• Cons: deployment cost; expertise required for deployment. 
Dedicated network for sole enterprise includes the cost of the 
whole system in the geographic area. 
b) Shared RAN 
• Pros: optimizes RAN infrastructure costs while the internal 
data remains within the NPN infrastructure providing good 
protection; PLMN RAN connectivity serves for delivering 
the data meant for outside of the NPN as per need. Within 
the NPN, part of the base stations can be connected to PLMN 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

according to the RAN sharing agreement between the PLMN 
and NPN operators while the rest can be kept internal. 
Licensed spectrum copes interferences; deployment less 
expensive compared to SNPN; uses typically local functions 
favoring low-latency applications. 
• Cons: external interferences can be higher than in SNPN, and 
the overall control of the network is less independent; need 
for local expertise, although less than in SNSP. 
c) Shared RAN and CP 
• Pros: licensed spectrum for controlled interferences; lower 
deployment expenses compared to SNPN and PNI-NPN; 
SLA can be applied between the NPN and public network. 
• Cons: less independent from public networks; latency 
typically higher than in SNSP and PNI-NPN deployments; 
some local expertise required. 
d) Hosted solution (Network Slicing by NSP/MNO) 
• 
Pros: facilitated by NSP, no need for local expertise; fast to 
set up and adjust based on expressed requirements. 
• 
Cons: less control for adjustments as the NS is managed by 
the NSP; technology not yet final, practical deployments 
require SA 5G network that are not yet many in markets. 
e) Open RAN as an NPN service 
• 
Pros: the cost can be low; easy to set up by provider; can be 
hosted as “light-weight” 5G SNPN or NPI-NSN. 
• 
Cons: technology is still evolving and the realistic products 
for Open RAN -based NPN can take time. 
f) 5G FWA (home office use case) 
• 
Pros: Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) easy to install; 
replaces fixed cabling. 
• 
Cons: use case adequate in a home office environment, but 
limited for larger enterprise NPN use. 
g) Non-5G-based solutions (Wi-Fi hotspots) 
• Pros: Wi-Fi hotspot deployment is rather straightforward 
within an enterprise area. The radio coverage does not 
require license, and it can also be extended to reach any Wi-
Fi device external to the enterprise premises. 
• Cons: low security, limited mobility, and lack of QoS. 
h) LPWAN 
• 
Pros: many options available basing on both cellular and 
non-cellular radio technologies. Cellular-based LPWANs 
are services integrated to system, easy to deploy. 
• 
Cons: non-3GPP-based LPWANs have varying security and 
protection levels, and they require a separate infrastructure. 
VI. TECHNO-ECONOMIC OPTIMIZATION MODELING ASPECTS 
A. Current deployment models 
Each NPN deployment model has their advantages and 
disadvantages. Understanding the requirements of the use cases, 
and applying tecno-economic optimization assessment that 
considers the key variables, the selection of the most adequate 
deployment model will benefit favorable business. 
In the selection of the deployment model, the task is to 
understand the realistic needs of the final users of the NPN 
access, performance, security aspects, mobility, capacity, QoS, 
and other key factors, and how they can be served by applying 
cost-efficient technical solutions. It is important to understand 
also the changing requirements in the foreseen future because 
along with the evolution of the environment, originally selected, 
initially optimal model, can turn out to be less optimal in longer 
term. 
As described in [11], related to NS scenarios, the collection 
of the verticals’ requirements can be done via practical means to 
interpret the needs of the end-users. From the operators’ 
perspective, this can be somewhat challenging task as the 
verticals may often express their requirements using non-
standard terminology, or are not able to formulate the actual 
requirements. The methodology in [11], despite its original 
focus on NS, can be useful to be extended to cover additional 
aspects the other NPN deployment models. This methodology 
suits to interpret practical vertical needs based on the foreseen 
use cases, and to form technical requirements that can be finally 
be mapped to represent input parameters for the NPN modeling, 
whether it is about tailored 5G NS template for which the GSMA 
PRD NG.116 serves as a base, more “traditional” standalone 
NPN setup, or shared network model. The aim of the 
requirement list is to ensure the common understanding of the 
environment, and set the expectations also for service level. 
B. On further techno-economic optimization 
The assumption of the modeling is that the NPN is a business 
between an entity capable of deploying adequate wireless 
network (such as MNO, NSP, network equipment vendor, or 
system integrator) and an enterprise desiring to facilitate the 
mobile 
communications 
for 
their 
end-users 
in 
their 
communications via Industry IoT applications (such as port or 
energy company monitoring and controlling their workflow via 
intelligent sensor network). 
The model for the selection of the most adequate NPN 
deployment option can build upon modular elements, which are: 
• Interpretation of the enterprise and end-user needs (e.g., via 
survey) to form technical requirements statement as a base 
for the input parameters; e.g., capacity (number of expected 
users/devices), coverage, QoS, need for roaming/local-only 
utilization; and services (IoT, voice, other). 
• Business aspects assessment (understanding possibility for 
investment in terms of CAPEX and OPEX; flexibility for 
initial and longer-term investments). 
• Forecast of today’s, near-future, and longer-term outlook for 
the possible need for expansion of the network, capacity, and 
evolving QoS (which is important to avoid investing to 
multiple types of NPN as the requirements evolve). 
• Any other relevant information on the deployment aspects. 
The assessment of the feasibility of the deployment options 
relevant to the scenario under evaluation can be carried out 
based on these results in a comparative manner. The base for the 
economic assessment is the cost for enterprise in terms of the 
CAPEX (initial deployment and forecasted posterior need for 
new infrastructure investments) and OPEX (yearly cost in order 
to operate NPN). The cost estimate of each scenario presented 
in the NPN Deployment Models Section considers the key 
attributes, such as area of deployment, device number (total 
expense xd), and radio performance indicators, which together 
result in the required bandwidth and number of radio cells, and 
finally in the total cost of cells xgnb. As an example, in very high 
data rate scenario requiring large indoor and outdoor NPN, the 
number of mm-Wave small cells, each resulting in, e.g., 80-100 
m cell range, can be in order of dozens per km2. Other attributes 
consider the cost of transmission network xtn, and spectrum xs. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

For the core network, the cost includes the licenses and other 
cost items to activate the needed network functions NF xnf. Cost 
of the needed applications / services xa refers to the support of, 
e.g., voice service (that requires either own or outsourced IMS 
core for integrated Voice over New Radio) and IoT service 
license, and Location Based Services (LBS) deployment. 
Roaming and interconnectivity cost xr is related to the 
agreements with national and international networks. 
The cost xv of other variable items can include, e.g., the 
actual installation of RAN, Transmission Network (TN), and 
Core Network (CN) equipment or cloud environment, including 
antenna systems, base station shields, cabling, and any other 
expense that is required to set up the NPN for enterprise. 
For the estimate of yearly operating costs y, the same main 
components as presented in CAPEX analysis generate expenses, 
such as licensing fees and electricity consumption, whereas an 
additional item to be considered in operations is the maintenance 
cost ym. The resulting Equations for the initial costs (1) and 
operating costs (2) are thus 
 
𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋 = 𝑥𝑔𝑛𝑏 + 𝑥𝑡𝑛 + 𝑥𝑠 + 𝑥𝑎 + 𝑥𝑑 + 𝑥𝑣
+ 𝑥𝑟 + ∑ 𝑥𝑛𝑓
𝑛𝑓𝑛
𝑛𝑓1
 
(1) 
 
𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋 = 𝑦𝑚 + 𝑦𝑔𝑛𝑏 + 𝑦𝑡𝑛 + 𝑦𝑠 + 𝑦𝑎 + 𝑦𝑑 + 𝑦𝑣
+ 𝑦𝑟 + ∑ 𝑦𝑛𝑓
𝑛𝑓𝑛
𝑛𝑓1
 
(2) 
 
It should be noted that the variables in Equations (1) and (2) 
can have non-linear inter-dependencies; as an example, the 
volume discount of the number of radio cells can also lower the 
relative cost of core software and cloud feature licensing. 
The assessment results in a statement of the suitability of 
deployment scenarios to indicate their level of compliance with 
the requirements. This method can be visualized in terms of the 
total cost per area as a function of time, considering attributes of 
interest, such as maximum supported device number or 
maximum data rate. The method serves thus to estimate the 
initial and longer-term cost of each deployment model under 
evaluation; it is possible, that the initially most cost-efficient 
option might turn out to be less optimal in longer run. 
C. Return on Investment 
The described modeling can be extended to estimate Return 
on Investment (RoI) of private network, including the business 
of MNO, enterprise, or 3rd party. The RoI depends on the 
deployment and operational costs, share of ownership of private 
network components (hardware, software) versus outsourced 
items (e.g., 5G core that runs in virtualized environment served 
by cloud provider) in different deployment scenarios of interest, 
the generated savings compared to reference deployment 
scenario (as an example, enterprise can compare MNO-operated 
scenario against completely or partially enterprise-owned 
network), as well as potential earnings for different 
stakeholders. As an example, enterprise managing completely or 
partially owned private network, either on shared or own 
spectrum, could allow also additional users to roam into that 
network for a fee that depends on the data consumption or time.  
Although the pricing of network components is business 
between the vendors and customers and thus largely non-public 
information, it can be assumed that large entities investing to 
either own network infrastructure or outsourced solutions to 
provide the private network services to the end-users, may 
benefit from lower costs due to scale of economies compared to 
smaller entities. Nevertheless, the private network ecosystem is 
expected to grow significantly at present, so it can thus also be 
assumed that small and medium sized entities could reach 
fortified position for own network component price negotiation 
in their private network market, which also can impact 
positively on the pricing models. 
D. Expectations of the modeling 
As can be seen from Equations 1 and 2, the selected items 
result in a linear presentation for initial and operating costs. That 
said, the Equations represent snapshots of scenarios, and each 
parameter value may have either linear or non-linear behavior as 
a function of time, number of components, etc. As an example, 
the expense related to gNB can be either fixed per the number 
of gNBs, or there could be a volume-based discount granted by 
the vendor as a function of the number of gNBs. 
As can be expected, the values of the cost items in Equations 
1 and 2 depend on the markets, vendor pricing strategies, 
competitive landscape, and many more variables, so the further 
analysis of scenarios would be merely speculative without the 
availability of concrete parameter values. Nevertheless, an 
example of the potential possible behavior can be presented by 
testing different scenarios and cost estimates of the parameters 
to understand the business impact in short, mid, and long-term 
operation of a private network. 
The scenarios can be divided into following categories for 
the assessment of the total cost of a network, that a) is 
completely owned, partially owned, or completely outsourced 
ownership; b) uses licensed, shared, or unlicensed spectrum; c) 
has no roaming (completely isolated), or has inbound roaming, 
outbound roaming, or bilateral roaming. To complement the 
evaluation, additional criteria can be assessed, too, for validating 
the level of compliance for end-user requirements such as QoS, 
latency, maximum and average data rate, reliability, etc. The 
level of compliance of different scenarios can be compared by 
using numeric values and their weights of importance. 
Let us assume an enterprise desires to compare the techno-
economic feasibility of a) completely own and isolated small-
scale (10 mm-Wave gNBs), 5G network (SNPN) that is based 
on unlicensed 5 GHz spectrum and 5GC NFs on cloud, with b) 
MNO-operated private network that is based on an NS dedicated 
to the enterprise with gNBs that are already partially deployed 
for PLMN users in the area complemented by new, 5 additional 
indoor mm-Wave small cells in the enterprise’s operational 
premises. Figure 6 depicts an imaginary example of the relevant 
key expense behavior over time using the parameters of 
Equation 1 and 2 and certain estimated values so that they are 
normalized having the SNPN CAPEX as the reference at year 0. 
As can be seen from Figure 6, the initial cost of enterprise’s 
completely own network can be considerably higher than a 
subscription to an MNO’s NS-based service to form a private 
network due to required investments on the infrastructure. In this 
scenario, also the OPEX of the SNPN cumulates faster 
compared to the dedicated MNO NS due to maintenance and 
licensing expenses of the own network. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

This method provides the enterprise with a tool to estimate 
the cost difference of deployment models of interest over time 
and to assess whether certain model is acceptable for 
deployment regardless of projected, potentially higher cost to 
balance the key requirements of the enterprise considering, e.g., 
the level of independent network control and security. 
 
 
Figure 6 Example of the model’s outcome comparing SNPN 
(reference) and NS deployment scenarios. 
VII. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK OPPORTUNITIES 
NPN can serve many verticals and their use cases in a more 
optimal way than PLMN may be able to, to comply with special 
requirements for, e.g., hardened security by isolation, or high 
flexibility for network settings adjustment, for which the pros 
and cons of enterprise-owned vs. operators’ components need to 
be evaluated. There are variety of deployment and ownership 
models, so the assessment of the scenarios prior to business 
decisions for the most feasible deployment and ownership 
model is beneficial. 
This paper presents means for the assessment of the techno-
economic feasibility of NPN models and an imaginary example 
on the evaluation. For the model to perform adequately, insights 
on realistic OPEX and CAPEX values of the model’s parameters 
are important. Thus, feedback from NPN proof of concepts and 
trials serves to calibrate this modeling and helps identify and 
focus on the evaluation of the most essential cost items.  
The private networks are becoming reality, and they provide 
a functional base for many verticals and use cases to cope with 
special requirements. Stakeholders considering deployment and 
use of private networks benefit from adequate platform. As this 
study shows, even a relatively simple model can support the 
ecosystem to better understand the differences of the business 
cases related to a variety of private network models. 
 
REFERENCES  
[1]  GSMA, "Internet of Things," GSMA, [Online]. Available: 
https://www.gsma.com/iot/manufacturing/private-
networks/private-networks/. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[2]  5GACIA, "5G Non-Public Networks for Industrial Scenarios," 
5GACIA, July 2019. 
[3]  GSMA, "5G industry campus network deployment guideline," 
10 
November 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/wp-
content/uploads//NG.123-v1.0.pdf. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[4]  D. Chandramouli, "5G for Industry 4.0," 13 May 2020. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-
news/tsn-v-lan. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[5]  H. J. Son, "7 Deployment Scenarios of Private 5G Networks," 
NetManias, 
21 
October 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.netmanias.com/en/?m=view&id=blog&no=14500
. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[6]  5G-ACIA, "Integration of 5G with Time-Sensitive Networking 
for Industrial Communications," 5G-ACIA, 2021. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://5g-acia.org/whitepapers/integration-of-5g-
with-time-sensitive-networking-for-industrial-
communications/. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[7]  Syniverse, "Managing the Complexities of Connectivity for 
Enterprises and Operators," Syniverse, 24 March 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.syniverse.com/blog/connectivity/managing-the-
complexities-of-connectivity-for-enterprises-and-operators/. 
[Accessed 24 January 2023]. 
[8]  M. Dryjański, "Private 5G Networks – Technology, 
Architecture, and Deployment," Rimedo Labs, 4 January 2021. 
[Online]. Available: https://rimedolabs.com/blog/private-5g-
networks-technology-architecture-and-deployment/. [Accessed 
10 May 2023]. 
[9]  3GPP, "3GPP TS 23.251 Network Sharing; Architecture and 
functional description (Release 17)," 3GPP, March 2022. 
[10]  Samsung, "Technical whitepaper: network slicing," Samsung, 
2020. 
[11]  GSMA, "Network Slicing: North America's Perspective V1.0," 
GSMA, 
3 
August 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/wp-
content/uploads//NG.130-White-Paper-Network-Slicing-NA-
Perspective-1.pdf. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[12]  GSMA, "Generic Network Slice Template V 7.0," GSMA, 17 
June 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/wp-
content/uploads//NG.116-v7.0.pdf. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[13]  GSMA, "5G Global Launches & Statistics," GSMA, [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gsma.com/futurenetworks/ip_services/understandi
ng-5g/5g-innovation/. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[14]  GSMA, "Mobile economy report 2022," GSMA, 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/wp-
content/uploads/2022/02/280222-The-Mobile-Economy-
2022.pdf. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[15]  M. Shelton, "Open RAN Terminology," Parallel Wireless, 20 
April 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.parallelwireless.com/open-ran-terminology-
understanding-the-difference-between-open-ran-openran-oran-
and-more/. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[16]  O-RAN Alliance, "O-RAN: Towards an Open and Smart 
RAN," O-RAN Alliance, October 2018. 
[17]  Intel, "LTE-WLAN Aggregation (LWA): Benefits and 
Deployment Considerations," Intel, 2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/docume
nts/white-papers/lte-wlan-aggregation-deployment-paper.pdf. 
[Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
[18]  Ericsson, "Fixed Wireless Access handbook 2023 edition," 
2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.ericsson.com/en/fixed-
wireless-access. [Accessed 10 May 2023]. 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Normalized CAPEX (year 0) and cumulative OPEX
SNPN
NS
t (years)
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-068-1
AICT 2023 : The Nineteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

