SEC and Survival RSA Problem on EONs with Time-Varying Traffic 
Der-Rong Din 
Computer Science & Information Engineering 
National Changhua University of Education 
Changhua City, Taiwan, R. O. C. 
deron@cc.ncue.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—For serving time-varying traffic on an Elastic Optical 
Network (EON), the spectrum allocated for the connection 
request can be expanded or contracted to meet the traffic 
requirement. For the survival connection, both the primary 
and the backup lightpaths should be expanded/contracted at 
the same time. In this paper, the Spectrum Expansion/ 
Contraction (SEC) and Survival Routing and Spectrum 
Allocation (SRSA) problems on EONs with time-varying 
traffic for the dynamic case are studied. For each protecting 
scheme, two survival routing algorithms and the respective 
SEC operation are developed to solve it. These algorithms are 
examined through simulations and the results show that the 
proposed algorithms can achieve good results. 
Keywords- spectrum expansion/contraction; survival routing; 
routing and spectrum allocation; time-varying traffic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Elastic Optical Networks (EONs), which employs 
Optical-Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (O-
OFDM) technology, have been proposed to increase the 
flexibility of optical networks. The spectrum of a link in 
EONs is divided into Frequency Slots (FSs) and the 
necessary amount of consecutive FSs are assigned to support 
the connection request. Besides, more efficient spectrum 
allocation is achieved in these networks [1]. Specifically, a 
BW-variable 
O-OFDM 
transponder 
can 
assign 
an 
appropriate number of FSs to serve a lightpath [1]. 
In an optical network, each connection can be transmitted 
by an optical channel, which consists of a central frequency 
(CF) and a size. The size of the channel is determined by the 
requested bit-rate, the modulation technique applied, the 
(fixed) slice width, and the Guard Band (GB) introduced to 
separate two spectrum adjacent connections, among others. 
Due to the spectrum continuity constraint [1], the Routing 
and Spectrum Assignment (RSA) problem has emerged as 
the essential problem for spectrum management on EONs. 
For a given connection request, the goal of the RSA problem 
is to find a lightpath on the network and assign the required 
FSs. 
A. 
Time-Varying Traffic 
Several Spectrum Allocation (SA) schemes that change 
the bandwidth dynamically have been studied in [2][3]. A 
general policy to allocate FSs to time-varying traffic was 
presented in [3]. For time-varying traffic demands on EONs, 
there are three SA schemes of different levels of elasticity [3]. 
The elastic scheme [3], both the assigned central frequency 
and the size can be subject to change by performing 
Spectrum Expansion/Contraction (SEC) in each time interval, 
is the most efficient method [2].  Recently, several SEC 
schemes have been considered and the EONs enable to 
expand/contract slot width of the channel [4]. Furthermore, 
future EONs will change slot width according to time-
varying traffic by changing the number of FSs flexibility. 
Din et al., [5] studied the SEC problem for the multipath 
routing scheme for Routing, Modulation, and Spectrum 
Assignment (RMSA) on EONs was studied. 
B. 
Survivable EONs 
In the traditional Wavelength Division Multiplexing 
(WDM) 
networks, 
network 
survivability 
has 
been 
extensively studied; several various network protection 
techniques were proposed in [6]. The protection techniques 
can be divided into the categories of Dedicated Path 
Protection (DPP) and Shared Backup Path Protection (SBPP) 
[6]. Dedicated path protection means that there is dedicated 
backup capacity to protect primary capacity. In contrast, 
shared protection means that the protection capacity can be 
shared among multiple protection lightpaths as long as their 
corresponding primary lightpaths do not fail simultaneously. 
Because of capacity sharing, the shared protection scheme 
are generally more capacity efficient than the dedicated 
protection scheme [6]. 
For the case of static traffic demand on the EON, 
Klinkowski et al. [7] focused on the problem of RSA with 
DPP. Shen et al. [8] developed Integer Linear Programming 
(ILP) models for the SBPP on EONs. For the case of 
dynamic traffic demand, Shao et al. [9] studied the shared-
path protection on EONs for RSA model. A heuristic 
algorithm was proposed to solve this problem. N. G. Anoh et 
al. [10] studied a hybrid protection scheme with shared and 
dedicated backup paths resources for the RMSA model. 
C. 
Studied Problem 
In this paper, the Spectrum Expansion/Contraction (SEC) 
and Survival Routing and Spectrum Allocation (SRSA) 
problem with time-varying traffic on EONs is studied. For a 
given EON and a sequence of survival connection requests, 
the goal is to add/delete/expand/contract (primary and 
backup) lightpaths and assigned suitable channels to the 
lightpaths to meet the traffic requirement of the survivable 
connection request such that the performance measure can be 
optimized. The RSA model is considered in this paper, that 
is, the transparent network only with single modulation 
format. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Two protecting schemes DPP and SBPP are considered 
in this article. When a new connection request arrived, the 
Survival Path Routing Algorithm (SPRA) is performed to 
find a pair of link-disjoint primary and backup lightpaths. If 
the required bandwidth cannot be allocated, then the 
connection request is blocked. Otherwise, these lightpaths 
are established, the required FSs of lightpaths are allocated. 
If the connection request is an adjusted request (that is, there 
exists a pair of primary and backup lightpaths with the same 
source and destination nodes), based on the selected SEC 
policy, the allocated FSs of the existing lightpath are 
adjusted. 
In this article, the elastic allocation scheme is used, that is, 
both the CF and the size of the lightpath can be adjusted 
(expanded or contracted). If the bandwidth variation can be 
accommodated, then the adjusted connection is updated. 
Otherwise, the SPRA is performed to route the new 
connection (after the old lightpaths are torn down). 
According to literature analysis by the author, only the SEC 
problems for single path [3] and multipath [5] were studied. 
Based on the survey, there is no article considered the SEC 
problem for survivable routing. 
II. 
PROBLEM DEFINITION 
In the following, the assumptions, constraints, notations 
and the definitions of the studied problem are given. 
A. 
Notations 
  G = (V, E): The physical topology of the network, where 
V = {v1, v2, ..., vn} and E = {e1, e2, ..., em} is the set of 
nodes and links, respectively. 
  r = (s, d, Bsd, q): The connection request, where s∈V and 
d∈V is the source and destination node of the request, 
respectively. Bsd is the required bandwidth (Gb/s) of the 
lightpaths between nodes s and d, q (0≤q≤1) is the 
protection level requirement of the connection [11]. 
  B: The number of FSs provided with each link of the 
network. Assume that each spectrum slot occupies Cf 
GHz bandwidth. 
  K: The number of shortest paths for each node-pair are 
pre-computed for finding routing path. 
  Psd: The set of candidate routing paths for node pair s-d. 
  bl(j): The bit-mask bl(j) of the link el∈E (j = 1, 2, ..., B = 
100), is the status of the jth FS of the link el. 
 If the jth FS of link el is occupied, then bl(j) = 1; otherwise, 
bl(j)=0. 
 
When the link failure occurs on the primary path, the 
backup path can provide at least q × Bsd bandwidth. If q = 0, 
then there is no protection; q = 1 is full protection and 0< <1 
is partial protection. If the request is supported by a single 
lightpath, the minimal required number of FSs of the primary 
lightpath (denoted as Nsd) can be computed by Nsd = Bsd/Cf 
+ GB, where Cf is the bandwidth (Gb/s) provided by each FS. 
The minimal required number of FSs of the backup lightpath 
(denoted as BNsd) can be computed by BNsd = (q×Bsd)/Cf  + 
GB. 
B. 
Assumptions 
The assumptions of the SEC problem for survivable 
routing on EONs are given as follows. 
  For each link, there is a fiber connecting the end-nodes 
and signal can be transmitted bidirectional. 
  All nodes in the network are equipped with Bandwidth 
Variable Wavelength Cross-Connects (BV-WXC) and 
Bandwidth Variable Transceiver (BVT). 
  For simplicity, the numbers of FSs provided by links are 
all equal. 
  A GB or guard subcarrier should be allocated between 
two lightpaths. 
  The network is a 2-connected graph, only the single-
edge failure case is considered.     
  If the expansion is not possible, the current primary and 
backup paths are expanded as many numbers of FSs as 
possible. 
Three constraints are considered in this paper, they are 
spectrum continuity constraint, subcarrier consecutiveness 
constraint, and non-overlapping spectrum constraint. Due to 
space limitation, the definition of these constraints can be 
found in [5]. 
III. 
SURVIVAL ROUTING AND SEC FOR DPP SCHEME 
In DPP scheme, for each connection request r = (s, d, 
Bsd, q), a pair of link-disjoint primary and backup paths is 
found. Where the bandwidth provided by the primary path 
and backup path is greater than or equal to Bsd and q × Bsd 
Gb/s, respectively. In this section, two algorithms are 
proposed to solve the DPP routing problem and then the 
SEC operations are developed to perform traffic updating. 
A. 
 Survival Path Routing Algorithm - DPP 
In this subsection, the survival path routing algorithm for 
a new connection request for DPP scheme is developed. To 
find the routing paths of the request, two algorithms are 
proposed, they are Dynamic Survival Path Routing 
Algorithm (DSPRA) and Semi-Dynamic Survival Path 
Routing Algorithm (SDSPRA). 
1) Dynamic Survival Path Routing Algorithm (DSPRA): 
In this subsection, the DSPRA is described. In DSPRA, for 
finding the primary path with Nsd FSs, the layered graphs 
LGi, i= 1, 2, ..., B-Nsd+1 of the network are constructed 
according to the current status of the network and 
connection request. The i-th layer graph is denoted as LGi 
(Vi, Ei), where Vi =V, Ei ={el| Σj=ii+Nsd-1bl(j)=0, el∈E}. On 
layered graph LGi, if a path from s to d can be found, then 
there exists a path with Nsd FSs on G and it can serve as the 
primary path of the request. The K-shortest paths on LGi are 
found as the candidate paths of the primary lightpaths. If the 
primary path can be found on LGi, then the resources of 
primary lightpath are temporarily allocated and the Backup 
Path Finding Algorithm (BPFA) is performed to find the 
backup path of the request. If both the primary and backup 
lightpaths can be found, then the resources are allocated. 
Otherwise, another possible primary path on the same 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

layered graph or on the different layered graph is selected, 
and then the backup lightpath is examined again. In the 
BPFA, first, the links passed by the primary lightpath are 
removed. Then, the layered graph approach is applied again 
to find the backup path. The details of the DSPRA and the 
BPFA are described in Figure 1 and Figure 2, respectively. 
 
Figure 1.  DSPRA. 
Figure 2.  BPFA. 
2) Semi-Dynamic Survival Path Routing Algorithm 
(SDSPRA): In this subsection, the SDSPRA was proposed. 
First, a set Psd of candidate paths on G(V, E) is found and 
paths in the Psd are sorted increasingly according to the 
length of the path. Path in Psd are examined in order. If the 
examined path can be allocated on the current network, then 
the primary lightpath is temporarily allocated and removed 
from the network, and then the BPFA (by using the layered 
graph approach) is performed to find the backup path of the 
request. The details of the Semi-Dynamic Survival Path 
Routing Algorithm are described in Figure 3. 
B. 
SEC operation for DPP 
For the survivable connection request, if the connection 
changed to r = (s, d, Bsdnew, qnew), the currently deployed 
(primary and backup) lightpaths should be adjusted to meet 
the bandwidth requirement. If Bsdnew is zero, the primary and 
backup lightpaths are deleted and the possessed resources are 
released. If qnew is zero, the backup lightpath can be deleted 
and the possessed resources can be released. 
If Bsdnew > (Nsd-1)×Cf and qnew×Bsdnew > Cf×(BNsd-1), the 
bandwidth of primary and backup lightpaths should be 
increased, respectively. Two lightpaths can be expanded 
separately. Several cases should be considered and described 
as follows. 
 
 Case 1: If both primary and backup lightpaths can be 
expanded successfully, then the expansion operation is 
performed to meet the requirement. 
 
 Case 2: If the primary lightpath can be expanded but 
the backup lightpath cannot, then the primary lightpath 
is expanded in the first step, and then, the original 
backup path is removed and the BPFA is performed to 
find a new backup lightpath. 
 
 Case 3: If the backup lightpath can be expanded but 
the primary lightpath cannot, then the backup lightpath 
is expanded in the first step. Then, the primary path is 
removed and a new primary lightpath, which is link-
disjoint to the backup lightpath, is found by performing 
the BPFA. 
 
 Case 4: If both primary and backup lightpaths cannot 
be expanded, then the primary and backup lightpaths 
are removed. Then, the SPRA is performed to find a 
pair of new primary and backup lightpaths. 
 
 Case 5: If the backup (or primary) lightpath cannot be 
found in the previous Cases 2 and 3, then the primary 
(or backup) lightpath is removed in the first step. Then, 
the respective SPRA (SSPRA, DSPRA, and SDSPRA) 
is performed to find a pair of new primary and backup 
lightpaths for the request. If failed to find the pair of 
lightpaths, then the request would be blocked. 
For the case with Bsdnew > (Nsd-1)×Cf or qnew× Bsdnew > Cf 
× (BNsd-1), the bandwidth of primary lightpath or backup 
lightpath should be increased separately. The expansion 
action is expanded first, and then the respective lightpath is 
re-found. If these two actions cannot be done, then the old 
lightpaths are deleted and then a pair of new lightpaths are 
found by performing the respective SPRA to route the 
request. In the contraction, it is worth noting that the actually 
provided bandwidth Nsd×Cf may be greater than the newly 
required bandwidth Bsdnew. The similar situation can be 
applied to the backup path. If Bsdnew≤(Nsd-1)×Cf and qnew 
×Bsdnew<(BNsd-1)×Cf, then the bandwidth of the primary and 
backup path should be contracted, respectively. In the 
contraction, the higher-index FS allocated to the selected 
path will be contracted first. 
Figure 3.  SDSPRA. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

IV. 
SURVIVAL ROUTING AND SEC FOR SBPP SCHEME 
In this section, the SBPP scheme is used. In SBPP 
scheme, two backup lightpaths, which pass through same 
fiber (or path), can share the spectrum resource on it, if their 
primary lightpaths are link-disjoint. In this section, two 
survival path routing algorithms and the SEC operations are 
developed to solve the problem. 
A. 
SSPRA-SBPP 
In this subsection, for SBPP scheme, two algorithms 
static-SPRA-SBPP (SSPRA-SBPP) and dynamic-SPRA-
SBPP (DSPRA-SBPP) are proposed to solve this problem. It 
is worth noting that these algorithms used the same 
algorithm to find the backup path of the primary lightpath. 
 
1) SSPRA-SBPP: In SSPRA-SBPP, a set Psd of pre-
computed paths are found as the candidate set of primary 
paths. All paths are sorted in increasing order according to 
the length of the paths. Then, a path in Psd is selected and 
examined sequentially as the primary path. If the selected 
path can be successful allocated, then the Shared Backup 
Path Protecting Algorithm (SBPPA) is performed to find 
the backup path. The details of the SSPRA-SBPP are 
described in Figure 4.      
To describe the backup path-finding process, several 
notations used in the algorithm are listed as follows. The 
number of required FSs of the backup path is equal to BNsd 
= q×Bsd/Cf. Let cl be the basic cost of link el∈E, which is 
set to 1 initially. The value of c’l is determined by the 
current network state. Let Pb be the set of existing backup 
paths whose respective primary paths are link-disjoint to the 
primary path p1. It is worth noting that the primary and 
backup paths can use different starting indices of FSs.   
To find the backup path with the great resource sharing of 
the primary path on layered graph BLGi, the cost of links is 
dynamically adjusted according to the formula (1), and then 
the Dijkstra's algorithm is used to find a link-disjoint backup 
path with the minimum cost on BLGi. 
 
On the layered graph BLGi, the links having the same 
link with the primary path cannot be used, the cost of links 
is set to +∞. If the link el has not been used by any primary 
or backup path on BLGi, the cost of el is set to cl. If the link 
el is not passed by the primary path and there are some FSs 
used by other backup lightpaths whose respective primary 
path is link-disjoint to the path p1, then the cost of link el is 
set to cl−Bli/BNsd. Where Bli =Σz=ii+BNsd-1 b*l(z) is the number 
of frequency slots of the link el ∈BLGi used by some backup 
lightpaths. Moreover, b*l(z)=1 represents that the z-th FS of 
link el is only used by backup paths; otherwise, b*l(z)=0. 
The cost of link el is set to cl−Bli/BNsd for increasing the 
resource-sharing ratio. In addition, the links that have 
reserved enough shared backup frequent slots have less link 
cost. If the backup path traverses these links, then there is no 
need to reserve new frequency-slots and the frequency 
sharing can be enhanced. The details of the SBPPA are 
described in Figure 5. 
Figure 4.  SSPRA-SBPP.  
Figure 5.  SBPPA. 
2) DSPRA-SBPP: In this subsection, the details of the 
DSPRA-SBPP is described. In the DSPRA-SBPP, the 
layered graph approach is applied. The main algorithm is 
the same as the proposed DSPRA described in Section 
III.A.1, except for the backup path-finding algorithm. The 
backup path-finding algorithm is changed to the SBPPA 
described in Figure 5. 
B. 
SEC operation for SBPP 
The SEC operation for the SBPP scheme is more 
complex than that of the DPP scheme. In SBPP, the backup 
resources are shared by several backup lightpaths. If the 
bandwidth of a connection decreases, the backup resources 
cannot decrease directly. Since releasing the shared resources 
of a backup path directly may cause other primary paths 
unprotected. Moreover, for the SEC operation, the spectrum-
sharing feature should be considered in designing the 
expansion and contraction algorithms to improve the 
spectrum sharing. 
1) Expansion: For a bandwidth increasing connection, if 
both primary and backup paths can be expanded directly, 
then the resources of these paths are expanded and the paths 
are unchanged. When the backup path expansion is 
performed, the sharing status of FSs should be taken into 
consideration. To expanse a frequency slot for the allocated 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

lightpath, if the FS of an edge to be expanded is free (not 
been allocated to any primary or backup lightpath), then the 
FS can be expanded directly. If the FS of an edge to be 
expanded is allocated to a primary lightpath, then the FS 
cannot be selected to expand. 
If the FS of an edge to be expanded is allocated to 
several backup lightpaths, then the FS should be examined 
further. Assume p1 and b1 be the primary and backup 
lightpath to be expanded, respectively. For the edge ei ∈ b1 
and the jth selected FS, let PS={p1ij, p2ij, ..., pzij} be the set of 
primary lightpaths whose backup lightpaths pass through 
the edge ei and use the selected FS. If the selected FS of an 
edge to be expanded have the property that p1 is link-
disjoint to all paths in PS, then the FS can be expanded. For 
a selected FS to be expanded, if all edges of the backup path 
can be expanded, then the selected FS can be expanded. The 
cost of the selected FS to be expanded is defined as the 
resource sharing value. For the expandable jth FS of an edge 
$ei$, the weight (denoted as wij) of the FS is defined as the 
number of shared backup paths on it. For the expandable jth 
FS of a path p, the weight (denoted as wjp) of the FS is 
defined as the total number of shared backup paths on all 
edges of the path. That is, wjp=Σ∀ei∈pwij. For the backup path, 
the expandable method is selected by checking and selecting 
the expandable (immediate upper or lower index) FS with 
maximal weight repeatedly, until it meets the bandwidth 
requirement.  
If the backup path cannot be expanded directly, then 
the currently allocated resources for the backup are 
temporarily contracted (by the method described later) as 
the first step. Then a new backup path is found by 
performing the SBPPA. 
If the primary path cannot be expanded, then this is a 
new situation should be considered further. Since the 
sharing status of the backup path is determined based on the 
primary lightpath, once the primary path changes, the 
backup path should be changed accordingly. In this case, the 
current primary lightpath is removed and backup path is 
contracted (by the method described later). Then, the 
respective Survival Path Routing Algorithm for SBPP 
scheme (SSPRA-SBPP or DSPRA-SBPP) is performed to 
find a pair of new primary and backup lightpaths for the 
request. If failed to find the pair of lightpaths, then the 
request would be blocked. 
2) Deletion or Contraction: If the demand of the new 
request is 0, then the primary path can be deleted and 
resources can be released directly. But the resources 
allocated to the backup lightpath should be considered 
further. If the selected FS of an edge is not shared by other 
lightpaths (used by the affected backup path only), then the 
resource can be released directly. If the selected FS of an 
edge is shared by other lightpaths, then the resource cannot 
be released directly. For each FS of an edge, a set of path-
allocating records is used to store the sharing backup 
lightpaths and the respective primary lightpaths. The record 
of the released FS of an edge should be updated by deleting 
the affected backup path. For the contraction operation, the 
path-allocating record should be updated after releasing the 
selected FSs of the affected backup lightpath.  
Consider the example shown in Figure 6, Figure 6(a) 
shows the primary and backup lightpaths of four requests 
and  Figure 6(b) shows the allocated FSs and sharing status 
of the edges on the backup path b1: 1→4 → 5 → 7 → 8. The 
number of allocated FSs for the backup lightpaths b1, b2, b3, 
and b4 are 18, 3, 3 and 10, respectively. The FS allocation 
for the primary lightpaths is not shown here. The backup 
lightpaths near to the right of the FSs allocation of 
lightpaths denoted as the path-allocating of the FS of the 
edge. For example, the first and second FSs are used by b2 
and 1-3 FSs of edges (1, 4) and (4, 5) are shared by the 
lightpaths b1 and b2. If backup lightpath b1 is deleted, the FS 
allocation is shown in Figure 6(c) and 5 free FSs are 
released. If six FSs are contracted from the backup lightpath 
b1, the best contraction method will be determined and 
selected, that is, the region of the allocated FSs will within 
5-16 (as shown in Figure 6(d)). 
 
Figure 6.  Examples of SEC for SBPP: (a) primary and backup lightpaths, 
(b) before deleting backup path b1, (c) after deleting backup path b1, (d) 
after contracting backup path b1. 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
The proposed algorithms were coded by using C++ 
programming language. All simulations were run on a 
notebook computer with Intel Core i7-4710 HQ CPU 
2.5GHz, 16.0 GB RAM and with Windows 10 pro 64-bit 
operating system. Two topologies (COST239 and NSFNET 
showed in Figure 7) were used for simulations. 
In the simulation, the arrival of request to the network 
follows the Poisson distribution with λ=20 connection 
requests per unit time and the connection-holding time obeys 
negative exponential distribution with a mean value of 1/μ=4 
and 4000 connection requests are randomly generated. The 
updated traffic is randomly generated uniformly for different 
pairs of nodes. The expansion/contraction operations are 
performed according to the updated traffic comparing to the 
currently provided bandwidth. The value of q is randomly 
generated uniformly with [0, 1]. These connections are 
simulated for each algorithm for six different network loads. 
For each proposed SEC method, a respective algorithm is 
also implemented for comparison. The method is denoted as 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

“Release and Add (RA)”. That is, for each updated traffic, 
the established lightpaths and allocated FSs for original 
traffic demand are released and then the new primary and 
backup lightpaths are re-established. Several performance 
criteria are considered in this paper, they are (1) Blocking 
Ratio (BR), (2) Resource Utilization Ratio (RUR) which is 
the ratio of protecting resources to that of the primary 
resources and (3) total number of allocated FSs.  
First, for the COST239 network, the simulation results 
are shown in Figure 8. Figure 8(a) shows that the BR of the 
algorithm with RA is worse than that of the respective SEC 
method, thus the SEC operation can get better performance 
than RA operation. For the proposed algorithms with DPP 
protection, the SDSPRA-DPP can get the lower BR than that 
of the DSPRA-DPP. For the proposed algorithms with SBPP 
protection, the DSPRA-SBPP can get the lower BR than that 
of the SSPRA-SBPP. Survival routing with SBPP scheme 
can get better BR performance than that of the method with 
DPP scheme. The BR increases as the network load 
increases. Figure 8(b) shows that the RUR of the algorithm 
with RA is lower than that of the algorithm since remove and 
re-find the primary and backup lightpaths can help to find 
better RUR paths. Survival routing with SBPP scheme can 
get better RUR performance than that of the DPP scheme. 
Figure 8(c) shows that the total FSs of the algorithm with RA 
is higher than that of the respective SEC algorithm. First, for 
the NSFNET network, similar simulation results can be 
obtained and not shown here. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, the spectrum expansion/contraction and 
survival routing problems with time-varying traffic on EONs 
have been studied. For a given EON and a set of connection 
requests, the goal is to design a spectrum expansion and 
contraction method to update the CF and the channel size of 
the lightpath so as to fit the required of the request. In the 
studied problem, the DPP and SBPP protecting schemes 
have been are considered and several routing algorithms and 
SEC operations have been proposed to solve this problem. 
Simulations were conducted to evaluate the performance of 
the proposed algorithms. 
The proposed algorithms are heuristic algorithms and can 
be executed in a reasonable polynomial time. This work can 
be extended in the future to hand other failure cases, such as 
node-failure, two or more links (or nodes) failure.     
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the MOST projects 
under Grant 105-2221-E-018-018 and 106-2221-E-018-002. 
 
Figure 7.  (a) COST239 network, (b) NSFNET 
 
Figure 8.  Simulation results on the COST239 network (a) BR, (b)RUR, (c) 
total number of FSs. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Zhang, M. D. Leenheer, and A. Morea, “A survey on OFDM-
based elastic core optical networking,” IEEE Commun. Surv. & Tut. 
vol. 15, First Quarter 2013, pp. 65-87, doi: 10.1109/SURV.2012. 
010912.00123. 
[2] 
G. Shen, Q. Yang, S. You, and W. Shao, “Maximizing time-
dependent spectrum sharing between neighbouring channels in CO-
OFDM optical networks,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Transparent Optical 
Networks 
(ICTON 
2011), 
IEEE 
Press, 
Jun. 
2011, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICTON.2011.5970769. 
[3] 
M. Klinkowski, et al., “Elastic spectrum allocation for time-varying 
traffic in flexgrid optical networks,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 31, Jan. 2013. 
pp. 26-38, doi:10.1109/JSAC.2013.130104. 
[4] 
M. Chino, et al., “Adaptive elastic spectrum allocation based on 
traffic fluctuation estimate under time-varying traffic in flexible 
OFDM-based optical networks,” IEICE Trans. on Commun., vol. 
E100.B, 
June 
2017, 
pp. 
962-973, 
doi: 
10.1587/ 
transcom.2016EBP3300. 
[5] 
D. R. Din, Y. F. Wu, B. J. Guo, C. Chen, and P. J. Wu, “Spectrum 
expansion/contraction problem for multipath routing with time-
varying traffic on elastic optical networks,” Proc. Int. Conf. on 
Internet of Things, Data and Cloud Computing (ICC'17), March 2017.  
[6] 
G. Shen, H.  Guo, and S. K.  Bose, “Survivable elastic optical 
networks: survey and perspective,” Photon. Netw. Commun., vol. 31, 
Feb. 2016. pp. 71-87, doi:10.1007/s11107-015-0532-0. 
[7] 
M. Klinkowski and K.  Walkowiak, “Offline RSA algorithms for 
elastic 
optical 
networks 
with 
dedicated 
path 
protection 
consideration,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Ultra-Modern Telecommunications 
and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT, 2012), IEEE Press,  
Oct. 2012, doi:10.1109/ICUMT.2012.6459751. 
[8] 
G. Shen, Y. Wei, S. K. Bose, “Optimal design for shared backup path 
protected elastic optical networks under single-link failure,” 
IEEE/OSA J. Opt. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, July 2014, pp. 649-659, 
doi:10.1109/JOCN.2014.6850206. 
[9] 
X. Shao, Y. K. Yeo, Z. Xu, X. Cheng, L. Zhou, “Shared-path 
protection in OFDM-based optical networks with elastic bandwidth 
allocation,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Optical Fiber Communication 
Conference and Exposition (OFC/NFOEC), IEEE Press, March 2012. 
[10] N. G. Anoh, st al., “An efficient hybrid protection scheme with 
shared/dedicated backup paths on elastic optical networks,” Digital 
Commun. and Netw., vol. 3, pp. 11-18, 2017, page OTh4B.4, 
doi:10.1364/OFC.2012.OTh4B.4. 
[11] L. Ruan, N.  Xiao, “Survivable multipath routing and spectrum 
allocation in OFDM-based flexible optical networks,” J. Opt. 
Commun. 
Netw., 
vol. 
5, 
Mar. 
2013, 
pp. 
172-182, 
doi:10.1364/JOCN.5.000172. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-650-7
AICT 2018 : The Fourteenth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

