ICT-Based Software as a Supervision Tool  
in Nursing Students’ Clinical Training 
Sari Mettiäinen, Anna-Liisa Karjalainen 
Tampere University of Applied Sciences 
Tampere, Finland 
sari.mettiainen@tamk.fi, 
anna-liisa.karjalainen@tamk.fi 
 
 
Abstract—The 
paper 
describes 
nursing 
students’ 
opinions on how a mobile application and a web-based 
reporting tool could act as a supervision method during 
their clinical training. In a Finnish university of applied 
sciences we selected software called eTaitava to our 
piloting project. The aim of the project was to find out 
about the possibility to establish a new supervising 
method 
to 
teaching 
by 
using 
information 
and 
communication technology. Lecturers can use this 
software 
in 
supervising 
and 
supporting 
nursing 
students’ learning process. The empirical study was 
made by a survey in May 2010. All in all 430 students 
have used this method and been sent a web-based 
questionnaire. 112 of them answered the survey, which 
consisted of 33 questions. According to the findings, two 
thirds of the students thought that answering almost 
daily to the questions sent by eTaitava was useful for 
their learning process, including setting of objectives, 
daily activities, self-assessment and cognitive reflection. 
They felt it easy and fast to use by computer, only 9 % 
used it by mobile phone. The first feedback showed that 
the information and communication technology-based 
method is a useful and effective way to supervise 
learning in nursing education. It is worth developing this 
idea further. 
 
Keywords-eLearning; mobile application; nursing; 
clinical training;  supervision 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
      In this paper, we describe the results of our pilot project 
which started with the support of EU-funding and where we 
tested the possibility to use ICT, or indeed mobile 
technology in nursing students’ clinical training. The 
software we used was called eTaitava [1]. 
      The ICT-based computer and mobile program could 
provide an active supervision method for lecturers to 
supervise many students at the same time.  Via such a 
helpful tool it could be possible for the lecturer to be aware 
of many students’ clinical learning process during the whole 
training period.  
      Clinical training is an important part of nursing 
education in all EU countries. In Finland there are long 
distances to the clinics and lecturers have lack of time for 
supervision. Travelling to the hospitals to meet students, 
which is the traditional method to supervise students, takes 
quite a lot of time. Therefore, new methods are needed.  
The purpose of the empirical study was to find out 
nursing students’ opinions on how ICT-based software like 
eTaitava could act as a supervision tool. The studied 
questions were how the students experienced its use as a tool 
for reporting their learning process, their feelings and 
experiences as learners and what kind of significance 
eTaitava had for their learning process during the clinical 
training.  
We describe first clinical training supervision in nursing 
education, related use of eTaitava program and its features. 
Then we present a case study on student views and its 
findings. The Conclusion part presents a short summary on 
implementation of our development project, the case study, 
the most significant findings and further development 
challenges. 
II. 
SUPERVISION OF CLINICAL TRAINING  
 
     Nursing education in Finland comprises 210 ECTS 
(European Credit Transfer System) Credits. Of these, 75 
credits (50 weeks) are performed in clinical sites in hospitals 
or other health care organizations. In universities of applied 
sciences training is always supervised by a senior lecturer 
and a training supervisor. Students have to plan individual 
objectives for the clinical training period based on theory 
and the curriculum. The objectives are approved by the 
senior lecturer at the university of applied sciences and the 
named supervisor at the clinic. At the end of the clinical 
training, the student, the lecturer and the training supervisor 
evaluate together how the student achieved his or her 
objectives. 
The aim of the supervision is to support the students’ 
learning process towards professional growth. Due to the 
underlying cognitive approach, the aim is to help students to 
analyse the learnt contents. Supervision is most successful 
when the relationship between the supervisor and the student 
is active [2]. The relationship between the nursing student 
and the supervisor has been the topic of many studies [3], but 
innovative ICT-based methods have been overlooked.  
 
72
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

III. 
ICT-BASED SOFTWARE ETAITAVA  
 
      We utilized software called eTaitava in students’ 
training supervision. It has been developed in Finland for 
vocational school students’ training periods.  eTaitava is a 
multimedia reflection and feedback tool on mobile phones 
and personal computers. It connects learners, teachers and 
workplace mentors in on-the-job training environments. Its 
strength lies in its capability to provide all parties involved 
with continuous and immediate feedback on the learning 
progress of trainees [4, 5]. 
      The teacher constructs questions through the eTaitava 
web-based user interface to map the student’s learning 
experiences and learning progress. The questions are saved 
and set to be sent on certain days. The daily questions can 
be either open ended questions or statements formulated e.g. 
as follows: "I have the basic knowledge of medical 
diseases” and the student can answer the questions e.g. on a 
scale of 1-5 (fully disagree – fully agree) or “I have 
practised giving medical injections” and the answering scale 
could be 1-5 (not at all - very much). The teacher can 
formulate diverse series of questions for different clinical 
training periods. 
      Students can answer the questions using either a 
computer or a mobile phone. In order to use a mobile phone 
for answering, eTaitava client has to be downloaded to the 
phone.  The use of mobile phone requires a colour screen 
and a data connection [4].  To use the software by computer 
only requires an Internet connection. The software is hosted 
by Wellworks Oy. 
      The teacher constructs similar series of questions for the 
supervisors as for the students. The supervisors respond to 
the questions once a week by computer and thus participate 
in evaluating the students’ learning progress.   
      The answers are saved to the database of the eTaitava 
program, where the teacher can easily see the individual 
answers and group-specific summaries by means of graphs. 
The teacher can in real time follow students’ learning during 
the clinical training [4]. 
      Pirttiaho et al. [5] have described in more detail the 
technical features of the program in their paper. Paalanen 
[6] has studied the first pilot-group who used eTaitava. 
Those 46 vocational school students were studying forestry, 
travel services, catering etc. According to the survey 
eTaitava was considered clear and simple. 71% of the 
respondents reckoned that answering by mobile phone was 
pleasing. The attitude towards eTaitava and its use was 
found positive and only 4% of the respondents did not want 
to use eTaitava in the future. eTaitava has since been 
introduced in approximately 30 educational institutions in 
Finland. 
 
 
IV. 
CASE  STUDY 
 
      eTaitava software has been in use with Finnish nursing 
students at Tampere University of Applied Sciences since 
autumn 2009 by suggestion of the authors. It has been in use 
during surgical, medical, preoperative, public health nursing 
and basic nursing training periods. The training periods 
consist of 3–7 weeks depending on the substance area 
(Table 1).      
 
TABLE 1. CLINICAL TRAINING PERIODS DURING WHICH THE STUDENT 
RESPONDENTS USED ETAITAVA 
Clinical 
Training Period  
Weeks 
 Number 
of 
Students  
Number 
of 
Teachers 
Number of 
Supervisors 
Basics of 
Nursing 
4 
27 
2 
‐ 
Medical 
Nursing 
4 
17 
4 
6 
Surgical 
Nursing 
4 
6 
2 
‐ 
Perioperative 
Nursing 
7 
22 
2 
4 
Public Health 
Nursing 
3 
51 
4 
‐ 
Home Care 
3 
53 
4 
‐ 
 
      Before a training period, students usually have an 
orientation hour during which they are told about the 
clinical training objectives and taught to use eTaitava by the 
authors of this paper, who have taken care of the whole 
implementation process of eTaitava. The students are 
invited to answer the questions every day after their shift on 
the ward.  
      In all 430 students, 15 lecturers and 10 training 
supervisors had used eTaitava until spring 2010 when this 
data was collected. Use of the program has been expanded 
gradually and supervisors from two special fields only 
participated in the project when the questionnaire was carried 
out (Table 1).  
      All the students were sent a link to the survey by email. 
They were told that the aim of the survey was to evaluate a 
new way of supervising training periods by utilizing ICT 
technology. The students were told that answering the 
survey was voluntary and they were able to answer 
anonymously. The survey consisted of 26 structural quizzes, 
6 of them concerned background information and 7 were 
open ended questions.  
      Qualitative data of the open ended questions was 
analysed by using thematic analysis and categorization. The 
analysis was conducted according to a three-step inductive 
process based on the data [7]. The data was reduced by 
identification. After that, similar data was categorised. 
Quantitative data of the structural quizzes was analysed 
73
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

using frequency distributions, and the results were described 
using percentage distributions.  
 
V. 
FINDINGS 
A. Information on respondents  
 
112 students answered the survey; the response rate was 
26 %. Most of the students who have answered the 
questionnaires, have used eTaitava in three-weeks training 
period of public health nursing or in clinical training in home 
care (Table 1).  
83 % of the respondents were 20–25 years old and 95 % 
of them were female. 94 % of the students who answered the 
survey had positive attitude towards using information and 
communication technologies in education.  
 
B. Answering and using eTaitava software  
 
79 % of the students answered the questions almost every 
day during their training period. 15 % of them answered 3–4 
times a week and rest of them once or twice a week. The 
most important reason for not answering every day was that 
students did not remember to do it. For 5 % of the students 
the reason was that they did not consider eTaitava as a 
sensible method.  
9 % of the participants answered the questions via mobile 
phone, and thus most of the students answered via computer. 
Students were asked why they did not use mobile phone to 
answer the questions. The most important reasons were data 
communication costs and the fact that they felt it was easy to 
answer by computer. All the answers are described in Table 
2. 
 
TABLE_2. REASONS GIVEN BY STUDENTS FOR WHY THEY DID NOT 
USE MOBILE PHONE TO ANSWER THE QUESTIONS 
 
 
 
      If the student answered that it was not possible with 
his/her phone, the reasons were: small screen, too little 
memory, the phone is iPhone, into which it cannot be 
loaded, or the phone does not support the software. 
      The students were asked whether they preferred to use 
eTaitava via mobile phone if it was cheaper. More than half 
of them disagreed (Table 3). 
 
TABLE 3.  STUDENTS’ (N=112) VIEWS ON USING MOBILE PHONE FOR 
ANSWERING THE QUESTIONS IF USE WAS CHEAPER 
 
 
      68 % of the respondents reported that it took 5 minutes 
to answer the questions. Rest of the students estimated they 
used 10–15 minutes to answer the questions. 83 % of the 
respondents thought it was easy and rest of them answered it 
was quite easy to use eTaitava.   
  
C. Opinions on questions and their significance for 
learning process  
 
The questions used on eTaitava were similar in different 
weeks. The students were asked what they thought about 
that. Half of them (46 %) reported they understand that it 
offers a useful way to follow their development process but 
13 % of them did not understand the idea of repeated 
questions (Table 4.) 
 
 
TABLE_4. STUDENTS’ (N=112) OPINIONS ON THE QUESTIONS BEING 
SIMILAR IN DIFFERENT WEEKS  
 
 
 
      Students were asked what they thought about the content 
of the questions. Half of them (49 %) estimated them well 
designed, 12 % estimated them too difficult, 24 % too easy 
and 15 % thought they were boring.  
      Students were asked whether the questions supervised 
their activities on the ward. 8 % of them estimated “quite a 
lot“, 56 % “somehow“ and 36 % “not at all“. The open 
ended questions asked the students how eTaitava supervised 
their activities on the ward  and what was the significance of 
eTaitava for their learning process. This question was 
answered by 53 students.     
 
      According to the answers, eTaitava helped the students 
to construct their learning objectives and update them. They 
become more aware of what they should learn. 
”Helped to understand what should be practised 
and what should be paid more attention to during 
the clinical training.” 
 
74
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

      On the basis of the answers, eTaitava supervised 
students’ work and helped them to pay their attention to the 
things asked. Answering also reminded of the objectives 
during the whole clinical training.  
”I maybe did some things more frequently as 
eTaitava reminded of them weekly.”  
”encouraged to patient contact etc.”  
      eTaitava was also an encouraging factor. It encouraged 
students to practise even things that were not in their own 
objectives. 
”It gave a buzz to my clinical training as it brought 
 out the development needs” 
”I noticed that there was something I had not done 
at all, and I had not even thought that it could be 
done” 
 
      Answering eTaitava questions also helped students to 
evaluate their learning experiences and their competence 
development. It also showed what the student had to 
practise more.   
”It mainly helped to analyse my own learning and 
clinical training as a whole.” 
”Guided thinking and evaluation of clinical  
training…usefulness” 
 
      Answering eTaitava questions helped students to think 
about matters both more independently and with their 
supervisor.  
”And answering the questions and giving vent to 
my feelings probably helped as I only met the 
teacher for a couple of times and did not much talk 
about the clinical training matters to others.” 
”answering the questions made me think what had 
 happened during the day” 
 
      eTaitava questions also helped students to become aware 
of some matters.  
”I more considered the meaning of the work 
community” 
”’have you given feedback to your supervisor' 
made me understand that it can also be done.” 
 
      According to these themes we can say that the 
significance of the continuous ICT-based supervision tool 
for learning during clinical training is that it can 
1. supervise students to create better learning 
objectives 
2. supervise students’ daily training activities 
3. help students in self-assessment 
4. inspire students’ cognitive learning process. 
 
      69 % of the students who answered the questionnaire, 
saw some benefit of it. 55 % of them reported that eTaitava 
was somehow useful and 14 % clearly useful for their 
learning process (Table 5). 74 % of the students thought 
eTaitava would be useful if the lecturer only met them in the 
final evaluation meeting on the ward. 
 
TABLE 5. STUDENTS’ PERSPECTIVES ON USEFULNESS OF ETAITAVA 
 
 
      30 % answered “yes” to the question “Are you willing to 
use eTaitava in future?”, 45 % “maybe” and 25 % “no”. 
      The students gave many useful ideas and feedback on 
how to develop the questions which are sent by eTaitava in 
such a way that they could support students’ learning 
process even better.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
      With the traditional method, lecturers met students 
maybe once or twice during a clinical training period. Via 
the ICT-based program the lecturers were able to follow and 
supervise students’ learning process step by step. The 
challenge for the lecturers is to create right and appropriate 
questions for different training periods.  
    eTaitava was introduced in Tampere University of 
Applied Sciences in autumn 2009. During the first academic 
year, it was used by a total of 430 students, who were sent a 
questionnaire in May 2010 in order to map their experiences 
on the program. 26 % of them answered the questionnaire. 
The low response rate may have been influenced by the fact 
that more than six months had gone since some students had 
used the eTaitava program and some students had already 
started their summer holiday. Due to the low response rate, 
the findings cannot be generalised, but they however 
provide valuable information for further development and 
research on training supervision.  
      Two thirds of the students who have answered the 
questionnaires thought eTaitava was useful for their learning 
process. It supervised students in creating better learning 
objectives and in their daily training activities. It helped 
students in self-assessment and inspired students’ cognitive 
learning process.  
      75 % of the respondents were willing to use eTaitava in 
future. It was surprising that so few students were willing to 
use mobile phone to answer the questions. 91 % of the 
students used eTaitava by computer and only 36 % thought 
it could be sensible to use it by phone in future. Answering 
the questions via computer was experienced easy and it took 
about 5 minutes a day. These findings differ from the 
findings of Paalanen [6], where 71 % of the respondents felt 
the mobile phone was a good way to report their 
experiences. If students use computer daily, they maybe 
think they do not need other methods to answer. On the 
other hand, when students do not have experiences of 
mobile use of eTaitava, they have not found the benefit 
75
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

which it maybe could offer. We believe that in a few years 
web-based use of mobile devices increases considerably and 
thus enables increase in using mobile devices also in 
studies. That is the topic which should be studied in future.     
      Most teachers who participated in the pilot project 
experienced the program useful, which was manifested in 
discussions with them. The responses showed which of the 
students needed personal supervision. The teachers also 
considered it was easy to use the program but it took time to 
follow it weekly. Efficient utilization of reports thus also 
calls for learning. 
      As project coordinators we consider it important to 
integrate the program to a learning environment used in the 
educational institution, such as Moodle. In this case, 
separate user identifications would not be needed for the 
program. Otherwise, usability of the program is good.  
      We have also used web-based discussion in clinical 
training supervision with some groups. Activation of 
students to discuss is sometimes difficult, but if it succeeds, 
web-based discussion is a workable method. It was easier to 
activate students to use eTaitava, almost all students used it 
several times every week.  
The purpose of this study was not to investigate features 
of the eTaitava software but its benefits for learning. This 
pilot study yielded results that were particularly encouraging, 
indicating that the project is worth further development.  
Anyway, attention should be paid to the software features, 
such as user-friendliness, in program introduction. We 
believe this can be a useful supervision method in all fields 
of education.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Quality and transparency for on-the-job learning. Wellworks Oy. 
http://mobiilioppiminen.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/etaitava.pdf 
20.01.2011  
[2] 
R. Vuorinen, R. Meretoja, and E. Eriksson. ”Contents, prerequisites 
and effects of supervised clinical training in nursing. A systematic 
review.”, Hoitotiede, Vol 17, No. 5, pp. 270-281. 2005.  
[3] 
B. Lindgren, C. Brulin, K. Holmlund, and E. Athlin. “Nursing 
students’ perception of group supervision during clinical training”, 
Journal of Clinical Nursing, Vol 7, No. 4, pp 822-829, 2005.   
[4] 
eTaitava. 
Ao 
Jyväskylä 
Vocational 
Institute. 
http://www.peda.net/img/portal/664066/eTaitava_en.swf?cs=1164287
053  15.01.2011. 
[5] 
P. Pirttiaho, J.-M. Holm, H. Paalanen, and T. Thorström. eTaitava – 
Mobile 
Tool 
for 
On-the-Job-Learning. 
2007. 
http://www.iadis.net/dl/final_uploads/200706C036.pdf.  
[6] 
H. Paalanen. User acceptance in eTaitava mobile service. Pro gradu -
työ (Master's thesis), in preparation. Department of Computer Science 
and Information Systems, Faculty of Information Technology, 
University of Jyväskylä, Finland. 2007. 
[7] 
M.B. Miles and A.M. Huberman. Qualitative data analysis (2nd 
edition), Sage, California. 1994. 
 
 
 
76
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

