 
Direction-based Greedy Forwarding in Mobile Wireless Sensor Networks 
Riad Kouah1,2, Samira Moussaoui2, and Mohamed Aissani1 
1 Research Unit in Computer Science, Ecole Militaire Polytechnique (EMP) 
P.O. Box 17 EMP, Bordj-El-Bahri, 16111, Algiers, Algeria 
riadkouah@hotmail.com, maissani@gmail.com 
2 Computer Science Department, University of Science and Technology (USTHB) 
P.O. Box 32 USTHB, El-Alia, Bab Ezzouar, Algiers, Algeria 
rkouah@usthb.dz, smoussaoui@usthb.dz 
 
Abstract— Geographical routing in mobile wireless sensor 
networks has attracted big attention in recent years by 
introducing new challenges. When a node has a packet to 
forward, it selects the closest available neighbor to the sink as 
the next forwarder regarding only the location parameter. 
However, this routing strategy does not consider the topology 
changes caused by the mobility of nodes, which may degrade 
performance or cause failures. To overcome this problem, we 
propose an efficient greedy forwarding mechanism based on a 
new decision metric that considers the distance to the sink, the 
moving direction and the moving speed of the forwarding 
candidate neighbors of a sender node. The moving direction 
depends on both distance and angle of a neighbor according to 
the sink between two successive location beacons. Associated 
with the well-known GPSR routing protocol, our proposal 
achieved good performance in terms of packet delivery ratio, 
average path length, control packet overhead and energy 
consumption. 
Keywords—Mobile sensor networks; geographical routing; 
node mobility; greedy forwarding. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Currently, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) attract the 
attention of many researchers due to the various challenges 
imposed by sensor nodes, such as the small amount of 
available memory, the limited processing capability, the 
limited lifetime of batteries and the small range of radio 
transceiver. Moreover, several researches are focusing on 
mobile WSNs where node mobility is critical to meet 
applications requirements. 
Today, by introducing mobility to WSNs, we can further 
improve the network capability in many aspects [1, 2]. Since 
the deployment of WSNs had never been considered 
completely static, the node mobility problem imposes 
various challenges to deal with, such as the connectivity, the 
coverage, the energy consumption and the routing. The later 
challenge has involved the design of several new protocols, 
especially geographical routing protocols [3-5]. However, 
only few of these protocols are designed for mobile WSNs. 
In fact, the efficient and scalable greedy forwarding is a 
promising scheme for large-scale WSNs when node 
locations are available [6]. Indeed, the packet is forwarded 
to a 1-hop neighbor who is closer to the destination than the 
actual node. This process is repeated until the packet reaches 
its destination. 
Traditionally, the selection of the next forwarder node is 
based only on the location parameter assuming ideal link 
conditions. However, this can degrade the performance of 
geographical routing in mobile WSNs. The location failure, 
which results from nodes’ mobility, degrades the routing 
performance or may lead to forwarding failures. Indeed, 
when a node selects its forwarder node, based only on 
location information, there may be another neighbor having 
better conditions according to the sink in terms of location, 
moving direction and moving speed. This effect is 
accentuated when the selected forwarder is within the range 
limit of the sender node, which probably leads to a 
forwarding failure. In this case it is better to select as 
forwarder the neighbor ensuring the tradeoff between 
location, moving direction and moving speed. 
To overcome the limits of the existing greedy forwarding 
schemes proposed for mobile WSNs, we first analyze the 
impact of node mobility on the routing performance. Then 
we propose an efficient greedy forwarding mechanism, 
called DGF (Direction-based Greedy Forwarding), which 
combines the location information, the moving direction and 
the moving speed of the forwarding candidate neighbors 
when a sender node selects the next forwarder of the current 
packet. We associate the DGF mechanism with the GPSR 
[3] routing protocol to use in mobile WSNs. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents some geographical routing schemes proposed in the 
literature for mobile WSNs. Section III discusses the node 
mobility effect on the greedy forwarding performance. 
Section IV describes the proposed DGF mechanism for 
mobile WSNs. Section V evaluates performance of our 
proposal. Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Node mobility arises additional challenges in WSNs. It 
has to be handled even in quasi-static WSN where few 
nodes may be mobile. One of these challenges is routing. 
We distinguish three classes of routing protocols in mobile 
WSNs based on the type of nodes: 1) protocols for static 
sensors and mobile sink(s) [7-9], 2) protocols for mobile 
sensors and static sink(s) [10-14], and 3) protocols for 
mobile sensors and mobile sink(s) [15]. In literature, the 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
majority of research works have been focused on the first 
class of protocols, while less works dealt with both the 
second and the third class. 
Luo et al. [7] propose the two-tier data dissemination 
(TTDD) protocol, which is used to forward a packet from 
static sensors towards a mobile sink. In TTDD, sinks are 
assumed to be mobile with unknown and uncontrolled 
mobility. The data about each event are assumed to 
originate from a single source. Each active source creates a 
grid structure dissemination network over the static 
network, with grid points acting as dissemination nodes. A 
mobile sink, when it issues queries for information, it sends 
out a locally controlled flood to discover its nearest 
dissemination point. Then the query is routed to the source 
node through 
the 
overlay 
network 
by 
suing 
the 
dissemination point. 
Fodor et al. [8] propose a gradient-based routing protocol 
(GBRP) to use mobile sinks that move in order to decrease 
the energy consumption of the whole network. In GBRP, 
sensor nodes maintain a list of neighboring next hops that 
are in the right direction towards the closest sink. The 
protocol uses a restricted flooding to update the locations of 
the mobile sinks. The principle behind this is to register by 
each node the cost between the appropriate sink and the 
given node and to update these routing entities only when 
the relative change is above a threshold. 
Wang et al. [9] propose a mobile sink cluster-based 
routing protocol (MSRP) for WSNs. The protocol operates 
in four phases: clustering, registering, dissemination and 
maintenance. The network is divided into multiple clusters 
during the first phase. The mobile sink which comes into the 
communication range of a cluster-head is registered into this 
cluster using the second phase. Once the mobile sink is 
registered, it receives from the cluster-head all sensed data 
in the cluster during the third phase. Possible new sensors 
are added to the cluster and the cluster-head is reelected 
during the fourth phase. 
Yang et al. [10] propose a dynamic enclose cell (DEC) 
routing algorithm to decrease the routing overhead by 
constructing cells with sensor nodes in order to retain stable 
the WSN in high mobility. This protocol groups the nodes 
into cells and develops the routing path using the cells 
boundaries. When the nodes are moving, only the adjacent 
cells of the moving nodes are reconstructed. In this way, the 
negative impact of the node mobility is minimized. The 
DEC algorithm consists of four schemes: neighbor beacon 
exchange, cell discovery, cell routing path update and cell 
routing selection. 
Arboleda et al. [11] propose a cluster-based routing 
(CBR) protocol for mobile WSNs using zone-base 
information and a cluster-like communication between 
nodes. It is based on two stages: route creation and route 
preservation. The first stage discovers a route between a 
source and a sink, but the second stage repairs the route 
when it is defective. The CBR protocol is based on the 
formation of non-overlapping square zones. Each node is 
placed in a zone and can obtain its zone ID based on its 
location parameters. The sensors in a common zone form a 
cluster and each cluster has one of the mobile nodes acting 
as cluster-head. This later acts as an aggregator node, 
receiving and forwarding messages to its neighbor cluster-
heads, and maintains information about both the routes and 
the nodes in a zone. 
Lambrou et al. [12] present a routing scheme in hybrid 
WSN that forwards packets to mobile nodes. The scheme 
objective is the delivery of event detection messages that 
contain information about position of the detected event in 
the sensor field. The routing of such messages can be easily 
achieved using a geographical routing based on greedy 
techniques towards a fixed base station. Moreover, this later 
easily requests information about a specific region or even a 
single static node using the position information. 
Santhosh-Kumar et al. [13] propose an adaptive cluster-
based routing (ACBR) scheme for mobile WSNs by 
including mobility as a new criterion for creation and 
maintenance of clusters. This work is considered as an 
improvement of the works proposed in [16, 17]. The ACBR 
protocol consists of two phases: set-up and steady-state. 
Nasser et al. [14] propose a Zone-based Routing Protocol 
for mobile WSNs (ZoroMSN) based on zone construction, 
route maintenance and zone-head election. This protocol is 
efficient in WSN with low mobility of nodes, where clusters 
are formed using the mobility patterns of sensors. ZoroMSN 
acts as a hybrid routing protocol, where communication 
between nodes in a zone is proactive and between zone-
heads towards the sink is reactive. The ZH is selected based 
on the mobility factor of each sensor in the zone, which is 
defined as the average number of times that a node moves 
from one zone to another during a given period of time. 
Saad et al. [15] propose an energy efficient routing 
algorithm called Ellipse-Routing. Using a region-based 
routing, the proposed algorithm builds a virtual ellipse 
thanks to the source and destination position. So, only nodes 
within this ellipse can forward a message towards the 
destination. Then, the algorithm was extended in order to 
take into account errors in node location. 
Although the above-resumed works play important roles 
in improving the performance of the geographical routing in 
mobile WSNs, the design of new routing solutions is still a 
challenging research area. Thus, the DGF mechanism is 
proposed in Section IV taking into account the mobility of 
nodes in WSNs. The DGF mechanism is associated with the 
well-known GPSR protocol and the obtained protocol is 
called GPSR-MS (GPSR with Mobile Sensors). The major 
difference between GPSR-MS and the above-summarized 
protocols includes the following aspects: 
• The proposed GPSR-MS protocol operates without 
organizing the network into clusters, while the 
majority of existing protocols for mobile nodes are 
cluster-based where the maintenance consumes the 
limited resources of nodes. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
• In the existing cluster-based protocols, the greedy 
forwarding mode is not applied, while the GPSR-MS 
protocol is based on this scalable and efficient mode. 
• Few of existing protocols are designed for WSNs 
with mobility of nodes. Therefore, the GPSR-MS 
protocol strengthens this class of protocols. Our 
objective is to maximize the packet delivery ratio 
with the minimum consumption of node resources. 
III. NODE MOBILITY IMPACT ON GREEDY 
FORWARDING 
In this section, we present the impact of nodes’ mobility 
on the next forwarder selection. Majority of geographical 
routing protocols use greedy forwarding techniques to route 
packets in a WSN. To make their routing decision, they use 
only the locations of the forwarding candidate neighbors, 
the sender and the sink. 
In greedy forwarding, the selected next-forwarder is the 
closest neighbor to the sink in term of distance based only 
on the nodes’ location. But the mobility of nodes causes the 
problem of location information freshness inside the 
neighbors table of each sender node. This may result some 
routing decisions failures. This problem can be resolved by 
broadcasting location beacons. But when node mobility 
increases rapidly, the beaconing overhead grows also 
rapidly. 
When the nodes move, the greedy forwarding mode does 
not often guarantee positive progression of packets towards 
their destination. Thus, when a sender node selects its next 
forwarder, this later may not be available because it moved. 
In the other hand, another node can come into the sender 
neighborhood, but it is not considered when selecting the 
next forwarder because it was not detected by the sender 
node. This situation has its importance when the non-
detected node is the closest neighbor to the sink. 
In addition, the moving direction and the moving speed of 
nodes may be the raison behind the obsolete table. Also, 
mobile nodes can repair holes that appear in a WSN due to 
their moving propriety. Then the greedy forwarding will use 
the shortest paths. 
These greedy mode weaknesses induce packet losses, 
delivery delays and excessive energy consumption. Indeed, 
the use of only distance to select the intermediate forwarders 
has limits in dynamic environments caused by nodes’ 
mobility. However, the use of periodic and frequent location 
beacons cannot resolve the problem because it creates 
packet collisions, overloads the network and consumes more 
energy. Consequently, some packets will be lost and other 
packets will be delayed. Therefore, the next-forwarder 
selection in a node must consider multiple metrics of its 
neighbors, such as the moving speed, the moving direction 
and the distance to the sink. The objective is to obtain a 
geographical routing protocol that maximizes the packet 
delivery ratio, minimizes the average path length and 
reduces the control packet overhead. 
IV. PROPOSED DGF MECHANISM 
To handle node mobility in mobile WSNS, the proposed 
DGF mechanism uses a new decision metric when selecting 
the next forwarder of the current packet. This metric 
considers the moving direction, the moving speed, and the 
distance to the sink of forwarding candidate neighbors of the 
sender node. The DGF mechanism supposes that each node 
moves with an angular variation according to the sink. 
However, each node  has an angle  which is formed by 
neighbor , sink , and the horizontal axis passing by , as 
shown in Figure 1. The moving direction of node , 
between two recent times t0 and t1, is calculated by 
combining both its two last distances and angles to sink . 
Neighbor  may become near to (or far from) the sink in 
terms of both distance and angle. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1. Neighbor moving: (a)  approaches sink  in term of 
distance and (b)  moves away from sink  in term of angle. 
To show the neighbor direction evolution, the DGF 
mechanism combines the angle and distance parameters of 
neighbors. In Figure 1, the moving direction of neighbor  
is calculated by node  using the two later parameters. The 
DGF mechanism operates in two main phases: neighbors’ 
information update and next forwarder selection. Note that 
we suppose a WSN with a static sink and mobile nodes, 
each node knows its neighbors’ positions, and sink’s 
position thanks to the network initialization phase. Also, 
each node has a table (TABLE I) which contains 
information about its neighbors, such as location, moving 
speed and moving direction. 
1) Neighbors’ information update: Each node broadcasts 
periodically a 1-hop location beacon informing its neighbors 
about its geographical position. The period of this beacon 
can be fixed according to the nodes’ moving speed. Thanks 
to these beacons, each node updates a local table containing 
information about all neighbors. We added to this table 
three new fields to record moving speed, angle and moving 
direction of each neighbor. TABLE I shows the structure of 
the neighbors table of a node. We also added a specific field 
into the location beacon, where the structure is given in 
TABLE II, to convey the moving speed of a node to all its 
neighbors. 
n 
s 
y 
x 
n 
t0 
n 
s 
  
y 
x 
n 
i 
i 
  
t1 
t0 
t1 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
TABLE I.  STRUCTURE OF A NEIGHBORS TABLE  
 
When a node  receives a location beacon B from its 
neighbor , it checks the existence of  in its neighbors 
table T. If node  does not exist, node  inserts information 
concerning  in T (TABLE I), else it calculates the old and 
new direction of neighbor  by using the formulas (1) and 
(2) respectively, where 	,   represents the old 
direction calculated using T, 	,  is the old angle 
calculated using T, 	,  is the new direction 
calculated using B and 	,  is the new angle calculated 
using B. The distances 	,  and 	, , between 
neighbor  and sink , based on locations that are extracted 
from T, respectively from B, are given by the respective 
formulas (3) and (4). Note that  ,  and , are locations 
of  in T, , and , are locations of  in B,  and  are 
locations of  in sender node . 
	,   	,   	,                              	1 
	,   	,   	,                             	2 
	,   	,    	,                 	3 
	,   	,    	,                 	4 
The angles 	,  and 	, , represented by  in 
Figure 1, are calculated according to the trigonometric 
quadrant in which neighbor  is located by using the 
respective formulas (5) and (6) based on the  !2	,   
function of the C++ language. Once the above calculations 
are done by a node , it updates all information concerning 
each neighbor  in its table T. 
	,                                                                                                               	5 
#
$$
%
$$
&
 
  
'
2   !2(,   , ,  ) ;         IF  , -   AND  , -  
'
2   !2(,   ,,  ) ;        IF  , 1   AND  , - 
 '
2   !2(,   , ,  ) ;     IF  , 1   AND  , 1  
 '
2   !2(,   , ,  ) ;     IF  , -   AND  , 1 
2 
	,                                                                                                               	6 
#
$$
%
$$
&
 
  
'
2   !2(,   ,,  ) ;           IF  , -   AND  , -  
'
2   !2(,   , ,  ) ;          IF  , 1   AND  , - 
 '
2   !2(,   , ,  ) ;       IF  , 1   AND  , 1  
 '
2   !2(,   , ,  ) ;      IF  , -   AND  , 1 
2 
2) Next-forwarder selection: This phase aims to enhance 
the greedy mode of GPSR by handling parameters of the 
mobile nodes. Thus, we propose a new routing factor 
combining three parameters: 1) the distance 	,  
between neighbor  and sink , 2) the moving direction 
	,  of the neighbor  and 3) the moving speed 
45667	 of neighbor . When a node  has to send a 
packet to sink , by using a greedy forwarding, it selects 
from its neighbors table node  having the smallest 
 89 :	,  given by Formula (7), where the direction 
	,  is given by Formula (8). Note that this 
direction is calculated using the formulas (1) and (2). When 
	,  is equal to 1 then  is static. When it is greater 
than 1 then  approaches the sink. When it is less than 1 
then  moves away from the sink. 
89 :	,   	,   	, 
45667	 
                     	7 
	,   	, 
	,                                                     	8 
TABLE II.  STRUCTURE OF A LOCATION BEACON 
 
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
We first implemented and evaluated the traditional GPSR 
protocol using ns2 [18] with mobility of nodes. Then we 
associated the proposed DGF mechanism with GPSR and 
evaluated in same conditions the resulting protocol (GPSR-
MS). Since GPSR can handle mobility of nodes by reducing 
the location beacon period, we evaluate performance of this 
protocol under four values of this period (2ms, 3ms, 4ms 
and 5ms) and obtained the results which are shown in the 
graphs as GPSR(2), GPSR(3), GPSR(4) and GPSR(5), 
respectively. This period is set to 5ms for the GPSR-MS 
protocol. 
In our simulations, we used a terrain 600m×600m with 
350 mobile sensors deployed randomly. Then they move 
according to Random Waypoint Model (RWM) with a 
random speed in [5-20] m/s to simulate the mobility in 
realistic environments. The sink is placed at the center of the 
terrain and 12 sources are selected randomly. Each source 
generates one CBR flow with a rate increased gradually 
from 1 to 12 p/s. For each rate and at the end of the 
simulation time, we measure the packet delivery ratio, the 
control packet overhead, the average path length and the 
network energy consumption per delivered packet. Table III 
gives the parameters settings used in our simulations. 
Compared to GPSR in Figure 2, our GPSR-MS protocol 
achieves a better packet delivery ratio, especially when the 
rate is less than 5p/s. The number of packets dropped in 
Field 
Mission/Content 
ID 
Identifier of the node that sent a beacon 
Position 
Location of the node that sent a beacon 
Speed 
Moving speed of the node that sent a beacon 
 
Field 
Mission/Content 
ID 
Identifier of a neighbor node 
Position 
Coordinates of a neighbor i 	G, G 
Direction 
Neighbor moving direction 
Speed 
Neighbor moving speed 
Angle 
Neighbor angle () calculated according to the sink 
ExpTime 
Expire time of a neighbor in the table 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
GPSR is important when a beaconing period is large (5ms). 
Figure 3 shows a good performance of GPSR-MS in term of 
average path length compared to GPSR. This is due to our 
DGF mechanism which dynamically selects as forwarders 
the neighbors that move toward the sink. 
TABLE III.  SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT SETTINGS 
Bandwith 
200 Kbps 
Playload 
32 Bytes 
Terrain 
600m × 600m 
Number of nodes 
350 nodes 
Node Speed 
Random in [5-20] m/s 
Node Radio Range 
40 m 
MAC Layer 
802.11 
Radio Layer 
RADIO-NONNOISE 
Propagation Model 
TWO-RAY 
Simulation Time 
224 sec 
Mobility Model 
RWM Version 1 
 
 
Figure 2. Performance in delivering data packets. 
 
Figure 3. Performance in reducing the paths length. 
Note that when the location beacon is not large (2ms), the 
average path length is reduced in GPSR because tables of 
neighbors are frequently updated. Consequently, GPSR 
generates more location beacons which overload the sensor 
network (Figure 4) and consume excessive energy of nodes 
(Figure 5). On the other hand, GPSR-MS delivers more data 
packets, generates less control packets and manages 
correctly the limited energy of nodes. 
 
 
Figure 4. Performance in reducing control packets. 
 
Figure 5. Performance in economizing energy of nodes. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Existing geographical schemes using greedy forwarding 
in mobile WSNs still have problems as mentioned above 
(Section III). To contribute on solving these problems, we 
have proposed the DGF mechanism that handles mobility of 
nodes in WSNs. It is simple to implement, saves the 
network resources and could be associated with various 
geographical routing protocols. The merit of our proposal is 
that the current packet is forwarded to the best neighbor 
node in terms of distance, moving direction and moving 
speed according to the static sink. We have associated the 
DGF mechanism with the well-known GPSR protocol and 
the resulting protocol, called GPSR-MS, has achieved good 
performance compared to different versions of the original 
GPSR. Indeed, GPSR-MS delivers more packets, broadcasts 
less control packets, uses the shortest routing paths and 
economizes much energy of nodes. Our future work will 
evaluate performance of GPSR-MS with the group mobility 
concept. 
0,60
0,65
0,70
0,75
0,80
0,85
0,90
0,95
1,00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
packet delivery ratio (%)
rate (p/s)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
10,5
11,9
13,3
14,7
16,1
17,5
18,9
20,3
21,7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
average path length (#hops)
rate (p/s)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
0,016
0,018
0,020
0,022
0,024
0,026
0,028
0,030
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
control packets overhead (%)
rate (p/s)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
0,090
0,095
0,100
0,105
0,110
0,115
0,120
0,125
0,130
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
energy consumption (j)
rate(p/s)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S.A. Munir, B. Ren, W. Jiao, B. Wang, D. Xie, and J. Ma, 
“Mobile wireless sensor network: Architecture and enabling 
technologies for ubiquitous computing”, Proc. of the 21st 
Int’l Conference on Advanced Information Networking and 
Applications Workshops, pp. 113–120, Ontario, Canada, 
May 21-23, 2007. 
[2] 
B. Liu, P. Brass, O. Dousse, P. Nain, and D. Towsley, 
“Mobility improves coverage of sensor networks”, Proc. of 
the 6th ACM international symposium on Mobile ad hoc 
networking and computing, pp. 300-308, Illinois, USA, May 
25-27, 2005. 
[3] B. Karp and H. Kung, “GPSR: Greedy perimeter stateless 
routing for wireless networks,” Proc. of the ACM/IEEE 
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 243-
254, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, August 6-11, 2000. 
[4] 
Y. Xu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, "Geography-informed 
Energy Conservation for Adhoc Routing", Proc. of the 7th 
Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile 
Computing and Networking, pp. 70-84, Rome, Italy, July 16-
21, 2001. 
[5] 
T. He, J.A. Stankovic, C. Lu, and T. Abdelzaher, “A 
Spatiotemporal Communication Protocol for Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed 
Systems, Vol. 16(10), pp. 995-1006, October 2005. 
[6] 
Q. Fang, J. Gao, and L.J. Guibas, “Locating and bypassing 
holes in sensor networks,” IEEE Mobile Networks and 
Applications, Vol. 11(2), pp. 187–200, April 2006. 
[7] 
F. Ye, H. Luo, J. Cheng, S. Lu, and L. Zhang, "A Two-Tier 
Data Dissemination Model for Large-scale Wireless Sensor 
Networks", Proc. of the Mobile Computing and Networks 
Conference, pp.148-159, Georgia, USA, Sept. 23-28, 2002. 
[8] 
K. Fodor and A. Vidacs, "Efficient Routing to Mobile Sinks 
in Wireless Sensor Networks", Proc. of the 2nd International 
Workshop on Performance Control in WSNs (PWSN), pp. 
1–7, Austin, Texas, USA, October 23, 2007. 
[9] 
Y.H. Wang, K.F. Huang, P.F. Fu, and J.X. Wang, "Mobile 
Sink Routing Protocol with Registering in Cluster-Based 
WSNs", Proc. of the 5th International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing, pp. 527-535, Oslo, 
Norway, June 23-25, 2008. 
[10] Y. Yang, L. Dong-Hyun, P.K. Myong-Soon, and I.H. Peter, 
"Dynamic Enclose Cell Routing in Mobile Sensor 
Networks", Proc. of the Asia-Pacific Software Engineering 
Conference (APSEC), pp.736-737, Busan, Korea, Nov. 30 – 
Dec. 3, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[11] M. Liliana, C. Arboleda, and N. Nidal, "Cluster-based 
Routing Protocol for Mobile Sensor Networks", Proc. of the 
3rd International Conference on Quality of Service in 
Heterogeneous 
Wired/Wireless 
Networks, 
pp. 
24-28, 
Canada, August 7–9, 2006. 
[12] C.G. Panayiotou, T. Theofanis, and P. Lambrou, "A Survey 
on Routing Techniques supporting Mobility in Sensor 
Networks", Proc. of the 5th International Conference on 
Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks, pp. 78–85, China, 
Dec. 14-16, 2009. 
[13] G.S. Kumar, A. Sitara, and K.P. Jacob "An adaptive cluster 
based routing scheme for mobile wireless sensor networks", 
Proc. of the 2nd International Conference on Computing, 
Communications and Networking Technologies, pp. 1-5, 
Karur, India, July 29-31, 2010. 
[14] N. Nasser, A. Al-Yatama, and K. Saleh, "Mobility and 
Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. of the 24th 
Annual IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, Niagara Falls, pp. 573-578, Canada, 
May 8-11, 2011. 
[15] C. Saad, A. Benslimane, J. Champ, and J.C. Konig, "Ellipse 
routing: A Geographic Routing Protocol for Mobile Sensor 
Networks with uncertain positions", Proc. of the 2nd Int’l 
Conference on Future Generation Communication and 
Networking, pp. 1–5, Sanya, China, December 13-15, 2008. 
[16] D.S. Kim and Y.J. Chung, "Self-Organization Routing 
Protocol Supporting Mobile Nodes for Wireless Sensor 
Network", Proc. of the First Int’l Multi-Symposiums on 
Computer and Computational Sciences, pp. 622-626, 
Hangzhou, China, June 20-24, 2006. 
[17] G.S. Kumar, M.V. Paul and K.P. Jacob, "Mobility Metric 
based LEACH-Mobile Protocol", Proc. of 16th International 
Conference on Advanced Computing and Communications, 
pp. 248–53, Chennai, India, December 14-17, 2008. 
[18] Collaboration between researchers at UC Berkeley, LBL, 
USC/ISI, and Xerox PARC, “The ns Manual”, on line at: 
http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/, last consultation in December 
March 2012. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

