Pre-selection Algorithm of Access Points in a Handover Management Scheme
Meriem Kassar∗, Souheib Ben Amor†, Brigitte Kervella‡, Daniel Fernandes Macedo§
∗Communication Systems Laboratory, ENIT, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunisia
Email: Meriem.Kassar@enit.rnu.tn
†INRS-EMT, Montreal, Canada
Email: ben.amor.souheib@gmail.com
‡LIP6, University Pierre & Marie Curie-Paris6, UMR 7606, France
Email: Brigitte.Kervella@lip6.fr
§Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
Email: damacedo@dcc.ufmg.br
Abstract—Recently, wireless networks and mobile terminals are
rapidly evolving. Wireless networks are evolving towards het-
erogeneous overlaying environment, while the mobile terminals
evolve towards having multi-interface functionality in order to
face seamless service continuity. Traditional horizontal handover
management schemes that mainly depend on signal strength for
decision making are unable to fulﬁll ubiquitous and seamless
mobility across heterogeneous networks. Vertical handover is
more related to convenient criteria such as user preferences
or application requirements. The use of location information
in decision making would certainly enhance horizontal or ver-
tical handover mechanisms by supporting optimized handover
management. For that, using the location information and the
mobile terminal movement can participate to a handover decision
improving the handover execution procedure. For example, when
a mobile terminal is moving with a certain velocity, it can perform
handover execution uselessly that affects handover performance.
This paper proposes and describes a pre-selecting access points
algorithm in a location-aided handover management scheme in
order to reduce unnecessary handovers in a moderate mobility
scenario. It shows by simulation the feasibility of the proposed
algorithm applied to a random mobility and a dense environment.
Keywords–Handover management ; Location information ;
Polar coordinates ; Access Points selection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Handover management is the key aspect in the development
of solutions supporting mobility scenarios. It is the process
by which a Mobile Terminal (MT) maintains its connection
active while moving from one point of attachment (access
point or base station or access router) to another. Handover
management issues include mobility scenarios, metrics, de-
cision algorithms and procedures. Mobility scenarios can be
classiﬁed into horizontal (between different cells of the same
network) and vertical (between different types of networks,
for example, Cellular Networks and Wireless Local Area
Networks (WLAN)). In homogeneous networks, horizontal
handovers are typically required when the serving access point
becomes unavailable due to MT’s movement. In heterogeneous
networks, the need for vertical handovers can be initiated for
convenience rather than connectivity reasons (e.g., according
to user choice for a particular service).
Conventional handover management techniques consider
usually the link quality parameters (received signal level,
reliability, etc.) and user parameters. In low mobility scenarios,
this solution is quite efﬁcient because MT always selects the
best access network according to link and service quality.
However, when MT moves at a moderate speed, the frequency
of handovers increases, and thus the time of connection to each
cell decreases. Despite of the recent improvements in levels 2
and 3 handover technology, packet loss is always performed
and therefore, a slight temporary service degradation can be
observed in each handover executed. In a moderate mobility
scenario, MT should choose the network or the cell that
provides the maximum connection time, especially in a dense
environment. Such choices would allow MT to remain over
time in each cell and reduce the number of unnecessary
handovers and thus service degradation. For that, a location-
assisted handover can be used in such scenarios. More speciﬁ-
cally, the location information can be added to the link quality
parameters in the handover decision process performed before
selecting the best access network.
In our paper, we propose the use of location information of
moving MT and Access Points (APs) in the choice of the target
AP for the handover process. According to several measure-
ments of the MT’s position over time, it is possible to estimate
the direction of its movement. Furthermore, if this information
is increased with its context (e.g., the user moves on a highway
between two towns), it is possible to predict its future position.
In this contribution, we only focus on an outdoor moderate
mobility scenario in a way that high mobility has to consider
more parameters such as cellular connectivity parameters. The
cell type concerned by our proposal covers picocell (range of
≈ 200 m or less) or femtocell (range of ≈ 10 m) in cellular
networks and WiFi hotspots cell (e.g., WiFi range of ≈ 100
m). In our scenario, thanks to the location information of each
detected AP, it is possible to give more weight to the nearest
APs of the MT’s future position. These APs will be in the
coverage of MT longer than those whose MT rolls away. Then,
we can choose among APs in MT movement direction the one
that gives the best link quality parameters thanks to a multi-
criteria decision method. Each AP knows the position of its
neighboring access points. This information can be obtained
in two ways: (i) from agreements between operators, which
provide the location of their access points; (ii) cooperation
between users, which record the APs, their location and their
Quality of Service (QoS) parameters. Location information
can be collected with other technologies: Global Positioning
System (GPS), Radio-Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID), WiFi,
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Bluetooth, etc. In our paper, we gather location information
from GPS as geographic/cartesian coordinates and we convert
it to polar coordinates in order to pre-select the nearest APs
in the MT movement direction.
Based on a location-assisted solution, we propose an intel-
ligent handover management scheme. Our solution considers a
pre-selection algorithm of access points, an important phase in
our handover process in order to reduce unnecessary handovers
that can affect handover performance in a moderate mobility
scenario. After this phase, an access network selection can be
processed based on user preferences. In this paper, we focus
on the feasibility of our algorithm in a dense environment and
with a random mobility by simulation results. Here, we deﬁne
a dense environment as an area in which the APs are deployed
such that MT always detects the overlapping of more than two
APs.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section II presents
the related work. Section III describes the whole handover
management scheme. Section IV introduces the proposed
algorithm for pre-selecting access points in the handover
management scheme. Section V gives the simulation results.
Finally, Section VI concludes our work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The handover management process is described in three
phases [1][2][3]:
(1) the handover information gathering: used to collect all the
information, through monitoring and measurements, required
to identify the need for handover and to apply handover
decision policies. It can be called also ”handover initiation”
phase or ”system discovery”.
(2) the handover decision: used to determine whether and
how to perform the handover by selecting the most suitable
access network (taking into account some criteria such as user
preferences) and by giving instructions to the execution phase.
It is also called ”network selection” or ”system selection”.
(3) the handover execution: used to change channels and ad-
dressing conforming to the details resolved during the decision
phase.
A handover management process can be enhanced by
adding location information. Localization techniques use dif-
ferent technologies. GPS gives a more precise location infor-
mation in outdoor environments. Signal quality based tech-
niques such as the quality or a mapping of the Signal Strength
(SS) received are used to estimate MT position. These tech-
niques give a position with a margin of error of several
meters. Otherwise, they can be useful and sufﬁcient to deduce
MT direction movement. Connectivity based techniques can
also be used in a way that MT can estimate its position
using the location of all the APs detected in its vicinity (i.e.,
intersection of all the APs coverage). Hybrid techniques use
GPS and the cellular network (such as Global System for
Mobile Communications (GSM)) for Assisted-GPS. Here, the
cell coverage information is used to enhance the precision
of the estimated location especially in poor satellite signal
conditions.
In the literature, many works propose a location-based
handover management process [4][5][6][7]. In [4], the authors
propose a location-assisted handover (LAH) which is the use
of position information to aid and optimize handover and
interface selection decisions within the multimode MT. LAH
supports more intelligent handover services that ensure opti-
mized MT operation. They have developed a novel multimode
MT architecture in order to realize LAH for such terminals.
Depending upon velocity, direction and on-going trafﬁc of
MTs, it can estimate the time when a handover is needed. The
authors proposed an architecture with no evaluation perfor-
mance results. Otherwise, Yu et al. [5] shows that a proposed
3G-WLAN heterogeneous network handover algorithm based
on location information has effectively reduced the number
of handovers, limited the ping-pong effect, improved the han-
dover performance compared to a traditional vertical handover.
But, the simulation experiments were made only on two cells,
one cell of 3G cellular network and one of WiFi hotspot and
on an MT moving with a ﬁxed velocity and direction. In the
same cellular-WLAN scenario, Nielsen et al. [6] contribution
performs two proactive handover decision algorithms by using
movement prediction to determine the right time and the right
place for a user terminal to handover. But, the authors do not
give precision on the positioning system used in their solutions.
For more accurate results, Folstad and Helvik [7] proposes a
reliability model of a trajectory (deﬁned as the series of APs)
based on measurement reports and signaling from networks
(i.e., extension of Media Independent Handover (MIH)) in
order to ﬁnd the optimal AP selection and handovers for a
dual homed service.
GPS can be used in location-based handover solutions
[8][9]. In [8], the handover latency is reduced by reducing the
number of APs scanned by MT during the handover process
by using GPS. It is a pre-authentication mechanism to the most
potential selected AP in order to reduce the scanning delay. In
[9], another scheme is based on a GPS pre-selective scanning
to reduce the scanning delay which is 90 percent of whole
handover delay.
Other works proposed handover algorithms considering
MT movement in low to moderate mobility scenario. Jeong et
al. [10] exploits a mobility prediction scheme with a relatively
low velocity in order to propose an optimized handover deci-
sion algorithm in hierarchical femto/macro cell networks. Dam
et al. [11] proposes a vertical handover algorithm considering
the user movement prediction, energy consumption and QoS
parameters for the end-to-end connections. It considers a
peer-to-peer scheme in a WLAN connection between devices
and a server bounce mechanism. Both works [10][11] use
a centralized component such as a server to gather terminal
mobility and network related information.
Our proposal is based on a location-aided handover man-
agement. It does not use the location information to estimate
the right time to handover like in [4] (i.e. that is fulﬁlled by
the handover initiation), but to do the right handover by pre-
selecting the candidate APs in MT movement. Our solution
collects the location information related to MT trajectory like
in [7] and uses it to calculate the speed and the direction. Our
experiments were made on a coverage of various cells with
a random movement but not only two cells compared to [5]
that ﬁxed the speed and the direction values. For that, it uses a
GPS like in [8][9] but the location information is integrated in
a more sophisticated handover management scheme. We give
more intelligence to our handover management scheme like the
works in [10] and [11] but without a centralized component
to store location information.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

III.
OUR HANDOVER MANAGEMENT SCHEME
Our handover management scheme is composed of four
phases :
(1)
Handover initiation,
(2)
Pre-selection of access points,
(3)
Multi-criteria handover decision for network selec-
tion,
(4)
Handover execution.
First of all, we need to collect all the necessary handover
criteria such as the phase deﬁned previously (Section II).
These latter are required to be context-aware in the sense
that it should be conscious of possibilities offered by each
access network, MT movement and QoS requirements for
the demanding service. In traditional handover decision, only
one criteria is used, the Received Signal Strength (RSS).
For a vertical handover decision, it is not sufﬁcient. Context
information are relevant in a way that they are useful enough to
avoid false decisions, therefore, bad performances. They can be
relative to the network, the terminal, the service and the user.
Here, we group it into two parts as in [12]: all the information
related to the network on one side and all the information that
may exist at the terminal on the other side. There are: (i) Net-
work context: QoS parameters (bandwidth, delay, jitter, packet
loss), Coverage, Monetary cost, AP location information ; (ii)
Terminal context: User preferences, Service capabilities (real-
time and non real-time), Terminal Status (battery and network
interfaces), Priority given to interfaces, Location information
(velocity, direction).
The third phase concerns the selection of the best available
network. This phase is aided by the second phase which
reduces the number of target access networks in order to avoid
the ping-pong effect (i.e., number of unnecessary handovers).
These two phases can be deﬁned as the handover decision
phase as deﬁned in Section II. The pre-selection phase is more
related to the MT movement (slow, moderate or high mobility).
Our handover management process is given in Figure 1,
highlighting the pre-selection phase concerned by this paper.
Our process begins with the handover initiation (Phase (1)). It
is mainly based on connectivity criteria in a way that performs
if a handover is needed or not. While MT uses a running
application and a handover is needed due to connectivity
reasons, a phase of pre-selection of access points (Phase (2))
is triggered according to the location information (velocity,
direction, position). The decision to initiate a handover to
the best access point or network among those pre-selected
according to user preferences is performed at the Phase
(3). Here, we consider a decision in which all the available
alternatives (access points or networks) have to be evaluated
according to given objectives. For that, the AHP (Analytic
Hierarchy Process) method is used to assign scores to these
networks (network scores). It carries only the calculation of the
ﬁnal decision, Decision Making, when all parameters (scores)
are already available. Before applying it directly, two steps
must be performed: (i) assigning scores to criteria, Criteria
Scoring, a pre-conﬁguration step in which the importance
of each objective is evaluated according to user preferences;
(ii) assigning scores to networks, Scoring Network, where
available networks are evaluated and compared according to
each objective. The last phase is the handover execution (Phase
(4)) that establishes the IP connectivity through the selected
Figure 1. Our Handover Management Scheme
access network. Details on the phases 1, 3 and 4 are given in
[12].
IV.
OUR AP PRE-SELECTION ALGORITHM
Our pre-selection algorithm has to retrieve the location
information given by GPS and to convert the coordinates in
order to compute an area of selected APs according to the
direction and the velocity of MT movement.
A. Location information gathering and processing
Before any processing, we have to retrieve the MT position.
This latter can be obtained via GPS that gives geographic
coordinates (longitude, latitude and elevation in degrees). For
more simplicity, these coordinates have to be converted to
cartesian/geocentric coordinates (x, y, z in meters) such as in
[13]. Once MT position obtained, we have to deﬁne periodi-
cally the MT velocity and direction. These two parameters are
computed by the equations 1 and 2.
v =
p
(xk−1 − xk)2 + (yk−1 − yk)2 + (zk−1 − zk)2
∆t
(1)
−→
α = arctan
 |yk−1 − yk|
|xk−1 − xk|

(2)
Here, the indexes k and k − 1 are the last two successive
samples of location information (the most recent values) be-
tween two times tk−1 and tk. ∆t is the sampling period. These
parameters are computed in order to allow a periodic update
of MT velocity and direction. In order to choose ∆t value,
we have to consider the transmission period of the beacon
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

message. The beacon is a frame transmitted periodically by
an AP to announce the presence of a wireless access network
containing all the necessary information such as the beacon
interval, SSID or the supported data rates. The default value
of the beacon interval is 0.1sec. Because GPS data is updated
every second, it is more advisable to choose one second for
∆t.
MT receives the location information of all APs that
surround it. Once APs localized, the algorithm converts the
cartesian coordinates of all detected APs into polar coordi-
nates. Here, each AP can be characterized by a distance (d)
and an angle (α). These two parameters allow to localize the
APs in a coordinate system whose origin is MT. The distance
and the angle between MT and AP are given by the equations
3 and 4.
d =
p
(xMT − xA)2 + (yMT − yA)2 + (zMT − zA)2
(3)
α = arctan
 |yMT − yA|
|xMT − xA|

(4)
where xMT , yMT and zMT are the cartesian coordinates of
MT and xA, yA, zA are those of an access point A.
B. Pre-selection algorithm description
According to the location information as polar coordinates
obtained in the previous section, the pre-selection algorithm
restricts the set of the available access points to which MT
can connect. It selects only the access points in MT’s direction
(limited by an angle of tolerance X). If we consider A as a
set of the available access points, the pre-selection consists of
getting a sub-set A∗ deﬁned by :
A∗ = {(di, αi) ∈ A|−→
α − X ≤ αi ≤ −→
α + X}
(5)
where the couple (di, αi) is the distance and the angle of the
pre-selected access point i. The vector −→
α represents the MT
direction and X is the tolerance angle. An AP is selected if it
is in MT proximity, it means that it has to belong to the area
limited by the tolerance angle X. The selection is given at the
Figure 2 where the stars are the selected access points and the
squares are the rejected ones.
We have to consider some criteria in order to determine
the tolerance angle in AP selection. The criteria that have to
be satisﬁed are :
•
An AP has to be in the coverage area of MT move-
ment.
•
The number of candidate APs has to exceed a min-
imum threshold (Min threshold). If the number of
the candidate APs is under the value 2, our algorithm
is not useful. The handover will be executed to the
unique available AP.
•
The number of selected APs does not exceed a max-
imum threshold (Max threshold).
We notice that the conversion to the polar coordinates system
can be imprecise in a way that the computing is realized
every ∆t seconds. The precision can be increased while ∆t is
decreased. Therefore, we can increase the location information
precision by relaxing our method constraints, i.e., by increasing
the tolerance angle X in order to select more candidate APs.
In this case, the disadvantage of our method will be the time
calculation and a high number of possible handovers.
In order to propose a precise AP pre-selection algorithm
that fulﬁlls the mentioned criteria, we opt for this process :
(1)
A ﬁrst selection is based on APs position. We choose
the APs in the coverage area of MT at the time
tk. It means that we initialize the tolerance angle to
X = 90◦. We choose this X value because we have
to consider the maximum value of the available APs
that can be detected in MT direction. We obtain a ﬁrst
subset A∗ as given in the Figure 2(a).
(2)
A second selection has to limit the number of prese-
lected APs in order to be comprised between the two
ﬁxed thresholds. For that, we have to eliminate the
farthest APs until obtaining a number of APs in the
interval [Min Threshold, Max Threshold]
In the second selection of our process, here are the steps to
obtain the ﬁnal number of pre-selected APs.
•
X
takes
the
value
of
the
angle
of
the
far-
thest selected AP from MT. If the number of
APs
in
the
set
A∗
are
not
included
in
the
[Min Threshold, Max Threshold], we eliminate
this AP. After the change of the set A∗, we affect
to X the value of the angle of the farthest AP.
•
This ﬁrst step will be repeated until we obtain a
number of APs less or equal to Max Threshold. We
notice that we can face the case in which two APs are
symmetric according to MT, i.e., one AP has an angle
αi = αT + X and the other αi = αT − X. Here, we
have to choose to eliminate one of them and keep the
other.
•
Finally,
we
can
decrease
the
value
of
the
Max Threshold
in
order
to
obtain
a
more
precise pre-selection if MT velocity is very high.
As we mentioned previously, the precision is closely
related to the ﬁnal value of the tolerance angle X.
In our work, we choose a value of Max Threshold
equal to 5. This value is sufﬁcient in a way that we
will get enough access points to perform a network
selection for convenience reasons (i.e., according to
user preferences).
Figure 2(b) gives the result of the second pre-selection for an
interval [Min Threshold, Max Threshold] = [2, 4].
The different steps of AP pre-selection are summarized in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 AP Pre-selection algorithm
1. Retrieving MT position (x, y, z)
2. Computing MT direction (−→
α ) and velocity (v)
3. Converting each available AP ∈ A coordinates into polar
coordinates (d, α)
4. Deﬁning A∗ = {(di, αi) ∈ A|−→
α − X ≤ αi ≤ −→
α + X}
5. First selection: X = 90◦
selecting the candidate APs in the coverage area of MT direction.
6. Second selection:
repeat Evaluating A∗ with X = XfarthestAP
if αiM = αt + X of an access point M and αiN = αt − X of an
access point N then M or N is eliminated.
until NselectedAP s ∈ [Min Threshold, Max Threshold]
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

(a) First Selection
(b) Second Selection
Figure 2. Our AP pre-selection process results
V.
SIMULATION RESULTS
In this paper, we focus our work on the feasibility of
our pre-selection algorithm in a speciﬁc scenario. In order
to evaluate our proposed algorithm, we use a Java-based
event-driven simulator. We choose SIDnet-SWANS (Simulator
and Integrated Development Platform for Sensor Networks
Applications), a project developed by the Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering department of Northwestern University [14].
SIDnet-SWANS is the GUI (Graphical User Interface) im-
plemented in Java of the network simulator JIST/SWANS.
JIST (Java in Simulation Time) is a discrete event-driven
simulation environment and SWANS (Scalable Wireless Ad
hoc Network Simulator) is the extension to simulate wireless
ad hoc networks. JIST/SWANS has the same functionalities
as the network simulator NS2 or GloMoSim (Global Mobile
Information System Simulator). In our simulation scenario,
MT (a node represented by a black point) has a random
mobility in which the new position and the velocity are
computed using a random direction. The cell coverage used
concerns the same type of nodes. We used IEEE 802.11 MAC
and PHY layers for each node. The AP/nodes are randomly
deployed in a square simulation area of 1000 ∗ 1000 m.
Our simulation results are presented in the next Figures 3,
4, 5 and 6. In the simulation tests represented by Figure 3
and 4, we use 100 AP/nodes in order to highlight the two
selection phases of the proposed AP pre-selection process.
Firstly, MT direction and velocity are determined according
to its initial position (represented by the black point). The
pink point represents the MT current position. Secondly, our
implemented algorithm pre-selects the candidate APs in the
coverage area of MT movement (represented by the green
points) using the tolerance angle X = 90◦ (see Figure 3).
Finally, it selects a ﬁxed number (Max Threshold = 5)
of APs (represented by the yellow points) while reducing
the tolerance angle (X = 15◦) until it answers the second
selection criteria (see Figure 4). In Figure 5, we see that
when the number of deployed AP/nodes is reduced (equal
to 30 nodes), the tolerance angle is adapted to X = 45◦ to
respect the Max Threshold. If we reduce more the number
of deployed AP/nodes until 10 nodes, the ﬁrst selection criteria
are matching the second selection criteria (see Figure 6).
Figure 3. First Selection (X = 90◦)
Figure 4. Second Selection (X = 15◦)
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

Figure 5. Second Selection (X = 45◦)
Figure 6. 1stSelection Criteria = 2nd Selection Criteria
VI.
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a pre-selection algorithm of
access points in an intelligent handover management scheme.
Our proposal converts cartesian coordinates of MT and the APs
in MT coverage to polar coordinates in order to retrieve APs
position in MT direction. It selects a ﬁxed number of candidate
APs according to a tolerance angle that can be reduced until
we obtain a minimum value. We showed that our algorithm is
feasible in a dense environment and with a random mobility.
It will be interesting to test this algorithm with another
existing type of mobility, implemented in JIST/SWANS, such
as STRAW (STreetRAndom Waypoint) that provides more
accurate simulation results by using a vehicular mobility model
or GMMM (Gauss-Markov Mobility Model). Here, we can
also consider different types of cells (macrocell) for high
mobility scenario. Hence, it will be interesting to analyze the
mobile speed effect on MT connection time to the network.
Our algorithm is involved in a location-assisted handover. It
helps the network selection phase in a way that it selects the
candidate APs (i.e., access networks) according to MT move-
ment (i.e., direction and velocity). Such a location-assisted
handover can reduce the ping-pong effect (i.e., the number of
unnecessary handovers) and therefore, a better handover can
be performed. More simulation results will be proposed in a
near future work that integrates the implemented algorithm
to the proposed handover management scheme. Hence, the
handover performance of our scheme will be compared to
traditional vertical handover management schemes such as
RSS or Bandwidth based vertical handover decision schemes.
In a future work, we intend to add to our outdoor solution
(using GPS) an indoor localization-based solution using WiFi
or femtocell coverage.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Chan, R. Sheriff, Y. Hu, P. Conforto, and C. Tocci, “Mobility Manage-
ment Incorporating Fuzzy Logic for a Heterogeneous IP Environment,”
IEEE Communications Magazine., vol. 39, no. 12, December 2001, pp.
42–51.
[2]
H. Wang, R. Katz, and J. Giese, “Policy-enabled Handoffs across
Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,” Second IEEE Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, 1999. Proceedings. WMCSA’99.,
February 1999, pp. 51–60.
[3]
M. Kassar, B. Kervella, and G. Pujolle, “An overview of vertical
handover decision strategies in heterogeneous wireless networks,” Com-
puter Communications, vol. 31, no. 10, 2008, pp. 2607–2620.
[4]
T. Ahmed, K. Kyamakya, M. Ludwig, M. Schielein, S. McCann,
E. Hepworth, and A. Surtees, “Location-assisted handover for mul-
timode mobile terminals,” Proc. of the IEEE/ACM Euro American
Conference on Telematics and Information Systems (EATIS), February
2016.
[5]
Q. Yu, W. Jiang, and Z. Xiao, “3g and wlan heterogeneous network
handover based on the location information,” International Conference
on Communications, Circuits and Systems (ICCCAS), vol. 2, 2013, pp.
50–54.
[6]
J. J. Nielsen, T. K. Madsen, and H.-P. Schwefel, “Location assisted
handover optimization for heterogeneous wireless networks,” 11th Eu-
ropean Wireless Conference 2011-Sustainable Wireless Technologies
(European Wireless), 2011, pp. 1–8.
[7]
E. L. Folstad and B. E. Helvik, “Reliability modelling of access point se-
lection and handovers in heterogeneous wireless environments,” Design
of Reliable Communication Networks (DRCN), 2013 9th International
Conference on the, 2013, pp. 103–110.
[8]
D. Sarddar, J. Banerjee, T. Jana, S. K. Saha, U. Biswas, and M. Naskar,
“Minimization of handoff latency by angular displacement method using
gps based map,” International Journal of Computer Science Issues
(IJCSI), vol. 7, no. 3, 2010, pp. 29–37.
[9]
D. Sarddar, J. Banerjee, J. G. Chowdhury, R. Jana, K. K. Nundy,
U. Biswas, and M. Naskar, “Reducing handover delay by pre-selective
scanning using gps,” International Journal of Distributed and Parallel
systems (IJDPS), vol. 1, no. 2, 2010.
[10]
B. Jeong, S. Shin, I. Jang, N. W. Sung, and H. Yoon, “A smart
handover decision algorithm using location prediction for hierarchical
macro/femto-cell networks,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC Fall), 2011, pp. 1–5.
[11]
M. S. Dam, S. R. Christensen, L. M. Mikkelsen, and R. L. Olesen,
“Location assisted vertical handover algorithm for qos optimization in
end-to-end connections,” IEEE 11th International Conference on Trust,
Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom),
2012, pp. 1632–1640.
[12]
M. Kassar, B. Kervella, and G. Pujolle, “An intelligent handover man-
agement system for future generation wireless networks,” EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2008, 2008,
p. 6.
[13]
“Transformation geographic to geocentric,” http://www.ngi.be, last ac-
cess 14/04/2016.
[14]
O. C. Ghica, G. Trajcevski, P. Scheuermann, Z. Bischof, and
N. Valtchanov, “Sidnet-swans: A simulator and integrated development
platform for sensor networks applications,” 2008, pp. 385–386.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-473-2
AICT 2016 : The Twelfth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

