Techno-economic analysis for Rural Broadband Access Networks 
 
Navneet Nayan, Rong Zhao, Nikolay Zhelev, 
Wolfgang Knospe 
Detecon International GmbH, 53227  
Bonn, Germany 
Navneet.Nayan | Rong.Zhao | Nikolay.Zhelev | 
Wolfgang.Knospe@detecon.com 
Carmen Mas Machuca 
Technology University of Munich, 80290 
München, Germany 
cmas@tum.de
 
 
Abstract— This paper elaborates a techno-economic cost model 
for deploying Broadband Access Networks in rural areas 
around the world. It is aimed to come up with the major 
benefits and challenges associated with offering broadband 
access/services in rural areas and also to derive an effective 
solution towards this problem. The complete picture including 
all relevant factors impacting costs and benefits of rural 
broadband networks have been presented. A Technology 
Selection Strategy is also proposed to select the best-fit 
solution, subject to technical and economic modelling including 
regulation, revenue and funding. A quantitative analysis 
leading to an empirical techno-economic model for computing 
the total cost-benefits associated with rural broadband has 
been developed. A short insight into a Germany-based case 
study for rural broadband has also been depicted.  
Keywords - Rural Broadband Access; Techno-economic 
analysis;  Cost model; Regulation; Funding 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The communication network market is widely accepted 
to be one of the most dynamic fields of business and 
technology. With a multitude of fast-paced technological 
innovations, ever-insatiable market demands and tightly 
coupled regulatory obligations; dynamism seems to exist in 
almost every aspect of this digitally networked environment. 
The Internet has been a global connector, establishing 
links from one corner of the world to the other through a well 
defined globally distributed network. A series of innovations 
in this field of engineering propelled different technological 
adoptions in all segments, leading to higher capacity 
networks as we see it currently.  
However, not much has driven the development of 
broadband communication networks for rural communities 
globally. This is primarily due to factors such as low return 
on investment potential for network operators, lower 
spending capability of rural populace, stringent regulatory 
landscapes and inadequate funding resources [1]. 
In order to understand the issue regarding rural 
broadband, and thereby, derive a feasible solution, it is vital 
to construct the overall picture of the components involved 
in the business case for rural networks. Most of the studies 
look for particular scenarios as for Africa [2] or India [3] 
although they do not include important aspects as regulation 
and funding.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces 
the current state of rural areas as well as an overview of the 
benefits and major challenges involved in provisioning 
broadband services such as regulatory and funding aspects..  
Section III revolves around the technology options for rural 
broadband 
services 
and 
their 
techno-economic 
benchmarking. An innovative approach to model the cost-
benefits of rural broadband networks, including the relevant 
factors, has been described in Section IV. This is achieved 
using the Technology Selection Strategy elaborated in the 
same section. Section V describes the process of identifying 
the best fitting technical choice and its application to a 
German rural area. 
II. 
RURAL BROADBAND ACCESS 
A. Rural Broadband – Motivation 
Rural broadband access aims to deliver efficient solutions 
to connect the rural (un- and underserved) community with 
access to the Internet at appropriate bandwidth. It is aimed to 
provide a previously un-served or underserved community 
with access to the Internet at a sufficient speed as to not be 
left behind or be disadvantaged from the subscribers in the 
city/localities with a proximity to regional/backbone 
networks. The connection will allow the subscribers to fast 
and efficiently use all services available on the Internet.  
Multifarious e-services, triple play and specified services 
for rural areas are the main drivers to develop the rural 
broadband access. As illustrated in Fig. 1, broadband brings 
along tremendous amount of opportunities for growth and 
development. The direct and indirect effect of broadband 
Internet has been thoroughly researched and proposes 
substantial benefits in terms of economic growth [4, 5]. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Services and Benefits of Rural Broadband 
B. Rural Broadband – Challenges 
Although the benefits of providing rural broadband 
access are countless, deploying rural networks face a number 
of challenges from multifarious domains. In general, the 
overall scope of factors hindering such initiatives can be 
summarized as follows: 
Technical factors 
A number of technical considerations must be taken into 
account while making the choice for a broadband 
technology.  
 
Distance and Topology: Technologies suited for 
special distance and topography 
 
Scalability: Technologies with expected bandwidth, 
and easily upgraded to future technology 
 
Resource Contention: reuse of existing infrastructure, 
shared or dedicated last mile platform 
 
Cost Efficiency: Technologies with low Capital and 
Operational Expenses (i.e. CAPEX and OPEX), e.g. 
lower 
energy 
consumption, 
access 
to 
solar 
technology 
 
Implementation and Maintenance: Technologies 
suited for installation and maintenance, both for 
network operators and end users 
 
Reliability: Simpler/Robust Equipment offering 
better reliability; Technologies less affected by 
weather or other environment conditions 
Regulatory factors 
In general, telecommunication regulations involve a 
complex domain of obligatory directives for a free and fair 
competitive telecom market within any country. An apex 
administrative body, like the “Bundesnetzagentur” in 
Germany, is usually responsible for enforcing such 
directives to protect the interests of the subscribers and 
prevent monopoly.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Regulatory Concerns of Rural Broadband 
 
While regulatory issues involving frequency spectrum 
license fees/open access networks are fairly common; there 
are different regulatory concerns that need to be taken care 
of, for different technologies. Additional expenditure on 
account of regulatory requirements hinders the ambitions of 
network operators in rural broadband deployments. Fig. 2 
shows the interaction between the parties involved and their 
concerns.  
 
Digital Dividend: The radio frequency spectrum, (790-862 
MHz) which has been derived out from the transition of 
terrestrial radio from analog to digital mode, is expected to 
be one of the important steps promoting Rural Broadband in 
Germany. Due to its physical wave propagation capabilities, 
this spectrum is particularly suited for supplying large areas 
with broadband utilizing lesser radio infrastructure. 
 
Optical fibre based PON/AON: Open Access Network 
policies promote usage by a number of different providers 
that share the investments and maintenance cost. However, 
they come with an additional price of enhanced CAPEX 
which is around 20%-50% more than the actual CAPEX [6]. 
 
xDSL: In order to ensure a fair regulatory landscape, 
directives for ensuring unbundling of the local loop are 
enforced for network operators. This translates to an OPEX 
implication (multiple providers accessing the same copper 
loops). A suitable factor can be assumed for related 
calculations. 
Socio-Economic factors 
Economy status, revenue potential, actual demand for 
broadband services must be considered to construct the 
overall 
business 
case. 
Moreover, 
an 
account 
of 
funding/subsidy availability for the project must also be 
taken into account. 
 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
C. Rural Broadband – Global Developments 
Realizing the significance of broadband services for rural 
areas, different state aid programs and national strategies of 
most of the developing/developed economies have proposed 
substantial funding resources towards this cause: 
 
Europe: The European Commission (EC) has approved ~ 
€1bn to be available for funding of rural broadband projects. 
The subsidy amount will be distributed among all Member 
States, which are responsible for project identification and 
documentation submission to EC for funding approval. 
Finally, the EC can fund up to 90% per project [7].The 
domains selected for funding involve: Creation of new 
broadband infrastructure including backhaul facilities (e.g., 
fixed, terrestrial wireless, satellite-based or combination of 
technologies); Upgrade of existing broadband infrastructure; 
Laying down passive broadband infrastructure (ducts, civil 
work, dark fibre). In particular for Germany, there is 
Broadband project, which aims to achieve 75% population 
coverage with at least 50 Mbit/s until 2014 [8]. Similarly for 
UK, the “Digital Britain” project proposes 2 Mbit/s for all 
users by the end of 2012.  
USA: As part of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act adopted in 2009, $7.2 billion was 
allocated for accelerating of deployment of broadband 
technologies in USA through the Broadband Stimulus 
Program. Two agencies, the Rural Utilities Service (RUS) 
under 
Department 
of 
Agriculture 
and 
National 
Telecommunications 
and 
Information 
Administration 
(NTIA) under Department of Commerce are responsible to 
distribute the money in terms of grants/loans to facilitate 
broadband deployment in rural areas and grants for 
deploying broadband infrastructure in un-served and 
underserved areas, enhance broadband capacity in public 
computer centers, thus, promote sustainable broadband 
adoption. 
Asia-Pacific (APAC): The Federal Government of 
Australia has spent up to $258 million during its operation of 
connecting rural areas with broadband Internet services. The 
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital 
Economy established the program in 2007 as a subsidy to 
service providers for the setup cost of Internet connections 
that do not meet metro-comparable broadband speed 
benchmarks [9]. 
III. 
TECHNICAL OPTIONS 
Although most of the developing/developed economies 
possess extensive copper cable infrastructure, with basic 
telephony services present almost in every nook and corner 
of the country; these copper based networks are limited in 
providing the requisite broadband services (through xDSL) 
due to longer distances between the DSLAM (Digital 
Subscriber Line Access Multiplexer) and the end-user. 
Moreover, rural and remote areas are generally characterized 
with no or limited telecommunication services, lower and 
limited economy, varying and rough geographical terrain, 
longer distances from COs (Central Office) of wireline 
networks or RBSs (Radio Base Station) of wireless 
networks. In such a scenario, a significantly large portion of 
the rural population is either un-served or underserved with 
respect to broadband Internet services. 
Connecting rural areas with broadband Internet does not 
only involve evaluation of the potential technology 
candidates in terms of their technical capabilities but also 
considering the total value they bring along and the cost 
required to be paid in return. Thus, an extensive 
benchmarking of technical options for rural broadband is a 
necessary step before deciding on the potential choices for 
rural broadband solutions. 
We adopt the following methodology to benchmark 
technical options based on a set of technical Key 
Performance Indicators (KPI), as follows: 
 
 
Maximum range  
 
Maximum throughput 
 
Next generation capabilities 
 
Quality of Service 
 
Interoperability 
 
Mobility 
 
Market status 
 
Innovation potential 
 
CAPEX/OPEX 
 
While wireline networks are traditionally suited for high 
bandwidth data communications, wireless networks provide 
mobility support for voice and limited data requirements 
Technical evolutions in both these network classes promise 
almost comparable bandwidth intensive services with the 
possibility to be mobile. Ranking each technology on the 
basis of the aforementioned KPIs yielded the potential 
candidates for enabling broadband services in rural areas. 
It is, however, important to note that in many cases, the 
maximum reach of a particular technology is already reached 
and serving a remote rural community requires a hybrid 
solution of technologies (for Backhaul & Access Network) 
to extend the maximum reach and bandwidth requirements. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Hybrid Solutions for Rural Broadband- Backhaul+Access 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

 
Hence, the resulting combination solutions could be of 
the form- Optical Fibre (e.g. with PON) in the backhaul 
(connected to the CO which houses the OLT (Optical Line 
Terminal) at the Access Point for Backhaul Link) with 
WiMax as the access network technology or Microwave 
Point to Point as backhaul (connected to the RNC (Radio 
Network Controller) at the Access Point for Backhaul Link) 
and xDSL in the access region. These can be conveniently 
represented by the notation Optical Fibre+WiMax and 
Microwave P2P+VDSL respectively. We evaluate the cost-
benefit implications for all of these resulting combinations, 
as illustrated in Fig. 3. This can then lead to an extended KPI 
set, particularly, for evaluating the hybrid technical solutions 
for rural broadband.  
Technically, a number of possible alternatives can be 
utilized to connect rural communities.  However, cost-wise, 
the choice of the scenario specific best-fitting solution is 
governed by factors like existing infrastructure, respective 
regulatory implications, revenue and funding opportunities. 
While abundant resources pointing towards the cost of 
network deployment [8, 9] are available, it is still difficult to 
comprehend the exact impact of these aforementioned 
factors 
affecting 
rural 
broadband 
costs 
and 
their 
interdependence. 
IV. 
SOLUTION SELECTION STRATEGY 
A. Process 
A detailed analysis on any Rural Broadband deployment 
project yielded the following considerations that must be 
taken into account for complete cost-benefits modeling. The 
most significant heads along with their respective decisive 
parameters are as follows.  
 
Technology feasibility analysis - Restricting the technical 
options to a set of feasible solutions for a given Capacity 
(Bandwidth) versus Distance (Reach) requirements (KPI 
based) for each technology.  
 
Solution evaluation - Calculating costs (CAPEX/OPEX) for 
every feasible technology solution and evaluating them with 
respect to the following related aspects:  
 
 Existing infrastructure: Deriving the value of the 
existing reusable resources  
 Regulatory inclusions and exemptions: Establishing a 
cost towards regulatory obligations involved in the 
broadband technology deployment  
 
Solution selection - Choice of the best-fitting technical 
solution in terms of costs, deployment feasibility and next 
generation network capabilities.  
 
 Revenue forecast: Assessment of the market through a 
current estimate and forecasted revenue results  
 Funding resources: Total Cost and State-dependent 
funding availability for the Rural Broadband project  
A step-wise strategy, involving the aforementioned cost-
related parameters that we developed to systematically 
model and evaluate the best solution, is illustrated in [1]. It 
would be worth noting that the following can be valid for a 
Greenfield or a Brownfield network deployment in rural 
areas. The value assigned for existing technical infrastructure 
in a Greenfield network is however, null. 
B. Cost-Benefits Modeling 
As is explicit, this step-wise approach comprehensively 
covers the most relevant aspects involving Rural Broadband 
and can also be utilized to obtain an accurate estimation of 
the Total Cost of Ownership of a project implementing any 
particular technology solution. This methodology laid the 
foundation for the development of the MS-Excel based 
Techno-Economic Model for Rural Broadband as part of this 
project work. It accepts the real scenario as the input and 
computes the Cost-Benefit values for the corresponding case 
as illustrated through Fig. 4.  
Figure 4.  Cost Benefits Modeling for Rural Broadband Networks 
C. Key Parameters & Objective Function 
The cost-benefits value for any technical solution is 
modeled as NPC (Net project cost) expressed in € which 
encapsulates all the significant key parameters associated 
with rural broadband. NPC is essentially, the final cost 
required to be paid by a rural community in exchange for 
broadband services. The key parameters associated with 
modeling the cost-benefits of rural broadband are described 
as follows: 
 
 
CAPEX consists of the fixed infrastructure and 
equipment for a network operator or provider and it 
takes into account the number of targeted users, etc. 
 
OPEX deals with the costs for running the operations 
of a network operator during a certain period of time. 
 
Time period (“T”) is the number of years, the project 
can be funded (Project duration)  
 
Regulatory cost implications (“REG”) 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

     
 
 
Existing infrastructure value deductions (“INF”) 
 
Revenue per annum (“REV”) 
 
Available funding amount for the rural broadband 
project (“FND”) 
 
Hence, the objective function describing the total costs 
payable by the rural community after including the relevant 
funding available, could be defined as NPC (Net Project 
Cost) which could have the following representation: 
 
    (1) 
 
We 
adopt 
the 
aforementioned 
equation 
while 
implementing the Rural Broadband Cost-Benefits Model and 
it is worth mentioning that although REG represents a fixed 
cost value per annum; yearly values of OPEX and REV vary, 
depending on the rate of increase/decrease which could be 
defined in the quantitative model. 
 
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
We consider the example of a German community. It lies 
around 7 Km (Length of Backhaul Link) from the nearest 
district (Gemeinde) of Dietingen and is sparsely populated 
with just over 100 households (Access Network Demand). 
Although small, it is completely connected externally 
through the old POTS copper infrastructure, boasts of an 
accessible 2G Radio Base Station nearby and forms the 
prefect picture for any rural community which, although 
connected, is detached from the broadband network services. 
Gößlingen lies in the German state of Baden-Württemberg. 
Fig. 5 shows the funding potential in Germany and the rural 
case description. 
 
 
Figure 5.  (a) Germany- Fundng Potential   (b) Rural Case-Description 
Although Germany has an extensive copper cable 
infrastructure, with basic telephony services present almost 
in every nook and corner of the country, these copper based 
networks are limited in providing the requisite broadband 
services (through xDSL) due to longer distances between the 
MDF (Main Distribution Frame)/ local exchange and the 
end- user. Thus, connecting any rural community today, not 
only involves developing the access network of the 
concerned region but also deploying or upgrading the link 
between the nearest access point (at the nearest town/district) 
and the community network, which we denote as “backhaul 
network” in this article.   
Establishing or upgrading both these network segments, 
i.e. backhaul network and access network with technologies 
capable of providing broadband Internet at sufficient data 
rates to the end-user is of prime importance while working 
out the technical solution.  
 
Figure 6.  Comparing NPC for varied project duration 
While optical fibre based wireline technologies have the 
potential to be sufficient for such scenarios, they come with 
an enormous price tag.  Wireless technologies from the 
3G/4G family and ones like WiMAX offer cheaper 
alternatives. However, longer stretches of the backhaul link 
(between the access point and the rural access network) and 
sufficiently higher access demands make these technologies 
unfavorable in many circumstances. Consequently, a 
combination of wireline and wireless technologies or 
mediums for the backhaul and access network seems to be a 
better proposition for this issue. 
 
On plotting NPC with reference to the payback period 
(duration of the project) the following result, as illustrated in 
Fig.6, are typically obtained for the given example scenario. 
As explicit, the NPC is on a downward track for technical 
solutions which are profitable in the long run (less OPEX, 
more revenue). Also, utilizing the existing copper 
infrastructure through the VDSL2 access network is always 
advisable.  
While results such as those obtained ín Fig. 6, must seem 
obvious for dense urban and suburban regions, it is important 
to note that they also hold good for rural networks with 
where demands as well as revenue potential are limited. The 
cost-revenue 
model 
developed 
during 
this 
project 
comprehensively considers all relevant parameters affecting 
the deployment costs of rural broadband network and can be 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

extended to other country scenarios with individual market, 
network, regulatory and funding data. 
It should also be pointed out that the current project work 
was carried out to study the effect of all key parameters 
described 
in 
Fig.6. 
Moreover, 
this 
process 
based 
methodology can be extended to different settings and varied 
geographies. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
It is widely believed that providing broadband services 
for rural communities can be quite a challenging as well as 
an expensive assignment. However, solution models such as 
the one presented in this paper, can help presenting the total 
business case comprehensively and to reach a logical 
conclusion regarding the technical choice for network 
deployments. The key take aways include, but are not 
confined to: 
 Reusing technical or civil infrastructure for Rural 
Broadband deployments can significantly reduce the 
costs of network establishment.  
 A 
regulations 
friendly 
network 
implies 
larger 
investments. However, with sustained efforts on the 
part of the Regulator to promote Rural Broadband, 
some regulatory cost contributing aspects could be 
diminished or at least reduced by a substantial margin.  
 In terms of a final technical solution for Rural 
Broadband; in addition to the cost of deployment, it is 
primarily 
important 
to 
consider 
the 
technical 
capabilities 
and 
NGN 
characteristics 
of 
the 
technologies 
before 
deciding 
on 
the 
potential 
candidates for the pool of technical solutions for Rural 
Broadband.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Zhao, N. Nayan, N. Zhelev, C. Mas Machuca, and W. 
Knospe,  “Strategic Design for Rural Broadband Access 
Network”, 5. ITG- Fachkonferenz, Breitband-versorgung in 
Deutschland, March 2011 
[2] C. J. Kenny,  “Expanding Internet Access to the rural poor in 
Africa”, Information Technology for Development 9, 2000, 
pp. 25-31 
[3] A. Kumar “Reduction in cost of rural network (CAPEX)” 
Course on Rural Telecommunications (ITU), Nov. 2005. 
[4] Bundesministeriums für Wirtschaft und Technologie 
(BMWi): "The Federal Government’s Broadband Strategy", 
[retrieved: 01/2012] 
[5] R. L. Katz, S.Vaterlaus, P.Zenhäusern, S.Suter, and P.Mahler:   
“ The impact of broadband on jobs and the German economy” 
[6] Research Archive: Detecon International GmbH, Germany, 
http://www.detecon.com/, 2009-2010 
[7] EUROPA: “EC MEMO/09/35”, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=ME
MO/09/35&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLan
guage=en [retrieved: 01/2012] 
[8] Bundesministeriums 
für 
Wirtschaft 
und 
Technologie 
(BMWi): "Möglichkeiten der Breitbandförderung- Ein 
Leitfaden", www.bmwi.de, 2009 
[9] Government of Australia eGovernment Resource Centre: 
http://www.egov.vic.gov.au/focus-on-
countries/australia/trends-and-issues-australia/broadband-
australia/audit-reveals-rural-broadband-subsidy-costs.html 
[retrieved: 01/2012] 
[10] J. L. Riding, J. C. Ellershaw, A. V. Tran, L. J. Guan, and T. 
Smith, “Economics of Broadband Access Technologies for 
Rural Areas“, Conference on Optical Fiber Communication, 
OFC 2009, pp. 1-3 
[11] D.Žagar and V.Križanović, „Analyses and Comparisons of 
Technologies for Rural Broadband Implementation“,17th 
International Conference on Software, Telecommunications & 
Computer Networks, SoftCOM 2009, pp. 292-296  
 
 
 
 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-199-1
AICT 2012 : The Eighth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications

