Theoretical Performance of Transform Domain
Communication Systems
Guillaume Fumat, Pascal Chargé, Danièle Fournier-Prunaret
LATTIS, INSA
University of Toulouse, France
gfumat@insa-toulouse.fr, pascal.charge@univ-nantes.fr
Ahmed Zoubir, Irène Mahafeno
Axess Europe
Toulouse, France
ahmed.zoubir@axesseurope.com
Abstract—Transform Domain Communication System (TDCS)
is a cognitive-radio technology that avoids frequency underuti-
lization by doing spectrum-scavenging. Although TDCSs’ is well-
known when dealing with interferers, theoretical limits of TDCS
in terms of spectrum efﬁciency remain unknown. Based on the
TDCS’ multidimensional property, we detail them in terms of
spectrum efﬁciency and Bit Error Rate (BER). It is shown
that most of previous TDCSs had suboptimal performances.
Guidelines are given to improve these metrics without much
increase in system’s complexity.
Index Terms—TDCS, spectral efﬁciency, CSK, cognitive radio,
multidimensional modulation
I. INTRODUCTION
Introduced by Mitola in [1], Cognitive-Radio was presented
to overcome the problem of spectrum under-utilization [2],
[3]. Technologies were proposed to counter this waste, such
as Transform Domain Communication Systems (TDCSs) that
generate interference-free waveforms.
TDCS’s major contributions are recent, and a signiﬁcant
part was achieved by the Airforce Institute of Technology
[4]–[7]. However these studies mainly focused on the BER
performance when bypassing jammers. More recently Han
et al. proposed a phase scrambling to improve the BER of
TDCS signals based on contiguous spectrum [8]. TDCS is
therein described as a low bit-rate communication system,
while in another article, Budiarjo et al. [9] mention they can
signiﬁcantly improve the BER performance and the spectrum
utilization of TDCS by using simultaneously two modulations.
Thus, if we know well TDCSs’ beneﬁts in terms of cog-
nitive radio and interference-avoidance property, its BER and
spectral efﬁciency performance remain unknown, though these
are essential performance metrics.
By means of the dimensionality property [10, pp 227-
229] that applies to TDCS, we propose to ﬁll this missing
piece of literature in order to give insights on the effective
speed and reliability that TDCS can achieve. We demonstrate
that the granularity of the spectrum mask does impact the
spectral efﬁciency and show that taking beneﬁt of the whole
dimensionality leads to great BER improvements while in-
creasing the spectral efﬁciency. Via this approach we stress
that previous TDCS implementations were suboptimum with
regard to these metrics.
In this article, we ﬁrst recall the deﬁnition of the dimen-
sionality and its impacts on the BER and spectrum efﬁciency.
Then, our TDCS system is introduced and key properties
related to its dimensionality are given. In the last section, a
particular care is taken on spectrum efﬁciency of previously
studied TDCS systems, we enhance them by using system’s
whole dimensionality to ensure maximum spectral efﬁciency
and minimum BER. Finally, a speciﬁc focus is done on the
modulation proposed in [9] and a new result is presented by
means of the dimensionality and the orthogonality point of
view. We explain in which extent the spectrum efﬁciency and
the BER of their system is improved and why.
II. SIGNAL DIMENSIONALITY AND ITS IMPACTS ON
SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
In this section, one recalls the notion of dimensionality
before studying its impact on the system in terms of BER.
A. General principles, and relations with spectrum efﬁciency
The dimensionality N of a signal x(t), which lasts T
seconds and occupies a bandwidth Wu, deﬁnes the number of
orthogonal signals such that x(t) can be expressed by a linear
combination of these orthogonal signals. In [10, pp. 227-229],
it is stated that the number of dimensions N of the space of
a signal x(t) is well approximated by Eq. (1):
N ≈ 2WuT
(1)
Although this formula looks very simple, the information it
contains is of the greatest importance since it has direct con-
sequences on the spectral efﬁciency ηeff of a multidimensional
system. Indeed, it is shown that [10, pp. 227-229] :
ηeff = Rbit
Wu
= log2(Mmod)Rsymb
N
2T
= 2 log2(Mmod)
N
(2)
where Mmod is the constellation size, Rbit is the bit-rate, and
Rsymb =
Rbit
log2(Mmod) = 1
T is the symbol rate.
As a consequence, the higher the signal dimensionality is,
the lower the spectrum efﬁciency gets. Thus, to improve the
latter, Mmod must be increased.
Let us now brieﬂy summarize the effects of high dimen-
sionality systems on the achievable BER. To do so, we will
take the example of the widely studied M-Ary Orthogonal
48
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

Signaling [10](MOS), where one symbol ﬁlls one dimension
(Mmod = N), before seeing how it applies to TDCS.
B. Bit Error Probability for MOS and TDCS
While in PSK, the bigger the constellation size MPSK is,
worse gets the BER (following the well known "waterfall
curves"), in MOS, where each symbol is represented by a
waveform orthogonal to every other one, the waterfall curves’
order is reversed : the higher the dimensionality, the better
the BER gets, as developed in [10, pp. 203-206]. It comes
from the fact that the more dimensions a signal has, the more
bits are sent with the same amount of energy, while keeping a
constant symbol error probability, since the distance between
two orthogonal signals does not change. One can transmit
information with high reliability at very low SNR, but with a
low spectrum efﬁciency. MOS systems are in a word "power-
efﬁcient".
In the case of a given TDCS system, N is set by the
spectrum mask deﬁnition as further stated in Section III-D.
Thus, it does not come into question to increase or to decrease
the system’s dimensionality. However the chosen modulation
deﬁnes the number of used dimensions. And similarly as the
phenomenon described above, the more dimensions are used,
the better gets the BER. Note that meanwhile, because more
dimensions are used, the constellation size of the modulation
increases, and thus, spectrum efﬁciency also increases. This
phenomenon is fully described in [10], [11].
In a word, when a telecommunication system’s dimension-
ality is N ≫ 1, it is of paramount importance to use every
possible dimensions. Otherwise it could lead to BER and
spectrum efﬁciency leakages.
III. TDCS SYSTEM MODEL
Hereafter, the receiver and transmitter’s model are de-
scribed. The waveform modulation is also detailed.
A. Transmitter’s Side
The typical TDCS transceiver model presented in [7] is
simple and cited in many publications, but does not well
describe how the modulation stage can be implemented. We
decide thus to present in Fig. 1 a model that takes into account
the two main modulations used in TDCS.
Estimate Spectrum
Spectrum Mask
Multiple Access
Phases vector
IFFT
Bits To Waveforms
Mapping
Transmit
s(t)
Data stream
ej(()
A(()
s(t)
MPSK - PSK Modulation
Phases vector
ejp
MCSK - CSK 
Modulation
MCSK. MPSK 
buffered Waveforms
MPSK times
Figure 1. TDCS Transmitter
The system described in Fig. 1 starts ﬁrst with sensing the
available spectrum to ensure an interference-free transmission.
This topic has been widely investigated through the use of
different techniques to better detect the interferences [6]. From
this estimate, a spectrum mask of bandwidth Wu is chosen,
which the transmitted signal will have to respect. An Inverse
Fourier Transform of this spectrum is then done, and the
generated waveforms are stored in a buffer. These waveforms
are then modulated before being sent.
B. Possible waveform modulations
As stated, two modulation processes are mainly used in
TDCS: a Cyclic Shift of the waveform and a Phase Shift
Keying modulation that occur in two different stages of the
transmitter [4], [7]. The ﬁrst one is the MPSK-Ary PSK modu-
lation and consists of generating several waveforms respecting
the same spectrum mask, having the same random phase
vector, but with a θmPSK = 2π mPSK
MPSK phase offset on every
component, with mPSK ∈ {1, · · · , MPSK} the PSK symbol
index, and MPSK the number of possible PSK symbols. The
signal’s spectrum can thus be written as in Eq. (3):
S(v)
mPSK(f) =
K
X
k=1
A(v)
k δ (f − k∆f) e+j
sCSKmCSK(t) = sCSK0

t − mCSKT
MCSK

T
(5)
with T the waveform duration, and s

t −
T
mCSK

T the
notation introduced in [4] for a
T
mCSK circular shift. mCSK ∈
{0 · · · MCSK − 1} is the CSK symbol index.
Depending
on
the
narrowness
of
the
autocorrelation
function of sCSK0, it can be shown that the set of shifted
waveforms sCSK0 · · · sCSK(MCSK−1) is pseudo-orthogonal [12].
C. Receiver’s side
A Maximum Likelihood (ML) receiver, known to be opti-
mum in an AWGN channel, is used and showed in Fig.2.
Spectrum 
Mask
Multiple Access
Phases vector
ej(+)
A(+)
IFFT
MCSK. MPSK 
buffered Waveforms
Correlation
Max
Noisy signal
Symbol 
Index
Stream
Bit Stream
Generator
Symbol to Bits
Mapping
Decoded
Bits 
Streams
MPSK - PSK Modulation
Phases vector
ejp
MCSK - CSK 
Modulation
Figure 2. TDCS Optimum Receiver
We assume that the receiver and the emitter have the same
waveforms buffered in their memory and also that they have
the same mapping between a waveform and a bits word.
To demodulate data, the receiver makes a correlation of the
incoming waveform with every buffered waveform and the
decision is taken by considering the maximum correlation
value. Although this demodulation requires a huge amount
of computations, this way of demodulating was chosen to
ensure a fair comparison between all the modulation schemes.
However, it is worth noting that a computation-efﬁcient im-
plementation is possible to demodulate CSK signals by using
DFT and IDFT as stated in [12]. Now that the TDCS System is
introduced, let us clarify the role that plays the dimensionality
parameter N = 2WuT on the system’s performance.
D. Impacts of the dimensionality N on TDCS performance
Since the symbol period is T =
1
∆f , and since the useful
spectrum is described by Kused = Wu
∆f frequency components,
the signal dimensionality is equal to N = 2Kused. Thus, it is
possible to write the spectrum efﬁciency of the system in a
simple manner in Eq. 6.
ηeff = log2(Mmod)
Kused
(6)
A ﬁrst tradeoff follows up: when deﬁning the spectrum mask
avoiding jammers, care should be taken not to choose a high
granularity that would imply a leakage in spectrum efﬁciency.
As previously stated, dimensionality of a TDCS signal is
set by the spectrum mask properties (the used bandwidth Wu
and the frequency sampling space ∆f). In the following, we
assume these parameters are already set. However the number
of used dimensions remains designer’s choice and depends
on the modulation stage. As explained in II-B, choosing a
good modulation is of paramount importance: the system
has to use as many symbols as possible to maximize the
spectrum efﬁciency, but meanwhile it also has to occupy
as many dimensions as possible to minimize the BER. In
the following subsection, we study how well the standard
modulations performs in TDCS.
IV. PERFORMANCE OF TDCS MODULATION
In the studied TDCS system, the signal bandwidth is deﬁned
from 1kHz to 7MHz and avoids interferences that are present
on the range from 2 to 3MHz. As a consequence, its total avail-
able bandwidth is Wa = 6.999 Mhz, but its used bandwidth
is Wu = 5.999 MHz. Kused = 256 frequency components
describe the used bandwidth, and thus the dimensionality of
our system is N = 512. These ﬁgures are summarized in the
spectrum mask of Fig. 3.
Spectrum 
Mask
1kHz
2MHz 3MHz
7MHz
Wu (Kused = 256)
Wa 
Figure 3. Spectrum description of the signal
A. Phase Shift Keying
Described in III-B, this modulation makes the symbol
occupy only two dimensions as the usual PSK signals. As a
consequence, the standard PSK waterfalls curves, ﬁt perfectly
PSK-TDCS BER results, as shown on Fig. 4.
ï2
ï1
0
1
2
3
4
10
ï2
10
ï1
10
0
Eb/N0 ï dB
Bit Error Rate
 
 
BPSK TDCS
QPSK TDCS
8PSK TDCS
BPSK Theoritical
QPSK Theoritical
8PSK Theoritical
Figure 4. BER performance TDCS using MPSK-Ary PSK
Modulation
The modulation and demodulation processes can be easily
implemented [7] and the spectrum efﬁciency is :
50
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

ηeff = log2(MPSK)
Kused
(7)
The problem is that the system is sub-optimal with regards
to the attainable BER because only 2 dimensions over 2Kused
are used. The BER leakage is obvious when looking at Fig.
5b.
B. Cyclic Shift Keying
As stated in [12], CSK can be seen as equivalent to MCSK-
Ary Orthogonal Signaling (MOS). This is effectively the case,
as we can see on Fig. 5a : the theoretical BER performance
of a MOS system match the simulated CSK-TDCS results.
Of course, since the cyclic shifted versions of the waveforms
are inherently correlated, CSK is theoretically sub-optimal
in terms of BER in comparison with MOS, but this is not
detectable when the dimensionality and the Eb/N0 are high
enough.
In Fig. 5b, we observe that BER of TDCS-CSK is much
lower than any PSK systems and keeps decreasing when the
CSK constellation grows. The spectral efﬁciency follows Eq.
(8) and is also higher than TDCS-PSK systems. Moreover
the demodulation process of CSK has the advantage of being
easily implementable as described in [12] and done in [8].
ηeff = log2(MCSK)
Kused
(8)
The main difference between Eq.(7) and Eq.(8) is that
increasing MCSK can lead to BER and spectrum efﬁciency
improvements whereas increasing MPSK leads to a BER degra-
dation.
It is worth noting that in the literature, system conﬁgurations
have always been MCSK ≤ Kused without further explanation.
It is possible that people fear that using CSK TDCS with
MCSK
> Kused would not provide enough orthogonality
between CSK symbols. Yet, experimental results show that
it can actually provide enough orthogonality to enhance the
BER according to Fig. 5b and as thoroughly investigated in
the next subsection.
We can note that using MCSK-Ary CSK Modulation with
MCSK = 512, improves the spectral efﬁciency while achieving
the same 3e−4 BER with 0.3dB Eb
N0 less than the system using
MCSK = 256.
Moreover, it has never been tried to combine Antipodal
Signaling and CSK with TDCS Systems. This results in bi-
orthogonal signaling. MOS and M-Ary Bi-Orthogonal Signal-
ing have almost identical BER functions when M is large, but
Bi-Orthogonal Signaling occupies two times less dimensions
(and thus bandwidth). As a consequence, it is possible to use
2Kused-Ary CSK with antipodal signaling to further enhance
the spectrum efﬁciency and the BER performance. Indeed, in
Fig. 5c, we can observe a 0.5 dB Eb
N0 gain over MCSK = 256-
Ary CSK TDCS when using MCSK = 512 with antipodal
signaling at the same 1e−3 BER. Note that the constellation
size is then four times higher.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
10
ï5
10
ï4
10
ï3
10
ï2
10
ï1
10
0
Eb/N0 ï dB
Bit Error Rate
 
 
2ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
4ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
8ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
16ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
32ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
2CSK Simulated
4CSK Simulated
8CSK Simulated
16CSK Simulated
32 CSK Simulated
(a) BER performance of TDCS System using MCSK-Ary CSK Modulation
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
10
ï4
10
ï3
10
ï2
10
ï1
EbN0 ï dB
Bit Error Rate
 
 
128ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
256ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
512ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
128 CSK
256 CSK Simulated
512 CSK Simulated
QPSK TDCS
(b) BER performance of TDCS System using MCSK-Ary CSK Modulation
with MCSK ≥ Kused
ï2
ï1
0
1
2
3
4
10
ï4
10
ï3
10
ï2
10
ï1
10
0
Eb/N0 ï dB
Bit Error Rate
 
 
256 CSK
256 CSK BPSK
512 CSK BPSK
256ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
512ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
1024ïAry Ortho. Sig. Theoritical
(c) BER performance of TDCS system using an Antipodal MCSK-Ary CSK
Modulation
Figure 5. BER performance of several CSK conﬁgurations
C. Combination of PSK and CSK
In [9], a system is presented where CSK and PSK modu-
lations are combined. In this article, the information streams
mapped by PSK or CSK are distinguished, and the BER for
both streams are computed. Let ﬁrst consider the spectral
efﬁciency of such a combined MPSK-Ary PSK / MCSK-Ary
51
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

CSK TDCS system, we have:
ηeff = log2(MPSKMCSK)
Kused
(9)
Budiarjo et al. were thus right when stating that this modula-
tion leads to a better spectrum utilization but when considering
the total BER of the whole system (both streams taken into
account) rises up another advantage, not studied in [9]. This is
what we computed for different system conﬁgurations in order
to highlight the effect of dimensionality. Results are plotted in
Fig. 6. Note that we use the X-axis scale Eb/N0 with Eb
computed as Eb =
Es
Mmod with Mmod = MPSKMCSK the total
constellation size.
ï2
ï1
0
1
2
3
4
10
ï4
10
ï3
10
ï2
10
ï1
Eb/N0 ï dB
Bit Error Rate
 
 
256 CSK
512 CSK
256 CSK BPSK
256 CSK QPSK
512 CSK BPSK
256 CSK 8PSK
Figure 6. BER performance of PSK-CSK TDCS
As observed in Fig. 6, 512-Ary CSK and 256-Ary CSK-
BPSK (equivalent to CSK with antipodal signaling) curves are
overlapping. It is noteworthy to highlight that 256-CSK-QPSK
has almost the same BER performance than 512-CSK-BPSK.
As explained in the previous sections, it comes from the fact
that in both cases, all dimensions 2Kused are used.
To provide a more accurate comparison of these mod-
ulations, Table I sums up intercorrelation statistics of the
waveforms for each modulation technique:
Intercorr.
32 CSK
256 CSK
256 CSK
512 CSK
256 CSK
Statistics
QPSK
BPSK
8PSK
mean
8.7e-5
6.9e-4
6.6e-4
6.8e-4
1.6e-3
min
1.1e-8
1.3e-9
8e-38
9.1e-10
8e-38
max
1.6e-3
8.5e-2
8.5e-2
8.5e-2
.5
var
1.6e-7
6.6e-5
4.8e-5
4.5e-5
7.6e-4
TABLE I. Intercorrelation Coefﬁcient Statistics of WF gener-
ated by different techniques
First of all, the maximum intercorrelation coefﬁcient in-
creases as the constellation size does. This comes from the
fact that the constellation size approaches or even exceeds the
dimensionality limit. It is thus not further possible to generate
more orthogonal waveforms. Concerning the minimum value,
the QPSK-CSK modulation shows much better performance
since QPSK generates 2 purely orthogonal waveforms for each
CSK-generated one. There is no obvious rules for the other
cases, since it highly depends on the autocorrelation function
of the waveform : if the time shift occurs on one of its lobe
or not. However, we can note that 256-CSK-QPSK average
intercorrelation coefﬁcient is slightly lower than 512-CSK-
BPSK. As a matter of fact, it should results in better BER
performance noticeable at higher Eb/N0.
To end section IV, let us summarize in Table II the different
rules to follow to take the most of TDCS’ spectral efﬁciency.
These guidelines are independant from the chosen spectrum
mask.
Rule #
Guideline
1
Use every dimension the system offers to decrease the BER
and enhance the spectral efﬁciency.
2
Use a spectrum granularity high enough to avoid jammers, but
as low as possible to enable good spectrum efﬁciency.
3
Between two modulations having the same number of sym-
bols, choose the one offering the largest intersymbol distance.
TABLE II. Guidelines to follow to improve TDCS’ spectral
efﬁciency
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, using the often forgotten fact that TDCS
is a multidimensional communication system enabled us to
show the maximum attainable BER and spectral efﬁciency
we can expect from any TDCS system. We show that TDCS
is inherently a "power-efﬁcient" communication system as
previously suggested in [8]. However, Han et al. did not take
beneﬁt of every available dimension. We were thus able to
improve their performance by using 512-Ary CSK modulation
instead of 256-Ary CSK. We also further investigated the im-
plementation proposed in [9] and show the global BER beneﬁt
of this implementation. This asset relies on the major fact we
proved: the same BER can be obtained at lower
Eb
N0 when
using every single dimension while enhancing the spectrum
efﬁciency of a standard CSK Modulation. By using every
dimension, the minimum BER and the maximum throughput
are simultaneously gathered. This article provided guidelines
to avoid further under-utilization of TDCS systems
If it is now obvious that TDCS systems ﬁt well to low
throughput transmissions in a context of poor SNR or long-
haul communications, the next step is to extend the use of
TDCS to high throughput communications, while ensuring
a good reliability. This can be done by ensuring a better
orthogonality between the dimensions and by using several
dimensions at one time to transmit more bits simultaneously.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Mitola, “Cognitive radio: An integrated agent architecture for software
deﬁned radio,” Doctor of Technology, Royal Inst. Technol. (KTH),
Stockholm, Sweden, 2000
[2] FCC, "Spectrum Policy Task Force", Rep. ET Docket no. 02-135,
November 2002
[3] G. Staple and K. Werbach, “The end of spectrum scarcity,” IEEE
Spectrum, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 48–52, Mar. 2004
[4] P.J. Swackhammer, "Performance Simulation of a Transform Domain
Communication System for Multiple Access Applications", MILCOM’99
pp. 1055-1059 Vol.2, October 1999
52
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

[5] A.S. Nunez, M.A. Temple, R.F. Mills, and R.A. Raines, "Interference
Avoidance in Spectrally Encoded Multiple Access Communications Using
MPSK Modulation", WCNC 2005 pp. 730-734 Vol.2, March 2005
[6] M.J. Lee, M.A. Temple, R.L. Claypoole, and R.A. Raines, "Interference
avoidance communications using wavelet domain transformation tech-
niques", WCNC2002 pp. 255-259 , March 2002
[7] A.S. Nunez, "Interference Suppression in Multiple Access Communica-
tions Using M-Ary Phase Shift Keying Generated via Spectral Encoding",
Air Force Institute of Technology, Master Thesis AFIT/GE/ENG/04-20,
2004
[8] C. Han, J. Wang, S. Gong, and S. Li, "Adressing the control channel
design problem : OFDM-based transform domain communication system
in cognitive radio", Computer Networks 2008 vol. 52, n.4, pp. 795-815,
June 2008
[9] I. Budiarjo, H. Nikookar, and L.P. Lighthart, "On the Utilization of
Embedded Symbol for CCSK BER Improvement in TDCS Dynamic
Spectrum Access", EuWiT 2008 pp. 123-126, October 2008
[10] J. G. Proakis and Masoud Salehi Digital Communications, Fifth Edition
McGraw-Hill, 2008
[11] G. Fumat, P. Chargé , A. Zoubir, D. Fournier-Prunaret, "Transform
Domain Communication Systems from a multidimensional perspective",
IET Communications, to be published, 2011
[12] G. M. Dillard, M. Reuter, J. Zeidler and B. Zeidler, "Cyclic code shift
keying: a low probability of intercept communication technique", IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems Vol. 39, Issue 3, pp.
786-798, July 2003
53
AICT 2011 : The Seventh Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-123-6

