 
 
 
 
  
 
Analyzing Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Global Stock Prices 
Yoshihisa Udagawa  
Faculty of Informatics, Tokyo University of Information Sciences 
Chiba-city, Chiba, Japan 
e-mail: yu207233@rsch.tuis.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— The spread of COVID-19 is making a serious 
impact on the world economy. As policies to maintain 
economic activities have been implemented in a timely manner, 
many stock markets have regained their stock prices to pre-
corona levels, although there are still strong opinions that the 
prices fail to reflect the real economy. This paper describes 
results of statistical analyses of daily historical data concerning 
Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), Nasdaq Composite 
Index (NASDAQ), France Stock Index (CAC), German Stock 
Index (DAX), Shanghai Composite Index (SSEC) and Nikkei 
Stock Average (Nikkei). In general, these stock prices plunged 
for approximately 20 days before the trading day that marked 
the lowest price, and increased for the next 25 days. Reflecting 
the fact that the world economies are tightly related to each 
other, it is confirmed that stock price fluctuations under study 
generally show the same trend. We propose a technical 
indicator defined by the difference between a stock price and 
moving average. The results of our experiments show that the 
indicator predicts short-term trends with a slight time lag. 
Keywords— COVID-19 infection; Technical indicator; Global 
market comparison; Candlestick chart. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
More than a year has passed since the first Covid-19 
infection was confirmed. But the spread of coronavirus is 
still continuing and the number of daily infections remains 
high. The spread of COVID-19 is forecasted to have a 
significant adverse impact on the global economy. While the 
global real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by 2.9 
percent in 2019, it is predicted that COVID-19 will cause 
GDP growth to decrease by three percent in 2020 [1]. World 
stock markets have experienced a large crash in the first 
quarter of 2020. Concerns about a further plunge of stock 
prices prevailed over global markets. However, due to the 
economic policies of each country, stock prices of world 
markets have turned from falling to rising in Mar. 2020. 
It can be easily inferred that there is a difference in the 
degree of collapse and recovery reflecting the situation in 
each country. What is missing is a comparison of the stock 
price fluctuations of world markets from a statistical point of 
view. In addition, because it is rare for the world stock price 
indexes to fall all at once and then recover, we come up with 
the idea of analyzing the history of the world stock price 
plunge and surge to deepen our understanding of stock price 
movements. This study discusses a comparison of 
representative stock indexes of the U.S., European, and 
Asian markets [2]. Specifically, we focus on Dow Jones 
Industrial Average (DJIA), Nasdaq Composite Index 
(NASDAQ), France Stock Index (CAC), German Stock 
Index (DAX), Shanghai Composite Index (SSEC), and 
Nikkei Stock Average (Nikkei). Daily historical data are 
used for the research. 
Dimson et al. [3] recommend investing in the U.S. 
markets rather than emerging ones because of the growth 
rate of stock prices and the stability of the investment 
environment. Reference [4] compares profitability of the U.S. 
and Asian markets by simulations that find buy-timing using 
a candlestick pattern model consisting of six parameters. The 
results of the simulation shows that the profitability of the 
U.S. markets outperforms other markets. However, these 
studies were carried out before the spread of the COVID-19 
coronavirus. There is no guarantee that the situation is the 
same after the pandemic. 
Ngwakwe [5] estimates how COVID-19 infections 
affected world stock indexes, i.e., Euronext 100, SSEC, 
DJIA and S&P 500. The results of analyses show that SSEC 
has resilience to COVID-19 pandemic with profit in stock 
values during the first fifty days into the pandemic, while the 
other indexes experience adverse impact from the COVID-
19 pandemic with a significant loss at that time period. All 
stock indexes experience a higher variability or fluctuation of 
stock market prices. 
Verma, et al. [6] statistically analyze the impact of the 
COVID-19 outbreak on global economic development. The 
indicators used in the analyses include S&P500 stock index, 
crude oil, gold, and 20-year treasury bond. They find that 
S&P500 stock index experiences high uncertainty from Feb. 
2019 to Apr. 2020, i.e., the latest month of their research. 
This paper aims to analyze stock price fluctuations of 
approximately 245 trading days before and after the COVID-
19 pandemic, and statistically compare degrees of impact on 
the world markets. 
The findings of this research are as follows: 
I. The six stock market indexes used for comparison 
experience bottom prices within a week, specifically four 
business days from Mar. 18 to 23. After that, they never 
fall below the bottom prices. 
II. The stock price best recovered in NASDAC, followed by 
Nikkei and DJIA, which is considered to reflect the 
degree of impact of the COVID-19 spread on each 
market. 
III. It is observed that the trajectory of 25-day average of 
difference between stock price and 5-day average 
reverses on the lowest price day. We propose an indicator 
to predict trend reversal based on the observation. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
Experimental results show that the proposed indicator 
correctly predicts at least a reversal of a stock price 
decline due to the COVID-19 outbreak. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II gives the background of the candlestick chart. 
Section III shows the result of comparisons of the stock 
market indexes by the ratio of stock prices to the lowest price 
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Section IV presents the 
results of comparisons of stock price movements in terms of 
the average and standard deviation in statistics. Section V 
describes statistics of candlestick parameters around the 
lowest price. Section VI proposes and discusses an indicator 
that can properly predict stock price trend reversals. Section 
VII concludes the paper with our plans for future work. 
II. 
CANDLESTICK CHART AND PRAMETERS 
This section introduces formations of a candlestick chart. 
The candlestick attributes to be analyzed are identified. 
A. Formation of Candlestick 
As depicted in Figure 1, a daily candlestick is formed 
with the market’s opening, high, low, and closing prices of a 
specific trading day [7]. The candlestick has a wide part, 
which is called real body representing the range between the 
opening and closing prices of that day’s trading, as shown in 
Figure 1. The color of the real body represents whether the 
opening price or the closing price is higher. If the price rises, 
a hollow body is drawn suggesting bullish or buying 
pressure. Otherwise, a filled body is drawn suggesting 
bearish or selling pressure. 
 
 
Figure 1. Candlestick formation 
 
The thin lines above and below the body, which are 
named shadows, represent the range of prices traded in a 
day. The high is marked by the top of the upper shadow and 
the low by the bottom of the lower shadow. 
B. Candlestick Chart and Parameters 
A candlestick chart is a graph in which candlesticks are 
arranged in order of market days. It is used as a tool to get 
information on whether the current price is higher or lower 
than the historical stock price movements, and what kind of 
price movements have been made in a certain period of time. 
Moving averages form a line graph by connecting the 
average of closing prices over a certain period of time. The 
line graph is useful to decide whether stock prices are in a 
rising or falling trend by considering the relative position 
between the moving average and the current stock price. As 
for periods of time to compute averages, each country uses 
its own periods. For example, the short-term average is 
often calculated for 5 days, the medium-term average is for 
25 days, and the long-term average is for 75 days in Japan.  
Figure 2 illustrates indicators including averages that 
formalize a candlestick chart. In accordance with the 
candlestick chart notation, the following six attributes are 
used for analysis. 
 
 
Figure 2. Candlestick chart and its parameters 
 
(1) Amount of stock price change (the difference between 
a stock’s closing price on a trading day and its closing 
price on the previous trading day) 
(2) Length of candlestick body 
(3) Length of upper shadow 
(4) Length of lower shadow 
(5) Difference between the stock price of a trading day and 
the 5-day moving average 
(6) Difference between the stock price of a trading day and 
the 25-day moving average 
 
III. 
COMPARISON OF STOCK INDEXES BY RATIO 
This section describes the process of data analysis to 
follow how this research is performed. Stock price 
fluctuations of the six markets are compared concerning the 
lowest price during COVID-19 pandemic to understand 
impacts of COVID-19 on each market. 
A. Data Analysis Process 
Figure 3 overviews the data analysis process in this 
research that consists of the following operations. 
(1) Downloading daily historical data from Web site 
(2) Calculating the six attributes mentioned in Section II 
(3) Extracting price data around the lowest price during 
COVID-19 pandemic 
(4) Calculating 25-day average and standard deviation of 
the six attributes 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 3. Overviews of data analysis process 
 
Among the sites that provide global stock data, Web site 
[2] has provided useful daily stock data for more than 10 
years in more than 40 markets. All data used in the research 
are downloaded manually. 
Because the daily stock data only consist of close, open, 
high, low prices, and volume of stock trading, Java programs 
are developed for performing operations 2) to 4), and 
visualizing the candlestick chart. Excel is used for 
visualizing data of 3) and 4) in graphs. 
B. Comparison of Stock Price Fluctuations 
In order to understand overall structures of stock price 
fluctuations, we compare the stock price ratios to the lowest 
price that was recorded in Mar. 2020. Let CPr(n) be the 
closing price of a trading day n, and CPrMin be the lowest 
closing price recorded in Mar. 2020. The price ratio 
PrRatio(n) is calculated by the following formula, where 
CPr(1) represents the closing price of the latest trading day. 
PrRatio(n)= (CPr(n) – CPrMin) * 100 / CPrMin 
(1) 
Figure 4 is a graph of the price ratio of the six markets’ 
stock indexes for approximately 490 days from 245 days 
before the lowest price to the latest market day, i.e., Mar. 12, 
2021. It shows that all stock indexes keep rising after the 
lowest price recorded in Mar. 2020. 
 
 
Figure 4. Ratio of stock index compared to the lowest price 
 
Table 1 summarizes the stock price profiles compared to 
the lowest price. The lowest prices have been recorded from 
Mar. 18 to Mar. 23 in the six markets under comparison. 
Since Mar. 22, 2020 is Sunday, they show that the stock 
trends reversed from downtrend to uptrend in just 4 trading 
days in the six markets. The degree of plunge is 63.34% in 
DAX (Germany), followed by 62.76% in CAC (France), and 
58.95% in DJIA (US), as shown in the column “highest price 
of pre-corona.” The lowest decline was of 22.95% in SSEC 
(China). 
 
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF STOCK PRICE INDICATORS  
COMPARED TO THE LOWEST PRICE 
 
 
A matter worthy of note is the degree of recovery from 
the lowest price. NASDAQ achieves the finest recovery of 
62.36% rise as the highest price ratio after the corona is 
105.45%, and the highest price ratio before the corona is 
43.09%. Following NASDAQ, Nikkei (Japan) comes back 
by 38.57% rise. The slowest recovery is recorded –1.73% in 
CAC, followed by 9.25% in DAX. From the stock price 
movements of the two markets, it can be inferred that the 
impact of COVID-19 pandemic in Europe is larger than the 
other regions. 
 
IV. 
COMPARISON BY AVERAGE AND  
STANDARD DEVIATION 
This section presents the results of comparisons of the six 
market indexes adopted in this research with respect to the 
average and standard deviation in statistics. In order to 
compute the meaningful standard deviation, we calculate the 
average and standard deviation of the past 25 days [8] 
including the reference trading day. This period is 
commonly used for the calculation of the six attributes of a 
candlestick. 
A. Amount of Stock Price Change 
Figure 5 shows a graph of the 25-day moving averages 
and standard deviations of price changes of each stock 
market. As seen at the center part of Figure 5, the averages 
(in solid lines) of stock price changes plummet during 
approximately 20 days before the lowest trading day, i.e., 
around Feb. 20 in the five markets excluding SSEC. Stock 
price averages rally for approximately 25 days after the 
bottom, i.e., around April 24.  
The standard deviations (in dashed lines) over this period, 
also increase in the range of 3.5 to 6 times of those of the 
other period reflecting the high volatility of price 
movements. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Average and standard deviation of price change 
 
Taking a closer look at the standard deviations, DJIA 
reaches the maximum of 6.00%, followed by NASDAC of 
5.47%, CAC of 4.56%, DAX of 4.54%, Nikkei of 3.53%, 
and SSEC of 2.14%, which is considered to reflect the 
strength of the impact on each market. The standard 
deviations of each market have roughly doubled after the 
lowest price, i.e., the right part, compared to those before 
the lowest price, i.e., the left part, which suggests that 
unstable trading has continued for roughly 180 days after 
the lowest price day. 
B. Length of Candlestick Body 
Figure 6 shows the 25-day averages and standard 
deviations of the candlestick lengths of the six stock markets. 
Figure 6 shows that the averages of SSEC are positive (plus) 
during the plunge period (–20 to 0), which means stock 
prices increase on average within a market day. The 25-day 
average of candlestick body lengths in NASDAQ is almost 
zero level during the plunge period. NASDAQ has 
consistently positive average during the period of stock 
price recovery (0 to 25), which means that the stock price 
continued to rise during trading hours. The four other 
markets experience remarkable negative averages, e.g., –
1.39% in CAC, –1.15% in DAX, –0.967% in Nikkei, and –
0.83% in DJIA at the lowest, suggesting that colored 
candlesticks are noticeable. 
 
 
Figure 6. Average and standard deviation of candlestick body length 
 
The largest standard deviation of 3.36% is marked in 
DJIA, followed by 3.07% in NASDAQ, 2.73% in Nikkei, 
2.54% in CAC, 2.44% in DAX, and 1.85% in SSEC. Trends 
of the average and standard deviation of SSEC are notably 
different from the other markets. 
C. Length of Upper and Lower Shadows 
Figures 7 and 8 illustrate the 25-day averages and 
standard deviations of the lengths of the upper and lower 
shadows. The two figures look similar, revealing that the 
lengths of upper shadows are apparently correlated with 
those of the lower shadows. 
 
 
Figure 7. Average and standard deviation of upper shadow length 
 
 
Figure 8. Average and standard deviation of lower shadow length 
 
In the five markets excluding SSEC, the averages and 
standard deviations of the upper and lower shadows increase 
sharply during the period from approximately 10 days 
before the lowest price to approximately next 25 days.  
Notably in the European markets of DAX and CAC, both 
the averages and standard deviations have surged about six 
times after the lowest price compared to these before the 
lowest price for the upper shadows, and about eight times 
for the lower ones. Those surges mean that rough price 
movements occur during the period. 
On the other hand, the Asian market is relatively stable. 
In SSEC, the averages and standard deviations of shadows 
are doubled after the lowest price than before for the upper 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
shadows, and are tripled for the lower ones. Nikkei marks 
about three times higher for the upper shadows, and about 
five times higher for the lower ones. 
Figure 9 is a scatter plot of the lengths of upper and lower 
shadows in the Nikkei market. It illustrates that there is a 
strong correlation between the lengths of the upper and 
lower shadows.  
 
 
Figure 9. Scatter plot of upper and lower shadow length of Nikkei 
 
The points surrounded by an ellipse correspond to the 
shadows that occur in the period between approximately 10 
days before and approximately 25 days after the lowest 
price. These points occupy a different portion of Figure 9 
from the rest of the points. R Square in statistics is 0.8422, 
which indicates that 84.22% of the upper shadow length can 
be explained by the lower shadow length, and vice versa. 
D. Difference Between Stock Price and 5-day Average 
Figure 10 shows the 25-day averages and standard 
deviations of the “difference between a stock price and 5-
day moving average” for the six markets. The 25-day 
averages of the differences sharply decreased during 
approximately 20 days before the day that record the lowest, 
and increases approximately 25 days after the bottom. 
 
 
Figure 10. 25-day average and standard deviation of “difference between 
stock price and 5-day average” 
 
In the five markets excluding SSEC, the day when the 25-
day average of the “difference between a stock price and 5-
day moving average” reverses the trend from downward to 
upward roughly coincides with a day when the stock price 
bottoms out. This is an important finding and detailed 
analyses are discussed in Section VI. The standard 
deviations almost reach their maximums during the period. 
E. Difference Between Stock Price and 25-day Average 
Figure 11 shows the 25-day averages and standard 
deviations of the “difference between a stock price and 25-
day moving average” for the six markets. The graphs have a 
smooth shape as a whole reflecting the fact that the 
difference is computed between a stock price and 25-day 
moving average. 
 
 
Figure 11. 25-day average and standard deviation of “difference between 
stock price and 25-day average” 
 
Again, in the five markets excluding SSEC, the averages 
and standard deviations fluctuate largely during a period 
between approximately 20 days before the day that recorded 
the lowest price and the next 25 days. 
V. 
STATISTICS OF PARAMETERS AROUND LOWEST PRICE 
The averages and standard deviations of each attribute are 
examined to find out how the COVID-19 affects each 
market in 25 days before and after the lowest price day. 
A. Amount of Stock Price Change 
Figure 12 shows the average and standard deviation of the 
stock price change. All averages are negative 25 days before 
the lowest price day and positive after the day. 
 
 
Figure 12. Average and standard deviation of stock price change 
 
The largest average price change is 2.58% in DJIA as the 
result of the change from –1.63% to 0.95%, followed by 
2.39% in DAX, 2.19% in CAC, 2.13% in NASDAQ, 1.94% 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
in Nikkei, and 0.434% in SSEC. The standard deviations 
notably decreased in Dow and NASDAQ with suggestion of 
stabilization of trading. 
B. Length of Candlestick Body 
Figure 13 shows that the averages of candlestick body 
lengths reverse the trend from negative to positive before 
and after the lowest price day in the four markets except for 
CAC and SSEC. The statistics of trend reversal indicate that 
there are many opportunities when stock prices rise during 
trading days after the lowest price day. The average after the 
day of the lowest price in CAC is –0.1388% for reference 
purposes. The averages in SSEC keep positive, i.e., 0.112% 
before the day of the lowest price, and 0.0489% after it. 
 
 
Figure 13. Average and standard deviation of candlestick body lengths 
 
The standard deviations conspicuously decreased in DJI 
and NASDAQ, which are the same tendency as in the stock 
price changes. 
C. Length of Upper and Lower Shadows 
Figures 14 and 15 show the averages and standard 
deviations of the upper and lower shadows in the six 
markets. In all markets, the upper shadows have larger 
averages and standard deviations before the lowest price day 
than those of after the day. 
 
 
Figure 14. Average and standard deviation of length of upper shadows 
 
 
Figure 15. Average and standard deviation of length of lower shadows 
 
The same tendency as the statistics of the upper shadows 
is observed in those of the lower shadows. However, the 
averages of the lower shadows increase by approximately 
0.3% after the lowest price in CAC and DAX, while they 
decreased in the other markets. 
D. Difference Between Stock Price and 5-day Average 
Figure 16 shows the averages and standard deviations of 
“difference between a stock price and 5-day average.” In the 
five markets excluding SSEC, the averages turn over from –
3% or less to approximately 1%. SSEC have far less average 
change of 0.835% than the other markets, e.g., 3.70% of 
Nikkei. 
 
 
Figure 16. Average and standard deviation of “difference between stock 
price and 5-day average” 
 
The five markets excluding Nikkei have slight reduction 
in the standard deviations roughly from 0.4% to 0.9%. 
E. Difference Between Stock Price and 25-day Average 
Figure 17 shows the averages and standard deviations of 
“difference between a stock price and 25-day average.” The 
averages in CAC and DAX noticeably remain negative, i.e., 
–6.05% in CAC and –4.47% in DAX, after the lowest price 
day, which is deemed to reflect the delay in the recovery of 
markets. 
 
 
Figure 17. Average and standard deviation of “difference between stock 
price and 25-day average” 
 
Meanwhile, NASDAQ achieves a positive average of 
1.89%, indicating that the stock price steadily recovered 
compared to the other five markets. 
VI. 
EXAMINING SIGNALS OF TREND REVERSAL 
As mentioned in Section IV-D, the 25-day average of 
“difference between a stock price and 5-day moving 
average” starts to rise just after the day when the lowest 
price is recorded. This section discusses that this indicator 
can properly predict stock price trend reversals. Java 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
programs using Swing packages are developed in order to 
perform the analysis efficiently. 
Let CPr(n) be the closing price of a trading day n, and 
CPr(1) be the closing price of the latest trading day. CPr(1) 
represents the current stock price in the case of trading 
hours.  
25-day average of “difference between a stock price and 
5-day moving average” is defined by the following formula: 
 
 
 
Analogously, 5-day average of the difference is defined by 
the following one: 
 
 
 
Figure 18 illustrates the candlestick chart for 30 days 
before and after Mar. 18, 2020 in the DAX market. The 
magenta line at the bottom of Figure 18 shows CPAvg (n, 5, 
5), and the blue line shows CPAvg (n, 25, 5). 
 
 
Figure 18. Candlestick chart for 30 days before and after  
Mar. 18, 2020 in DAX market 
 
The proposed two average lines go across up on Mar. 19, 
i.e., the next day when the lowest price is recorded. The two 
lines do not crossover on Mar. 5, which predicts that stock 
prices will continue to fall. In other words, a short-term 
recovery from Feb. 28 to Mar. 5 is a “dead cat bounce,” i.e., 
a temporary recovery of stock prices during a prolonged 
decline period. 
The two lines also do not crossover during the decline 
from Mar. 27 to April 3, which suggests that Apr. 3 is a 
“buying on the dips” type of opportunity since the 
difference of the two lines increase on Apr. 3. The magenta 
line crosses down through the blue line on Apr. 17. 
However, given that the stock remains above the 25-day 
average with a margin, the two average lines suggests that 
we should not take any action for a down trend. 
Similar results have been obtained in the other markets. 
Regarding recovery from the plunge caused by COVID-19, 
it is confirmed that the proposed two average lines forecast 
short-term trends properly. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper describes the results of analyses of stock price 
fluctuations in European, the U.S. and Asian markets with 
special focus on the effects of COVID-19 pandemic. In 
general, thanks to the timely implementation of monetary 
measures of each country, all stock indexes under study keep 
rising after the lowest price recorded in Mar. 2020. 
As of Mar. 12, 2021, the NASDAQ Composite Index 
(U.S.) of post-corona recovered 62.36% higher price 
compared to the highest price of pre-corona, while CAC 
(France) decreased by –1.73%. Analyses of the average and 
standard deviation of the six attributes that characterize the 
candlestick chart reveal that CAC and DAX (Germany) are 
deemed to experience a larger impact on stock prices than 
the other markets. 
We propose an indicator consisting of a pair of moving 
averages. The indicator is devised in the process of 
investigating how the difference between the stock price and 
5-day average is related to the reversal of stock trends. The 
results of experiments using daily stock indexes under study 
show that the proposed indicator forecasts short-term trends 
properly with a short time lag, at least as far as the stock 
price plunge caused by COVID-19 is concerned. 
We are planning comparative studies with well-known 
indicators including MACD (Moving Average Convergence 
Divergence) and ADX (Average Directional Index) [7] to 
inspect the effectiveness of the proposed indicator. The study 
may use daily historical stock data of various global stock 
markets and individual companies over different periods of 
time. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Chudik, K. Mohaddes, M. H. Pesaran, M. Raissi, and A. 
Rebucci, 
“Economic 
consequences 
of 
Covid-19: 
a 
counterfactual 
multi-country analysis,” 
Available 
from: 
https://voxeu.org/article/economic-consequences-covid-19-
multi-country-analysis/ Oct. 2020. 
[2] “Major 
World 
Market 
Indices,” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.investing.com/indices/major-indices/ Mar. 2021. 
[3] E. Dimson, P. Marsh, and M. Staunton, “Should you invest in 
emerging markets?” London Business School, Available from: 
https://www.london.edu/ think/emerging-markets/ Apr. 2019. 
[4] Y. Udagawa, “Statistical Analysis of Stock Profits to Evaluate 
Performance of Markets,” The Sixth International Conference 
on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data 
(ALLDATA 2020) IARIA, pp. 14–21, Feb. 2020. 
[5] C. C. Ngwakwe, “Effect of COVID-19 Pandemic on Global 
Stock Market Values: A Differential Analysis,” Acta 
Universitatis Danubius. Œconomica, No 2, Vol 16, pp. 255-
269, 2020. 
[6] P. Verma, A. Dumka, A. Bhardwaj, A. Ashok, M. C. Kestwal, 
and P. Kumar, “A Statistical Analysis of Impact of COVID19 
on the Global Economy and Stock Index Returns,” Springer 
Nature journal Computer Science,2:27, pp. 13, Jan. 2021. 
[7] “Technical Analysis,” Cambridge Univ., Available from: 
http://www.mrao.cam.ac.uk/~mph/Technical_Analysis.pdf, pp. 
1-179, Feb. 2011. 
[8] S. Glen, “Statistics How To, T-Distribution/Student’s T: 
Definition, 
Step 
by 
Step 
Articles,” 
https://www. 
statisticshowto.com/probability-and-statistics/t-distribution/ 
2020. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

