A Vision on Prescriptive Analytics
Maya Sappelli
TNO
Data Science, The Hague, The Netherlands
Email: maya.sappelli@tno.nl
Maaike H.T. de Boer
TNO and Radboud University
Data Science, The Hague and Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Email: maaike.deboer@tno.nl
Selmar K. Smit
TNO
Modelling, Simulation& Gaming, The Hague, The Netherlands
Email: selmar.smit@tno.nl
Freek Bomhof
TNO
Data Science, The Hague, The Netherlands
Email: freek.bomhof@tno.nl
Abstract—In this paper, we show our vision on prescriptive
analytics. Prescriptive analytics is a ﬁeld of study in which the
actions are determined that are required in order to achieve
a particular goal. This is different from predictive analytics,
where we only determine what will happen if we continue
current trend. Consequently, the amount of data that needs to
be taken into account is much larger, making it a relevant big
data problem. We zoom in on the requirements of prescriptive
analytics problems: impact, complexity, objective, constraints and
data. We explain some of the challenges, such as the availability
of the data, the downside of simulations, the creation of bias
in the data and trust of the user. We highlight a number of
application areas in which prescriptive analytics could or would
not work given our requirements. Based on these application
areas, we conclude that domains with a large amount of data
and in which the phenomena are restricted by laws of physics
or math are very applicable for prescriptive analytics. Areas
in which the human or human activities play a role, future
research will be required to meet the requirements and tackle
the challenges. Directions of future research will be in integrating
model-driven and data-driven approaches, but also privacy, ethics
and legislation. Whereas predictive analytics is often already
accepted in society, prescriptive analytics is still in its infancy.
Keywords–Prescriptive Analytics; Requirements; Applications
I.
INTRODUCTION
Prescriptive analytics is one of the big data buzzwords from
recent years. Being able to automatically prescribe actions in
order to attain some goal would mean a huge step forward
in decision support or automatic decision making for any
ﬁeld, especially growing ﬁelds like industry [1]. However,
the problem of prescriptive analytics is its complexity
[2],
[3] Nevertheless, there are more and more indications that
the increase in computer power allows for more complex
calculations. Think only of the ﬁeld of deep learning in which
continuous progress is made on a wide variety of application
areas. This suggest that it is time to investigate when and how
we can and should apply prescriptive analytics.
In order to assess the feasibility of prescriptive analytics in
any application area it is important to understand the complex-
ity of the prescriptive analytics ﬁeld. In this paper we aim to
do so, by analyzing the characteristics of prescriptive problems
and how it has been applied so far. We start off by explaining
the difference between prescriptive analytics and its brothers
descriptive and predictive analytics in Section II. We continue
with the challenges and requirements in prescriptive analytics
in Section III. In Section IV we use several application
domains, such as oil and gas, law enforcement, healthcare and
logistics, to explain in which situations prescriptive analytics
might be fruitful and in which it will not. This paper ends with
a direction of future prescriptive analytics research.
II.
DESCRIPTIVE, PREDICTIVE AND PRESCRIPTIVE
ANALYTICS
The number of organizations that base their results on data
analysis is growing. In the simplest form, the data analysis
of organization entails a form of descriptive analytics [4]. In
this form of analytics, a (typically large) dataset is described
quantitatively on its main features with the aim to reduce
the amount of data into ‘human consumable information’. An
example is the extraction of simple statistics, such as average
number of products that has been sold per day.
The next step of analytics is predictive analytics. In predic-
tive analytics, typically a prediction is made about the future
based on information from the past and current situations [5].
An example is the prediction of how many products will be
sold in one month, or one year. These predictions are based
on correlations and patterns in past data. A simple predictive
model can be a linear regression model that assumes that the
average number of sales per day decreases each month. More
complex models can take into account other aspects that could
inﬂuence the number of products that will be sold.
In predictive analytics, the underlying question is: ‘What
will happen?’ The next step is prescriptive analytics: ‘What
should I do to make this happen?’ [4]. This means that pre-
scriptive analytics is focused on ﬁnding the action that should
be taken to optimize some outcome, rather than focused on
what will happen if I continue to do the same thing. In the
sales example, an example of prescriptive analytics would be
to prescribe the action or actions that should be undertaken to
increase the average number of sales with a certain amount.
Just as descriptive and predictive analytics have tight
bonds, predictive and prescriptive analytics are also strongly
connected. One important reason is because prescriptive ana-
lytics also include predictions to estimate the effect of possible
actions. However, note that these are very different kind of
predictions. In prescriptive analytics, the prediction of the
effect of a (sequence of) actions or interventions is central.
This type of prediction deals with more complex situations
such as interaction between actions or hypothetical effects for
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

which no historical data is available. Predictive analytics only
involves predictions in a single dimension based on the current
and historical situations.
Imagine that a car seller wants to get some insight in his
business. First, he starts with some descriptive analytics and
calculates the number of sales and proﬁt he made the past 5
years. He also deﬁnes some cohorts of interest, such as high
end cars and low end cars and the proﬁt he made on each
of those cohorts. Then, he moves on to predictive analytics
and calculates what his expected proﬁt is for the next month,
based on the current and past situation. He also calculates a
more advance prediction, such as the expected number of sales
if the supplier prices go up ﬁve percent. In the prescriptive
analytics case, the car seller goes one step further. He wants
to increase his total proﬁt by ﬁve percent and wants to know
what he should do; should he a) ﬁnd a new supplier, b) stop
selling low-end cars, or c) start an advertisement campaign. To
answer this question he will most likely use some predictions
but, since the seller has never done an advertisement campaign
before, and has always used the same supplier he needs to rely
on other sources of data to calculate the expected effect of
strategies a) and c). Moreover, the optimal solution can also
be a combination of actions a), b) and c). And, the actions can
also interact. For example: an advertisement campaign may not
have the same impact when the car seller stops selling low-end
cars, because low-end cars might attract precisely those buyers
that are attracted through the campaign, making the campaign
irrelevant when the low-end cars are not available anymore.
Although a predictive analysis itself can also lead to a
prescription, this is typically one that is straightforward: ‘if
the stock prices are expected to go up, I buy’. Although
the question behind this prediction is an optimization prob-
lem (optimizing proﬁt), the optimization itself is not part
of predictive analytics. An example of a solution to such
an optimization problem stems from optimal control theory.
This is a mathematical theory dealing with ﬁnding a control
law to achieve an optimality criterion [6]. On the other
hand, a prescriptive analysis typically involves two aspects:
1) exploration of possible actions and 2) generation of the
prescription. It leads to a complex prescription, such as the
prescription of combinations or sequences of actions, which
requires more complex predictions. Typically, the decision
space for prescriptive analytics tends to be larger; multiple
situations with many variables, options and constraints are
taken into account.
Moreover, the interpretation of the prediction may not
always lead to an unambiguous decision. Therefore, an impor-
tant aspect of prescriptive analytics is the transparency of the
method: the algorithm must be able to explain why a certain
strategy is prescribed.
This also illustrates the close link between prescriptive
analytics and business analytics. Business analytics has been
deﬁned as ‘a process of transforming data into actions through
analysis and insights in the context of organizational decision
making and problem solving’ [7]. Hence, prescriptive ana-
lytics is a method for automating this manual process that is
speciﬁcally suited, as all automation methods, when the job is
dull, dirty, dangerous, demanding or difﬁcult.
III.
REQUIREMENTS AND CHALLENGES
For a problem space to be relevant for prescriptive an-
alytics, there are a couple of requirements that need to be
present. The relevance of each requirement is determined by
the application domain, but is typically present for interesting
applications of prescriptive analytics. An overview of the
criteria is presented in Table I, based on [2].
First and foremost the decision space needs to be complex.
Complexity can arise from the number of possible actions that
need to be evaluated, number of context parameters that need
to be taken into account and the inﬂuence of a decision on the
search space itself. Moreover the impact of the decision should
be signiﬁcant. For simple decision spaces, it is most likely
sufﬁcient to predict the outcome of the alternative situation
compared to the current situation and the analysis is complete.
For example, in the stock market example, the impact of the
decision will be very limited (except if you are a big player)
and hardly inﬂuence the new situation.
The same is true if it is not the proﬁt on a single stock that
needs to be optimized, but a complete strategy or portfolio.
Hence, it is not about optimizing a single action, but a sequence
of actions that needs to be executed in a coordinated manner.
For such a complex situation in which there are multiple
variables and multiple interventions that need to be optimized,
a prescriptive analytics approach is more suitable for the
decision maker to oversee the impact of his decision.
Another important requirement is that the objective is
deﬁnable, i.e. there is a clear quantiﬁable objective, such as
long-term proﬁt. Moreover, this objective often competes with
other objectives, making the decision space more complex. For
large pension funds for example, the decision to buy or sell
will have so many implications that the decision will not only
depend on an expected stock price. Another complication that
increases the complexity of the decision space even more, are
possible constraints, for example when limited resources are
available.
Finally, the required data should be available, speciﬁcally
data on previous actions, decisions and the consequent situ-
ation. As predictive analytics can map the current situation
to some point in the past and assume that they will progress
similarly, prescriptive analytics can map the current situation
to a point in the past, and the possible interventions to previous
interventions and assume that the response will be similar.
Hence, prescriptive analytics requires not only time series as
input, but also the actions performed previously.
This speciﬁc requirement of the availability of data and
speciﬁcally the actions taken is often a big challenge. It is
something that is often lacking, either because of (privacy)
concerns and legislations or simply because the required data
is not monitored. For example, it might be very useful for
the car sales-manager in the previous example, to constantly
monitor the actions and emotions of employees and customers
to derive the best sales tactic. However, this is probably both
not desired and hard to record. The data about these employees
and customers should thus be collected in a non-intrusive
manner, meaning that the individuals that are monitored should
not get disturbed.
In the case of little data, simulation models can provide
a solution, but this can lead to simulation or knowledge-
driven prescriptions, and does not exploit the full capabilities
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

TABLE I. REQUIREMENTS AND DESCRIPTION FOR PRESCRIPTIVE ANALYTICS
Nr
Name
Description
1
Impact
Is the expected impact worth the effort?
2
Complexity
Is the problem sufﬁciently complex (i.e. more than one possible action and multiple alternatives).
3
Objective
Does the problem have a clear quantiﬁable objective that can be optimized?
4
Constraints
Are there boundaries on the decision space that make the problem more complex?
5
Data
Is there data on the possible actions, decisions and the consequent situation?
of prescriptive analytics, hence some hybrid solution is needed.
Furthermore, in simulations physical systems are easier to
model through the laws of nature compared to the behavior
of people. This is because human behavior tends to be less
rational or predictable, whereas physical laws tend to be strict.
Moreover, a generic ‘human simulation model’ will not capture
the diversity in drives, needs and motivations that are an
integral part of an individuals actions.
Another challenge regarding the data is that when (implic-
itly) including previous decisions to the dataset, the decisions
might get towards a certain decision. To illustrate this, we
move to an example in policing. Imagine that prescriptive
analytics is used to steer surveillance against drugs dealers.
Increasing the police surveillance in a speciﬁc area of a city
will increase the number of catches in that area (and not
in other areas). This will cause a prescription algorithm to
increase surveillance in that area (since the expected number of
dealers caught is the highest there) and creates an inﬁnite loop.
This loop for the example of prescriptive policing is visualized
in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Loop in Surveillance
Besides challenges regarding the data, an important chal-
lenge is related to the user and trust. The system should pro-
duce decisions that are transparent, explainable and traceable in
order for a user to trust and accept the decision of the system.
On the other hand, the user should not overtrust the system in
cases it provides a suboptimal solution. As explained before in
the challenges regarding the data, the system has no creativity
and can only produce results based on the data it has seen. The
user is needed to validate whether the decision is right in the
situation, because humans are able to use their creativity and
adaptation capabilities in novel situations. Balancing between
those extremes will be a major challenge in any practical
application.
IV.
APPLICATIONS
We will elaborate on four application areas to provide
an example of how, and in what kind of application areas
prescriptive analytics might be useful. We indicate to what
extent they meet the mentioned requirements. Note that these
areas are merely used as an example, and are not an extensive
list of possibilities.
A. Oil, Gas and Offshore
Oil, gas and offshore are a group of domains in which
prescriptive analytics can be very beneﬁcial and in which it is
already applied [8]. Costs are very high and any reduction, no
matter how small, can lead to big proﬁts. Due to the nature of
the ﬁeld, the (sensor) data has nice properties, such as that they
are rich, readily available and relatively accurate. The most
promising application of prescriptive analytics is, confusingly,
predictive maintenance [9]. Three example applications within
this domain are:
(a) Predictive maintenance. Any minute a plant or turbine is
not working can cost thousands of euros, especially when
this occurs unplanned. Hence, maintenance is of major
importance to this area. It should not be performed too
late; otherwise a breakdown will cost a massive amount of
money. But also performing it early is not the solution,
since replacement parts are also very costly. Predictive
maintenance could come to rescue by suggesting (or
prescribing) the ideal moment for maintenance given
weather conditions, expected demand, and sensor data
indicating the current state of each part. For offshore
speciﬁcally, the algorithm should also take into account
that a bulk replacement might be cheaper than just-in-
time.
(b) Where to drill, lift or frack. Within the area of oil and gas,
prescriptive analytics can also be used to determine where
to drill (or where not to) and with which techniques. Even
though at ﬁrst sight it does not seem to be a very dynamic
problem, in practice the dynamics of an (oil) ﬁeld are
very volatile. The technique used for drilling or lifting at
one place, affects the performance on other places and is
dependent on the type of well.
(c) Automatic drill support. Prescriptive analytics can support
horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing operations
by automatically interpreting real-time sound, video and
other forms of data to automatically make real-time
adjustment to the parameters of the machines.
For each of the application, the relation to each of the
requirements is shown in Table II.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

TABLE II. APPLICATIONS IN OIL, GAS AND OFFSHORE IN
RELATION TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF PRESCRIPTIVE ANALYTICS
(green is requirement met, orange is neutral and red is requirement not met)
Impact
Complexity
Objective
Constraints
Data
a. Predictive
maintenance
b. Where to drill
c. Drill support
B. Law Enforcement and Justice
Predictive Policing is one of the hot topics within law
enforcements all over the world. A typical application is to
predict where and when a certain type of crime will occur
[10]. Currently, applications exist that use predictive analytics
to predict who is most likely to be the victim or the perpetrator,
or who is most likely to recidive. Although these applications
provide some insight into the dynamics of crime, they are
not necessarily of much use directly. Since the objective is
to prevent crime from happening, it is more important to
know what will be the effect of your intervention; this leads
to Prescriptive Policing. This is a challenging ﬁeld, not only
because of the human behavior that is included, but more
importantly because of the privacy, bias and other concerns,
such as ethical proﬁling. Furthermore, it is to be expected that
explainability of the outcomes is necessary to stand a chance
in court. Examples of possible applications of prescriptive
modeling in the law enforcement domain are:
(a) Prescriptive Policing. As mentioned above, Prescriptive
Policing is applying prescriptive analytics in order to
determine the best possible intervention to prevent crime
from happening. Problems are all over the ‘requirements
spectrum’; constraints are unclear, data is not available or
legislated by law, the impact is hard to monetarize. Even
the objective is not clear: do you want to prevent crime,
or catch criminals?
(b) City Planning & Legislation. From Environmental Crimi-
nology it is known that the environment, and speciﬁcally
the buildings, parks and infrastructure can have a great
impact on the actual and the perceived amount of crime
[3]. As local government can, more or less, control them,
predicting the effect of city planning and legislation could
lead to safer cities. Again impact and constraint are
unclear, however data is readily available.
(c) Sentencing. Law ﬁrms can use algorithms that offer
predictions on certain cases and based on how similar
cases fared in the same jurisdiction give a prediction how
new cases could work out. The small Californian law ﬁrm
Dummit, Buchholz & Trapp already uses such technology,
developed by LexisNexis, to determine in 20 minutes
whether a case is worth taking or not [11]. One might
even imagine that judges are replaced by prescriptive
algorithms that determine the appropriate sentence. This
could lead to a more objective and consequent practice.
Whether society would accept such developments is,
however, highly uncertain.
Table III shows for each application which of the requirements
are met.
TABLE III. APPLICATIONS IN LAW ENFORCEMENT AND JUSTICE IN
RELATION TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF PRESCRIPTIVE ANALYTICS
(green is requirement met, orange is neutral and red is requirement not met)
Impact
Complexity
Objective
Constraints
Data
a. Prescriptive
Policing
b. City Planning
c. Sentencing
C. Healthcare
The domain of healthcare is typically well-suited for the ap-
plication of prescriptive analytics [12]. The impact of decisions
in the healthcare-domain is large and the decision space, with
patient types and possible treatments is complex. There are
also clear trade-offs and constraints in healthcare that cannot
be ignored. Especially with additional constraints coming from
insurance companies, decision making and optimization is
important for hospitals and other healthcare professionals.
However, the reason why it has not yet been applied in
healthcare often is that it usually requires the modeling of a
human action. As explained earlier, this is more difﬁcult than
modeling physical systems because their range of choices and
actions is much more diverse and less predictable. Examples of
possible applications of prescriptive modeling in the healthcare
domain are:
(a) Activity planning for the optimization of an individuals
well-being. In this example a prescription can look like
a sequence of actions that an individual would need to
take in order to improve their well-being [13]. Actions
can include adapting sleeping behavior, eating behavior,
physical activity or a combination. Problems in this
example is the effort and privacy issues involved with
collecting data on an individuals sleep, eat and activity
behavior. Moreover, the objective - increasing well-being
- is ill-deﬁned and highly subjective, making it harder to
optimize.
(b) Hospital constraint modeling
reduce cost and increase
throughput. Another example is on the level of optimizing
cost and throughput in a hospital. This problem is highly
complex since many people are involved. Especially
constraints on availability of employees can make the
problem difﬁcult. There are multiple objectives that play
a role in this scenario. Not only cost and throughput are
important, but patient satisfaction as well. The impact is
large, since sending patients home too early is undesirable
in the long run. It is likely that hospitals have a sufﬁcient
amount of data to work on these prescriptive scenarios.
Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General Hospital has been
looking into enterprise optimization using prescriptive
analytics [14].
(c) Personalized decision support for medical experts. A ﬁnal
example in the healthcare domain would be the prescrip-
tion of a treatment plan, personalized for an individuals
speciﬁc situation. The biggest problem in this scenario
is the availability of required data and the privacy issues
that are involved once aspects, such as sleep, food and
activity are involved.
Table IV gives an overview of the relation between the
requirements and each application.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

TABLE IV. APPLICATIONS IN HEALTHCARE IN RELATION TO THE
REQUIREMENTS OF PRESCRIPTIVE ANALYTICS
(green is requirement met, orange is neutral and red is requirement not met)
Impact
Complexity
Objective
Constraints
Data
a. Activity
planning
b. Hospital
constraint
modeling
c. Personalized
decision
support
D. Logistics
The logistics domain seems an interesting domain for the
application of prescriptive analytics. Although humans are
often in the loop, they are typically not the core of the
objective that needs to be optimized. This means that a less
advanced human model is required, making the application
of prescriptive analytics more realistic. Examples of possible
applications of prescriptive modeling in the logistics domain
are:
(a) Routing of ships and trucks for loading and unloading on
docks [15]. A possible example of a routing problem is
the case where multiple companies are cooperating. This
makes the problem complex and interesting, since there
are strong interactions between actions, i.e. if a single
driver pauses, than this effects other trucks and ships as
well. Moreover, there is a clear objective reducing time
and optimizing throughput. Constraints are also clear,
for example local speed limits. With the increase in use
of GPS trackers, there is a continuous availability of
streaming data. The optimization of the activities of all
parties involved at a dock can have a large impact on total
revenue and throughput.
(b) Dairy farm optimization. In the food industry, farms
collect a lot of data about their farm and their animals
[16], [17]. This ensures an optimal ﬂow of milk and other
animal products. Food industry in general has a large
impact on society, however the impact of a single farm
might be small. There is an interesting overlap between
optimizing the health of animals and optimizing the health
of people. Constructing animal models might be less
complex than constructing human models, making this
a particularly interesting example application. Moreover,
optimization in dairy farms could also be focused on
optimizing supply-demand ﬂows. This makes the decision
space, from cow to retailer elaborate and complex.
The relation of these two applications in the Logistics
domain to the requirements of prescriptive analytics is shown
in Table V.
TABLE V. APPLICATIONS IN LOGISTICS IN RELATION TO THE
REQUIREMENTS OF PRESCRIPTIVE ANALYTICS
(green is requirement met, orange is neutral and red is requirement not met)
Impact
Complexity
Objective
Constraints
Data
a. Routing
on Docks
b. Dairy farm
optimization
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
It is immediately clear from the applications in the previous
section that the low hanging fruit of prescriptive analytics is
in those areas with lots of data and in which the phenomena
can be described with physics or math. Logistics and oil, gas
and offshore are just two examples, but automotive, chemistry
and additive manufacturing can also beneﬁt from prescriptive
analytics.
The areas which are more challenging are areas in which
we do not have the data available or in which we have
a gigantic number of possible actions or a large degree
of freedom. In these circumstances, models and knowledge
can come to aid as these can ﬁll in the gaps of missing
data [18]. Human behavior is the most typical example here.
Healthcare, Law Enforcement, Human Resource Management,
Force Protection, Sustainability; each of them has the promise
of major (societal) impact. In terms of algorithms, this means
adapting or combining current predictive algorithms, self-
learning algorithms and knowledge-driven algorithms to deal
with the complexity of a prescriptive analytics problem.
Within a few years Google, Facebook, IBM and other
companies will deliver prescriptive algorithms - ’as a service’.
Any company can, and will, move towards a more data-driven
approach in decision making. Prescriptive analytics is the Holy
Grail in this area; whereas descriptive and predictive algo-
rithms still make you do the thinking, prescriptive algorithms
are the ﬁrst that actually deliver actionable insights. However,
although building such algorithms is easy, controlling them and
keeping them clear from biases is not. These dynamics are
complicated to grasp and require extensive knowledge from
both self-learning algorithms and the application area.
Finally, privacy, ethics and legislation are important issues
in some of those areas and should not be overlooked. We
should not fear a Minority Report; predictions and prescrip-
tions are no forecast, they are just math. We should be careful
also to treat them as such. Humans are intrinsically lazy, and
will readily comply, even if the prescription is coming from
a machine. Hence, machines that are making prescriptions
are not that different from autonomous systems, and should
therefore be considered equal. If we do not want autonomous
weapons, we should also not build prescriptive ones either.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the Early Research Program ‘Mak-
ing Sense Of Big Data’ of TNO for their ﬁnancial support.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Banerjee, T. Bandyopadhyay, and P. Acharya. Data analytics:
Hyped
up
aspirations
or
true
potential?
[Online].
Available:
http://www.vikalpa.com/pdf/articles/2013/04-Perspectives.pdf (2013)
[2]
C. Centurion. Prescriptive analytics in healthcare. [Online]. Available:
http://www.riverlogic.com/prescriptive-analytics-in-healthcare (2014)
[3]
S. Smit, B. van der Vecht, and L. Lebesque, “Predictive mapping of anti-
social behaviour,” European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research,
vol. 21, no. 4, 2015, pp. 509–521.
[4]
D. Delen and H. Demirkan, “Data, information and analytics as ser-
vices,” 2013.
[5]
M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett, “Data science, predictive analytics,
and big data: a revolution that will transform supply chain design and
management,” Journal of Business Logistics, vol. 34, no. 2, 2013, pp.
77–84.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

[6]
D. E. Kirk, Optimal control theory: an introduction.
Courier Corpo-
ration, 2012.
[7]
M. J. Liberatore and W. Luo, “The analytics movement: Implications
for operations research,” Interfaces, vol. 40, no. 4, 2010, pp. 313–324.
[8]
S. Gupta, L. Saputelli, M. Nikolaou et al., “Applying big data analytics
to detect, diagnose, and prevent impending failures in electric sub-
mersible pumps,” in SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition.
Society of Petroleum Engineers, 2016.
[9]
R. K. Mobley, An introduction to predictive maintenance. Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2002.
[10]
S. Smit, A. de Vries, R. van Kleij, and H. van Vliet, “From predictive
to prescriptive policing,” TNO report, The Hague, 2016.
[11]
S. Thammaboosadee, “Big data and big lawyer,” TIMES-iCON2016, p.
193.
[12]
W. Raghupathi and V. Raghupathi, “An overview of health analytics,”
J Health Med Informat, vol. 4, no. 132, 2013, p. 2.
[13]
S. Koldijk, W. Kraaij, and M. A. Neerincx, “Deriving requirements
for pervasive well-being technology from work stress and intervention
theory: framework and case study,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 4,
no. 3, 2016.
[14]
P. Troy, A. Berg, J. Richards, G. Pellerin, and L. Rosenberg, “A pre-
scriptive analytics project for maximizing healthcare value generation,”
2015.
[15]
A. G. Dominguez, “‘smart ships”: Mobile applications, cloud and
bigdata on marine trafﬁc for increased safety and optimized costs op-
erations,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Modelling and Simulation (AIMS),
2014 2nd International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 303–308.
[16]
G.
Leopold.
Dairy
industry
asks:
Got
big
data?
[Online].
Available:
https://www.datanami.com/2014/10/31/dairy-industry-asks-
got-big-data/
[17]
R. Schrijver, P. Berentsen, R. A. Groeneveld, A. Corporaal, and
T. de Koeijer, “Development of nature-oriented dairy farm systems
with an optimization model: the case of ‘farming for nature’ in ‘de
langstraat’, the netherlands,” Agrarwirtschaft, vol. 55, no. 5/6, 2006,
pp. 280–289.
[18]
M. J. Mortenson, N. F. Doherty, and S. Robinson, “Operational research
from taylorism to terabytes: A research agenda for the analytics age,”
European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 241, no. 3, 2015, pp.
583–595.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

