Informed Consent and Privacy of De-Identified Information and Estimated Data  
 
Lessons from Iceland and the United States in an Era of Computational Genomics
 
 
Donna M. Gitter 
Department of Law 
Baruch College, City University of New York 
55 Lexington Avenue 
New York, New York 10010 
USA 
e-mail: Donna.Gitter@baruch.cuny.edu 
 
Abstract—Advances in bioinformatics and computational 
genomics necessitate reexamination of the principles of privacy 
and informed consent.   The law of informed consent requires 
that research subjects give their consent to participation in 
biomedical research.  In the current age of bioinformatics and 
computational genomics, however, researchers are in many 
cases able to use genetic and genealogical data from research 
subjects who did agree to participate in genetic testing, in 
order to make educated guesses about the genetic profile of the 
subjects’ relatives, who did not volunteer to participate.  The 
law of informed consent does not address the use of estimated 
data, given that it was not possible before the advent of 
computational genomics to conduct “in silico” research.  In 
considering whether to extend informed consent protection to 
those to whom “estimated data” is extrapolated, it is useful to 
consider currently proposed changes to the law of informed 
consent in the U.S.  These proposed changes arise from the 
notion 
that 
biospecimens 
are 
increasingly 
considered 
intrinsically identifiable, and therefore individuals ought to be 
asked for their informed consent before the use of even de-
identified specimens.  Moreover, the recently revised Genomic 
Data Sharing (GDS) Policy of the U.S. National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) goes even further to require informed consent 
not only for use of biospecimens and identifiable private 
information, but also for genomic or other data, even if it is de-
identified.   It follows logically that those who do not agree to 
participate in biomedical research, but from whom estimated 
data are gleaned, ought to be asked for their informed consent.   
Keywords-bioinformatics; computational genomics; privacy; 
informed consent. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Advances in bioinformatics and computational genomics 
necessitate reexamination of the principles of privacy and 
informed consent.  Since the formation of the Nuremberg 
Code, which developed as a result of the Nazi War Crimes 
Tribunal and was the first internationally recognized code of 
research ethics, medical researchers must recognize 
protections for human research subjects.  The primary tenet 
of the Nuremberg Code is that “The voluntary consent of the 
human subject is absolutely essential.”  In the current age of 
bioinformatics and computational genomics, however, 
researchers are in many cases able to use genetic and 
genealogical data from research subjects who did agree to 
participate in genetic testing, in order to make educated 
guesses about the genetic profile of the subjects’ relatives, 
who did not volunteer to participate.  This estimated data can 
then be combined with health records of the non-volunteers 
in order to conduct genetic research, often termed “in silico” 
biology, without their informed consent.  Researchers use 
these technologies to calculate the probability that an 
individual carries a particular genetic variant, without 
sequencing that person’s deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 
thereby developing estimated data for inclusion in research 
databases.  
Section II of this paper considers the use of 
computational genomics in Iceland to conduct research 
using estimated data from individuals without their 
informed consent, noting that this conflicts directly with a 
legal trend toward enhanced recognition of the privacy 
rights and autonomy of research participants, as reflected in 
proposed changes to the law and policy of informed consent 
in the United States.  Section III then considers proposed 
changes in the U.S. enhancing informed consent protection 
for research with de-identified materials, and advocates for 
the same level of protection for estimated data, in keeping 
with traditional norms of informed consent. 
 
 
II. 
THE USE OF COMPUTATIONAL GENOMICS IN ICELAND 
Controversial methods of computational genomics, 
particularly the use of estimated genetic data, are 
particularly effective in Iceland, an island nation with 
detailed genealogical records and a population of 
approximately 320,000 citizens who are considered to be 
genetically homogeneous.  The intimacy of this small 
country is made evident by the existence of a smart-phone 
app in Iceland that permits individuals to determine whether 
they are related to another person whom they are 
considering dating. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

In light of Iceland’s genetic homogeneity and the 
availability of detailed genealogical information, in 1996 
Icelander Dr. Kari Steffansson founded the company 
deCODE Genetics in order to use Iceland’s population to 
pioneer genetic population studies.  In 1999, the Icelandic 
government granted deCODE an exclusive 12-year license 
to build a Health Sector Database to hold centralized health 
records of its entire population [1]. The plan incited much 
controversy due to the presumption that citizens of Iceland 
would be deemed to consent to participate unless they 
actively opted out.  In November 2003, the Supreme Court 
of Iceland disrupted deCODE’s plans by ruling in favor of 
Ragnhildur Gudmundsdottir, an eighteen-year-old student, 
holding that she could prevent the transfer to the database of 
her deceased father’s health records.  The court held that the 
records in the database might allow her to be identified as an 
individual at risk of a heritable disease, even though the data 
would be anonymous and encrypted.  The court noted that 
this risk was heightened by the fact that the Health Sector 
Database would allow information to be linked with data 
from other genetic and genealogical databases [1]. 
     DeCODE then pursued another strategy, using estimated 
data to create a research database to find genetic sequences 
linked to diseases.  Using DNA and clinical data from more 
than 120,000 research volunteers, deCODE analyzed their 
DNA sequences for a selection of slight variations called 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which are the 
most common genetic variations among individuals and 
some of which may prove important in the study of human 
health. 
Using a relatively new technique, deCODE geneticists 
calculate the probability that an individual carries a 
particular genetic variant without actually sequencing that 
person’s DNA.  For example, deCODE was able to use its 
whole genome sequencing of the DNA of approximately 
2,500 research participants in order to extrapolate the 
genomes of many more individuals.  When deCODE 
identified a genetic variant of interest among the 2,500 
whole genomes, the company used the more limited SNP 
data that it had amassed from its 120,000 volunteers in order 
to impute, with 99 per cent accuracy, whether any among 
the 120,000 also carried the mutations [6]. As noted by one 
source, “if your mother had been in the hospital for a stroke 
and agreed to participate in a clinical study, while her 
brother had volunteered his DNA, deCODE would be able 
to predict your likelihood of a genetic disposition for stroke 
[5].” 
While other researchers are using the same technique as 
deCODE, the company’s unique approach is to combine the 
known and estimated genotypes for its research participants 
with its genealogical database, thereby permitting deCODE 
to estimate what it calls the “in silico” genotypes of close 
relatives of the volunteers whose SNPs were analyzed.  This 
permits deCODE to infer data about 200,000 living and 
80,000 deceased Icelanders, who have not consented to 
participate in deCODE’s studies.  Further, it could give the 
company genotypes for the largely consanguineous 
population of 320,000 people in its entirety.  Researchers 
can then determine whether a variant in a DNA sequence 
found by fully sequencing the DNA of a small group 
likewise appears in a larger population in the same 
proportion [6]. 
The company has used these estimated genotypes for 
individuals as controls in its studies and also combined them 
with health records for patients who were involved in a 
disease study in Iceland but whose DNA has not been 
sampled.  Using estimated data, deCODE published six 
papers between 2011 and 2013 in the prestigious journals 
Nature, Nature Genetics, and the New England Journal of 
Medicine, linking specific genetic mutations to risks of 
diseases.  DeCODE’s drug discovery efforts were less 
successful, however, and the company declared bankruptcy 
in 2009.  In December 2012, Amgen purchased the 
company for $415 million [6]. 
In 2012, deCODE planned to use its strategy as part of a 
new study.  Having imputed the genotypes of the close 
relatives of the volunteers whose SNPs had been fully 
catalogued, deCODE intended to collaborate with Iceland’s 
National Hospital to link these relatives to certain hospital 
records for individuals, such as surgery codes and 
prescriptions.  On May 28. 2013, Iceland’s Data Protection 
Authority (DPA) denied this request, on the grounds that it 
would violate the relatives’ privacy unless they gave their 
informed consent.  The DPA gave deCODE until November 
2013 to demonstrate that it obtained consent [10]. 
DeCODE ultimately found a means of working around 
the requirement of informed consent, describing it in a 
November 5, 2013 letter to the DPA.  DeCODE confirmed 
that it had deleted all data registers containing imputed 
genotypes for individuals from whom consent was lacking.  
However, deCODE also presented the DPA with a proposal, 
according to which genotype data from research participants 
(who had consented) would be linked with genealogy data 
in a way that would generate statistical results as strong as 
those formerly achieved.  According to the Iceland DPA, 
this would entail that a genetic imputation for those who had 
not consented would be generated “in a split [] second in the 
processing memory of a computer.  However, this 
imputation would then cease to exist and would never be 
accessible to anyone in any form. The only accessible data 
would be the aforementioned statistical results, which would 
not in any way be traceable to individuals [10].” The DPA 
confirmed in a letter dated 26 November 2013 that this 
proposal did not give rise to objections if “all the 
aforementioned prerequisites were met [10].” 
Most recently, deCODE published a series of papers in 
the journal Nature Genetics in March 2015 that described 
sequencing the genomes of 2,636 Icelanders, the largest 
collection ever analyzed in a single human population.  
Using the imputation technique, deCODE claims that it was 
able to combine the full genomes it has for about 10,000 
Icelanders and the partial genetic information on 150,000 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

more to generate a report for genetic disease on every 
person in Iceland.  For example, the firm can identify every 
Icelander with the well-known BRCA2 mutation, which 
raises the risk of breast and ovarian cancer, even if the 
individuals 
have 
not 
submitted 
to 
genetic 
testing 
themselves. 
  
Dr. Steffánsson of deCODE contends that his company’s 
research methods do not violate patient privacy because the 
company is not actually sequencing the citizens’ DNA, but 
rather devising “conjectures” or “hypotheses” about them, 
rather than obtaining personal information.  He notes that 
estimated DNA sequences, unlike directly measured 
sequences, are not very accurate for individuals, though they 
are valuable at the group level. Moreover, Steffánsson 
emphasizes that, until now, both the DPA and Iceland’s 
national bioethics committee have approved the use of 
estimated genotypes for the two-thirds of Icelanders who 
have not consented to its research [6]. 
Geneticists disagree as to whether deCODE must obtain 
informed consent.  Jón Jóhannes Jónsson, a geneticist with 
the University of Iceland, observes that deCODE is not truly 
doing anything new, given that geneticists routinely infer 
whether relatives who are not part of a particular study carry 
a genetic mutation.  What is different about deCODE’s 
strategy is that it invokes the DNA sequences of the entire 
Icelandic population.  Jónsson concedes that deCODE’s 
plan to use estimated data supplemented by hospital records 
presents a difficult case.  Daniel MacArthur, a geneticist at 
Massachusetts General Hospital in the United States, 
suggests that although deCODE did not actually violate the 
privacy of individuals, from an ethics points of view the 
researchers should at least attempt to obtain informed 
consent.  MacArthur laments that blocking deCODE from 
using its estimated data present a “tragedy” not only for the 
company, but the wider “complex disease genetics 
community [6].” 
On the other hand, DeCODE’s promise to delete 
individuals’ data once it has calculated statistical results 
remains problematic, given the increasing proliferation of 
easy, cheap, and powerful reidentification technologies. [8] 
Erlich and Narayanan, experts in computational biology and 
computer information systems, have deemed deCODE’s 
actions a “breach” of “genetic privacy” of the sort 
increasingly common in the last few years as the range of 
techniques to carry out such privacy breaching “attacks” has 
expanded.  In particular, they term deCODE’s method a 
“completion technique,” meaning the use of known DNA 
data ”to enable prediction of genomic information when 
there is no access to the DNA of the target.”  There have 
been several high profile breaches of privacy whereby an 
“attacker” has been able to infer, from the known genome of 
one individual, the genomes of his or her relatives [3]. 
Erlich and Narayanan note that deCODE’s approach is an 
advanced version of the completion technique, given that 
deCODE has access to the genealogical and genetic 
information of several relatives of the target, and permits 
genotypes of distant relatives to be inferred.  They explain 
that it is possible to develop an algorithm that finds relatives 
of a “target” who donated their DNA to the reference panel 
and who share a “unique genealogical path that includes the 
target, for example, a pair of half-first cousins when the 
target is their grandfather  [3].”  A shared DNA segment 
between the relatives indicates that the target has the same 
segment.  By studying more pairs of relatives that are 
connected through the target, it is possible to collect more 
genomic information on the target without any access to his 
or her DNA, and, more importantly, without his or her 
informed consent  [3].  This conflicts directly with a legal 
trend toward enhanced recognition of the privacy rights and 
autonomy of research participants, as reflected in proposed 
changes to the law and policy of informed consent in the 
United States. 
 
III. 
PROPOSED CHANGES TO TO THE LAW AND POLICY OF 
INFORMED CONSENT IN THE U.S. 
The September 8, 2015 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(NPRM) published by the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services in the Federal Register, entitled Human 
Subjects Research Protections: Enhancing Protections for 
Research Subjects and Reducing Burden, Delay, and 
Ambiguity 
for 
Researchers, 
reflects 
the 
emerging 
recognition of the dangers of re-identification of research 
participants  [4].   
In the summary of its major provisions, the NPRM 
provides that “informed consent would generally be required 
for secondary research with a biospecimen (for example, part 
of a blood sample that is left over after being drawn for 
clinical purposes), even if the investigator is not being given 
information that would enable him or her to identify whose 
biospecimen it is [4].” The NPRM describes the changes in 
technology driving this proposed change, noting that “[n]ew 
methods, more powerful computers, and easy access to large 
administrative datasets produced by local, state, and federal 
governments have meant that some types of data that 
formerly were treated as non-identified can now be re-
identified through combining large amounts of information 
from multiple sources,” including publicly available sources.  
In light of this change, “the possibility of fully identifying 
biospecimens and some types of data from which direct 
identifiers had been stripped or [which] did not originally 
include direct identifiers has grown, requiring vigilance to 
ensure that such research be subject to appropriate oversight 
[4].” “Most importantly”, according to the NPRM, “[a] 
growing body of survey data shows that many prospective 
participants want to be asked for their consent before their 
biospecimens are used in research [4].” Thus, the NPRM 
clearly prioritizes an individual’s right to elect or decline 
participation in research.  This notion aligns with recognition 
of the right of informed consent for individuals who 
participate via in silico biology, though the use of their 
estimated data. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

Moreover, the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
have recently revised their Genomic Data Sharing Policy 
(GDS) to set forth the expectation that investigators will 
obtain participants’ consent not only for the use of their 
biospecimens and identifiable private information, but also 
for the use of their genomic data.  This will be true even if 
the cell lines or clinical specimens used to generate the data 
are de-identified [7].  By requiring informed consent for 
genomic data, the GDS goes even further than the NPRM is 
recognizing the risks of re-identification and an individual’s 
right to informed consent for research participation.   
There are many reasons that individuals may object to the 
use of their de-identified information, even if it is estimated 
data.  First, individuals may decline on ethical, religious or 
other personal grounds to participate in certain controversial 
forms of research, such as somatic nuclear cell transfer, stem 
cell research, and germ-line gene therapy.  As noted in the 
Human Subjects Research NPRM, “a more participatory 
research model is emerging in social, behavioral, and 
biomedical research, one in which potential research subjects 
and communities express their views about the value and 
acceptability of research studies [4].” Second, research 
participants may object to commercial exploitation of 
discoveries developed through the use of their de-identified 
information.  Largely in response to some highly publicized 
lawsuits in which research participants have sued researchers 
for revenue earned from using their information and 
biospecimens, it has become common for researchers to 
present research participants with informed consent 
documents that disclaim any economic interest in possible 
commercial applications flowing from the research.  
Research using de-identified records is highly problematic in 
that there is no informed consent and therefore no disclaimer.  
Just as there are many valid arguments in favor of 
expanding informed consent protections for research 
participants, there are numerous reasons why the research 
community is likely to oppose the extension of research 
protections, whether for de-identified biospecimens or 
information, or estimated data.  First, it is not feasible to 
contact each individual from whom materials have been 
gathered in order to request that person’s informed consent.  
Even if it were possible, it would be very time-consuming 
and costly.  Each individual’s contribution to the research is 
so small, perhaps as to be dispensable, yet would require the 
full process of informed consent.  Most importantly, and 
flowing from these reasons, the necessity of such informed 
consent might delay and perhaps even preclude altogether 
the development and introduction of medical advances. 
Furthermore, it is not only researchers, but also patient 
advocacy groups, who warn of these dangers.  As noted by 
these critics, in the context of requiring informed consent for 
the use of de-identified biospecimens and identifiable private 
information, requiring such consent “might inappropriately 
give greater weight to the [] principle of autonomy over the 
principle of justice, because requiring consent could result in 
lower participation rates in research by minority groups and 
marginalized members of society,” though “most of the 
comments from individual members of the public strongly 
supported 
consent 
requirements 
for 
use 
of 
their 
biospecimens, regardless of identifiability [4].” 
Indeed, it can undermine trust in the medical 
establishment when individuals learn that their biospecimens 
or information, whether de-identified or estimated, are used 
without their consent. Indeed, the Human Subjects Research 
NPRM states that “the failure to acknowledge and give 
appropriate weight to this distinct autonomy interest in 
research using biospecimens could, in the end, diminish 
public support for such research, and ultimately jeopardize 
our ability to be able to conduct the appropriate amount of 
future research with biospecimens [4].” 
It is clear that the trend, as evidenced by the Human 
Subjects Research NPRM and the revised NIH GDS, is 
toward the requirement of informed consent for the use of 
de-identified biospecimens and genetic information.  The 
question then arises whether there is a meaningful distinction 
between de-identified biospecimens and information, on the 
one hand, and estimated data, on the other, in terms of the 
need for informed consent.  It should be noted that neither 
de-identified information nor estimated data requires any 
direct interaction with the individual about whom it is 
gathered.  Indeed, the Common Rule specifies that human 
subject research occurs when an investigator conducting 
research obtains “data through intervention or interaction 
with the individual”, or obtains “identifiable private 
information” from any source [2]. The regulation further 
provides that “Private information must be individually 
identifiable (i.e., the identity of the subject is or may readily 
be ascertained by the investigator or associated with the 
information) in order for obtaining the information to 
constitute research involving human subjects [2].” It is this 
condition of individual identifiability that deCODE Genetics 
seeks to avoid when it declares to the Icelandic Data 
Protection Authority that the data will be individually 
identifiable only for a split second and then deleted from the 
computer memory. This argument fails, however, if data are 
as easily identifiable as Yaniv and Erlich have described. 
The main difference between de-identified biospecimens 
and identifiable private information, on the one hand, and 
estimated data, on the other, is that the latter are not accurate 
at the individual level, but only at the group level. While this 
fact may adequately address the privacy issue, it does not 
resolve the issue of autonomy, meaning individuals’ ability 
to decline to participate in research, either totally or as a 
means of rejecting the specific research proposed. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Biospecimens are increasingly viewed as intrinsically 
identifiable. What is more, armed with bioinformatics and 
computational genomics techniques, along with public and 
private databases, researchers can accurately impute the 
genetic sequence information of individuals without their 
informed consent.  While this can yield new discoveries and 
vital data for improving diagnostics, it also raises complex 
questions regarding the need to obtain informed consent 
from research participants about whom data is imputed via 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

in silico research.  The law of informed consent, codified 
before the development of powerful current technologies, 
does not address issues arising from the use of estimated 
data.  
Proposed changes to U.S. regulations would provide 
enhanced protection for research subjects by requiring 
informed consent for the use of their biospecimens and 
identifiable private information, whether clinical or from 
prior research.  Presently, researchers can use these 
specimens without consent by stripping them of identifiers.  
The newly revised NIH GDS goes even further by requiring 
informed consent for the use of genomic data, even if it 
derives from de-identified sources.  These changes reflect the 
current view that researchers ought to respect the privacy and 
autonomy of research participants in an era where re-
identification of research subjects has become easier to 
achieve.  While a liberal reading of the proposed federal rule 
changes and the new NIH policy support the notion that 
those from whom estimated data is gathered and used are 
entitled to the same rights of informed consent, privacy, and 
autonomy as conventional research subjects, the proposed 
rule changes contemplate for the moment only research 
subjects who contribute biospecimens or identifiable private 
information, whether wittingly or not. This article contends 
that individuals who contribute estimated data are similarly 
entitled to be asked for their informed consent for their 
research participation. 
The next steps in this research will be an investigation of 
the “right not to know” the results of one’s genetic risks.  
Paradoxically, while the law provides increasing protection 
for the right of informed consent, there is an emerging view 
that genetic incidental findings ought to be gathered and 
returned to individuals, even absent their informed consent.  
Indeed, deCode declares that it ought to be able to contact 
Icelanders to inform them of the genetic risks of which 
deCode learned when studying their estimated data.  This 
raises the troubling specter of individuals who have given 
consent neither for the use of their estimated data, nor the 
return of incidental findings to them, having their data used 
for research and then being contacted with researchers’ 
incidental findings.  This paternalistic approach conflicts 
deeply with the longstanding norms of biomedical ethics.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author thanks for their helpful comments on this 
work the hosts of and participants at the Law and Ethics of 
Big Data Research Colloquium held at University of Indiana 
at Bloomington on April 18, 2015.  The author also 
expresses appreciation to the Zicklin School of Business, 
Baruch College, City University of New York, for research 
support for this work. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Abbott, “Icelandic database shelved as court judges privacy 
in 
peril,” 
Nature, 
vol. 429, 
p. 
118, 
May 
13, 
2004, 
doi:10.1038/429118b. 
[2] Code of Federal Regulations, 45 C.F.R. § 46.102(f) (2009).   
[3] Y. Erlich and A. Narayanan, “Routes for breaching and 
protecting genetic privacy,” Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 15, pp. 
409-421, May 8, 2014, doi:10.1038/nrg323. 
[4] Federal Register, Federal Policy for the Protections of Human 
Subjects: Proposed Rules, Vol. 80, No. 172, 53,933 – 54,060 
(September 8, 2015). 
[5] R. Goldin, “Privacy and our genes: is deCODE’s DNA project 
‘Big Brother’ or the gateway to a healthier future,” Genetic 
Literacy 
Project, 
June 
24, 
2013, 
available 
at 
https://www.geneticliteracyproject.org/2013/06/24/privacy-and-
our-genes-is-decodes-dna-project-big-brother-or-the-gateway-to-a-
healthier-future/, retrieved: January, 2016. 
[6] J. Kaiser, “Agency nixes deCODE’s new data-mining plan,” 
Science, vol. 340, pp. 1388-1389, June 21, 2013, doi: 
10.1126/science.340.6139.1388. 
[7] National Institutes of Health, NIH Genomic Data Sharing 
Policy, Notice Number NOT-OD-14-124 (Aug. 27, 2014), 
http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-14-
124.html, retrieved: January, 2016. 
[8] P. Ohm, “Broken promises of privacy: responding to the 
surprising failure of anonymization,” UCLA Law Review, vol. 57, 
pp. 1701-1777, 2010. 
[9] T. Sveinsson, Iceland Data Protection Authority, E-mail 
message to Donna M. Gitter, Professor of Law, Baruch College 
(Oct. 20, 2014), unpublished. 
[10] K. Yandell, “All Icelandic women with the BRCA2 gene can 
be found in the database,” News of Iceland, May 13, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

