Wine Critic Scores and Consumer Behavior in a Major USA Metropolitan Market
Andrew P. Snow
School of Information and Telecommunication Systems
Ohio University
Athens, Ohio
e-mail: asnow@ohio.edu
Gary R. Weckman
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Ohio University
Athens, Ohio
e-mail: weckmang@ohio.edu
Abstract— In this paper, we investigated three questions. First,
to what extend do wine critic scores and descriptions influence
consumer-buying
decisions?
Second,
to what
extent
this
influence varies with price? Third, how do demographics affect
consumer decisions? The experimental design consisted of
convenience samples from four different stores in a major
United
States
(US)
metropolitan
market,
with
random
assignment of consumers to different groups, who completed a
total of 240 survey questionnaires. The dependent variable was
likelihood to buy wine when presented with varying amount of
wine
critic
information
(a
control
group
and
three
experimental groups with different levels of information).
Independent variables included wine price, age, gender, wine
interest, store type and location. Major findings include some
surprises. For a $20 bottle of wine, the critic information was
not a factor on likelihood to purchase, while critic information
was a factor for a $50 bottle. These findings varied somewhat
based on demographics such as wine club membership, gender,
type store, and store location. The findings have implications
for wine producer, distributor and retailer marketing methods.
Keywords-wine critic; consumer behavior; wine marketing;
tukey-kramer
I.
INTRODUCTION
Total world wine production in 2014 was estimated at
271 million hectoliters [1]. The world is producing more
wine than ever and Europe is not the only player; new world
countries, such as the United States of America (USA),
Argentina, Chile, Australia and South Africa are producing
large quantities of wine. With China on the horizon, the
world production will continue to rise, and there are now
thousands
of consumer
wine
choices.
Consumers
are
exposed to a range of wine advertising including magazine
ads, emails, website popups and newsletters. Extensive store
displays lend perception that wines are of quality and must
be purchased. At the end of the day, price range is certainly
an important factor consumer wine purchasing decisions. As
people only have a certain budget for wine expenditures, a
natural question is, how important are wine critic scores in
consumer choices?
This is a very important question because of the
proliferation of wine ratings in the marketplace. There is
evidence to suggest that consumers might be willing to spend
a bit more because of a wine critic score. Whether it is a 97-
point score from The Wine Advocate or landing in the top 10
of The Wine Spectator’s top 100, significant positive
attention is great for a wine’s image and marketability.
Retailers and restaurants may seek the wine and distributors
could very well change their purchasing strategy to meet
market demand. These scores also affect wineries because
higher scores usually lead to higher prices for retailers and
direct sales. Also, wine critics are known to have certain
specific tastes and it can be argued that if a winery can tailor
their wine to that taste and get a high score, perhaps they
could increase their price. The purpose of this research is to
test
how critic’s
wine
scores
and
descriptions
affect
consumer behavior in a large USA metropolitan market.
Experimental research in a major USA metropolitan
marketplace was conducted to investigate three questions
regarding the impact of wine critic information in buying
decisions:
R1. How do critic scores and descriptions affect
consumer decisions?
R2. If wine critic scores/descriptions do affect consumer
decisions, how sensitive are decisions to price?
R3. How do consumer demographics like gender, age
and wine club membership affect consumer decisions?
In Section 2, a background on wine assessment and critic
scoring.
In Section 3, the methodology of the testing is
proposed and explained in detail. In Section 4, the results are
compared against each other. Finally, in Section 5, the major
findings and overall conclusion is stated.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Wine is quite arguably the most complex alcoholic
beverage in existence. While beer and spirits are produced
from grains and vegetables, there are thousands of grape
varieties. Beer and spirits can be produced year-round, but
for wine production, grapes are only available once a year.
How good a taster is the modern wine critic and what are
the necessary qualifications to become a critic? Jancis
Robinson is a very influential critic and holds the title of
Master of Wine, which is one of the highest accolades
attainable in the wine business. Ironically, Robert Parker has
no formal wine training or certifications however, for his
efforts during his career; he has received the highest honor
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

possible
from
Italy
and
France
(Commendatore
and
Knighthood in the Legion of Honor, respectively). Parker
has also authored over a dozen books translated into multiple
languages. This suggests that a professional certification in
wine may not be necessary and experience can be just as
valuable as accreditation. Perhaps people would buy a wine
highly recommended by a critic because the perception is
that the critic knows more about wine than the average
person does and have better tastes.
How do people assess wine? There is little evidence to
suggest that everyone will enjoy a very expensive wine. A
study of 6,000 blind tastings [2] between inexpensive and
expensive wine showed that experienced tasters (minority of
the population) enjoyed the more expensive wine; however,
the inexperienced wine tasters more often enjoyed the less
expensive wine.
A test conducted in the USA on how Generation Y buys
European wine [3] claims that Generation Y accounts for
72% of food and beverage sales in the USA, and that
European wineries should target this group. Their test
concluded that when Generation Y purchases European
wines, brand familiarity and experience are key factors in the
decision process. Interestingly, researchers did not test wine
critic reviews for this peer group, and the questionnaire did
not ask the subjects if they subscribed to wine publications.
Additionally, the test was limited to European.
The problem is that with many more countries producing
wine, there are a myriad of choices for consumers. Also,
rules regarding labeling vary from country to country
(percentage of grape variety/vintage to be used in labeling a
wine) which always leads to the infamous traditionalist
versus modern debate. A major criticism of European wine
labels is that they are hard to understand. Many labels do not
have an indication of grape variety and give little clue on the
back label as to what is in the bottle. This is confirmed by a
survey published in Wines & Vines [4], an organization that
compiles wine metrics and information about the wine
business. According to a survey conducted in 2005, wine
labels confused 36% of USA wine drinkers, 51% of drinkers
found
imported
wine
labels
very
difficult
to
read/comprehend, and 81% of wine drinkers want labels that
are easy to read and understand. Interestingly, 51% of wine
drinkers liked humorous wine labels.
It can be argued that the modern labelling simplifies the
wine process for the consumer because the labels are easy to
understand and indicate grape variety. However, new world
labels can be misleading because in the USA, only 75% of a
grape variety is required to label that wine as a single variety.
Thus, a wine with 76% zinfandel and seven other grapes can
be labeled solely as a zinfandel. It could be argued that such
labeling is misleading. Either way (traditional or modern),
there are many choices, which lead one to question whether
consumers are confused. Another study [5] suggests that too
many choices can be positive, increasing the likelihood of
satisfying customers.
At
the
top
end,
there
are
educated
and
wealthy
connoisseurs who are not afraid to spend for what they know
or want. However, sales of Romanée Conti and first growth
Bordeaux represent a miniscule amount of wine purchases.
At the other end, $10 for a bottle may be too expensive for
some people – price is their selection criterion. This leaves a
gaping hole of consumers in the middle that are potentially
very confused. Consumers may choose to buy a wine for a
multitude of reasons (price, prestige, style, country of origin,
etc.) and a critic review is something to consider.
A study done in Australia [6] focused on how consumers
assess wine. Their report concluded Australian consumers
peruse a wine display shelf for one minute. Their research
focused on shelf information in front of the bottle (shelf-
talker) because although there are many sources of opinion
in Australia, there is no major dominating critic influence.
Their study concluded that wines with shelf information
increased the choice of a particular wine by 7.4%. It is
common to find shelf information in the USA; however, the
USA is home to some of the world’s most influential critics
(The Wine Advocate, The Wine Spectator) and their
information may be used as well. It is important to note that
while the influential critics in the USA taste and rate some of
the worlds’ most sought-after wines; they also do the same
for inexpensive wines. In fact, The Wine Advocate and The
Wine Spectator have value reports in their publications that
focus on inexpensive/good value wines with good ratings.
These publications review many kinds/prices of wine and
target
professional,
collector,
intermediate
and
novice
consumers.
Are wine critic reviews always effective? Someone went
so far as to say the wine critics are “BS artists” [7]. Quandt
bashes critics because scores vary considerably for the same
wine, sometimes critics contradict themselves, but most
importantly, he attacks the critics for their vocabulary, which
no one can understand. What does scorched earth taste like?
Or how do zesty minerals differ from minerals – are crushed
rocks really delicious? Quant argues that reviews do not tell
you much about a wine in terms that an ordinary person can
comprehend.
Adding to the argument, tests were conducted by Weil. In
one test [8], Weil provided subjects with three wines, of
which two were the same. For those who can correctly
identify which one is different, they are then presented with
the critic review to see if they can match the wine to the
verbiage. Only 51% of the subjects could correctly identify
the correct review. Weil conducted another test [9] to see if
people agree with the wine critic scores. The test was the
same, except for those who correctly identify the different
one, they were then asked to select which one they prefer.
The wines used for the test were from the same producer,
one was the entry level, and the other was the reserve. His
test concluded that for those who could identify the
difference, 52% liked the reserve wine better. Consequently,
Weil claims that the average person does not benefit from a
critic review because they may not like the same style wine
as a critic.
While the previous tests may suggest that wine critic
reviews are not effective, there is evidence and reason to
suggest that they are perceived to be valuable. The Wine
Advocate has at least 40,000 subscribers in every state in the
USA and have subscribers in 37 foreign countries [10]. A
paper on the impact of wine critics [11] suggest that these
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

reviews can be very valuable for Bordeaux lovers, as wine
critics taste almost all Bordeaux wines (at the en priemeur
tasting held every April). Most wine consumers cannot
attend these events; thus, they may rely on the insight of
wine critics. A test was conducted on Bordeaux wines rated
by Robert Parker [11] and it was concluded that a “Parker
effect” existed and affected pricing for Bordeaux wine by as
much as 3 Euro per bottle (highly graded wines were
affected most, and the effect diminished for lowly rated
wines).
The effectiveness of wine critic scores was tested in the
USA in a national grocery chain, targeted in northern
California [12]. Over a 2-month period, 32% of all the wines
that had ratings were selected for tasting. These wines had
critic expert opinions and scores in front of them on the
shelves. Using scores from 78 to 89, the test concluded that
wines with expert opinion and scores increased demand by
25%, while lower scoring decreased demand. This test may
help explain the aforementioned study about consumer
confusion because in a grocery store chain, the selections are
quite large and within a category, there are dozens of choices
within a similar price range. Interestingly, wines that were
not selected for testing did not change significantly in sales,
illustrating that not everyone may pay attention to reviews or
might have already developed brand loyalty before the test
was conducted. Although this test was only conducted for
two months and in a very small area, it does shed light on the
possible effectiveness of wine critic scores.
III.
METHODOLOGY
In the research presented here, we focused testing in a
setting where the sole purpose of the store visit is to buy
wine from a wine outlet. We chose to test the effectiveness
of wine critic reviews in the Baltimore, Maryland (MD) to
Washington District of Columbia (DC) corridor. The stores
ranged from small boutique selections to larger stores that
cater to everyone in terms of selection and price.
To address the aforementioned research questions, we
generated three sets of major null and alternative hypotheses:
Wine Critic Score Influence
 H10: The WA score has no effect on consumer decisions
on selecting wine to buy.
 H1a: The WA score influences consumer decisions on
selecting wine to buy.
Wine Critic Descriptions Influence
 H20: Wine descriptions have no effect on consumer
decisions on selecting wine to buy.
 H2a: Wine descriptions influence consumer decisions on
selecting wine to buy.
Wine Critic Score versus Description
 H30: Critic wine scores are given no more weight than
wine descriptions by consumers in wine purchasing
decisions.
 H3a: Critic wine scores are given more weight than wine
descriptions by consumers in wine purchasing decisions.
For the test, we developed a one-page questionnaire for
consumers buying wine from wine outlets. Each subject was
presented with certain information about two wines. Each
subject was asked how likely they would be to buy each
wine, by rating on an anchored scale of 1 (lowest) to 7
(highest). Four questionnaires were developed with different
information about each wine. All subjects were asked the
same questions for each wine, regardless of the experimental
group.
Three of these groups were experimental groups and one
was a control group. Sampling (store selection) was based on
convenience and there was random assignment of subjects to
the four different groups.
 Experimental Group A - Subjects were presented with
Châteaux, price, critic score and a critic description of
the wine.
 Experimental Group B - Subjects were presented with
Châteaux, price and critic score, but no critic description
of the wine.
 Experimental Group C - Subjects were presented with
Châteaux, price and critic description of the wine, but
not the critic score.
 Control Group D - Subjects were only presented with
Châteaux and the price. This is the control group.
In order to make statistical comparisons, questionnaires
were
distributed
to
four
retail
stores
in
the
greater
Washington D.C. and Baltimore area. A total of 240
responses were administered, resulting in 60 responses per
experimental group. The stack of questionnaires provided to
each store were ordered by group and inconspicuously
arranged and labelled (A, B, C, D, A, B, C, D, .. , A, B, C, D)
to ensure random subject assignment. Researchers also knew
which
store
questionnaires
come
from,
allowing
for
additional comparisons as to store type.
Besides demographic information, each questionnaire
asked the likelihood of buying two differently priced bottles
of wine (no tasting was involved). This allowed testing of
whether likelihood to buy was sensitive to price. Subjects
were presented with the questionnaire at the cashier during
checkout. It was expected that some would choose not to do
the survey, but everyone was asked until 60 were completed
at each store. Certain demographics were not targeted, e.g.,
gender, age, as assignment was random and sequential.
As each questionnaire contained different amounts of
data, the following legend was used to facilitate an analysis
and comparison of the data for groups:
 P – Price
 S – Score
 D – Description
For each questionnaire, châteaux names were provided
for each of the two wines. However, for questionnaire A, the
châteaux, price, score and description were provided. For
questionnaire D, only the châteaux and price were provided.
The groups are now referred to as:
 PSD – price/châteaux, score and description (Group A)
 PS – price/châteaux and score (Group B)
 PD – price/châteaux and description (Group C)
 P – price/châteaux (Group D)
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

To control for possible confounding variables, the
following techniques were used:
 Budget - Certain subjects will have more discretionary
income than others. Telling everyone that they have a
wine budget of $70 for this purchase helped control for
this variable.
 Appellations – This was controlled by only using one
appellation (Bordeaux).
 Critic – All scores came from one critic source (The
Wine Advocate).
 Châteaux name – The name of the two Chateaus were
fictional. Real Châteaux names could bias answers if a
subject knew of or had tasted these wines.
An example questionnaire is shown in Figure 1 for Group
PS (Group B). This questionnaire contains information about
several
Bordeaux
wines.
First,
assume
that
you
like
Bordeaux. Second, assume you have a budget for this
purchase of $70. Please indicate how likely you are to
purchase a 750ml bottle, based on the information provided.
You are not obliged to purchase anything by participating in
this survey.
Figure 1. Example of questionaire for Group PS.
The wines selected for the questionnaire were two
Bordeaux wines from the 2012 vintage. To eliminate bias
during the test, the châteaux names were changed to fictional
ones.
 Wine #1 – 2012 Chateau Joanin Becot, Cotes de
Castillon ($20)
 Wine #1 pseudonym in the questionnaire – 2012
Chateau Segay
 Wine #2 – 2012 Chateau D’Isaan, Margaux ($50)
 Wine #2 pseudonym in the questionnaire – 2012
Chateau Chelios
Other factors involved were:
 Wine Score – rated by Robert Parker for the 2012
vintage; sourced from his website.
 Wine description – exact wine review from Robert
Parker sourced from his website. The reviews were only
modified
to
remove
the
property
name,
winemakers/consultants and components of the final
assemblage to remove any potential bias.
 Price – the price is the average bottle price in the USA
that was sourced from www.wine-searcher.com. This
site collects data from wine retailers all over the world.
Based
on
the
factors
above,
the
wines
for
the
questionnaire were chosen:
 Wine Score – a difference of 5 points between the wines
was assumed sufficient to clearly distinguish the ratings.
The Wine Advocate’s rating system says that scores
from 90 – 95, “are an outstanding wine of exceptional
complexity and character. In short, these are terrific
wines” [10]. While both of these wines are in the
outstanding category, they fall at opposite ends of the
exceptional spectrum. Parker rated the $20 bottle as 90
while the $50 bottle was rated 95.
 Wine Description – Both of the wine descriptions have
the classic Parker vocabulary. The wines are described
as having plump fruit, intense spices, inky/opaque color
and being flashy/opulent. Also, there is mention of the
wines being “over achievers” or being underrated.
 Price – Bordeaux can be painfully expensive, so price
was a major factor in determining which wines to select.
Once above 95 points, the price was too high to use for
the test. In fact, we were surprised to find a wine-rated
95 points for $50 because other wines with the same
rating score were much more expensive. By having a
price difference of $30 between the two wines, the
wines were clearly separated from each other.
A.
Hypotheses
The
dependent
variable
investigated
for
each
experimental group was likelihood to buy the stipulated wine
(on a scale of 1 to 7). The expectation regarding the mean
dependent variable responses for the groups is given by:
µPSD > µPS > µPD> µP
We expected that consumers, when given all relevant
information, will depend
heavily on that information,
especially the critic score.
After the questionnaires were completed, the likelihoods
to buy for each group was compiled and the mean responses
for each group compared by the following tests:
 Single Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test (F-Test) –
performed to determine if there was a statistical
equivalence of experimental group means, using a
critical value of 0.05. If the means were equivalent, no
further testing was necessary. If the means were
different, further testing was required.
 Tukey-Kramer test – The Single ANOVA test above
indicates if at least one on the means is different, but it
does not provide the answer as to which means are
different. Additionally, some of the means could be
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

statistically equal and others could be statistically
greater/less than each other. The test for this situation is
the Tukey-Kramer multiple comparison procedure, also
at the 0.05 level of significance. With four control and
experimental groups, there are six combinations tested
for equivalence.
µPSD = µPS
µPSD = µPD
µPSD = µP
µPS = µPD
µPS = µP
µPD = µP
For the Tukey-Kramer test, the absolute differences in
means for each pair were computed and then compared to a
critical range, computed by:
where Q is the 0.05 critical value of the studentized range
distribution, k is the number of groups (in our case 4), ni, nj
the number of observations in the subpopulations i and j
associated with each mean, N is the number of total
observations (ni + nj) and mean-square-within (MSW) is the
value from the single factor ANOVA [13].
B.
Statistical Test Hypotheses
For the tests conducted, all hypotheses were accepted or
rejected based on critical value of 0.05. For all tests
performed for the $20 and $50 bottle, the hypotheses are
listed below:
Single ANOVA Test (Means across groups)
H0: µPSD = µPS = µPD = µP
Ha: At least one of the means is unequal.
Tukey-Kramer Test (Pairwise means across groups)
H0: two means are equal.
Ha: two means are unequal.
T – Test (Means between two sub-demographics)
H0 – two demographic pairs are equal.
Ha – two 2 demographic pairs are unequal.
IV.
RESULTS
A.
Single ANOVA Test
All the raw data was compiled, and a Single ANOVA
Test was performed to determine the mean responses for
each of the two bottles of wine. We also conducted ANOVA
on different demographic groups. The summary table is
listed in Table 1 along with the number of subjects in each
demographic.
All colors highlighted orange indicate that there is no
statistical
difference
in
the
means
across
the
four
experimental groups. For the $20 bottle, all but one category
had no statistical differences in the means, thus, we accepted
H0. Although some of the means appear to be different, the
critical value of 0.05 was used to determine if statistically
significant differences existed. Figure 2 is an example of the
Single ANOVA Test performed on the category “Wine
Club” for the $20 bottle.
TABLE 1. SINGLE ANOVA TABLE
CATEGORY (n)
$20
$50
PSD
PS
PD
P
PSD
PS
PD
P
ALL (240)
4.3
4.8
4.1
4.3
3.5
3.4
2.0
1.8
AGE > 40 (79)
4.4
5.0
3.6
3.7
4.4
3.6
2.0
1.4
AGE ≤ 40 (161)
4.3
4.6
4.4
4.6
3.1
3.3
2.1
2.0
WINE CLUB
MEMBER (64)
4.8
5.7
5.0
4.6
4.8
4.9
2.6
2.3
NOT CLUB
MEMBER (176)
4.0
4.5
3.8
4.2
2.7
3.0
1.8
1.7
BOTIQUE
STORE (120)
4.3
4.8
4.4
4.6
3.3
3.0
2.0
1.9
LARGE STORE
(120)
4.4
4.7
4.0
4.0
3.8
3.8
2.0
1.7
DC (120)
3.9
4.3
4.4
4.63
3.4
3.0
2.3
2.3
MD (120)
4.8
5.1
4.0
4.0
3.7
3.8
1.7
1.2
MALE (140)
4.4
5.2
4.0
4.4
4.0
3.9
1.7
1.9
FEMALE (100)
4.2
4.1
4.3
4.1
2.9
2.8
2.4
1.5
Legend for ANOVA Results
No Statistical Difference
in Means
At Least One Mean
Statistically Different
No difference in the means concludes that a buying
decision was indifferent between those presented with all
information (Group PSD) and those presented with the least
information (Group P). This indicates that perhaps wine
critic scores and descriptions are not that relevant for
inexpensive Bordeaux. However, a difference was identified
for the “Maryland” category. The differences in this
category were further tested with the Tukey-Kramer test.
Figure 2. Single ANOVA “Wine Club” ($20 bottle)
In contrast, for the $50 bottle, there was a difference in
means for all categories except for “Washington DC”. To
summarize, the Single ANOVA Test only indicated that
there is a difference in the means. It does not indicate which
of the means are equal, less than or greater than each other.
The “Maryland” category for the $20 bottle, and all
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

categories (except for “Washington D.C.”) were further
investigated by way of the Tukey-Kramer Test.
B.
Tukey-Kramer Test Results
For all differences in means indicated in the Single
ANOVA
Test,
the
Tukey-Kramer
test
was
used
to
investigate
the differences. The Single
ANOVA only
mentions if a difference exists, and the Tukey-Kramer will
statistically show which ones are different. For this test,
groups are compared to each other (in pairs) to see if the
differences were statistically different. A total of 4 groups
results in 6 different comparisons. The test was performed
for all data for the $50 bottle (only the $20 bottle for
Maryland), and was also performed categorically. Figure 3 is
the result for the $50 bottle for the category “ALL”:
Figure 3. Tukey-Kramer Test “ALL” $50 bottle
For the Tukey-Kramer test, if the absolute difference of
the means was greater than the critical value, H0 is rejected,
noting that the two means are different.
The results are interpreted as follows. For the comparison
of “Group PSD” and “Group PS”, the absolute value of the
difference of means are not higher than the critical range,
thus they are not significantly different. That means that if
one
person
was
provided
with
the
price,
score
and
description; and the other person was only provided with the
price and score, there was no difference in likelihood as to
whether they would purchase the wine. This indicates that
the description of the wine was less relevant because there
was no difference as to the likelihood of making purchase
when one group (Group PSD) had more information than
another group (Group PS).
The comparison between “Group PD” and “Group P”
were also not significantly different. What this means is that
the likelihood of purchasing the wine was not influenced by
the fact that one group had the price and the description,
while the other group was only provided the price. For this
comparison, having an additional piece of information (the
description) would not influence the purchase decision.
The significant differences lie in the middle (the other 4
comparisons). Comparing “Group PSD” to “Group PD”
shows a significant difference. This indicates that the score is
a relevant factor when determining the likelihood of a
purchase (ANOVA means for PSD is 3.5 and means for PD
are 2.0). When looking at the means from the Single
ANOVA Test for the means of “Group PSD” are 3.5 and the
means for “Group PS” are 3.4, which are statistically equal.
This comparison shows that having more information is a
relevant factor in determining the likelihood of a purchase.
The absolute difference of the means is the highest for
the comparison of “Group PSD” to “Group P” because
“Group P” was only provided with the price and Chateau.
The significant difference concludes that for this comparison,
having all the information versus the least information
influences the decision as to the likelihood of making a
purchase. The wine critic score appears to be very important
as well in the comparison of “Group PS” to “Group “PD”.
This comparison shows a significant difference; both groups
are provided the price, but the likelihood in determining a
purchase is statistically different (the ANOVA means for PS
3.4 and the means for PD are 2.0).
Overall, 10 categories were selected for the Tukey-
Kramer test for the $50 bottle. Maryland was also tested for
the $20 bottle because of differences noted in the Single
ANOVA Test. Of the 10 categories, the results of the
comparisons were the same for 7 categories, as those noted
in the “All” category above, in which “Group PSD” and
“Group PS” were not significantly different. Also, “Group
PD” and “Group P” were not significantly different. All
other
comparisons
were
significantly
different.
The
categories with the same results (which means were equal)
are as follows:
•
All ($50 bottle)
•
> 40 ($50 bottle)
•
<= 40 ($50 bottle)
•
Maryland ($20 bottle)
•
Wine Club ($50 bottle)
•
Boutique ($50 bottle)
•
Large ($50 bottle)
•
Male ($50 bottle)
For these cases, the following is concluded:
µPSD = µPS > µPD = µP
Other differences were noted than those above in the
categories; “No Wine Club”, “Marlyand” ($50 bottle) and
“Female”. Each one will be investigated below.
1)
Category “No Wine Club” ($50 bottle)
The differences are almost exactly the same as
found in the “All” category above, but there was a significant
difference between “Group PSD” and “Group PS. For this
comparison, to what extend is the importance of the
description? By looking at the means for the two groups
from the Single ANOVA, the means for “Group PS” are
higher than the means for “Group PSD”. This shows that for
the $50 bottle, which is a high price point; those not
belonging to a wine club are going right to the score. For all
other significant differences, price is a major factor. For
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

comparison of “Group PD” and “Group P”, there is no
significant difference. Here, we conclude:
µPS > µPSD > µPD = µP
2)
Category “Maryland” ($50 bottle)
The findings here are mostly consistent with other
tables. For comparison of “Group PSD” and Group “PS”,
there are no differences, highlighting the fact that the
description may not be that important. However, there is a
significant difference between the comparison of “Group
PD” and “Group P”. The Single ANOVA means are higher
for PD than P, but this shows that for a $50 bottle,
description could be a factor in determining the likelihood of
a purchase. It is important to note that for the category
“Maryland” for the $20, the same comparison of “Group
PD” and “Group P” showed no significant difference. There
is a price difference of $30 and this finding shows that as the
bottle price increases, subjects in Maryland were curious
about the description. Here, we conclude:
µPSD = µPS > µPD > µP
3)
Category “Female” ($50 bottle)
The results from this category were very interesting
because this is the only category where there was a
significant difference between “Group PSD” and “Group
PD”. Although the Single ANOVA means are higher for
PSD (2.9) than PD (2.4), those means are far closer to each
other than any other category. This shows as the price of the
bottle becomes more expensive, women pay attention to the
wine description and this can be a factor determining the
likelihood of a purchase. This is also true when comparing
“Group PS” to “Group PD”, as this was the only comparison
to be not significantly different amongst the categories. This
shows the importance of the wine description to women.
This is also true for the “Group PD” and “Group P”
comparison. Here, we conclude:
µPSD = µPS
µPS = µPD
µPSD > µPD
µPD > µP.
C.
Equal Variance Pairwise Two-tailed T-Test
The results for the pairwise T-Test are presented in
Table 2. Presented with the same information, was the
likelihood of purchase different for the $20 and $50 bottle?
The statistical difference is based on a 0.05 significance.
In most cases, when presented the same information,
price was a factor in determining the likelihood of a
purchase. However, there were some instances in which
price was not a factor. Most of the instances occurred when
the subjects were presented with the most information:
• Age > 40 - to determine the likelihood of a purchase,
age was important.
• Wine Club Member – this was the only category that
also had a difference when only the score was presented.
Maybe these subjects willing to make a high dollar
purchase with only the score.
• Large Store – in a large setting, the consumer has many
more choices. Perhaps they depend more on critics when
there are so many choices.
• Male - little speculation can be offered other than
perhaps status of a more expensive highly rated wine?
TABLE 2. UNEQUAL VARIANCE PAIRWISE T-TEST
• DC
–
a small
but very affluent
city.
Also, an
international city. Perhaps people in DC are willing to
spend more money on wine. City-Data [14] shows that
the median household income as of 2013 was about
$25,000 higher in Washington DC versus Baltimore.
D.
Unequal Variance, Two-Tailed T-Test
Demographic category differences were investigated
within the same experimental group. Demographic groups
were compared for both $20 and $50 bottles. Statistical
differences in Table 3 are based on 0.05 significance. When
presented with all relevant information for the $20 bottle,
there were only a few instances of demographic differences
within the same groups. Most of the differences were
between “wine-club versus no-wine-club members” as the
information provided decreased (all the way down to price).
For each difference (PS, PD and P), the means from the
ANOVA
table
were
higher
for
wine
club
members,
indicating they were more likely to make a purchase.
Perhaps
the
wine
club
members
subscribe
to
wine
publications with ratings? It is also noted that a difference
existed between “male versus female” for “Group PS”. The
likelihood of a purchase, the means were higher for males.
For the $50 bottle, there was a difference as those over
40 were more likely to make a purchase. Just like the $20
bottle, differences were also noted for “wine club versus no
wine club” for the $50 bottle. Differences were only noted in
“Group PSD and PS” because as price is much higher for a
$50 bottle, description and price alone were not enough to
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

make a difference. To note the previous T-Test again, a
difference in “Group P” was noted for “DC versus MD”, in
which the means were higher for DC. This sheds light that
perhaps DC is more affluent than MD and those subjects are
willing to make a purchase when only provided the price.
TABLE 3. UNEQUAL VARIANCE, TWO-TAILED T-TEST
For the $50 bottle, there was a difference as those over
40 were more likely to make a purchase. Just like the $20
bottle, differences were also noted for “wine club versus no
wine club” for the $50 bottle. Differences were only noted in
“Group PSD and PS” because as price is much higher for a
$50 bottle, description and price alone were not enough to
make a difference. To note the previous T-Test again, a
difference in “Group P” was noted for “DC versus MD”, in
which the means were higher for DC. This sheds light that
perhaps DC is more affluent than MD and those subjects are
willing to make a purchase when only provided the price.
A very interesting finding is the difference in “male
versus female” for “Group PS”. This is consistent with the
$20 bottle in which the means are higher for the male to
make a purchase. The Tukey-Kramer test indicates women
regarded the critic description as very important. Only
differences existed where the description was not provided,
indicating that perhaps males only care about the score.
It is important to also note the comparison of “male
versus female” for Group PSD for the $50 bottle. Although
the T-Test concluded there was no difference, the results
were very close (0.056 with a critical difference value of
0.05). The means for males to purchase for Group PSD were
much higher than the means for the female. Although no
difference was noted, an opposite conclusion is rationale.
V.
MAJOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
The
likelihood
to
purchase
based
on
wine
critic
information was very dependent on price. For a $20 bottle,
the critic information was not a factor in consumer decisions.
Conversely, for the $50 bottle, the scores and description, or
just the score are important.
Demographics definitely play a role. When presented
with score and description, the same individual is as likely to
buy the $20 bottle as the $50 bottle if they are male, over the
age of 40, belong to a wine membership club, shopping in
DC, or in a large store. So, gender, age, membership, store
location, and type store matter.
When comparing different individuals demographically,
wine critic score is more influential for males versus females,
and for club membership/no membership, for both the $20
and $50 bottle. In contrast, the wine description matters most
to females. The demographic that was most likely to buy
wine is club membership, followed by gender, followed by
age and location. The type store demographic showed no
differences in purchase likelihood.
A.
Research Limitations
Although random assignment of subjects to groups was
used, the four stores were selected using convenience
sampling. Existing relationships in the region were exploited
to recruit stores for this research.
The questionnaire only focused on one wine region
(Bordeaux) in the wine-producing world. Even though the
questionnaire asked subjects to assume they like Bordeaux,
there could be some bias amongst some subjects if they do
not happen to like Bordeaux. Additionally, subjects were
asked to assume they had $70 to spend. Some may have had
an aversion to buying a $50 bottle of wine.
Another limitation of the questionnaire is that it only had
two different bottle prices. Perhaps, more questions could
have been asked with different price points.
Lastly,
the
test
results
only
pertain
to
a
certain
geographical area in the U.S. and may not be representative
of other countries/regions.
B.
Implications for Producers, Distributors and Retailers
Wine Producers
According to this research, consumers pay little attention
to wine critic scores/information for inexpensive bottles.
There are of course other factors -- some producers may be
great at making wine, but not so great at marketing. Every
wine needs a label; in fact, some anecdotal evidence suggests
that for inexpensive imported wines, the label is more
important than the wine quality. The literature review
concluded customers prefer easy to understand labels.
For those producers in the business of selling expensive
wines, this research concludes that wine information is
important to consumers likely to buy. As the price rises,
those with money and the more educated wine-consumer are
likely to seek out additional information about the wine.
Strategic positioning is very important as well because this
research indicates that those in a very affluent area might
make a purchase with little or no information at all. Either
way, it would make sense for wine producers to get their
wines in front of critics because positive attention never
hurts. Of course, the risk is a low rating.
Wine Retailers
For inexpensive wines, retailers should include shelf
information to assist consumers. A wine of the month section
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

could be created for those wines a retailer would like to
highlight. This research also indicates that in large retail
stores, drawing attention to particular wine is good.
It is common for retailers to have a few customers that do
not mind spending a lot and if they prefer high scoring
wines, retailers should be looking at all wine
critic
publications and identifying these wines for their customers.
This research indicates that wine club members are more
involved customers and are maybe willing to spend a bit
more for bottles of wine. Retailers could take advantage of
this and create their own wine club for their customers. They
could do this with wines of the month and can focus a small
part of their business on highly involved wine customers.
Certain wines could be selected for this wine group and the
purpose is to draw more people to the group. As some
consumers are less involved but have interest in wine,
belonging to club could potentially make them more
involved, and perhaps could lead them into possibly raising
their budget for wine over time.
Wine Distributors
Just like wine retailers, distributors need to look at wine
critic scores and publications to be aware of what is
happening. They also need to be in constant contact with
their customers, so they can obtain wines that certain people
may be looking for. For expensive wines, it is important for
wine sales representatives to transmit wine critic scores to
their customers because a retailer might not always have
time to be constantly searching for this information.
For inexpensive wines, distributors need to pay attention
to market trends and know what their customers are looking
for. Distributors need to buy what they know they can sell,
but they have to know the trends in the market place as well.
A distributor might determine to bring in a new product
because the wine label is great, or the wine has a good story.
It
is
common
for
distributors
to
have
a
marketing
department, which can prepare shelf information, display
signs and anything a retailer might need to help sell the wine.
If a distributor does not have this, they should investigate the
possibility of doing so.
C.
Future Research
Analyzing this dataset using more powerful statistical
methods could be useful, such as Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) approaches or Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
to mine more insights.
It would also make sense to replicate this research using
more granular pricing to obtain more information on how
price influences purchase decisions. For instance -- to fully
investigate this question: At what price point would scores
and descriptions not be as relevant? Additionally, there are
many major metropolitan markets/cities in the USA and if a
similar experiment included more cities, more insights could
be gained. Likewise, the research could be extended to study
international locations and customers.
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Jeffrey Snow, who
independently recruited the four stores, conducted the
field research, and provided the data. He also provided us
his extensive knowledge and expertise regarding wine
markets and consumer behavior.
REFERENCES
[1]
OIV.
State
of
the
vitiviniculture
world
market.
http://www.oiv.int/oiv/info/en_vins_effer
vescents_OIV_2014. Web.
[2]
J. Almenberg, et al., “Do More Expensive Wines Taste
Better? Evidence from a Large Sample of Blind Tastings”,
American Association of Wine Economists, Working Paper
#16, Print. 2008.
[3]
S. Geringer, D. Patterson, and L. Forsythe, “When Generation
Y Buys European Wine: A Consumer Decision-Making
Model”, Academy Of Marketing Studies Journal, vol. 18, no.
1,
pp.
167-186,
2014,
Business
Source
Complete,
EBSCOhost, viewed 20 January 2015.
[4]
Wines & Vines,. 'Designers Take On Label Trends'. N.p.,
2015. Web. 9 February. 2015
[5]
B. Scheibehenne, R. Greifeneder, and P. Todd, “Can there
ever be Too Many Options? A Meta-Analytic Review of
Choice” 2010, Business Source Complete, EBSCOhost,
viewed 08 Feburary 2015.
[6]
L. Francis, L. L. Lockshin, S. Mueller, and P. Osidacz, “How
does shelf information influence consumers’ wine choices?”
Australian and New Zealand Wine Industry Journal Aust.
N.Z. Wine Ind. J. vol. 24 no. 3, pp. 50–56, 2009. Print.
[7]
R. E. Quandt, “On Wine Bullshit: Some New Software.”
Journal of Wine Economics vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 129-135, 2007.
Print.
[8]
R. L. Weil, “Analysis of Reserve and Regular Bottlings: Why
Pay for a Difference Only the Critics Claim to Notice?”
Chance vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 9-15, 2005. Print.
[9]
R.
L.
Weil,
“Debunking
Critics’
Wine
Words:
Can
Economists Distinguish the Smell of Asphalt from the Taste
of Cherries?” Journal of Wine Economics vol. 2, no. 2, pp.
136-144, 2007. Print.
[10] R.
Parker,
“The
Wine
Advocate
Rating
System.”
Erobertparker.com.
https://www.erobertparker.com/info/wstandards.asp.
[11] H. Ali, S. Lecocq, and M. Visser, “The Impact of Gurus:
Parker Grades and En Primeur Wine Prices”, Economic
Journal, vol. 118, no. 529, pp. F158-F173, 2008, Business
Source Complete, EBSCOhost, viewed 18 January 2015.
[12] J. Hilger, G. Rafert, and S. Villas-Boas, “Expert Opinion and
the
Demand
for
Experience
Goods:
An
Experimental
Approach in the Retail Wine Market”, Review Of Economics
& Statistics, vol. 93, no. 4, pp. 1289-1296, 2011, Business
Source Complete, EBSCOhost, viewed 1 February 2015.
[13] J.
Hsu,
Multiple
Comparisons:
Theory
And
Methods.
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1996. Print.
[14] City-data.com,. 'City-Data.Com - Stats About All US Cities -
Real Estate, Relocation Info, Crime, House Prices, Cost Of
Living, Races, Home Value Estimator, Recent Sales, Income,
Photos, Schools, Maps, Weather, Neighborhoods, And More'.
N.p., 2015. Web. 8 September. 2015.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-631-6
ALLDATA 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

