Numerical Groundwater Model Results As Linked Open Data 
 
 
Xavier Almolda Cardona, Francisco Batlle Pifarré 
Hydromodel Host, S.L. 
Barcelona, Spain 
xavi.almolda@hydromodelhost.com, francisco.batlle@hydromodelhost.com 
 
 
Abstract— A service has been developed that facilitates the 
management of groundwater bodies (aquifers) using linked 
open data.  Numerical models simulating the behavior of each 
aquifer are hosted in Cloud Services, both for data model as 
for the model execution itself in a flexible virtual dedicated 
computer. Data are periodically and automatically obtained 
from open databases (mainly climatic conditions data) and 
public agencies (water level observations and detractions) in 
order to update the model.  An ontology has been designed to 
describe groundwater data coming either from measuring sites 
or model results. This ontology has been applied to an area of 
interest with an associated numerical model and transformed 
its results to Linked Open Data (RDF) files. This set of Linked 
Open Data files has been stored in a RDF store (Strabon) 
located in a cloud platform. Finally, a set of Web Services has 
been designed to query the above mentioned database as a 
public interface. This methodology has been applied to the 
Delta del Llobregat Aquifer located south of Barcelona 
(Spain). 
Keywords-Linked 
Open 
Data; 
cloud 
computing; 
groundwater; numerical models; ontology; Web Service. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION    
There is an increasing environmental awareness and 
quantitatively based management of natural resources, but 
specifically on the Water Framework Directive (WFD), 
which demands not only quantitative assessment of the status 
of water bodies, but also their expected evolution. Moreover, 
it requires active engagement of the public, which requires 
providing access to model results. The goal is to facilitate 
frequent updating of the model by means of integration of 
the large volume of observation data being collected by 
Water Agencies, and communication of model results. 
Numerical groundwater models allow assessing the current 
status of those bodies, their evolution under natural 
conditions and their sensitivity to human actions. 
Many projects and initiatives are trying to maximize the 
exploitation of linked data. The W3C Linking Open Data 
Project [1] aims at making data freely available to everyone 
by publishing open data sets on the Web and by linking 
items from different data sources, and the Geospatial 
Semantic Web [2] goal is to use the Web as a platform for 
geospatial knowledge integration. 
In the context of the EU Project MELODIES 
(Maximizing the Exploitation of Linked Open Data In 
Enterprise and Science) [3] a service has been developed that 
facilitates the management of groundwater bodies by means 
of numerical models using linked open data.  
In this paper, a methodology is described in which the 
numerical models are hosted in Cloud Services that provide 
space and computing capabilities for executing model 
simulations [4].  This project is also using Strabon [5], an 
open-source system for storing and analyzing time-evolving 
geospatial Linked Data, like dynamic meshes of values that 
change over time. 
Numerical models typically discretize spatial geometry 
using grids or meshes. Although some ontologies for 
groundwater data exist [6], an ontology from the model 
results has been derived since no ontologies have been found 
related to groundwater data derived from numerical models; 
and it has been complemented with an ontology for times 
series observations. The linked open data that results from 
applying this ontology has been stored in the above 
mentioned Strabon storage and made available via web 
services.  
II. 
GROUNDWATER MODEL RESULTS DATA 
The groundwater model data that will be published as 
Linked Open Data consist of time series, either of point 
values or mesh values. A mesh value is a collection of values 
over a space discretization, such a as a finite element mesh. 
A. Time series of mesh values 
Time series of mesh values consist of a list of mesh 
values for a given variable, each one with its date and time 
property. Each mesh value consists of a space discretization 
and a set of values for each node or element of this space 
discretization. The space discretization is defined by a set of 
points in space called nodes, and a set of elements that 
connect these nodes forming polygons. For the time series of 
mesh values, each new value has been stored as a mesh with 
its geometry and values for nodes and/or elements.  
Meshes have been stored as Resource Description 
Framework (RDF) triples in an RDF store [7]. 
B. Time series of point values 
Time series of point values consists of a list of time and 
value pairs, for a given location in space and a specific 
variable. The locations of these time series are sites where 
the measurements are made, like wells or meteorological 
stations. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

Due to the large amount of time series data of point 
values, the individual values have been stored in an 
Observations Data Model (ODM) database [8], and 
Representational State Transfer (REST) web services have 
been provided to query and retrieve this data as WaterML 
[9]. 
For the purpose of linking these time series of point 
values with other Open Data datasets and to facilitate the 
discovery of new time series, a catalog of available time 
series for the model has been stored as RDF data in an RDF 
store, with start time, end time and location among other 
properties.  
III. 
MODEL ONTOLOGY 
In order to represent the data from the model as RDF 
triples, an ontology [10] has been created to describe the 
objects that contain this information. 
Time series of values defined over a spatial discretization 
are defined as a list of meshes, with values on its elements or 
nodes, and with a hasTimestamp property that indicates the 
date and time of the simulated values. 
In order to expose the time series of point values as Open 
Linked Data, the ontology describes the elements necessary 
to represent the catalog of time series available for the 
model. This catalog allows the user to retrieve the time series 
information for a given location, variable or source and use 
this data to retrieve the values from web services. 
A diagram of the main classes of the ontology is shown 
in Figure 1. The elements shown have two different prefixes, 
the prefix geo for the elements of the geoSPARQL 
namespace, and the prefix donto for the elements of our 
ontology.  
A. Mesh  
A mesh is an unstructured grid that consists of nodes and 
elements. The elements are sets of connected nodes. The 
property hasVariable links this mesh to a Variable object 
that indicates the type of values for the nodes and/or 
elements. The data property hasTimestamp represents the 
date and time of the simulated values for this mesh. 
B. Element  
An element is a geometric element connecting a list of 
nodes. Each element has a geometry property. This geometry 
property is redundant because it can be obtained from the 
nodes of the element, but it can be useful for spatial queries 
involving elements. 
C. Node 
Each node of the unstructured mesh has a geometry 
property with its location of space and another property with 
its calculated value. 
D. Variable  
A variable is the type of property calculated for the nodes 
or elements, such as water level or chloride concentration. 
The data properties for a Variable are: 
• 
hasName: Name of the variable. 
• 
hasCode: Code used to identify the variable. 
• 
hasGeneralCategory: Category of the variable. 
• 
hasValueType: An indication of whether the value 
represents an actual measurement, a calculated 
value, or is the result of a model simulation. 
• 
hasDataType: An indication of the kind of quantity 
being measured, such as (according to WaterML 
Figure 1. Groundwater results ontology diagram 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

controlled 
vocabulary): 
Average, 
Best 
Easy 
Systematic Estimator, Categorical, Constant Over 
Interval, Continuous, Cumulative, Incremental, 
Maximum, Median, Minimum, Sporadic, Standard 
Deviation, Variance and Unknown. 
E. TimeSeries  
Each Time Series is identified by three characteristics: 
• 
The variable measured. 
• 
The site where the measurements were taken. 
• 
The source that collected the measurements. 
Each Time Series has the following data properties: 
• 
hasBeginDateTime: Date and time of the first value 
of the series. 
• 
hasBeginDateTimeUTC: Date and time of the first 
value of the series in UTC time. 
• 
hasEndDateTime: Date and time of the last value of 
the series. 
• 
hasEndDateTimeUTC: Date and time of the last 
value of the series in UTC time. 
• 
hasVariableUnitsName: Name of the variable 
observed. 
• 
hasTimeUnitsName: Name of the time units of the 
variable. 
• 
hasQCLCode: Code that indicates the Quality 
Control Level of the measurements. 
• 
hasMethodDescription: Description of the method 
used for obtaining the values. 
• 
hasValueCount: Number of values in this series. 
• 
hasValues: link to the web service with the values 
for this series. 
F. Site 
A site is the location in space where measurements are 
made. It has a geometry property indicating its geographic 
location, that is, a point. 
It also has the following data properties: 
• 
hasName: Name of the site. 
• 
hasCode: Unique code that identifies the site. 
G. Source 
A source element contains the information on the original 
source of the observation. 
It has the following properties: 
• 
hasContactName: Name of contact, or title of 
organization. 
• 
hasDescription: Full text description of the source 
of the data. 
• 
hasOrganization: Name of the organization that 
collected the data. 
IV. 
LINKED OPEN DATA 
In order to make the groundwater model data available as 
linked data, it has been transformed to RDF triples and these 
triples have been stored in an RDF store. 
The data from the time series of mesh values have been 
encoded as RDF triples and stored in Strabon, a RDF store 
with spatial and temporal capabilities that allows the use of 
stSPARQL [5] to query this data. 
Data can be retrieved by accessing the web page of the 
Strabon endpoint or by making REST web service calls to 
the Strabon endpoint. The result can be obtained in a variety 
of formats, such as RDF/XML [11] or KML [12]. An 
example of a stSPARQL query on the Strabon endpoint web 
page can be seen in Figure 2. 
The main purpose of linking time series data is not 
necessary to access each of the individual value of the time 
series of point data as RDF but the whole series, hence only 
the catalog of the available time series has been encoded as 
RDF data.  
For each time series available, the catalog provides, 
among other information, the location in space (point), the 
variable measured, the first and last date of the values, the 
original source of the data, and a link to a web service with 
the necessary parameters to retrieve the set of values of this 
time series as WaterML. 
A REST web service has been implemented, and is part 
of a family of web services that provide access to the time 
SELECT DISTINCT ?elemWKT ?tstamp  
WHERE { 
?mesh rdf:type donto:Mesh; 
     donto:hasElement ?elem; 
     donto:hasTimestamp ?tstamp. 
?node rdf:type donto:Node; 
     donto:hasValue ?nodeValue. 
?elem rdf:type donto:Element; 
     geo:hasGeometry ?eg; 
     donto:hasNode ?node. 
?eg rdf:type geo:Geometry; 
   geo:asWKT ?elemWKT. 
FILTER ( ?nodeValue > 2000 ) 
} 
Figure 2. stSPARQL query and results (mesh elements filtered by a certain condition) on the Strabon endpoint 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

series data as WaterML. The main methods implemented are 
the following: 
• 
GetSites(): Returns a list of sites with their basic 
information. 
• 
GetSiteInfo(): It returns the information of one site. 
• 
GetVariableInfo(): Returns information about a 
time series variable. 
• 
GetValues(): It returns a time series for a given 
variable, at a given location and for a given  time 
interval.  
The diagram in Figure 3 shows the architecture of the 
linked data service. 
V. 
APPLICATION 
This technology has been tested and applied to the 
groundwater model of the Llobregat Delta Aquifer [13]. 
This model has a two-layered mesh of 2920 nodes and 
5538 elements and it calculates flow and transport (chloride) 
data. The first 11 monthly values of the model simulation 
have been converted to RDF and uploaded to Strabon as a 
time series of mesh values. A catalog of more than 7000 time 
series of point data has also been uploaded as RDF to 
Strabon. The result is a dataset with more than 800,000 RDF 
triples for both model simulation and a time series catalog. A 
web portal with public access has also been created to test 
data [14]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
An ontology has been defined to describe the elements of 
groundwater model results and the time series of 
observations used by the model. This ontology describes 
how to convert this information into RDF. The use of RDF 
allows other services or applications to cross their data with 
the model results.  
By choosing a spatiotemporal RDF store like Strabon, 
topological or temporal relations can be established to link 
the results from the numerical model with other existing 
datasets. 
By publishing the catalog of time series and the links to 
obtain the values as Linked Open Data, the time series can be 
linked with other spatial or temporal information without 
having to store each of the individual values in the RDF 
store. 
Finally, this methodology has been tested and applied to 
a real model located near Barcelona (Spain). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by the FP7 project 
MELODIES under grant agreement number 603525. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked Data - The 
Story So Far”, IJSWIS, Vol. 5, Issue 3, pp. 1-22, 2009 
[2] “Geospatial Semantic Web Community Group”, Retrieved 
from https://www.w3.org/community/geosemweb/  [retrieved: 
March, 2015] 
[3] J. D. Blower, D. Clifford, P. Gonçalves, and M. Koubarakis, 
“The MELODIES Project: Integrating diverse data using 
Linked Data and Cloud Computing” in ESA Big Data From 
Space Conference, 2014, pp. 244-247. 
[4] J. Jódar, X. Almolda, F. Batlle, and J. Carrera, “Model 
Hosting for continuous updating and transparent Water 
Resources Management”, Geophysical Research Abstracts 
(15), EGU2013-13009-1, 2013. 
[5] K. Kyzirakos, M. Karpathiotakis, and M. Koubarakis, 
“Strabon: A semantic geospatial DBMS”, in International 
Semantic Web Conference (1), 2012, pp. 295-311. 
[6] B. Brodaric and T. Hahmann. “Towards a Foundational 
Hydro Ontology for Water Data Interoperability”, Proc. of the 
11th Int. Conference on Hydroinformatics (HIC-2014). 
[7] R. Cyganiak, D. Wood, and M. Lanthaler, “RDF 1.1 Concepts 
and Abstract Syntax”, W3C Recommendation, 25 February 
2014. 
URL: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-rdf11-
concepts-20140225/. The latest edition is available at 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts.  [retrieved: March, 
2015] 
[8] D. G. Tarboton, J. S. Horsburgh, and D. R. Maidment, 
“CUAHSI Community Observations Data Model (ODM)”, 
May 
2008. 
Available 
from: 
http://his.cuahsi.org/documents/odm1.1designspecifications.p
df.  [retrieved: March, 2015] 
[9] D. Valentine and I. Zaslavsky, “CUAHSI WaterML 1.1. 
Specification. Introduciotn to WaterML Schema”, June 2009. 
Available 
from: 
http://his.cuahsi.org/documents/WaterML_1_1_part1_v2.doc
x.  [retrieved: March, 2015] 
[10] N. Shadbolt, W. Hall, and T. Berners-Lee, “The Semantic 
Web Revisited”, IEEE Intelligent Systems Journal, May/June 
2006, pp. 96-101. 
[11] F. Gandon and G. Schreiber, “RDF 1.1 XML Syntax”, W3C 
Recommendation, 
25 
February 
2014. 
URL: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-rdf-syntax-grammar-
20140225/. The latest published version is available at 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-syntax-grammar. 
[retrieved: 
March, 2015] 
[12] T. Wilson, “OGC KML 2.2.0”, Document #07-147r2, Open 
Geospatial Consortium. April 2008. Available from: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/kml. 
 [retrieved: 
March, 2015] 
[13] E. Abarca, E. Vázquez-Suñé, J. Carrera, B. Capino, D. 
Gámez, and F. Batlle, “Optimal design of measures to correct 
seawater intrusion”, Water Resources Research, Vol.42, 
W09415, doi:10.1029/2005WR004524, 2006. 
[14] “Hydromodel Host Open Data Portal”, Available from: 
http://h2-lod.cloudapp.net. [retrieved: March, 2015] 
 
 
client 
Mesh Values 
Web Services 
Catalog of time series 
Link to values 
stSPARQL 
REST  
WaterML 
Strabon 
Figure 3. Linked Open Data Service architecture schema 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

