From Linguistic Resources to Medical Entity
Recognition: a Supervised Morpho-syntactic
Approach
Maria Pia di Buono, Alessandro Maisto
and Serena Pelosi
Department of Political, Social and Communication Sciences
University of Salerno
84084 Fisciano, Italy
{mdibuono, amaisto, spelosi}@unisa.it
Abstract—Due to the importance of the information it conveys,
Medical Entity Recognition is one of the most investigated tasks
in Natural Language Processing. Many researches have been
aiming at solving the issue of Text Extraction, also in order
to develop Decision Support Systems in the ﬁeld of Health
Care. In this paper, we propose a Lexicon-grammar method
for the automatic extraction from raw texts of the semantic
information referring to medical entities and, furthermore,
for the identiﬁcation of the semantic categories that describe
the located entities. Our work is grounded on an electronic
dictionary of neoclassical formative elements of the medical
domain, an electronic dictionary of nouns indicating drugs,
body parts and internal body parts and a grammar network
composed of morphological and syntactical rules in the form
of Finite-State Automata. The outcome of our research is an
Extensible Markup Language (XML) annotated corpus of
medical reports with information pertaining to the medical
Diseases, Treatments, Tests, Symptoms and Medical Branches,
which can be reused by any kind of machine learning tool in
the medical domain.
Index Terms—Medical Entity Recognition, Lexicon-Grammar,
Morphosemantics,
Semi-automatically
Generated
Lexical
Re-
sources.
I. INTRODUCTION
The necessity to access and integrate in real time health
related data that come from multiple sources, opens plenty
of opportunities for the research studies in Natural Language
Processing (NLP). This comes together with the need of
support in the extraction and in the management of useful
information and in the development of systems, which must
be able to give a structure to the semantic dimension of real
words and sentences.
In this paper, we present a Lexicon-grammar (LG) method,
that takes advantages from word combination rules and from
the lexical and syntactic structures of the natural language.
Our purpose is to locate and describe the meaning of phrases,
sentences and even entire documents belonging to the medical
domain.
In order to overcome the poor ﬂexibility of the existing
medical databases with respect to neologisms, we exploit
many Morpho-semantic strategies, which can be crucial in the
automatic deﬁnition of technical-scientiﬁc lexicons, in which
the global meaning of the words presents strong connections
with the meaning of the morphemes that compose them. In
other words, we reorganize the information derived from the
semantics of the word formation elements, by making the
medical words derive the meaning of the morphemes with
which they are formed. In this way, starting from a small
number of indicators and without any dependence to limited
knowledge bases, we can any time automatically build a
technical-scientiﬁc dictionary of the medical text we process.
In this work, thanks to the opportunities offered by the
productive morphology, we automatically locate and deﬁne the
medical entities contained in a corpus of 989 medical reports.
Moreover, using the theoretical insights of the LG framework,
we use syntactic rules to semantically describe the categories
(e.g., Disease, Treatment, Test, Symptom and Medical Branch)
of the located entities. Therefore, if our starting point is a
corpus of medical records in electronic format, the output of
our research is a structured version of the same corpus, which
can be easily reused and queried in every kind of machine
learning tool, Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS) or
NLP tool in the medical domain.
The paper is structured in the following way: Section II
introduces the most important works on the identiﬁcation
and categorization of medical entities in free texts; Section
III brieﬂy describes the Lexicon-grammar framework, the
Morpho-semantic approach and the tools we used to perform
our tasks; in the Section IV, we introduce the automatically
generated IMED dictionary and the set of syntactic rules
applied to extract entity classes from Medical Records; the
Section V describes the structure of the Medical Records
Corpus used to test our approach and the results of the
application of our method; in the end, Section VI presents
the conclusions and the further developments of our research.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

II. RELATED WORKS
The Medical Entity Recognition (MER) can be decomposed
in two main tasks: the extraction of semantic information
referring
to
medical
entities
from
raw
texts
and
the
identiﬁcation of the semantic categories that describe the
located entities [1].
As regards the ﬁrst task, many medical lexical databases
(e.g., Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), RxNorm, Logical
Observation
Identiﬁers
Names
and
Codes
(LOINC),
Systematized
Nomenclature
of
Medicine
(SNOMED),
and Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS), which
includes all the other sources) can be used as knowledge base
for the location of the medical entities.
Anyway, the quick evolution of entity naming and the
slowness of the manual development and updating of the
resources often make it necessary to exploit some word-
formation strategies, that can be truly helpful in the automatic
population of technical-scientiﬁc databases. Such strategies
concern
the
Morpho-semantic
approach
and
have
been
successfully applied to the medical domain by [2] on terminal
morphemes into an English medical dictionary; by [3] on
medical formative elements of Latin and Greek origin; by [4]
on the sufﬁx -itis; by [5] on sufﬁxes -ectomy or -stomy and
by [6] on the sufﬁx -osis.
Among the most used tools for the MER, we mention
MetaMap
[7],
a
reference
tool
which
recognizes
and
categorizes medical terms by matching noun phrases in
free texts to the corresponding UMLS Metathesaurus and
Semantic Network, and MEDSYNDIKATE [8], a natural
language processor able to automatically acquire data from
medical ﬁndings reports.
Examples of approaches based on the MetaMap knowledge
base are the one of [9], which extracts medical entities from
pathologist reports, and the one of [10], which focuses on
the extraction of medical problems with an approach based
on the MetaMap Transfer and the NegEx negation detection
algorithm.
With reference to the second task, we can ﬁnd in literature
rule-based, statistical and hybrid approaches.
As regards the contributions that exploit statistical methods
for the identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of medical entities,
we mention [11], that uses decision trees or SVMs; [12], that
uses Hidden Markov Models or CRFs; [13], that presents
a machine learning system which makes use of both local
and syntactic features of the texts and external resources
(gazetteers, web-querying, etc.); and [14], that obtains the
nouns of disease, medical condition, treatment and symptom
types, by using MQL queries and the Medlineplus Health
Topics ontology (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/xml.html).
Rule-based methods are the ones proposed by [15], who
identiﬁes, with a set of graphical patterns, cause-effect
information from medical abstracts in the Medline database,
and [16], that manages to extract clinical entities disorders,
symptoms and body structures from unstructured text in
health records, using a rule-based algorithm.
Hybrid approaches have been proposed by [17] for the
extraction of gene symbols and names; by [18] for protein-
name recognition and by [19], which combines terminology
resources and statistical methods with sensible improvements
in terms of Precision.
III. METHODOLOGY
Our methodology is based on the LG framework, set up
by the French linguist Maurice Gross during the ‘60s and
subsequently applied to Italian by [20].
The LG theoretical and practical framework is one of the
most consistent methods for natural language formalization,
automatic textual analysis and parsing. Its main goal is to
describe all mechanisms of word combinations closely related
to concrete lexical units and sentence creation, and to give an
exhaustive description of lexical and syntactic structures of
natural language.
LG theoretical approach is prevalently based on [21], which
assumes that each human language is a self-organizing system,
and that the syntactic and semantic properties of a given
word may be calculated on the basis of the relationships that
this word has with all other co-occurring words inside given
sentence contexts. The study of simple or nuclear sentences
is achieved analyzing the rules of co-occurrence and selection
restriction, i.e., distributional and transformational rules based
on predicate syntactic-semantic properties.
As described in Section IV-B, in this work, following LG
methodology, we anchored the recognition of terminological
ALUs (Atomic Linguistic Units) to the sentence structures
that recursively occur in medical reports. This way, on the
base of co-occurrence rules, which can be characterized by
different levels of variability, we could correctly annotate and
classify a great part of the medical entities contained in our
corpus.
As it is commonly done in literature, in our work we
divided the Medical Entity Recognition into two subtasks,
every one of which takes advantages from different resources.
• Semi-automatically generated lexical resources, for the
extraction of semantic information from raw texts (see
Section IV-A);
• Syntactic rules, for the extraction of semantic and
domain information. The assumption for this step is that
domain terminology is strictly interlinked with syntactic
combination and co-occurrence behaviors (see Section
IV-B).
Table 1 shows entity types recognized in our experiment; we
also provide a description for these one.
A. NLP Tool
For our TE task we use NooJ, a software developed by Max
Silberztein [22]. This system allows to formalize natural lan-
guage descriptions and to apply them to corpora. NooJ is used
by a large community, which developed linguistic modules,
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

TABLE I
ENTITY RECOGNITION CLASSES
Entity Type
Details
Disease
disorders and medical conditions
Treatment
therapies following diagnosis
Drug
information about prescribed drugs
Test
analysis and exams
Symptom
subjective evidences of diseases
or of patient’s conditions
Medical Branch
speciﬁc medical subdomains
including Finite State Automata/Transducers and Electronic
Dictionaries, for more than twenty languages. The Italian
Linguistic Resources have been built by the Computational
Linguistic group of University of Salerno, which started its
study of language formalization from 1981 [20]. Our analysis
is based on the Italian module for NooJ [23], which is enriched
with IMED and with grammars for Text Extraction (TE).
IV. LINGUISTIC RESOURCES
A. Italian Medical Electronic Dictionary
In order to automatically create the Italian Medical
Electronic Dictionary (IMED) of the disease ALUs occurring
in the corpus, we exploited morphosemantic strategies, which
uses the semantics of a special kind of morphemes to identify
and describe disease nouns or adjectives. Such kind of
morphems are called neoclassical formative elements [24].
They come into being from Latin and Greek words and are
generally used to form both technical-scientiﬁc words and
ordinary words in a very productive way. They can combine
themselves with other formative elements or with independent
words.
In this paper we will talk about them using the word
“conﬁxes”, which has been predominantly employed in
literature [25]–[29].
The
Medical
Morphosemantic
Module
(M 3)
we
implemented is composed of the following resources:
• An Electronic Dictionary of Italian Morphemes belonging
to the Medical Domain called M3.dic.
• Seven Morphological Grammars, denominated M3#.nom
• A syntactic Grammar, named M3.nog
The Dictionary M3.dic contains morphemes of the Italian
medical domain which have been extracted from the electronic
version of the GRADIT [30]. The morphemes has been divided
into three classes: preﬁxes, sufﬁxes and conﬁxes, on the base
of the positions of the morphemes in the words. Table II
shows the morphemes extracted from the GRADIT. Each
morpheme is described by a tag that speciﬁes the meaning
of the morpheme (i.e., -oma corresponds to the descriptions
tumori, “tumours”) and a tag that gives its medical sub-
category (assigned with the support of a domain expert by
dividing the macro class of the medicine into 25 subcategories,
i.e., CARDIO, “cardiology”; ENDOCRIN, “endocrinology”;
PSIC, “psychiatry” GASTRO, “gastroenterology”; PNEUMO,
“pneumology”; NEURO, “neurology”; etc). We made use of
a class UNKNOWN that has been used as residual category,
in order to collect the words particularly difﬁcult to classify.
TABLE II
MORPHEMES EXTRACTED FROM THE GRADIT
Manner of Use
Category
Number
Medicine
Conﬁxes
485
Medicine
Sufﬁxes
5
Medicine
Preﬁxes
7
Anatomy
Conﬁxes
104
Anatomy
Preﬁxes
3
The morphemes that were not contained in the GRADIT’s
medical category have been manually added to our list, i.e.,
morphemes that are used in the formation of adjectives. The
electronic dictionary of medical morphemes is classiﬁed in
the following way:
• Conﬁxes (CPX): neoclassical formative elements that
appear in the initial part of the word (i.e., pupillo-,
mammo-, cefalia-);
• Preﬁxes (PFX): morphemes that appear in the ﬁrst part
of the word and are able to connote it with a speciﬁc
meaning (i.e., -ipo, -iper);
• Sufﬁxes (SFX): morphemes that appear in the ﬁnal part
of the word and are able to connote it with a speciﬁc
meaning (i.e., -oma, -ite);
• Sufﬁxes
for
the
adjectives
formation:
derivational
morphemes
that
make
it
possible
to
derive
and
distinguish in the medical domain the adjectives (i.e.,
polmonare, “pulmonary”) from the nouns that have a
morpho-phonological relation with them (i.e., polmone,
“lung”).
The IMED has been completed with the addition of an
electronic dictionary composed of more than 700 Concrete
nouns of body/organism parts (“+Npc”, i.e., braccio, “arm”;
“+Npcorg”, i.e., cervello, “brain”) and of more than 400 Con-
crete nouns of drugs and medicines (“+Nfarm”, i.e., morﬁna,
“morphine ”) developed by the Maurice Gross Laboratory of
the University of Salerno.
The
dictionaries
works
in
combination
with
seven
Morphological Grammars built with Nooj, which are able to
ﬁnd occurrences and co-occurrences of medical morphemes
or nouns in medical documents’ words. The seven grammars
include the following combination of morphemes:
1) conﬁxes-conﬁxes
or
preﬁxes-conﬁxes
or
preﬁxes-
conﬁxes-conﬁxes;
2) conﬁxes-sufﬁxes or preﬁxes-conﬁxes-sufﬁxes;
3) conﬁxes-conﬁxes-sufﬁxes or preﬁxes-conﬁxes-conﬁxes-
sufﬁxes;
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

4) nouns-conﬁxes;
5) preﬁxes-nouns-conﬁxes;
6) conﬁxes-nouns-conﬁxes;
7) nouns-sufﬁxes;
In order to complete the IMED dictionary with medical
multiword expressions, a syntactic grammar, built with NooJ,
has been created with the goal of ﬁnding the following
combination of Nouns (N), Adjectives (A) and Prepositions
(P): N, NN, AN, NA, NNA, NAA, NPN.
B. Syntactic Rules
In the corpus, we noticed the presence of recursive sentence
structure, in which we recognized speciﬁc and terminological
ALUs. In this way, we could identify open series compounds,
that are ALUs in which one or more ﬁxed elements co-occur
with one or more variable ones.
On the basis of this evidence, we developed different Finite
State Automata for the TE task and for annotating treatments,
tests, symptoms.
As for semantics, we observed the presence of compounds
in which the head did not occur in the ﬁrst position; for
instance, the open series to recognize treatments terapia
di N , “therapy of N”, places the heads at the end of the
compounds, being terapia used to explicit the notion N0 is a
part of N1.
In Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b), we recognized Treatment
and Test classes by selecting a series of nouns, as ﬁxed
part, and a variable part, as head, formed by a Noun Group
and/or an Adjective. We also applied a node with the option
‘unknown word’ (UNK); this feature allowed us to retrieve
words which have not been inserted in IMED, also in order
to update our dictionary.
To extract the Symptom class we developed a Finite State
Automaton (Figure 1(c)) in which semantic features can be
identiﬁed using grammars that are built on speciﬁc verb
classes (semantic predicate sets) - i.e., presentare, riferire,
esporre, etc..., “to present, to report, to express, etc...”; in
such cases, co-occurrence restrictions can be described in
terms of lexical forms and syntactic structures.
We used the grammatical information with which dictionary
entries are tagged and syntactic rules as a weighting preference
for the co-occurrence selection. So, we developed matrix
tables in which semantic role sets, established on the basis of
those constrains (properties), are matched with grammatical
and syntactic rules. Matrices list a certain number of verbal
entries and a speciﬁc number of distributional and syntactic
properties.
During the recognition process, labeled IMED entries and
FSA are the inputs. After the phase of text processing, the
result is as follow:
⟨cardiology⟩ Il Paziente ⟨symptom⟩ affetto da ipertensione
arteriosa e BPCO ⟨/symptom⟩. Nel 1998 ´e stato sottoposto
ad ⟨treatment⟩ intervento di sostituzione valvolare aortica
mediante protesi meccanica Carbomedics ⟨/treatment⟩ e in
quell’occasione le coronarie erano risultate prive di lesioni
signiﬁcative. Dopo l’intervento il Paziente ha eseguito pe-
riodici ⟨test⟩ controlli cardiologici ⟨/test⟩ presso l’Ospedale
di Montichiari per ⟨symptom⟩ ﬁbrillazione atriale ad ele-
vata risposta ventricolare e scompenso cardiaco ⟨/symptom⟩
⟨/cardiology⟩.
“⟨cardiology⟩ The patient is ⟨symptom⟩ suffering from hy-
pertension and BPCO ⟨/symptom⟩. In 1998 he had ⟨treatment⟩
surgery for aortic valve replacement using Carbomedics me-
chanical prosthesis ⟨/treatment⟩ and coronary arteries did not
have signiﬁcant injuries. After surgery, the patient performed
periodic ⟨test⟩ cardiology checks ⟨/test⟩ at the Hospital of
Montichiari for ⟨symptom⟩ atrial ﬁbrillation with high ven-
tricular response and heart failure⟨/symptom⟩ ⟨/cardiology⟩ ”.
V. TESTING AND RESULTS
The annotation process is performed on Italian clinical
texts. The corpus has been built from a collection of 989
real medical records, opportunely anonymized with regards
to every kind of sensitive data they contained.
Our
corpus
provides
information
about
the
Family
History, the Physiological Anamnesis, the Past Illnesses, the
Anamnesis, the Medical Diary and the Diagnosis Review
for every patient. For our analysis we kept out the Family
History and the Physiological Anamnesis sections, since they
did not contain concepts, assertions or relation information.
The
corpus,
pre-processed
with
Nooj
exploiting
the
traditional NLP pipeline, includes 470591 text units, 41409
different tokens and 1529774 word forms.
An evaluation of the results produced by our MER tool
is given in Table III. We gave a measure of the validity
of our method by calculating the Precision, the Recall and
the F-score in the extraction of every entity class. In this
phase we merged together the classes Drug/Treatment and
Disease/Medical Branch because the syntactic grammars used
to locate them are the same and our tool presents their results
in the same list of concordances. Anyway, the tags used to
annotate them are always different, so a distinction between
these categories is performed any time.
As we can notice, the values present a variability with
reference to the different categories, but we consider the
average results very satisfying; nevertheless we are already
planning to enrich our research outcomes with many other
improvements.
TABLE III
EVALUATION
Entity Name
Precision
Recall
F-score
Symptom
0,75
0,52
0,61
Drug and Treatment
0,83
0,51
0,63
Test
0,96
0,51
0,67
Disease and Medical Branch
0,69
0,76
0,72
Average
0,80
0,58
0,66
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

(a) Sample of FSA for Entity Recognition of Treatment
(b) Sample of FSA for Entity Recognition of Test
(c) Sample of FSA for Entity Recognition of Symptom
Fig. 1. Samples of FSA
All the annotations produced by the application (almost
5000 with the morpho-semantic method; more than 4000 with
the syntactic strategies and about 2500 applying the preexistent
dictionaries of the Italian module of Nooj) of our method
and resources can be reused to enrich lexical databases or
ontologies referred to the medical domain. Obviously, the size
and the quality of the enrichment is strictly dependent on the
largeness and on the content of the corpus on which the Nooj
resources are applied. Therefore, in order to obtain widespread
medical databases, it is preferable to use corpora able to cover
the larger group of medical branches.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we presented our methodology for the ex-
traction of entity classes from medical records, conducting
different levels of linguistic analysis. Our framework is based
on a robust deﬁnition language, which is used for creating and
extending grammars and lexicons.
In our experiment, we considered the issue of entity bound-
aries carefully, but result analysis shows a request of improve-
ment in ALUs recognizing. This comes from the speciﬁc use
of medication abbreviations and word separators and from a
nonstandard method to compile free-text notes. Challenging
areas are the presence of ambiguous phenomena, e.g., fractions
or numbers without unit or time references, and the use of
brand name of drugs or a class of products, i.e., eye drops.
The combination of computational morphology and se-
mantic distribution proposed here indicates very promising
perspective: processing different corpora could instruct our
system to recognize more recursive phenomena and more stop
words in order to overcome partial matching issues. Future
works aim at integrating our tools with the alignment of
ontology constraints to syntactic relations in order to improve
extraction of clinical concepts from notes, increasing the
interoperability and the utility of clinical information.
REFERENCES
[1] A. B. Abacha and P. Zweigenbaum, “Medical entity recognition: A
comparison of semantic and statistical methods,” in Proceedings of
BioNLP 2011 Workshop.
Association for Computational Linguistics,
2011, pp. 56–64.
[2] A. W. Pratt and M. Pacak, “Identiﬁcation and transformation of terminal
morphemes in medical english.” Methods of information in medicine,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 84–90, 1969.
[3] S. Wolff, “The use of morphosemantic regularities in the medical
vocabulary for automatic lexical coding,” Methods of Information in
Medicine, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 195–203, 1984.
[4] M. G. Pacak, L. Norton, and G. S. Dunham, “Morphosemantic analysis
of-itis forms in medical language.” Methods of Information in Medicine,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 99–105, 1980.
[5] L. Norton and M. G. Pacak, “Morphosemantic analysis of compound
word forms denoting surgical procedures.” Methods of Information in
Medicine, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 29–36, 1983.
[6] P. Dujols, P. Aubas, C. Baylon, and F. Gr´emy, “Morpho-semantic analy-
sis and translation of medical compound terms.” Methods of Information
in Medicine, vol. 30, no. 1, p. 30, 1991.
[7] A. R. Aronson, “Effective mapping of biomedical text to the umls
metathesaurus: the metamap program.” in Proceedings of the AMIA
Symposium.
American Medical Informatics Association, 2001, p. 17.
[8] U. Hahn, M. Romacker, and S. Schulz, “Medsyndikatea natural language
system for the extraction of medical information from ﬁndings reports,”
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

International journal of medical informatics, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 63–74,
2002.
[9] G. Schadow and C. J. McDonald, “Extracting structured information
from free text pathology reports,” in AMIA Annual Symposium Pro-
ceedings, vol. 2003.
American Medical Informatics Association, 2003,
p. 584.
[10] S. M. Meystre and P. J. Haug, “Comparing natural language processing
tools to extract medical problems from narrative text,” in AMIA annual
symposium proceedings, vol. 2005.
American Medical Informatics
Association, 2005, p. 525.
[11] H. Isozaki and H. Kazawa, “Efﬁcient support vector classiﬁers for named
entity recognition,” in Proceedings of the 19th international conference
on Computational linguistics-Volume 1. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2002, pp. 1–7.
[12] Y. He and M. Kayaalp, “Biological entity recognition with conditional
random ﬁelds,” in AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, vol. 2008.
American Medical Informatics Association, 2008, p. 293.
[13] J. Finkel, S. Dingare, H. Nguyen, M. Nissim, C. Manning, and G. Sin-
clair, “Exploiting context for biomedical entity recognition: from syntax
to the web,” in Proceedings of the International Joint Workshop on
Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine and its Applications.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2004, pp. 88–91.
[14] M. de la Villa, F. Aparicio, M. J. Ma˜na, and M. de Buenaga, “A learning
support tool with clinical cases based on concept maps and medical
entity recognition,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM international
conference on Intelligent User Interfaces.
ACM, 2012, pp. 61–70.
[15] C. S. Khoo, S. Chan, and Y. Niu, “Extracting causal knowledge from
a medical database using graphical patterns,” in Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2000, pp. 336–343.
[16] M. Skeppstedt, M. Kvist, and H. Dalianis, “Rule-based entity recognition
and coverage of snomed ct in swedish clinical text.” in LREC, 2012, pp.
1250–1257.
[17] D. Proux, F. Rechenmann, L. Julliard, V. Pillet, B. Jacq et al., “Detecting
gene symbols and names in biological texts: a ﬁrst step toward pertinent
information extraction,” Genome informatics series, pp. 72–80, 1998.
[18] T. Liang and P.-K. Shih, “Empirical textual mining to protein entities
recognition from pubmed corpus,” in Natural Language Processing and
Information Systems.
Springer, 2005, pp. 56–66.
[19] A. Roberts, R. J. Gaizauskas, M. Hepple, and Y. Guo, “Combining
terminology resources and statistical methods for entity recognition: an
evaluation.” in LREC, 2008.
[20] A. Elia, M. Martinelli, and E. D’Agostino, Lessico e Strutture sintattiche.
Introduzione alla sintassi del verbo italiano.
Napoli: Liguori, 1981.
[21] Z. S. Harris, “Notes du cours de syntaxe, traduction franc¸aise par
maurice gross,” Paris: Le Seuil, 1976.
[22] M. Silberztein, “Nooj manual,” Available for download at: www.
nooj4nlp.net, 2003.
[23] S. Vietri, “The italian module for nooj.” in In Proceedings of the First
Italian Conference on Computational Linguistics, CLiC-it 2014.
Pisa
University Press, 2014.
[24] A. M. Thornton, Morfologia, R. Carocci Editore, Ed., 2005.
[25] A. Martinet, Syntaxe generale, A. Colin, Ed., 1985.
[26] A. Kirkness, “Aero-lexicography: Observations on the treatment of
combinemes and neoclassical combinations in historical and scholarly
european dictionaries,” Willy Martin ua (Hrsg.): Euralex, pp. 530–535,
1994.
[27] S. C. Sgroi, “Per una ridenizione di “conﬁsso”: composti conﬁssati,
derivati conﬁssati, parasintetici conﬁssati vs etimi ibridi e incongrui,”
Quaderni di semantica, vol. 24, pp. 81–153, 2003.
[28] P. D’Achille, L’italiano contemporaneo, B. Il Mulino, Ed., 2003.
[29] T. De Mauro, Nuove Parole Italiane dell’uso, ser. GRADIT, T. UTET,
Ed., 2003, vol. 7.
[30] ——, Grande Dizionario Italiano dell’Uso, T. UTET, Ed., 1999, vol. 8.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

