IPR Issues in Data Sharing via Linkage of Platforms and Apps
Iryna Lishchuk, Marc Stauch, Nikolaus Forgó
Institut für Rechtsinformatik
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Hannover, Germany
e-mail: {lishchuk, stauch, forgo}@iri.uni-hannover.de
Abstract—Data exchange systems have made it possible to link
platforms, apps, wearables and share the users´ data. Apart
from personal data, collected by the platforms, also user
generated content may be shared. However, sharing the
content brings various intellectual property (IP) issues into
play – on top of privacy matters. So, sharing creative content
requires authorization from the content owner. But who is the
content owner in respect of content shared online? From whom
and how can a service provider obtain rights on use of the
content? In this article, we explore some legal issues associated
with content sharing and provide solutions on how these issues
may be resolved.
Keywords-user-generated
content;
Intellectual
Property
Rights (IPR); IP protected content; content license; copyright.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many platforms, like Facebook, Fitbit and Twitter,
release their application programming interfaces (API) for
the purposes of data sharing. By doing so, they offer third
party service providers a technical possibility to access and
share users´ data. Through a platform API, a third party
service can connect to the platform and exchange data with
it. Apart from the user´s personal data, such as name, date of
birth, etc., the platform may also store content generated by
the user. Such content, if produced by intellectual creation,
may be protected by intellectual property rights (IPR).
While processing and sharing the users´ personal data is
subject to the law on data protection and may require consent
of the user, the processing of IP protected content will be
subject to intellectual property law and, unless exceptions
apply, require authorization of the right holder (who is not
necessarily the user). In the case of personal data, the user
behind the data is normally identified or at least identifiable.
Hence, the user to whom the data relate has the right to
decide with whom and how to share his data. However, in
the case of user-generated content, which is freely shared
among the networks, the question about who is the right
holder
and
may
decide
on
its
exploitation
is
often
complicated by the unclear origin of the work. Creative
content may be produced by a user who uploads such
content, or it may also be created by a group of users (who
would share copyright in it together), or it may be a result of
post-processing of someone´ else work (requiring permission
by the latter), etc. When a user posts some creative content to
the platform services, it does not mean that the user is the
copyright owner or even has the right to upload such content
and share it with the public. On the other hand, almost all
forms
of
online
communication
require
copying
and
distributing creative content, thus becoming copyright-
related [1]. This makes it necessary for service providers,
engaged in spreading user generated content, to obtain a
copyright license. However, a problem arises when the
holder of rights in creative content is not that easy to
identify. In such a case, how should the service provider go
about obtaining the relevant license?
In this paper, we explore legal issues such as these,
associated with content sharing and content licensing and
suggest some options as to how service providers may get
rights in order to carry creative content and provide their
services to their users.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides
insight into data sharing in clinical research. Section III
describes the types of data collected by the platforms.
Section IV then deals with IP rights in content and IPR
implications by content sharing. Data sharing via API
exchange systems follows in Section V. Section VI deals
with
licensing
implications.
The
overall
findings
are
summarized in Section VII.
II.
DATA SHARING IN CLINICAL RESEARCH
Data sharing is widely used now as a way to increase
service functionality. Many service providers offer an option
to share content via Facebook, Twitter, etc. Increasingly, too,
the research community is looking into data sharing as a
potential resource for expanding research.
One such ICT research project funded under the EU 7th
Framework Program is ‘MyHealthAvatar’ (full name “A
Demonstration of 4D Digital Avatar Infrastructure for
Access of Complete Patient Information”, abbreviated to
“MHA”) This aims at creating a platform, . “…that offers
access, collection and sharing of long term and consistent
personal health status data through an integrated digital
representation of an in silico environment, which helps to
deliver
clinical
analysis,
prediction,
prevention
and
treatment tailored to the individual citizen.” [2]. Various
possibilities are being investigated to allow, inter alia,
connecting the avatar to hospital records, and to third party
social networks (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, etc.), to extend the
population of medical data within the platform.
III.
PLATFORM DATA
Because the MHA project is engaged in clinical research,
lifestyle platforms Fitbit [3], Withings [4] and Moves [5] are
the primary sources for data sharing. Also, the social
platform Twitter is being explored for linking, but rather
because of the role of Twitter in spreading the content, than
the nature of the data, which Twitter stores.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

The information stored on these platforms may have
different value and quality in terms of the law. Personal data
and user-generated content are the two major categories of
information processed by the service providers.
The
processing of these two types of information is subject to
different legal rules.
A.
Personal Data
Most social platforms collect in one way or another data
related to the user. Usually, platforms ask the user to provide
some personal information, such as name, date of birth, e-
mail, etc., when creating a user account.
Data, which may be associated to a particular user, who
is identified or may be identified by some parameters or
features, will qualify as personal data. Personal data
comprises “any information relating to an identified or
identifiable natural person ('data subject'); an identifiable
person is one who can be identified , directly or indirectly, in
particular by reference to an identification number or to one
or more factors specific to his physical, physiological,
mental, economic, cultural or social identity” [6]. Processing
of personal data is subject to the law on data protection.
Data collected by wearable devices, such as Moves,
Fitbit and Withings, would normally have the status of
personal data Moves collects data from a mobile application
Moves App, which records walking, cycling and running,
which the user does while the application is on [5]. The
major part of Fitbit data also comes from wearables, which
track the physical activity of the user. The collected data may
include the number of steps taken by the user, heart rate,
calories burnt, etc. “Every time Fitbit owners walk by their
wireless base station (Bluetooth dongle and computer), data
from
their
Fitbit
device
is
silently
uploaded
in
the
background to fitbit.com.” [7]. The user can also enter
certain data to fitbit.com manually, such as sleep logs, food
logs, other activity logs.
According
to
European
data
protection
law,
data
concerning the user´s health falls into a special category of
sensitive personal data. Processing of sensitive data has to
comply with more stringent legal requirements than those
applicable to processing of personal data as such [6]. The
sharing of sensitive health related data among the platforms
raises multiple legal issues and privacy concerns, which have
been described elsewhere [8], [9] and are outside the scope
of the present paper.
The data recorded by the tracking devices or data entered
by the user manually, which does not involve any creative
input would normally qualify as personal data (with a higher
or lower degree of sensitivity). Another quality may be
attributed to data generated by the user himself, such as
comments or images taken by the user. These types of data
may expose certain parameters relating to a particular user
(such as when a user is marked as the author), thus falling
into the category of personal data. At the same time, this data
may comprise creative input invested by the user (or another
person), thus qualifying as a copyright work. Creative
content, related to a particular person, such as marked as
author or captured on a picture, would be subject to both
legal regimes: the law of copyright and data protection at
once.
B.
User Generated Content
Most online platforms, either lifestyle or social, allow
their users to submit their own content, like text, photographs
or other data and information. Any data, which is produced
and supplied to service providers in digital form constitutes
“digital content” [10]. Such content may include “computer
programs, applications, games, music, videos or texts,
irrespective
of
whether
they
are
accessed
through
downloading or streaming, from a tangible medium or
through any other means.” [10]. Digital content created and
provided to the online services by the users and made by
such means accessible directly to the public is commonly
referred to as “user generated content” [1]. If produced by
intellectual effort, such content may be protected by IP rights
(IP protected content).
C.
Copyrighted Content
A number of items uploaded to the platform services,
including images, melodies, videos, commentaries, etc., by
showing a certain degree of creativity may relate to original
intellectual creations in the literary or artistic domain and
constitute works protected by copyright [11]. A comment
where
the
user
“through
the
choice,
sequence
and
combination of those words … may express his creativity in
an original manner and achieve a result which is an
intellectual creation” [12] would qualify as a copyright work
and be protected as such. Also, a picture taken by a user
exercising free and creative choices thus stamping a picture
with his personal touch [13] should be copyright protected.
However, just
as
data
protection
law has
certain
requirements for processing of personal data, so too will the
use of copyrighted content on the digital services need to
comply with the rules of copyright law. We look further at
the substance of these rules below.
IV.
IPR ISSUES IN CONTENT SHARING
A.
Protected Rights
Whereas reading a book or listening to music does not
create a copyright relevant action, the upload of a photo to
online services, sharing music online or streaming may
produce a copyright relevant action. The reason is that, in
contrast with the case in which there is simple perception of
the work by a viewer or hearer, technical actions of this kind
involve a degree of copying or communication to the public.
Reproduction and communication to the public may also
be carried out by service providers in the course of providing
their services. Thus, transmission of content items between
and/or on behalf of the user, the upload and hosting of
content items on the platform facilities, or making the
content items available to the others may qualify as one or
another copyright relevant action and, unless exceptions
apply, require authorization by the right owner.
Because the “fair use” doctrine [1] and exhaustion of
copyright do not apply to the digital content commonly
shared via online services [15], service providers who deal
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

with the user generated content would normally require a
copyright license from the user.
B.
Content License
Platforms usually obtain such a license on use of IP
protected content when the user registers for a platform
account and agrees to the platform terms. As a rule, a content
license is incorporated into the platform terms of use and
constitutes part of the agreement between the provider and
the user.
Normally,
platforms
acquire
a
complete
copyright
license, which allows them to perform any actions with the
user´s content as required to provide their services. A typical
content license is granted on a royalty-free, non-exclusive,
perpetual, worldwide basis and includes the sublicensable
right
of
reproduction,
modification,
distribution,
communication and making the content available to the
public. For instance, Fitbit users grant Fitbit a “perpetual,
irrevocable, non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free license,
with the right to sublicense, to reproduce, distribute,
transmit,
publicly
perform,
publicly
display,
digitally
perform, modify, create derivative works of, and otherwise
use and commercially exploit any text, photographs or other
data and information you submit to the Fitbit Services
(collectively, "User Generated Content") in any media now
existing or hereafter developed, including without limitation
on websites, in audio format, and in any print media format.”
[16]. Similar content license conditions may be found in the
terms of other platforms, like Twitter and Withings.
V.
DATA SHARING VIA API EXCHANGE SYSTEMS
As mentioned, most platforms, which collect information
from their users, be it personal data or digital content, allow
the sharing of such information via API exchange systems.
However, in allowing third party services to use an API,
platforms normally do not allow the use of creative content,
which they store.
A.
API Exchange Systems
API stands for application programming interface and is
an element through which software interact and exchange
information with each other. The use of a platform API
allows external applications to communicate with the
platform and access the platform data (if a platform allows
this). In legal terms, an API can be defined as an element of
a computer program, which provides for “a logical and,
where appropriate, physical interconnection and interaction
… to permit all elements of software and hardware to work
with other software and hardware and with users in all the
ways in which they are intended to function.” [17]. For
example, when a word processor sends a document to a
printer, the word processor talks to the printer driver via API
[18]. Although an element necessary for interoperability,
API is a constituent part of a platform and usually released
into use under an API license. This then allows software
developers to use platform APIs in order to develop
compatible apps designed to interact with a platform and
exchange users data.
B.
API License
As may be observed, when platform operators release
platform APIs, they enable third party services to connect to
the platform and share the data. Therefore, a typical API
license is generally limited to the purpose of data sharing.
For instance, Fitbit allows use of Fitbit API “to develop
Applications designed to interact with and enhance the Fitbit
Platform, to retrieve or post Fitbit Data, subscribe to User
Data-feeds and render and display information in external
applications according to these Terms of Service” [19]. As a
rule, a personal, non-exclusive, non-transferrable license is
granted.
Whereas an API license allows use of API for data
sharing, it is, as previously noted, mostly the case that rights
on the use of content itself are not included, unless such
rights are expressly granted.
In these circumstances, third
party service providers, who intend to carry user generated
content on their services, need to get the content license by
themselves. The ways in which service providers may do this
are described below.
VI.
LICENSING IMPLICATIONS
There are several options how a service provider may
obtain rights on use of content. One is to get the rights from
the platform. Another possibility is to obtain a content
license directly from the user himself. However, both of
these
options
carry
further
legal
implications.
These
implications can relate to copyright ownership, validity and
survival
of
rights,
applicable
contract
type,
form
requirements, etc, and may vary from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction. Some key points in this respect, which are
relevant to cases of content licensing by linking, are
discussed below.
A.
Content Sublicense from the Platform
Platforms, which have a sublicensable content license,
have a right to sublicense their rights, which, however, they
rarely make use of.
In fact, out of the considered platforms, it appears that
only Twitter, when licensing its API, grants developers rights
to use the content. In particular, Twitter accords the
developer “a non-exclusive, royalty free, non-transferable,
non-sublicensable, revocable license...to...Copy a reasonable
amount of and display the Content on and through your
Services to End Users...; Modify Content only to format it for
display on your Services” [20].
First, Twitter has the right to sublicense its rights in
content because the user grants to Twitter “a worldwide,
non-exclusive,
royalty-free
license
(with
the
right
to
sublicense) to use, copy, reproduce, process, adapt, modify,
publish, transmit, display and distribute such Content in any
and all media or distribution methods (now known or later
developed).” [21]. As explained by Twitter, the user
authorizes not only Twitter to make the user´s Tweets
available to the public, but also “let others do the same.”
[21]. Second, the user generated content is included into the
term “Content”, which may be shared via Twitter API. In the
Twitter API license agreement, the term “Content” covers
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

“Tweets, Tweet IDs, Twitter end user profile information,
and any other data and information made available to you
through the Twitter API or by any other means authorized by
Twitter, and any copies and derivative works thereof.” [20].
In contrast, as follows from the API license terms of
other platforms, in particular Fitbit and Withings (which also
carry some user generated content), express grant of rights
on use of the content is not included. If we consider Fitbit,
and also Withings, it is rather unclear whether they allow
connecting services to use and re-post the user´s content on
their services or not.
Thus, dealing with Fitbit first, it also hosts some user
generated content and has a sublicensable content license
[16]. Fitbit allows data sharing via its API, but ‘User
Generated Content’, as defined in the Fitbit Terms of Use
[16], is not included in the scope of Fitbit Data, which may
be shared via Fitbit API. The Fitbit Data, as defined in the
Fitbit API license agreement, covers “the user data collected
from the Fitbit Tracker and made available to you through
the API” [19]. Fitbit allows a third party service provider to
“use the API to retrieve or post Fitbit Data, subscribe to
User Data-feeds and render and display information in
external applications” [19], but Fitbit is silent on the rights
to re-post the User Generated Content. At the same time,
Fitbit is rather clear in not allowing developers to “upload or
otherwise transmit any content that you do not have a right
to
transmit
under
any
law
or
under
contractual
relationships” [19]. However, whether the term “content”, as
used in the Fitbit API license agreement, covers also “User
Generated Content”, as defined in the Fitbit Terms of Use
(and which a third party service provider may not transmit
on its services ) is for Fitbit to answer.
A similarly unclear content licensing practice is pursued
by the lifestyle platform Withings. Withings also provides a
function to
submit users´ comments and opinions to
Withings website. Withings also obtains “a sub licensable,
right on a worldwide basis to represent and reproduce your
commentary and/or opinion in whole or in part, in a lineal
manner or not on any media, such as the Website, press
review or advertising, presentation or any physical or digital
media as long as the rights shall enjoy legal protection”
[22]. By licensing its API for data sharing, Withings allows
use of API to “exchange data concerning you, Withings or
Withings’ Products and Services Users [23]. As long as a
commentary or opinion can be related to a Withings
user
(for instance, when the user is marked as the author), then
the user´s comments may be considered as relating to the
user and included into the scope of data, which may be
shared via Withings API. On the other hand, if Withings
expects to make use of the user´s comments or opinion, such
as in an advertisement or third party website, Withings
should contact the user. In cases where it is unable to reach
the user, or upon the user´s request, it also reserves the right
to use the user´s commentary or opinion without identifying
the user as the author [22]. At the same time, this wording
and practice of Withings makes it questionable whether a
third party service designed to interact and share data with
Withings may re-post the user´s comments on its services or
not.
In the absence of an express term, an implied license on
use of copyrighted content may be presumed. However, an
implied license may not be regarded as a reliable instrument
for getting the rights because of varying interpretation rules
and the copyright licensing implications, which we consider
next.
B.
Implied Copyright License
The legal strength of an implied license as a basis for
using copyrighted content is relative and depends on the
rules on interpretation of agreements and court practice. The
rules on interpretation of agreements vary from jurisdiction
to jurisdiction and relevant domestic case law is rather
scarce. If an agreement is to be interpreted by purpose, as is
typically the case under the German or English law, then in
the absence of an express term an implied license may be
presumed. Hence, a UK court might depending on the facts
of the case accept an implied copyright license where such
license is “necessary to give business efficacy to the
contract” [24]. If accepted, an implied license would be
limited to the purpose of contract. In the context of an API
license agreement limited to the purpose of data sharing, it
may be argued that a developer might be entitled to an
implied personal, non-assignable and non-sublicensable,
royalty free copyright license to access, copy and re-display
the user´s content on its service as necessary to provide a
service to the user. Such implied copyright license might be
considered as justifiable for data sharing with a platform
whose data assets subsist for the most part in the user
generated content, like Twitter, for example. Otherwise, i.e.
in the absence of such an express content license, the
principal goal of using the API for data sharing would be
lost.
In contrast, most data assets of lifestyle platforms Fitbit
or Withings come from the tracking devices. It is obvious
that exactly such lifestyle data is a target for data sharing.
Some smaller part of Fitbit and Withings data may comprise
creative content produced by the users, such as comments,
opinions or photographs. But, in comparison to the volume
and value of the lifestyle data, it is hardly arguable that such
user generated content would constitute the primary goal for
data sharing. Under these circumstances, it is doubtful how
far a content license in the Fitbit or Withings API license
agreement is “necessary to give business efficacy to the
contract”. Hence, the chance that an implied content license
as granted by Withings or Fitbit under an API license
agreement would be accepted by the court is arguably fairly
low. Under the rules of verbal interpretation of agreements
(as may be the case under the Russian law [25], for
example), the prospects for an implied content license may
also be assessed as negative. According to oral interpretation,
a right, which is not expressly granted is to be considered as
not granted at all.
C.
Content License from the User
Alternatively, as noted, a service provider may get a
license on use of the content from the user. The core legal
issue here is that the user, who introduces creative content to
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

the platform, is not necessarily the author with the right to
make such content available to the public.
According to the rule of first ownership in copyright, it is
the original author, who created a work and who owns
copyright in it [26]. Creative content may be generated by a
group of people, sharing co-authorship and copyright
respectively. Such content may also be produced by re-using
and/or transforming pre-existing copyright works [1]. The
latter type of content might fall into the category of
derivative works. The use and sharing of such derived
content would be legitimate if permission on transformation
of the prior work and making such derivative work available
to the public is obtained from the original copyright owner.
Some platforms try to address this situation by making
the user guarantee that he has the rights to share the content,
which he introduces. Such a provision, by which a user
represents and warrants that he has obtained all necessary
rights and licenses required to allow posting of any content
posted by the user [16], may be found in the terms of some
platforms. However, though such clause may have effect and
be enforceable under the US law, it may not survive the
control of general terms and conditions provided for under
the German law [27]. Instead, the inclusion of such a clause
into the terms of a service provider established in Germany
(or also in other jurisdictions) needs to be considered on a
case-by-case basis.
As noted earlier, platform operators usually get a content
license from the user by incorporation of such content
license into the platform terms. The user, at the time of
registering an account or using the platform services, accepts
the terms - and by so doing grants rights on use of his
content to the platform - [16]. In the absence of other
plausible options, this approach may also be extended to
other service providers who intend to carry the user´s content
on their services.
Regarding the scope of the license, as we saw, platform
operators typically acquire the rights, which they consider
necessary to provide their services. As a rule, a non-
exclusive, royalty free, worldwide, non-assignable license to
copy, reproduce, display, transmit, distribute, post, publish,
modify,
produce
derivative
works,
make
the
content
available to the public in the media, in the form and via
distribution methods, known and later developed is specified
[16]. Such scope of rights may also be considered as
sufficient for third party services.
However, it is not advisable to copy this scope of license
verbatim, because a license term, which can have validity for
the US based platform, may have no legal effect for a service
provider established elsewhere. It may be noted, that the
terms of most platforms, including Twitter, Fitbit and
Withings, are governed by US law. Whereas the content
license, which allows exploitation of content “in any media
now existing or hereafter developed” [16] granted in this
form, i.e. via clicking the “Accept” button, may have effect
and be enforceable under the US law, this may not be the
case under the national law of some EU member states.
Thus, the German Copyright Act, Article 31a, requires that
contracts concerning unknown types of exploitation be made
in writing [28]. Also, under UK copyright law agreements as
to future ownership of copyright would only be enforceable
if evidenced in writing [24]. In this regard, the UK
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, section 91 (1), provides
that agreements in relation to future copyright be made in
writing. “Future copyright” in this context means “copyright
which will or may come into existence in respect of a future
work or class of works or on the occurrence of a future
event” [29]. Thus, for such a license to be enforceable in
Germany or the UK, it would need to be signed via
handwritten or e-signature by authorized representatives of
the parties, which can hardly be expected in a license
agreement concluded online.
From this observation, it may be noted, that a form, in
which one or another type of copyright license needs to be
obtained in order to have legal effect, should be considered
on a case- by-case basis and depending on the jurisdiction
where the service provider is established.
VII.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In this paper, we have described some core legal issues
associated with content sharing on digital services and by
linking the platforms and apps, in particular.
To summarize the main points, a service provider
carrying some user-generated content on its platform needs
to have an IP license to do so. Platform operators, who host
and transmit user-generated content, typically acquire a
copyright license from the user who uploads the content.
Such a content license is normally included into the platform
terms, which the user accepts (and thereby grants a content
license to the platform) when the user signs up for the
platform services. Normally, it is non-exclusive, non-
assignable, worldwide royalty free license with the right to
sublicense. The scope of rights normally covers the whole
spectrum of copyright relevant actions, which a platform
may need to perform for providing its services. The basic
rights of reproduction, distribution and communication to the
public are typically included.
Third party service providers who intend to exchange
data with social platforms via API exchange systems, such as
via apps designed to communicate with a platform via API,
may obtain the rights on use of the content from the platform
or from the user. In cases where the rights on use of the user
generated content are incorporated into and granted under the
API license agreement (such as is done by Twitter), an
external service provider may rely on the content license
from the platform (subject to its validity) and does not
necessarily have to obtain a separate content license from the
user.
In the absence of content license from the platform (and
due to the absence or weak legal strength of other
alternatives), the remaining option would be to obtain a
license on use of the content from the user himself. In this
case, a service provider may follow the practice of platform
operators, i.e. include the content license into the service
terms and make acceptance of the terms by the user a pre-
requisite of using the service. However, when following this
practice, re-use of the content license verbatim is not
encouraged. First, the terms in question may themselves be
copyrighted and not be reproduced without authorization of
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

the right holder. Second, a license granted on the terms and
in the form, which have legal effect in one jurisdiction may
be challengeable and subject to the risk of being declared
invalid by the court in another.
As we have seen, there are multiple copyright issues,
which are inherent to the sharing of creative content and
which service providers need to handle. However, as is also
apparent, the methods and means of dealing with such issues
may vary depending on the legal and technical background.
The issues, which need to be looked at include the following:
what type of data is stored and is to be shared with the
platform? Will the user generated content be stored by the
platform? Does the platform grant the rights on use of the
content via API license agreement or not? What scope of
rights is needed for provision of the service? And in what
jurisdiction is the service provider established? Therefore,
there is no hard rule, which may be considered as applicable
and advisable to all service providers. Rather, these matters
will need to be assessed as part of arriving at a satisfactory
legal solution in each particular case.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union Seventh Framework Program
FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement No 600929.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Dobusch, “Need for new regulation to enhance creativity in
the digital age: The case of user generated content and
cultural
heritage
institutions”,
input
paper
to
Baku
Conference, First Council of Europe Platfrom Excahnge on
Culture and Digitisation “Creating an enabling environment
ofr digital culture and for empowering citizens”, July 2014,
Baku, Azerbaijan.
[2]
MyHealthAvatar,
Project,
Concept
<http://www.myhealthavatar.eu/?page_id=927> 2015.10.26.
[3]
Fitbit <http://www.fitbit.com/uk> 2015.12.28.
[4]
Withings <http://www.withings.com/eu/de/> 2015.12.28.
[5]
Moves App <https://www.moves-app.com/> 2015.12.28.
[6]
Directive 95/46/EC of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and
on the free movement of such data, Official Journal of the
European Communities, No L 281 /31, 23.11.95.
[7]
Fitbit, WEB API Documentation <https://dev.fitbit.com/docs>
2015.12.28.
[8]
S. Jandt and C. Hohmann, “Fitness- und Gesudheits-Apps –
Neues
Schutzkonzept
für
Gesundheitsdaten?”,
Kommunikation und Recht, pp. 694-701, November 2015.
[9]
A. Dahi, N. Forgó, S. Jensen, and M. Stauch, “Using patient
avatars
to
promote
health
data
sharing
applications:
perspectives and regulatory challenges”, European Journal of
Health Law, available from: <http://www.brill.com/european-
journal-health-law> 2016.01.11. Accepted for publication in
March 2016.
[10] Directive of 25 October 2011 on consumer rights, amending
Council Directive 93/13/EEC and Directive 1999/44/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing
Council Directive 85/577/EEC and Directive 97/7/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council, OJEU, L 304/64,
22.11.2011.
[11] Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works of 9 September 1886.
[12] CJEU, Judgment of 16 July 2009, Case C 5/08, Infopaq
International A/S v Danske Dagblades Forening, Recital 45.
[13] CJEU, Judgment of 7 March 2013, Case C 145/10 REC, Eva-
Maria Painer v. Standard VerlagsGmbH, Axel Springer AG,
Süddeutsche Zeitung GmbH, Spiegel-Verlag Rudolf Augstein
GmbH & Co. KG, Verlag M. DuMont Schauberg Expedition
der Kölnischen Zeitung GmbH & Co. KG, Recital 94.
[14] Directive 2001/29/EC of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation
of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the
information
society,
Official
Journal
of
the
European
Communities, L 167/10, 22.6.2001.
[15] M.
Schmidt-Kessel,
“Verträge
über
digitale
Inhalte
–
Einordnug und Verbracuherschutz”, Kommunikation und
Recht, pp. 475-483, July-August 2014.
[16] Fitbit
Terms
of
Use
<http://www.fitbit.com/uk/terms>
2015.12.28.
[17] Directive 2009/24/EC of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection
of computer programs, Official Journal of the European
Union, L 111/16, 5.5.2009, Recital 10.
[18] C. McSherry, “Dangerous Decision in Oracle v. Google:
Federal Circuit Reverses Sensible Lower Court Ruling on
APIs”, Electronic Frontier Foundation, 9 May 2014, available
from:
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/05/dangerous-
ruling-oracle-v-google-federal-circuit-reverses-sensible-
lower-court> 2016.01.05.
[19] Fitbit API Terms of Service <https://dev.fitbit.com/terms>
2015.12.28.
[20] Twitter
Developer
Agreement
<https://dev.twitter.com/overview/terms/agreement>
2015.09.18.
[21] Twitter Terms of Service <https://twitter.com/tos?lang=en>
2015.12.28.
[22] Withings
Website
Terms
of
Use
<http://www.withings.com/uk/en/legal/legal-
information#/uk/en/legal/website-terms-of-use> 2015.12.28.
[23] Withings
API
Terms
of
Use
<http://www-media-
cdn.withings.com/wysiwyg/legal/2015-Withings-API-Terms-
of-Use-
VUS.pdf?_ga=1.254361352.1215146296.1418739123>
2015.12.28.
[24] D.Rowland,
U.Kohl,
and
A.Charlesworth,
“Information
Technology Law“, 4th edition, Routledge, Taylor&Francis
Group, pp. 400, 2012.
[25] Civil Code of Russian Federatrion N 51-ФЗ of 30.11.1994 
/Гражданский кодекс Российской Федерации (ГК РФ) от 
30.11.1994 
N 
51-ФЗ 
<http://pravo.gov.ru/proxy/ips/?docbody=&nd=102033239&i
ntelsearch=%C3%F0%E0%E6%E4%E0%ED%F1%EA%E8
%E9+%EA%EE%E4%E5%EA%F1+%D0%EE%F1%F1%E
8%E9%F1%EA%EE%E9+%D4%E5%E4%E5%F0%E0%F6
%E8%E8> 2015.12.28.
[26] C.Reed and J.Angel, “Computer Law”, Sixth Edition, Oxford
University Press, pp.352-353, 2007.
[27] German Civil Code in the version promulgated on 2 January
2002 (Federal Law Gazette, p.42, 2909, 2003, p.738, last
amended by Article 4 para 5 of the Act of 1 October 2013
(Federal Law Gazette, p.3719), Artricle 307.
[28] Copyright Act of 9 September 1965 (Federal Law Gazette
Part I, p. 1273), as last amended by Article 8 of the Act of 1
October 2013 (Federal Law Gazette Part I, p. 3714).
[29] United Kingdom, Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-457-2
ALLDATA 2016 : The Second International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2016)

