 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Statistical Analysis of Stock Profits to Evaluate Performance of Markets 
Yoshihisa Udagawa  
Faculty of Informatics, Tokyo University of Information Sciences 
Chiba-city, Chiba, Japan 
e-mail: yu207233@rsch.tuis.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Candlestick charting is one of the most popular 
techniques used to predict short-term stock price trends. 
Despite popularity, there is still no consistent conclusion for the 
predictability of the technique mainly due to qualitative 
description of candlestick patterns. This paper proposes a 
retrieval model with six parameters that allows us to define 
both candlestick patterns and price zones where the patterns 
occur. Because criteria that trigger exit from a market largely 
affect profits and losses, we propose three market exit criteria. 
Simulations to estimate profits are performed using five global 
markets with approximately the same parameters for the 
retrieval model and the market exit criteria. The results of 
simulations indicate that the proposed method leads to trades 
with around 85% of successful stock trades in the case of a 
typical uptrend candlestick pattern. Five global markets are 
also analyzed and compared to show graphically the 
profitability of the markets based on simulated profits. 
 
Keywords— Stock price prediction; Technical analysis; 
Candlestick charts; Market exit criteria; Profit simulation; 
Global market comparison. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Forecasting a direction of future stock prices attracts the 
attention of not only financial investors but also researchers 
in computer science. The common motivation is to predict 
the future direction of prices for successful stock trade and 
developing computer system to support a trader. While many 
researches on stock price prediction focus on a specific 
market, some researches deal with multiple stock markets to 
seek global investment opportunities. 
Dimson et al. [1] discuss performances of global markets 
including emerging and developed ones. Though emerging 
markets have grown to a significant size up to 2007, 
developed markets, notably US markets, have outpaced the 
growth in emerging markets in the 21st century because of 
global financial crisis. Ahmad et al. [2] measure the impact 
of volatility in six emerging stock markets of Asia. The 
results of statistical analyses show volatility is significantly 
related to return in each market. 
What is missing in the research of Dimson et al. [1] is the 
lack of algorithmic and statistical analyses for objective 
comparison among global markets in terms of profits from a 
trader’s point of view. They discuss performances of global 
markets from an economic point of view without mentioning 
results of statistical analyses. They suggest that US stock 
markets are more profitable than others and that is the same 
conclusion to which we arrived in this paper. Meanwhile, 
Ahmad et al. [2] examine volatilities among Asian stock 
markets to find out a causal relation between volatility and 
stock returns. While their research uses statistical analyses, it 
fails to include developed markets. 
The purpose of this resarch is to compare profitability of 
emerging and developed markets based on algorithmic and 
statistical analyses. We develop a simulator program in Java 
that implements a retrieval model to find opportunities for 
buying stocks, and algorithms to trigger selling stocks to lead 
to profitable trade. The experimental results are statistically 
analyzed to examine the extent of relationship among 
measured variables. Simulated profits are displayed in bar 
graphs to easily compare the global stock markets under 
discussion. 
The contributions of this paper are as follows: 
I. Proposal of a model using six parameters to retrieve 
candlestick patterns that are both similar in price patterns 
and price level, i.e., price high and/or low zone in which 
they occur. 
II. Proposal of three novel algorithms to trigger selling 
stocks to fix profit in case of a long market position. 
III. Evaluation of performances of the proposed model and 
the algorithms to trigger selling stocks through 
simulations in terms of profit. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II recapitulates some related work. Section III gives 
backgrounds of the candlestick charting. Section IV proposes 
a model for retrieving similar candlestick charts and the 
triggering algorithms. Section V presents experimental 
results on a strong uptrend pattern using five markets’ data in 
US and Asia stock markets. Section VI concludes the paper 
with our plans for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There have been a growing number of studies on 
predicting future movements of stock markets. In this 
section, we review previous studies on performances of 
global markets and predictabilities of candlestick patterns. 
A. Studies on Performances of Global Markets 
Dimson et al. [1] discuss performances of markets in 
emerging and developed countries from an economic 
perspective. They find that emerging markets achieved a 
higher return of 11.7% per year than a developed markets’ 
return of 10.5% from 1950 to 2019. However, because of the 
global financial crisis, the average return of US stocks is 
10.6%, while that of the world stocks excluding US ones is 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
5.3% in the 21st century. They conclude that investors 
should be modest to invest in emerging markets because 
exchange rate movements are largely affected by inflation in 
emerging countries in addition to questionable capabilities to 
maintain a fair market. 
Ahmad et al. [2] statistically examine six emerging Asian 
stock markets with respect to stock returns and volatility. 
The markets include KSE100 (Pakistan), Nikkei 225 (Japan), 
KOSPI (South Korea), Hang Seng (Hong Kong), SSE 
(China), and BSE (India). The results show that KOSPI has 
the highest average annual return of 12.67%, followed by 
BSE with 11.61%. 
B. Studies on candlestick patterns 
The researches in [4]-[13] are on usefulness of candlestick 
patterns in technical analysis [3]. Most researches focus on 
one market. Some researches use stock data of multiple 
markets, but their aims are to confirm their estimated profits. 
1) Studies disapproving of candlestick patterns 
As for the candlestick pattern method in technical analysis 
[3], several studies [4]-[6] conclude that it is useless based 
on the experiments using the stock exchange markets’ data in 
the US, Japan and Thailand. 
Horton [4] studies the profitability of 4 pairs of three-day 
candlestick patterns on 349 stocks that are representing 
major industry groups. The main conclusion of his study is 
that these candlestick patterns create no value for trading 
individual stocks.  
Marshall et al. [5] find that under fixed holding period of 
10 days, candlestick charting strategies are unprofitable for 
Dow Jones Industrial’s components from 1992 to 2002. They 
also confirm that candlestick strategies generate no profit in 
Japanese markets from 1975 to 2004. 
Based on experiments using stock data in the Stock 
Exchange of Thailand, Tharavanij et al. [6] conclude that any 
candlestick patterns cannot reliably predict market directions 
even with filtering by well-known stochastic oscillators [3]. 
2) Studies approving of candlestick patterns 
Other studies conclude that applying certain candlestick 
patterns is profitable at least for short-term trading [7]-[13].  
Caginalp et al. [7] study and favorably evaluate the 
predictive power of eight three-day reversal candlestick 
patterns on the S&P 500 index from 1992 to 1996. They 
propose to define candlestick patterns as a set of inequalities 
using opening, high, low, and closing prices. These 
inequalities are taken over in later studies. 
Goo et al. [8] define 26 candlestick patterns using 
modified version of inequalities that are proposed by 
Caginalp et al. [7]. They examine these patterns using stock 
data of Taiwan markets, and conclude that the candlestick 
trading strategies are valuable for traders. 
Chootong et al. [9] propose a trading strategy combining 
price movement patterns, candlestick chart patterns, and 
trading indicators. A neural network is employed to 
determine buy and sell signals. Experimental results using 
stock data in the Stock Exchange of Thailand show that the 
proposed strategy generally outperforms the use of 
traditional trading methods based on indicators. 
One of the obstacles of candlestick charting is the highly 
subjective nature of candlestick pattern [3] since the 
candlestick patterns are defined using words and illustrations. 
Tsai et al. [10] propose an image processing technique to 
analyze the similarities of the candlestick charts. Their 
experimental results using Dow Jones Industrial Average 
index show that visual matching of candlestick charts is 
useful for predicting short-term stock movements. 
Zhu et al. [11] examine the effectiveness of five different 
candlestick reversal patterns in predicting short-term stock 
movements. They use Chinese exchanges’ data from 1999 to 
2008 in the experiments. The results of statistical analyses 
suggest that the candlestick patterns perform well in 
predicting price trends. 
Jamaloodeen et al. [12] statistically analyze the predictive 
power of two popular Japanese candlestick patterns, i.e., 
Shooting Star and Hammer patterns. They use over six 
decades of historical daily data of the S&P 500 index. Their 
findings include the two patterns are highly reliable when 
using high price for the Shooting Star and low price for the 
Hammer. 
Udagawa [13] proposes a dynamic programing method to 
skip small and noisy candlesticks to improve predictability 
of candlestick charting. Experimental results show that the 
proposed method is effective in predicting both an uptrend 
and a downtrend. 
The researches in [4]-[13] are dedicated to discuss 
effectiveness of candlestick patterns to spot a good 
opportunity for successful stock trading. On the other hand, 
this research aims to objectively compare profitability of 
emerging and developed markets using algorithms and 
statistical analyses. The proposed method implements a 
retrieval model that uniquely considers price zones in which 
candlestick patterns occur. In addition, the proposed method 
realizes algorithms that tell us when to sell stocks to fix 
profits, which allows us to estimate precise profits in stock 
trading, and to compare global markets in an objective 
manner. 
III. 
CANDLESTICK CHART AND PATTERNS 
This section introduces the formation of a candlestick. A 
series of candlesticks forms a candlestick pattern. Samples 
of well-known candlestick chart patterns that are believed to 
be useful for a successful investment are depicted. Criticism 
of candlestick patterns for predicting stock price movements 
are also mentioned. 
A. Formation of Candlestick  
A daily candlestick line is formed with the market’s 
opening, high, low, and closing prices of a specific trading 
day [3]. The candlestick has a wide part, which is called real 
body representing the range between the opening and 
closing prices of that day’s trading as shown in Figure 1. 
The color of the real body represents whether the opening 
price or the closing price is higher. If the price rises, a 
hollow body is drawn suggesting bullish or buying pressure. 
Otherwise a filled body is drawn suggesting bearish or 
selling pressure. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Candlestick formation 
 
The thin lines above and below the body, which are 
named shadows, represent the range of prices traded in a 
day. The high is marked by the top of the upper shadow and 
the low by the bottom of the lower shadow. 
B. Samples of Candlestick Patterns 
Dozens of candlestick patterns are identified and become 
popular among worldwide stock traders [3]. These patterns 
have colorful names like morning star, evening star, three 
white soldiers, and three crows. 
Figure 2 shows the morning star pattern which is 
considered as a major reversal signal when it appears in a 
price low zone or at a bottom. It consists of three candles, 
i.e., one short-bodied candle (filled or hollow) between a 
preceding long filled candle and a succeeding long hollow 
one. The pattern shows that the selling pressure that was 
there the day before is now subsiding. The third hollow 
candle overlaps with the body of the filled candle suggests a 
start of a bullish reversal. The larger the filled and hollow 
candles, and the higher the hollow candle moves, the larger 
the potential reversal. The opposite version of the morning 
star pattern is known as the evening star pattern which is a 
reversal signal when it appears in a price high zone or at the 
end of an uptrend. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Morning star pattern 
 
Figure 3 shows the three white soldiers pattern which is 
interpreted as a strong indication of a bullish market reversal 
when it appears in a price low zone.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Three white soldiers pattern 
 
It consists of three long hollow candles that close 
progressively higher on each subsequent trading day. Each 
candle opens higher than the previous opening price and 
closes near the high price of the day, showing a steady 
advance of buying pressure.  
C. Criticism of Candlestick Patterns 
The major criticism of the candlestick chart patterns is 
that the patterns are qualitatively described with words, such 
as 
“long/short 
candlesticks,” 
“higher/lower 
trading,” 
“strong/weak signal,” supported by some illustrations [3]. 
Without modeling the candlestick patterns in a way that a 
computer 
can 
process 
and 
perform 
experiments 
comprehensively, arguments on the effectiveness of chart 
patterns would not come to an end. 
In addition, some candlestick chart patterns yield a 
different, even opposite, forecast depending on whether they 
appear in price high and/or low zones. Formulating a 
suitable mathematical formulation of trend is still an open 
issue.  
It deems that because of the lack of the strict definition of 
the candlestick chart patterns, mixed results are obtained in 
the studies on candlestick patterns. Negative conclusions to 
the predictability of candlesticks are reported [4]-[6], while 
positive evidences are provided for several candlestick chart 
patterns in experiments using U.S., Brazil and Asian stock 
markets [7]-[13]. 
IV. 
PROPOSED MODEL FOR RETRIEVING  
CANDLESTICK PATTERNS 
This section describes a model that allows us to retrieve 
similar to both candlestick patterns and price zones where 
the patterns occur. Three criteria that cope with moderate and 
sudden stock price changes are proposed to find 
opportunities for selling stocks. 
A. Retrieval Model of Candlestick Patterns 
After trial and error, we propose a model for retrieving 
similar candlestick charts that take into account where the 
stock price occurs in price zones in addition to a price 
change and a length of candlestick body. Figure 4 illustrates 
the model that consists of the six parameters as follows: 
(1) Change of prices w.r.t previous closing price, 
(2) Length of candlestick body, 
(3) Difference between stock price and 5-day moving 
average, 
(4) Difference between stock price and 25-day moving 
average, 
(5) Slope of 5-day moving average,  
(6) Slope of 25-day moving average. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Candlestick pattern retrieval model 
 
While most researches of candlestick patterns use a series 
of inequalities or technical indicators to identify stock price 
trends, i.e., an uptrend or a downtrend or a sideway (flat), the 
proposed model is unique in a sense that it uses two moving 
averages and their slopes. 5-day and 25-day moving averages 
are used since they are widely used in Japan. The moving 
averages are significant to identify the price zone where the 
candlestick pattern occurs. The slopes of the averages are 
also important to identify their trends.  
Retrieval of similar candlestick charts in this research 
takes the following steps: 
(1) Specify a reference day, i.e., typically a day of trend 
reversal, such as the last day of the morning star 
pattern in Figure 2. 
(2) Define tolerances of the six parameters with respect to 
the reference day. 
(3) Retrieve candidate candlesticks that satisfy all conditions 
C1 to C6. 
C1: if a difference between a closing price change of the 
reference day and that of a candidate day is within the 
change tolerance (change_tol), then C1 is true. 
C2: if a difference between a body length of the reference 
day and that of a candidate day is within the body 
tolerance (body_tol), then C2 is true. 
C3: if a difference between a closing price and a 5-day 
moving average of the reference day and that of a 
candidate day is within the tolerance (av5diff_tol), then 
C3 is true. 
C4: if a difference between a closing price and a 25-day 
moving average of the reference day and that of a 
candidate day is within the tolerance (av25diff_tol), then 
C4 is true. 
C5: if a slope of a 5-day moving average of the reference 
day and that of a candidate day is within the given 
tolerance (slope5_tol), then C5 is true. 
C6: if a slope of a 25-day moving average of the reference 
day and that of a candidate day is within the given 
tolerance (slope25_tol), then C6 is true. 
(4) Check the conditions below on the two days following 
the reference day, i.e., ones labeled t+1 and t+2 in Figure 
4. 
F1: if the change of the reference day and that of the day 
labeled t+1, i.e. the day after the reference day, are in 
the same direction. 
F2: if the change of the reference day and that of the day 
labeled t+2, are in the same direction. 
Retrieval conditions of F1 and F2 are empirically derived. 
Setting values of six parameters are statistically determined 
to retrieve a suitable set of similar charts in order to analyze 
expected profits as described in Section V. 
B. Finding selling opportunities 
A set of similar candlesticks is retrieved by specifying a 
reference date and tolerances concerning six parameters 
shown in Figure 4. In the rest of the paper, we deal with 
patterns of uptrend in a long market position. 
Traders will make a profit by a “buy low and sell high” 
strategy in uptrend. Candlestick patterns can suggest us when 
a specified trend begins, but do not cope with when a reverse 
of the trend begins. So, we need criteria or algorithms that 
tell us when to sell back stocks to fix profits and/or losses of 
a stock trading. One is the use of reversal candlestick 
patterns indicating downtrends. However, considering that 
candlestick patterns are derived from experience, use of the 
reversal patterns to trigger selling stocks seems incomplete 
and unprofitable due to dynamic nature of stock price 
movements. 
In this study, we examine an approach using algorithm. 
Specifically, we decide an opportunity of selling stocks using 
the following three criteria: 
(1) Sum of the negative change prices (SumNC) criterion: 
The value of SumNC is calculated by summing change 
prices in percentage that moved downward from the 
previous market day thorough a holding period. If The 
value exceeds a specified value then selling stocks is 
triggered.  
(2) Sum of the negative differences from 5-day average 
(SumND5av) criterion: 
The value of SumND5av is calculated by summing 
negative differences between a 5-day average and stock 
price thorough a holding period. Selling stocks is 
triggered when the value exceeds a specified limit. 
(3) Plunge detection criterion:  
This criterion intends to cope with quick price decline. 
When the stock price falls below the 5-day average then 
the range of price movements over the past 5 days 
(PM5day) is calculated. If the range is broader than a 
certain multiple of the standard deviation of price 
changes, the price fall is judged as a plunge and selling 
stocks is triggered. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
After outlining processes of experiments, statistical 
analyses of profits using Dow Jones Industrial Average, 
NASDAQ Composite index, Shanghai Composite index, 
Hang Seng index, and Nikkei Stock Average are discussed to 
evaluate performance of each market. 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
A. Data Conversion 
The stock prices are converted to the ratio of closing 
prices. The conversion contributes to reduction of the effects 
of highness or lowness of the stock prices. The formula 
below is used for calculating the ratio of prices in a 
percentage. 
Ri = (CP i – CP i-1) * 100 / CP i (1≦i≦n) 
 
(1) 
CPi indicates the closing price of the i-th business date. 
CPn means the closing price of the current date. Rn is the 
ratio of the difference between CPn and CPn-1 to the closing 
price of the current date CPn. The daily stock data from Nov. 
25, 2009 to Dec. 24, 2019 are used in experiments on the 
research. The number of data is approximately 2,536 for 
each market. 
B. Statistics of Candlestick Parameters 
Table I summarizes statistics of six parameters concerning 
the proposed retrieval model of a candlestick pattern shown 
in Figure 4. The statistics of each parameter are calculated 
for all market days in the five markets. They provide basis 
of setting parameter values in this study. 
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF STATISTICS OF SIX PARAMETERS 
 
 
Averages of all six parameters are positive for Dow Jones 
and NASDAQ indicating that the two markets are on 
uptrends as a whole. Nikkei 225 and Hang Seng mark 
negative values for candlestick body length. In Shanghai, 
four parameters excluding candlestick body length and price 
change are negative values, suggesting that the market is 
less profitable than other markets. 
C. Finding Profitable Trading Days for Each Market 
Stock prices fluctuate depending not only on international 
but also domestic political and economic news. Therefore, 
the day suitable for buying stocks differs in each market. 
For a fair comparison of the markets, a preferred reference 
day for each market is determined by the following 
processes. 
(1) For all market days, profit and/or loss of buying stock in 
a long position is calculated using a simulator. 
(2) Sort market days by calculated profits, and select the day 
that generates the highest profit in 2019. 
The following days are chosen as reference days. 
・June 4, 2019: for DOW and NASDAC markets 
・October 10, 2019: for Nikkei225 market 
・January 4, 2019: for Hang Seng and Shanghai markets 
Figure 5 shows the candlestick chart of Dow Jones index 
around June 4, 2019 coded by 0604. 
 
 
Figure 5. Candlestick chart of Dow Jones index around June 4, 2019 
The day is the last day of a morning star pattern and the 
first day of a three white soldiers pattern. These patterns are 
known as strong uptrend patterns in the candlestick charting. 
D. Experiments using Dow Jones Industrial Average 
Experiments are performed using the GUI shown in 
Figure 6. Values of parameters used in the experiments are 
statistically determined.  
First click on the File button to choose a CSV file 
containing a set of stock price data. The full path of the file 
is displayed. In Figure 6, a file named Dow_ed.csv is chosen. 
 
 
Figure 6. GUI for candlestick pattern retrieval model 
 
The two text boxes in top right corner show periods of 
market days, i.e., 20091125 to 20191224. The text box 
labeled Reference Day specifies a reference market day that 
has a typical candlestick pattern for an uptrend reversal. 
The two text boxes labeled Candlestick specify the 
tolerances of the length of the candlestick of a reference 
market day. 
The two text boxes labeled 5av-Diff mean the tolerances 
of the difference between the stock price and that of a 5-day 
average in percentage. The text boxes labeled Change, 
25av-Diff, 
5av-Slope, 
and 
25av-Slope 
are 
defined 
analogously.  
The two text boxes labeled SumNC and SumND5av 
specify parameters to trigger selling stocks. The value of 
PM5day, which does not appear in Figure 6, is calculated by 
the following formula: 
PM5day= 1 – ( SumND5av / 5 )  
 
(2) 
The formula is derived from experience so that the days 
of holding a stock is almost comparable to those of SumNC 
and SumND5av. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
E. Experiments on Profit Estimation 
Table II shows an experimental result that is performed 
on June 4, 2019 as the reference day whose candlesticks are 
shown Figure 5. Because the length of the candlestick body 
on the day is 1.5036%, the length of candlestick body is 
restricted between 1.4036% (= 1.5036 − 0.1) and 3.5036% 
(= 1.5036 + 2.5). The value of SumNC and SumND5av are 
set to −3%. Accordingly, the value of PM5day is 1.6% (= 1 
– (–3/5)). 
The other parameters are carefully adjusted to retrieve 
approximately 18 sample days that is suitable sample sizes 
to be statistically analyzed. The x column in Table II shows 
price changes of the market day MDay. y and z columns 
show price changes of the next day and the day after next. 
The Date to sell, Holding Days, and Profits columns mean 
the date to sell back stocks, the number of days to keep 
stocks holding, and 
simulated profits, respectively. 
Averages of profits are 3.332%, 4.271%, and 3.183% for 
SumNC, SumND5av, and PM5day, respectively. 
Success trade ratio is calculated by dividing the number 
of retrieved dates that yield profits by the number of 
retrieved dates. Table III summarizes profit averages and 
success trade ratios for each parameter to trigger selling 
stocks. The simulated trade profit average using parameter 
SumND5av marks high profit average of 4.271%, while 
shows low success trade ratio of 0.833. The trade profit 
averages using parameters SumNC and PM5day show the 
opposite, i.e., rather low profit average with high success 
trade ratio. Product of the profit average and success trade 
ratio seems to suggest potential profits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III. AVERAGES OF PROFITS AND SUCCESS TRADE RATIO 
 
 
Figure 7 shows a graph with a profit in the y-axis, and a 
value of parameters SumNC, SumND5av and PM5day in the 
x-axis. Generally, the profits increase as the values of 
parameters to trigger selling stocks increase. Profits peak at 
the value of 4% to 6% and seem to decline over 8%. 
 
Figure 7. Graph showing exit value and profit 
 
Figure 8 shows a graph with an average of stock holding 
days in the y-axis, and a value of parameters SumNC, 
SumND5av and PM5day in the x-axis. The averages in the 
y-axis increase approximately linearly as the values of 
parameters in the x-axis increase. 
TABLE II. ESTIMATED PROFITS ON JUNE 4, 2019 AS REFERENCE MARKET DAY 
TABLE II. ESTIMATED PROFITS ON JUNE 4, 2019 AS REFERENCE MARKET DAY 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 8. Graph showing exit value and average holding days 
Table IV summarizes the result of the statistical analysis 
using Excel that is performed by specifying Profit as an 
independent variable and Holding Days as a dependent 
variable. R Square is 0.7647 suggests that 76.47% of Profit 
values can be explained by the variable of Holding Days. 
The last column of the table ANOVA shows the results of an 
overall F test. The value of Significance F is 0.000002074 
(<0.05), which indicates that Profit are significantly related 
to Holding Days. 
 
TABLE IV. RESULTS OF REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
 
Figure 9 shows simulated profits in a bar graph for each 
retrieved day using SumNC, SumND5av, and PM5day.  
 
Figure 9. Calculated profits for each retrieved day (Dow Jones index) 
 
As Figure 9 shows, the values of three parameters to 
trigger selling stocks produce comparable profits and/or 
losses. Strictly speaking, while SumND5av parameter yields 
better profits than those of the other two. SumND5av tends 
to generate larger losses while generates larger profits. 
F. Experiments on Asian Markets 
Experiments are performed using three Asian markets. 
The retrieval conditions are almost the same as those used in 
Dow Jones index, though in order to retrieve approximately 
18 market days, values of parameters, such as av5diff_tol, 
slope5_tol etc., are adjusted within 0.5%. 
Figure 10 shows simulated profits of Shanghai index. Five 
days out of 19 days result in losses. The maximum profit is 
estimated about 20%, which occurs on Oct. 28 2014. Other 
high returns of approximately 12% happen on Sept. 30, 2010 
and Dec. 5, 2012. Excluding the three large profits, Shanghai 
market seems less profitable than Dow Jones market. 
 
Figure 10. Calculated profits for each retrieved day (Shanghai index) 
Figure 11 shows simulated profits of Hang Seng index. 
Four days out of 18 days result in losses. The maximum 
profit is estimated about 8%, which is less than that of Dow 
Jones index. 
 
Figure 11. Calculated profits for each retrieved day (Hang Seng index) 
 
Figure 12 shows simulated profits of Nikkei 225 index. 
Two days out of 18 days result in losses.  
 
Figure 12. Calculated profits for each retrieved day (Nikkei 225 index) 
 
Large profits of 14.0% and 12.9% occur on Sept. 11, 2017 
and Nov. 15, 2012. Excluding the two profits, Nikkei 225 
market seems comparable to Dow Jones market. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposes a model for retrieving similar 
candlestick charts with six parameters. It deals with the 5-
day and 25-day moving averages to identify their trends in 
addition to decide whether the price occurs in price high or 
low zones. Since successful stock trade is significantly 
depends on good timing of selling stocks, three criteria are 
proposed and the profits that they generate are simulated 
using developed and emerging markets in the US and Asia. 
The experiments are performed on a pattern that suggests 
a strong uptrend according to the prediction based on 
candlestick pattern, i.e., the morning star pattern followed by 
the three white soldiers one. Daily stock data of two US 
markets and three Asian markets are used in the experiments. 
The results show that the pattern yields significant profits in 
all markets. As for profits in global markets, the 
experimental results generally support what is stated in the 
paper of Dimson et al. [1]. 
Future work may include experiments using other 
candlestick patterns to measure the profitability of the 
proposed method. Additional studies may be conducted to 
compare global markets to meet demands of finding the most 
profitable market. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Dimson, P. Marsh, and M. Staunton, “Should you invest in 
emerging markets?” London Business School, Apr. 2019, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.london.edu/think/emerging-
markets 
[2] N. Ahmad, R. R. Ahmed, J. Vveinhardt, and D. Streimikiene, 
“Empirical Analysis of Stock Returns and Volatility: Evidence 
from Asian Stock Markets,” Technological and Economic 
Development of Economy, vol. 22, 2016, pp. 808–829. 
[3] “Technical Analysis,” Cambridge Univ. pp. 1–179, Feb. 2011, 
Available from: http://www.mrao.cam.ac.uk/~mph/Technical_ 
Analysis.pdf 
[4] J. M. Horton, “Stars, crows, and doji: The use of candlesticks 
in stock selection,” Quarterly Review of Economics and 
Finance, vol. 49, Nov. 2007, pp. 283–294. 
[5] R. B. Marshall, R. M. Young, and R. Cahan, “Are candlestick 
technical trading strategies profitable in the Japanese equity 
market?” Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, vol. 
31, Aug. 2008, pp. 191–207. 
[6] P. Tharavanij, V. Siraprapasiri, and K. Rajchamaha, 
“Profitability of Candlestick Charting Patterns in the Stock 
Exchange of Thailand,” SAGE journals, Oct. 2017, pp. 1–18. 
[7] G. Caginalp, and H. Laurent, “The predictive power of price 
patterns,” Applied Mathematical Finance, vol. 5, Jun. 1998, pp. 
181–206. 
[8] Y.-J. Goo, D.-H. Chen, and Y.-W. Chang, “The application of 
Japanese candlestick trading strategies in Taiwan,” Investment 
Management and Financial Innovations, vol. 4, Jan. 2007, pp. 
49–79. 
[9] C. Chootong and O. Sornil, “Trading Signal Generation Using 
a Combination of Chart Patterns and Indicators,” International 
Journal of Computer Science Issues, vol. 9, Nov. 2012, pp. 
202–209. 
 
 
 
[10] C.-F. Tsai and Z.-Y. Quan, “Stock Prediction by Searching for 
Similarities in Candlestick Charts,” Journal ACM Transactions 
on Management Information Systems (TMIS), vol. 5, Jul. 2014, 
pp. 1–21. 
[11] M. Zhu, S. Atri, and E. Yegen, “Are candlestick trading 
strategies effective in certain stocks with distinct features?” 
Pacific Basin Finance Journal, vol. 37, Apr. 2016, pp. 116–127. 
[12] M. Jamaloodeen, A. Heinz, and L. Pollacia, “A Statistical 
Analysis of the Predictive Power of Japanese Candlesticks,” 
Journal of International & Interdisciplinary Business Research: 
vol. 5, 2018, pp. 62–94, Available from: https://scholars. 
fhsu.edu/jiibr/vol5/iss1/5 
[13] Y. Udagawa, “Dynamic Programming Approach to Retrieving 
Similar Candlestick Charts for Short-Term Stock Price 
Prediction,” International Journal on Advances in Software, 
IARIA, vol. 11, Dec. 2018, pp. 440-451. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

