 
 
 
 
  
 
Developing a Stock Trading Simulator Using Candlestick Chart Patterns  
for Estimating Profitability of Global Markets 
Yoshihisa Udagawa  
Faculty of Informatics, Tokyo University of Information Sciences 
Chiba-city, Chiba, Japan 
e-mail: yu207233@rsch.tuis.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— This paper deals with the development of a stock 
trading simulator. It uses candlestick chart patterns and the 5-
day moving average for deciding trade opportunities, and tries 
to make profits on both trades that start with buying stocks 
and those that start with selling stocks, i.e., long and short 
trades. Experiments are performed using the seven world 
markets consisting of Euro Stoxx 50 (the European Union), 
DJI and NASDAQ (the United Sates), Bovespa (Brazil), Sensex 
(India), SSEC (China), and Nikkei 225 (Japan). Profits are 
simulated using ten-year daily stock data of the seven global 
stock markets with and without a trading fee. The results of 
experiments are generally consistent in the seven markets, 
showing the wide range of applicability of the simulator. The 
average success rates for trades that are started with buying 
stocks with a trading fee remains in the middle of 60%, while it 
is at the beginning of 20% for the trades that start with selling 
stocks because margin interest to loan stocks squeezes profits. 
Although the developed simulator has some limitations, it 
provides a benchmark for measuring profitability of trading 
techniques and helps to analyze stock trade timings that lead to 
significant profits or losses. 
 
Keywords— Stock trading simulator; Global market comparison; 
Technical analysis; Candlestick chart; Moving average. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The stock market has fascinated people for extra income. 
Many make profits, others losses thorough trading on a stock 
market. Stock price forecasts play an important role to 
mitigate the risks associated with investment. 
Generally, there are two main types of methods that allow 
investors to make an investment decision, namely 
fundamental analysis and technical analysis [1]. 
Fundamental analysis is an investing strategy that attempts 
to determine a security’s intrinsic value by focusing on 
microeconomic indicators and macroeconomic factors. 
Examples of the former are a company’s historical earnings 
and profit margins as well as future growth prospects. 
Examples of the latter include the state of industry conditions 
and market sentiments. The primary assumption of the 
fundamental analysis is that the stock price of a company 
reflects the intrinsic value in the long run. Because of this 
nature, the fundamental analysis is considered to be effective 
for a long-term trade. 
In contrast, technical analysis is an investing strategy that 
tries to identify trading signals by analyzing the statistics of 
preceding stock price data and volume. Typically, the 
technical analysis uses charts and indicators to forecast price 
trends and patterns in the near future. 
This study focuses on candlestick patterns to spot the 
timing of a trade [2][3]. Because candlestick patterns are 
typically formed by one to three candlesticks, they are 
believed to be suitable for a short-term prediction. While the 
candlestick charting technique was probably established 
sometime after 1850, the candlestick technique became 
popular worldwide in the 1990s. Despite its long history and 
popularity, mixed results are obtained in the studies on the 
technique. Negative conclusions to the predictability of 
candlestick charts are reported [4]-[6], while positive 
evidences are provided for several candlestick patterns by 
experiments using the U.S. and Asian stock markets’ 
historical data [7]-[11]. Most of the papers on stock price 
prediction focus on discussions about the accuracy of 
predictions concerning stock price increases using specific 
chart patterns and/or indicators. Since stock trading 
fundamentally consists of buying and selling stocks, the 
criteria for deciding when to buy and sell stocks, and the 
resulting profits must be estimated before they can be 
applied to actual trading. 
The purpose of this study is to develop a simulator for 
stock trading and to compare the performances of global 
markets in terms of profits. The developed simulator uses 
candlestick patterns and the 5-day moving average to find 
the opportunities to buy and sell stocks. It is designed to 
make profits on both trades that start with buying stocks, i.e., 
trades in a long position, and those that start with selling 
stocks, i.e., trades in a short position. Experiments are 
performed using the seven international markets consisting 
of Euro Stoxx 50 (the European Union), Dow Jones 
Industrial Average (DJI) and NASDAQ (the United Sates), 
Bovespa (Brazil), Sensex (India), SSEC (China), and Nikkei 
225 (Japan) [12]. 
The contributions of this study are as follows: 
I. Developing a stock trade simulator that continuously tries 
to make profits by buying and selling a stock. 
II. Profits are simulated over the seven global stock markets 
for long and short trades, with and without trade fees. 
III. Detailed analysis on big trades for demonstrating 
usefulness and limitation of the developed simulator. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II gives the background of the candlestick chart, and 
overviews the algorithm of the developed simulator. Section 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-945-4
ALLDATA 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
III shows experimental results including success rates and 
cumulative profits in seven markets. Section IV concludes 
the paper with our plans for future work. 
II. 
STRUCTURE OF STOCK SIMULATOR 
This section describes formations of a candlestick chart, 
criteria for finding trade opportunities, and outlines the 
developed stock trading simulator. 
A. Formation of Candlestick 
As depicted in Figure 1, a daily candlestick is formed 
with the market’s opening, high, low, and closing prices of a 
market day [2][3]. The candlestick has a wide part, which is 
called real body representing the range between the opening 
and closing prices of that day’s trading. The color of the 
real body represents whether the opening price or the 
closing price is higher. If the price rises, a hollow body is 
drawn indicating bullish or buying pressure. Otherwise, a 
filled body is drawn showing bearish or selling pressure. 
 
 
Figure 1. Candlestick formation. 
 
The thin lines above and below the body, which are 
named shadows, represent the range of prices traded in a 
day. The high is marked by the top of the upper shadow and 
the low by the bottom of the lower shadow. 
B. Criteria for Spotting Trade Timings 
A candlestick chart is a graph in which candlesticks are 
presented in chronological order. It is used as a tool to get 
information on whether the current price is higher or lower 
than the historical stock price movements. Moving averages 
form a line graph by connecting the average of closing 
prices over a certain period of time. As for a period of time 
to compute an average, each country uses its own. For 
example, the short-term average is often calculated for 5 
days, the medium-term average is for 25 days in Japan. The 
moving average graph is useful to decide whether a stock 
price is at the beginning stage of a rising trend or a falling 
one. 
Candlestick patterns are usually described in a context of 
stock price trends. In this study, we focus on the difference 
between the closing price and the 5-day average. Figure 2 
depicts a bullish reversal pattern that is commonly observed 
at the start of a rising trend. The pattern has two parameters, 
i.e., δ for the length of the candlestick body and ε for the 
difference between the closing price and the 5-day moving 
average. The optimum values for δand ε vary for each 
stock market, which is discussed in the next subsection. 
 
Figure 2. Bullish reversal pattern. 
 
Figure 3 illustrates a bearish reversal pattern that is 
generally observed at the beginning of a falling trend. The 
pattern also has two parameters, i.e., δ and ε. In this study, 
the perfect symmetry of the bullish and bearish reversal 
patterns is presumed. 
 
 
Figure 3. Bearish reversal pattern. 
 
Figure 4 shows the pseudocode that outlines the 
algorithms of the developed simulator. Stock data are stored 
in arrays, such as Open[] for the opening prices, Close[] for 
the closing prices, Pbody[] for the lengths of candlesticks, 
and CP5av[] for the difference between the closing price 
and the 5-day moving average. Stock data are stored in 
chronological order, i.e., the larger index values of an array 
represent the further past trading dates. 
 
 
Figure 4. Outline of developed simulator algorithms. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-945-4
ALLDATA 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
The 
method 
Trade_simulation 
takes 
two 
integer 
parameters, i.e., IndexFrom, and IndexTo. These variables 
specify the start and end of a simulation, respectively.  
The position of a trade is indicated by the value of a 
variable named flg, i.e., 1 for a long position, and –1 for a 
short position. At the start of a trading simulation, the 
position is determined by the value of CP5av[j]. If 
CP5av[j]>0 then the variable flg is assigned to 1, otherwise 
to –1. 
If the bearish or downward reversal pattern shown in 
Figure 3 is detected during the period of buying a stock, the 
simulator sells the stock and calculates the profit diff of the 
trade and the cumulative profit profit, updates the trade 
price trade_p, and assigns the variable flg to –1 to enter a 
short position, etc. The profit diff is calculated as the profit 
of one stock at the market price. The trade price trade_p is 
calculated by adding the opening and closing prices, and 
dividing by 2.  
If the bullish or upward reversal pattern shown in Figure 
2 is found during the period of selling a stock, the simulator 
buys a stock back and assigns the variables in the 
symmetrically same way as the detection of the bearish 
reversal pattern. 
C. Calculating trading fee 
Purchasing stocks comes with a trading fee. The trading 
fee varies across brokers and depends on the amount of the 
trade. Table I summarizes trading fees of some Japanese 
online brokers. This study assumes the trading fee is 0.1% 
of the amount of a traded stock price due to the fact that the 
fee is reasonable for the trade amount between 1M JPY (≒
8,700 USD) to 3M JPY (≒26,000 USD). 
 
TABLE I. TYPICAL TRADING FEE OF JAPANESE ONLINE BROKERS 
 
 
In a short sale, a trader must borrow the stock to sell from 
an investment firm with a payment of margin interest. The 
leverage of trades is assumed to be one, because the 
symmetry of long and short trades is presumed in this study. 
Margin interest slightly varies across brokers. Typically, it 
consists of an annual interest and a fixed one. In this study, 
the margin interest is calculated using the following 
formula: 
(Stock price) * (2.80% / 365 * N + 1.15%)  
(1) 
N is the total number of days for borrowing stocks. 1.15% 
indicates the fixed interest, which greatly affects short sale 
profits, as described in Section III. 
D. Determining Optimal δ and ε 
All market data used in this study are downloaded from 
the Investing.com’s Web site [12]. Price data are converted 
into percentage ratios. For example, let Close[j] indicate the 
closing price of the j-th trading day stored in the simulator. 
The price change ratio in percentage is calculated by the 
following formula: 
PriceChangeRatio[j]=  
(Close[j] – Close[j+1]) * 100 / Close[j+1] (1≦j≦n) (2) 
Since the proposed model of stock trading has two 
parameters, i.e., δ and ε, an exhaustive search method or a 
brute-force approach is applied to find the optimum 
combination of the parameters in the sense of maximizing 
profits. Table II shows the result of the exhaustive search on 
δ and ε using NASDAQ stock price data for ten years, i.e., 
strictly between Nov. 30, 2011 and Dec. 1, 2021 in a long 
position. The maximum profit is achieved when the value of 
δ= 0.2% and ε= –2.4%, i.e., between –2.3% and –2.5%. The 
profit values in US dollar in Table II are those without the 
trading fee. 
 
TABLE II. RESULT OF EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ON δ AND ε 
 
 
The optimal combinations of δ and ε concerning the seven 
global markets are listed in Table III. The value of the 
parameter δ is positive except for SSEC, which indicates 
that the candlestick body is hollow or Doji [2], i.e., the 
opening price and the closing prices are virtually equal, 
when the price is rising. Meanwhile, the candlestick body is 
filled or Doji when the price is falling. 
 
TABLE III. OPTIMAL COMBINATIONS OF δ AND ε  
FOR SEVEN GLOBAL MARKETS 
 
 
The value of the parameter ε is negative in all markets. 
This indicates that the closing price is before crossing the 5-
day average upward during a price increase, whereas before 
crossing downward during a price decrease. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
This section discusses simulated success rates and 
profitability of stock trading in the seven markets under 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-945-4
ALLDATA 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
consideration. It also includes analyses of the cumulative 
profits over ten-year trade simulations, which show strong 
liner dependency upon the number of trades. 
A. Success Rate and Profitability 
Stock trade simulations are performed over the ten years’ 
daily stock data using the seven markets, i.e., Euro Stoxx 50 
(the European Union), Dow Jones Industrial Average and 
NASDAQ (the United Sates), Bovespa (Brazil), Sensex 
(India), SSEC (China), and Nikkei 225 (Japan) [12]. The 
success rate of stock trading in the study is defined by the 
following formula: 
Success rate=  
the number of profitable trades  
/ the total number of trades 
 
(3) 
Strictly, the number of profitable trades indicates the 
number of trades that result in a positive profit.  
A trade profit is calculated by the subtraction of a 
purchasing price from a selling price. In a long position, a 
trader firstly purchases a stock at a market price, and 
eventually sells it to fix profits and/or losses. A profit is 
generated when a market price increases. Meanwhile, in a 
short position, a trader firstly borrows a stock with margin 
interest from a broker and sells the stock at a market price, 
and eventually buys them back to fix profits. A profit is 
generated when a market price declines. 
Table IV summaries the success rates for each market in 
both long and short positions, with and without the trading 
fee or interest. Cells with the largest success rates among the 
markets are highlighted with a yellow background color, and 
cells with the smallest value are filled with a light blue color. 
The success rates in a short position with interest are notably 
low compared to other success rates. This indicates that the 
margin interest (1) has a significant influence on the success 
rates. 
 
TABLE IV. SUMMARY OF THE SUCCESS RATES 
 
 
Table V shows a summary of the profitability for each 
market in both long and short positions, with and without the 
fee or interest. Like Table IV, cells with the largest success 
rate are highlighted with a yellow color, and cells with the 
smallest are filled with a light blue color. 
The profit ratio is calculated by the following formula:  
Profit ratio= Simulated profits / Base stock price 
(4) 
The base stock price is a 25-day average at the beginning 
of the simulation, i.e., the 25-day average on Nov. 30, 2011, 
for each market. 
 
TABLE V. SUMMARY OF PROFIT RATIOS 
 
 
NASDAQ has the maximum profit ratio of 11.24 times the 
25-day average on Nov. 30, 2011 in ten years in a long 
position with the trading fee. Meanwhile, profit ratios in a 
short sale are catastrophic. Losses reach 6.76 times the base 
stock price in NASDAQ. Again, the simulations prove that 
the margin interest (1) has a heavy negative impact on profits. 
B. Analysis of Cumulative Profits 
One of the important aspects of stock trading is stability of 
investment returns on an annual basis. Figure 5 shows the 
graphs of cumulative profits in a long position with the 
trading fee for each of the seven markets being discussed. 
The cumulative profits’ graphs without the fee have the same 
shapes except for the slopes of increase are 1.001 times of 
those in Figure 5. 
As the graphs show, the cumulative profits almost 
constantly increase as stock trades continue. NASDAQ 
achieves the best ratio of 11.24 times at the end of a 
simulation. Linear regression equations with the R-squared 
(R2) are added near the graphs. R2 is a statistical measure of 
how close the original data are to the approximate regression 
line. All R2s of the seven markets are greater than 0.9302 
which 
indicates 
significant 
correlation 
between 
the 
cumulative profits and the number of trades. 
 
 
Figure 5. Cumulative profits in long position with fee. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-945-4
ALLDATA 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
Scarlet “X” marks on the graphs indicate the trade in the 
vicinity of the lowest price day, i.e., around March 18, 2020 
[13]. Since that day, most stock markets have seen obvious 
increases in cumulative profits. 
Figure 6 shows the line graphs of cumulative profits in a 
short position without the margin interest. All R2s are 
greater than 0.9486 indicating significant correlation 
between the cumulative profits and the number of trades. In 
other words, the proposed reversal criterion in Figure 3 
fairly predicts the bearish trend in all seven markets on an 
annual basis. 
 
 
Figure 6. Cumulative profit in short position without margin interest. 
 
Figure 7 shows the line graphs of cumulative profits 
including the margin interest. All lines are in the negative 
region, which means losses. The margin interest defined by 
(1) overwhelms the profits generated by the simulator. 
 
 
Figure 7. Cumulative profit in short position with margin interest. 
 
Table VI shows the number of stock-holding days for all 
trades using NASDAQ historical data in long and short 
positions. Bullish reversals of 158 out of 476, i.e., 33.2%, 
are proved to be fail, which causes to change from a long 
position to a short position in one market day. On the other 
hand, bearish reversals of 227 out of 475, i.e., 47.8%, 
occurred in one market day. In this case, most trades yield 
losses for the payment of the margin interest of slightly 
greater than 1.15% according to (1). 
 
TABLE VI. THE NUMBER OF HOLDING DAYS IN NASDAQ 
 
 
In summary, the developed simulator has lower accuracy 
in a bearish trend prediction than a bullish trend prediction. 
Furthermore, the margin interest for borrowing stocks for 
taking a short position worsens profits, leading to notable 
losses. 
C. Trading Frequency and Profits 
As shown in Table VI, 33.2% of the trades based on the 
proposed method have one-day stock holding in a long 
position and 47.8% in a short position. Figure 8 shows a 
candlestick chart that includes a trade in which the number 
of days to hold stock is one, causing high frequency of 
trading. Since the stock price rises on the market day t, the 
simulator buys a stock in anticipation of a price increase. 
Since the stock price remarkably fall on the day t+3, the 
simulator sells the stock short. However, on the next day 
t+4, the price of the stock notably goes up, signaling the 
simulator to change positions and buy a stock. The number 
of holding days is one for this trade. Because the traded 
price of the stock on the day t+4 is higher than the traded 
price on the day t+3 in Figure 8, a loss, i.e., –SP1, is 
incurred.  
 
 
Figure 8. Candlestick chart including one-day stock holding. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-945-4
ALLDATA 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
The losses of –SP1 also worsen profits in a long position. 
If the short sale on the day t+3 was avoided, the simulator 
could earn a profit LB3 calculated by the following formula: 
LP3= LP1 + SP1 + LP2 
 
 
(5) 
Figure 9 shows a candlestick chart consisting of favorable 
trades whose holding days of a stock are longer than one. 
The developed simulator sells the stock in a short position 
because a stock price falls on the market day t+3. The stock 
price continues to fall on the next day t+4. 
 
 
Figure 9. Candlestick chart consisting of favorable trades. 
 
Since the stock price rises on the day t+5, the simulator 
takes a long position and buys the stock back. In this case, 
the traded price of the stock on the day t+5 is fortunately 
lower than that on the day t+3 as shown in Figure 9, a profit, 
i.e., SP1, is generated. 
It is important to note that a trade with a one-day stock 
holding frequently results in losses, and causes low success 
rates. Methods using candlestick patterns are effective to 
avoid unsuccessful trading, which is discussed in [13]. 
D. Analysis of Trades in Long Position 
Figure 10 is a scatter plot of all trades in a long position 
with the trading fee using the NASDAQ historical stock 
data. The Y-axis represents profits and the X-axis shows the 
number of days to hold a stock. As R2 is 0.2161, there is an 
insignificant correlation between profits and holding days. 
 
 
Figure 10. Scatter plot of profits and holding days in long position. 
Points with a negative value on the Y-axis yield losses. 
They mostly occur in the range of one to four on the X-axis. 
In other words, trades with more than four holding days are 
generally profitable. 
Figure 11 shows the candlestick chart of the most 
profitable trade whose point is located at the upper center in 
Figure 10. The trade begins on Mar. 30 and ends on Apr. 14, 
2021 with ten holding days. The simulator makes sensible 
buying and selling decisions as far as this trade is concerned. 
The profits are UD$890.80 with the fee, and UD$903.90 
without the fee.  
 
 
Figure 11. Candlestick chart on the most profitable trade occurred in 2021. 
 
 
The trade that ends in the least profit is located at the 
lower left corner in Figure 10. The magenta vertical lines in 
Figure 12 indicate the traded date.  
 
 
Figure 12. Candlestick chart on the least profitable trade. 
 
The simulator takes a long position on Friday, Mar. 13, 
2020. But the stock price plummets on the very next market 
day, i.e., Monday, Mar. 16, 2020. The simulator reverses the 
position, causing a loss of US$601.70 with the trading fee or 
US$594.00 without the fee. During the periods when prices 
rise and fall frequently, as in this example, it is difficult to 
make good decisions based on the proposed criterion in 
Figure 2. The use of sophisticated candlestick patterns is 
discussed in [13] for achieving profitable trades. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-945-4
ALLDATA 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
  
 
E. Analysis of Trades in Short Position 
Figure 13 shows a scatter plot of all trades in a short 
position with the margin interest (1). The most lucrative 
trade is located at the upper center in Figure 13. The trade 
begins on Feb. 20 and ends on Mar. 2, 2020 with seven 
holding days as the orange and green vertical lines indicate 
in Figure 12. The profits are US$847.80 with the interest or 
US$965.40 without the interest. 
 
 
Figure 13. Scatter plot of profits and holding days in short position. 
 
The most unsuccessful trade begins on Apr. 3, 2020 and 
ends on the following day, which is located at the lower left 
corner. Coincidentally, the trade with the worst losses is 
included in Figure 12, and is indicated by the red and dark 
gray vertical lines. As is the case for a long position, the 
simulator changes to the opposite position only in one 
market day. The losses are US$447.50 with the interest or 
US$361.50 without the interest. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study deals with a stock trade simulator that tries to 
make profits in both long and short positions. The trade 
opportunities are decided based on the criteria using two 
parameters, i.e., the length of the candlestick body, and the 
difference between the closing price and the 5-day moving 
average. The symmetry of bullish and bearish reversal 
patterns is presumed. The optimal values of the parameters 
are determined thorough an exhaustive search method for 
seven global markets, i.e., Dow Jones Industrial Average, 
NASDAQ, Bovespa, Euro Stoxx 50, Sensex, SSEC, and 
Nikkei 225. 
Stock trade simulations with and without stock trading 
fees are performed using the daily historical stock data of the 
seven markets for a period of ten years. The profits simulated 
in each market in a long position are noteworthy. The best 
performance is recorded in NASDAQ with 11.24 times the 
stock price at the beginning of the trade in ten-year 
simulation with fees. However, significant losses occur in 
each market in a short position. Margin interest to loan 
stocks is generally greater than a simulated profit in a short 
trade, especially when the trading period is one or two days. 
Through a series of experiments, we find that the 
developed simulator has some limitations. The average of 
success rates in a long position remains in the middle of 60%, 
while it is at the beginning of 20% in a short position. The 
improvement of success rates is a major issue. In a highly 
volatile period of price fluctuation, the proposed criteria tend 
to result in a false prediction, incurring notable losses. There 
is an idea to refrain from trading stocks during the periods of 
market turbulence. This means developing a simulator with 
three states, i.e., buying, selling, and no trading.  
Another interesting study subject is to simulate trades 
using individual stocks. This type of research is expected to 
be an important contribution toward practical stock trading. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Utami, L. Nugroho, and A. Farida, “Fundamental Versus 
Technical Analysis of Investment: Case Study of Investors 
Decision in Indonesia Stock Exchange,” Journal of Internet 
Banking and Commerce, vol. 22, pp. 1-18, June 2017. 
[2] “Technical Analysis,” Cambridge Univ., Available from: 
http://www.mrao.cam.ac.uk/~mph/Technical_Analysis.pdf, pp. 
1-179, February 2011. 
[3] M. C. Thomsett, “Bloomberg Visual Guide to Candlestick 
Charting,” John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 
2012. 
[4] M. J. Horton, “Stars, crows, and doji: The use of candlesticks 
in stock selection,” Quarterly Review of Economics and 
Finance, vol. 49, pp. 283–294, November 2007. 
[5] R. B. Marshall, R. M. Young, and R. Cahan, “Are candlestick 
technical trading strategies profitable in the Japanese equity 
market?” Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, vol. 
31, pp. 191–207, August 2008. 
[6] P. Tharavanij, V. Siraprapasiri, and K. Rajchamaha, 
“Profitability of Candlestick Charting Patterns in the Stock 
Exchange of Thailand,” SAGE journals, pp. 1–18, October 
2017. 
[7] G. Caginalp and H. Laurent, “The predictive power of price 
patterns,” Applied Mathematical Finance, vol. 5, pp. 181-206, 
June 1998. 
[8] Y.-J. Goo, D.-H. Chen, and Y.-W. Chang, “The application of 
Japanese candlestick trading strategies in Taiwan,” Investment 
Management and Financial Innovations, vol. 4, pp. 49–79, 
January 2007. 
[9] N. Goumatianos, I. T. Christou, and P. Lindgren, “Useful 
pattern mining on time series: Applications in the stock 
market,” Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on 
Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods (ICPRAM 
2013), pp. 608-612, February 2013.  
[10] M. Zhu, S. Atri, and E. Yegen, “Are candlestick trading 
strategies effective in certain stocks with distinct features?” 
Pacific Basin Finance Journal, vol. 37, pp. 116–127, April 
2016. 
[11] T.-H. Lu, Y.-. Chen, and Y.-C. Hsu, “Trend definition or 
holding strategy: What determines the profitability of 
candlestick charting?” Journal of Banking & Finance, vol. 61, 
pp. 172–183, December 2015. 
[12] 
“Major 
World 
Market 
Indices,” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.investing.com/indices/major-indices/, 
December 
2021. 
[13] Y. Udagawa, “Stock Price Prediction Using Average Based 
Trend Indicator Derived from Analysis of Impact of COVID-
19 Pandemic,” International Journal on Advances in Systems 
and Measurements, v 15 n 1&2 2022., in press. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-945-4
ALLDATA 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

