Development and Implementation of an Ontology to Support the Product Development
of Smart Textiles Using Open Innovation Platforms
Inga Gehrke∗, Magnus Knuth†‡, Sabine Kolvenbach§, Urs Riedlinger§, Thomas Gries∗ and Sebastian Tramp†
∗Institut fuer Textiltechnik at RWTH Aachen University, Germany, Email: inga.gehrke@ita.rwth-aachen.de
†eccenca GmbH, Leipzig, Germany, Email: {magnus.knuth,sebastian.tramp}@eccenca.com
‡Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany, Email: magnus.knuth@kit.edu
§Fraunhofer FIT, Sankt Augustin, Germany, Email: {sabine.kolvenbach,urs.riedlinger}@fit.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—To create innovative connected products and services,
more and more interdisciplinary development efforts across
industries covering hardware, software and business model design
are required. One example for this is smart textiles, where the
complexity of the value chain has so far hindered the successful
market launch of new products. In this paper, semantic web
ontologies are used to support faster development and market
entry by a structured interaction of all players along the value
chain. A speciﬁc Smart Textiles Ontology is deﬁned, validated
and evaluated with the help of the structured incorporation of
expert knowledge. The ontology acts as a foundation for an open
co-innovation platform called GeniusTex, and has successfully
enabled ﬁrst product development projects.
Keywords–Ontology Development; Smart Textiles.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Smart Textiles are textiles with an extended range of
functions that enable the interaction of the textile with the
environment and the human user. Applications range from
shirts for monitoring vital signs, activity or stress in health
and sports to displays integrated in furniture and protective and
heating equipment in industrial settings [1]. A standard of the
European Committee for Standardization (CEN) deﬁnes Smart
Textiles more speciﬁcally as intelligent systems consisting of
textile and non-textile components that actively interact with
their environment, a user or an object. Data is recorded and
processed via sensors and a deﬁned reaction is generated
via actuators or an information display on a supplementary
device [2].
The market outlook for smart textiles is very promising,
with a market size of approximately AC5 billion for 2022,
growing from AC1.3 billion in 2017 [3]. However, this potential
has not yet been realized and few products have passed from
prototype stage to mass market. Challenges arise mainly due to
the complex value chain of smart textiles that includes textile
and electronics suppliers, software and application developers,
product designers and manufacturers (system integrators), as
described also by [1], [4]–[6]. Such challenges are:
•
Technical challenges that include the complex design
of interfaces between textile and electronics compo-
nents, the miniaturisation of all components for the
seamless integration in textiles, as well as their usabil-
ity and durability. To solve these challenges, expertise
from different knowledge domains, such as textiles
and electronics production, needs to be combined
during the Product Development Process (PDP).
•
Organizational challenges that emerge from diverse
value chain which has limited experience in collabo-
ration across the different knowledge domains. Due to
a lack of standards in the smart textiles domain, the
producers cannot refer to norms to ensure interoper-
ability between their domains, but need to collaborate
intensely with all parties along the value chain during
the PDP.
This paper describes how the GeniusTex project addresses
these complex challenges by utilising a Smart Textiles On-
tology, which can be retrieved from [7], together with a co-
innovation platform.
•
Related work on ontologies for collaborative product
development and (smart) textiles (Section II)
•
Deﬁning an Ontology as common language to describe
the modules and diverse knowledge areas of smart
textile domain (Section III)
•
Validation (Section IV) and implementation on a co-
innovation platform called GeniusTex (Section V)
II.
RELATED WORK
Product and process development needs to handle a de-
mand for shortened and more efﬁcient development cycles
despite higher product complexity [8]. Modularization is an
established method to handle the complexity of product de-
velopment and production processes by dividing the product
into modules with clearly deﬁned interfaces and relationships.
This structured representation of the product enables both
parallel development of modules, as well as reusing previously
developed modules in new products [9]. Plus, a modular
product concept simpliﬁes collaborative development projects
that involve different players along the value chain. While
this has been the standard approach for collaborating both
in development and production for industries like automo-
tive, where Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and
suppliers are highly integrated, it has not been adopted yet
in the textiles domain [10]. Small and Medium Enterprises
(SMEs) lack the integrated supply chain, especially to cover
both textile, electronics and software components required for
smart textiles.
Knowledge management and information sharing across all
parties involved has been identiﬁed as a crucial prerequisite
for successful development processes [11] [12]. Ontologies
are one concept to support this by acting as a ”common
language” between modules and parties involved in PDP. An
ontology has been deﬁned by Gruber [13] as a formal, explicit
speciﬁcation of a shared conceptualisation. Ontologies support
knowledge management by structuring knowledge domains
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

into classes with properties and relations, thus allowing for
searches and processes to be deﬁned along the structures [10].
Since ontologies can be expanded, adapted and merged, they
can support knowledge domains subject to changes in techno-
logical advances [14].
A. Ontologies enabling collaboration along the value chain
The use of ontologies to support the PDP has been
described in literature for various knowledge domains, for
instance to promote knowledge integration and sharing [12].
In addition to the mere provision of knowledge, ontologies
can also enable decision-support in the PDP, e. g. by auto-
matically ﬁnding previously developed modules or documents
with high similarity to the current product speciﬁcation [15],
or suggesting new combinations of prior modules into new
products [16]. Moreover, ontologies have been applied with
a focus on collaboration and co-innovation. The collaborative
product innovation network by Song et al. applies ontology
based knowledge integration to reduce the development time
of a water heater [17]. To integrate knowledge across different
players along an aviation development process, Li et al. merge
and map local ontologies into a global ontology for knowledge
sharing [18].
B. Ontologies for Textiles
For textiles, there are few examples of structured knowl-
edge management using ontologies. A knowledge exchange
infrastructure has been proposed to promote collaboration [19]
and to support interoperability in the textile industry [10]. The
Textile chemical ontology focusses on hazardous and forbidden
chemicals for textiles, e. g. by formalizing standards like the
OEKO-TEX label [20]. While the VetiVoc ontology addresses
only the fashion domain rather than technical or smart textiles,
it gives an example how textiles can be modularized [21].
C. Ontologies for Smart Textiles and Services
In the domain of smart textiles and services, ontologies
have been applied mainly for integrating different data sources.
For example, sensor data collected by a wearable are combined
with historical health data and weather data for health care
services [22] or used to process wearable sensor data into spe-
ciﬁc human gestures [23]. The ontology-driven open reference
architecture and platform around services for elderly of the
project OASIS combines multiple measurements from smart
textiles for unobtrusive monitoring applications [24].
However, the idea of exploiting modularity to handle
the complexity of smart textile development processes has
been introduced for example by Schwarz et al. [25]. They
describe 6 functions of an intelligent textile system whose
interdependence needs to be accounted for during the PDP,
and which act as foundation for the functional components
of a smart textile introduced in Section III. Similarly, reusing
certain modules for multiple products is promising to reduce
time and costs of smart textiles development. The Simple Skin
project proposes textile building blocks where a conductive
fabric acts as foundation for various products and services [26].
The EASY-IMP project described the use of meta-products that
can be enhanced with different modules and services [27].
This research aims at exploiting the potential of ontologies
to support the PDP of smart textiles. To address their spe-
ciﬁc challenges and the gaps in previous research, the Smart
Textiles Ontology focuses on two objectives:
1)
structured and accessible knowledge base across the
smart textile domain
2)
enabler
of
collaborative
development
and
co-
innovation processes
III.
DEFINING THE SMART TEXTILES ONTOLOGY
The domain of smart textiles covers multiple areas, such as
textile materials, electronic components, as well as manifold
steps of the production process. Hence, an ontology for smart
textiles should cover these concepts and allow to express
interdependencies among them in order to direct development
projects. The scope of the ontology is determined by a set of
natural language competency questions that are expected to be
answered by the ontology in the end.
The smart textiles domain is described in modular structure,
looking at classes of processes, materials, and component
modules. Component modules include the functional parts that
make a textile smart (sensors, actuators), data processing, data
transmission and interconnection modules, as well as textile
carrier or substrate. The production processes cover joining,
separating, forming, handling and quality control. The focus
lies on the joining class, as it includes the critical processes
of integrating functional components to a textile carrier and
the contacting between different components. For all these
modules, properties and relations that describe the interde-
pendencies between materials, components and processes are
deﬁned. This allows for the codiﬁcation of domain knowledge
speciﬁc to smart textiles: e. g., the drapability and elasticity
of components is a critical property. While it is common to
account for this in textile processing, for developers with an
electronics background it is crucial to know this to select
both electronic components and technologies for handling and
integrating them accordingly.
A common challenge for any ontology development project
is the effective involvement of domain experts. Specialists in
related ﬁelds possess knowledge and skills that are indispens-
able for the construction of a domain ontology. Whereas they
neither have to be experts in ontology development nor in the
rather technical tools, the contributing knowledge engineers are
often no experts in the domain. To overcome this problem in
the GeniusTex project, the domain experts are provided with a
minimal knowledge acquisition template, which is familiar to
them. In this particular case, we use an Excel master document
for collecting the ontology elements. There, the domain experts
simply have to ﬁll in labels, deﬁnitions, and straightforward
references (e. g., superclass, domain, and range) for Classes,
Relations, Attributes, and Individuals. This still demands a
fundamental understanding of what an ontology is, but keeps
away the technicalities of developing an OWL ontology.
The actual ontology is automatically built by the eccenca
Ontology Pipeline based on the master document and the
conﬁgurations made by a supporting knowledge engineer. The
domain experts get immediate feedback in form of a valida-
tion report and an ontology visualisation (c. f. Section IV).
The eccenca ontology pipeline is integrated in a continuous
integration pipeline, which regenerates all relevant artifacts
on updating the master document. With each commit the
pipeline (1) generates an OWL ﬁle, (2) validates the ontology
ﬁle resulting in a validation report, (3) creates a correspond-
ing visualisation and (4) an ontology documentation. The
WIDOCO tool [28] is used in this setting. These artifacts
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

are immediately accessible to the editors (domain experts and
knowledge engineer), i. e., with each commit the contributors
get information whether the ontology was build successfully
and could be validated, as well as a visual representation.
According to the elements deﬁned by the domain experts, a
knowledge engineer solves particular ontological problems and
enforces best practices, e. g. mapping of external ontologies,
realising consistent structures and naming conventions. He also
deﬁnes example instance data which is used to validate the
ontology.
The GeniusTex Smart Textiles Ontology reuses concepts
from multiple external ontologies, such as
•
the Semantic Sensor Network Ontology (SSN) for the
description of sensor features [29],
•
the Ontology of Units of Measure 2.0 for represent-
ing units of measurement needed to describe sensor
features [30], whereas a number of very speciﬁc units
had to be replenished for the textile domain, as well
as
•
schema.org for general product aspects of individual
components, e. g. dimensions and price.
IV.
VALIDATION AND EVALUATION OF THE SMART
TEXTILES ONTOLOGY
To ensure an adequate level of quality throughout the ontol-
ogy development process, routines have been set up to check
for multiple validation constraints after each development step.
Finally, the Smart Textiles Ontology has been evaluated with
actual data.
A. Validation
During the ontology development, it is crucial to validate
the ontology after each development step in an automated
way in order to ﬁnd problems and quality issues fast. There
are several criteria to validate an ontology. Some of these
criteria can be checked fully automatically, such as syntactical
correctness, logical consistency, and the application of some
best practices. Other criteria demand judgement from experts
who have a certain domain knowledge. For example whether
the ontology is coherent to a common understanding of the
domain.
We are following this approach with a continuous integra-
tion ontology development pipeline, which generates reports
on each revision of the ontology. The aim is to evaluate and
report as many things a possible in an automated way. These
reports are played back to the domain experts who are obliged
to keep the ontology in a validated state with every change. The
eccenca Ontology Pipeline is based on a version control system
and a continuous-integration (CI) server. The build process and
integration tests are run automatically on the CI server when
a new commit has been made:
1)
The build process compiles the ontology from a
knowledge acquisition template and several conﬁg-
urable source ﬁles.
2)
An RDF parser (in this case, Apache Jena RIOT)
ensures syntactical correctness.
3)
An OWL reasoner (in this case, Pellet [31]) ensures
logical consistency.
Figure 1: Continuous Integration Workﬂow.
4)
RDFUnit [32] ensures a number of general best
practice requirements, which are deﬁned as tests in
form of SPARQL queries or SHACL shapes.
5)
OWL2DOT generates a visual representation of the
ontology elements (see Figure 2).
6)
WIDOCO
generates
an
ontology
documentation
HTML document explaining the ontology elements.
The overall workﬂow is depicted in Figure 1. The results
of all tests are collected as build artefacts on the CI server and
respective authors (committers) are automatically informed if
one of the tests fails. Furthermore, the generated documen-
tation allows domain experts to inspect the deﬁned elements
in order to spot problems and share the current state of the
ontology with colleagues. RDFUnit generates tests from the
involved ontologies and executes these tests on the ontology
deﬁnition and the optionally given instance data. The best
practice requirements that are currently conﬁgured are mainly
targeting documentation aspects, whereas it is desirable to
extend these in the future:
•
All deﬁned resources should have an rdf:type
•
All deﬁned resources should have at least one label
and a comment
•
All deﬁned resources should have different comments
in different languages
•
All deﬁned resources should have a label different
from its comment
•
All labels and comments must not contain todo, foo,
bar, lorem or ipsum
•
Two deﬁned resources should not have the same
comment
•
Two deﬁned resources should not have the same label
•
All resources deﬁned by an ontology should be pre-
ﬁxed with the ontology URI and link this ontology
with rdfs:isDeﬁnedBy
•
All ontologies should state their preferred namespace
preﬁx
•
All ontologies should state their preferred namespace
matching their URI
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

Figure 2: A visual representation of the Smart Textiles Ontology.
•
All ontologies should have a version info
By adhering to these concepts, it can be made sure that the
ontology remains valid and operational during its development
cycle. Secondly, it leads to a more consistent development in
general and an overall quality improvement.
B. Evaluation
In order to evaluate the Smart Textiles Ontology, a graph
had to be populated with respective A-Box data. This has
been done based on actual data on smart textile components
along two example products (smart orthosis, smart wristband)
as it occurred in the project. The data has been transformed
to RDF using eccenca’s Corporate Memory data integration
capabilities. While doing so, the resulting triples have been
continuously validated against the ontology.
For evaluating the ontology, 27 (out of originally 35)
competency questions have been translated to SPARQL queries
and ﬁnally executed on our knowledge graph. The questions
have been collected at the beginning of the project, so that
eight questions were not covered by the ontology in the end,
mainly due to data gaps (e. g., CQ 3.4 Which companies can
create a prototype with SMD (surface mounted device)?) or an
no further pursued meta-level (e. g., CQ 3.7 What is generally
required for approval of a smart textile?).
An example query for CQ 2.11 Which actuators, which
emit light or acoustic signals, are smaller than 20x20x3mm?
can be seen in Listing 1, it ﬁlters actuators by their signal
type and physical dimensions. Since for all dimensions the
millimetre unit is used, it has been neglected here (c. f.
Section VI-A).
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

Figure 3: The collaborative GeniusTex Idea Conﬁgurator.
Listing 1: Query
<SELECT ∗ WHERE {
? a c t
a
gt : Actuator
;
gt : hasSignalType
? s i g n a l
;
schema : depth
[ schema : value
?d ]
;
schema : width
[ schema : value
?w]
;
schema : h e i g h t
[ schema : value
?h ]
.
FILTER (? s i g n a l = gt : o p t i c s i g n a l
| |
? s i g n a l = gt : a c u s t i c s i g n a l )
FILTER (? d <= 20 && ?w <= 20 && ?h <= 3)
}
V.
IMPLEMENTATION ON GENIUSTEX - CURRENT
INFRASTRUCTURE
Beyond the modularization of smart textile products, ser-
vices and processes with the Smart Textiles Ontology, Ge-
niusTex addresses the challenges of the smart textiles PDP
with an open innovation platform. The platform enhances
the PDP along the smart textile value chain by enabling
all involved stakeholders such as manufacturers, suppliers,
service-providers, and end-users to connect, collaborate, ideate,
and develop innovate business models. Main features of the
GeniusTex platform are the import of ontology-based product
data and its semantic representation, intelligent search to ﬁnd
and order relevant and compatible smart textile products,
ideas browsing and collaborative idea conﬁguration as well as
information sharing in protected workspaces to generate new
knowledge with experts and end-users.
Figure 3 shows the shared idea “Insole Tracking”. The
three idea members can collaboratively build the idea by
deﬁning the properties that are relevant for the perspective
smart textile product. In this example, authors are interested
in smart products with the TRL 9 (highest level of technology
readiness), which have to be machine washable, are designed
for skin-contact, and conforms to Oekotex Standard 100.
GeniusTex ﬁnds twenty results that match the conﬁguration.
Idea members can browse the results, ﬁnd detailed product
information and order suitable products. Moreover, users can
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

publish the idea to the GeniusTex community with intend to
ﬁnd and discuss with other experts. GeniusTex platform users
get notiﬁed of the published idea and can ask for joining the
PDP.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The application of an ontology has been proven as an
eligible common language in the multi-disciplinary ﬁeld of
smart textile development. The steep learning curve that comes
along the ”ontological overhead” faced by many domain ex-
perts confronted with an ontology development project, could
be obviated by providing them familiar tools and immediate
feedback mechanisms. Nevertheless, some decisions have to
be made by knowledge engineers who are aware of the
technological pitfalls.
A. Learnings: success factors for applying the Smart Textiles
Ontology
When creating the Smart Textiles Ontology, a number of
existing concepts from external ontologies have been reused,
which is in particular helpful for compatibility reasons. Nev-
ertheless, we experienced some issues which are generally
unresolved: There are plenty of ways, but no standard pattern
to represent measurements and physical quantities in RDF,
i. e. values with well-deﬁned units. We decided to go for
schema.org’s PropertyValue pattern, mainly because it
supports values and value ranges along with units of measure-
ments, for which the Ontology of units of Measure (OM) is
used. While this approach allows to explicitly express values,
it became apparent that it is on the other hand intricate to write
queries for that model. Furthermore, it would actually be nec-
essary to convert units of measurement during the query pro-
cess to compare between measurements using different units,
e. g. as suggested by Lefrancois using Custom Datatypes [33].
To really beneﬁt from this variety of representation possibilities
it would be beneﬁcial to have the ability to transform between
standard representations. Likewise, even though multiple on-
tologies for units of measurement exist, none is fully covering
units from all domains [34]. Consequently, a number of units
for the textile domain were added to the OM ontology.
B. Outlook: Internationalising and broadening the functional-
ities of GeniusTex
The Smart Textiles Ontology and its implementation on the
GeniusTex platform help to streamline smart textile product
and process development. So far, it has enabled three co-
innovative development projects across different application
areas: a smart orthosis, a smart wristband, and a connected
pillow. To better support future projects, further functionalities
have been identiﬁed, such as the link to broader product
databases, modelling of complex inter-dependencies and rules
within the ontology and improving search and recommendation
functions based on this. Moreover, the internationalisation of
the ontology and the platform is a next step. To ensure both
platform architecture and its structured language are globally
accessible, workshops with partners from different linguistic
backgrounds, e. g. from South Korea, are conducted.
Finally, the platform-based development approach enabled
by an ontology is applicable beyond the smart textiles domain.
It is relevant whenever interdisciplinary domain knowledge
from suppliers, manufacturers and service providers from
different industries needs to be combined to create innovative
connected products and services.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has been supported by the Federal Ministry
of Economic Affairs and Energy of Germany for the project
GeniusTex as part of the strategic projects for ”Smart Service
Welt”. The consortium consists of Fraunhofer FIT, Inﬁneon
Technologies AG, ASYS Group, ottobock GmbH, Technology
and Innovation Management Group at RWTH Aachen and is
lead by Institute of Textile Technology (ITA) at RWTH Aachen
University.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Gehrke, V. Tenner, V. Lutz, D. Schmelzeisen, and T. Gries, Smart
Textiles Production: Overview of Materials, Sensor and Production
Technologies for Industrial Smart Textiles.
MDPI, 2019.
[2]
CEN European Committee for Standardization, “Textilien und textile
produkte - intelligente textilien - deﬁnitionen, klassiﬁzierung, anwen-
dungen und normungsbedarf,” Berlin, 2012.
[3]
O. D¨ohne, “Endlich wieder oberwasser: Technische und smarte tex-
tilien,” Markets International, Berlin, 2018.
[4]
T. Kirstein, Ed., Multidisciplinary know-how for smart textiles devel-
opers, ser. Woodhead publishing series in textiles, 2042-0803.
Oxford
and Philadelphia: Woodhead Pub, 2013, vol. no. 139.
[5]
A. Lymberis, “Smart wearables reﬂection and orientation paper: Digital
industry competitive electronics industry,” 2017.
[6]
A. Garlinska and A. R¨opert, “Technology management and innovation
strategies in the development of smart textiles,” in Multidisciplinary
Know-How for Smart-Textiles Developers.
Elsevier, 2013, pp. 369–
398.
[7]
I. Gehrke, M. Knuth, and S. Tramp, “Geniustex - smart textiles ontol-
ogy,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://vocab.eccenca.com/geniustex/
[8]
A. Grifﬁn, “The effect of project and process characteristics on product
development cycle time,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 34, no. 1,
pp. 24–35, 1997.
[9]
J. G¨opfert, “Modularisierung von technik und organisation in der pro-
duktentwicklung,” in Modulare Produktentwicklung.
Springer, 1998,
pp. 59–203.
[10]
A. Duque, C. Campos, E. Jim´enez-Ruiz, and R. Chalmeta, “An onto-
logical solution to support interoperability in the textile industry,” in
IFIP-International Workshop on Enterprise Interoperability.
Springer,
2009, pp. 38–51.
[11]
A. L. Szejka, O. C. J´unior, E. R. Loures, H. Panetto, and A. Aubry,
“Proposal of a model-driven ontology for product development process
interoperability and information sharing,” in Product Lifecycle Man-
agement for Digital Transformation of Industries, R. Harik, L. Rivest,
A. Bernard, B. Eynard, and A. Bouras, Eds.
Cham: Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2016, pp. 158–168.
[12]
Z. Y. Wu, X. G. Ming, L. N. He, M. Li, and X. Z. Li, “Knowledge in-
tegration and sharing for complex product development,” International
Journal of Production Research, vol. 52, no. 21, pp. 6296–6313, 2014.
[13]
T. R. Gruber, “A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁca-
tions,” Knowledge acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 199–220, 1993.
[14]
A. Petrovan, M. Lobontiu, G. Lobontiu, and S. R. Nagy, “Overview on
equipment development ontology,” Applied Mechanics and Materials,
vol. 657, pp. 1066–1070, 2014.
[15]
T. Liu, H. Wang, and Y. He, “Intelligent knowledge recommending
approach for new product development based on workﬂow context
matching,” Concurrent Engineering, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 318–329, 2016.
[16]
O. Matei and D. Contras, “Automated product design and development
using evolutionary ontology,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence Perspectives in
Intelligent Systems.
Springer, 2016, pp. 47–57.
[17]
W. Song, X. Ming, and P. Wang, “Collaborative product innovation net-
work: Status review, framework, and technology solutions,” Concurrent
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 55–64, 2013.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

[18]
X. Li, Z. Wu, M. Goh, and S. Qiu, “Ontological knowledge integration
and sharing for collaborative product development,” International Jour-
nal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 275–288,
2018.
[19]
P. de Sabbata, N. Gessa, G. D’Agosta, M. Busanelli, C. Novelli, and G.-
A. Kartsounis, “Knowledge exchange infrastructure to support extended
smart garment organizations,” Transforming Clothing Production into
a Demand Driven, Knowledgebased High Tech Industry, the Leapfrog
Paradigm, 2009.
[20]
C. P. Ferrero, E. Lloret, and M. Palomar, “Towards the design of a textile
chemical ontology,” International Journal of Advanced Computer Sci-
ence and Applications, Special Issue on Natural Language Processing,
pp. 35–41, 2014.
[21]
X. Aim´e, S. Georges, and J. Hornung, “Vetivoc: a modular ontology for
the fashion, textile, and clothing domain,” Applied ontology, 10 2015.
[22]
J. Kim, J. Kim, D. Lee, and K.-Y. Chung, “Ontology driven interactive
healthcare with wearable sensors,” Multimedia Tools and Applications,
vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 827–841, 2014.
[23]
L. Xin, W. Xue-fen, and Z. Tao, Eds., An e-Textile human gesture
ontology model: 2011 4th International Congress on Image and Signal
Processing, vol. 3, 2011.
[24]
G. Pioggia, G. Ricci, S. Bonﬁglio, E. Bekiaris, G. Siciliano, and
D. De Rossi, Eds., An Ontology-Driven Multisensorial Platform to
Enable Unobtrusive Human Monitoring and Independent Living: 2009
Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and
Applications, 2009.
[25]
A. Schwarz, L. van Langenhove, P. Guermonprez, and D. Deguillemont,
“A roadmap on smart textiles,” Textile Progress, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 99–
180, 2010.
[26]
J. Cheng, B. Zhou, P. Lukowicz, F. Seoane, M. Varga, A. Mehmann,
P. Chabrecek, W. Gaschler, K. Goenner, and H. Horter, “Textile building
blocks: Toward simple, modularized, and standardized smart textile,” in
Smart Textiles, S. Schneegass, Ed.
Springer, 2017, pp. 303–331.
[27]
D. Stricker, “Easy-imp collaborative development of intelligent wear-
able meta-products in the cloud: Schlussbericht; f¨orderkennzeichen fp7-
nmp 609078.”
[28]
D. Garijo, “Widoco: A wizard for documenting ontologies.” in Inter-
national Semantic Web Conference (2), ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, C. d’Amato, M. Fernndez, V. A. M. Tamma, F. Lcu, P. Cudr-
Mauroux, J. F. Sequeda, C. Lange, and J. Heﬂin, Eds., vol. 10588.
Springer, 2017, pp. 94–102.
[29]
R.
Atkinson,
R.
Garca-Castro,
J.
Lieberman,
and
C.
Stadler,
“Semantic
sensor
network
ontology,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/
[30]
H. Rijgersberg, “Om - ontology of units of measure,” 2013. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/HajoRijgersberg/OM
[31]
“Pellet: An open source owl dl reasoner for java,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/stardog-union/pellet
[32]
D. Kontokostas, P. Westphal, S. Auer, S. Hellmann, J. Lehmann,
R. Cornelissen, and A. Zaveri, “Test-driven evaluation of linked data
quality,” in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World
Wide Web, ser. WWW ’14. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee, 2014, pp. 747–758.
[33]
M. Lefranois and A. Zimmermann, “Supporting arbitrary custom
datatypes in rdf and sparql.” in ESWC, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, H. Sack, E. Blomqvist, M. d’Aquin, C. Ghidini, S. P. Ponzetto,
and C. Lange, Eds., vol. 9678.
Springer, 2016, pp. 371–386.
[34]
J. M. Keil and S. Schindler, “Comparison and evaluation of ontologies
for units of measurement.” Semantic Web, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 33–51,
2019.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-775-7
ALLDATA 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

