iTweet about #Privacy 
Mapping Privacy Frames in Twitter Conversation 
 
Federica Fornaciari 
Department of Arts and Humanities  
National University 
La Jolla, CA, USA 
e-mail: ffornaciari@nu.edu 
 
 
Abstract— Adopting a pragmatic bottom-up approach, the 
current study applies semantic network analysis and discourse 
analysis to unfold individual frames of privacy emerging in 
Twitter. To do so, the author collected and analyzed 100,000 
publicly available Tweets selected using the word “privacy.” 
The following two overarching questions guided the study: 
What are the frames that emerge in relation to privacy on 
Twitter? How are these frames discussed? Through a mixed 
method approach, the author identified the following nine 
frames of privacy: Privacy and Technology, Personal Privacy, 
Legal Privacy, Fundamental Privacy, Privacy Concerns, 
Spatial Privacy, Gossip, Trading Privacy, and Expected Flow 
of Information. The author also developed robust dictionaries 
to automate frame detection. In a future step, the author plans 
to use these dictionaries of privacy to analyze larger corpora of 
text and reach a meaningful understanding of how individuals 
frame privacy in everyday conversation. 
Keywords-network analysis; discourse analysis; framing 
theory; privacy; Twitter 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In a technologically driven communication environment, 
privacy is undoubtedly a major concern influencing how we 
share or withhold information – and how we think about 
personal data. Perhaps paradoxically, many voice their 
privacy concerns in rather public venues, such as social 
media. These public platforms facilitate researchers who 
wish to explore, unobtrusively, the textures and patterns of 
user’s casual discussions – and thereby observe how 
individuals understand and frame reality [1]. Based on the 
assumption that Twitter discussion mimics an online word-
of-mouth [2], the author suggests combining semantic 
network analysis and discourse analysis to explore the 
frames of privacy emerging on Twitter, and to develop 
dictionaries that facilitate frame detection. The results of 
such study begin to shed light upon how individuals discuss 
privacy in everyday conversation.  
Privacy is an increasingly relevant issue in today’s 
computing era. Currently, many individuals store personal 
data in the Cloud, a virtual data storage where users can 
archive and remotely access information [3]. For many, 
accessing the Internet and sharing information online has 
become a routine activity. Yet – partly due to the gained 
popularity 
of 
online-networked 
platforms 
– 
privacy 
increasingly becomes a concern for users who desire to 
protect their data. Belonging in this category of networked 
environments, social media too are platforms where users 
share information becoming potential victims of privacy 
loss. However, social media are also possible vehicles for 
discussing concerns and solutions related to privacy. 
Section two provides a short review of relevant literature 
to contextualize framing theory, semantic network analysis, 
and discourse analysis. Section three presents the research 
questions and describes the methodological approach 
adopted in the current study. Section four introduces some 
preliminary findings. Finally, section five discusses findings 
and limitations.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Framing theory 
Goffman [4] explained that individuals approach the 
complexity of reality developing or borrowing primary 
frames, or “schemata of interpretations,” based on abstract 
principles that organize, untangle, and simplify reality. 
Frames emerge through symbolic forms of expression and 
provide structures that enforce preferred interpretations of 
the social world. Frames may be individual or collective [5], 
and 
emerge 
within 
different 
occurrences 
of 
the 
communication process: the communicator, the text, the 
receiver, and the culture itself [6]. Available frames are 
either consciously recognized or unconsciously processed, 
often influencing how people understand, assess, remember 
and discuss issues [7].  
B. Semantic Network Analysis and Discourse Analysis  
Semantic network analysis is a specific type of 
automated content analysis that investigates text to explore 
the networks that emerge from the occurrences and co-
occurrences of concepts [8]. In such a way, semantic 
network analysis allows drawing conceptual maps as they 
emerge in text.  
Discourse analysis, on the other hand, is a qualitative 
process seeking to provide deeper explanation of meaning 
through the analysis of themes and patterns that emerge from 
texts [9] [10]. It also takes into account the role of context in 
developing the semantic networks of “privacy.” Such a 
qualitative approach may be used to strengthen the findings 
obtained in the quantitative steps of this research project.  
The current study combined quantitative semantic 
network analysis [11]–[13] with qualitative discourse 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

analysis [9] [10]. Such mixed method approach enabled the 
author to validate, contextualize, and strengthen the results 
obtained through each method of analysis [14]. 
III. 
METHOD AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
The current study is twofold. First, the author combined 
semantic network analysis and discourse analysis to map and 
explore the frames of privacy emerged in Twitter using a 
bottom-up approach [15]. Then, the author developed robust 
dictionaries to automate frame detection in large corpora of 
text. In a future step, the author plans to use these 
dictionaries to analyze larger samples of tweets and thereby 
develop a more robust understanding of existing individual 
frames 
of 
privacy, 
which 
refer 
to 
our 
cognitive 
understanding of privacy [4]. 
In the current study, the author analyzed 100,000 
publicly available tweets collected using the keyword 
“privacy” between July 1st 2016 and July 25th 2016 (the 
software HootSuite facilitated the collection of tweets). 
Considering the nature of the current study, the author did 
not distinguish between tweets and re-tweets, as both were 
considered equally useful and meaningful in frame 
implementation. After collection, the author used the 
software Automap [11] to generate frequency lists and begin 
the analysis.  
The following two overarching questions guided the 
study: 
RQ1 – What are the frames that emerge in relation to 
privacy on Twitter? 
RQ2 – How are these frames discussed? 
The quantitative analysis, implemented to address RQ1 
included three steps.  
To address RQ1, the author implemented several steps. 
First, the author imputed the tweets in the software Automap 
to generate frequency lists. This resulted in almost 10,000 
item recorded in a frequency list. Using Automap, the 
frequency list was refined by deleting non-content bearing 
elements such as articles, conjunctions, and other noise from 
the text [11].  
Second, the author manually processed the frequency list 
to qualitatively assess the contexts of use of each word. To 
undertake this second step, the author read and reread 
carefully the frequency list. During each reading, and 
informed by existing literature, the author added new themes 
as they emerged from the words in the list. For instance, 
keywords referring to legislations – such as the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and 
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) 
were included in a “legal privacy” dictionary.  
As a result, the author developed lists of recurring terms 
and expressions, and clustered these into overarching sub-
themes and groups that co-occurred with the word “privacy” 
in Twitter conversation. The words in the frequency list were 
sorted into 40 sub-themes. These themes were then 
combined into nine overarching frames including the 
following: privacy and technology, personal privacy, legal 
privacy, fundamental privacy, privacy concerns, spatial 
privacy, gossip, trading privacy, and expected flow of 
information. Each frame was subsequently analyzed through 
qualitative discourse analysis to allow a deeper, qualitative 
understanding of how privacy was discussed within each 
category. 
Third, the author and a coder manually processed the list 
of the frequencies and placed each word in the corresponding 
category. Agreement between the two researchers was then 
calculated to gauge the reliability of the third step. Intercoder 
reliability scored between .88 and .95 [16]. These three 
phases enabled the author to map the semantic networks of 
privacy as they emerged from the 100,000 tweets collected. 
It also allowed the author to start developing robust 
dictionaries of the individual frames of privacy.  
To address RQ2, the author used the keyword in the 
dictionaries to select sub-samples of tweets belonging in 
each theme emerged from the semantic network analysis. For 
example, the theme “privacy is a fundamental human right” 
emerged from words such as: human right, sacred, freedom, 
liberty, and universal. These keywords were used to retrieve 
a sub-sample of tweets from the original sample. Each sub-
sample consisted of 20 tweets randomly selected. The author 
further analyzed each sub-sample through discourse analysis 
to understand and clarify how each theme was discussed in 
the tweets. 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS 
After a preliminary analysis, eight frames emerged. The 
frames were labeled as follow: privacy and technology, 
personal 
privacy, 
privacy 
concerns, 
legal 
privacy, 
fundamental privacy, spatial privacy, gossip, and trading 
privacy.  
The frame “Privacy and Technology” implies that when 
new technology is introduced, new privacy concerns 
develop.  
“Personal Privacy” suggests that privacy is related to 
sociality, social roles, relationships, and personal feelings. 
“Privacy Concerns” emerges from tweets suggesting that 
privacy infringements generate problems and that the 
tradeoff is often unfair.  
“Legal Privacy” emphasizes that the government, 
regulations, contextual norms, permission, and transparency 
are fundamentally related to privacy.  
“Fundamental Privacy” emerges when users frame 
privacy as a fundamental human right suggesting that, as 
such, it should be protected.  
“Spatial Privacy” emerges in tweets that describe privacy 
in terms of access or boundary control.  
“Gossip” is implemented when users describe gossip as 
an invasion of someone’s privacy.  
Finally, “Trading Privacy” emerges when tweets focus 
upon the economic value of information, implying that 
personal data are commodities that can be stolen or sold. 
Table 1, in the next page, summarizes the eight frames 
identified providing examples of the dictionaries used for 
frame detection. It also delivers data on the cumulative 
frequencies to provide an overview of frame implementation 
in the sample analyzed. 
 
 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

 
 
TABLE I.  
CUMULATIVE FREQUENCIES OF FRAMES 
 
Frame 
Example of Keywords 
Cumul. 
Freq.  
Privacy and 
Technology 
Cellphone, Pokemon Go, 
Google, Facebook, cameras…  
 
81,812 
Personal 
Privacy 
Boyfriend, relationship, 
girlfriend, angry, annoying… 
51,697 
Privacy 
Concerns 
Data, concerns, dossiers, spy, 
cookie, surveillance, war, 
security 
35,232 
Legal Privacy 
Laws, setting, bill, banned, 
transparency, setting, court, 
Obama, permission, health, 
education… 
34,408 
Fundamental 
Privacy 
Right, need, important, respect, 
essential, hope, human... 
32,028 
Spatial 
Privacy  
Border, gates, space, location, 
bedroom, bar, wall, cars… 
12,719 
Gossip 
Paparazzi, famous, popstar, 
vanityfair, popularity… 
8,104 
Trading 
Privacy 
Business, consumers, property, 
buy, marketing, commercial 
5,822 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
In Twitter discussion, privacy surfaces as multifaceted 
and complex. Users discuss privacy as a social construct that 
entails a variety of components and perspectives.  
Not surprisingly “privacy and technology” was the most 
frequent frame adopted in Twitter discussion. People often 
express their concerns about personal data stored in 
networked environments, such as Facebook and Google. 
When voicing these concerns, users also criticize the 
obscurity and scarce usability of existing privacy policies. 
Strong privacy concerns are frequently channeled to new 
technologies such as face recognition software, drones, and 
Pokemon Go. These concerns develop a very typical pattern 
of reactions to the introduction of new technological devices 
that emerge as powerful, unexpected, and often intimidating 
due to their potential for information collection, processing, 
and shareability.  
Current research on social capital emphasizes that 
privacy is fundamentally related to publicity and sociality. In 
fact, needs for connection and sociality often encourage 
individuals to share personal information [17]. As a social 
media, Twitter could be considered a preferred platform for 
discussing the importance of relationships and sociality, and 
the risks that privacy infringement may cause in this respect. 
The high frequency of tweets referring to “personal privacy” 
reflects that privacy, sociality, and publicity meaningfully 
intersect in individuals’ frames of privacy as well. 
The predominance of the frame “legal privacy” 
emphasizes that Twitter users are often adopting a legal or 
ethical framework to understand and discuss privacy. They 
emphasize the role of government in the protection of 
privacy, while highlighting the role of contextual norms of 
information flow [18].  
As shown in the frequency of “fundamental privacy”, 
Twitter users understand privacy as a sacred and 
fundamental human right that should always be protected. 
Moving forward, the author believes that the frame “Gossip” 
should be included as a sub-theme of “fundamental privacy.” 
In fact, the frame “gossip” suggests that celebrities are 
human beings and – as such – deserve privacy. 
Due to the nature of the current contribution (i.e., short 
paper), the author emphasizes the need to further refine the 
methodology and to more closely interpret the findings. 
Moving forward, the author intends to use software for 
Natural Language Processing such as Nooj [19] in order to 
automatically distinguish between orthographical sequences 
of letters and relevant linguistic units. Moreover, the author 
will use the dictionaries of privacy developed during the 
current study to facilitate extracting semantic information 
from text [as suggested in 20]. The dictionaries will prove 
particularly useful in analyzing tweets collected over a 
longer and therefore more representative timeframe. Despite 
its limitation, the author believes that the current study 
provides valuable toolkits to automate the detection of 
individual frames of privacy in Twitter conversation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Jalal, and M. Zaidieh, “The use of social networking in 
education: Challenges and opportunities,” World of Computer 
Science and Information Technology Journal, vol. 2, pp. 18-
21, 2012. 
[2] B. J. Jansen, M. Zhang, K. Sobel, and A. Chowdury, “Twitter 
power: Tweets as electronic word of mouth,” Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
vol. 60,pp.  2169–2188, 2009. 
[3] E. A. Aldakheel, “A Cloud Computing Framework for 
Computer Science,” Education. Master's Thesis, Bowling 
Green State University, United State of America, 2011. 
[4] E. Goffman, “Frame analysis: An essay in the organization of 
experience,” Northeastern University Press, Boston, 1974. 
[5] S. D. Reese, “Prologue: Framing public life, a bridging model 
for media research,” in Reese, S.D, Gandy, O.H., and Grant, 
A.E. (Eds.), Framing public life: Perspectives on media and 
our understanding of the social world, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 
2001. 
[6] Z. Papacharissi and M. de Fatima Oliveira, “News Frames 
Terrorism: A Comparative Analysis of Frames Employed in 
Terrorism Coverage in U.S. and U.K. Newspapers,” The 
International Journal of Press/Politics, vol. 13, pp. 52–74, 
January 2008. 
[7] W. Gamson, and A. Modigliani, “Media discourse and public 
opinion on nuclear power,” American Journal of Sociology, 
vol. 95, pp. 1-37, 1989. 
[8] W. van Atteveldt, J. Kleinnijenhuis, and N. Ruigrok, 
“Parsing, semantic networks, and political authority using 
syntactic analysis to extract semantic relations from Dutch 
newspaper articles,” Political Analysis, vol. 16, pp. 428–446, 
October 2008. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

[9] N. Fairclough, “Critical analysis of media discourse,” in: 
Marris, P., Thornham, S., (Eds.), Media studies. New York 
University Press, New York, pp. 308–325, 2000.  
[10] T. vanDijk, “The study of discourse,” in: Treun A., van Dijk 
(Eds.), Discourse as structure and process. Sage, London, pp. 
1-34, 1997. 
[11] K. M. Carley, D. Columbus, and A. Azoulay, “Automap 
user’s guide 2012,” CASOS technical report Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, PA, 2012. 
[12] A. E. Smith and M. S. Humphreys, “Evaluation of 
unsupervised semantic mapping of natural language with 
Leximancer concept mapping,” Behavior Research Methods, 
vol. 38, pp. 262–279, 2006. 
[13] M. Stubbs, “Text and Corpus Analysis,” Computer-Assisted 
Studies of Language and Culture. Cambridge, MA, 
Blackwell, 1996. 
[14] A. Tashakkori, and C. Teddlie, “Handbook of mixed methods 
in social and behavioral research.” Thousand Oaks, CA:  
Sage, 2003. 
[15] D. J. Solove, “Conceptualizing privacy,” California Law 
Review, pp. 1087–1155, 2002. 
[16] W. Perreault, and L. Leigh, “Reliability of nominal data based 
on qualitative judgments,” Journal of Marketing Research,  
vol. 26, pp. 135–148, 1989. 
[17] N. B. Ellison, J. Vitak, C. Steinfield, R. Gray, and  C. Lampe, 
“Negotiating privacy concerns and social capital needs in a 
social media environment,” in Trepte, S. and Reinecke, L. 
(eds.) Privacy Online, Berlin: Heidelberg, 2011.  
[18] H. Nissenbaum, “Privacy in context. technology, policy, and 
the integrity of social life,” Stanford: Stanford Law Books, 
2010. 
[19] M. Monteleone, and S. Vietri, “The NooJ English dictionary. 
Formalising natural languages with NooJ 2013,” Selected 
Papers from the NooJ 2013 International Conference, pp. 69-
84, 2014. 
[20] M. P. di Buono, A. Maisto, and D. Pelosi, “From linguistic 
resources to medical entity recognition: a supervised morpho-
syntactic approach,” The First International Conference on 
Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data 
(ALLDATA 2015), IARIA,  pp. 81-86, Apr. 2015. 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-552-4
ALLDATA 2017 : The Third International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes KESA 2017)

