Big Data for Demand Management Programs Designing for Colombia’s Industrial 
Sector 
 
 Jairo Pineda Agudelo, Sandra Ximena Carvajal Quintero, Daniela Valencia Lopez 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia 
Manizales, Colombia 
e-mails: {jpinedaa, sxcarvajalq, davalencialo}@unal.edu.co 
 
 
Abstract—Demand Management Programs is not a new 
concept; 
moreover, 
the 
key 
technologies 
for 
their 
implementation are already successful. However, Demand 
Management Programs applications in a worldwide context 
have been slow, especially in the industrial sector. Despite this, 
emerging countries like Colombia have great opportunities to 
internalize these policies in their energy planning and 
economic growth programs, so as to maximize their use as a 
tool integrated to energy markets. Demand Management 
Programs may allow to deal with the risks associated with 
system demand and to satisfy the reliability needs of an active 
and dynamic energy market. For this to take place, one should 
migrate to active and dynamic demand response, under 
reliability criteria based on the smart grid paradigm. This 
paper uses a big data analysis for planning industrial demand- 
management programs, based on the mechanisms and 
instruments of demand management and integration processes 
in smart grids.  
Keywords- All Data; Big Data; Demand Management 
Programs;  Industrial demand; Energy Efficiency; Open Data. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Global consumption of electricity has increased 45% 
since 1980 [1] and is projected to grow 70% by 2030; this is 
mainly due to growth in emerging countries like China and 
India [2]. Meanwhile, mature markets, such as North 
America, Europe and Japan will also face increasing 
demand and limited fossil resources [3].  
In Colombia, industrial demand is the largest consumer 
of electrical energy from fossil fuels [4] and this causes 
problems to the environment by greenhouse - gas emissions. 
The creation of methodologies to efficiently manage 
electricity consumption is internationally known as Demand 
Management Programs (DMP). DMP have environmental 
benefits, allow postponing investment in electricity 
infrastructure and increase electricity service coverage, 
because an efficient management increases transformers 
capability near the end user and improve voltage profiles 
[5].  
DMP design depends on the accuracy in predicting the 
power consumption behavior of the target demand [5]. The 
characterization of the demand allows a prediction that 
might ensure a balance between generation and demand in 
order to achieve a more efficient operation of the electrical 
power system. Therefore, it is possible to avoid cost 
overruns in the generation, transmission and distribution as 
well as a resources optimization by the trader that provides 
the end user with quality standard conditions [6].  
The objective of this research is to select industrial users 
to implement DMP in Colombia. Such response is estimated 
from data found in a virtual platform, since deregulated 
users have smart metering devices that send usage 
information via web to the network operator [7].  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes 
the proposed methodology, including response and 
analytical prediction, Section III presents the case study and 
Section IV summarizes the main conclusions and proposes 
future work. 
II. 
DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT AND BIG DATA 
ANALYTICS: OVERVIEW 
DMP have been implemented to achieve a better 
participation in demand compared to electrical market prices 
or the need to improve reliability levels of the electric power 
system. Participation of demand in DMP seeks to mitigate 
the constraints of power grid and yield economic benefits 
for stakeholders [8]. Historically, the possibility of 
increasing the efficiency of the system and the existing 
investment in generation and transmission of electricity has 
been the key to the introduction of DMP [9]. 
DMPs in mature markets, like USA and Europe, show 
consumption reductions up to 40% in peak hours and a 
reduction in the need for generation reserve up to 50% [8]. 
The effectiveness of DMPs in USA and Europe is due to 
their technology implementation, which allows them to 
exert active demand control [9]. In the regulation, they have 
also incorporated various DMPs, which are based on studies 
of user’s behavior and habits with assistance of 
methodologies related to Analytics. 
Latin America has slowly begun integrating policies 
related to the efficient use of energy and the integration of 
demand management programs in residential, commercial 
and industrial sectors. Chile, Brazil and Colombia have been 
referring to the region for the implementation of innovative 
energy policies. 
Particularly, in Colombia, there are initiatives that allow, 
in some way, implementation of some basic concepts about 
the possibilities of managing electricity demand in energy 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

markets; such initiatives are advances in demand 
management in the country, although not are demand 
management programs. Among these initiatives there are 
the hourly pricing for the case of industrial demand and the 
recent decision of the regulator regarding contracts load 
shedding, disconnecting Voluntary Demand [10], as well as 
Law 1715 2014 [11], which considers the participation in 
energy efficiency, including renewable energy. 
However, ignorance of the laws and regulations, as well 
as the lack of adequate human and financial resources, plus 
the difficulty of designing realistic and clear goals with 
measurable results, makes it difficult to quantify the 
potential benefits of these policies [12]. 
Currently, Colombia has data provided by concentrators 
of measurements, but no studies have been developed based 
on this information. A next step is to exploit the billions of 
data rows to work on transforming useful knowledge in 
order to provide answers to operational and market issues 
with active participation of demand [13]. 
The active participation of demand refers to the study of 
the users consumption behavior and the changes in those 
habits regarding tariff incentives that may include hourly-
based price discrimination on a daily basis and by use 
periods [14][15]. 
The relation between the study of the target demand 
active participation and the regulatory incentives that can be 
implemented is the basis for the design of possible 
successful DMPs. An analytics method that provides 
guidelines on the best conditions for the development of 
DMPs is necessary to determine such information from data 
obtained by the meters [16]. 
Big Data Analytics is the application of advanced 
analytics techniques to operate on large data sets. Predictive 
analytics, data mining, statistics and artificial intelligence 
are among these advanced data analytics to examine data 
[16].  
The management of such tools to analyze giant datasets 
requires identifying, combining and managing multiple data 
sources, and the ability to build advanced analytics models 
for the prediction and optimization of results. The most 
critical component is related to the ability to transform the 
passive contribution of energy customers into an active 
contribution in real-time to achieve the purposes of DMPs 
for industrial users.  
The information demand for these smart grids involves 
the 
consumption 
quantification 
and 
characterization, 
including the study of clusters within industrial consumers 
to determine, for example, economic similarities in users 
with similar loads. This fits the broader definition of Big 
Data (large data or macro data according to Fundéu BBVA 
Foundation), since the meters owned by the unregulated 
user generate an avalanche of data that must be exploited to 
dramatically improve DMPs performance. According to 
Harvard Business Review [17], the evidence is clear:  
“decisions controlled by data tend to make better decisions”. 
Particularly, electrical system operating practices need to 
give greater emphasis to effective real-time operation with 
accurate and timely information and state-of-art technology 
to facilitate effective contingency planning. 
Currently, Management of system security needs to keep 
improving to maintain reliable electricity services in this 
more dynamic operating environment. The challenges raise 
fundamental issues for policymakers [18]. Big data 
promises to have success in to design energy policy, since 
the evidence is clear: decisions controlled by data tend to 
make better decisions.   
Along with this disruptive force associated with the data 
growth, data analysis has evolved into what is now known 
as the analytics, visualization and, in particular, data mining, 
from the traditional disciplines of statistical data analysis. It 
is actually a complement of tools caused by the evolution 
rather than a dilemma in terms of a break since the statistical 
criteria remain valid in the sense of preventing failed 
predictions to make Big Data in Big Data Winter. For 
Michael Jordan [19], this may be "Due to simple-minded 
and statistically unsound approaches which will produce too 
many false positives." 
True, the immense amount of data poses unprecedented 
challenges in terms of its analysis, due inter alia to 
qualitative change that implies an increase in the amount. 
However, a statistical point of view is essential as it 
contributes to consider the component of uncertainty in 
predictions and errors quantification. This is missing in 
much of the current literature of Machine Learning [19]. 
The massive data production growth in all modern 
society dimensions and the demand for prompt responses 
for decision-making is a powerful challenge for data 
scientists who are at risk of an inappropriate statistical 
coverage of their work and provide models with high 
randomized bias. Language pushed by the urgency of the 
decisions ends up being the result of what Douglas Merrill 
called the "button effect" [20], which refers to a simple 
expression of the pitfalls of chance and not sufficiently 
controlled in the model. "Button effect" occurs when surface 
data analyses are made and this causes erroneous results. In 
this paper, we propose to reiterate the rigorous use of Big 
Data tools to ensure correct results. 
The next step after data production is to focus on analysis 
in order to overcome the situation, as described by Graham 
Williams who suggests that we are very rich in data but very 
poor in information [21]. This concern coincides with IDC 
International Data Corporation, predictions for the year 
2017 [22], including the role of the CIO Chief Information 
Officer, that focus 80% of their time on analytics, cyber 
security and new revenue sources creation through digital 
services. This does not include recent cybersecurity issues 
and expanding revenue sources that, despite their 
importance, are not the subject of this article; the interest is 
to focus the discussion on the elements of Analytics and its 
benefit in DMPs for an industrial user. 
The study of time series originated in the periodic 
consumption data collection is the basis for the construction 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

of the demand curve, consumption modelling and demand 
prediction. Advanced analytics also offers the use of 
decision trees, neural networks and support vector machines 
to predict time series problems.  
The Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [23] appears to be the 
most used architecture of artificial neural networks for 
prediction of nonlinear time series. Forecasting electricity 
prices and demand are counted among its many 
applications. 
Autoregressive neural networks (ARNN) are obtained by 
considering the merging of a linear autoregressive model 
with an MLP [23]. Their initial conceptual development is 
based on the development of a statistical test for 
nonlinearity to compare the two previous models. However, 
ARNN is an important alternative to the use of MLP in 
predicting time series due to the incorporation of the linear 
autoregressive component [23]. 
Support Vector Machines (SVM) [24] are a type of 
neural network that was originally designed for the solution 
of nonlinear classification problems; but recently, they have 
been applied to time series regression and forecasting 
problems. This is due to their generalization features, which 
is a direct function of their structure and methodology used 
for their parameters estimation [24]. 
Similarly, it is possible to conduct a study of clusters 
based on the response to different price levels. This 
information is included as an objective in this first stage of 
the DMP and it is extremely important to have data 
available from open source like the traditionally so-called 
Open Data, more recently called Urban Data [25]. 
Subsequent claims are related to operations analysis and 
analytical applications. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
As mentioned before, the aim of this work is industrial 
demand. In Colombia, industrial demand is classified within 
the so-called unregulated users, i.e., those users with 
consumption above 0.1 MW. The current regulation allows 
them to purchase electricity at prices agreed freely [6], 
which usually causes reductions in kWh prices, compared to 
the price the residential user must pay for the same kWh 
[26].  
To access tariff privileges, industrial user must install a 
measuring system with telemetry capacity to determine the 
traded energy hourly [6]. This information is recorded in a 
web site via the Internet that can be accessed by the user 
later.  
The study was conducted in the west central area of 
Colombia and industry data pertaining to the metropolitan 
area corresponding to the municipalities of Manizales, 
Villamaría, Neira, Palestine, and Chinchiná were used.  
Unregulated users in that region were identified 
according to the operating company of the Colombian 
electricity system [27] in order to model and characterize 
the curve of daily demand. Consumption of industrial users 
will be used since the meters installed send this information 
to a web site. 
After a characterization of industrial users and knowing 
the main factors that influence their behavior, the next step 
is to create a DMP appropriate for users, which is crucial 
because of the change in demand by industrial activity. 
Another aspect that directly affects the development of a 
DMP is the knowledge that the end user has about the active 
participation benefits he gets. It is also important to know 
the law requirements and its participation in these programs 
and the technologies that will be used for remote controls 
and monitoring on consumption in real-time. 
This paper considers the influence of the type of activity 
within the industrial sector in the demand behavior to 
develop diversified demand graphs that allow observing a 
typical demand curve for selected industrial activities. 
Figure 1 shows the graphs of diversified demand 
corresponding to various activities of industrial production. 
The demand factor in a range of a distribution system or a 
load is the ratio between its peak demand in the range 
considered and the total installed load.  
The demand factor is a dimensionless number; therefore, 
peak demand and installed load must be considered in the 
same units, the demand factor is generally less than 1 and it 
will be unitary when, during the interval, all installed loads 
are operating at nominal power. Therefore, in the time 
intervals in which the demand profiles shown in Figure 1 
exceed the unity, industrial users are considered to be 
operating above 100% of permissible value for the electrical 
installation.  
Exceeding safe operating condition means overloading 
the electrical system of each user. Figure 1 shows that 
generally this behavior occurs about two standard hours, the 
first reflected at 8:00 when work activity begins, and the 
second can be seen at 16:00 before the end of the day.  
The generalized overload behavior at certain intervals 
causes widespread power quality problems [15] since the 
voltage supply is reduced and there are technical losses in 
the power system due to electrical current increase. These 
technical conditions result in economic losses for industrial 
users since electrical machines can reduce the production 
and their lifetime might decrease as well [15]. Additionally, 
Figure 1 shows the trend of stable consumption during the 
day with exceptions in the activity of cement and iron and 
steel, which have more marked valleys at 12m throughout 
the workday. In order to identify the fundamental reason of 
that behavior, it is necessary to have detailed knowledge 
about the production process development.  
Typical demand curves form the basis of statistical 
analysis for the corresponding decision-making in terms of 
DMP. They gather the consumption history of different 
industrial activities and allow defining the demand profiles 
through the statistical analysis methodology of time series. 
The description of such curves includes identifying the 
long-term trend in industrial use and its seasonal 
component, present in all of them, given the regularity of 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

energy consumption behavior, which is typical in any 
industrial activity, as deduced from visual analysis of 
Figure1.  
The input provided by the description of the curve 
displays the consumption through historical time in various 
industrial activities and, therefore, the proposals to manage 
demand. Table 1 shows an operation typology in which 
several criteria that must be clear at the time of initiating the 
process of analysis and data collection are identified. 
TABLE I      DIFFERENTIATING FACTORS IN OBTAINING DATA 
DEVELOPMENT 
CRITERIA 
OPTIONS 
User Type 
Regulated User  
Unregulated User  
Initiative by   
Power system operator  
Agents of the 
liberalized market 
Consumer type 
Low Voltage (small 
businesses and home 
users) 
High voltage (Industry 
and high trade) 
Obtaining 
information  
Installation of smart 
meters and creation of 
specialized software to 
gather information  
Telemetry devices 
owned by the user, to 
discriminate the value 
of consumption on an 
hourly basis  
The target population of this work has the features 
framed in column 3 of Table 1. Data collected from the 
target population are used to process first description and 
then forecasting, so that in the time horizon defined by 
operators and in accordance with industry, the curves are 
projected in time and therefore demand. Hence, it is possible 
to harmonize generation and consumption in relation to the 
forecasts provided by the data. Of course, it is always 
desirable to supplement the historical course provided by 
the demand curve with one related to the prospects for 
consumption in the short- and medium-term. The final 
model gathers past behaviors and the immediate prospects.  
The core of the Analytics of typical consummation 
demand curves is the Analysis of Time Series whose 
objective is to identify those components that are present to 
detect its causes and to predict future series values. Table II 
identifies the models for the four industrial activities. 
TABLE II      MODELS FOR THE FOUR INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES 
Economic 
Activity 
Exponential 
Smoothing (Brown) 
ARIMA (0,2,0) 
Chemical 
α = 0,844 
R square = 0,937 
Statistical Ljung-Box 
Q(18) = 18,22 (0,375) 
 
Food 
α = 0,796 
R square = 0,933 
Statistical Ljung-Box 
Q(18) = 7,936 (0,968) 
R square = 0,939 
Statistical Ljung-Box 
Q(18) = 7,936 (0,905) 
Drinks 
α = 0,924 
R square = 0,949 
Statistical Ljung-Box 
Q(18) = 13,005(0,736) 
R square = 0,955 
Statistical Ljung-Box 
Q(18) = 15,908 
(0,599) 
Plastics 
α = 0,864 
R square = 0,901 
Statistical Ljung-Box 
Q(18) = 9,455(0,925) 
R square = 0,935 
Statistical Ljung-Box 
Q(18) = 12,056 
(0,844) 
The models of exponential smoothing and ARIMA show 
similarities for the four activities, R square high and 
significant Statistical Ljung-Box Q [28] (SPSS V. 22) 
Analytics combines a statistical and an algorithmic 
modelling approach to build the basis of DMP. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Demand management programs, framed in the context of 
data analysis show great potential and a promising future, 
especially if it is possible to realize the benefits of demand 
modelling as a fundamental step in understanding industrial 
user behavior. This is important firstly to estimate the 
changes that might occur in the demand curves and secondly 
to assess the impact of these changes in the power system. 
At present, it is necessary to make a use of energy 
resources because of overall demand growth. Thus, sound 
knowledge 
about 
power 
consumption 
will 
have 
environmental and social impact. By acquiring knowledge, 
it is possible to transform the thinking of people for efficient 
use of energy. 
Industrial users have particular behaviors given their 
productive activity, which can be a downside for DMP 
design. However, this type of users is important because 
they can have more active participation in a DMP; they also 
have the resources and technology to provide the data to be 
analyzed.  
Data Analytics is the answer to the exponential growth of 
data that the industry acquires through remote sensing in 
order to provide management tools of power demand. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] “IEA International Energy Agency 1874-2014 Energy Policiy 
Highlight”, 
http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/energy_
policy_highlights_2013.pdf, [Accesed: Dec, 2014]. 
[2] “International 
Energy 
Agency 
Word 
Energy 
Outlook”,  
http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/factsheets/W
EO2013_Factsheets.pdf, [Accesed: Dec, 2014]. 
[3] “World Energy Investment Outlook”, International Energy Agency, 
http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/weio201
4.pdf, © OECD/IEA, [Accesed: Dec, 2014]. 
[4] B. Paola and C. Angela Ines,  “Benefits of Implementing a Demand 
Response Program in a Non-regulated Market in Colombia”, 
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT Latin America), 2011 
IEEE PES Conference on. October 2011. Medellín, Colombia. 
[5] K. Jungsuk and R. Ram, “Demand Response Targeting Using Big 
Data Analytics”, 2013 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, 
doi: 10.1109/BigData.2013.6691643, Oct 2013, Santa Clara, CA, 
USA. 
[6] Resolution 131 of 1998. Official Journal No 43.465 of December 31, 
1998. Comisión de Regulación de Energía y Gas (CREG). 
http:www.creg.gov.co,  [Accesed: Dec, 2014].. 
[7] L. M. Johanna, N. P. Phillip, K. Sila, and P. Mary Ann. “Quantifying 
Changes in Building Electricity Use, With Application to Demand 
Response”,  IEEE Transactions On Smart Grid, vol. 2, no. 3, 
September 2011, pp. 507-518. 
[8] J. M Victor and R. Hugh, “Design of demand response programs in 
emerging countries”, Power System Technology (POWERCON), 
2012 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

on  doi: 10.1109/PowerCon.2012.6401387, November 2012, Santiago 
de Chile, Chile. 
[9] C. Adela and L. Pedro, “Estimating the benefits of active demand 
management. Review of the state of art and proposals”, Economic 
Notebooks of ICE, ISSN 0210-2633, Nº 79, 2010  p.p. 187-212. 
[10] Resolution 063 de 2010. Official Journal No 47.700 of april 27, 2010. 
Comisión 
de 
Regulación 
de 
Energía 
y 
Gas 
(CREG). 
http:www.creg.gov.co,  March  20, 2015. 
[11] Law 1715 of 2014. “By regulating the integration of renewable 
energies non conventional of energy to the system national”, May 13, 
2014, Gobierno Nacional de la Republica de Colombia, Bogota, 
http://wsp.presidencia.gov.co/Normativa/Leyes/Documents/LEY%20
1715%20DEL%2013%20DE%20MAYO%20DE%202014.pdf, 
[Accesed: Mar, 2014]. 
[12] B. C. Paola, “Implementation of a program to the demand response 
for electric energy in an unregulated customers of market  in 
Colombia”, Rev. maest. derecho econ. Bogotá (Colombia) vol. 6, no. 
6, pp: 259-292, Dec 2010. 
[13] Schneider 
electric, 
Energy 
efficiency: 
Solutions 
Manual. 
http:www.schneiderelectric.es/.../eficiencia-energetica/eficiencia-
energetica, [Accesed: Dec, 2014].. 
[14] P. Jennifer. Analytics at SMUD evolve with the smart grid, Nov 4, 
2014, http://www.intelligentutility.com/article/14/11/analytics-smud-
evolve-smart-grid, [Accesed: Dec, 2014]. 
[15] I. Toshifiimi, H. Yusuke, and T. Kiichiro, “Definitions of Power 
Quality Levels and the Simplest Approach for Unbundled Power 
Quality Services”,  Ninth International Conference on Harmonics and 
Quality of Power Proceedings, vol  2, Oct 2000, doi: 
10.1109/ICHQP.2000.897711, Orlando-Florida. 
[16] J. A. Luis, “Big Data Analysis of large volumes of data in 
organizations”,  Alfaomega Marcombo Ediciones Técnicas, 2013 
[17] M. Andrew and B. Erik, “ Big Data: The Management Revolution” 
October, 
2012, 
https://hbr.org/2012/10/bigdatathemanagementrevolution/ar, 
[Accesed: Dec, 2014]. 
[18]  C. Q. Sandra, S. Jean, and A. Santiago, “Colombian ancillary 
services and international connections: Current weaknesses and 
policy challenges”, Energy Policy, vol 52, Jan 2013, pp 770–778, 
Special Section: Transition Pathways to a Low Carbon Economy, 
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.10.041. 
[19] J. Michel, ¨Big Data Winter ahead – unless we change course¨, By 
Gregory 
Piatetsky, 
Oct 
30, 
2014. , 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/2014/10/big-data-winter-ahead-unless-
we-change-course.html, [Accesed: Dec, 2014]. 
[20] Douglas M. “Careful with easy answers of Big Data”. HBR, August  
5, 2014. 
[21] W. Graham. “Data Mining with Rattle and R, The Art the Excavation 
Data for Knowledge Discovery”. Springer Use R!. New York 2011. 
[22] The 10 predictions of the CIO's agenda in the coming years, 
http://www.ticbeat.com/tecnologias/10-predicciones-agenda-cio-
proximos-anos-segun-idc/, October 31, 2014. 
[23] V. Juan, Z. Cristian, and V. Laura, “ARNN: A packages for time 
series forecasting using autoregressive neural networks” , Computer 
systems and informatics breakthrougs magazine, vol.8, no2, Jul 2011, 
Medellin-Colombia, ISSN 1657-7663. 
[24] V. Juan, O. Yris, and  F. Carlos, “Time series prediction using 
support 
vector 
machines”, 
Ingeniare. 
Rev. 
chil. 
ing. v.18 n.1 Arica abr. 2010, 
pp. 
64-75, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-33052010000100008. 
[25] B. Luciano, P. Kien, S. Claudio, R. V. Marcos, and F. Juliana. 
Structured Open Urban Data. Understanding the Landscape. BIG 
DATA, doi: 10.1089/big.2014.0020. [Accesed: Sep, 2014]. 
[26] Document CREG-138: Revision of the limit unregulated user of 
electricity power, December 2009. Comisión de Regulación de 
Energía y Gas (CREG). http:www.creg.gov.co, [Accesed: Mar, 
2015]. 
[27] Especialistas en mercado XM filial de ISA, “list of users not 
regulated 
by 
voltage 
levels”, 
http: 
http://www.xm.com.co/Pages/UsuariosNoReguladosporNivelesdeTen
sion.aspx , November 2014. 
[28] P.O. Hermelinda, Estadistics II, Exponential Smoothing (Brown), 
Chapter 5, tips models, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad 
Nacional 
de 
Colombia 
http://www.virtual.unal.edu.co/cursos/sedes/manizales/4030006/lecci
ones/capitulocinco/5_2_3.html, [Accesed: Mar, 2014]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Typical curves of electricity demand by economic activity of industrial users. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

