 
 
From Open Data to Linked Open Data 
The GIOCOnDa LOD platform 
 
Lorenzo Sommaruga, Nadia Catenazzi, Davide Bertacco, Riccardo Mazza  
Department of Innovative Technologies  
University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland (SUPSI) 
CH-6962 Lugano, Switzerland 
e-mail: lorenzo.sommaruga@supsi.ch 
nadia.catenazzi@supsi.ch  
davide.bertacco@supsi.ch 
riccardo.mazza@supsi.ch 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—In 
the 
context 
of 
the 
European 
project 
“GIOCOnDa”, this paper describes the conversion process 
from Open Data to Linked Open Data (LOD) and its 
implementation in the GIOCOnDa LOD platform. The 
platform contains a number of conversion configurations that 
allow different data sources from a variety of Open Data 
domains to be converted into LOD, without the need of 
software 
programming. 
In 
addition, 
the 
platform 
is 
configurable and extensible, as it enables to define mapping 
configurations for new datasets. 
Keywords-Linked Open Data (LOD); GIOCOnDa; OntoPia. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes the methodology and the conversion 
process from Open Data to Linked Open Data (LOD) 
implemented in the GIOCOnDa LOD platform in the context 
of the EU Interreg GIOCOnDa project (“Integrated and 
holistic management of the open data life cycle” [1]). 
This project, funded by the Interreg V-A Italy-
Switzerland Programme, aims to create value by developing 
information products based on the re-use of public Open 
Data. The project involves the creation of a federated 
platform for the publication of Linked Open Data by public 
administrations. In the GIOCOnDa LOD platform, open 
data, coming from various sources and in different formats, 
are converted into homogeneous Linked Open Data 
according to standard ontologies and published together with 
their metadata. The platform allows conversion of existing 
3* Open Data to 5* Open Data, according to the well-known 
5-star deployment scheme [2]: data are formalized in RDF, 
identified by URI and linked to other datasets. 
The project focuses on data from the Insubric area, a 
cross-border territory and community across Italy and 
Switzerland. According to the project specifications, data 
useful in the touristic sector are considered. These include 
data 
about 
museums, 
accommodation 
facilities 
and 
environmental data. The main data sources currently used 
include:  Regione Lombardia open data portal [3] and ARPA 
(Regional Agency for the Protection of the Environment) [4] 
for Italian data; Wikidata, Ticino Turismo [5] and OASI [6] 
for Swiss data. 
The GIOCOnDa LOD platform is mainly oriented to 
domain and ontology experts, who need to authenticate to 
operate in the platform to create and modify datasets. A 
public portal is also available, where the datasets produced in 
the 
LOD 
platform 
are 
made 
accessible. 
Public 
administrations can submit new datasets for conversion into 
LOD. 
This paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 the 
methodology adopted to publish LOD data is described; 
Section 3 is focused on the process of conversion of Open 
Data to LOD, one of the main steps of this methodology; 
finally, Section 4 clarifies how this process is implemented 
in the GIOCOnDa LOD platform. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY TO PUBLISH LINKED OPEN DATA 
The subject of Linked Open Data publishing has been 
widely discussed in literature (e.g., [7]) and different projects 
and platforms have been developed to support this process. 
One of the first significant projects is Lucero and the 
resulting Tabloid toolkit, which aims to help institutions and 
developers to publish and consume linked data [8]. Another 
interesting work, supporting US open government data 
production and consumption, is the TWC LOGD portal [9]. 
A workﬂow for linked open data deployment is defined, 
consisting of different stages, where the conversion process 
is automated by using the csv2rdf4lod tool. A more recent 
initiative is represented by the Italian cultural heritage 
platform “dati.beniculturali.it”, promoted by the Italian 
Ministry of Culture, which collects and publish standardized 
and interoperable LOD heterogenous datasets [10]. 
From a methodological point of view, a number of best 
practices, recommendations and guidelines have been 
produced. For example, Bauer and Kaltenböck [11] provide 
a step-by-step model, highlighting the most important issues 
that need to be taken into account in LOD publishing; W3C 
[12] presents best practices designed to facilitate LOD 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
development and delivery; the “Agenzia per l’Italia Digitale” 
[13] proposes a general methodological approach for the 
interoperable opening of public data through the LODs. This 
methodology basically consists of the following steps: 
selection of dataset, data cleaning, analysis and RDF 
modelling, 
enrichment, 
interlinking, 
validation 
and 
publication. 
The approach adopted in GIOCOnDa is in line with the 
above recommendations and in particular with the AGID 
guidelines. The selection of datasets was made on the basis 
of the results of a previous need analysis phase carried out in 
the project; as a starting point, data about museums, 
accommodation facilities and environment of the Insubric 
region are selected. 
Concerning data cleaning, it is assumed that the selected 
datasets are already published as “clean” open data, where a 
quality check is already accomplished. 
Once selected, datasets are deeply analyzed to understand 
their structure and appropriate ontologies and vocabularies 
are identified to model them. 
In particular, the adopted ontologies are taken from the 
OntoPia network [14], also presented in [15]. They include 
for instance the Cultural-ON ontology for museums and the 
ACCO ontology for accommodations. In the GIOCOnDa 
LOD platform, data are imported from different sources and 
converted into the RDF format, according to these standard 
ontologies. The conversion process is detailed in the next 
section. 
As additional steps, datasets are enriched with metadata 
and interlinked to other datasets. Metadata are added to the 
single datasets following the DCAT-AP standard. Interlinks 
are created to other datasets by identifying alignments and 
similarities between different datasets. For instance, a 
museum of the “Regione Lombardia” dataset can be declared 
“the same as” a museum described in Wikidata. The 
identification of interlinks is mainly carried out using the 
Silk software libraries [16]. 
Finally, datasets are published using Openlink Virtuoso 
Universal Server [17]; they can be queried through a 
SPARQL endpoint. 
III. 
THE CONVERSION PROCESS FROM OPEN DATA TO 
LOD IN THE GIOCONDA PLATFORM 
The core of the system lies in the mapping functionality 
of heterogenous data into linked open data, according to 
standard ontologies. 
This conversion is a complex process that depends on the 
initial format and on the final standard RDF format. From a 
literature study it emerges that the most frequently adopted 
approach is the implementation of ad-hoc middleware. For 
example, to convert a relational database to LOD, a typical 
solution is to use declarative languages, such as D2R [18] or 
R2RML [19] that require ontological and programming 
skills.  
In the GIOCOnDa LOD platform, the complexity of the 
conversion process is simplified by defining a converter, 
facilitated by a graphical user interface that an expert can use 
to configure the conversion. This process can be explained 
through a simple example: we would like to convert two 
different 
datasets 
about 
museums 
into 
a 
common 
interoperable format. The first dataset concerns Lombard 
museums retrieved from the Regione Lombardia portal in 
JSON format by means of REST APIs [20]. The second is 
represented by Tessin Canton museums retrieved from 
Wikidata through SPARQL queries. 
Figure 1 shows an excerpt of the Lombard museums 
visualized on the Regione Lombardia portal, while Figure 2 
shows an example of a Swiss museum in Wikidata [21]. 
To be able to configure the mapping from the original to 
LOD format, the structure of the two museum data sources 
has to be analyzed and an appropriate ontology selected. In 
this phase it is important to find the most appropriate 
ontology to model the domain. The Cultural-ON ontology 
[22] and its connected ontologies have been chosen because 
they are representative of the museum domain and can be 
exploited to support transnational interoperability. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Lombard museums from the Regione Lombardia Open Data 
portal 
 
 
Figure 2.  The Swiss Vela museum in Wikidata  
The next step consists of going through the different 
descriptive fields of the museum datasets: for instance, each 
Lombard museum is described in terms of 79 fields, such as 
denominazione museo (name), telefono (telephone), codice 
sede (site code) as shown in Figure 1. 
For each field, the objective is to find a match with the 
ontology classes and properties. For example, each museum 
could be represented as an instance of the cis:Museum class 
of the Cultural-ON ontology, where cis is the prefix of the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
ontology namespace; the telephone field can be mapped into 
a property of a smapit:OnlineContactPoint instance of the 
Social Media / Contact and Internet ontology [23].  
Figures 3 and 4 represent some result details of the 
conversion of a Lombard and a Tessin canton museum, 
respectively, in RDF Turtle, according to the Cultural-ON 
and the connected ontologies. In particular, in the excerpts, 
light blue highlights the hasSite relation to the Site instance, 
and yellow highlights the hasOnlineContactPoint relation to 
the ContactPoint instance with their respective properties. 
It is important to note that two museums, initially 
available in different formats, are finally described in a 
common interoperable RDF format. This translation process 
leads, in this case, to information loss because there is not a 
full correspondence between the initial format and the 
ontological one. The ontology contains more classes and 
properties than the original file format; on the other hand, it 
is not enough expressive to represent all fields of the original 
data sources. For instance, the number of visitors is not 
included in the Cultural-ON ontology. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Excerpt of the Lombard Museum of Science and Technology in 
RDF Turtle 
 
Figure 4.   Excerpt of The Swiss Vela museum in RFD Turtle 
In the conversion process, the mapping from the initial 
input data format to the final LOD format would need to be 
configured for each data source. This requires a deep 
knowledge of the OWL syntax, and understanding of the 
classes and datatype/object properties of the selected 
ontologies. 
To simplify the conversion process, an internal 
vocabulary was created, with the objective to describe in a 
homogeneous and simple way data coming from different 
sources, without knowing the details of the ontology and 
further separate the input from the output. The main 
advantage of having this vocabulary is to hide the 
complexity of the ontology in the mapping management. The 
internal vocabulary is organized in categories, that represent 
contexts or ontologies; each category contains classes; each 
class has a number of fields. For instance, to describe 
museums we have defined the museum Cultural-ON 
category; this category contains classes, such as museum and 
discipline, and fields, such as geographical coordinates. 
Thanks to the internal vocabulary, the conversion process 
is divided in two steps: 
• 
the conversion from the input data format to the 
internal vocabulary (input mapping) 
• 
the conversion from the internal vocabulary to the 
ontological LOD format (output mapping). 
Going back to the museum example, the two datasets, 
originally described in different formats and with different 
descriptive fields, are translated by means of the input 
mapping specifications into a common format, which is 
described by the internal vocabulary. The resulting datasets 
are then converted to the LOD format, according to a 
standard ontology, by means of the output mapping 
specification. This guarantees standardization and semantic 
interoperability. Figure 5 illustrates the process. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Two step conversion process: museum data example 
While it is necessary to configure the input mapping of 
each imported dataset towards the internal vocabulary, the 
output mapping of a specific category (e.g., museum) to the 
corresponding LOD format has to be configured only once. 
The first step can be accomplished by a user who knows the 
input format, the domain and the internal vocabulary, the 
second step requires a deep knowledge of the ontologies and 
of the OWL language. 
This mechanism, to convert Open Data to Linked Open 
Data based on two independent and configurable steps, is the 
peculiar feature of GIOCOnDa LOD platform compared to 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
other frameworks, which do not provide the flexibility and 
dynamic configurability required by the GIOCOnDa project. 
IV. 
GIOCONDA LOD PLATFORM 
The GIOCOnDa LOD platform [24], implemented as a 
Java based web application, provides different functionalities 
that enable the publication of LOD datasets starting from 
open datasets, and their visualization in a catalogue or in a 
map.  
The web app presents a menu consisting of different 
items: dataset catalogue, input mapping and output mapping.  
A. LOD Datasets 
The catalogue shows the list of the existing datasets, as 
shown in Figure 6, and enables the creation of a new LOD 
dataset by converting an existing open dataset on the basis of 
the input and output mapping configuration. The system 
supports dataset updates at regular intervals (e.g., for air 
quality measurements) and propagates the changes to the 
RDF representation. 
 
 
Figure 6.  LOD datasets catalogue 
 
By clicking on the “map view” button it is possible to 
visualize geo-locable data on the map as shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  LOD Datasets visualized in the map 
About 25 datasets about accommodation, museums and 
air quality have been boosted to LOD datasets through the 
GIOCOnDa platform, resulting as published LOD resources 
complaint to the selected ontologies and vocabularies. 
Concerning 
validation, 
the 
output 
mapping 
process 
guarantees by design and implementation that the produced 
datasets are serialized in RDF format conforming to each 
ontology. A further manual checking has been accomplished 
on some resources of each typology. 
B. Input Mapping 
The Input mapping concerns the configuration of the 
conversion from the input format to the internal vocabulary. 
Together with the output mapping it enables to configure the 
conversion from different input data sources to the final 
LOD format. 
In general, the system accepts input data retrieved from a 
number of sources in different formats, such as JSON, CSV 
and XML, and using different services, such as Rest APIs, 
SOAP APIs and SPARQL Queries. For each input format 
and service the conversion towards the internal vocabulary is 
configured through the input mapping. 
Figure 8 clarifies how the mapping mechanism works: 
the first column shows the fields of the original data source, 
the second and third columns concern the internal 
vocabulary, in particular the second identifies the category 
and the third the fields.  
Categories and fields of the internal vocabulary are 
predetermined and selected from a drop-down menu, while 
the input fields must be entered by hand, according to the 
data structure in use. 
In the example shown in Figure 8 we work with fields of 
the "Cultural-ON museums" category; the "email_sede" field 
of the initial source, representing the email of the museum 
site, for example, is mapped into the "email" field of the 
"museum Cultural-ON" category of the internal vocabulary. 
In some cases, it is possible to group multiple fields of the 
data source into a single field of the intermediate vocabulary; 
for example, to compose the field “full_address”, more fields 
of the input source are used. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Input mapping 
In this mapping, particular attention is dedicated to how 
the geospatial data are represented. This is essential to 
guarantee 
interoperability 
and 
efficient 
sharing 
of 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
information across different regions and national standards. 
The Cultural-ON ontology assumes, by default, that spatial 
data are represented in the geocentric Datum WGS84 and 
that the coordinates are expressed in terms of latitude and 
longitude. Therefore, data are transformed in this system 
when they are imported in the GIOCOnDA platform and 
appropriate metadata are added to make the Coordinate 
Reference System (CRS) explicit. 
C. Ouput Mapping 
From the output mapping page, it is possible to create, 
modify and extend the internal vocabulary and define its 
mapping to the ontology. This process requires a deep 
knowledge of ontological concepts and existing reference 
ontologies. Nevertheless, this mapping has to be done only 
once for each category by an expert. 
As already said, the internal vocabulary consists of 
several categories, similar to contexts or ontologies; each 
category contains classes, with associated a number of fields. 
Examples of categories include museums, addresses, 
accommodations, etc. 
As shown in Figure 9, the output mapping defines the 
match between internal vocabulary classes and ontology 
classes, and between fields of the internal vocabulary and 
object and datatype properties of the ontology; this is visible 
by activating the “Show fields” button. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Output mapping: class/field match 
It is worth noting that only categories and fields of the 
intermediate vocabulary defined in the output mapping can 
be used in the input mapping (but not classes), providing in 
this way a simplified version of the data structure for the 
non-expert user. 
A specific interlinking software has also been developed 
and integrated in the GIOCOnDa LOD platform. In order to 
boost a dataset to 5* level it is necessary to configure the 
interlinking and then activate it. The configuration is 
accomplished in the output mapping page where one or more 
interlinking files can be associated to each category. This file 
is generated using the SILK Link Specification Language 
and contains rules to create cross-reference links towards 
external datasets, such as Wikidata. The activation takes 
place in the datasets page, where it is possible to enable or 
disable interlinking on a specific dataset. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper has presented a platform that facilitates the 
process of conversion of open data to linked open data, by 
means of a visual interface, without the need of a specific 
software programming. Indeed, one of its main advantages is 
the reduction of complexity of a process that requires deep 
knowledge of ontologies and programming skills. The 
complexity of mapping existing data to standard ontologies 
is one of the major issues preventing a larger diffusion of 
LOD. 
The GIOCOnDa LOD platform contains a number of 
conversion configurations that allow different data sources to 
be converted to LOD in different domains. For instance, if a 
dataset has the same structure of an existing one (for 
example, a new dataset structured as the Lombard 
museums), the conversion is very simple, since the input 
mapping is very similar to an existing one and the output 
mapping is already defined. 
However, the platform is also flexible and extensible, and 
enables to import and convert other datasets: for example, 
the conversion to LOD of a new dataset about museums, 
with a structure that can be mappable to the existing internal 
vocabulary, only requires the configuration of the input 
mapping from the initial format to the internal vocabulary, 
because the output mapping is already configured. More 
labour-intensive but still possible is to convert a dataset with 
a new structure, not mappable on the existing internal 
vocabulary; for example, a new dataset about bike sharing. 
In this case, it is necessary to find an ontology that models 
the domain; to extend the internal vocabulary with a new 
category and define the mapping towards the ontology - this 
is configured in the output mapping; to define the mapping 
from the original data format to the internal vocabulary - this 
is configured in the input mapping. 
In addition to the conversion to LOD, another important 
step of the adopted methodology is the identification and 
creation of interlinks between datasets. A specific 
interlinking software has been developed to configure and 
activate the process of identification of cross-reference links 
towards external datasets. The integration of the interlinking 
module in the GIOCOnDa LOD platform enables lifting 
datasets to 5* level, creating added value through an Extract-
Transform-Load (ETL) pipeline. This has been demonstrated 
for instance in a showcase that presents data about museums 
of the Insubric region taken both from the GIOCOnDa LOD 
datasets and from Wikidata. 
In spite of the benefits offered by platform to publish 
LOD 
datasets 
(visual 
interface, 
configurability, 
extensibility), it also presents some limitations: the main one 
is the possibility of information loss during the conversion to 
LOD if there are fields not represented in the selected 
ontology. A possible solution is the extension of the selected 
ontologies with additional fields and the publication of the 
new version with appropriate documentation. 
Finally, the platform development is still in progress and 
some details need to be fully implemented or considered for 
future implementation, such as the validation process, 
inference and interlinking. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge the European Regional Development 
Fund, the Tessin Canton and the Swiss Confederation for the 
financial support provided to the project. We also 
acknowledge all the partners involved in the project for their 
contribution to the different project activities. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] GIOCOnDa, Integrated and holistic management of the Open 
Data life cycle (Gestione integrata e olistica del ciclo di vita 
degli Open Data) https://interreg-italiasvizzera.eu/progetti/ 
gioconda/ [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[2] Berners-Lee, Linked Data, http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/ 
LinkedData.html, 2009 [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[3] Open Data, Regione Lombardia, https://dati.lombardia.it 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[4] Arpa Lombardia, https://www.arpalombardia.it/ [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
[5] Ticino Turismo, https://www.ticino.ch [retrieved: March, 
2021]. 
[6] OASI, Osservatorio Ambientale della Svizzera italiana, 
https://www.oasi.ti.ch [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[7] T. Heath and C. Bizer, Linked Data: Evolving the Web into a 
Global Data Space, Synthesis Lectures on the Semantic Web: 
Theory and Technology, Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 
2011. 
[8] The Lucero Project, https://lucero-project.info/ [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
[9] L. Ding, T. Lebo, J. S. Erickson, D. DiFranzo, G. T. 
Williams, X. Li, J. Michaelis, A. Graves, J. G. Zheng, Z. 
Shangguan, J. Flores, D. L. McGuinness, J. A. Hendler, 
“TWC LOGD: A portal for linked open government data 
ecosystems”, Journal of Web Semantics, vol. 9(3), pp. 325-
333, 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.websem.2011.06.002. 
[10] Open Data e Linked Data, https://www.beniculturali.it/open-
data-e-linked-data [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[11] B. Florian and K. Martin, Linked Open Data: The Essentials - 
A Quick Start Guide for Decision Makers. Edition 
mono/monochrom, Vienna, Austria, 2012, ISBN: 978-3-
902796-05-9, 
http://www.semantic-web.at/LOD-TheEssentials.pdf 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[12] W3C, Best Practices for Publishing Linked Data, W3C 
Working 
Group 
Note 
09 
January 
2014, 
https://www.w3.org/TR/ld-bp/ [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[13] Agenzia per Italia Digitale, Guidelines for semantic 
interoperability through Linked Open Data (Linee Guida per 
Interoperabilità semantica attraverso i Linked Open Data), 
http://www.agid.gov.it/sites/default/files/documentazione_tras
parenza/cdc-spc-gdl6-
interoperabilitasemopendata_v2.0_0.pdf 
2012 
[retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
[14] Ontologie e Vocabolari Controllati, https://github.com/italia/ 
daf-ontologie-vocabolari-controllati [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[15] G. Lodi, “OntoPiA –The network of ontologies and controlled 
vocabularies for public admistration (OntoPIA - La rete di 
ontologie 
e 
vocabolari 
controllati 
per 
la 
pubblica 
amministrazione)”, Open Data Sicilia – raduno annuale, 9/10 
novembre 
2018, 
http://ods2018.opendatasicilia.it/presentazioni/Lodi-
OntoPiA.pdf, 2018 [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[16] Silk, 
The 
Linked 
Data 
Integration 
Framework. 
http://silkframework.org/ [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[17] Open 
Link 
Virtuoso, 
https://virtuoso.openlinksw.com 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[18] C. Bizer and R. Cyganiak, “D2R Server - Publishing 
Relational Databases on the Semantic Web”, 5th International 
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2006), Athens, USA, 
November 
2006, 
http://wifo5-03.informatik.uni-
mannheim.de/bizer/pub/Bizer-Cyganiak-D2R-Server-
ISWC2006.pdf, 2006 [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[19] R2ML: 
RDB 
to 
RDF 
Mapping 
Language 
https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[20] Musei 
riconosciuti 
da 
Regione 
Lombardia 
https://www.dati.lombardia.it/Cultura/Musei-riconosciuti-da-
Regione-Lombardia/3syc-54zf [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[21] Museo 
Vela 
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q3867651 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[22] Cultural-ON (Cultural ONtology): Cultural Institute/Site and 
Cultural Event Ontology, https://w3id.org/italia/onto/Cultural-
ON [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[23] Social Media / Contact and Internet ontology - Italian 
Application Profile https://w3id.org/italia/onto/SM [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
[24] GIOCOnDa 
LOD 
platform 
https://gioconda.supsi.ch/ 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-842-6
ALLDATA 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

