Visualizing Autonomous Warehouse Data Streams through User-Centered Design
Raghu Nayyar
Media Technology and Interaction
Design
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
Email: raghun@kth.se
Didem Gürdür
Department of Machine Design,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
Email: dgurdur@kth.se
Aneta Vulgarakis Feljan
Ericsson Research,
Ericsson
Stockholm, Sweden
Email:
aneta.vulgarakis@ericsson.com
Abstract—In this paper, we develop and evaluate a dashboard
design that visualises a stream of data from different entities
involved in autonomous warehouses, as a subset of cyber-
physical systems. The dashboard is designed and developed
through User-Centered Design (UCD) methodologies based on
two iterations of feedback sessions with the stakeholders.
During
these
sessions,
semi-structured
expert
opinion
interviews are conducted. The paper discusses the different
stages involved in building the proposed dashboard design, the
design decisions, the technical aspects of the libraries used, and
the results of the feedback sessions towards the end of the
project. It also presents the implemented dashboard as a proof
of development efforts and explains its different functionalities.
The study concludes by evaluating the dashboard through the
semi-structured interviews with the respective stakeholders
and suggests features for further development.
Keywords—data visualization; cyber-physical systems; user
experience; user-centered design; supply chain; autonomous
warehouse; intelligent agents; dashboard design.
I. INTRODUCTION
In simple terms, a Cyber-Physical System (CPS) is a
system in which different computational and physical
processes are being carried out together in order to perform
several tasks [1]. These tasks could belong to a wide range
of domains, including assisted living, traffic control and
safety, advanced automotive systems, distributed robotics
defense systems, manufacturing, and smart structures [2][3].
In this paper, we discuss a narrow application of CPS,
namely, an automated warehouse.
Traditionally,
a
warehouse
involves
four
major
functions: (1) receiving, (2) storage, (3) order picking, and
(4) shipping [3]. Today, there is an ever-increasing demand
for a variety of products and shorter response times causing
a tremendous emphasis on the ability to establish smooth
and efficient logistics operations. These logistic operations
are complex and hence produce a lot of data. This data has
the potential to be used for further monitoring the complex
operations by the stakeholders to understand the current
state of the warehouse. Based on this, the stakeholders can
analyse
several
Key
Performance
Indicators
(KPI),
including
interoperability,
knowledge
reusability,
performance, sustainability, safety, risk, and profitability
[4]. Hence, for a smooth functioning and maintenance of
these systems, there is a need to gracefully represent these
complex data streams in an easy to understand manner.
This study is part of a project, which is called Secure
Connected Trustable Things (SCOTT) and focuses on
complex logistics use cases. The study explores a dashboard
design to best represent the data streams in an automated
warehouse to help the stakeholders to monitor the current
state of the warehouse. The automated warehouse in
question has three levels as follows: (1) Supply Chain level,
(2) Warehouse level, (3) Intelligent Agent level [4].
The aim of the project is to address the research
question: What are the suitable visualization techniques that
are required to build a dashboard which represents a
stream of data from an autonomous warehouse, focusing on
KPI such as performance, safety, and sustainability by
employing user-centered design methodologies?
To this end, this report leverages on expert opinion [5]
and semi-structured interviews [6] at the onset of the study
to understand the needs of stakeholders, gather feedback and
suggest new features for further iterations. Section I
introduces the concept of CPS and autonomous warehouse,
defines the problem statement, the objective of the study,
methodology used to achieve that and delimitations of
certain procedures and technology used. Section II discusses
the previous work done in the field of CPS and autonomous
warehouses,
different
methods
to
build
user
friendly
dashboards for retailers and smart warehouses. Section III
discusses the design process, the initial decisions taken,
defining the entities, and building three different dashboard
views based of the level of the warehouse. Section IV
discusses the metrics for the user study and interviews.
Section V explains the results based on the interview
feedback. Section VI discusses the results and breaks down
similar feedback into three categories. The paper ends with
concussion and suggestions for future work in Section VII.
A. Objective
The primary goal of the study is to design and develop a
dashboard to answer the defined research question. This
dashboard represents a stream of data that comes from the
different entities involved in and around an autonomous
warehouse which is a fully-automated CPS. These entities
include (1) trucks, (2) warehouses, (3) retailers, (4) smart
robots, and (5) conveyor belts.
B. Methodology
During the project, the identified stakeholders were
interviewed on two stages of the design process. Semi-
structured interviewing is a very flexible technique for
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-700-9
ALLDATA 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

small-scale research in which detailed structure is left to be
worked out during the interview, and the person being
interviewed has a fair degree of freedom in what to talk
about, how much to say, and how to express it [7]. The
feedback session was an informal user study with one
stakeholder where a pen-paper prototype was evaluated.
Based on the feedback, the final visual design was made
which later got converted to a functional prototype. The
development was further shaped by feedback from one-to-
one semi-structured interviews. Towards the end of the final
prototype, a final interview was conducted to get feedback
relevant to the next iteration of the dashboard.
To develop this prototype, ReactJS[15], a component-
based JavaScript framework was used for the base front-end
of the application. It was primarily because of its rendering
performance and the ability to break down the application
into smaller independent components. D3js[16], the industry
standard of data visualization javascript library was used to
develop the dashboard prototype. A state machine, Redux,
was also introduced to capture the state after every change
in the data as an immutable object. This was done to avoid
continuously calling the server to make the dashboard more
performant. Nivo, a wrapper on top of D3js, was used to
make the visualizations. Nivo was preferred because of the
flexibility in the layout of the graphs it generates and the
data structures are more adaptable unlike libraries like react-
d3. ImmutableJS was used to create factories for the entities
in the form of records. Fetch was used for the HTTP
requests to the server. Postman is used for mocking the
back-end API.
C. Delimitations
The project does not involve a real-time data streaming
coming from automated warehouse since the research
project prototype is still under development. Therefore,
there are assumptions made for the structure and properties
of the data streams that might change or evolve. Although a
very strict data structure is followed and obeyed while
building the visualization, there might be performance
issues due to the machine learning algorithms. In terms of
design, although the dashboard incorporates the UCD
approach [7][10], the feedback session is limited to 5
people, considering stakeholders include user experience
designers, system engineers and researchers who work on
the same project. The dashboard currently incorporates 3
KPI: (1) safety; (2) sustainability; and (3) performance. The
scope of the work does not include the identification of the
relevant KPI and also does not include the further data
integration with the existing or in development CPS.
However, the interested reader can learn more about the
earlier research conducted as part of the project to identify
these
KPI
[4]
and
the
minimalistic
data
model
for
monitoring purpose [8].
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Research in the domain of CPS is driven by several
recent
factors:
(1)
the
development
of low-cost
and
increased-capability sensors of increasingly smaller form-
factor, (2) the availability of low-cost, low-power, high-
capacity, small form-factor computing devices, (3) the
wireless
communication
revolution;
abundant
Internet
bandwidth, (4) continuing improvements in energy capacity,
alternative energy sources and energy harvesting [1].
As we mentioned before, automated warehouses, an
example of CPS, have interactions between different
moving parts (or entities) involved in keeping or retrieving
different objects present in the warehouse or the interactions
of the warehouse with the outside world. The complex
nature of these interactions makes it difficult to see the
overall activity in and around the warehouse.
In [4], the authors conduct several interviews with
experts to identify the important KPIs and stakeholders as a
first step. During this work, an example dashboard design is
also presented. However, this preliminary study does not
include a working prototype.
Furthermore, in [7], (1) safety, (2) sustainability, and (3)
performance are chosen as important KPI to monitor
through the dashboard.
Safety refers to the level of trust in the warehouse. A
collision probability is one example metric used to monitor
the safety level in the warehouse.
Performance is related to metrics such as time, goals
accomplished by a particular robot or the overall goals of
the warehouse.
Sustainability
refers
to
the
energy levels
of the
warehouse. This includes the energy and the battery
consumed to perform actions within the warehouse, which is
directly correlated to the efficiency of the robots and the
warehouse.
Later, a minimalistic data model [8] is presented in the
same study through a linked data technologies which
promise both consistency and interoperability throughout
the CPS in focus.
Other
research
projects
have
been
working
with
management dashboards in scenarios specific to retailers
and
for one of them, the views
are split
into
(1)
Management layer, (2) Physical layer, and (3) Agent layer
but these layers have not been evaluated by the respective
stakeholders [8].
The automated warehouse’s smartness is guaranteed by
the intelligent agents. These agents are the representations
of real components such as robots, smart shelf systems and
so
on.
For
this
purpose,
Soar,
a
general
cognitive
architecture, has been a studied as part of the project. It
offers
demonstrations
of
individual
components,
components
working
in
combination,
and
real-world
applications [9]. VISTA is a generic toolkit that allows
stakeholders
to
visualize
internal
reasoning
of
these
intelligent agents [10]. However, this toolkit is concentrated
on the behaviour of the agents, in contrast to, the data
streams from the agents.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-700-9
ALLDATA 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

III. DESIGN PROCESS
A. Initial Design Decisions
In terms of the first design process, the first step was
identifying the entities and splitting them into the three
levels. Every level was then split into cards and atomic
design [11] approach is used to build smaller cards instead
of
making
one
big
dashboard.
Atomic
design
is
a
methodology of creating a design system based on creating
small components (or atoms) like buttons, inputs, headings,
and so on. Later, these components comb are combined to
create larger components (or molecules) like forms, button
groups and in our case, cards. This approach is chosen for
the purpose of making the application as modular as
possible.
To make the implementation as light as possible, a
highlight boolean variable is included in every entity which
enabled to fetch the required data instead of querying all the
data. This way, the performance of the prototype is ensured.
The idea of not revealing the entire data set was given
prime
importance
to
enhance
both
experience
and
performance. Hence, a highlight boolean was introduced in
all the entities and only entities set to true by the users were
displayed at first and the entire data set was released once
requested by clicking the button.
Figure 1. State of the retailers and warehouse on the supply chain level.
The dashboard consisted of a lot of data streams that
signify an empty or a full state which could not be expressed
only by numbers, hence three colors, based on color
selection for highlighting tasks [12] were consistently used
to signify negative (full), positive (empty) and in progress
space (Figure 1).
As we mentioned before, the warehouse is divided into
three levels (supply chain, warehouse, and intelligent agent)
and the information for each level is represented by cards.
The dashboard is designed in a way that each card owned a
separate API request to make all cards independent of each
other. Moreover, information text was provided for every
card in the form of a tooltip so that the helpful information
is only available when needed. These implementation
decisions are selected to allow enough resources available
for the performative visualizations [13].
B. Defining Entities and Their Records
The following entity records are defined to represent the
entire system:

Warehouse and Retailers represent the entire space and
consist of a similar data structure composed of an ID
(string), highlighted tag (bool), location (geo), the name
of the space (string) and the capacity of the space (num).
The IDs of these entities are needed for trucks to identify
destination and source of their journeys.

Robots of different kinds: (1) arms, (2) conveyor belts,
and (3) other retrieval systems are an integral part of the
intelligent agent level and warehouse level. Their data
stream is comprised of an ID (string), activity, battery
and
performance
indicators
with
their
respective
deviation. It also consists of the location ID and the
object ID that signifies in which warehouse they are
present and the object they are carrying. They could be
highlighted based on battery or robot status. The prime
value is the time to return to its base after completing its
task.

Trucks are entities that connect: (1) retailers-retailers;
(2) retailers-warehouses, and (3) warehouse-warehouse,
and hence consist of their location (geo) of start and end
point. Trucks also have a sustainability index and
activity, measured in hours.

Notes and stakeholders card is shared across all the
three levels and also have an ability to be highlighted to
display the notes and stakeholder of choice on the home
screen. Notes consist of an ID (string), the text field
(string), the data of addition (string), author ID (string)
and
the
highlight
tag
(bool)
and
type
(string).
Stakeholder consists of the ID (string), name (string),
email (string), type (string), phone (num). The author ID
of the notes is linked to the stakeholder ID to identify
where the note is coming from.
C. Data Connections
All the entities are connected to each other and share
data as per the linked data structure. Stakeholders and Notes
are present in all the three levels of the data visualizations,
but their ids are linked to their respective levels (Figure 2).
For example, a stakeholder responsible for Retailer 1 has its
ID linked to the ID of the retailer. At the supply chain level,
the trucks are linked to the warehouse and the retailers as
their locations (to and from) with the time left to complete
the task as the primary variable.
At the warehouse level, the position of the robots is used
to define the interior map layout of the warehouse. They
carry boxes that have unique ids.
At the intelligent agent level, information related to the
interoperability between robots is visualized through data
about interaction and memory usage of the agents.
D. Level 1: Supply Chain level
The purpose of the Supply Chain level is to visualize
data available outside the warehouse scope and how the
objects
in
the
warehouse
interact
with
the
outside
environment (suppliers, retailers, and warehouse). The
dashboard is divided into 5 cards: (1) Capacity, (2) Truck
Journey, (3) Profitability vs. Risk Curve, (4) Notes, and (5)
Stakeholders.
 Capacity: The capacity card details the available space
in the current / adjoining warehouses along with the
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-700-9
ALLDATA 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

space available at the retailers. The data is represented by
a dial visualization to give stronger emphasis to the color
and the percentage value of availability. This section can
be updated to check the average capacity of the
warehouse or the retailer over the month, week or even
year.
 Ongoing truck journey card details the connection
journey between (1) warehouse-retailer; (2) retailer-
retailer;
(3)
warehouse-warehouse;
and
depicts
the
current state of the journey as a progress bar. Since there
is a lot more data available for the truck (Figure 3), it
could be displayed on clicking the View more button
next to every truck progress bar.
Figure 2. An overview of Warehouse 1 with different kinds of active robots
(Autonomous Robot 1 and Conveyor Belt 1) being managed by system
engineers.

Profitability vs. risk curve is an X-Y plot with
Profitability/Risk on the Y-axis and the time on the X-
axis. The curve could be updated to accommodate daily,
weekly monthly and yearly values. This curve represents
the profits (in %) and related risk generated from the
warehouse while dealing with different retailers.

Notes and stakeholders. Stakeholders for the supply
chain level are the truck drivers, warehouse managers,
and retail managers and they have the option to add and
share notes between each other.
E. Level 2: Warehouse level
The purpose of the Warehouse level is to visualize the
movement and exchange of data inside the warehouse
primarily by the robots. The dashboard is divided into (1)
Real-time map of the warehouse, (2) Stacked-Performance
Chart, (3) Robots, (4) Notes, and (5) Stakeholders.
 Real-time map of warehouse depicts the top view of the
warehouse with robots being placed by the waypoints [7],
X (Line - <num>) - Y (Y - <num>) coordinates as circles
with the size of the circle representative of the battery of
the robots and the intensity of the color signifying the
activity state of the robot. To view more information on
the robot like the danger zone, destination and the ID of
the object being carried, any robot can be clicked to
display that information (Figure 4).
Figure 3. The modal with secondary information about the truck including
the total activity hours and the Sustainability Index.
 Stacked performance chart gives the stakeholders an
ability to select the robots from all the active robots in the
warehouse and check their performance index varying
from 0 - 100. The different types of robots are
represented by different colors. This chart could be
updated based on daily, weekly, monthly and yearly
performance for further analysis (Figure 5).
 Battery status of robots card signifies the battery status
of the robots as a primary value, which is also
represented in a map state (Figure 4). Clicking on the
‘view all’ button reveals more information on the robot-
like time left to return, the performance percent of that
robot and how it is performing compared to the overall
warehouse average.
 Notes and stakeholders. Stakeholders for the warehouse
level are the warehouse managers and robot operators
and they have the ability to share notes with everyone or
one another.
Figure 4. An overhead map of Warehouse
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-700-9
ALLDATA 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

F. Level 3: Intelligent Agent level
The purpose of the intelligent agent level is to visualize
intelligence and interoperability related concerns of the
robots. The dashboard is divided into (1) Interoperability
Curve, (2) Activity Monitor, (3) Notes, and (4) Stakeholders
cards.

Robot interoperability curve is an updatable chord
diagram that has all the axis as robots in the warehouse
represented by different colors. This interdependence
allows the stakeholders to monitor robots when they
perform a particular task. This curve can be updated on a
daily, weekly monthly and yearly basis (Figure 6).
Figure 5. Stacking different robots in the warehouse with each other to
compare the performance of their combination for the year 2013.
Figure 6. A chord diagram was used to visualize the interoperability
between all the available robots present in Warehouse 1 for the year of
2013.

Activity monitor details the connection points of the
robots, with the prime value as the percentage of the job
completed. When a user clicks the ‘view all’ button,
more information about the performance of the robot is
revealed such as, the start and end point, the objects
being transported and the overall active hours. This
information is deeply connected to the information from
the real-time map and the battery status in the warehouse
levels.

Notes and stakeholders, the main stakeholders of this
level are the system engineers, robot maintainers, and
the warehouse managers. They have an ability to add
and share notes between each other.
IV. USER STUDY
The final interview was conducted with 5 stakeholders
who took part in the development of the automated
warehouse project. These interviewees come from different
domains including design, software development, systems
engineering and robotics. The interview was conducted in a
one-to-one semi-structured
way. The length of every
interview varied between 20 to 30 minutes with both the
interviewer and interviewee discussing the use case of the
dashboard relevant to their domain of knowledge. The
interview
was
conducted
in
an
uninterrupted
open
environment and the response was handwritten. The general
structure of the interview included:
1) Introduction of the interviewer and the interviewee, the
roles in the project and discussion about the first
feedback iteration.
2) Primary discussion about SCOTT project and the prior
experience with the dashboard and the data architecture.
3) A think-aloud session of using the dashboard exploring
different levels and asking questions before switching
levels with additional efforts to find the answers within
the dashboard.
4) Questions the interviewee had with respect to the cards
most relevant to the interviewees. What works for them
and what does not?
5) Optional hands-on exercise: If any visualization is not
clear, is there a better way to represent a data?
V. RESULTS
Based on the interview feedback, it was evident that
defining KPI, in the beginning, proved out to be a crucial
step to make the dashboard unified. During the hands-on
exercise, four out of five stakeholders preferred using the
chord interoperability diagram due to prior experience with
a similar visualization while one stakeholder suggested
using a tree-map visualization to represent the same data.
Three stakeholders suggested giving preference to data
susceptible to daily changes instead of data closer to the
three
KPI
under
consideration
that
does
not
update
frequently. Four out of five stakeholders felt using size to
represent the amount of battery left, on the warehouse map
was confusing as compared to using colors to depict the
same data. All the stakeholders preferred fetching only
highlighted data on the dashboard instead of the entire data
set on the first load because of the decrease in page load
speed.
Two
stakeholders
suggested
using
stakeholder
hierarchy to customize the available data could be used to
further simplify the visualization. For our use case, the
warehouse managers could have access to all three levels of
the dashboard while the systems engineers could only
access the intelligent agent level.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-700-9
ALLDATA 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

VI. DISCUSSION
A. Using three KPI as a starting point
Before the implementation of the visualization, two
earlier studies [3][7] were conducted to identify KPI,
stakeholders and the data model as the basis of deciding
what kind of data would be presented on the dashboard, for
whom and by what data which turned out to be extremely
helpful to make both, data streams and, the dashboard
uniform. At this stage, a minimal set of required data was
selected, which was to be used only for monitoring
purposes.
B. Expert opinion as an evaluation technique
Despite the exploratory nature of this study, we tried to
validate the dashboard using a structured approach. Using
expert opinion at the preliminary stage of the research
proved out to be a fast and efficient way to build the
prototype and identify the direction of future development.
So, if these expert evaluations are not performed prior to
formative
evaluations,
the
formative
evaluations
will
typically take longer and require more users, and yet reveal
many of the same usability problems that could generally
have
been
discovered
by
less
expensive
heuristic
evaluations [14]. Thus, expert evaluations can reduce the
cost of formative studies.
C. Cognitive bias in visualizations used
In terms of the visualizations used, there was a strong
bias towards the visualizations used by the stakeholders for
a prior similar data set, which greatly reduced the learning
curve for the dashboard. The bias was expressed in the final
feedback from the stakeholders when the data visualizations
were fully functional. This feedback was not expressed in
the earlier feedback session. This is a classic case of
cognitive bias, which is observed when similar design
patterns (or, in our case, data visualizations) are used
frequently [15].
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Future work will be to extend the above dashboard to
incorporate
real-time
data
streams
from
a
working
warehouse. We will continue to work on the dashboard and
customize the dashboard to further to improve the user
experience in the light of the feedback we received after the
interviews. Furthermore, we plan to employ user-centered
methodologies in the form of research tools like eye-
tracking and heat-maps, to capture participant behaviour
while performing certain tasks within the dashboard to draw
clear conclusions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from
Ericsson Research, Cognitive Automation Lab. The research
leading to these results has received funding from the
“SCOTT -Secure Connected Trustable Things.” SCOTT
(www.scottproject.eu)
has
received
funding
from
the
Electronic Component Systems for European Leadership
Joint Undertaking under grant agreement No. 737422. This
Joint Undertaking receives support from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program and
Austria, Spain, Finland, Ireland, Sweden, Germany, Poland,
Portugal, Netherlands, Belgium, and Norway.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Rajkumar, I. Lee, L. Sha and J. Stankovic, “Cyber-Physical
systems: the next computing revolution,” In Proceedings of the 47th
Design Automation Conference (DAC '10). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, pp. 731-736, 2010.
[2]
E. A. Lee, “Cyber Physical Systems: Design Challenges,” 11th
IEEE
International
Symposium
on
Object
and
Component-
Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing (ISORC), pp. 363-369,
2008.
[3]
D. Gürdür, K. Raizer, and J. El-Khoury, “Data Visualization
Support for Complex Logistics Operations and Cyber-Physical
Systems,” Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Conference
on Computer Vision, Imaging and Computer Graphics Theory and
Applications, 2018.
[4]
M. J. Clayton, “Delphi: a technique to harness expert opinion for
critical
decision‐making
tasks
in
education,”
Educational
Psychology, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 373–386, 1997.
[5]
S. E. Hove and B. Anda, “Experiences from conducting semi-
structured interviews in empirical software engineering research,”
11th
IEEE
International
Software
Metrics
Symposium
(METRICS'05). IEEE, pp. 10-pp, 2005.
[6]
R. Longhurst. Semi-structured interviews and focus groups. Key
methods in geography, 117-132, 2003
[7]
D. Gürdür, "Knowledge Representation of Cyber-physical Systems
for Monitoring Purpose." 51st CIRP Conference on Manufacturing
Systems (CIRP CMS 2018). Elsevier, 2018.
[8]
G. Kahl, S. Warwas, P. Liedtke, L. Spassova and B. Brandherm,
“Management dashboard in a retail scenario,” in Workshop on
Location Awareness in Dual and Mixed Reality. International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. IUI-11, pp. 22-25.
[9]
J. E Laird and P. Rosenbloom, The evolution of the Soar cognitive
architecture. Mind matters: A tribute to Allen Newell, 1996, pp. 1-
50.
[10] G. Taylor, R. M. Jones, M. Goldstein, R. Frederiksen and R. E.
Wray III, “VISTA: A generic toolkit for visualizing agent
behaviour,” Ann Arbor, 1001, 2002.
[11] B.
Frost,
“Designing
systems—atomic
design
by
brad
frost,” Consultado em 16, 2015.
[12] G. Ellis and D. Alan, “A taxonomy of clutter reduction for
information visualization,” IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics 13(6), pp. 1216-1223, 2007.
[13] D. Hix, J. E. Swan, J. L. Gabbard, M. McGee, J. Durbin and T.
King,
“User-centered
design
and
evaluation
of
a
real-time
battlefield visualization virtual environment,” In Virtual Reality,
1999. Proceedings. IEEE, pp. 96-103, 1999.
[14] J. Liedtka, “Perspective: Linking design thinking with innovation
outcomes through cognitive bias reduction,” In Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 32(6), pp. 925-938, 2015.
[15] A. M. Vipul and P. Sonpatki. ReactJS by Example-Building
Modern Web Applications with React. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2016
[16] N. Q. Zhu, Data visualization with D3. js cookbook. Packt
Publishing Ltd, 2013.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-700-9
ALLDATA 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

