Towards Big Business Process Mining 
Badr Omair, Ahmed Emam 
Information Systems 
King Saud University, KSU 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
e-mail:balomair@gmail.com, aemam@ksu.edu.sa 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, the topic of Big Data has received 
much attention from researchers. Because Big Data provides 
excellent analytics on a broad spectrum of data, data science 
is currently emerging as an interesting scientific discipline as 
a field of study comprehensively identified with the 
accumulation, administration, and examination of data. 
Business process mining is a process-centric technique 
focused on the mining of data and, for this reason, Big Data 
can be a big help for business process mining. In this paper, 
we will review Big Data and business process mining and 
present 
a 
model 
for 
mapping 
between 
Big 
Data 
characteristics and business process mining techniques. The 
mapping model has discovered that Big Data can help 
business process mining in different areas and open the door 
for  more help. 
Keywords-business process mining; Big Data; business 
process; smart business processes. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Business process mining techniques are very useful for 
any organization in any field. The power of these 
techniques comes from the fact that they are based on fact-
based data [1]. Most of the time, it is very difficult to know 
all the facts of a given situation. One of the most important 
reasons for this is the inability of current technology to 
host huge volumes of data [2]. In some fields, like health 
care, seismology, astronomy and finance, archive data is 
regularly deleted  to save on storage space. This data 
usually contains much important information and so 
business process techniques are unable to work well 
without it. Even in fields that do not generate huge data 
volumes, they will, in the long run, have increasingly large 
event logs, which will eventually create performance 
problems. Machines, sensors, and surveillance devices 
generate huge amounts of data that are also frequently 
deleted due to the incapability of saving such a large 
volume of information. We are now approaching the 
Internet of things era. Business process mining techniques 
must be able to handle the huge amount of data logs these 
devices create in order to be able to manage the facts and 
correlate them efficiently, or they will not be able to work 
successfully. In addition to the volume problem, currently, 
data is restricted to the structured data type only in process 
mining techniques [3], but there are also lots of facts 
available in semi and unstructured data types. For these 
reasons, some efforts are being made to solve these issues 
by using emerging Big Data technologies. These efforts 
are 
scattered, 
disorganized 
and 
do 
not 
cover 
comprehensive views, and so they do not take full 
advantage of Big Data technologies for process mining 
techniques. In this paper, we will present a model that 
maps every characteristic of Big Data to  process mining 
techniques. This model proves that Big Data can contribute 
a great deal to business process mining. Comprehensive 
discovery, 
accurate 
prediction 
abilities, 
visibility, 
efficiency, and flexibility represent the main advantages of 
the mapping model. This mapping model will open the 
door for using Big Data at different levels for business 
process mining and will maximize its use in business 
process mining. Future efforts should now be aimed at 
investigating each help track in detail to ascertain a 
practical 
implementation, 
especially 
as 
Big 
Data 
technologies are beginning to mature and become more 
available. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 
II 
describes 
Big 
Data 
definitions 
and 
characteristics, Big Data versus business intelligence, the 
Big Data life cycle, Big Data opportunities and challenges, 
and Big Data architecture, business process and business 
process mining; Section III describes Big Data and 
business process mining tools; Section IV reviews the 
previous work in using Big Data for business process 
mining; Section V will present the mapping model;  and 
Section VI shows the conclusion and future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Big Data definitions and characteristics 
Due to the boom of generated data, Big Data has 
become a strong concern for many organizations. Current 
technologies, such as Relational Database Management 
System (RDBMS), data warehouses, and business 
intelligence, do not have the capabilities to support the Big 
Data business goal, which is to enable organizations to 
create actionable business insights in a rapidly changing 
environment [4]. 
In a book by Hurwitz et al. [5], Big Data is defined as 
the ability to deal with an enormous volume of divergent 
data, at the speed, and inside the time span to permit 
continuous investigation and response. 
In Savitz’s [6] gave a more detailed definition as: “Big 
Data are high-volume, high-velocity, and/or high-variety 
information assets that require new forms of processing to 
enable enhanced decision making, insight discovery and 
process optimization”. 
Watson [2] provided the 
most 
comprehensive 
definition of Big Data as: “Big data is a term that is used to 
describe data that is high volume, high velocity, and/or 
high variety; requires new technologies and techniques to 
capture, store, and analyze it; and is used to enhance 
decision making, provide insight and discovery, and 
support and optimize processes”. Big data is considered as 
the most recent era in the development of decision support 
data management [7]. 
Thus, from these definitions of Big Data, we can see 
that the main characteristics of Big Data are: volume, 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

velocity, and variety, also known as the 3Vs. The term 
volume alludes to the huge size of the data set, velocity 
demonstrates the speed of data movement, and variety 
refers to the different data types [8]. 
B. Big Data versus business intelligence 
Chen et al. [9] stated  that business intelligence and 
analytics fall into three categories: first, Database 
Management System (DBMS) structured content, utilizing 
traditional analytic tools via data warehousing, Extract, 
Transform, and Load (ETL), Online Analytical Processing 
(OLAP) and data mining; second, web-based and 
unstructured content, utilizing tools in information 
retrieval, opinion mining, question answering, web 
analytics, social media analytics, social network analysis, 
and spatial-temporal analysis; and third, mobile and 
sensor-based content, utilizing tools in location-awareness 
analysis, 
person-centered 
analysis, 
context-relevant 
analysis, and mobile visualization. 
The main differences between Big Data and a data 
warehouse are: Big Data is stored in a distributed file 
system rather than on a central server; the Big Data format 
can be unstructured or semi-structured rather than only 
structured data; Big Data includes real-time data as well as 
offline data [10]; Big Data comes from a variety of 
sources, including new data sources such as web data, 
social media, device logs and mobile data; and finally, Big 
Data is mainly used for predictive analysis. Hu et al. [11] 
made a comparison between big data and traditional data 
as depicted in TABLE I. 
C. Big Data life cycle 
There are some applied Big Data life cycles, but Hu et 
al. [11] stated that the most common Big Data life cycle 
consists of four phases, the first of which is data 
generation. . Second is data acquisition, which refers to the 
process of obtaining information and is subdivided into 
data collection, data transmission, and data pre-processing. 
Third is data storage, which refers to the persistent storage 
and management of large-scale datasets. Fourth is data 
analysis, which leverages analytical methods or tools to 
inspect, transform, and model data to extract value. Figure 
1 depicts these phases with exemplar technologies. 
D. Big Data opportunities and challenges 
Big Data has a wide variety of sources, from traditional 
transactional processing to processes that incorporate 
Internet data (e.g., clickstream and social networking), 
research data (e.g., reviews and industry reports), area 
information (e.g., cell phone information and geospatial 
information), pictures (e.g., observation and satellites), 
store 
network 
information 
(e.g., 
Electronic 
Data 
Interchange (EDI) and merchant inventories), and device 
data (e.g., sensors and Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID) gadgets) which allow for many Big Data 
applications [12]. For example, by integrating a customer's 
profile with his habits, location and interests, which can be 
obtained from the Internet (e.g., Google, Twitter, 
Facebook, LinkedIn and other social media), we can  build 
tailored products, conduct customer sentiment analysis and 
provide targeted services [13]. Integrating the huge amount 
of patients’ historical data with medicine manufacturing 
data can help to provide personalized medication and gain 
insights into genetic and environmental causes of diseases 
[14]. Support companies can provide better services and 
improved troubleshooting, cyber security and uptime for 
their customers by monitoring recorded data from smart 
meters and machine logs [10]. 
In addition to retail, manufacturing, banking and 
finance, and healthcare, C. L. Philip Chen & Zhang [15], 
stated that Big Data applications also lie in many scientific 
disciplines, such as astronomy, atmospheric science, 
medicine, genomics, biology, biogeochemistry and other 
complex and interdisciplinary scientific researches.  They 
also conducted a survey about Big Data benefits in the 
business sector, as depicted in Figure 2. 
Big Data security and privacy are a big challenge. In 
addition, inconsistency, incompleteness, scalability and 
timeliness of the data are also challenges [16][17]. In a 
predictive analytics study in 2013 at The Data 
Warehousing Institute (TDWI) [18], a survey was made 
regarding the challenges of Big Data. It found that data 
integration complexity, architecting Big Data systems, lack 
of skills or staff, dealing with real-time data, poor data 
quality, and data privacy are the most important 
challenges. 
Watson [2] stated that the clear business need, strong 
management support, the alignment of analytics strategies 
with business need, skilled people, the right analytics tools 
and fact-based decision making are the keys to Big Data 
analytics success. 
E. Big Data architecture 
The most famous software framework for processing 
Big Data is Apache Hadoop. For this reason, we will take 
it as an example to demonstrate Big Data architecture. The 
Apache Hadoop software library is a massive computing 
framework consisting of several modules including 
Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), Hadoop 
MapReduce, HBase, and Chukwa [11] as depicted in 
Figure 3.       TABLE will briefly describe these modules. 
Chan [4] illustrated architecture for Big Data analytics and 
investigated Big Data innovations that incorporated Not 
only SQL (NoSQL) databases, HDFS and MapReduce. He 
examined running batch and real-time analytics using 
Hadoop. Its bidirectional association with conventional 
data warehouses and data mining analytics is depicted in 
Figure 4.  
F. Business process 
“A business process instance represents a concrete case 
in the operational business of a company, consisting of 
activity instances” [19]. Business processes have become 
progressively vital in numerous enterprises because they 
define the method for developing value and distributing it 
to customers [20]. Business processes are the key drivers 
behind three critical success factors—cost, quality, and 
time [21]. There are some well-known business processes 
methodologies, such as Six Sigma, Lean, BP Trends, 
Hammer and Rummler–Brache. The main elements of 
these methodologies are: (1) management and leadership, 
for describing  how the processes will be managed, (2) 
process improvement, for describing the improvement 
process steps, (3) measurement, for describing  how the 
processes will be measured, (4) learning, for describing 
training  needs, (5) alignment with organizational 
priorities,  for prioritizing process improvement projects, 
(6) continuous improvement, for determine how are  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
Figure 1. Big Data life cycle technology map [11]. 
TABLE I. BIG DATA VERSUS TRADITIONAL DATA [11]. 
processes be monitored and by whom, (7) technology, for 
specifying Business Process Management (BPM) tools, (8)  
common practices,  for specifying the organization 
standards, (9) change management, for describing the 
change management process for the business processes 
[22]. BPM covers how we study, distinguish, change and 
screen business methodologies to guarantee that they run 
easily and can be enhanced over the long term. It involves 
a constant assessment of existing processes and 
identification of approaches to improve them, in order to 
bring about global organizational enhancement [23]. 
G. Business process mining 
W. M. P. van der Aalst [24] stated that there is currently 
a missing link between business processes and the real 
processes with information systems. Process mining has 
arisen as a new scientific discipline to provide a link 
between process models and event data [25]. Simeonova  
[26] defined process mining as techniques that help to find, 
screen and enhance genuine procedures by concentrating 
learning from event logs. Data is gathered from assorted 
types of systems and examined to identify deviations from 
standard processes and see where the bottlenecks are. 
Process mining is based on fact-based data and starts with 
an analysis of data, followed by the creation of a process 
model. This differs from the classic way of first modeling 
a control flow and then adding data to it. For example, in 
navigation devices, there is a link between the current 
reality and the models; they are not a static map, but a 
dynamic one that we use every day for understanding the 
locations of traffic jams, listening to directions, and 
estimating the remaining journey time. For this reason, 
using process mining together with traditional process 
documenting techniques will give more accurate results, as 
shown in Figure 5. Companies often use process 
intelligence, mining or analytics, and apply a variety of 
statistical and artificial intelligence techniques to measure 
and analyze process-related data [27]. The three types of 
Business 
Process 
Analysis 
(BPA) 
are 
validation, 
verification, and performance, which all require collecting 
and storing large volumes of process and event data [28]. 
In the following section, we will describe the well-known 
tools of Big Data and process mining. 
III. 
TOOLS OF BIG DATA AND BUSINESS 
PROCESS MINING 
A. Big Data tools 
Watson [2] stated that the criteria to choose the right 
Big Data platform are: the applications that use the 
platform; the capabilities of processing the volume, 
velocity and variety of data; real-time or batch processing; 
people skills; and finally the implementation cost. As 
previously mentioned, Apache Hadoop is the most famous 
software framework for processing big data. It has the 
capabilities to process large amounts of data across 
potentially massively parallel clusters of servers (for 
example, Yahoo! has over 42,000 servers in its Hadoop 
installation) [2]. Apache Hadoop consists of client 
machines and clusters of loosely-coupled commodity 
servers. Hadoop has two main components: first, HDFS, 
which is the storage system and distributes data files over 
large server clusters; and second, MapReduce is the 
distributed processing framework for parallel processing of 
large data sets that distribute computing jobs to each server 
in the cluster and collects the results. There are three major 
categories of machines in  HDFS: client machines, master 
nodes and slave nodes [29]. The client machines load data 
 
Traditional Data 
Big Data 
Volume 
gigabyte 
Constantly 
updated 
(terabyte 
or 
petabyte 
currently) 
Generated rate 
per hour/day 
more rapid 
Structure 
structured 
semi-structured 
or 
unstructured 
Data source 
centralized 
fully distributed 
Data integration 
easy 
difficult 
Data store 
RDBMS 
HDFS, NoSQL 
Access 
interactive 
batch or near-time 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
into servers and retrieve results. The master nodes have 
two types: HDFS nodes (name nodes), which are 
responsible for keeping the directory of all files in the 
HDFS file system, and MapReduce (job tracks) nodes, 
which are responsible for assigning MapReduce tasks to 
slave nodes.  
B.  Business process mining  tools 
W. M. P. van der Aalst [1] stated that there are three 
main techniques in BPM, as depicted in Figure 6. The first 
is the discovery technique, which takes an event log and 
produces a model without using a priori information. The 
second is the conformance technique, where an existing 
process model is compared to an event log of the same 
process. The third is the enhancement technique, which 
covers or improves an existing process model using 
information about the actual process recorded in an event 
log. 
The most commonly used tools for process mining are 
ProM and Disco. ProM is a generic open-source 
framework for implementing process. It is very powerful 
but complicated. On the other hand, Disco is a commercial 
product and is very easy to use, but it lacks some of the 
process mining techniques. In the following section, we 
will show the most important effort made for using Big 
Data with  business process mining. 
IV. 
PREVIOUS WORK OF USING BIG DATA TO 
CONDUCT BUSINESS PROCESS MINING 
Traditional Business Intelligence (BI) and Decision 
Support System (DSS) tools require something more than 
 
Figure 2. Operational  Big Data opportunities [15]. 
 
Figure 3. Hadoop architecture [11]. 
      TABLE II. SUMMARY OF A HADOOP MODULE [11]. 
Function 
Module 
Description 
Data Acquisition 
Flume 
Data collection from disparate 
sources to a centralized store 
Sqoop 
Data 
import 
and 
export 
between structured stores and 
Hadoop 
Data Storage 
HDFS 
Distributed file system 
HBase 
Column-based data store 
Computation 
MapReduce 
Group-aggregation 
computation framework 
Query & Analysis 
Pig Latin 
SQL-like language for data 
flow tasks 
Hive 
SQL-like language for data 
query 
Mahout 
Data mining library 
Management 
Zokeeper 
Service 
configuration, 
synchronization, etc. 
Chukwa 
System monitoring 
 
 
Figure 4. Big Data analytics architecture [4]. 
 
Figure 5. Process mining [25]. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

 
Figure 6. Types of process mining techniques in terms of input and 
output [1]. 
 
Figure 7. Process mining positions [31]. 
the use of mere historical data and rudimentary analysis 
tools to be able to predict future actions, identify trends or 
discover new business opportunities [30]. Real-time, low 
latency monitoring and analysis of business  events for 
decision-making are required, but difficult to achieve [20]. 
It is a challenge to turn lots of event data ("Big Data") into 
valuable insights related to performance and compliance. 
Process mining with Big Data can do more than automate 
process discovery based on event data; it can also be used 
to answer a wide variety of performance and compliance 
questions in a unified and integrated manner, as shown in 
Figure 7. Transaction data and sensor data will enable new 
process mining applications to replace traditional analysis 
based on hand-made models [25]. Therefore, we should 
focus on a wide variety of different event data for mining. 
Process mining with Big Data will enable us to develop 
business processes that follow the right path in each 
situation. 
Vera-Baquero et al. [32] introduced a business process 
improvement methodology for overcoming processing 
time and data size limitations by integrating process 
improvement 
with 
Big 
Data-based 
DSSs. 
The 
methodology is explained in Figure 8, and consists of five 
phases. The first phase is the definition phase, and it 
intends to not only identify and represent the business 
process that has a significant value to the organization, but 
also to have clear insight into the strategic management of 
the enterprise and a good understanding of the business 
goals being pursued. The definition phase involves four 
steps: (1) determine the scope and boundaries of the global 
business process (cross-organizational); (2) identify 
operational flaws within each single organization, 
including 
interactions 
between 
operational 
units 
(interdepartmental); (3) identify the level of detail that the 
global business process will be broken down into (level of 
sub-activities); and (4) develop process and activity tables. 
The configuration phase comes next and intends to prepare 
the analytical environment for receiving structural event 
data from the operational systems that will feed the DSS 
for later analysis. It includes identifying software 
boundaries 
and 
interdepartmental 
processes 
within 
business nodes, the selection of an event data format, the 
determination of instance correlations, and implementation 
of software listeners, along with a selection of metric and 
their threshold values. Next, the execution phase starts to 
capture the operational data and send business event data 
to the DSS. Finally, the control phase monitors and 
analyzes the outcomes of the DSS, and the diagnosis phase 
identifies deficiencies and weaknesses in the business 
processes identified in the definition phase. We use 
visualization to identify hotspots, or re-run event streams 
in a simulation mode in order to perform root cause 
analysis, among others. In the following section, we will 
present the mapping model, which map the Big Data 
characteristics to business process techniques. 
V. 
MAPPING BIG DATA CHARACTERISTICS TO 
BUSINESS PROCESS TECHNIQUES 
In Figure 9, we have presented the 3Vs characteristics 
of Big Data and showed how each of them can affect 
process mining techniques. The 3Vs characteristics of Big 
Data are volume, variety, and velocity, and they are 
considered the most important characteristics of Big Data 
as previously explained in this paper. These characteristics 
are mapped to process mining techniques of process 
discovery, 
process 
enhancement, 
and 
conformance 
checking; they are also explained previously in this paper. 
This mapping is very useful to discover how Big Data can 
help in process mining. We will explain this mapping in 
detail by describing each help track as follows: 
1) Adequateness for discovery: in some application 
domains like the healthcare and finance sectors, it is 
impossible to preserve data for more than a year due to the 
huge volume of data generated from their systems. The 
same thing happens for data logs that are generated by 
machines and sensors. For this reason, this data is 
frequently deleted, even it is very important, in order to 
save on storage space. However, with existing Big Data 
technologies, we can save this data and take advantage of 
saving it for the long term. In process discovery 
techniques, we depend on event logs to discover the 
business process model. So, a bigger event log will ensure 
that we cover almost all the cases that may happen in the 
system. The data volume will increase the accuracy of the 
process discovery technique. 
2) Adequateness for prediction: there are very useful 
probability techniques that can applied to the event logs for 
prediction, for example, what-if analysis, and the decision 
tree that can be applied to predict the path of a business 
process. For this reason, the more samples we have, the 
more we can improve the probability techniques. In 
addition, prediction reports will be improved with the 
volume of data, such as estimating the completion date. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

3) Visibility: Event logs cannot include all the desired 
facts for the business process model. Big Data 
technologies can help us to cover all the facts by looking at 
extra data that was previously impossible to analyze. Big 
Data can help us to look for semi and unstructured data, 
like social media, images, emails and competitors’ web 
sites, to feed the business process model with useful data. 
4) Flexibility for efficiency: with increasing numbers 
of devices that are connected to the Internet, and the 
advent of the Internet of things era, it is very important to 
take advantage of these devices as much as we can. 
Because Big Data technologies can give us the ability 
analyze data in real-time by handling the huge data logs of 
these devices, this will help us to use these devices to 
increase the efficiency of the business process model. 
These devices can be used to extract the data from inside 
or outside the organization. For example, the business 
process model path can be changed in real-time as a quick 
response to use the logs of some meters like workload and 
inventory balance. 
5) Flexibility for conformance: similar to flexibility for 
efficiency, flexibility for conformance can be achieved by 
enabling the business process model path to be changed 
automatically in real-time as a quick response to generated 
data logs from conformance devices. Temperature meters 
and surveillance are examples of such devices. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As we have seen in this paper, there are some un-
coordinated efforts existing for discovering Big Data 
applications for business process mining, but they are not 
yet sufficient for covering the whole picture. For this 
reason, we have provided a model for mapping the 3Vs 
characteristics of Big Data to process mining techniques. 
The model will help us to bring all the applicable benefits 
of Big Data into business process mining. Adequateness 
for discovery, adequateness for prediction, visibility, 
flexibility for efficiency, and flexibility for conformance 
are the main help tracks shown in the model. In future 
work, these tracks should be studied in detail to ascertain 
practical help for business process mining using Big Data 
technologies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to thank KSU-CCIS Ph.D. committee for 
their unlimited support. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Mapping between Big Data characteristics and business 
process mining techniques. 
 
 
Figure 8. Business Process Analytics for Different Dimensions [32].
REFERENCES 
[1] 
W. M. P. van der Aalst, “Process Mining,” 
Communications of the ACM, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2012. 
[2] 
H. J. Watson, “Tutorial: Big data analytics: Concepts, 
technologies, and applications,” Commun. Assoc. Inf. 
Syst., vol. 34, 2014, pp. 1247–1268. 
[3] 
A. Rozinat, “How Big Data Relates to Process Mining 
– And How It Doesn’t — Flux Capacitor,” 2014. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://fluxicon.com/blog/2011/12/how-big-data-relates-
to-process-mining-and-how-it-doesnt/. [Accessed: 13-
Dec-2014]. 
[4] 
J. Chan, “An architecture for Big Data analytics,” 
Commun. IIMA, vol. 13, 2013, pp. 1. 
[5] 
J. Hurwitz, A. Nugent, F. Halper, and M. Kaufman, Big 
data for dummies. For Dummies, 2013, pp. 15. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

[6] 
E. Savitz, “Gartner: 10 Critical Tech Trends For The 
Next Five Years,” 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/ericsavitz/2012/10/22/gart
ner-10-critical-tech-trends-for-the-next-five-years/. 
[Accessed: 29-Dec-2014]. 
[7] 
H. J. Watson and O. Marjanovic, “Big Data: The Fourth 
Data Management Generation,” Bus. Intell. J., vol. 18, 
no. 3, 2013, pp. 4–8. 
[8] 
C. L. Philip Chen and C.-Y. Zhang, “Data-intensive 
applications, challenges, techniques and technologies: 
A survey on Big Data,” Inf. Sci. (Ny)., vol. 275, 2014, 
pp. 314–347. 
[9] 
H. Chen, R. H. L. Chiang, and V. C. Storey, “Business 
intelligence and analytics: from Big Data to big 
impact,” MIS Q., vol. 36, 2012, pp. 1165–1188. 
[10] 
N. Sawant and H. Shah, Big Data Application 
Architecture Q&A: A Problem-Solution Approach. 
Apress, 2013, pp. 2. 
[11] 
H. Hu, Y. Wen, T. Chua, and X. Li, “Towards Scalable 
Systems for Big Data Analytics: A Technology 
Tutorial,” IEEE Access, 2014. 
[12] 
M. Minelli, M. Chambers, and A. Dhiraj, Big Data, Big 
Analytics: Emerging Business Intelligence and Analytic 
Trends for Today’s Businesses. 2013, pp. 5–8. 
[13] 
K. V. N. Rajesh, “Big Data Analytics: Applications and 
Benefits.,” IUP J. Inf. Technol., vol. 9, no. 4, 2013, pp. 
41–51. 
[14] 
P. Chandarana and M. Vijayalakshmi, “Big Data 
analytics frameworks,” in Circuits, Systems, 
Communication and Information Technology 
Applications (CSCITA), 2014 International Conference 
on, 2014, pp. 430–434. 
[15] 
C. L. Philip Chen and C. Y. Zhang, “Data-intensive 
applications, challenges, techniques and technologies: 
A survey on Big Data,” Inf. Sci. (Ny)., vol. 275, Aug. 
2014, pp. 314–347. 
[16] 
D. Agrawal et al., “Challenges and Opportunities with 
Big Data 2011-1,” Purdue e-Pubs, 2011. 
[17] 
R. T. Kouzes, G. A. Anderson, S. T. Elbert, I. Gorton, 
and D. K. Gracio, “The Changing Paradigm of Data-
Intensive Computing.,” IEEE Comput., vol. 42, no. 1, 
2009, pp. 26–34. 
[18] 
“TDWI predictive analytics study,” TDWI, 2013. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.business2community.com/big-data/drive-
real-time-revenue-world-big-data-01109279. 
[Accessed: 31-Dec-2014]. 
[19] 
M. Weske, Business process management: concepts, 
languages, architectures. Springer Science & Business 
Media, 2012, pp. 7. 
[20] 
A. Vera-Baquero, R. Colomo-Palacios, and O. Molloy, 
“Business process analytics using a big data approach,” 
IT Prof., vol. 15, 2013, pp. 29–35. 
[21] 
S. Adam, N. Riegel, J. Doerr, O. Uenalan, and D. 
Kerkow, “From business processes to software services 
and vice versa - An improved transition through 
service-oriented requirements engineering,” in Journal 
of software: Evolution and Process, 2012, vol. 24, pp. 
237–258. 
[22] 
S. Sweet, “Which BPM Methodology is Best for Us?,” 
bpminstitute. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.bpminstitute.org/resources/articles/which-
bpm-methodology-best-us. [Accessed: 17-Feb-2015]. 
[23] 
“AIIM - What is Business Process Management?,” 
AIIM. [Online]. Available: http://www.aiim.org/What-
is-BPM-Business-Process-Management. [Accessed: 30-
Dec-2014]. 
[24] 
W. M. P. van der Aalst, “Business Process 
Management: A Comprehensive Survey,” ISRN Softw. 
Eng., 2013, pp. 1–37. 
[25] 
W. M. P. van der Aalst, Process Mining: Discovery, 
Conformance and Enhancement of Business Processes, 
vol. 136. 2011, pp. 80. 
[26] 
D. Simeonova, “BIG DATA AND PROCESS 
MINING,” DG DIGIT, 2014. [Online]. Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/digit-ict/sites/digit-
ict/files/ictinterview.pdf. [Accessed: 13-Dec-2014]. 
[27] 
C. Janiesch, M. Matzner, and O. Müller, “Beyond 
process monitoring: a proof-of-concept of event-driven 
business activity management,” Business Process 
Management Journal, vol. 18. 2012, pp. 625–643. 
[28] 
M. P. van der A. Wil, W. Mathias, and W. Guido, 
“Advanced Topics In Workflow Management: Issues, 
Requirements, And Solutions,” J. Integr. Des. Process 
Sci., vol. 7, 2003, pp. 49–77. 
[29] 
B. Hedlund, “Understanding Hadoop Clusters and the 
Network,” 2011. [Online]. Available: 
http://bradhedlund.com/2011/09/10/understanding-
hadoop-clusters-and-the-network/. [Accessed: 29-Dec-
2014]. 
[30] 
A. V. Baquero and O. Molloy, “A Framework to 
Support Business Process Analytics.,” in KMIS, 2012, 
pp. 321–332. 
[31] 
W. van der Aalst, “‘ Mine your own business ’: using 
process mining to turn big data into real value,” Proc. 
Eur. Conf. Inf. Syst., 2013, pp. 1–9. 
[32] 
A. Vera-Baquero, R. Colomo-Palacios, and O. Molloy, 
“Towards a Process to Guide Big Data Based Decision 
Support Systems for Business Processes,” Procedia 
Technol., vol. 16, 2014, pp. 11–21.  
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-445-9
ALLDATA 2015 : The First International Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data

