A Contribution to the Measurement of Skin to Textile Friction
Lukas Pfarr, Bernhard G. Zagar
Institute for Measurement Technology
Johannes Kepler University
Linz, Austria
Email: lukas.pfarr@jku.at, bernhard.zagar@jku.at
Abstract—In this work, we detail the problems encountered and
recommended associated solutions in determinig the tribological
properties of fabric frictioning vis-`a-vis human skin under various
conditions like dry skin, conditioned skin, and sweaty skin,
to name just a few. Furthermore, we report on the necessary
measurement setup to reliably determine the non-linear frictional
behaviour of different fabric being the friction partner to like
and other types of fabric, which are either stretched and
thus mechanically loaded or otherwise untensioned and possibly
hanging loose. Those cases are encountered in textiles worn
under different physical activities like various sport activities or
might play an important role in textile-based medical devices like
surgical stockings, band–aids, etc. By analyzing various inﬂuences
it can be shown that Coulomb’s law for rigid body friction must
be extended to also include the dependency on parameters such
as yarn orientation, skin hydration, contact force and fabric
pre–stretch. The developed system is easy to use and measures
reliably and reproducibly both dynamic and static friction for
most typically encountered friction partners.
Keywords–non-coulomb friction; coefﬁcient of friction; in–vivo
human skin friction; tribological behaviour of human skin; friction
measurement.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Lately, there has been a dramatic increase in interest in
rapid prototyping in the textile industry, which is relying
on high performance garment simulations with the overall
goal to increase wear comfort in particular in sportswear.
Clearly, meaningful simulations heavily depend on reliable
textile parameters and associated friction models and result
in design advantages that can be named as:
•
faster progress from idea to ﬁnal product,
•
greater ﬂexibility by instantaneous feedback,
•
ﬁtting in motion (results see Figure 1 for a tennis
player’s action as input for a garment simulation
software),
•
and comparison of fabric materials.
The exactness of garment simulations is dependent on
the knowledge of the textile’s stress-strain proﬁle (tensile
& shear), its bending stiffness, its coefﬁcient of friction
and specimen surface weight [1] [2]. A universal measuring
machine to address and measure all those parameters (except
surface weight) was developed and tested successfully [3] for
a colleague (mentioned in the acknowledgement) who also
provided the garment simulation results from previous work
of her which is which is depicted in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Garment simulation to result in strain values (colorcoded) with
permission from [1].
Figure 2. Photo of a textile characterization system [3].
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The paper is structured as follows, in Section II the
peculiarities of textile friction partners are stressed over those
showing solid body friction, Section III details the chosen
sensors and their arrangement to allow even human skin as
friction partner in dynamic friction tests, Section IV describes
experiments to characterize textiles on their friction behaviour
for both skin and other textiles as friction partners and
discusses the measurement results obtained, and Section V
concludes the paper.
II.
TRIBOLOGICAL DESCRIPTION OF TEXTILES
In the regime of Coulomb type friction between two dry
solid bodies the maximum tangential force can be deﬁned
as Ft = µFN, where FN is the normal force acting on the
interface perpendicularly to two parallel ﬂat surfaces of the
friction partners and Ft is the maximum sustainable friction
force. The coefﬁcient of friction µ is a dimensionless, in this
particular case, scalar constant that describes the maximum
friction force below which static friction occurs. Exceeding
that tangential force will lead to kinetic friction and the
partners will slide against each other effectively generating
heat. The coefﬁcient of friction is dependent on the materials of
the frictioning partners, the possible deformation of one or both
partners, and surface roughness, both seen at the microscopic
level and is conveyed by the chemical bonding between atoms
in the bulk materials. For static friction of solid bodies, the
following equation is to hold: −µFN < FR < +µFN. For
textiles that can presumably be stretched, however, and thus
do not act as solid bodies this friction model seems to be
oversimpliﬁed. For resilient materials, areas of the friction
partners might experience higher than average normal forces
whereas other areas might in turn see even bulging of the
textile, speciﬁcally where compressive tangential forces might
act upon the textile resulting in local wrinkling. Clearly, this
bulging might be located at areas where the textile formed into
a garment experiences belt-type friction at wrapped around
locations, particularly at the knees or elbow areas.
Moreover, if these textiles are to absorb sweat during
sports activities the model of dry-friction might not be able to
describe properly the friction behaviour under these conditions.
Slightly damp garments might on the other hand be only
described by a deﬁcient ﬂuid-type friction, since in true ﬂuid
friction a ﬂuid ﬁlm effectively separates the two — most of the
time — solid surfaces thus decreasing the friction forces. As
it is common knowledge damp or almost wet garments tend
to even stick better to the skin (and can be taken off harder)
than still dry garments. To complicate things even further skin
of different body parts also tend to behave differently friction–
wise and need to be studied case by case using an easy to use
equipment.
From the above presented facts, it seems clear that the
measurement of tribological parameters of skin to textile fric-
tion is an involved problem and requires a careful planning of
the experiments and also a very ﬂexible kind of measurement
equipment to cover the wide variety of friction partners under
different pre–loading conditions and also allows for skin at
different body parts to be used as friction partner. In this
contribution, we present a system that is able to allow the
analysis and measurement of tribological parameters using
even human skin as friction partner.
Figure 3. View of the measurement system exhibiting the cross–mounted
load cells (Fmax = 100 N for the vertically oriented and Fmax = 50 N for
the horizontally oriented cell).
While analyzing results obtained for the coefﬁcient of
friction from the universal textile measurement machine, which
still assumed that a single ﬁgure of merit might characterize
all of the tribological behaviour of such complex friction
partners like garment and dry, or conditioned or hydrated
skin it became apparent that a more detailed study has to
be undertaken. This contribution extends considerably to and
concentrates only on the single parameter coefﬁcient of friction
but as such it is covered in greater detail as given in [2].
The tribological parameter(s) of textiles from our experience
and underpinned by practical experiments turned out to be the
most demanding mechanical property. The difference between
static and dynamic friction is as equally crucial in the slipping
of objects (garment vs. skin) as is the consideration of the
compliance of textile under mechanical load in the direction
of the yarn if stretched under sports action and also if the
more complicated belt–friction case is considered if the friction
partner is wrapped around a knee or an elbow for example.
In clothing simulation software for example, it is typical to
have only a single value to cover both the static and dynamic
effects due to friction [4]. So, the results can not cover the
known tendency, caused by larger differences between static
and dynamic friction, of clothes to stick to the body for a
ﬂexing action and loosen for a stretching action, which is often
perceived as rather uncomfortable.
In Figure 2 a textile testing maschine developed in a former
project by the authors is depicted. It is able to measure in a
single unit stress–strain behaviour, bending stiffness, and co-
efﬁcient of friction (here still assuming the simple Coulomb’s
model). While analyzing all the problems encountered oper-
ating this machine it was decided to single out the friction
measuremen part of the fabric characerization and devise a
novel set–up, which is depicted in Figure 3.
III.
OPTIMIZED ARRANGEMENT OF THE FRICTION UNIT
This optimized set up of the friction-only unit is shown in
Figure 3. It mainly consists of two orthogonally mounted load
cells (products of HBM GmbH, Germany) and a specimen
receptacle to ﬁx to friction partner 1.
The horizontally oriented load cell (measuring range 50 N)
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

measures the resulting friction force FR and the vertically
oriented one (measuring range 100 N) the normal force FN
applied to by friction partner 2. From the highly time resolved
aquired data (sampling time 2 ms) the ratio of FR(t) to FN(t),
the friction coefﬁcient µ(t) can be calculated.
The value of this ratio clearly is only representative for the
friction coefﬁcient if the two related forces are measured at
the same instant in time t. Therefore they are measured simul-
taneously by two separate 24 bit analog to digital converters
with associated analog front ends (Analog Devices’ AD7194).
Their master clocks are synchronized via SPI communication
after powering up the friction unit’s electronic. The sampling
rate is 500 Hz and the result consists of measurands stable to
approximately 21 bits (according to the data sheet). This fast
sampling in combination with the accurate electronics enables
a high quality analysis of friction properties.
The working principle of this set up makes it also possible
to determine the breakaway force (needed to determine static
friction’s µS) as well as the acting friction force after the
breakaway (needed to determine dynamic friction’s µD) in a
single experiment. It is easy to handle and delivers results very
fast and accurately, because the only necessary operation is to
pull friction partner 2 over the held ﬁxed friction partner 1. All
kinds of inﬂuences (relative velocity, contact force, direction
of movement, skin hydration, etc.) can be varied by the user.
The most outstanding feature of this friction unit, however,
is the possibility to use arbitrary materials for friction partner
2. This mighty tool for textile development allows to quantify
the wearing comfort of garments by not only assessing the
textile to textile friction but to an even greater extend, the
friction between skin and, e.g., the inner layer of any garment.
A novel version that incorporates three orthogonally acting
load cells is currently under construction and should then be
able to determine the coefﬁcient of friction for the dynamic
case as a tensor. The idea of which is commonly seen if
two textiles are rubbed against each other using thumb and
foreﬁnger on a circular motion trajectory and experiencing
a preferential direction leading to a non–circular reaction.
Furthermore, the next version of the system will be so compact
in design as to also allow for the second partner (the fabric)
to be ﬁxed to a (then non–planar) template mimicking the
counterpart of a knee or an elbow with the actual like human
part’s skin as friction partner for the test. Thus, the results
obtained from such a unit will be very close to the true
tribologic behaviour of garment.
To demonstrate the versatility of the current system the
experimental results presented in this paper are divided in the
two main groups textile to textile friction and textile to skin
friction.
IV.
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A selection of textiles (44 in all) were tested to get a
feeling in the development phase about the necessary ranges
of the forces involved. As was expected, the friction forces
covered a very wide range from very little friction of a
thin barely loaded silk scarf vis-`a-vis silk, to structured wool
vis-`a-vis almost pressed against fatty skin. A subset of the
materials are presented in Table 1, to get a feeling about the
variety. The tested specimen were material compositions of
cotton, elastane, polyamide, polyester, virgin wool; smooth
Figure 4. Zoomed in view of the structure of a textile. The width is
approximately 100 mm.
TABLE I. DESCRIPTION OF THE MATERIALS UNDER TEST
Nr.
Surface
Composition
Surface condition
density
1
165 g m−2
55 % polyester,
bulky, strong
% 45 % virgin wool
texturization
2
120 g m−2
100 % polyester
smooth, poor texturization
3
165 g m−2
100 % polyester
bulky ﬂeece, no texturization
4
200 g m−2
93 % polyester,
smooth, usual texturization
7 % elastane
and bulky surfaces; striking and poor texturization; ones with
predominant direction and ones without. While testing it turned
out that the high frequency oscillations initially seen in a
dramatic way in all the time domain signals acquired (FN
and FR) largely were due to the dynamic behavior of the
measurement system itself, which exhibits sufﬁcient stiffness
to be excited to oscillations beyond approximately 70 Hz for
the horizontal and approximately 50 Hz for the vertical load
cell. A striking example of these deteriorating oscillations is
given in Figure 5, so appropriate measures were needed to
suppress, thus a moving average ﬁlter of appropriate bandwidth
(< 30 Hz) has been used to do so to only record the dynamic
forces induced by the interaction of the friction partners.
Figure 5. Initial test results exhibiting signiﬁcant parasitic oscillations.
A. Analysis of the textile to textile friction
This loading case is especially important in garments for
sportswear that is subject to periodic repeated movements, e.g.,
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

in running, when the two pant legs rub against each other
during each stroke. Mainly the outer layers of the garments
are affected in this process. The following properties were
expected to seriously inﬂuence the friction coefﬁcient in this
experiment.
•
orientation of yarns (warp vs. weft) of the frictioning
partners
•
texturizing of garments outer layer
•
relative velocity of the friction partners
•
contact force between them
•
possible predominant orientation of textile ﬁbres
B. Results of textile to textile test case
A ﬁrst conclusion drawn from the experiments is that
rarely a noteworthy difference between static and dynamic
friction can be observed. In almost all cases both are almost
equal as long as the experimental parameters (magnitude and
orientation of the acting contact force) remains constant. Only
bulky materials, such as textile 3, exhibit an exception. They
tend to have a signiﬁcant friction force overshoot preceeding
the point of breakaway from friction partner 2, which can be
seen in Figure 6. For all following diagrams, the green graph
Figure 6. Signiﬁcant overshoot of friction force preceeding the point in time
when the kinetic friction sets in (at appox. 4 s, 12 s, 20 s, and 27 s in time).
stands for the friction coefﬁcient, the blue one for the measured
normal force and the red one for the measured friction force
(always opposing the possible motion). Figure 6 shows the
highly time resolved value (1000 samples recorded per second)
of the friction force opposing the motion, dependent on the
textile’s orientation. Just this high resolution in time enables
the detection of breakaway peaks, which deﬁne according to
Coulomb’s law the static coefﬁcient of friction µS.
In this experiment, friction partner 2 slides against friction
partner 1 two times back and forth in warp direction while
FN remains almost constant (note: FR and so mathematically
also µ changed sign on the backward stroke. This sign was
only kept for clarity of presentation.). While the peaks of the
forward direction reach just about µS ≈ 1.25 the ones of the
backward direction go up to µS ≈ 1.5. As already mentioned,
this bulky material shows variations of the static and dynamic
Figure 7. An unexpected dependency on the normal force can be seen in
structured materials exhibiting signiﬁcant texturization. This behaviour might
hint on mechanical interlocking of structures.
friction. In the forth direction the dynamic friction µD reaches
a value slightly lower than 1.0 and in backward direction
slightly higher than 1.0. These results clearly exhibit the
presence of a predominant direction for this material.
Textiles with a signiﬁcant texturization of the surface (see
magniﬁed image of the yarns of a textile in Figure 4), exhibit
a rather pronounced impact on the orientation of the yarns
with respect to the intended motion. This empirical observation
conﬁrms once more the assumption of a possible mechanical
interlocking. Thus, especially knitted and woven materials
have to be characterized separately in warp and weft direction.
Contrary to expectations there is hardly seen any inﬂuence
on the relative velocity between the friction partners. It
is negligible and thus not necessary to be analysed in a
Stribeck-type curve [5].
The most important inﬂuence comes with the contact force,
which is equal to the normal force FN. It has comparably small
consequences (≈ 10 % of µ) for materials with smooth surface
conditions, such as textile 2. But especially for bulky materials
(e.g., textile 1 and 3), it is crucial as Figure 7 emphasizes.
Variations of FN lead to variations of the friction coefﬁcient.
While low forces lead to high friction (µmax ≈ 0.9), do high
forces lead to low friction (µmin ≈ 0.5).
C. Analysis of the textile to skin friction
This loading case is important for each garment’s inner
layer that directly gets in contact to the user’s skin. All
dependencies of the textile to textile case have to be considered
here as well. Additionally the factors skin hydration as well as
body region were expected to seriously inﬂuence the friction
coefﬁcient in these experiments. These attributes have been
examined in [4] as well, where the goal was a generalized
examination of human skin friction. The conclusion of [4]
resulted in the opinion, that the friction behaviour of in-vivo
human skin is too complex to be replaced by any representative
material in the research of textile to skin friction. Nonetheless
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 8. A textile to skin friction experiment (with constant, though
undetermined skin hydration) exhibited very little dependency on the applied
normal, contact force.
it should be mentioned, that the synthetic skin substitute
HUMSkin [6] achieves great results in the ﬁeld of cosmetic
development and should be considered for future friction tests.
D. Results of textile to skin test case
The main dependencies in these experiments turned out
again to be the contact force and additionally, the skin hydra-
tion. The consequences are also limited for smooth surfaces but
turned out to be signiﬁcant for bulky ones. In analyzing textile
2 the results showed the friction coefﬁcient remains largely
constant even if the variation of the normal force is signiﬁcant
(see Figure 8). Skin hydration and its location on the body also
have a major inﬂuence on the apparent friction between the
garment and the user’s skin. Figure 9 shows the variation of the
friction coefﬁcient dependent on the skin hydration. The skin
hydration was determined with a device used by beauticians
and those results can not be really be considered measured
quantities, although the results in Figure 9 seem to indicate
some effects with the correct trend.
The red curve µ1 was recorded at the dorsal upper arm with
27 % hydration, the blue one µ2 was recorded with the palmar
side of the hand with 45 % hydration and the green one µ3 was
recorded also with the palm of the hand though sweating with
99 % skin hydration. The skin hydration level was determined
as indicated above using a device called Ckeyin SK-IV, which
uses the so-called bioelectric impedance analysis to indicate
skin hydration.
V.
CONCLUSION
The assumption that the tribology of textiles in both textile
to textile or textile to skin friction cases can be described
accurately by a single parameter µR was shown to be clearly
wrong. There are types of fabric that show a signiﬁcant
dependency on the acting normal force and other types seem to
show no dependency at all. The most interesting fact exhibited
for the cases of skin to fabric friction is the clearly shown
dependency on skin conditions like hydration and location on
the body of the considered skin as friction partner. These facts
Figure 9. Tribologic signiﬁcance of textile to skin friction dependent on skin
hydration. (Red) skin of upper arm, hydration 27 %, (Blue) palmar side of
hand, hydration 45 %, (Green) palm of (sweating) hand, hydration 99 %.
lead to the conclusion that garment simulation software will
have to incorpoate a much more involved tribological model
for any pairing of friction partners relevant to the garment
industry.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are indebted to Prof. Dr. Christiane Luible of ”kunst-
universit¨at linz” for bringing up the measurement problem, for
discussions on fabric properties and their inﬂuences on wearing
comfort, and further for providing us with the wide variety of
textiles to be tested in the presented system. Furthermore for
allowing us to include the simulation data presented in Figure
1.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Luible, ”Study of mechanical properties in the simulation of 3D
garments”, Ph.D. Univ. Geneve, 2008
[2]
L. Pfarr, and B. Zagar, ”Measuring Machine for Mechanical Properties
of Garments”, Proc. 2nd Intl Conference on Sensors and Electronic
Instrumentation Advances, pp. 79–81, International Frequency Sensor
Association (IFSA) Publishing, S. L., Castelldefels, Spain, Sept. 2016
[3]
L. Pfarr, and B. Zagar, ”In-Vivo Human Skin to Textiles Friction
Measurements”, Proc. 17th World Textile Conference AUTEX 2017,
Corfu, Greece, May 2017, IOP Conference Series-Materials Science and
Engineering, Vol. 254, Article Number UNSP 142017
[4]
N. K. Veijgen, ”Skin Friction — a novel approach to measuring in vivo
human skin”, Ph.D. Univ. of Twente, 2013
[5]
V. L. Popov, ”Contact Mechanics and Friction: Physical Principles and
Applications”, 2nd ed., Springer, Berlin, 2017
[6]
Q. Li et al., ”Friction Between a Viscoelastic Body and a Rigid Surface
with Random Self-Afﬁne Roughness”, Physical Review Letters, Vol. 111,
Issue 3, Article number 034301, pp. 034301-1 - 034301-5, Jul. 2013
[7]
B. Gortan, ”HUM-skin — artiﬁcial skin replacement material”,
.
www.hohenstein.de [retrieved 01, 2018]
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

