 
 
Cyclical Heating to Reduce Consumption of SnO2 Sensors for Alcohol Monitoring  
 
Bruno Lawson, Virginie Martini-Laithier, Tomas Fiorido, Marc Bendahan, Rachid Bouchakour, Khalifa Aguir 
Aix Marseille Univ, Université de Toulon, CNRS, IM2NP,  
Marseille, France 
E-mail: {bruno.lawson, virginie.laithier, tomas.fiorido, marc.bendahan, rachid.bouchakour, khalifa.aguir}@im2np.fr 
 
 
Abstract— In this work, we study the response of a Tin Dioxide 
(SnO2) sensor under ethanol exposure to enable alcohol 
monitoring under a number of different power conditions 
(continuous and cyclical heating) in order to investigate the 
impact of reduced system level power consumption on sensor 
sensitivity. The sensitive thin layer of SnO2 with a thickness of 
50nm was deposited by a magnetron reactive sputtering 
technique. The power consumption of the SnO2 sensor when 
continuously heated was 53mW (280°C). In the case of a 
cyclical heating operating mode, power consumption was 
13mW when a frequency of 16mHz was used. The division of 
power consumption by four results in a slight decrease in the 
sensitivity of the sensor of about 25%.  
Keywords-ethanol monitoring; cyclical heating; low power 
consumption; SnO2 gas sensor. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Research in the field of metal oxide chemo-resistive gas 
sensors (MOX Sensors) has been a growing area of interest 
for biomedical applications, such as the detection of Volatile 
Organic Compounds (VOC) released by the human body. 
For the monitoring of alcohol vapor emitted by transdermal 
perspiration after alcohol consumption [1], SnO2 metal 
oxide sensors are often used. Tin dioxide is one of the most 
sensitive layers which can be used for gas detection due to 
its high sensitivity and stability [2]. Thus, in the case of 
transdermal alcohol monitoring, the main criterion to be 
considered when developing a mobile/battery-operated 
sensor is the greatest sensitivity attainable with the 
minimum heater power consumption conditions which 
allow it to be incorporated into the power-constrained 
mobile component.  
A MOX sensor requires two voltage inputs, the heater 
voltage and the sensor bias voltage. The heater voltage 
allows the semiconductor to be maintained at a specific 
temperature in order to enable gas detection. A sensor bias 
voltage is applied to allow the measurement of the sensor 
response to gas exposure. One critical aspect to be 
considered when working with a metal oxide semiconductor 
gas sensor is the power consumption required for the 
heating element, which is in the order of 70mW or more on 
average. In the case of continuous monitoring using power-
constrained sensors, it is important to decrease heater 
consumption so that they can be incorporated in 
microsystems such as a wristband, patch and armband, or 
watch (this requires a power consumption in the order of 
5mW). One possible solution is to use cyclical heating, 
which means switching the heater on and off, thus 
minimizing the active period of energy consumption so as to 
save power [3]. Given the high value of sensitive layer 
resistance, the power of the sensitive layer is negligible 
compared with that of the heater. In order to monitor the 
transdermal ethanol emission of the skin, we compare the 
responses of the sensor in both cases, i.e. continuous heating 
and cyclical heating. The SnO2 sensors were exposed to 
ethanol vapor with various concentrations ranging from 
1ppm to 100ppm. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.  
In Section 2, we describe the MOX sensor device, 
the measuring bench and the parameters of cyclical heating. 
In Section 3, we present the sensor responses in each 
case of heating conditions and we offer a brief discussion. 
The paper concludes with Section IV. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A. Gas sensor 
Tin dioxide is an n-type wide-band-gap (3.6eV) metal 
oxide semiconductor, with a wide range of applications for 
various types of oxidizing or reductive gas/vapor detection. 
Figure 1 shows the sensitive thin layers of SnO2 with a 
thickness of 50nm which were deposited by reactive radio 
frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering on transducers 
patented by the AMU-IM2NP laboratory [4]. The 
transducers are designed to have three sensors and two 
heaters. In this study we will present only the response of 
the central sensor.  
 
 
  
 
Figure 1. AMU-IM2NP ethanol sensor based on SnO2   
 
The films were deposited at a pressure of 22µbar with a 
mixture of Ar/O2 for the sputtering process and annealed at 
500°C for a duration of 12h in dry air in order to improve 
the sensitive layer detection properties. 
SnO2 sensitive 
layer 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
B. Measuring bench 
An innovative sensor system calibration was developed 
in 
collaboration 
with 
the 
OMICRON 
Company 
(http://www.omicron-technologies.com). This platform for 
sensor characterization generates ethanol and acetone vapor 
(acetone is one of the most important interference VOCs for 
the detection of alcohol in perspiration). Ethanol vapor is 
generated by heating tubes with concentrations ranging from 
20ppb to 150ppm for a flow rate of 250ml/min with dry air 
as the gas vector. Ethanol vapor is carried in a test chamber 
with a volume of 1.86ml, where the sensor is polarized by 
means of a Keithley source meter for data acquisition and 
the heater power is modulated to provide the operating 
temperature. The sensor response is defined as Ra/Rg, 
where Ra is the sensor resistance measured in air and Rg is 
the sensor resistance measured under ethanol exposure.  
When the concentration of alcohol in the blood after 
alcohol consumption reaches 0.5g/l (2 standard glasses of 
alcoholic beverage), its equivalent in the breath is 139ppm 
and lower concentrations varying between 1 and 100ppm 
may be expected on the surface of the skin. We therefore 
varied the ethanol concentration from 1ppm to 100ppm 
every 2 minutes of exposure in our application.  
C. Cyclical heating 
MOX sensors involve high working temperatures 
(220°C-300°C) in order to detect gaseous species. This is 
because temperature provides the sensitive layer with the 
activation energy required for adsorption between the 
gaseous species and the surface of the oxide. Temperature 
also influences the gas desorption. Figure 2 illustrates the 
sensor response as a function of the heater voltage supply 
for 50ppm of ethanol. 2V is the heater polarization which 
corresponds to the optimal heating temperature for the best 
response. Below this value, the response decreases.  
 
 
Figure 2. Ethanol sensor response according to the heater voltage 
 
A frequency of cyclical heating was studied previously 
to determine the optimum active time of a heating element. 
Figure 3 illustrates an example of a sensor response 
according to different heater activation times (6s, 10s, 15s, 
and 20s) under different ethanol concentrations. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Cyclical frequency study 
 
Figure 3 shows that, for a heater activation of 15s, the 
response of the sensor stabilizes and the sensitive layer 
almost reaches the optimal temperature for the detection 
process. 
Before applying the voltage for the cyclical temperature, 
we used an oscilloscope to visualize the output voltage 
modulation. Figure 4 shows an example of cyclical heating 
which was considered.  
 
 
Figure 4. Cyclical heating applied to SnO2 sensor (2V~53mW/280°C) 
 
During a period of 60s (1min), the heater is switched off 
for 45s, and on for 15s. This is repeated throughout the 
measurement. The period of this cyclical heating is 60s, its 
frequency is 16mHz and the cyclical ratio is 0.25. 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
The SnO2 sensor shows a good sensitivity to ethanol, 
mainly for low concentrations and a slight saturation of 
around 70ppm. This slight saturation occurs when the 
coverage rate of the adsorption sites decreases. Figure 5 
shows the variation of sensor resistance in the case of 
continuous heating (53mW).  
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
Figure 5. SnO2 sensor reponse under different ethanol concentrations: 
continuous heating 
 
Figure 6 shows the variation of sensor resistance in the 
cyclical heating mode (13mW). The power reduction (by a 
factor of 4) causes a slight decrease in sensor responses, as 
shown in Figure 7. In fact, in the case of continuous heating 
the sensor operates at 280°C and 53mW. With cyclical 
heating, the heating time is decreased and thus power 
consumption too, without any reduction of the operating 
temperature (280°C) during the detection process. 
 
 
Figure 6. SnO2 sensor reponse under different ethanol concentrations:  
cyclical heating 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Comparison of SnO2 responses with continuous heating (53mW) 
and cyclical heating (13mW) 
 
However, even if cyclical heating allows a reduction of 
power consuption of 75%, it is important to note that pulse 
mode heating can also reduce slightly the sensor response. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper describes the efficiency of cyclical heating in 
the gas/vapor detection process. This method allows a 
reduction of power consumption in the integrated gas 
detection microsystems. Thanks to this heating modulation 
and to the short response time of the microsensors, energy 
consumption can be further reduced with only a slight 
decrease in the response.  
 
 
V. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. S. Hawthorne, and M. H. Wojcik, “Transdermal alcohol 
measurement: a review of the literature,” Canadian Society of 
Forensic Science, vol. 39, No 2, pp. 65–71, 2012. 
[2] L. K. Bagal, J. Y. Patil, M. V. Vaishampayan, I. S. Mulla, and 
S. S. Suryavanski, “Effect of Pd and Ce on the enhancement 
of ethanol vapor response of SnO2 thick films,” Sensors and 
Actuators B Chemical, vol. 207, pp. 383-390, 2015. 
[3] D. Spirjakin, A. M. Baranov, A. SomoV, and V. Sleptsov, 
“Investigation of heating profiles and optimization of power 
consumption of gas sensors for wireless sensor networks,” 
Sensors and Actuators A Physical, vol. 247, pp. 247-253, 
2016. 
[4] K. Aguir, M. Bendahan, and V. Martini-Laithier, “Gas sensor 
based on heated sensitive layer,” patent N° FR 13 59494, 
2013, international extension 2016. 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

