Ultra-Wide-Band SAW Sensors 
Based on Hyperbolically Frequency Modulated Signals
Victor Plessky 
GVR Trade SA 
Gorgier, Switzerland 
Email: victor.plessky@gvrtrade.com  
Aleksey Shimko, You Jen Cho 
Tai-Saw Technology Co. Ltd.  
Taiwan 
Email: aleksey.shimko@mail.taisaw.com,  
larrycho@mail.taisaw.com 
 
 
Abstract— A SAW (Surface Acoustic Wave) sensor including 
grooved-grating chirp reflectors is designed, manufactured and 
measured/probed on wafer. The device includes two wide-band 
SAW interdigital transducers (IDTs) on a YZ-cut LiNbO3 
substrate, operating in the frequency range of 2000MHz-
2500MHz (B=500MHz), situated in parallel acoustic tracks 
having two dispersive reflectors operating at the same 
frequencies. The reflector period increases linearly with 
distance from the IDTs and, correspondingly, the frequency of 
the impulse response of the reflectors is hyperbolically 
dependent on time. The duration of the impulse response is 
1000ns, so that the signal base is B*T= 500.  In remote 
measurements, such a sensor transforms interrogation signals 
received from the reader in its specific way and the reflected 
signals can be compressed such that the processing gain is 
greater than 20dB compared to other parasitic reflections. In 
contrast to classic Linear Frequency Modulated (LFM) signals, 
for the proposed signal, the compression process remains 
invariant with respect to the thermal expansion of the sensor, 
which significantly simplifies the “reading” algorithms. For the 
measurement of temperature, the device uses two offset 
reflectors, with the delay between the reflection peaks being 
dependent on temperature. At the moment of writing this paper, 
the different designs of the device were probed on wafer. 
Compressed signals are obtained with an expected duration of 
about 2 ns.  We plan to package the sample devices and 
subsequently measure them remotely using a “reader” for 
measuring the S11(f) on the defined frequency grid. 
Keywords – SAW sensors; hyperbolic frequency modulation; 
signal compression; reflecting grating; processing gain. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 There are a few reasons why using Ultra-Wide-Band 
(UWB) signals in passive, remotely-controlled, sensors and 
SAW-tags can be interesting [1].  Such a sensor including 
chirp Interdigital Transducer (IDT) or chirp reflector, reflects 
interrogation signals sent by the “reader” thereby significantly 
transforming it. Knowing how the sensor is coding the signals 
allows to decipher the code (for signal compression) using the 
“matched to signal” filtering [2]. Such a procedure results in 
the processing gain of B*T times because the signal of 
duration T is compressed into a short pulse of duration  1/B.  
In SAW devices, we have typical delays comparable to a few 
microseconds.  Therefore, if we can use short compressed 
pulses, we can read simultaneously numerous sensors by the 
same reader, distinguishing them by delays of the peaks.  
Finally, the processing gain allows increasing the reading 
distance, or higher accuracy of measurements, or reducing the 
size of a sensor. 
While using LFM chirps [3], or “orthogonal frequency 
coding” [4], the unknown change in temperature of the sensor 
results in an unknown extension or compression of the 
impulse response of the sensor. Consequently, the reader must 
find the matched filter to a signal which is not exactly known, 
which creates additional complications to the reader 
algorithms. It was recently proposed [5] to use the 
“Hyperbolically Frequency Modulated” (HFM) signals in 
SAW sensors for which the period, and not frequency, of the 
signal linearly varies with time.  The advantage of such signals 
is that the extension or compression of the signal is equivalent 
to a small shift of it in time. Therefore, for “matched to signal” 
compression the reader can always use the same algorithm, 
independent of the sensor temperature. 
In this paper, the following aspects are discussed. In 
Section II, design of the devices along with some key 
parameters 
are 
presented. 
Experimental 
results 
of 
manufacturing and measurements of the devices made in 
frames of Swiss-Lithuanian research project [7], along with 
prospective application in temperature sensing after post 
signal processing of the measured HFM signals, is presented 
in Section III. The paper is concluded by presenting the 
advantages of using these devices for remote temperature 
sensing with future work in Section IV. 
  
II. 
DEVICE DESIGN 
The device is designed to operate at 2000-2500MHz 
(B=500MHz) frequency range with dispersive reflectors 
providing chirp reflected signal 1000ns (T=1s) long, with the 
product B*T equal to 500. The device includes two parallel 
connected IDTs (9 fingers in each), and 2 reflectors, with 
either a uniform or weighted aperture, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Sensor with aperture-weighted reflectors. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The following numbers and dimensions were used in the 
design: SAW velocity inside the IDTs VT= 3290 m/s for YZ-
LN with about 70nm thick Al electrodes, the pitch in the IDTs 
pT =0.73µm. For the shallow grooved reflectors on YZ-LN, 
the equivalent SAW velocity VG = 3488 m/s with pitches at 
the beginning and at the end of reflectors p0= 0.6976µm and 
pN= 0.872µm respectively and total length of the reflectors 
L= 1744µm. Therefore, the number of grooves in each 
reflector grating is NG= 2231. The initial delay between the 
IDTs and close-in reflector in different sensors were designed 
to be 500ns, 550 ns and 600ns, and the off-set between 
reflectors was always the same – equal to 500ns. The initial 
delay can be reduced (discussed in Section IV). 
Metal (Al) thickness of electrodes was close to 72 nm, 
metallization coefficient was 0.5 on the mask, but looked 
higher on the wafer.  The targeted nominal depth of grooves 
was   h= 15 - 40 nm; this has not been measured yet. 
III. 
PROBE RESULTS AND SIGNAL PROCESSING 
A. Probes on the wafer 
The manufactured devices were probed on wafer. We had 
a few wafers with evidently different quality of devices and 
the depth of etched grooves in reflectors seems not to be very 
uniform. S11(f) of the devices were measured using a 
Network 
Analyzer 
(NWA) 
from 
1500-3100MHz 
(B=1600MHz) with a uniform grid of step 0.2MHz (8001 
frequency points), providing visible delay of 5 s. 
On the Smith chart, shown in Figure 2, one can see a small 
loop due to impedance of the IDT in the capacitive zone, in 
the bottom-right quadrant of the chart.  It can be matched with 
a series inductance of 5.5 nH reasonably close to the center of 
the Smith chart, with real part of admittance Re(adm)  1/50 
1/ as shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 2.  S11 on the Smith’s chart, as measured. The insert shows the part 
of the curve corresponding to the reflections. 
The reflected waves from the gratings arrive to the IDTs 
with phases fast varying with frequency and appearing as 
chaotic oscillations on the Smith chart as seen in the insert of 
Figure 2 and on the real and imaginary part of admittance, 
shown in Figure 3. It is also noted that the reflections are much 
stronger at high frequencies, close to 2.5 GHz, which run a 
shorter distance and hence, their propagation loss is about 6 
dB lower than that of lower frequency (2.0 GHz) components. 
The device under test (P9) had uniform aperture and the SAW 
with shorter wavelength are also more strongly reflected. 
 
 
Figure 3.  ReAdm(red) and ImAdm(blue). 
B. Signal processing 
After deleting the slowly varying part of S11, 
corresponding to the signal reflection from the IDT itself, we 
can see only the remaining contribution of the signals arriving 
from the reflectors, as seen in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Fast rotating part of S11(f) – reflections from the chirp 
reflectors. 
From Figure 4, we can estimate that the reflected signals 
have the level below 20*log10(0.04) = - 28 dB or so, at all 
frequencies of the reflector. The main part of the signals have 
losses close to -34dB. 
Transforming the response from Figure 4 to the time 
domain, we can see the reflected pulses (impulse response of 
the device), as depicted in Figure 5. As expected, the 
reflections from the first reflector begin at a delay of 500ns 
and continue until 1000ns, overlapping with identical 
reflections from the second reflector beginning at t=1.0 s.  
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 5.  Reflections in time domain. 
Between t= 1.0 s and t=1.5s both signals overlap 
creating beating due to the frequency change in the chirp 
signals, as seen in Figure 6. In order to make all periods of the 
signal visible, we used a so-called “zero-padding” technique, 
extending the frequency range to 40 GHz by filling the 
missing S11(f) points (outside of the actual measured 
frequency range) with zeros. The strong amplitude of the beats 
confirms that the reflected signals coming from the same 
distance from two reflectors have about equal amplitude, as 
expected. 
 
Figure 6.  Overlapping of the chirp signals. 
Calculating the periods of the reflected signals between 
the time delays 0.5s – 1.0s (where they do not overlap) we 
can see in Figure 7 that the period of this chirp signal is a linear 
function of time. To compress the signals, we used an ideal 
theoretical signal inverted in time and generated according the 
formulas [5]:  

𝜃2 = −2𝜋
𝑇
𝐵 (𝑓0
2 −
𝐵2
4 ) log (1 −
𝐵𝑡
(𝑓0+𝐵/2)𝑇)


𝐴2 = exp(𝑖𝜃2)

where T=1 s is the duration of the signal, B=500MHz - its 
frequency band, f0=2250 MHz – center frequency, and t – is 
current time.  
 
Figure 7.  Periods in the signal linearly depend on time; red streight line is 
drawn for comparison. 
This theoretical unit amplitude signal was convolved with 
the device response in the time domain, shown in Figure 8. 
The compressed pulses show -3dB duration of about 2 ns, as 
expected, and their amplitude is of the order of -10.5 dB (first 
blue peak in Figure 8), which corresponds to about 20dB of 
the processing gain. The brown peaks in Figure 8 correspond 
to the following numeric experiment. We have increased the 
duration of the used theoretical pulse T => 1.01 T, that is by 
1%, and decreased its frequency band correspondingly 
(B/1.01). This would correspond to a +120°C change in 
temperature of “matched to signal” YZ-LiNbO3 based 
physical filter (if used). The experiment shows that the 
compression remains practically unchanged, only the 
compressed pulses are shifted. But the distance between the 
pulses is unchanged.  
 
Figure 8.  Compressed pulses (blue);the theoretical pulse used for 
colvolution extended by 1% (brownline). 
Figure 9 illustrates compressed pulses for 6 probed 
devices. The devices consist of two sets of three designs with 
different initial delays. Reasonable reproducibility of results 
has been obtained. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 9.  6 sensors, 12 peaks. 
At this scale, the compressed peaks with the same delay 
completely overlap. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The numeric experiment, illustrated by Figure 8, shows 
that for compression of the UWB pulses we do not need to 
care much about exact inversion in the time of the measured 
pulse. Moreover, that would be impossible without additional 
experimental devices, because in the present samples the 
reflected pulses do overlap. The compression is invariant for 
small changes of the reference signal as it results in a 
simultaneous shift of the two compressed peaks. However, the 
distance between said peaks remains unchanged. On the other 
hand, if there was a significant change in temperature of the 
measured sensor itself, the compression process will remain 
invariant, but the distance between compressed peaks is 
temperature dependent. Namely, this allows measurement of 
temperature by accurate measurement of the said time delay 
between the compressed peaks. The described procedure 
makes multiple trials of matched to signal filter parameters 
and, in this way, essentially simplifies reader software and 
accelerates extraction of the measured physical value (in this 
case, temperature). 
Figure 9 allows us to estimate the number of sensors that 
can be interrogated simultaneously by one reader. The 
identification of the individual sensor can be done by the 
position of the compressed peak pairs. The distance between 
the reader and the sensors is of the order of a few meters and 
can introduce the uncertainty of the initial delay of around 10 
ns. A change in temperature of 100°C introduces a variation 
of the 2nd peak position of the order of 20ns. Therefore, we 
must allocate a time slot about 30 ns long for each 2nd peak. 
Otherwise, the peak from a “cold” sensor might be confused 
with the peak of “hot” sensor separated at larger distance.  In 
this design, we have about 500ns for all “2nd” peaks, which 
means that we can have 500/30 16 sensors interrogated 
simultaneously. Potentially, we could increase the off-set 
between the reflectors to about 1 s, and thus, increase the 
possible number of interrogated sensors to about 30. On 
contrary, the initial delay of 500ns, serves no purpose since 
the compressed pulse appears after the end of the impulse 
response of the 1st reflector, that is after 1 s delay in our case. 
Therefore, the empty space between the IDTs and the 1st 
reflector can be significantly reduced. The above estimations 
show that the maximal number of sensors interrogated by one 
reader is also dependent on the expected operation 
temperature range of the sensor system. 
A. Futher work 
After packaging a sufficient number of sensors, we plan to 
measure them remotely using the interrogation device (“the 
reader”) developed earlier by T. Ostertag, RSSI GmbH, 
Germany [6].  The reader device measures distantly the 
reflected sensor signals S11(f) in a predetermined set of 
frequency points. According to our previous experience [1], 
the expected precision of the measurements must be better 
than 0.1°C. We plan direct experiments by varying sensor 
temperature.  The software being developed now will fully 
profit from the above discussed invariance of the compression 
pulse procedure with respect to the sensor temperature. 
Our other goal is the accurate measurement of power 
levels (instant and average) of the electromagnetic radiation 
of the reader in different measurement regimes and 
comparisons with existing UWB regulations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was done within the frame of the Swiss-
Lithuanian Eurostars Project No. E!10640 UWB_SENS and 
was co-funded by the State Secretariat for Education, 
Research and Innovation. This support is welcomed by 
authors with gratitude.  V.P. is grateful to Lithuanian 
colleagues, R. Miskinis, S. Ragaisis and A. Mitasiunas for the 
discussions and to R. Hammond of Resonant Inc. for showing 
interest in the sensor research area. Many thanks to S. 
Yandrapalli, P. Turner and to J. Koskela for reading the text. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Lamothe, V. Plessky, J.-M. Friedt, T. Ostertag, and S. 
Ballandras, “Ultra-wideband SAW sensors and tags,” 
Electronics Letters, Volume 49, pp. 1576 – 1577, Issue 24, 21 
November 2013, doi:10.1049/el.2013.3333. 
[2] D. Morgan, “Surfave acoustic wave filters”, Amsterdam, 
Elsevier, 2007. 
[3] S. Harma,  V. Plessky,  Xianyi Li, and  P. Hartogh, “Feasibility 
of ultra-wideband SAW RFID tags meeting FCC rules”, IEEE 
Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency 
Control, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 812-820, April 2009, doi: 
10.1109/TUFFC.2009.1104. 
[4] D. C. Malocha, D. Puccio, and D. Gallagher, "Orthogonal 
frequency coding for SAW device applications," IEEE 
Ultrasonics Symposium, 2004, pp. 1082-1085 Vol.2. 
doi: 10.1109/ULTSYM.2004.1417965. 
[5] V. Plessky and M. Lamothe, “Hyperbolically frequency 
modulated transducer in SAW sensors and tags”, Electronics 
Letters, Volume 49, Issue 24, p. 1503 – 1504, 21 November 
2013, doi: 10.1049/el.2013.2815. 
[6] T. Ostertag, RSSI GmbH - Contact. Retrieved January, 2018, 
from http://www.rssi-gmbh.de/kontakt.html 
[7] UWB_SENS | EUROSTARS. Retrieved January, 2018, from 
https://www.eurostars-eureka.eu/project/id/10640 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

