Analysis of Wireless and Internet Link Failure Effects on Open Loop Remote
Control of Motors
Arpit Ainchwar, Jasmeet Singh Ladoiye, Dan Necsulescu
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, Canada
Email: aainc092@uottawa.ca, jlado023@uottawa.ca, necsu@uottawa.ca
Abstract— In the era of the Internet of Things (IoT), it is
crucial to study the real-time dependencies of the Web, its
failures, and the time delays. Wireless links widen the domain
of
applications
of
mixed,
engineered
systems
such
that
computer integration includes remote nodes that are not wired
to a central station. System integration requires addressing,
monitoring and control issues resulting from link uncertainty.
The performance of a real-time control system depends not
only on the reliability of the hardware and software used but
also on the time delay in estimating the output, because of the
effects of
computing
time
delay
on the control
system
performance. New solutions are required based on distributed
model predictive control, inverse problem solutions, and
fractional order modeling. Remote monitoring and control
contain wireless sensors and actuator networks that are stand-
alone or embedded in an Internet of Things system. The focus
of the paper is on enhancing continuity of operation of remote
nodes considering random link failures. This is illustrated by
the simulation results of Model Predictive Control (MPC) and
Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID). Mechatronic systems
control is illustrated for the case of data loss in a remote motor
closed loop operation.
Keywords-wireless
links;
internet;
motors;
experimental
study; model predictive control.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wireless
links
permit
to
expand
the
domain
of
applications
of
mixed,
engineered
systems
such
that
computer integration includes remote nodes, which belong
to a network that is partly not wired to a central station.
Wireless
mechatronic
system
integration
requires
addressing monitoring and control issues resulting from link
uncertainty [1]- [4]. Mechatronic systems for remote
monitoring
and
control
contain
wireless
sensors
and
actuators consisting of standing-alone nodes of networks
that can be embedded in an Internet of Things system.
Systems
integrated
using
wireless
links
expand
the
applications of wired links between components of various
physical types (mechanical, electrical, fluid, thermal etc.)
but also introduce uncertainty due to inherent effects of the
environment of wireless communications. Remote nodes
considered in this paper are part of sensor and actuator
networks. The focus is on enhancing continuity of operation
of remote nodes considering the random failure of links [5] -
[8]. The effects of random discontinuities of links will be
addressed for remote monitoring and control by developing
autonomous features. Some of the important application
fields are the network of mobile sensors and of vehicle
formations. In case of functioning wireless network links, a
central control station will generate sequences of optimal
commands
from
distributed
control.
During
link
interruption, the remote nodes will switch to autonomous
operation using the finite sequence of the last pre-computed
optimal
commands
from
distributed
model
predictive
control, until the link is recovered [9]-[13].
This paper is the extension of paper, [14] “Determination
of Cycle Time Constraints in Case of Link Failure in Closed
Loop Control in the Internet of Things”, which focused on
the experimental setup for studying time delay and network
losses in the open loop system. This paper analyses the data
from a new experimental architecture and emphasizes on
providing solutions for network interruption using MPC. A
DC motor with an encoder is used as an actuator in our
system for data analysis. A preliminary closed-loop solution
for compensating for the time delay and losses in the
recorded data is provided using MPC.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes
the analysis of the delay components in detail. Section III
presents the experimental setup and describes its various
components.
Section
IV
illustrates
the
experimental
observations of our developed system implicating the rise in
time delay and losses with an increase in the sampling
intervals. Lastly, Section V shows preliminary results using
MPC and a comparison is done with PID controller
followed by discussion.
II.
TIME DELAY ANALYSIS
Time delay at a single node along its route from source to
destination is composed of: nodal processing time +
queueing delay + transmission delay + propagation delay as
shown in Figure 1. Delays are usually short, but packets can
be dropped in the communication network. For reliable
links, in case of loss, packet resending is required. For this
purpose, stable data transfer protocols were developed [4]
[14].
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 1. Delay components
The sampling rate must satisfy Shannon’s sampling
theorem [15] to accomplish the desired performance. A
good example to confirm this is in [16] where series of robot
control experiments were performed with different sampling
rates. With the increase in the sampling rate time delay,
computation becomes more evident. The effects of time
delay cannot be neglected when the plant has a short time
constant, and the order is high [17].
III.
EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEM
A. Experimental Setup
The configuration of the experimental setup of open
loop control system for the study of time delay and data
losses in the given wireless network is shown in Figure 2. It
consists of two different parts communicating with each
other. The first part of the system consists of (Arduino
UnoTM + Wi-Fi ShieldTM + DC Motor) and the second part
contains (Arduino UnoTM + Wi-Fi ShieldTM + Encoder).
There is a physical wired connection between (DC Motor +
Encoder) of the first part to the Wi-Fi Shield of the second
part of the system. The DC Motor can be operated remotely
using the port forward method, which allows devices in a
local network to be operated in a global environment, using
an assigned IP address. The DC Motor attached to the
Arduino Uno can be operated (from turning ON and OFF)
continuously for regular time interval using the program
uploaded on the Arduino through IDE software. The
Encoder connected to the other part of the system senses the
variations in the speed and sends the speed of the DC motor
to the attached server, where it gets recorded and stored,
subject to its time constraint. The recorded data further can
be studied for the data delays and the link failure statistics.
The timing of each recorded data will give the time delay in
execution of the loop. If the time delay is greater than that of
the sampling interval, there is a loss of data, which can be
observed from the experimentally recorded data.
B. System Components
The experimental setup components consist of two sets
of Arduinos UnoTM and Arduino Wi-Fi Shield 101TM
connected with each other in two separate parts. First part
containing
(Arduino
Uno
+
Arduino
Wi-Fi
Shield)
connected to a DC Motor, while the other part is connected
to the Encoder.
DC motor's speed can be controlled over a wide range.
The rotary encoder converts the motion or angular position
of a shaft or axle to an analog signal and eventually, in a
binary form. The signal can be further processed for
obtaining the position and speed of the motor shaft.
Figure 2. Experimental setup of open loop motor remote control
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The increasing implementation of IoT has made it crucial
to thoroughly analyze the effects of time delay and data
losses for the given wireless environment to study the link
failures and find out its cycle time constraints. This
computing time delay differs from system time delay
resulting from the execution of control programs.
Consequences of computing time delay are categorized as
the delay and loss problems which can be analyzed for cycle
time to link failure. The experimental setup described in this
article concentrates on the development of the practical
approach to study the closed-loop link failure problems and
eventually find its randomness characteristics and cycle time
of link failure for different time intervals. This study will
help in determining the suitable time interval or frequency
for performing the closed loop control accounting for data
losses and link failures.
Figure 3 depicts the recorded data from the preliminary
experiment.
Time
constraint
is
associated
with
each
registered data which ultimately helps to find the delay and
data losses and can be used in determining the suitable time
interval for performing the closed-loop control with reduced
effects of failures. In the graphs, the x-axis represents the
time of the data recorded while the y-axis denotes the DC
motor speed. The short horizontal lines on the x-axis
indicate data losses when there is no data recorded at that
time constraint.
Recorded data in Figure 3 has its time constraint. The
collected
data
for
the
sampling
interval
shows
the
randomness throughout the period. From this figure, it can
be observed that sometimes the time constraint of two
continuous data is greater than the fixed sampling interval
which shows the time delay, while for certain consecutive
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

readings the time difference is in multiples of sampling
intervals that shows the loss of data.
Figure 4-6 illustrates the experimentally recorded data for
the 2, 5 and 15 seconds time intervals of DC motor
operating (turn ON to OFF) respectively, and each recorded
data has its time constraint. As can be observed from these
figures the data delay and data loss are more evident in case
of 2 seconds’ time interval as compared to the other two
graphs. As we compare the results of 5 seconds’ and 15
seconds’ time interval, data delay and loss are more
apparent in 5 seconds’ graph than the graph that represents
the 15 seconds’ time interval. This shows that as the time
interval for the control system increases there are lesser
chances of data delay and data losses resulting in fewer
failures of the system.
Figure 3. Experimental results with time constraints.
Figure 4. Experimental results for 2 seconds’ time interval.
Figure 5. Experimental results for 5 seconds’ time interval.
Figure 6. Experimental results for 15 seconds’ time interval.
These experimental results show that, as the frequency of
the open loop control system increases, more are the
chances of failure of the system because of longer data
delay and data loss as compared to the closed loop cycles of
higher time intervals, i.e., lower frequency.
V.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS FOR MODEL PREDICTIVE
CONTROL
The wireless NCS (Network Control System) is a closed-
loop system consisting of a plant consisting of an actuator
and
a sensor to provide feedback and a controller. The
wireless input is communicating with the DC motor using
the shared network. The wireless network is not a stable
network as it always consists of delays and even data losses.
To compensate the network latency and the data losses,
Model Predictive Control (MPC) has been used, and the
results
are
compared
with
the
Proportional-Integral-
Derivative (PID) controller. The property of the MPC to
predict the future states will be exploited to compensate the
losses in the network. In this system, as described in Figure
6, the delay is introduced when the Wi-Fi shield gets the
signal from the webpage. Data packets also get lost when
the latency exceeds a certain limit. We have introduced
network delays and losses in the designed system imitating
TCP/IP protocol considering average round trip delay of
70ms. The simulation results are produced and compared
using MATLABTM 2017b. Simulation results in Figure 7
show how MPC performs in case of network delays and
losses.
Figure 7. Closed loop network compensation using MPC
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 8. Closed loop delay compensation using MPC and PID.
Figure 8 describes the delay of 70ms during network
interruptions. The network delays compensation was done
using both MPC and PID stating the advantages of MPC
over PID. MPC predicts the delay of its time as per its
characteristic, unlike PID.
A sampling interval of 100ms was chosen for the
simulation. Prediction horizon of 20 ms and control horizon
as 3 ms were chosen such that the controller can look ahead
at the behavior of the entire pulse. Reducing the sampling
time will increase the performance of the system at the
expense of the computational cost.
Figure 9. Simulation result for network compensation using MPC vs. PID.
The results obtained indicate that MPC can address the
problems due to the delays and the losses such that in this
initial investigation the output of the DC motor is unaffected
by the network interruptions.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Wireless network control system depends heavily on the
network
protocol.
The
experimentally
recorded
data
quantifies the randomness in the time delay and the data
losses. Because of the time delays, wireless networks of
sensors and actuators can become unstable. To stabilize the
system, an appropriate controller must be used for the
network delay and loss compensation.
In this paper, the various network delays and losses were
verified using the custom-made experimental setup. The
model predictive controller has been used to counter the
effects of the time delay. MPC showed its robustness and
prediction characteristics in the above results. The proposed
scheme gives encouraging results and helps to operate
remotely based sensor nodes and eventually record the
sensor data accounting for the time delay and data loss
problems.
In
future
work,
the
practical
experimentation
and
evaluation with the constant and variable time delays will be
done. Other delay compensation schemes can be applied and
compared with the proposed ones. The future work will help
present
the
intended
experimental
study
of
wireless
networks of sensors and actuators for a remote velocity
control, based on the approaches discussed in the paper.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y.-Q. Xia et al., Recent Progress in Networked Control
Systems – A Survey, International Journal of Automation and
Computing, Aug. 2015, pp. 343-367.
[2]
I. F. Akyildiz and I. H. Kasimoglu, Wireless Sensor and Actor
Network: Research Challenges. Ad-Hoc Networks, 2, 2004,
pp. 351-367.
[3]
I.F. Akyildiz et al., A Survey on Wireless Multimedia Sensor
Networks, Computer Networks, 2006.10.002, pp. 1-40.
[4]
C. Wang and K. Sohraby, A Survey of Transport Protocols
for Wireless Sensor Networks, IEEE Network, May-June
2006, pp. 34-40.
[5]
K. G. Shin and X. Cui. “Computing Time Delay and Its
Effects on Real-Time Control Systems”. IEEE transactions on
control systems technology, vol. 3, no. 2, June 1995
[6]
T. Strohmer and J. Tanner. “Implementations of Shannon’s
sampling theorem, a time-frequency approach.” Vol. 4, No. 1,
Jan. 2005, pp. 1-17 ISSN: 1530-6429.
[7]
P. K. Khosla, “Choosing Sampling Rates for Robot Control,”
in front. IEEE Int. Conf 5 Robotics Automat., 1987, pp. 169-
174.
[8]
T. Mita, “Optimal digital feedback control systems counting
computation time of control laws,” IEEE Trans. Automat
Contr., vol. AC-30, no. 6, pp. 542-547, June 1985
[9]
S. Mansour, Using Model Predictive Control for Real-Time
Control over the Internet, IEEE CCECE, Conf., Niagara Falls,
May 2004, pp. 0827-0830.
[10] A. Fletcher et al., Estimation from Lossy Sensor Data: Jump
Linear Modeling and Kalman Filtering, IEEE IPSN”04 Conf.,
Berkeley, Apr. 2004, pp. 251-258.
[11] A. Bemporad et al., Hybrid Model Predictive Control based
on Wireless Sensor Feedback: An Experimental Study, Int. J.
of Robust and Nonlinear Control, May, 2009, pp. 209-225.
[12] E. Henrikson, Predictive Control for Wireless Network
Systems in Process Industry, Doctoral Thesis, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, 2014.
[13] W. Hu et al., Network Predictive Control over the Internet
using Round-Trip Delay Measurement, IEEE Trans on I and
M, no. 10, 2008, pp. 2231-2241.
[14] A. Ainchwar and D. Necsulescu. “Determination of cycle
time constraints in case of link failure in
closed loop control
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

in Internet of Things”. Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference of Control, Dynamic Systems, and Robotics
(CDSR'17) Toronto, Canada – August 21 – 23, 2017 Paper
No. 122 DOI: 10.11159/cdsr17.122.
[15] T. Strohmer and J. Tanner. “Implementations of Shannon’s
sampling theorem, a time frequency approach”. Vol. 4, No. 1,
Jan. 2005, pp. 1-17 ISSN: 1530-6429.
[16] P. K. Khosla, “Choosing Sampling Rates for Robot Control,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Con. 5 Robotics Automat., 1987, pp. 169-174.
[17] T. Mita, “Optimal digital feedback control systems counting
computation time of control laws,” IEEE Trans. Automat.
Contr.,
vol.
AC-30,
no.
6,
pp.
542-547,
June
1985.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

