Design and Fabrication of a Solid-State pH Sensor Module
Considering Its Possible Applications
Lan Zhang, Jian Lu, Ryutaro Maeda
Research Center for Ubiquitous MEMS and Micro
Engineering (UMEMSME)
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology (AIST)
Tsukuba, Japan
email: {chou-ran@aist.go.jp, jian-lu@aist.go.jp,
maeda-ryutaro}@aist.go.jp
Hirofumi Nogami
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
email: nogami.hirofumi.406@m.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract— We developed a solid pH sensor, which can
implement a real-time monitoring of pH value with low power
consumption and high accuracy. The prototype of the pH
sensor was fabricated and packaged well and can keep a linear
output proportional to the changes in the pH value and has a
high-sensitivity of >14 µA/pH. The developed pH sensor is
believed to be significantly important for both the industrial
and the civilian sectors for improving the efficiency of
environment monitoring.
Keywords- pH value test; solid state; MEMS sensor; Indium
Tin Oxide
I.
INTRODUCTION
Measurements of pH are important in many fields [1][2],
such
as
chemical
engineering,
agriculture,
medicine,
environmental science, water treatment and purification, and
many other applications. However, conventionally, the pH
sensor has a reference electrode with a large size because of
high
concentration
of
electrolyte
solution
in
it.
The
shortcoming of big size and large power consumption
seriously restrict the application of traditional pH sensors,
especially in the coming “Internet of Things” age where
maintenance-free and wireless communications are essential
for arbitrary distributing of the sensor node.
State-of-the-art
microelectromechanical
systems
(MEMS) and complementary MOS (CMOS) techniques
have undergone many advances [3]. As MEMS researchers,
we need to contribute to the industrial revolution and
improve the pH measurement technology. We have engaged
in developing a solid-type pH sensor for real-time pH
measurement recently. Figure 1 shows a typical pH sensor
prototype including the package, measurement electrodes,
and testing and transmission boards. MEMS fabrication
technology was used in this work to realize the sensing
electrode
with
high
dimensional
and
performance
homogeneity.
The
developed
pH
sensor
offers
the
advantages of field effect transistor (FET) and indium tin
oxide (ITO) sensing techniques. The sensor system can be
fabricated with a compact size by eliminating the reference
solution. The solid-state sensor structure is fit for long-term
pH measurement, and the separate ITO sensing electrode can
be patterned with a suitable capture structure for various test
environments. In Sections 2 and 3, sensor system setup and
preliminary results will be presented.
II.
ELECTRODE FABRICATION AND SENSOR SYSTEM
SETUP
A.
Sensor electrodes fabrication
The fabrication procedure of the pH sensor electrodes has
been introduced comprehensively in our previous works [4]
[5]. By the MEMS technique, 47 die chip sensor electrodes
can be fabricated on a 4-inch silicon wafer. The flat area of
every single electrode can be controlled at <120 mm2. The
die chip of sensor electrodes was fabricated with a compact
size can induce the packaged sensor system enjoying a high
flexible application potential in feature works.
B.
Sensor system setup
The given typical pH sensor prototype combines the
functional components of sensor electrodes, testing and
transmission boards, see upper left insert of Figure 1.
An
ITO-sensing electrode connects the gate terminal of a
MOSFET, the specific FET was loaded on the testing board
was used to measure the pH value of target solutions.
Transmission board has a CPU, a wireless module, a chip
temperature unit and an IR temperature sensor to coding and
transmitting the tested date, recording the environment and
board temperature, respectively.
III.
PRELIMINARY MEASUREMENT RESULTS
A.
Sensor sensitivity and output linearity
The output function of given solid pH was evaluated first.
The lower right insert of Figure 1 shows the coded data of
the output current versus pH characteristics, considering that
the pH sensor is immersed in a solution with varying pH
values. The coded data of the output current decreased as the
pH value increased from 5 to 7, accordingly. Moreover, the
output data was linearly proportional to the changes in the
pH value, i.e., the output data can be represented by a first-
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

degree polynomial equation. Thus, the pH sensor can be
easily used to measure the pH of target solutions by fitting
the output current to the pH value.
B.
Temperature calibration for long-term measurement
Normally,
in
a
commercial
pH
sensor,
several
temperature sensors are placed into the sensor system to
calibrate the output from the effect of temperature. As
previously
mentioned,
for
our
sensor,
two
types
of
temperature sensors (chip sensor and IR temperature device
unit) were loaded on the transmission board to calibrate the
given pH sensor. Figure 2 shows the results of pH sensor
output versus on-board temperature at the same time. A
pH=7.3@25 solution was simultaneously tested by the given
pH sensor and temperature sensor. The comparison results
can be used to eliminate the temperature effect of the given
pH sensor system for the next long-term field measurement.
IV.
CONCLUSION
We developed a solid-state pH sensor for real time pH
monitoring. The given sensor was packaged and preliminary
tested. As the results show, the developed pH sensor has a
good stability and linear output performance. After the
temperature
calibration
process,
a
long-term
field
measurement for industrial application is going on, and the
tested data can provide very important database information
for the management system to realize of smart manufactory.
Moreover, in order to realize a commercial pH sensor with a
long time stable performance, the fabrication method of
sensor electrodes, cost of testing and transmission boards and
package approach are also considered to be improved.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Batista, “An embedded measurement system for the
electrical characterization of EGFET as a pH sensor,” Sci.
Technol, vol. 25, pp. 027001-1-6, 2014.
[2]
J. Bausells, J. Carrabina, A. Errachid, and A. Merlos, “Ion-
sensitive field-effect transistors fabricated in a commercial
CMOS technology,” Sens. Actuators B, vol. 57, pp. 56-62,
1999.
[3]
A. Richter et al. “Review on hydrogel-based pH sensors and
microsensors,” Sensors, vol. 8, pp. 561-581, 2008.
[4]
L. Zhang, J. Lu, H. Okada, H. Nogami, and T. Itoh,
“Development of ITO- and FET-based cow rumen sensor for
long-term pH value monitoring,” Symposium on Design,
Test, Integration and Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS (DTIP),
vol. 2016, pp.92-96, May 2016.
[5]
L. Zhang et al. “Low-Power Highly Sensitive pH sensor with
μ-dots protective structures for monitoring rumen in cows in 
real-time,” IEEE Sens. J. vol. 17, pp. 7281 - 7289, 2017.
Figure 2. Temperature and pH test feature of the given
sensor.
Figure 1. pH sensor system
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

