Evaluation of LP-WAN Technologies for Fire Forest Detection Systems
Daniel Adorno∗, Salviano Soares†, Jos´e Lima‡, and Antonio Valente§
∗University of Tr´as-os-Montes and Alto Douro
†IEETA - UA
Vila Real, Portugal
and University of Tr´as-os-Montes and Alto Douro
Email: adornogomes@gmail.com
Vila Real, Portugal
Email: salblues@utad.pt
‡INESC TEC - INESC Technology and Science
§INESC TEC - INESC Technology and Science
and Research Center in Digitalization and Intelligent,
and University of Tr´as-os-Montes and Alto Douro,
Robotics, Polytechnic Institute of Braganc¸a,
Vila Real, Portugal
Braganc¸a, Portugal
Email: avalente@utad.pt
Email: jllima@ipb.pt
Abstract—Low Power Wide Area Networks (LP-WAN)
are receiving a lot of attention because of their ability
to communicate using radio frequency in long distances,
with low-power consumption and low-cost devices. In this
paper, we provide a comparison between the two LP-WAN
platforms that are leading the market, the Sigfox and
the LoRaWAN, based on the literature. Both platforms
are analyzed considering the context of the forest ﬁre
detection and veriﬁcation systems. Many aspects are being
considered to identify which LP-WAN is more adequate to
be used in this kind of systems, such as battery lifetime,
coverage range, business model and costs. The comparison
shows that both platforms are very similar in most of
the aspects, although LoRaWAN is more ﬂexible than
Sigfox on the deployment and management of the network
infrastructure. LoRaWAN allows customers to implement
and manage their own infrastructure network, which is
essential in systems which monitor vast forest areas.
Keywords–IoT; LoRaWAN; Sigfox; Fire detection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Forest is one of the most important resources of the
earth that protects the ecological balance. It has a huge
impact on reducing the emission of greenhouse gases,
soil erosion, atmospheric carbon absorption, moderating
the temperature, and regulating rainfall. A forest ﬁre is
considered one of the most dangerous natural accidents,
caused by natural forces or human activities. It can
affect practically all the forests in the world, having
many consequences such as physical, biological and
environmental [1]–[3]. In the last decade, with the
advent of the Internet of Things (IoT), many forest ﬁre
detection and veriﬁcation systems based on Wireless
Sensor Network (WSN) technology were being pro-
posed. In fact, these identiﬁed technologies represent
an advance in comparison with traditional forest ﬁre
prevention [4]. But, most of those systems used short-
range radio communication with mesh network proto-
cols, and long-range communication based on Global
System for Mobile Communications (GSM). In general,
this approach contributes to an increase of the energy
consumption and the cost of the system [5], [6].
Recently, a new concept of wireless telecommuni-
cation wide area network has arisen to attend the need
to develop highly scalable systems with low-cost, low-
power consumption, with the capacity to communicate
in long distances using radio frequency [7]. Nowadays,
there are many platforms and technologies based on this
new paradigm called Low-Power Wide Area Network-
ing (LP-WAN). In this article, we will compare two of
those platforms, commercially available, that are leading
the market: LoRa and Sigfox [8]. The goal is to identify
which of them is more adequate to be used in forest
ﬁre detection and veriﬁcation systems, as depicted in
Figure 1. More speciﬁcally, this system should cover
an area of 6600 km2, involving urban, rural and forest
spaces (Figure 2, Braganc¸a District, Portugal).
Besides Sigfox and LoRa being the most popular
LP-WAN platforms, they were also chosen to be com-
pared in this article because both operate in unlicensed
bands, reducing the ﬁnal cost of the solution [9]. Sigfox
is a closed platform and LoRa is an open platform [6].
The two platforms are available for the customers as
Network-as-a-Service (NaaS). But, LoRa allows cus-
tomers to create their own infrastructure without the
need to contract any service [10], [11].
The rest of the article is organized as follows:
Section II presents the state of the art on LP-WAN
technologies and platforms, section III describes the
LoRaWAN and Sigfox low power wide area networks
where the business model, the architecture, the technical
aspects and the costs are stressed. Section IV performs
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 1. Overview
a comparison between the presented platforms. Conclu-
sion is described in Section V.
Figure 2. Case study - Braganc¸a, Portugal
II.
RELATED WORK
Marco Centenaro et al. [6] make a presenta-
tion about the main characteristics of the LP-WAN
paradigm, focusing on the platforms that operate in the
unlicensed spectrum. They compares three platforms
commercially available: LoRaWAN, Sigfox and Ingenu.
These platforms are analyzed in terms of efﬁciency,
effectiveness, and architectural design, especially for
smart city applications. Also, they present practical re-
sults of experiments and deployments with IoT networks
based on LoRaWAN, developed in the city of Padova,
Italy. Raza et al. [7] presents the most important Low
Power Wide Area (LPWA) platforms and technologies
available in the market, the standardization activities
developed by different standards organizations and the
industrial consortia built around some LP-WAN tech-
nologies. They point that LP-WAN technologies have
similar approaches, limitations and challenges. Also,
they highlight the need for standards because of the
variety of LP-WAN solutions which is resulting in a
fragmented market. They provide an overview of many
standardization efforts. Also, they make a comparison of
the following LP-WAN platforms: LoRaWAN, Sigfox,
Ingenu, Weightless-N and NB-IoT. The comparison is
based on business and technical aspects. Sinha et al. [9]
analyze and compare two LP-WAN platforms based
on licensed and unlicensed bands, respectively, NB-
IoT and LoRaWAN. They provide a survey on both
technologies, describing the technical differences in
terms of physical features, network architecture and
MAC protocol. The comparison shows that LoRaWAN
has advantages in terms of battery lifetime, capacity and
cost. NB-IoT also has advantages , like QoS, latency,
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

reliability and range. They consider application scenar-
ios and show the current status of these technologies
in Korea, Japan, and China. Mekki et al. [8] provide a
comprehensive and comparative study of the three LP-
WAN platforms that are competing for large-scale IoT
deployment worldwide: Sigfox, LoRaWAN and NB-
IoT. The ﬁrst two, based on unlicensed bands, and the
last one, on licensed bands. The platforms are compared,
showing the technical differences between Sigfox, Lo-
RaWAN and NB-IoT in terms of IoT success factors
such as quality of service, coverage, range, latency,
battery life, scalability, payload length, deployment and
cost. The result of the comparison shows that Sigfox and
LoRaWAN have advantages in terms of battery lifetime,
capacity and cost. NB-IoT offers beneﬁts in terms of
latency and quality of service.
III.
SIGFOX AND LORA PLATFORMS
This section addresses the business models, the
architecture and the technical aspects for both Sigfox
and LoRa low power wide area networks.
A. Business Model
Sigfox is a company and a LP-WAN network opera-
tor that commercializes its own IoT solution as Network
and as a Service (NaaS) in around 57 countries. To
cover all these countries, the company has partnership
with various network operators. In the Sigfox’s business
model, customers can implement their own application
in a fast and easy way, because they are only concerned
about the end-devices. All the costs and management
related to the infrastructure is Sigfox responsibility [10].
LoRa is a technology that was developed by a start-
up called Cycleo in 2009. Three years later, Cycleo
was purchased by Semtech, a company from USA. In
2015, LoRa was standardized by LoRa-Alliance that
makes it an open software and IoT platform hardware.
Furthermore, LoRa is deployed in around 100 countries.
In LoRas business model, customers can use a public
network offered by LP-WAN network operator (e.g.,
Orange in France, KPN in Netherlands, and Fastnet in
South Africa), or create their own LoRa infrastructure.
A network infrastructure based on LoRa can use hard-
ware from many different manufacturers with a low cost
[11].
B. Architecture
In terms of architecture, both platforms are very
similar. Their architecture can be divided into four
layers, as shown in Figure 3. In the ﬁrst layer are
presented the end-devices, which collect the monitored
data. The end-devices send the collected data to the
gateways or base stations, into the second layer. In
the third layer, the network server receives the data
from the gateways, process and stores the data into the
databases. At the upper layer, the application layer the
TABLE I. LORA END-DEVICES CLASSES
Class A
Class B
Class C
Communication
Bidirectional
Bidirectional
Bidirectional
Power consumption
Low
Medium
High
Latency
High
Low
Low
Messages
Unicast
Unicast and
Multicast
Unicast and
Multicast
end-users access the information acquired by the end-
devices, through speciﬁc applications, such as industrial
monitoring, home automation, smart city applications,
smart grid and smart metering applications. End-devices
and gateways communicate using radio frequency. The
Network layer communicates with the Gateway and Ap-
plication layers using a TCP/IP based communication
[10], [11].
C. Technical aspects
Regarding the radiofrequency, both Sigfox and LoRa
use unlicensed Industrial, Scientiﬁc and Medical (ISM)
radio bands (868 MHz in Europe, 915 MHz in North
America, 433 MHz in Asia)
At Sigfox network, the end-devices connect to the
base-stations using Binary Phase-Shift Keying (BPSK)
modulation in an ultra-narrow band sub-GHZ ISM band
carrier. Sigfox supports bidirectional communication,
uplink (from the end-device to the base station) and
downlink (from the base station to the end-device). The
number of messages over the uplink is limited to 140
messages per day, and the maximum payload length
for each uplink message is 12 bytes. The number of
messages over the downlink is limited to four messages
per day. Sigfox permits encrypted messages using the
the algorithm AES-128. Accordingly with the company,
the communication is up to 30–50 km in rural areas and
3–10 km in urban areas [6], [10]. The battery lifetime
for each end-device is around 8 years [7].
On the other hand, LoRa also supports a bidirec-
tional communication but provided by the chirp spread
spectrum (CSS) modulation. It uses six spreading fac-
tors (SF7 to SF12) to adapt the data rate and range trade
off. The data rate is between 300 bps and 50 kbps. It
depends on the spreading factor and on the channel
bandwidth. The maximum payload length for each
message is 243 bytes. The LoRaWAN communication
protocol is used by the LoRa platform. In this protocol,
each message transmitted by an end-device is received
by all the base stations in the coverage range of the
system. Messages can be encrypted using the algorithm
AES-128b. The communication range is between 15–
20 km in rural areas and between 3–5 km in urban
areas. LoRaWAN considers three classes of end-devices
as presented in Table I [11], [12]. The battery lifetime
is around 10 years for each LoRa end-device [7].
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 3. Lora and Sigfox architecture
TABLE II. COMPARISON OF SIGFOX AND LORA COSTS
Spectrum cost
Network
infrastructure
cost
End-device
cost
Sigfox
Free
Not
Applicable
(Network as a
Service)
$1–$5
LoRa
Free
$100–
$1000/gateway
$1–$5
D. Costs
For both platforms, is possible to ﬁnd into the
market, end-device hardware with low prices from $1
to $3, in average. The connectivity subscription per unit
is around $1 per year, when applicable. Besides these
items, there are other cost aspects like spectrum and
network infrastructure that impacts an implementation
[8], [9]. Table II shows a comparison for these topics.
IV.
COMPARING THE PLATFORMS
Some relevant aspects for an IoT project will be
compared, considering the presented Sigfox and LoRa
characteristics as show in Table 3. The compared char-
acteristics are:
Implementation time:
Necessary time until to get the project on
production;
Initial investiments:
Initial monetary resources to create the IoT
infrastructure;
Adaptative Data Rate (ADR):
Conﬁgurations to adjust the size of the
message, and control the coverage range
of the devices impacting on the power
consumption;
Uplink messages:
Messages sent from the end-devices to the
network server;
Downlink messages:
Messages sent from the network server to
the end-devices;
Maximum payload:
Maximum size of the uplink messages (in
bytes);
Coverage and range of the gateways:
The maximum distance of communication
between an end-device and a gateway in
urban and rural areas.
In addition, other IoT comparison factors may be
added [8]. These factors include the quality of service,
battery life, latency, scalability, deployment and cost.
The spider web diagram presented in Figure 4 summa-
rizes the comparison between these factors for Sigfox
and LoRaWAN low power wide area networks.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

TABLE III. COMPARISON OF SIGFOX AND LORA
LoRa
SigFox
Implementation time
Higher
Lower
Initial investiments
Higher
Lower
Adaptative Data Rate (ADR)
Yes
No
Uplink messages
Unlimited
140 per day
Downlink messages
Unlimited
4 per day
Maximum payload
243 bytes
12 bytes
Coverage and range of the gateways
15 – 20 Km (Rural)
30 – 50 Km (Rural)
3 – 5 Km (Urban)
3 – 10 Km (Urban)
Scalability
Latency
Perfor-
mance
QoS
Battry Life
Cost
Efﬁciency
Deployment
Sigfox
LoRaWAN
Figure 4. Spider web Diagram
V.
CONCLUSION
This article analyzed and compared some aspects
of LoRa and Sigfox low power wide area networks
platforms. In all aspects, both platforms are very similar
and could be used to implement forest ﬁre detection and
veriﬁcation systems. However, Sigfox is limited in the
regions of the world where the service is available. This
is a great advantage showed by LoRa, because, if the
system has to be implemented in a region where there
is no LoRa public network available, the customers can
implement their own networks. In terms of coverage, the
considered area of the 6000 km2 could be covered by
one or two LoRa base stations, based on the experience
related in Belgium, where a LoRa network covers the
entire country (30 500 km2) with seven base stations [9].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is ﬁnanced by the ERDF European Re-
gional Development Fund through the Operational Pro-
gramme for Competitiveness and Internationalisation -
COMPETE 2020 Programme within project “POCI- 01-
0145-FEDER-006961”, and by National Funds through
the FCT - Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia
(Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology)
as part of project UID/EEA/50014/2013. This research
was also partially supported by SAFe Project through
PROMOVE - La Caixa.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Zhang, W. li, N. Han, and J. Kan, “Forest ﬁre detection sys-
tem based on zigbee wireless sensor network,” Front. Forestry
China, vol. 3, 09 2008, pp. 369–374.
[2]
J. Zhang, W. Li, Z. Yin, S. Liu, and X. Guo, “Forest ﬁre
detection system based on wireless sensor network,” 06 2009,
pp. 520–523.
[3]
L. Guang-Hui, Z. Jun, and W. Zhi, “Research on forest ﬁre
detection based on wireless sensor network,” in 2006 6th World
Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, 01 2006, pp.
275–279.
[4]
G. Kaur and M. Manshahia, “Wireless sensor networks for ﬁre
detection and control,” International Journal on Future Revolu-
tion in Computer Science & Communication Engineering, 12
2017, pp. 14–21.
[5]
R. Sanchez-Iborra and M.-D. Cano, “State of the art in
lp-wan solutions for industrial iot services,” Sensors, vol. 16,
no. 5, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.mdpi.com/1424-
8220/16/5/708
[6]
M. Centenaro, L. Vangelista, A. Zanella, and M. Zorzi, “Long-
range communications in unlicensed bands: the rising stars in
the iot and smart city scenarios,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 23, 10 2015, pp. 60–67.
[7]
U. Raza, P. Kulkarni, and M. Sooriyabandara, “Low power wide
area networks: An overview,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, 01 2017.
[8]
K. Mekki, E. Bajic, F. Chaxel, and F. Meyer, “A comparative
study of lpwan technologies for large-scale iot deployment,”
ICT Express, 2018, in Press.
[9]
R. S. Sinha, Y. Wei, and S.-H. Hwang, “A survey on lpwa
technology: Lora and nb-iot,” ICT Express, vol. 3, no. 1, 2017,
pp. 14–21.
[10]
“Sigfox world coverage, pricing and technical information,”
2019, URL: http://www.sigfox.com/en/coverage/ [retrieved:
February, 2019].
[11]
“LoRa world coverage, pricing and technical information,”
2019, URL: http://www.lora-alliance.org/ [retrieved: February,
2019].
[12]
J. de Carvalho Silva, J. Rodrigues, A. Alberti, P. oli, and
A. Aquino, “Lorawan - a low power wan protocol for internet
of things: a review and opportunities,” in 2017 2nd International
Multidisciplinary Conference on Computer and Energy Science
(SpliTech), 07 2017, pp. 1–6.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

