Frequency and Intensity Decision of Laser Microphone 
using Deep Leaning 
 
Ryota Mori, Norio Tsuda, Jun Yamada 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Aichi Institute of Technology, AIT 
Toyota, Japan 
E-mail: v18723vv@aitech.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Laser Microphones do not use a diaphragm, and are 
hence able to detect sound waves over a wide frequency band, 
from low frequency waves to ultrasonic waves. They can also 
measure sound waves in fluids, such as under water, without 
contact. However, the output signal of the Laser Microphone 
has many superimposed noise components, digital filter 
processing may be necessary and there was a disadvantage that 
the amount of processing increased. Therefore, we verified 
whether the desired frequency and sound pressure intensity 
can be determined even in the presence of superimposed noise 
by learning the output signal in the non-processed state via 
Deep Learning. As a result, when the number of epochs 
corresponding to the learning amount is 500, frequency 
judgment was generally possible. 
Keywords-: Laser Microphone; self-coupling effect; deep 
learning; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
These days, many researches are actively and extensively 
engaged on the development of optical microphones that do 
not use a diaphragm, yet could detect sound waves over a 
wide band range, in fluid, and the like. Laser Microphone, 
which applies a self-coupling effect of a semiconductor 
Laser Diode (LD), has broadband and flat frequency 
characteristics, and is capable of 360° omnidirectional audio 
detection on a plane perpendicular to the laser optical axis 
[1]. However, many noise components are superimposed on 
the output signal of the Laser Microphone. Thus, after 
performing fast Fourier transform (FFT), it is necessary to 
judge its frequency and sound pressure intensity by carrying 
out digital processing.  
However, there was a disadvantage that the amount of 
processing increased. Therefore, we verified by learning the 
output signal in the non-processed state via Deep Learning, 
whether the desired frequency and intensity can be 
determined even in the presence of superimposed noise.  
Moreover, it could be assumed that a state where it is 
impossible to judge the threshold by superimposing many 
noises could be avoided. This paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes the principle and system of measurement 
using Deep Learning, Section III describes the measurement 
results, and Section IV summarizes what were found from 
the measurement results. 
II. 
MEASUREMENT PRINCIPLE AND SYSTEM 
The Sound wave detection in laser optical employs the 
self-coupling effect of LD. The self-coupling effect is a 
phenomenon in which the optical output of the LD slightly 
increases and decreases by returning a part of the laser 
optical emitted from the LD into the active layer by the 
reflecting material. Figure 1 shows the operating principle of 
the Laser Microphone. 
 
 
Figure 1. Operating Principle of Laser Microphone 
 
Because sound waves are longitudinal waves, the density of 
the medium changes. High medium density increases slightly 
the refractive index of optical. On the contrary, low medium 
density also decreases the refractive index of optical. By 
repeating their states, the phase of the standing wave of the 
optical interference generated by the self-coupling effect 
periodically changes. The phase change of the optical 
interference coincides with the incident sound wave, and the 
change amount is proportional to the intensity. Thus, the 
frequency and intensity can be measured in the same way as 
a typical microphone. 
    The measurement system of frequency and intensity 
decision using Deep Learning is shown in Figure 2. LD uses 
a Distributed Feedback Laser diode (DFB-Laser), and the 
optical output was continuously oscillated at 25 mW. The 
prism sheet was used as the reflection plate was set to 10 cm. 
Sound  
Source 
Reflector 
Refractive Index 
            : Low 
 
Standing Wave 
           : Decrease 
Refractive Index 
            : High 
 
Standing Wave 
            : Increase 
Density of Medium: Low 
LD internal detection 
surface 
 
Density of Medium: High 
Laser Diode 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

A sound source was installed in a place 20 cm away so as to 
go straight to the laser beam. These measurement systems 
were fixed inside the anechoic box by a magnet. The output 
signal is processed by the personal computer. The Operating 
System (OS) of the personal computer uses Ubuntu16.04, 
while the framework for Deep Learning uses Chainer. 
 
Figure 2. Measurement system 
 
    An overview of the Deep Learning program is shown in 
Figure 3. Neural network uses Recurrent Neural Network 
(RNN) with return value in the Hidden layer. 
 
Figure 3. Overview of the Deep Learning Program 
 
The number of nodes for one layer was 1024 and the mini 
batch size was fixed to 20, the number of epochs 
corresponding to the learning amount, and hidden layers are 
varied, and the frequency and intensity decision were carried 
out to measure the loss. 
III. 
MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
In this abstract, the result is shown in Figure 4 when 100 
Hz to 1 kHz sound waves are indent every 100 Hz and 
number of epoch is changed. The result of a typical 
microphone for comparison with the Laser Microphone is 
also shown in Figure 4. 
In the same figure, the loss of decision using the Laser 
Microphone decreased until the number of epoch reached 
500. This was because the output signal of the Laser 
Microphone contained a lot of noise components, error 
propagation within the program did not work well, and over-
learning may have occurred. 
On the other hand, when measuring with typical 
microphone, the losses decrease just like in the Laser 
Microphone. However, over-learning did not occur and the 
losses were approaching zero at an epoch of 500 or greater. 
 
Figure 4. Result of decision using Laser Microphone 
 
Moreover, the loss in both cases is smallest at an epoch of 
500. Therefore, Epoch = 500 was assumed as the optimum 
place and the reference point where the Deep Learning 
program was created. 
Figure 5 shows the answer rate for each frequency due to 
the change in epoch.  
 
Figure 5. Result of decision using typical microphone 
 
From Figure 5, in case of misjudgment, the desired 
frequency was judged as “Frequency of Adjacent”. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We found that it is possible to judge the frequency of the 
Laser Microphone using Deep Learning. Moreover, the Deep 
Learning program experiences the smallest loss when the 
number of epoch is 500. Future research will deal with the 
increase in the number of learning data and whether Laser 
Microphone can be used as a sound level meter for digital 
display. Furthermore, the results of change in loss due to 
change in hidden layers and intensity decision will be 
announced on the day of the conference. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Mizushima, T. Yoshimatsu, K. Goshima, N. Tsuda, and J. 
Yamada: “SoundDetection by Laser Microphone Using Self-
coupling of Semiconductor Laser” IEEJ Trans. EIS, Vol. 136-
C, No. 7, pp. 1021-1026, 2016. 
Return Value : Yt-1 
Input Layer 
Hidden Layer 
Output Layer 
Xt 
Ht 
Yt 
This value is decided by 
number of frequency 
and intensity data 
Hidden Layer: 1 - 5 
Nodes in One Layer: 1024 
Mini Badge Size: 20 
Epoch: 1 - 10000 
Epoch: 50 
Epoch: 10000 
Epoch: 5 
Epoch: 500 
Horizontal: Frequency [kHz], Vertical: Accuracy [%] 
Drover Power Supply 
(PMM24-1QU) 
Function Generator (AF320) 
Amplifier (FreeSpace IZA250) 
Anechoic Box 
Sound Source 
(Bose DS16S) 
DFB-Laser(GH8360A2A) 
λ= 830 nm, Power = 25 mW 
Aluminum Case 
Constant Current 
Circuit 
I-V 
Converter 
BPF 
with Gain 
Prism 
Sheet 
OS :  
Ubuntu16.04 
Framework
: Chainer 
Volume 
Convex Lens 
(f = 10 mm) 
20 cm 
90° 
10 cm 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

