UHF Printed Sensor for Force Detection
Almudena Rivadeneyra
Pervasive Electronics Advanced
Research Laboratory (PEARL)
Department of Electronics and
Computer Technology
University of Granada, 18071
Granada, Spain
email:arivadeneyra@ugr.es
Andreas Albrecht
Institute for Nanoelectronics
Technical University of Munich,
80333
Munich, Spain
email:andreas.albrecht@tum.de
Paolo Lugli
Faculty of Science
Free University of Bozen-
Bolzano, 39100
Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
email: paolo.lugli@unibz.it
Markus Becherer
Institute for Nanoelectronics
Technical University of Munich,
80333
Munich, Spain
email: markus.becherer@tum.de
José F. Salmerón
Pervasive Electronics Advanced
Research Laboratory (PEARL)
Department of Electronics and
Computer Technology
University of Granada, 18071
Granada, Spain
email: jfsalmeron@ugr.es
Abstract— In this contribution, we show the advances in the
direction of designing Radiofrequency Identification (RFID)
antennas with sensing capabilities. In this particular case, we
have integrated a force/pressure sensor made of a silicon-based
organic polymer in one of the arms of a dipole antenna made of
silver paste. The sensor response to external forces modifies the
resonance frequency of the dipole antenna that can be detected
by an external RFID reader, building up a wireless force sensor
system.
Keywords—
flexible;
force
sensor;
pressure;
printed
electronics; Ultra-High Frequency band.
I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we focus on the Ultra-High Frequency (UHF)
band (860 MHz) that is commonly used for Radiofrequency
Identification (RFID) tags and communications. In particular,
lots of effort has been made in the past decades to develop
antennas operating in this frequency band with the so-called
printed electronics [1]-[3]. The reasons behind this are the
attractive features that such technology offers with respect to
conventional ones, like the feasibility of creating electronics in
virtually any substrate, its cost-effectiveness and large-scale
manufacturing, among others [4]. There are many examples in
the literature where printed UHF antennas are embedded in
RFID tags with sensing capabilities [5]-[7]. However, these
tags require the utilization of silicon chips to transmit the
information, leading to hybrid electronics, which slows the
fabrication
process
and
makes
more
difficult
their
industrialisation [8]. An alternative that has arisen interest in
the last years is the implementation of wireless chipless
sensors. The characteristic of these sensor tags is the design of
sensors
whose
information
is
associated
with
their
electromagnetic properties, such as the resonance frequency or
the threshold power magnitude [9].
What we describe in this paper is precisely an UHF
chipless sensor for pressure detection. The sensor is fabricated
by
screen
printing
of
silver
and
poly(dimethylsiloxane)
(PDMS) and its working principle is the variation in the
resonance frequency when a certain pressure is applied in the
UHF antenna.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
the fabrication of the sensor and its characterization are
presented. The results of the sensor’ characterization are shown
in Section 3, together with the discussion. Finally, the main
conclusions are drawn in Section 4.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The silver (Ag) screen printing paste employed in this work
to print the antenna was LOCTITE ECI 1010 0.2KG E&C by
Henkel (Germany) used without modifications. An array of
pillar was made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) formulated
as in [10], but deposited with screen printing. All pastes were
printed
onto
thermally
pre-heated
(100°C
for
30
min)
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) Melinex 506 of DuPont of a
thickness of 100 µm. A manual screen printer (Nino from
Coruna, Switzerland) was used to print with a screen with 120
threads/cm of mesh density. After printing, the pastes were
dried at 100°C for 30 min in an Memmert oven before printing
the next type of paste.
The E5061B ENA Vector Network Analyzer of Keyight
was utilized for the S11 parameter measurements, as described
in [11]. Similar capacitive pressure sensors were already
studied in [12].
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We investigated the use of our thin pressure sensors
without a dielectric, as these are shorted at a certain pressure.
Figure 1 shows the patterned area that acts as the sensor. The
dielectric
is
structured
in
pillars
and
the
contact
area
corresponds precisely to the areas between pillars when certain
pressure is applied in the patterned area. At UHF frequency,
the sensor device behaves as a capacitor in series with one of
the antenna dipole arms. When pressure is applied, the sensor
device behaves as a series resistor, ideally a short-circuit,
leading to a change in both the resonance frequency and the
magnitude, as shown in Figure 2.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 1. Pressure-sensing area.
We studied the frequency response, represented in Figure 2,
by pressing and releasing several times with a plastic clamp
(button area) over the sensor area.
Figure 2. S11 magnitude for open and close states. Close 0 corresponds to the
first attemp of closing the button, followed by Open when the button is
released and finally Close 1 when the button is pressed again.
The dipole antenna that can be modelled as RLC series
circuit was designed to resonate at 868 MHz when the sensor
is pressed. When the sensor is released, a small series
capacitance is added to the dipole series capacitance causing a
shift of the resonance frequency upwards. This detuning of the
resonance frequency is enough to be discriminated by an
RFID reader, but it is not enough to inhibit the wireless link
between the reader and the sensor tag.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this contribution, we present the possibility of designing
a printed UHF sensor for force detection based on PDMS and
silver on a flexible substrate. In particular, there is a shift in the
resonance frequency as well as a change in its magnitude when
the force is applied in the area where the structured PDMS has
been deposited. When pressing the mentioned area, the
resonance frequency is increased and its magnitude decreases.
This solution paves the way for including sensor information in
printed RFID antennas. In the future, we will study in depth the
influence of the force applied on the resonance frequency
together with the analysis of the area where the structured
PDMS is located.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported by the fellowship
H2020-MSCA-IF-2017-794885-SELFSENS
and
the
TUM
Graduate School.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Falco, J. F. Salmerón, F. C. Loghin, P. Lugli, and A. Rivadeneyra,
“Fully printed flexible single-chip RFID tag with light detection
capabilities”, Sensors, 2017, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 534.
[2]
M. Akbari, M. W. A. Khan, M. Hasani, T. Bjorninen, L. Sydanheimo,
and L. Ukkonen, “Fabrication and Characterization of Graphene
Antenna for Low-Cost and Environmentally Friendly RFID tags”, IEEE
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, 2015, vol. 15, pp. 1569-
1572.
[3]
S. Kim, T. Le, M. M. Tentzeris, A. Harrabi, A. Collado, and A.
Georgiadis, “An RFID-enabled inkjet-printed soil moisture sensor on
paper for “smart” agricultural applications”, In “Book An RFID-enabled
inkjet-printed soil moisture sensor on paper for “smart” agricultural
applications” (IEEE, 2014, edn.), pp. 1507-1510.
[4]
S. M. F. Cruz, L. A. Rocha, and J. C. Viana. “Printing technologies on
flexible substrates for printed electronics”: “Flexible Electronics”
(IntechOpen, 2018).
[5]
J. Virtanen, L. Ukkonen, T. Bjorninen, A. Z. Elsherbeni, and L.
Sydanheimo, “Inkjet-printed humidity sensor for passive UHF RFID
systems”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement,
2011, vol. 60, no 8, pp. 2768-2777.
[6]
A.
Martínez-Olmos,
J.
Fernández-Salmerón,
N.
Lopez-Ruiz,
A.
Rivadeneyra Torres, L. F. Capitan-Vallvey, and A. Palma, “Screen
printed
flexible
radiofrequency
identification
tag
for
oxygen
monitoring”, Analytical chemistry, 2013, vol. 85, no 22, pp. 11098-
11105.
[7]
R. Nair et al., “A fully printed passive chipless RFID tag for low-cost
mass production”, The 8th European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation (EuCAP 2014). IEEE, 2014. pp. 2950-2954.
[8]
A. Rivadeneyra, F. C. Loghin, and A. Falco. “Technological Integration
in Printed Electronics”: “Flexible Electronics” (IntechOpen, 2018).
[9]
R. Nopper, R. Has, and L. Reindl, “A wireless sensor readout system—
Circuit concept, simulation, and accuracy”, IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, 2011, vol. 60, no 8, pp. 2976-2983.
[10] S. El-Molla et al., “Integration of a Thin Film PDMS-Based Capacitive
Sensor for Tactile Sensing in an Electronic Skin”, Journal of Sensors,
2016, vol. 2016.
[11] R. Colella et al., “Comparison of fabrication techniques for flexible
UHF RFID tag antennas [wireless corner]”, IEEE Antennas and
Propagation Magazine, 2017, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 159-168.
[12] S. C. Mannsfeld et al., “Highly sensitive flexible pressure sensors with
microstructured rubber dielectric layers”, Nature materials, 2010, vol. 9,
no. 10, pp. 859-864.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

