CuO Thin Film/ZnO Nanorods Heterojunction Diode Structure for Efficient 
Detection of NO Gas 
 
Hwansu Yoo 
Graduate School of Advanced Circuit Substrate Engineering 
 Chungnam National University 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: hwansuyoo@gmail.com 
Hyojin Kim, Soon-Ku Hong, and Dojin Kim 
Department of Materials Science and Engineering 
Chungnam National University 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: hyojkim@cnu.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract—We report on the efficient detection of NO gas by an 
oxide semiconductor p-n heterojunction diode structure with 
n-type ZnO nanorods embedded in p-type CuO thin film, 
which was fabricated on an indium tin oxide-coated glass 
substrate by combining a hydrothermal synthesis method and 
a sputtering deposition method. The transport behavior and 
NO gas sensing properties of the hybrid CuO thin film/ZnO 
nanorods heterostructure were characterized. The oxide 
heterojunction structure exhibited a definite rectifying diode-
like behavior at various temperatures ranging from room 
temperature to 250 oC. When the oxide p-n heterojunction 
diode structure was exposed to the acceptor gas NO in dry air, 
a significant decrease in the forward diode current was 
observed. The NO gas sensing response of the CuO thin 
film/ZnO nanorods heterostructure at 2 V was found to show a 
value as high as ~1,000% for the NO concentration of 10 ppm 
at a comparatively low operating temperature of 150 oC and 
increase linearly with increasing NO gas concentration in the 
range of 2-14 ppm. The experimental results indicate that this 
type of oxide heterostructure can be effectively used in various 
gas sensing applications thanks to its simple fabrication 
procedure and potential performance. 
Keywords-oxide heterostructure; gas sensor; p-n junction; 
zinc oxide, copper oxide. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recent great concern about anthropogenic environmental 
pollution and accidental leakages of toxic or explosive gases 
has led to an urgent demand for relevant gas sensors for 
detecting harmful gases in air. A nitric oxide or nitrogen 
monoxide (NO) gas sensor is much required because NO gas 
is closely connected with human life. Because of recent 
intensive studies of NO gas sensors, several types of NO gas 
sensors have been proposed. The most practical and effective 
are of the oxide semiconductor type, which utilizes oxide 
semiconductors including ZnO and CuO as the gas sensing 
element [1]. However, most oxide semiconductor-based gas 
sensors require operation at relatively high temperatures and 
have lowly sensitive responses. Recent developments in the 
synthesis of ZnO and CuO nanostructures with controllable 
size and shape have provided a good opportunity to improve 
gas sensing performance thanks to their large surface-to-
volume ratio. In particular, a significant enhancement in the 
gas sensing properties of gas sensors based on ZnO nanorods 
has been reported [2]. Meanwhile, oxide semiconductor p–n 
heterojunction structures have been regarded as a key 
technology in many electronic and optoelectronic devices 
including gas sensors [3]. 
In this study, we report on the fabrication and 
characterization of an oxide semiconductor heterojunction 
diode structure with n-type ZnO nanorods embedded in p-
type CuO thin film for sensing of NO gas. Section II 
provides the fabrication procedure for the CuO thin 
film/ZnO nanorods heterojunction structure. Section III 
offers a concise sketch of the experimental results for the 
CuO/ZnO heterojunction gas sensor element. Finally, a brief 
summary of this study is given in Section IV. 
II. 
FABRICATION PROCEDURE 
ZnO nanorods were grown on a glass substrate coated 
with an indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode via a seed-mediated 
hydrothermal technique with the use of a ZnO nanoparticle 
seed layer with a thickness of 10 nm, which was formed by 
thermally oxidizing a sputtered Zn metal film. Aligned ZnO 
nanorods were prepared by dipping the ZnO-coated substrate 
into an aqueous solution which consisted of 50 mM 
Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 50 mM C6H12N4 in distilled water, and 
then keeping the prepared mixture under continuous 
magnetic stirring at 95 °C for 6 h. The substrate covered with 
ZnO nanorods was rinsed with deionized water and dried 
under a high-purity nitrogen gas flow. To fabricate an oxide 
p–n junction heterostructure, Cu metal film was deposited 
onto the array of ZnO nanorods for 20 min at RT by using a 
rf magnetron sputtering system with power of 50 W and then 
thermally oxidized in dry air at 600 °C for 1 h, yielding the 
oxide heterostructure with n-type ZnO nanorods embedded 
in p-type CuO thin film. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The crystalline phases and morphologies of CuO thin 
film/ZnO nanorods heterostructures fabricated on the ITO-
coated glass substrate were characterized by using X-ray 
diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 
respectively. A typical SEM image for the cross-sectional 
morphology of the oxide heterostructure is presented in 
Figure 1. It is clearly seen that the surface of the distinct ITO 
layer is covered by vertically aligned ZnO nanorods with a 
length of approximately 500 nm and an average diameter of 
approximately 40 nm. Also, an apparently blurred interface 
between ZnO nanorods and CuO thin film is observed with a 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

thickness of approximately 300 nm, revealing the formation 
of a structure in which the ZnO nanorods are embedded in 
the CuO thin film. XRD was used to verify the formation of 
CuO and ZnO crystalline phases, showing the diffraction 
peaks which simply correspond to either monoclinic tenorite 
CuO or hexagonal wurtzite ZnO phase without any other 
second phase peaks being detected, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Cross-sectional SEM image of the CuO thin film/ZnO nanorods 
heterostructure fabricated on an ITO-coated glass substrate. 
 
Figure 2.  Typical X-ray diffraction pattern of the CuO thin film/ZnO 
nanorods heterostructure fabricated on an ITO-coated glass substrate. 
The formation of p–n heterojunction diode structure can 
be confirmed by the I–V characteristic curves as presented in 
Figure 3, the inset of which shows a schematic circuit of the 
oxide heterostructure. Here, for electrical measurements, two 
square silver contacts with an area of 1×1 cm2 were formed 
on CuO and ITO surfaces. All of the I–V characteristic 
curves observed in dry air at several temperatures exhibit a 
well-defined rectifying diode-like behavior, revealing a 
typical semiconductor p–n junction. With increasing the 
temperature, the turn-on voltage of the p-n heterojunction 
diode gradually decreases while its forward current distinctly 
increases, as expected for semiconducting materials.  
In order to see the potential for gas sensing, the CuO thin 
film/ZnO nanorods heterostructure was exposed to NO gas 
in dry air. During the electrical measurements, the NO gas 
concentration in dry air was varied from 2 ppm to 14 ppm. 
Figure 4(a) illustrates the effect of NO gas concentration in 
dry air on the I–V characteristics of the oxide heterostructure 
at an operating temperature of 150 °C. It is clearly seen that 
the oxide p–n junction heterostructure exhibits a diode-like 
nature in the examined NO concentration range. The forward 
current of the oxide heterojunction diode is found to decrease 
significantly with the increase in NO gas concentration. Now 
the gas sensing response S of a p–n heterojunction structure 
can be estimated using the formula S = I/Ig = (Ia  Ig)/Ig 
where Ia and Ig are the forward currents at a specific forward 
voltage (e.g., 2 V) in dry air and upon exposure to NO gas in 
dry air, respectively.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Currentvoltage (IV) characteristic curves of the CuO thin 
film/ZnO nanorods heterostructure in dry air at several temperatures. The 
inset shows a schematic circuit of the oxide p-n heterojunction device. 
 
Figure 4.  (a) Currentvoltage (IV) characteristic curves of the CuO thin 
film/ZnO nanorods heterojunction diode structure for several NO gas 
concentration in dry air at 150 C. (b) Variation of the sensitivity as a 
function of the NO gas concentration in dry air. 
Figure 4(b) illustrates the variation of the NO gas sensing 
response of the oxide heterojunction diode operating at 
150 °C as a function of the NO concentration in dry air for a 
forward bias of 2 V, revealing a good linear relationship 
between gas sensing response and NO concentration. Now 
the observed value of the response of the CuO/ZnO hetero-
junction NO gas sensor was estimated to be as high as 
~1,000% for 10 ppm NO concentration at  150 °C, which is 
several times higher than the values observed for 
conventional CuO film NO gas sensors. The NO gas sensing 
response of the oxide heterojunction was also found to 
depend on the operating temperature and reach a maximum 
value at 150 °C, as shown in the inset of Figure 4(b). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In summary, we fabricated an oxide p–n heterojunction 
diode structure with n-type ZnO nanorods embedded in p-
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

type CuO thin film for efficient sensing of NO gas. The CuO 
thin film/ZnO nanorods heterojunction structure showed a 
good rectifying behavior and a significant decrease in the 
forward diode current upon exposure to NO gas in dry air. 
The NO gas sensing response of the oxide diode structure at 
2 V was found to show a value as high as ~1,000% for 10 
ppm NO concentration at 150 °C. This work suggests that 
this type of oxide heterojunction diode structure could be 
effectively used in various gas-sensing applications thanks to 
its simple fabrication procedure and good performance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by the National Research Lab 
Program and by a grant funded by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF-2013R1A1A4A01007571). 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. 
Yamazoe, 
G. 
Sakai, 
and 
K. 
Simanoe, 
“Oxide 
semiconductor gas sensors,” Catalysis Surveys from Asia, vol. 
7, April 2003, pp. 63–75. 
[2] J. X. Wang et al., “Hydrothermally grown oriented ZnO 
nanorod arrays for gas sensing applications,” Nanotechnology, 
vol 17, September 2006, pp. 4995-4998. 
[3] S. Mridha and D. Basak, “Investigation of a p-CuO/n-ZnO 
thin film heterojunction for H2 gas-sensor applications,” 
Semicond. Sci. Technol., vol. 21, June 2006, pp. 928-932. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

