Sub-ppm Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) Sensor Based on Inkjet Printed CuO on
Microhotplate with a Pulsed Temperature Modulation
Aymen Sendi, Grérory Besnard, Philippe Menini, Chaabane Talhi, Frédéric Blanc, and Bernard Franc
Laboratoire d’Analyse et d’Architecture des Systèmes
LAAS-CNRS, University of Toulouse
7 Avenue du Colonel Roche
Toulouse, France
E-mail: {aymen.sendi, gbesnard, menini, talhi, blanc, bfranc}@laas.fr
Myrtil Kahn, Katia Fajerwerg, and Pierre Fau
Laboratoire de Chimie de Coordination
LCC-CNRS, University of Toulouse
205 Route de Narbonne
Toulouse, France
E-mail: {myrtil.kahn, katia.fajerwerg, pierre.fau}@lcc-toulouse.fr
Abstract— Nitrogen dioxide (NO2), a toxic oxidizing gas, is
considered among the main pollutants found in atmosphere
and indoor air as well. Since long-term or short-term exposure
to this gas is deleterious for human health, its detection is an
urgent need that requires the development of efficient and cost
effective methods and techniques. In this context, copper oxide
(CuO) is a good candidate that is sensitive and selective for
NO2
at
sub-ppm
concentrations.
In
this
work,
CuO
nanoparticles
have
been
deposited
by
inkjet
printing
technology on a micro hotplate that can be operated up to
500°C at low power consumption (55 mW). The optimum
detection capacity
is obtained thanks to a temperature
modulation (two -consecutive temperature steps from 100°C to
500°C), where the sensing resistance is measured. Thanks to
this operating mode, we report in this study a very simple
method for data processing and exploitation in order to obtain
a good selectivity for the nitrogen dioxide over few interferent
gases. Only four parameters from the sensor response allow us
to make an efficient discrimination between individual or
mixed gases in humid atmosphere.
Keywords- NO2; CuO nanoparticles; temperature modulation;
gas sensor; selectivity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Humans spend more than 90% of their time in closed
environments, even though this indoor environment offers a
wide variety of pollutants [1][2].
Indoor air pollution is a real health threat, so measuring
indoor air quality is important for protecting the health from
chemical and gaseous contaminants. Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
is a dangerous pulmonary irritant [1]. NO2 is generated by
multiple sources of combustion in indoor air, such as
smoking and heaters, but it also comes from outside air
(industrial sources, road traffic) [3]. NO2 may have adverse
effects of shortness of breath, asthma attacks and bronchial
obstructions [4]. It is also classified as toxic by the
“International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)” [5],
hence the necessity for sensor development for accurate
NO2 detection is an acute need. Among sensors techniques,
the
metal
oxide
gas
(MOX)
sensors
are
promising
candidates because of their high performance in terms of
sensitivity on top of their low production cost. The copper
oxide (CuO) material is highly studied because of its high
sensitivity
and
its
ability
to
detect
oxidant
gaseous
compounds, but also for other indoor air pollutants, such as
acetaldehyde (C2H4O), formaldehyde (CH2O), NO2, CO,
etc. However, CuO suffers from a major disadvantage
which is the lack of selectivity with respect to targeted gas.
In this study, our main objective is to develop an
innovative and simple pulsed- temperature operating mode
associated with an efficient data processing technique,
which enables good selectivity toward NO2 in gas mixtures.
This technique is based on few parameters extracted from
the dynamic response of sensor versus temperature changes
in a gaseous environment. These parameters are: the
normalized sensing resistance, the values of the slope at the
origin, the intermediate slope and the final slope of the
response of NO2 against different reference gases, such as
C2H4O, CH2O and moist air. The selectivity of NO2 was
examined in relation to air moisture with 30% humidity,
C2H4O at 0.5-ppm, CH2O at a concentration of 0.5-ppm and
the binary mixture of these gases with 0.3-ppm of each.
In Section II of the paper, we describe the materials and
methods used in our work. Section III presents our results
and the discussion. We conclude this work in Section IV.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The sensitive layer made of CuO nanoparticles is
deposited by inkjet printing on a silicon microhotplate [6].
The ink is prepared with 5% CuO weight, which was
dispersed in ethylene glycol by an ultrasonic bath for about
one hour. The dispersions obtained were allowed to settle
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

for 24 hours. The final ink was collected and then used for
printing using Altadrop equipment control, where the
numbers of the deposited drops of ink were controlled [6].
This
technique
is
simple
and
allowed
us
to
obtain
reproducible layers thicknesses of a few micrometers
depending on the number of deposited drops. In addition,
this technique permits to have a precisely localized deposit
without need of additional complex photolithographic steps
[7]. The CuO layer is finally annealed in ambient air from
room temperature to 500°C (rate 1°C/min) followed by a
plateau at 500°C for 1 hour before cooling to room
temperature (1°C/min). This initial temperature treatment is
necessary because CuO requires operating temperatures
between 100°C<T<500°C. The thermal pretreatment is
necessary to generate ionized oxygen species in atomic or
molecular form at the oxide surface and therefore to
improve the reactivity between the reacting gas and the
sensor surface [6].
In this study, we have used a pulsed temperature profile,
presented in a previously published work, which showed
that optimized sensitivity can be achieved with the use of
two different temperature stages at 100°C and 500°C
respectively. This dual temperature protocol also reduces
the total power consumption of the device (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. CuO temperature profile.
The CuO sensor was placed in a 250 ml test chamber and
the test conditions were as follow:
- A flow rate of 200 ml/min, controlled by a digital
flowmeter.
- A relative humidity (RH) level of 30% is obtained by
bubbling synthetic air flow controlled by a mass flow
controller.
- The measuring chamber is at ambient temperature,
controlled by a temperature sensor placed inside the vessel.
- A bias current is applied to the sensitive layer, controlled
by a Source Measure Unit (SMU).
We started a test with single gas injections after a phase
of two-hours stabilization in humid air, then with injections
of binary mixtures for 16-min. During 32-min, moist air is
injected between two successive gas injections. This time is
enough to clean the chamber and stabilize the sensor to its
baseline.
The gas injections concentrations are summarized in
Table 1. A schematic representation of these injections is
presented in Figure 2.
TABLE 1. INJECTED GASES CONCENTRATIONS
Gas
Concentration
Acetaldehyde (C2H4O)
0.5-ppm
Formaldehyde (CH2O)
0.5-ppm
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
0.5-ppm
Acetaldehyde and
Formaldehyde (C2H4O/ CH2O)
0.3-ppm/0.3-ppm
Acetaldehyde and Nitrogen
dioxide (C2H2O/ NO2)
0.3-ppm/0.3-ppm
Formaldehyde and Nitrogen
dioxide (CH2O/ NO2)
0.3-ppm/0.3-ppm
Figure 2. Synoptic representative of a sequence of gas injections.
During all the experience (stabilization phase, gases
injections and stage between two successive gases) , the
sensor is powered by a square signal voltage applied on the
heater in order to obtain two temperature steps as shown in
Figure 1. To ensure a constant overall flow, we adapted the
gas injection sequences duration in correlation with the
heating signal period (see Figure 3).
The resistance variation of CuO is measured under a fixed
supply current of 100 nA in order to obtain voltage
measurements
in
the
range
of
few
volts,
far
from
compliance limit of the measuring device (20V). We also
verified that this procedure (temperature cycling) doesn’t
affect the sensor reproducibility in terms of baseline or the
sensor sensitivity.
Under such test conditions, we achieved a continuous 6.5
hours testing period without observing any drift on the raw
sensor response. The sampling period is 500 ms, which
gives us 60 points on a 30-second response step, this
acquisition rate being enough for accurate data processing.
Figure 3. Diagram of a gas sequence.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Finally, we analyzed the sensor responses at each steps,
according to the different gas injections, using a simple
method of data processing in order to have the better
selectivity of NO2.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Method of analysis
During each gas injection, 16 periods of temperature
modulation are applied. After verifying the reproducibility of
sensor responses along these cycles, we only present here the
responses
of the
last
cycle,
which
is
stabilized
and
reproducible from one cycle to another. As mentioned
previously, we used new simple data treatment methods to
obtain the better selectivity toward NO2 with respect to
several interferent gases. Among the multiple possible
criteria, we chose representative variables that take into
account the dynamic sensor behavior during a change of
gaseous conditions and during a pulsed temperature; these
criteria are obtained from the sensor resistance slopes during
the
gas
response
on
each
30-second-steps.
The
data
acquisition relies on the decomposition of the response into
three distinct domains (see Figure 4):
- Starting Slope: from the 1st point to the 10th point (in
yellow),
- Intermediate slope: from the 10th point to the 30th point
(in red),
- Final slope: from the 30th point to the 60th point (in
black).
The normalized resistance is measured from the last point
on each step: this is the absolute difference between the
resistance of the sensor under a reference gas (like moist air)
and the resistance of the sensor under targeted gas(es), at the
final cycle of each injection:
Rn= ((Rgas -Rair) / Rair) * 100
(1)
Figure 4. Representative diagram of a response of a gas sensor during an
injection cycle and showing the 3 domain slopes.
By treating these four parameters, a good selectivity of
NO2 can be obtained with respect to moist air, C2H4O and
CH2O.
B.
Slope at the origin
The slope at the origin is calculated on the first 10 points
of each temperature step of the 8th cycle of each injection.
Regarding the reference gas (moist air); we took the response
of the 8th cycle of the last sequence under humid air before
the injection of gases. The values of these slopes (in
Ohms/ms) are shown in Figure 5; each bar represents the
value of the slope at the origin of each gas at 500 and 100°C.
Figure 5. Representation of the slopes at the origin under different
gases of the 8th cycle in “Ohms/ms” according to the temperature of the
sensors.
Figure 5 clearly shows that the calculations of this
parameter enable us to differentiate NO2 from the other
reference gases by measures on the plateau at 100°C.
Regarding the other step at 500°C we note that the response
is almost zero, because the transition from a cold to a hot
state decreases the detection sensitivity and therefore reduces
the sensors resistance variations under gas. We also note that
with this criterion we evidence a significant difference
between the value of the starting slope under NO2 compare
to others under other gases and mixtures without NO2.
C.
Intermediate slope
The intermediate slope is calculated from the 10th point
to the 30th point of each temperature step of the last cycle
during each gas injection and compared with the value under
air. The calculated values are shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6. Representation of the intermediate slopes under different
gases at the 8th cycle in “Ohms/ms” according to the temperature of the
sensors.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

According to Figure 6, the value of the intermediate slope
of individual NO2 injection or of the gas mixtures in which
there is NO2, is not prominent compared with the other
reference gases even on the plateau at 100°C. This parameter
is less effective than the previous one to detect NO2 in gas
mixtures.
D.
Final slope
The final slope is the slope of the second half of the gas
response; it is calculated between the 30th point and the 60th
point. The response to the different temperature steps of the
last cycle during NO2 injection and the reference gases is
presented in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Representation of the final slopes under different gases at the
8th cycle in “Ohms/ms” according to the temperature of the sensors.
It is worth noting that the value of the final slopes of NO2
or gaseous mixtures, which contain the NO2, are very
different compared to the other reference gases on the two
stages at 100°C only. This parameter allows us to select NO2
with respect to other interfering gases.
E.
Normalized resistance
As previously presented, the normalized resistance is
calculated with respect to humid air from each last cycle
level. The reference resistance used is the resistance of each
stage of the last wet air sequence before the gas injection.
The results obtained from these calculations are shown in
Figure 8.
Figure 8. The normalized resistance of the different gas injections at the
8th cycle according to the temperature.
Figure 8 shows a slight variation in the values of the
normalized resistance between two similar and successive
temperatures for the same gases. This slight variation can be
explained by data dispersion which is +/- 2%, due to the fact
that
the normalized resistance is calculated from the raw
values during the gas injection and the raw values of
resistances during the injections of humid air that may be
slightly
different between
two
similar
and
successive
temperature stages.
The CuO sensor response to sub-ppm NO2 levels when
injected individually or in combination with another gas, is
specific
when
measurements
are
taken
on
the
low
temperature plateau at 100°C.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The selectivity and sensitivity of our CuO sensor has
been studied by different operating modes and simple
methods of analysis. Specific temperature modulation was
applied to the metal oxide with the use of temperature steps
at 500 and 100°C. The response of CuO sensitive layer
toward gases representatives of indoor air pollution (C2H4O,
CH2O, NO2, humid air) has been studied. These responses
were analysed with several parameters, such as the study of
the
slope
of
resistance
variation
at
the
origin,
the
intermediate slope, the final slope and the normalized
resistance measured at each temperature steps. The study of
these different parameters shows that the CuO material is
able to detect sub-ppm levels of NO2 with a good selectivity
compared to different interfering gases. To still improve the
selectivity of gas sensor device to a larger variety of
polluting gases, we plan to integrate these CuO sensors in a
multichip system, which will allow us to use in parallel new
metal oxide layers with specific temperature profiles and
data analysis criteria.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express their gratitude to neOCampus, the
university project of the Paul
Sabatier University of
Toulouse, for the financial support and the Chemical
Coordination Laboratory of Toulouse for the preparation of
the CuO nanoparticle powder. This work was also partly
supported by the French RENATECH network.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Lévesque et al. P-L. Auger, J Bourbeau, J-F. Duchesne, P.
Lajoie, D.
Menzies, “Indoor air quality,” Environment and
Public Health. Foundations and Practices, pp. 317-332.2003.
[2]
J. Namiesnik, T. Gorecki, B. Kozdron-Zabiega, and J.
Lukasiak, “Indoor air quality (IAQ),”. Pollutants, their
sources, and concentration levels. Build. Environ. 27. 1992.
pp. 339-356.
[3]
Roger Cadiergues, “Indoor air quality,” Guide RefCad:
nR15.a. pp. 16-17. 2017.
[4]
K.Koistinen
et
al.
D. Kotzias, S. Kephalopoulos, C. Schlitt, P. Carrer,
M. Jantunen,
S. Kirchner, J. McLaughlin, L. Mølhave,
E.
Fernandes,
B. Seifert,
“The
INDEX
project:
executive
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

summary of a European Union project on indoor air pollutants
Allergy,” 63. 2008. pp. 810-819.
[5]
D Loomis, W Huang, and G Chen, “The International Agency
for
Research
on
Cancer
(IARC)
evaluation
of
the
carcinogenicity of outdoor air pollution: focus on China,”
Chin
J
Cancer.
2014
Apr;33(4):189-96.
doi:
10.5732/cjc.014.10028.
[6]
N. Dufour, A. Chapelle, F. Mesnilgrente, V. Conedera, and
Ph. Menini, “Technological improvements of a metal oxide
gas multi-sensor based on a micro-hotplate structure and
inkjet
deposition for
an
automotive air
quality sensor
application,” 25th Micromechanics and Microsystems Europe
workshop. MME 2014. Aug-2014. Istanbul, Turkey.4p.
[7]
M. Morozova et al. P. Kluson, J. Krysa, P. Dzik, M. Vesely,
O. Solcova, “Thin TiO2 films prepared by inkjet printing of
the reverse micelles sol–gel composition,” Sensors and
Actuators B 160. 2011.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

