Identification of Stress Situations in Urban Space 
When biosensors capture emotions 
 
Sana Layeb,  Faten Hussein 
Research Team on Ambiances,  
Graduate School of Architecture and Urbanism  
ERA, ENAU 
Tunis, Tunisia  
E-mails : sana.layeb@yahoo.fr, faten.hussein@gmail.com 
 
Raja Ghozi, Meriem Jaidane 
Research Unit on Systems and Signals, 
 National School of Engineering 
U2S, ENIT 
Tunis, Tunisia 
E-mails: raja.ghozi@ieee.org, meriem.jaidane@planet.tn 
 
 
Abstract—This study raises the question of stress situations in 
public space. Interested in the well-being of city users while 
evolving in town, we performed an experimentation based on a 
multidisciplinary methodology that combines qualitative and 
quantitative data resulted from commented walks in urban 
areas at city-center of Tunis. Stress level physiological 
measurements, called Electro Dermal Activity (EDA),   are 
generated while crossing these areas and analysis of the 
soundscape were conducted. The target of this paper is to check 
the links between urban sound phenomenon, the stress of 
participants and architectural and urban characteristics of 
space. Our research aims to reduce those stress situations and 
to propose adequate urban configuration to make the city 
accessible to everybody. 
Keywords-stress situations; urban space; Electro Dermal 
Activity ; Q sensor; emotions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Using urban space often calls for physical and perceptive 
skills [1]. Users experience the city by walking, driving, 
using public transportation, etc., and all those actions cannot 
be taken correctly if we don’t consider the urban 
accessibility for all city users. Many studies revealed that 
incompatibility between the urban and 
architectural 
environment and the physical capacities of city user can lead 
to stress situation and dissuade to attend the city [2]. 
Urbanites and architects work together on challenging 
situations of stress in urban space and to design a city in line 
with the well-being of her users. 
This multidisciplinary research invokes the human 
psycho-physiology dimension as a pertinent indicator of 
stress levels in urban space. Using knowledge ranging from 
urban studies [3] to information and communications 
technologies, this work aims to draw attention to original 
application of the sensor techniques in city studies. 
Thus, to highlight those stress situations, we need to 
characterize them by analyzing the arousal levels via 
psychophysiological measures called EDA [4]. When an 
emotional arousal occurs, the brain receives signals 
translated by electrical changes at the skin surface.  
 
Those psychophysiological signals are characterized by 
the succession of Skin Conductance Responses (SCR) [5] as 
illustrated in Figure 1, which represent the relationship 
between stress and EDA signal. Those skin conductance data 
represent events-related alertness, characterized through 
three components [6]: 
 
-The amplitude: after stimulation, the signal resistance 
goes down to a minimum point; then it backs to its initial 
value. The amplitude of the SCR is measured by the 
difference between the maximum point and the minimum 
point of the signal.  
- The duration d1: it is the time interval between the 
maximum point and the minimum point of the SCR 
- The duration d2: it is the time interval between the point 
which marks the peak of the SCR and the point where the 
signal returns to 50% of the amplitude of the same reply. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  EDA variation and ocuurence of a SCR. 
The SCR measures application covers a multitude of 
fields, such as health research, as well as urbanism discipline 
where they can be objective indicators of measuring arousal 
level when walking in the city [7]. Then, situations of stress 
can be identified and urban space accessibility and safety can 
be enhanced. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 details the experimental protocol and the data 
collection process. Section 3 presents the results of an EDA 
and sound sources correlation. We discuss in Section 4 the 
relationship 
between 
stress 
situations 
and 
urban 
configurations. Section 5 concludes with a summary and an 
outline for few perspectives to this study. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL 
This study is based on a multidisciplinary experimental 
protocol of three components: 
- Spatial analysis: it’s an urban graphic survey that shows 
urban crossroads (plans, spatial configurations, etc.) [8].  
- Analysis of the physical signal: This part is divided into 
three parts: sound level measurements (acoustic metrology), 
audio records and analysis of spectral compositions. 
- The perception of sound phenomena which is composed of 
two phases: 
- First, the commented walk method [9], which requests 
from the participant three simultaneous activities: 
walking, perceiving and describing what she/he heard. 
The aim of these walks was to obtain a full record of 
the multi sensorial perception in movement and the 
audio perception in particular. During each walk, we 
paid particular attention to behavioral indicators to help 
us analyze the relation between each subject and their 
surroundings [10][14]. 
- Secondly, the capture of user’s arousal (emotion) 
which is based on the capture of the physiological data 
during the commented walks by the biosensor (Q-
Sensor). Emotional arousal is a form of EDA that 
increases during states of stress, anxiety or excitement 
and decreases during states of boredom, relaxation or 
indifference. Additionally, the sensor measured the 
participants’ temperature and speed but also tracked 
their stress level [11][12]. 
A. Material 
To realize this experimental protocol, we used these 
following devices: 
- Q-sensor, which is a hand wear device; this is a biosensor 
of EDA (sampling frequency 32 Hz). It measures via the skin 
conductance the 
arousals, 
the 
temperature 
and the 
acceleration of the user for a 24-hour. Those data can be 
visualized thanks to software called “Q” (developed by the 
startup Affectiva from the Affective Computing Group of 
MIT Media Lab) [13]. It produces curves representing the 
EDA activity. Awareness’ moments are detected through 
specific peaks. 
 
   
 
(A)                                                       (B)  
Figure 2.  The Q-Sensor. 
- A digital voice recorder (sampling frequency 44,1 KHz). It 
is used to record the different sound sources along the walk. 
The dynamic frequency (spectrum) can be read by software 
called “audacity” 
- A sonometer: A sound level meter that measures the noise 
levels. The unit used is the decibel, dB (A). 
B. Field of the study 
Our choice was fixed on the downtown of Tunis. This 
field is considered as a part of city development and urban 
growth articulation point between the south and the north of 
the capital. Our study focuses on two paths.  
The first one, represented in red in the Figure 1, begins 
by the intersection between the Yugoslavie street and Greece 
street, then passes near the subway station « Place 
Barcelone » and ends at the intersection of the united 
Nations 
avenue, 
Yougoslavie 
street 
and 
Farés 
El 
Khoury street. 
The second path is represented in green in Figure 1. It is 
located on the main avenue of the down town of Tunis, 
Habib BOURGIBA. Then, it passes by the most important 
crossroad “14 January square”. 
These walks include a variety of urban situations: a 
subway crossing, several potential crossroads, official 
establishments, bars and pedestrian walks. It is also known 
the trade activities on the ground floors and habitat and 
offices on the other floors building with three to ten floors). 
It is divided into different sectors (zones), fig, according 
to variety of functions: in the first one, we note the diversity 
of the activities (mall, coffee shops, passage of the subway, 
etc.); the second zone is a habitation zone and small trades; 
then, the third one is a mechanic works’ sector with 
buildings of just a ground floor or high ground floor; with 
the abundance of pedestrian walks. Finally, the forth sector is 
known by the importance of the traffic along the day and the 
rarity of the pedestrian walks and the trade markets. This 
diversity affects the quality of the soundscape. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The field of the study. 
C. Population 
Our target population was about thirteen persons. In this 
paper, we will present the results of four cases: two men and 
two women, aged between 20 and 80 years. The experiments 
were made between 2010 and 2011. Each subject performed 
a commented walk in the itineraries previously chosen. 
Participants must wear the sensor just five minutes before the 
beginning of each walk (a necessary time for the sensor 
adaptation) [16]. During the experiment, we asked the 
subject to describe his feelings toward the ambiance and 
specially the sonic ambience. Here, the investigator's 
intervention should be minimal (just to remind the set point 
to the respondent) in order to not influence the participant. 
III. 
RESULTS 
To identify the different stress sound situation [15][17] 
[18], we have to correlate the different levels: the audio 
analysis, the physiologic data and the speech of the 
respondent.   
In this section, we will present the EDA data collected 
from the two experiences (two walks).  
A. The first experience 
For the first experience, illustrated by Figure 4 and Figure 
5, we will present the EDA curves of a man of 39 years old 
and a woman of 45 years old in the first path (represented in 
red in Figure 3). We obtain: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  First experience: The EDA curve of the first subject. 
We identify, in Figure 4, different sound stress situations 
(as explained in Figure 1). Some are related to particular 
sound sources (policeman whistle, passage of a motorcycle or 
the subway). We found that on the comments of the 
respondent “The subway arrives. (...) And it bothers me” or “(…) I 
don’t like motorcycles that speed after the turn“or “oh! The 
policeman whistle’s is very disturbing!”  In other situations, 
we note also the multiplicity of the sound sources. “The noise 
becomes more important than the other street. Especially here with 
this intersection, there is every kind of noise. I don’t feel good 
anymore.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  First experience: The EDA curve of the second subject. 
 
In Figure 5, we note also two types of sound stress 
situations: due to particular sound sources and due to the 
diversity of the sources. This was confirmed by the comments 
of the users. “My god! What’s this sound? Oh! It’s the 
subway grating” and also “But here it starts to fuss. (…) The 
noise increases, we approach the source of the noise, oh there 
are many here: Cars, pedestrians, motorcycles, hawkers…so, 
necessarily the tension rises”  
B. The second experience 
For this experience, we will present, in Figure 6 and 
Figure 7 two EDA curves corresponding to two cases of a 
man of 83 years old and a woman of 63 years old in the 
second path (represented in green on Figure 3).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Second experience: The EDA curve of the first subject. 
The sound stress situations detected in Figure 6 are linked 
mainly to the policeman whistle and the car horns even if the 
subject does not express clearly that she heard them. Due to 
age, elderly suffer from hearing loss and they cannot identify 
some sounds. This was confirmed by the EAD where we 
identified stressfull sound events but the participant expressed 
them in her comments leaning on the visual parameter: “I 
hate this place, I can’t deal with the cars…they don’t respect 
pedestrian…Look! He is speeding with his car (…) There is a 
policeman, good job! I don’t come here very often since I’m 
afraid from the traffic jam, I have difficulties to hear, and it’s 
dangerous for me to go out of my home…” 
 
 
Policemen’s 
 whistle 
 
Policemen’s 
whistle 
 
Car  
Horns 
Subway 
tinkling 
 
Subway 
grating 
 
Motorcycle 
passage 
 
Diversity of 
sound sources 
 
 
Subway 
passage 
 
Motorcycle 
passage 
 
Policeman 
whistle  
 
Diversity of 
sound sources 
 
 
Second  walk  
First walk  
 
Interior 
ministry 
 
Bank 
 
Post office 
 
Trade 
center 
0            50 
           50 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Second experience: The EDA curve of the second subject. 
In Figure 7, we find the same disturbing sound sources, 
which are mainly the policeman whistle and the car brakes.  
The EDA of this subject reflect his stressful state by the 
succession of the SCR and the disturbed curve. This subject 
identified clearly the whistle’s sound and after examining his 
clinical case, we discovered that he’s wearing an internal 
audio prosthesis. These findings are confirmed by the verbal 
data: “it’s a crowded place! …I don’t feel secure, many cars 
and I can’t even distinguish the traffic light to cross the 
road…Oh, and I’m listening to a whistle!!! A policeman, yes 
it’s good (…) I hope he’ll help me to cross, I’m feared…I 
have a headache”. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
We will try in this section to correlate the results above by 
the audio data; so, we present in this paper just one case. We 
confront the EDA signal with the spectrum of audio signal 
recorded among the walk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Correlation between the spectrum of the audio signal(A) and the 
EDA curve  (B), case1. 
The analysis of spectrum frequent of the audio signal 
highlights the physical characteristics of the urban space. Our 
setting is composed by a diversity of sound sources which 
compose an urban background sound made of high frequency 
of 10 kHz. We have note, also, in the last section that the 
stress feeling in the urban space, for the four cases presented 
in this paper, is linked to particular sound sources, situated on 
high and medium frequencies, such as the whistle of the 
policeman with 4 kHz, horns of the cars, grating and tinkling 
of the subway composed by signals between 8 kHz and 12 
kHz and also, acceleration and braking of vehicles (cars, 
buses, motorcycles, etc.), which are high frequency signals by 
12kHz. 
By 
characterizing 
the 
complexity 
of 
the 
urban 
soundscape, we can conclude that the nature of the sounds 
and their frequency content are one of the causes of stress and 
discomfort feelings and emotions of the urban space users. 
However, those results can be more discussed if we 
analyze with more accuracy EDA curves. In fact, the link 
between audio signal, EDA data and the commented walks 
cannot be highlighted if we don’t consider the specificity of 
the urban configuration, the scene of the experience [19]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We presented in this paper an original approach of 
detecting arousal states via biosensors in city studies. In fact, 
according to the interest given to the question of pedestrian 
well-being and safety and how they experience the city, we 
developed a strategy to identify stress situations in urban 
space. 
Through this multidisciplinary research, we adopted an 
exploratory approach to characterize the sound signal in 
order to detect the stressful information contained in 
complex soundscapes. By combining tools that qualify and 
quantify the informational content of the sound scene in the 
city, we achieved our task taking into consideration not only 
the audio parameter, but all senses, as a part of the 
multisensory experience of pedestrians in the city. 
We were able to rich our goal thanks to the collaboration 
between many disciplines: architecture, psychophysiology, 
signal processing, urban design, etc. We identified stress 
situation by linking the sound event, the human perception 
and the urban configuration. It is important for architect to 
identify disabled spaces in the city that may cause problems 
for pedestrian, especially ones with disabilities, in order to 
correct them and to propose new urban design that may help 
to make the city safe for all users [20].  
Among the perspectives of this work, we tend, using this 
protocol, to improve the graphical stage of any project 
realization with sound mappings for specific city users 
thereby improving the chances of their safety level during 
walking or crossing roads for equal accessibility of urban 
spaces by all users. 
The affective dimension of the study represents a new 
response that shows potential on the perceptual dimension of 
a given category of city users [21]. The aptitude to 
personalize a given soundscape design while considering 
age, gender, physical and mental capacities of a specified 
class of population is an important step forward in a society 
that aspires for stress control. In that regard, a personalized 
study would be more useful instead of a group one. Such 
objective would be line with a global well-being. 
 
 
 
 
Policemen’s 
whistle 
 
Horns 
 
Cars 
braking 
 
(A) 
 
(B)  
 
 
 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We are particularly grateful to Professor Jean-Pierre 
PENEAU for framing this work. Our sincere gratefulness 
goes U2S team from the National School of Engineering of 
Tunis for helping on examining the analysis of frequency data 
and making algorithms of signal processing in particular 
misses Yosra Mzah, Asma Ameur and Olfa Fraj. We need to 
thanks also all participants of the experimental protocol for 
their collaboration and patience. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Moser, Les stress urbains, Paris, Armand Colin, 1992. 
[2] P. Amphoux, G. Chelkoff, and J. P. Thibaud, Ambiances en 
débats, Grenoble: A la Croisée, p. 164, 2004. 
[3] L. Saby, Vers une amélioration de l’accessibilité urbaine pour 
les sourds et les malentendants: quelles situations de handicap 
résoudre et sur quelles spécificités perceptives s’appuyer ? 
Thèse en génie civil. Institut National des Sciences Appliquées 
de Lyon. 358 p, 2007. 
[4] R. W. Picard, “Emotion Research, by the People, for the 
People”, Emotion Review 2 (3): 2010, pp. 250-254.  
[5] W. 
Boucsein, 
Electrodermal 
Activity, 
University 
of 
Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany, second edition, 2012. 
[6] R. Nocua, Conception et développement d'un système 
ambulatoire pour la mesure de l'activité du Système Nerveux 
Autonome pour la surveillance de personnes âgées à domicile, 
thèse de doctorat, Techniques de l'Ingénierie Médicale et de la 
Complexité, Université Joseph-Fourier, Grenoble, 176 p, 2009. 
[7] B. Massot, Conception, réalisation de capteurs non-invasifs 
ambulatoires et d'exocapteurs embarqués pour l'étude et le 
suivi de la réactivité émotionnelle, PhD diss., University of 
Lyon, 2011.  
[8] L. Ammar and Ph. Panerai,  Tunis d’une ville à une autre 
Cartographie et histoire urbaine 1860-1935, Tunis : Espace 
Diwan, 2010. 
[9] J. P. Thibaud, La méthode des parcours commentés, comment 
observer une ambiance ? Les cahiers de la Recherche 
Architectural. n°42/43, pp. 77-89, 1998. 
[10] F. Hussein, Construction et expérimentation d’un protocole 
pour le traitement des ambiances sonores urbaines adapté aux 
personnes âgées presbyacousiques. Thèse en architecture. 
Spécialité ambainces architecturales et urbaines. Nantes, 330 
p, 2012. 
[11] R. 
Adhami, 
et 
al., 
‘‘Stress 
monitoring 
using 
a 
distributedwireless 
intelligent 
sensor 
system’’, 
IEEE, 
Engineering in Medecine and Biology Magazine, 22(3), 2003, 
pp. 49-55. 
[12]  M. Z. Poh, N. C. Swenson, and R. W. Picard, “Wearable 
sensor  
 
for unobtrusive, 
long-term assessment 
of 
electrodermal activity”, IEEE Trans Biomed Eng., 57(5): Feb. 
2010, pp. 4352.  
 [13] R. Picard, “Future affective technology for autism and 
emotion communication, Philosophy Transactions of the Royal 
Society, Biological Sciences”, vol. 364, no. 1535, pp. 3575-
3584, 12 December 2009. 
[14] F. Hussein, R. Ghozi, M. Jaïdane, and J. P. Péneau, ‘‘Detecting 
hazardous situations faced by presbycusic pedestrians in cities: 
an 
audio-texture 
approach’’, 
Ambiances 
[En 
ligne], 
Environnement - Modélisation- Caractérisation, March/April 
2016. URL : http://ambiances.revues.org/485 
[15] J. M. Auberlet, R. Bremond, and A. Tom, ‘‘Pedestrians 
crossing: a psychological approach: Implications for pedestrian 
simulation’’, Recherche Transports Sécurité 101, 2008, pp. 
265–279. 
[16] H. Bahri, R. Ghozi, F.  Hussein, and D. Mallouch, 
‘‘Identification et caractérisation des états de stress par une 
segmentation 
probabiliste 
des 
signaux 
de 
l'activité 
électrodermale’’, submitted to the 46th  Journées des 
Statistiques, Rennes, France, 2014. 
[17] R. Ghozi, O. Fraj, N. Khalfa, F. Hussein, and M. Jaidane, 
‘‘Presbyacusis and Stress Evaluation in Urban Settings’’, 4th 
International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical 
and Communication Technologies, Barcelona, 2011. 
[18 ]J. A. Healey and R. W. Picard, ‘‘Detecting Stress During Real-
World Driving Tasks Using Physiological Sensors’’, IEEE 
Trans. On Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2005, pp. 156-
166. 
[19 ]L. Brown, ‘‘Review of Progress in Soundscapes and an 
Approach to Soundscape Planning’’, International Journal of 
Acoustics and Vibration, vol. 17, no. 2, 2012, pp. 7381. 
[20] J. P. Péneau, ‘‘L’approche ambiantale : une complexité 
augmentée’’, SCAN’12, Paris, September 2012. 
[21] 
J. 
P. 
Massabuau, 
Eloge 
de 
l’inconfort, 
Marseille, 
EditionsParenthèses, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

