Remote Sensing of Temperature-Stress Coupled Effects
Simone Boccardi, Giovanni Maria Carlomagno, Carosena Meola
Department of Industrial Engineering - Aerospace Division, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
e-mail: simone.boccardi@unina.it, carmagno@unina.it, carmeola@unina.it
Abstract— The aim of this paper is concerned with the use of
an infrared imaging
device
to
measure the very
small
temperature variations which are linked to thermo-elastic
effects.
The
latter
are
associated
with
material
volume
variations undergone by a cantilever beam under cyclic
bending load. This is a difficult task since the temperature
variations are very small and at the edge of the instrument
resolution. However, with the aid of a reference sample it is
possible
to
eliminate
most
of
the
instrumental
and
environmental noise so as to obtain reliable measurements.
This method allows extending the use of an infrared imaging
device outside its resolution range.
Keywords-infrared thermography; cyclic bending; thermo-
elastic effect; temperature variation; radiation sensing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Temperature represents a key parameter in almost all the
industrial processes. In particular, owing to composite
materials, the production of a sound laminate strongly
depends
on
the
processing
temperature.
In
fact,
the
polymerization cycle of a thermoset matrix based composite
is generally performed in autoclave and strongly depends on
the
temperature
ramp
and
absolute
value.
However,
temperature is important also for the forming of a laminate
involving a thermoplastic matrix. The possibility to obtain a
laminate free, or of low content, of porosity strongly depends
on the combination of temperature and pressure during the
fabrication process. In these cases the temperature values to
be controlled are quite high and measurable with different
types of sensors.
It is not easy to measure very small temperature
variations, which can be easily affected by the several
sources of error that are always present and which become
progressively more important as the quantity to be measured
becomes smaller. Of course, the measure becomes more
complex
in
the
presence
of
dynamic,
or
unsteady,
phenomena.
As
an
example,
trying
to
measure
the
temperature variations, which develop over the surface of a
cantilever beam under cyclic bending tests, may be a very
difficult task.
This measure appears complex from two points of view.
On one side, depending on the material under test, the
temperature amplitude may be very small. On the other side,
the temperature variations are generated by the oscillation of
the sample and depend on its geometry.
Then, no contact sensors are allowed since their presence
can alter the geometry and jeopardize the measurement. In
addition, contact sensors suffer from contact resistance and
are vulnerable to thermal conduction effects, which also
affect the measurement accuracy. The only solution may be
to perform measurements through remote detection of
thermal
radiation,
which
mainly
means
with
infrared
thermography (IRT). Indeed, IRT thanks to its non-contact
character and its multifarious applications, is consolidating
increasing attention from both the industrial and academic
communities.
In particular, IRT has proved its capability to visualize
the surface temperature variations, associated with thermo-
elastic/plastic effects, which are experienced by a body under
load [1][2]. These temperature variations supply information
useful
for
assessing
the
material's
characteristics
and
performance. This represents a great advantage since it
makes possible getting information on the material by simply
monitoring it under load. This can be done using the thermo-
elastic
equation
[3],
which
expresses
the
change
in
temperature (∆T) of a solid in terms of the change of the sum
of the principal stresses (∆σ). In particular, under adiabatic 
conditions, positive dilatation (tension) entails cooling of the
material and vice-versa.
In this regard, a difficult task is to perceive the
temperature variations which develop under relatively low
loads. In these circumstances, a detector able to sense the
small difference in thermal radiation, associated with light
surface temperature variations, is required. Previous works
[4][5] showed that a long wave (LW) quantum well infrared
photodetector (QWIP) is well suited for sensing the small
thermal
radiation
associated
with
thermo-elastic
phenomena, but the QWIP is affected by noise, mainly dark
current, effects [5]. This noise exhibits a random temporal
character that cannot be easily removed through the
commonly in use signal restoration methods. Conversely, it
seems that it can be accounted for and suppressed in a
simple manner with the use of a reference area [4][5].
The aim of this work is to further investigate the
reference-area method by highlighting its potential and likely
limitations for a better exploitation of infrared imaging
devices in presence of feeble thermal radiation.
Apart from the introduction, the structure of this paper
includes four sections. In particular, a description of the test
setup and the testing procedure is given in Section II, to
follow in Section III with some theoretical hints, which
justify the use of infrared thermography to monitor cyclic
bending tests. Section IV, which represents the core of the
work, is involved with post-processing of thermographic
images. In particular, it is shown how the reference area
method is effective to account for and eliminate most of the
instrument and environmental noise; this is illustrated with
some key examples. The work ends with some concluding
remarks and future trends.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

II.
EXPERIMENTAL
The reference-area method can be deployed in different
applications and for different purposes. In the following, an
example of application concerning cyclic bending tests is
illustrated. This involves the measurement of very small
temperature variations and is well suited for the purpose.
A. Test Setup and Procedure
The test setup is shown in Fig. 1. The specimen bending
is operated with an electro mechanical actuator through a
taut wire and a return spring. As it can be seen, two
specimens are clamped nearby on their bottom side (fixture)
as cantilever beams. One remains unloaded and is used as
source to apply the reference-area method. The other one
(the specimen under test) is inserted, with its upper end, into
a clip attached to the wire which forces the specimen to
bend back and forth under the wire alternate displacement.
Figure 1. Setup for cyclic bending tests
The infrared camera is positioned so as to see both
specimens at once (from one surface). The used infrared
camera is the SC6000 (Flir systems), which is equipped
with a QWIP detector, working in the 8-9 µm infrared band,
NEDT < 35 mK, spatial resolution 640x512 pixels full
frame with the pixel size 25 µm x 25 µm and with a
windowing option linked to frequency frame rate and
temperature
range.
Sequences
of
thermal
images
are
acquired during loading, or better, to allow for a complete
visualization of thermal effects evolution with respect to the
ambient temperature, the acquisition starts few seconds
before load application and lasts for some time after.
III.
SOME THEORETICAL REMARKS
The case study involves variations of temperature
induced by thermo-elastic effects, which can be traced to the
classical thermo-elastic equation, formulated by Biot [3]:
∆ܶ = −ܭܶ௔ ∆ߪ(1)
which expresses the change of temperature (∆T) of a solid in
terms of the change of the sum of the principal stresses
(∆σ). In particular, Ta is the absolute body temperature, ∆σ
is the mean stress amplitude, and K is the material thermo-
elastic
constant.
Equation
(1) relates
the
temperature
variations to the volume variations and applies to isotropic
materials under reversible and adiabatic conditions (i.e., in
the elastic regime and neglecting heat transfer within the
body and to the environment). Under adiabatic conditions,
positive dilatation (tension) entails cooling of the material
and vice-versa.
The interest is to extract ∆T values from the sequences
recorded during cyclic bending. The amplitude of ∆T
values, for a given material, depends mainly on the location
over the specimen length, i.e., the distance from the fixture
and on the bending frequency if temperature relaxation
occurs.
IV.
IMAGE PROCESSING AND DATA ANALYSIS
The recorded sequences undergo post-processing by
using the Flir ResearchIR software (available from the Flir
systems package) and specific routines developed in the
Matlab environment [4]. The first image (t = 0 s) of the
sequence, i.e. the specimen surface at ambient temperature,
before starting of loading, is subtracted to each subsequent
image so as to generate a map of temperature difference ∆T:
∆ܶ(݅, ݆,ݐ)=ܶ(݅,݆,ݐ)− ܶ(݅,݆,0)(2)
i and j representing lines and columns of the surface
temperature
array.
Several
measurement
positions,
as
depicted in Fig. 2, are considered over solicited (A) and
unsolicited (P1, P2, P3) specimens.
Figure 2. Sketch of measurement positions over the two specimens
A. Some Examples
A ∆T plot is extracted in the position A (i.e., close to the
fixture) and is shown in Fig. 3. In more details, the resulting
curve corresponds to the mean value in an area of width 40
pixels and height 20 pixels by suppressing, of course, border
appraisals. This plot refers to the original raw signal ∆TR
taken with cyclic bending at a frequency fb = 0.8 Hz. As it
can be seen, ∆TR displays quasi-sinusoidal variations
coupled with the cyclic load; more specifically ∆TR goes up
and down following the alternate tension/compression load.
However, the sinusoidal trend is not a regular one, but
disrupted by a jumping-like effect that is due to the
instrument noise [5].
Reference
specimen
Solicited
specimen
P3
P1
Fixture
A
P2
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

To separately account for the instrument noise ∆TN, a
plot is meanwhile extracted on the unloaded reference
specimen and shown in Fig. 4. In particular, the ∆TN curve
corresponds to the mean value in the P1 zone, which is
placed at the same distance from the fixture of the zone A
and has its same dimensions (see Fig. 2).
Figure 3. ∆TR plot for fb = 0.8 Hz
Figure 4. ∆TN plot over the unloaded specimen
By comparing Fig. 4 to Fig. 3, it is possible to clearly
distinguish the detrimental effects the random noise has on
the quasi-sinusoidal pattern. Such effects include macro
(jumps) and micro (slight slopes) scale phenomena. The two
plots ∆TR and ∆TN are characterized by the same trend, even
if they are extracted from two different zones, i.e. one on the
specimen under test (Fig. 3) and the other one on the
reference specimen (Fig. 4).
As a major effect, the quasi-sinusoid has lost the
alignment of peaks and valleys with respect to the horizontal
axis. These displacements of the ∆TR signal are perfectly
coupled with the position of ramps and jumps in the ∆TN
signal. In particular, by looking at the first portion of Fig. 3
within the first 2.5 seconds (before starting of the bending)
it is possible to see that, by changing zone, the noise
amplitude remains the same. In fact, on both graphs, ∆T = 0
for t = 0, but soon after ∆T undergoes an abrupt rise,
followed by a steadiness and then a ramp.
To better underline this aspect, three ∆TN plots, taken in
three different zones P1, P2 and P3, are compared in Fig. 5.
As depicted in Fig. 2, the three zones are differently
displaced along the reference specimen, with care to avoid
boundary effects. In particular, P1 represents the zone from
where the ∆TN signal already shown in Fig. 3 has been
extracted.
Looking at Fig. 5 it is possible to see that the three
signals are practically superimposed. More specifically, they
are perfectly superimposed with regards to the appearance
of jumps in time, which means the macro-scale temporal
noise. Instead, small
variations of amplitude can be
discriminated by changing zone. Such variations may be
ascribed to several factors involving either the spatial noise
of the instrument, or environmental noise, or surface
emissivity changes. This type of noise, whatever its origin,
is very small and surely negligible with respect to the major
temporal component.
Figure 5. ∆TN plot in three places over the unloaded specimen
B. Noise Correction
First of all, the correction is intended to eliminate
temporal
noise
while
spatial
noise
is
considered
as
negligible. The noise can be eliminated through correction
by the use of the unloaded reference specimen [4]. The
signal in the reference specimen, which accounts for the
noise ∆TN, is subtracted from the original raw signal ∆TR.
Then, the corrected ∆TC signal is obtained as:
∆ܶ஼ = ∆ܶோ − ∆ܶே
(3)
An example of corrected ∆TC signal is shown in Fig. 6,
which is practically the result of the subtraction of Fig. 4
from Fig. 3. As it can be seen, the noise is eliminated and a
sinusoidal pattern is practically recovered, which perfectly
synchronizes with the specimen alternate displacement. In
addition, also the constant (on the average) ∆T = 0 value in
the first portion before starting of the load is recovered.
It is worth underlining that the correction method appears
able to eliminate different types of noise: the jumps effect,
but also the slight ramp effect like that present in the first
portion of the ∆TR signal of Fig. 3.
Figure 6. Corrected ∆TC plot for fb = 0.8 Hz
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Of
course,
the
noise
effects
become
ever
more
pronounced as the ∆T amplitude decreases. Thus, to further
investigate the effectiveness of the reference-area method, a
much lower amplitude signal is analyzed. This signal is
obtained by recording thermal images in time sequence
during cyclic bending at the lower frequency of fb = 0.05 Hz.
The three signals ∆TR, ∆TN. and ∆TC are compared in Fig. 7.
The first thing to notice is the predominant effect of the
instrument noise. In fact, by comparing Fig. 7a to Fig. 7b, it
is practically impossible to distinguish any difference
between ∆TR and ∆TN trends, or better between the solicited
specimen and the unsolicited one. It is worth noting that the
∆TR signal has been recorded with a specimen undergoing
cyclic bending at frequency fb = 0.05 Hz and deflection DF =
± 7.5 mm. The temperature variations associated within this
pair of parameters are very small and then, it is normal to
see the noise fluctuations to prevailing and completely
disrupting the sinusoidal pattern (Fig. 7a) produced by the
thermo-elastic effects. Surprisingly, the sinusoidal pattern is
again recovered (Fig. 7c), through correction with the
reference-area method.
a) ∆TR
b) ∆TN
c) ∆TC
Figure 7. ∆TR , ∆TN and ∆TC plot for bending at fb = 0.05 Hz
However, the resulting ∆TC signal is very small to be
exploited for material characterization purposes. In fact, it is
affected by heat transfer mechanisms and other phenomena,
which should be taken into account to make the ∆T values
usable, but this is outside the aim of this work and is not
herein discussed.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Through some practical examples, it has been shown that
it is possible to use an infrared imaging device to detect and
also evaluate also the feeble thermal radiation, which is of
the same order of magnitude as the instrument noise and that
is commonly considered outside the instrument resolution
range. In particular, it has been demonstrated that this is
possible with the help of a reference area, which allows for
estimation of the instrument noise. Then, the noise is
separately evaluated and eliminated from the raw signal.
It is worth noting that cyclic bending tests have herein
been used as reference, for convenience, since the sinusoidal
pattern coupled with the specimen alternate displacement is
well suited to demonstrate the validity of the method. In fact,
by changing the bending frequency and so the amplitude of
the sinusoid, it has been possible to visualize noise effects of
different types and of different orders of magnitude. In
addition, the capability of the method to either restore a
fairly affected curve, or recover a completely destroyed one,
has been demonstrated.
Conversely, this method can be exploited in a broader
context whenever the measurement of small variations of
temperature is required. Of course, this method may be
applied to a larger extent, even in the presence of not-too-
small values that are less affected by noise. It is worth
nothing that the possibility to perform measurements with a
remote imaging device offers countless benefits. Amongst
them, it prevents any alterations to the testing objet and to
the quantity to be measured. But, it eliminates also the
trouble of placing a great number of contact sensors and
managing with cables. As a last point, it can be inferred that,
with the application of this simple method, it becomes
possible to resolve small variations of temperature, which
may be otherwise impossible.
As future work, we will investigate other study cases
such as monitoring composite materials under impact tests
with an infrared imaging device. Indeed, due to the ever
broad deployment and development of composites, assessing
their resistance under impact is of great concern to both
academic and industrial communities. While it has already
been demonstrated the capability of infrared thermography to
catch thermal signatures induced by impact tests [6][7],
outlining in an accurate way the boundaries between sound
and damaged zones remains still an open question. This task,
due to the small size of temperature variations at these
boundaries, may benefit of the application of the reference
area method. On the other hand, the evaluation of the
extension of the damaged zone is very useful for material
design purposes to assess the material performance.
However, in the future, this method may be improved
and exploited in other study cases to get the best from
thermographic images also in consideration of the vast
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

variety of applications which may be addressed with infrared
thermography.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Meola, G.M. Carlomagno. "Infrared thermography to
impact-driven thermal effects" Applied Physics A, vol. 96,
pp. 759-762, 2009.
[2]
C. Meola, G.M. Carlomagno, C. Bonavolontà, M. Valentino,
"Monitoring composites under bending tests with infrared
thermography" Advances in Optical Technologies, vol. 2012,
(7 pages) 2012.
[3]
M.A.
Biot,
"Thermoelasticity
and
irreversible
thermodynamics" Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 27, pp.
240- 253, 1956.
[4]
S.
Boccardi,
G.M.
Carlomagno,
C.
Bonavolontà,
M.
Valentino, C. Meola, "Infrared thermography to monitor
Glare® under cyclic bending tests with correction of camera
noise" Proc. QIRT 2014, Bordeaux, France, 7-11 July 2014.
[5]
C. Meola, S. Boccardi, G.M. Carlomagno, "Measurements of
very small temperature variations with LWIR QWIP infrared
camera", Infrared Physics and Technology, vol. 72, pp. 195-
203, 2015.
[6]
C. Meola, G.M. Carlomagno, "Impact damage in GFRP: new
insights with Infrared Thermography", Composites Part A,
vol.41, pp. 1839-1847, 2010.
[7]
S. Boccardi, G.M. Carlomagno, C. Meola, P. Russo, G.
Simeoli, "Monitoring impact damaging of thermoplastic
composites", Journal of Physics: Conference Series 658
(2015)
(XXII
AIVELA
Annual
Meeting)
012005
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/658/1/012005.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

