An Interoperable Framework for Network-Enabled Cross-Border  
Multi-Agency First-Aid Vehicles in Multiple Casualty Incidents 
Marco Manso 
PARTICLE Summary 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: marco@particle-summary.pt
Pedro Petiz 
PARTICLE Summary 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: pedro@particle-summary.pt
Bárbara Guerra 
PARTICLE Summary 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: barbara@particle-summary.pt
Alberto Montarelo 
TASSICA 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: alberto.montarelo@tassica.com
Navid Behzadi Koochani
Servicio de Urgencias Medicas de 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: navid.behzadi@salud.madrid.org
Ioannis Chatzichristos 
ARATOS 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: ichatzichristos@aratos.gr 
Jorge Maestre Vidal 
INDRA 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: jmaestre@indra.es
Meritxell Bassols Tayeda 
INDRA 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: mbassols@indra.es
Sergio López Bernal 
Universidad de Murcia 
Murcia, Spain 
e-mail: slopez@um.es
Abstract- A cross-border Multiple Casualty Incident (MCI) 
affects a large number of persons requiring urgent medical 
assistance by authorities and warrants significant international 
coordination. This work addresses the technical challenge of 
building a cross-border multi-agency coalition as a federated 
system supporting international coordination, while delivering 
the required assistance to the victims. Using as basis a 
reference 
MCI 
cross-border 
scenario, 
an 
overarching 
architecture is defined, the VALKYRIES architecture, 
including the rules, protocols and data models that enable 
integration of heterogeneous entities, being those services, 
applications or sensors. By implementing the VALKYRIES 
architecture, organisations become ready to participate in a 
federated collaborative environment, exchange MCI-related 
information and achieve high-levels of shared situational 
awareness, thus contributing towards a better employment of 
resources and improving the mission’s effectiveness and 
efficiency.
Keywords- Multiple casualty incident; Emergency Services; 
Interoperability; Federated System; Technical Architecture. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
A MCI affects a large number of persons requiring urgent 
medical assistance by authorities. It may demand more 
resources and capabilities than those available in a single 
organisation, thus collaborating with other agencies is 
fundamental to deliver an efficient response. This is even 
more so for incidents crossing borders, where international 
coordination is mandatory.  Implementing a cross-border 
multi-agency coalition offers significant technology-related 
challenges, 
since 
different 
technological 
solutions, 
applications, communication networks, data models, and 
protocols – including legacy solutions – are used by the 
different involved partners, resulting in a heterogeneous 
landscape 
of 
artifacts 
and 
tools. 
 
Standards 
for 
interoperability, contributing towards the harmonisation 
between heterogeneous organisations, have to be defined, 
implemented and adopted.  
This paper presents the work performed in the 
VALKYRIES Action towards defining rules and protocols 
enabling the integration of the different capabilities, 
technologies, data gathering sensors and artifacts at play in a 
cross-border MCI, in a coordinated and in-field deployable 
way.  The paper is structured as follows: Section II describes 
an operating cross-border MCI scenario, including involved 
actors, artifacts and information flows; Section III presents 
the technical architecture defined for VALKYRIES, 
including relevant standards and defined services; Section IV 
introduces the data models used in VALKYRIES; and 
Section V concludes this paper.  
II.
OPERATING IN A MULTIPLE CASUALTY INCIDENT 
SCENARIO
The VALKYRIES Innovation Action analyses and 
defines 
harmonised 
mechanisms 
for 
the 
effective 
management and deployment of resources during the run-up 
to a major crisis related to any kind of cross-border disaster 
(natural or intentional) that demands the fast actuation and 
coordination of first-aid emergency services and associated 
response teams, with Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) 
and volunteering. Its primary objective is to develop, 
implement, validate, and apply innovative theoretical 
foundations, methods, prototypes, and their demonstration on 
a 
reference 
integration 
framework 
to 
support 
the 
ongoing/planned European actions for pre-standardisation  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

and harmonisation technologies, procedures, preparedness, 
and cross-border/sector cooperation for first aid response at 
disaster management by first aid emergency services, with 
the focus on health services and vehicular deployments.  
VALKYRIES also aims to generate synergies between 
different parties, regardless of their language and action 
protocols, to optimize the management of the incident 
without trying to modify its structure and normal operation. 
By improving interoperability in cross-border and cross-
sector emergency situations, particularly when involving a 
MCI, the reference integration framework will empower 
improved coordination and employment of resources and 
increased mission efficiency and effectiveness. 
The project implements an Observe-Orient-Decide-Act 
(OODA) approach for solving the identified harmonisation 
challenges [1], where: 

Observe: Resembles the acquisition of preliminarily 
factual knowledge. 

Orient: Reasons on the best hypothetical approach for 
addressing identified gaps and materialise opportunities. 

Decide: Selects the most suitable harmonisation options 
and applies them on a reference integration framework. 

Act: 
Coincides 
with 
deploying, 
evaluating 
and 
contrasting the assumed hypothesis based on the 
achieved analytical and empirical results. 
Next, a reference scenario is presented that will guide the 
definition of the VALKYRIES architecture. 
A.
Reference Operating Scenario 
A MCI scenario involves multiple actors operating at 
different levels that need to interact with each other to 
develop shared situational awareness and ensure adequate 
coordination of resources.  
A general overview of an operating scenario, showing the 
main involved actors and their interrelations, is depicted in 
Figure 1. The fictional scenario involves a large forest fire 
starting in the region of Badajoz, close to the border between 
Spain and Portugal. The fire rapidly spreads to the Natural 
Park of Serra de S. Mamede in Portugal, evolving into a 
cross-border incident. The intensity of the fire, together with 
the large extension of burned ground and weather conditions, 
cause the authorities to activate the regional emergency plan 
at both sides of the border. Authorities understand that, to 
minimise human and material damage, an effective 
collaboration is crucial.  Cooperation is established at 
different 
levels, 
including 
political 
(e.g., 
ministries 
collaboration and protocols), tactical (civil protection 
authorities and command posts) and operational (e.g., 
firefighters, medical teams and their vehicles).   
This fictional incident involves the deployment of several 
technological artifacts (presented in Table I) and information 
flows (presented in Table II). 
Figure 1. General Operating Scenario: Interaction Diagram 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

TABLE I. 
ACTORS AND TECHNOLOGICAL ARTIFACTS
Actors 
Technological Artifact 
Citizens 
User Terminal (e.g., Mobile phone and 
App), Web-client 
Firefighters 
FR (*) 
Advanced Medical Post
Wearables (e.g., activity tracker with 
satellite positioning) 
User Terminal (e.g., Professional Mobile 
Phone with App)  
TETRA Terminal  
PSAP (*) Operator 
112 Coordination Centre
112 Terminal 
Emergency Management System 
Coordination Centre 
Command Post 
Emergency Management System 
Command and Control System 
Political Liaison 
User Terminal (e.g., Phone / E-mail) 
First Aid Vehicles &  
Ambulances 
Vehicle Terminal (with network 
connection and satellite positioning) 
Medical devices and wearables 
Hospital 
Hospital Information System 
Victims 
Medical devices and wearables 
(*) PSAP: Public Safety Answering Point.  FR: First Responder 
III.
VALKYRIES ARCHITECTURE AND APPROACH
Considering the large variety of involved actors and 
sovereignty over their own systems, VALKYRIES adopts a 
federated approach to connect the different systems together, 
a system of systems approach aiming to provide distributed 
operational response, coordination capability and supporting 
services. VALKYRIES overarching architecture is presented 
next. 
A.
VALKYRIES Overarching Architecture 
The VALKYRIES overarching architecture follows a 
federated approach capable of interconnecting heterogeneous 
applications, data sources and systems. It establishes a 
common integrated framework (e.g., principles, business 
processes, 
core 
functions, 
data 
models, 
protocols, 
communications and security requirements), herein named as 
VALKYRIES Interoperability Framework (VIF). VIF 
encompasses: federation-level data services enabling data 
sharing among the different applications; communications 
services that establish the connectivity among the different 
users; and the core services that establishes common 
functions required for the orchestration and deployment of 
resources. Applications and services provided by each 
agency interoperate with each other via SIGRUN, a 
conceptual connector complying with VIF. A high-level 
diagram illustrating the VIF integration concept is presented 
in Figure 2.  
TABLE II. 
INFORMATION FLOW
1. Alert 
Communication of a medical emergency by a 
citizen via an emergency call
2. Raises Alert
Report of the emergency case to the 
Command Centre 
3. Dispatch 
Forward the emergency case to the Advanced 
Command Post in response to a confirmed 
incident 
4. Situational 
Awareness 
Report incident victims and medical status 
and data received, including victims, FR and 
assets’ location status and priority 
5. Register victim
Victim information including triage data
6. Report first 
response data 
First responder information, including 
location and status 
7. Victim data 
Victim data update: symptoms, pathology, 
medical information; status (triage). 
Emergency case file updated 
8. Dispatch 
Ambulance 
Dispatch information: assign victim to an 
ambulance, victim information 
9. Dispatch Victim 
to Hospital 
Ambulance task, Destination hospital, victim 
information, Emergency case file updated; 
victim pathology 
10. Report 
ambulance data 
Ambulance position and time-of-arrival, 
victim information (on-transport) 
11. Report victim 
data 
Victim information; victim vitals data 
(ambulance or wearable devices); Victim 
triage update 
12. Report response 
availability 
Hospital medical emergency’s availability 
13. Reference Alert
Cross-border incident data alert   
14. Incident Report 
(Spain) 
Data on cross-border confirmed incidents
generated from Spanish authorities 
15. Incident Report 
(Portugal) 
Data on cross-border confirmed incidents 
generated from Portuguese authorities 
16. Political 
Coordination 
National authorisations and political 
agreements 
17. Operations 
Report 
Operations’ progress and status: incident 
updates; assets’ updates; victims’ updates; 
situational awareness of high risks elements
18. Sensor data 
Deployed sensor data:  weather, fire 
detection, air quality indicator, video, 
chemical/biological agents detection, beacon 
(location) 
Within the VIF concept, applications and services are 
able to either natively implement VIF or, in case of legacy 
systems, a specifically connector may be applied. This 
ensures that the VALKYRIES concept can be universally 
applied to any application, data source and component, as 
illustrated in Figure 3. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Communications Landscape
Figure 2. VIF Integration Concept Overview 
DATA HANDLING
COMMUNICATIONS HANDLING
CONNECTOR
Figure 3. SIGRUN Integrations: native and connector-based 
B.
Standards and Technologies for Interoperability 
VIF rules and principles were defined considering and 
benefiting 
from 
existing widely-used 
standards and 
technologies, presented next. 

All-over-IP: the Internet Protocol (IP) (RFC6864), is 
the current dominant network protocol, connecting 
billions of systems on the Internet. VIF uses IP to 
interconnect applications and services. 

Emergency Data Exchange Language (EDXL): the 
Organisation for the Advancement of Structured 
Information Standards (OASIS) sets the main goal of 
the EDXL as an enabler to facilitate emergency 
information sharing and data exchange among key 
stakeholders namely local, state actors, national 
agencies or non-governmental organisations supporting 
emergency response and management services [2].  

EDXL Hospital Availability Exchange (EDXL-
HAVE) specifies an Extensible Markup Language 
(XML) 
document 
format 
that 
allows 
the 
communication of the status of a hospital, its services 
and resources, including bed capacity and availability, 
emergency 
department 
status, 
available 
service 
coverage, and the status of the hospital’s facilities and 
operations [2]. 

NENA Emergency Incident Data Object (EIDO): the 
United 
States’ 
National 
Emergency 
Number 
Association (NENA) created EIDO, a standardised, 
industry-neutral format for exchanging emergency 
incident information between disparate manufacturer 
systems located within one or more public safety 
agencies, and with other incident stakeholders [3]. 
Recognising the existence of many functional elements 
involved in emergency management and response, 
which in turn involve multi-agencies and actors, EIDO 
provides a common representation of emergency 
incidents across the lifecycle of an emergency. 

FHIR 
for 
medical 
data: 
Fast 
Healthcare 
Interoperability Resources (FHIR) is a standard for 
healthcare data exchange, published by Health Level 7 
(HL7) [4]. FHIR was created to cope with the fast 
digitisation of health records, aiming to provide a 
harmonised way to ensure that electronic health records 
and medical data are available, discoverable, and 
understandable across different medical agencies and 
healthcare systems. 

Smart Applications REFerence ontology (SAREF): 
under the aegis of the European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute (ETSI), SAFER is intended to 
enable interoperability between solutions from different 
providers and among various activity sectors in the 
Internet of Things (IoT) [5]. SAREF identified about 50 
different semantic assets later translated into Web 
Ontology Language (OWL).  SAREF is being extended 
to address specific sectors like agriculture, automotive, 
energy and environment. 

VALKYRIES web-based requests: components in 
VALKYRIES may need to issue requests to other 
federated components, such as retrieving a list of 
emergency incidents, retrieving information about the 
health status of a specific victim or even request the 
assignment of an ambulance to a victim. Federated 
components can issue web-based requests to other 
components using the widely adopted Representational 
State Transfer (REST) architectural style. REST 
emphasises scalability of component interactions, 
generality of interfaces, independent deployment of 
components, and intermediary components to reduce 
interaction latency, enforce security, and encapsulate 
legacy systems [6]. The application of REST principles 
with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (Secure) 
(HTTP(S)) protocol (Request for Comments or RFC 
7231) and JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)-
formatted 
payload 
in 
web-based 
server-client 
architectures is widely used over the Internet. Servers 
expose their interfaces by what is called as “RESTful 
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)”.   

Data exchange and communication protocols:
complementing transactional requests (i.e., RESTful 
API), VALKYRIES supports a message broker service 
following the publish-subscribe paradigm via the open 
standard Message Queuing Telemetry Transport 
(MQTT) version 5.0 [7]; data streaming via Websockets
(Internet Engineering Task Force or IETF RFC 6455); 
video 
streaming 
via 
the 
Web 
Real-Time 
Communication (WebRTC) protocol suite [8]; and 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

multimedia 
communication 
via 
the 
Extensible 
Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) standard 
(RFC 6120). 

Security: access to VALKYRIES is restricted to 
authorised users with valid credentials. Exchanged 
information is end-to-end encrypted, using Transport 
Layer Security (TLS). TLS is designed to prevent 
eavesdropping, tampering, and message forgery (RFC 
8446). 
C.
VIF Services  
VIF Services provide underlying functions that support 
the integration in the SIGRUN connector, enabling 
applications and services to become a part of the 
VALKYRIES federation. VIF Services are presented in 
Figure 4 and described next. 
Figure 4. VIF Services. 
VIF Services are organised in three categories: 
Communication 
Resources: 
These 
services 
are 
responsible for delivering communication capabilities to 
federated entities, enabling them to access and interact with 
VALKYRIES resources. It also deals with management and 
coordination of different networks and technologies to 
deliver robust and resilient communications. It uses a 
Software Defined Network (SDN) approach to address 
traditional network architecture limitations, as pointed out by 
Priyadarsini et al. [9]. 
Data Exchange: These services provide data exchange 
protocols, enabling operational services to exchange data 
within SIGRUN (e.g., subscribe messages to the message 
broker). 
VIF Core Services: These services provide the necessary 
functions to set-up, deploy and orchestrate the VALKYRIES 
federation. They enable a highly dynamic environment, 
where deployed services, at any time, can operate in a secure 
environment, enter or leave the federation, discover services 
and exchange data without the need to know the topology of 
the services in use. The VIF core services encompass the 
following services: 

The Single Sign-On service & User registration
(SSO) provides authentication in the VALKYRIES 
system, functioning across the federation’s different 
applications and services. It also supports registration 
of users and definition of roles within the federation. 
The SSO is a centralised service in VALKYRIES. 

The Registration service provides the mechanisms to 
register 
applications 
and 
components 
in 
the 
VALKYRIES system, thus becoming known in the 
federation. This service is a centralised service in 
VALKYRIES. 

The SIGRUN time service provides the reference time 
to the VALKYRIES system and thus consequently to 
VALKYRIES’s applications and services. This service 
is a centralised service in VALKYRIES. 

The Message broker service, which can be realised by 
a single server or a cluster of servers, allows 
applications to exchange data following the publish-
subscribe mechanism. The mechanism supports event-
based processing by notifying subscribers when new 
messages are published. 

Blockchain (BLC) based services tracks exchanged 
data in VALKYRIES and stores the metadata and the 
transactional data in the BLC network. The BLC 
services function as a secure trace and auditing 
mechanism in VALKYRIES.  
IV.
VALKYRIES DATA MODEL AND METADATA
VALKYRIES defines data models representing MCI and 
emergency response information. The data models are 
designed to be agnostic of data producers’ characteristics, 
being well adapted to support different types of producers, 
which can be sensors, algorithms and human inputs. The data 
model defines MCI specific data, represented by a MDS and 
associated metadata, as introduced next. 
A.
Minimum Data Set  
A MDS is a structured collection of data associated with 
a unique body of work.  It is designed to represent MCI-
related information in SIGRUN, including the necessary 
information to support a coordinated action of the federated 
organisation. The MDS is structured into six main 
categories, as presented in Table III. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

TABLE III. 
MINIMUM DATA SET CATEGORIES
Category 
Description 
Incident Data 
Data related with an MCI.  It observes EDXL 
and EIDO specifications. 
Vehicle Data 
Data concerning vehicles used in an MCI, like 
ambulances.  It observes FHIR and EIDO 
specifications. 
Smart Devices 
and IoT Data 
Data related with connected devices and IoT, 
such as victims’ vitals, fire detection and air 
quality.  It observes FHIR and SAREF 
specifications.  
First Responders 
Data 
Data related to first responders.  It observes 
EIDO and FHIR specifications. 
Victim Data 
Information collected about a victim during an 
MCI.  This includes triage information, location 
and injuries. It observes FHIR standards. 
Hospital Incident 
Data 
Information about a hospital capabilities and 
capacity in receiving and treating victims. It 
observes EDXL, EDXL-HAVE and FHIR 
standards. 
B.
Metadata 
Every generated message in VALKYRIES contains 
associated metadata, providing mechanisms to trace, control 
and restrict how it is handled and shared. The metadata 
includes: 

Timestamp: date and time the message was generated. 

ProducerID: identifier of the artifact (e.g., sensor or 
application) that generated the data. 

DataTimeValidity: time validity of the information. 

OwnerID: identifier of the owner of the data, used for 
traceability purposes and assure compliance with the 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [10]. 

PriorityLevel: priority of the message. 

UserID: identification of the user that generated the 
data;  

Shared: flag indicating if the data is authorised to be 
shared cross-border. 
VALKYRIES functions as a cooperative environment 
allowing entities to exchange data. Since the environment 
involves 
sensitive 
data, 
VALKYRIES 
implements 
mechanisms to trace and audit messages, as well as 
information flows. VALKYRIES stores all metadata in a 
Blockchain service, ensuring immutability and security. 
Blockchain auditing tools can be used, for example, in case a 
post-event assessment is needed. 
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presents the work performed in the 
VALKYRIES 
project 
towards 
defining 
a 
technical 
architecture capable of enabling collaboration among 
multiple agencies operating in a cross-border MCI. The 
definition of the VALKYRIES architecture considers actors, 
artifacts and information flows involved in a cross-border 
MCI, from which an interoperability framework, named VIF, 
was defined. Organisations complying with VIF are 
empowered to easily participate in a federated collaborative 
environment, exchange MCI-related information and achieve 
high-levels of shared situational awareness, thus contributing 
towards a better employment of resources and improving the 
mission’s effectiveness and efficiency. Next steps of 
VALKYRIES will involve to further detail the technical 
architecture and to validate its operational performance in 
several realistic demonstration scenarios planned for 2023 in 
Portugal, Spain, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Italy, Greece and 
Norway, as part of the VALKYRIES Action. A key 
objective will be to develop technical specifications serving 
as the basis for a standard, thus benefitting all organisations 
involved in MCI and cross-border emergency situations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Funding: “This research has received funding from the 
European Union´s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme under grant agreement: Nº 101020676”. The 
authors would like to thank all the partners of the 
VALKYRIES Action that supported and contributed to the 
concepts developed.   
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
REFERENCES
[1]
VALKYRIES 
website. 
https://www.valkyries-h2020.eu. 
[Retrieved: February, 2023]. 
[2]
OASIS. 2013. Emergency Data Exchange Language (EDXL)
Distribution 
Element 
Version 
2.0. 
Available 
at: 
https://docs.oasis-open.org/emergency/edxl-
de/v2.0/cs02/edxl-de-v2.0-cs02.html. 
Dated: 
September, 
2013. [Retrieved: February, 2023]. 
[3]
NENA. 2022. NENA Standard for Emergency Incident Data 
Object (EIDO). NENA-STA-021.1-2021. Dated: October 19, 
2021. Approved: April 4, 2022. [Retrieved: February, 2023]. 
[4]
FHIR Website.  https://www.hl7.org/fhir/. Accessed version 
4.3.0 generated at 2022-May-28. [Retrieved: February, 2023].  
[5]
ETSI. 2020. SmartM2M; Smart Applications; Reference 
Ontology and oneM2M Mapping. ETSI TS 103 264 V3.1.1 
(2020-02). [Retrieved: February, 2023]. 
[6]
Fielding, R., Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-
based 
Software 
Architectures". 
Doctoral 
Dissertation, 
University of California, Irvine, Sep-tember 2000.  Available 
at: http://roy.gbiv.com/pubs/dissertation/top.htm. [Retrieved: 
February, 2023]. 
[7]
OASIS. 2019. MQTT Version 5.0. OASIS Standard. Available at: 
https://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v5.0/mqtt-v5.0.html. 
[Retrieved: February, 2023]. 
[8]
W3C. 2021. WebRTC 1.0: Real-Time Communication 
Between Browsers. W3C Recommendation. Dated: 26 
January 2021. Available at: https://www.w3.org/TR/webrtc/. 
[Retrieved: February, 2023]. 
[9]
Priyadarsini, M., and Bera, P., Software defined networking 
architecture, traffic management, security, and placement: A 
survey.  Computer Networks, 192, 2021.  
[10] Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of The European Parliament and of 
The Council. Of 27 April 2016. Available at: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A02016R0679-20160504
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

