Enhancing Electricity Meters with Smart Functionality
Using Metering System with Optical Sensors
Mateusz Brzozowski
and Michał Kruszewski
OneMeter Ltd.
ul. Dobrzanskiego 3
20-262 Lublin, Poland
Email: {Mateusz.Brzozowski,
Michal.Kruszewski}@onemeter.com
Artur Janicki
Institute of Telecommunications
Warsaw University of Technology
ul. Nowowiejska 15/19
00-665 Warsaw, Poland
OneMeter Ltd., Lublin, Poland
Email: A.Janicki@tele.pw.edu.pl
Abstract—The article presents on-going work on a system, called
OneMeter 2.0, that uses energy-efﬁcient beacons with optical
sensors to create an advanced metering infrastructure. The
system allows the use of the current, non-smart electricity meters
with IEC 65056-21 optical ports to create an intelligent metering
system. The core components of the system are described, such
as a beacon with an optical sensor, a mobile application, and a
data platform. The status of the project is presented, including the
number of test installations and initial assessment of the beacon’s
energy efﬁciency. Sample visualizations originating from the data
analytics platform are shown and explained.
Keywords–Optical sensor; Beacon; Smart metering; Smart
grids; AMI.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In times of growing costs for electricity production and
increasing problems with air pollution, the need for real-time
monitoring of energy consumption is tremendous. Unsurpris-
ingly, the European Commission requires that all member
countries equip at least 80% of their electricity customers with
intelligent metering systems by 2020 [1]. This is supposed to
lead to the creation of smart power grids [2], which would
allow for monitoring and managing of country-based and EU-
based power consumption.
The process of installing smart meters is very costly and
time-consuming, so it is no wonder that the majority of the
EU countries, as described in the next section, are not likely
to meet the above deadline. Therefore, to improve the process
of deployment of smart metering, we propose a system, called
OneMeter 2.0, which will use energy-efﬁcient beacons with
optical sensors, communicating via the IEC 65056-21 proto-
col. The system will add intelligent functionality to existing,
popular, non-smart, electronic meters, called Automated Meter
Reading (AMR) [3], equipped with an optical port – without
a need to install smart meters at all.
In this paper, in Section II we will brieﬂy describe the
problem of smart metering deployment. Next, in Section III
we will present a description of the OneMeter 2.0 system,
followed by the current status of the project (Section IV).
Finally, we will conclude in Section V with a plan for the
future of our work.
This work was supported by the National Centre for Research and De-
velopment within the Smart Growth Operational Programme (agreement
No. POIR.01.02.00-00-0352/16-00).
Figure 1. OneMeter beacon with optical sensor attached to IEC 62056-21
port of electricity meter.
II.
SMART METERING CHALLENGES
A. Smart Metering in Europe
According to the data of the European Commission [4]
and European energy regulators [5], so far only three EU
members have achieved a full roll-out of smart meters: Italy,
Finland, and Sweden. In 2015, in Denmark, Estonia, Malta,
Slovenia, and Spain about half of the customers had had smart
meters installed in their households, while in the Netherlands
it was below 30%. In Austria, Latvia, Poland, and the UK,
the household penetration was only about 10% (for Latvia) or
below. In the rest of the EU countries, the deployment of smart
meters had hardly started.
This means, for example, in Poland, where there are 8
million metering points, only less than 700 thousand are
equipped with smart meters. However, a remarkable part of the
remaining electricity meters are equipped with optical ports,
which are normally used for billing readouts but can be equally
used to access the meter readouts using an optical sensor.
B. Existing Solutions
Several solutions exist that aim to acquire energy con-
sumption data from existing electronic, non-smart meters. The
Rhino Company offers the so-called RhinoAMI AP device [6],
which accesses electronic meters via a DIN bus using a cable
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of proposed OneMeter 2.0 system based on beacons with optical sensors.
connection. Metering data can be then transmitted further,
using a GPRS or Ethernet connection. The device requires an
external 5-12 V power source.
Smappee [7] is another cable solution, offered currently
at 229 EUR, which, in contrast to the previously described
system, uses an electromagnetic sensor clipped to the phase
cable supplying an electrical installation, e.g., in an apartment
or an ofﬁce. A dedicated application allows the monitoring of
the current energy consumption. A proprietary Non-Intrusive
Load Monitoring (NILM) algorithm helps to recognize indi-
vidual electrical appliances. The Smappee metering system is
powered by a 100-230 V main supply. It is noteworthy that
Smappee, in fact, estimates the consumption instead of reading
it from the meter.
A
device
called
mReader R
⃝Opto,
produced
by
NU-
MERON [8], uses an optical sensor to communicate with the
meter over the IEC 62056-21 protocol. It requires a USB
connection to connect with a smartphone or a computer. It
can work on a battery, but only for ca. 2h. The same producer
also offers a gateway called smartBOX, which allows a remote
transmission of the meter readouts over a network or GPRS.
REDZ Smart Communication Technologies offers another
device with an optical sensor: KMK 118 Bluetooth Optical
Probe [9]. Its functionality is similar to the previously de-
scribed device, but here the cable communication is replaced
by a wireless one. The device can be battery powered, but
the battery life is reported to be only “greater than 24h”. The
device is offered at the price of 180 EUR.
C. OneMeter 2.0 Project
We are working on a system that utilizes beacons with
optical sensors to read data directly from electricity meters. In
contrast to other existing solutions, our beacons are energy
efﬁcient, allowing them to work on a single battery for
over a year. Thanks to a cloud-based data platform and the
use of smartphones, our solution enables a fast and cheap
deployment of the AMI infrastructure using the existing, non-
smart electricity meters.
III.
IDEA OF PROPOSED SOLUTION
The idea of our solution is based on using a small, energy-
efﬁcient wireless beacon with optical sensors attached to an
electricity meter (see Figure 1). We propose employing either
smartphones or dedicated gateways to transfer measurement
data to the cloud, as shown schematically in Figure 2. The
details of the proposed solution are described below.
A. Optical Sensor in Beacon
A small bottle cap-shaped beacon of 32 mm diameter
(compatible with the IEC 62056-21 standard) was designed,
equipped with an optical sensor, LED diode, Nordic Semi-
conductor’s processor nRF51, ﬂash memory, Bluetooth Low
Energy (BLE) radio components, and a 3.0V battery (CR2032).
The beacon is attached magnetically to an electronic meter
equipped with an optical port. The optical sensor is designed
with a miniature silicon photodiode of high radiant sensitivity
and a low power comparator. The optical sensor, together with
the IR LED diode, are able to set up communication with a
meter using the IEC 62056-21 (old: IEC 1107) protocol. The
amount of measurement data acquired from the meter depends
on the meter’s model – some of the meters present only the
absolute active energy, while the others allow the readout of
more detailed information, such as positive and negative active
energy, or reactive energy.
The processor was programmed in such a way that the
beacon performs a readout of the meter every 15 min and stores
the metering data in the ﬂash memory. The BLE component
allows other BLE devices to connect to the beacon to download
metering data or to transmit the readout in real time.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 3. Sample monthly consumption chart for residential consumer. Values shown in [kWh].
Figure 4. 15-minute daily consumption proﬁle calculated over 2-month period for residential consumer.
B. Smartphone as Gateway
We decided to use smartphones as gateways to transmit
measurement data from beacons to the cloud. We designed
an Android application, which allows the setting up of data
connections between the smartphone and the beacon. The
connection is carried out using the BLE protocol version
4.0. When the connection is established, the measurement
data, encrypted using the AES protocol, is sent to the data
cloud over the smartphone’s Internet connection, i.e., via Wi-
Fi network or via a data connection from the mobile provider.
The synchronization can be triggered by a user in arbitrary
moments. The application can also operate in the gateway
mode: in this case, the smartphone receives advertising packets
and transfers them to the cloud.
Apart from using smartphones, we also plan to deploy
dedicated gateways, which would communicate with the cloud
using any of the IoT communication protocols, similarly
to [10]. This option may be especially needed in rural areas,
with less developed infrastructure, as depicted in Figure 2.
C. Data Platform
The data platform provides gathering, analysis, and visual-
izations of the collected metering data. The initial version of
the platform was realized using the MongoDB database with
a set of proprietary analytic algorithms.
A web-based user interface allows the visualization of the
energy consumption data. The user is able to enter information
about their tariff. Thanks to the tariff data imported to the
database for various energy re-sellers, the cost estimation of
the consumed energy can be calculated. The platform provides
tools to generate reports showing consumption proﬁles for
chosen date ranges and information about maximum power
demand including, for example, information on the percentage
of time a certain power threshold was exceeded.
IV.
ON-GOING RESEARCH WORK
Intensive work on the OneMeter 2.0 system started at the
beginning of 2018. The project highlights are presented below.
A. Experimental Installations
To verify experimentally how the solution works in a real
environment, we needed to deploy it at the end users’ locations.
Up to the time of writing this article (October 2018) we have
achieved the following approximate metrics:
•
160 business client installations (small and medium
entrepreneurships);
•
20 household client installations;
•
40 installations in laboratory conditions;
•
76 meter models veriﬁed to work correctly with elab-
orated beacon;
•
0.8 million valid measurement records gathered in
database starting from 1 Jan 2018.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

In general, the experience built upon the above-described
installations was very positive. Nevertheless, several issues
were identiﬁed, which were then subject to improvements.
One such issue was the problem introduced by Doze and
App Standby feature in API level 23 (Android 6.0) – a
power saving mechanism, which caused the gateway service
installed on a smartphone to stop at random moments. This was
solved by implementing the so-called wake lock feature, which
prevents moving the gateway application into sleep mode by
the smartphone’s operating system.
B. Energy Effectiveness of Beacon
We performed several measurements to estimate the poten-
tial lifetime of the beacon with a single CR2032 battery. We
took the following presumptions:
•
160 mAh of effective CR2032 battery capacity;
•
96 meter readouts per day (i.e., every 15 min);
•
650 B of data returned by the meter at 9600 baud rate;
•
data collected by the gateway in real-time;
•
4 s BLE advertising interval.
Detailed information about the current demand and consequent
battery usage by various beacon activities is shown in Table I.
TABLE I. BEACON ACTIVITIES WITHIN 15 MIN. WORK CYCLE.
Beacon
Current
Dura-
Time
Energy
Energy
activity
[µA]
tion [s]
share [%]
usage [µAh]
share [%]
Meter readouts
978.04
3.46
0.38
0.94
21.95
BLE comm.
6038.71
1.24
0.14
2.08
48.78
Flash operations
3150.03
0.24
0.03
0.21
4.88
Idle
4.18
895.06
99.45
1.04
24.39
Energy consumption of ca. 4.27 µAh per 15 min. means
that the daily beacon’s energy consumption is on the level of
0.41 mAh. This implies that the beacon is now able to work
without a battery replacement for about one year.
Based on [11] we estimated the foreseen energy consump-
tion after adding support for a LPWAN network. For instance,
assuming a LoRa with the lowest bitrate (250 b/s) the device
would need a battery with at least 500 mAh capacity to send
the daily single OBIS code data once per day. This requires
replacing the CR2032 battery with AAA batteries to maintain
at least one year of the beacon’s uninterrupted operation.
C. Initial Data Analysis and Visualization
So far the data analytic platform allows users to access the
following information:
•
Monthly, weekly, daily, and 15-min. daily metrics of
energy consumption (see Figure 3 for an example).
•
15-min daily consumption proﬁle over an arbitrary
period of time, showing average, minimum, and max-
imum consumption for every quarter (see Figure 4
for an example of a proﬁle for a residential consumer
calculated over two months).
•
Information on the amount of the energy consumed
during peak hours, off-peak hours, and during week-
ends.
•
Cost of the consumed energy over the selected period
for the selected tariff, showing the cost of electricity
and distribution.
•
Load duration curve, showing, e.g., the percentage of
time when the power limit is exceeded.
•
Comparison of hourly consumption proﬁles.
The initial feedback from the users, gathered using ques-
tionnaires, revealed that the clients were in general satisﬁed
with the information available in the platform and the way it
was visualized. However, the need for additional features (e.g.,
alerts) was reported and will be addressed soon in the project.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we showed the on-going work on the
OneMeter 2.0 system, which, thanks to the beacons with
optical sensors, would be able to enhance the existing AMR
electricity meters with smart functionality. Contrary to the
solutions offered by the competitors, the described system is
both wireless and energy-efﬁcient. What is more, the cost of
a single beacon is not likely to exceed several EUR, which is
signiﬁcantly lower than that for similar products available on
the market.
The proposed system can be highly useful to end users,
re-sellers, and distribution system operators (DSOs). Last but
not least, the system may provide valuable information to
prosumers, which would be able to monitor in real-time how
much energy they both consume and produce.
The future work will involve intensive work on developing
stand-alone gateways, including the ones using IoT commu-
nication protocols. Further work on increasing the beacon’s
energy efﬁciency is also foreseen.
REFERENCES
[1]
European Union, “Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament
and of the COUNCIL of 25 October 2012 on energy efﬁciency, amend-
ing Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives
2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC,” Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union,
Nov. 2012.
[2]
R. Morello, C. D. Capua, G. Fulco, and S. C. Mukhopadhyay, “A Smart
Power Meter to Monitor Energy Flow in Smart Grids: The Role of
Advanced Sensing and IoT in the Electric Grid of the Future,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, vol. 17, no. 23, Dec 2017, pp. 7828–7837.
[3]
F. D. Garcia, F. P. Marafao, W. A. de Souza, and L. C. P. da Silva,
“Power Metering: History and Future Trends,” in 9th IEEE Green
Technologies Conference (GreenTech 2017), March 2017, pp. 26–33.
[4]
European Commission, “Second Report on the State of the Energy
Union. Monitoring progress towards the Energy Union objectives – key
indicators,” Feb 2017.
[5]
Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) and the
Council of European Energy Regulators (CEER), “ACER/CEER Annual
Report on the Results of Monitoring the Internal Electricity and Gas
Markets in 2015 – Key Insights and Recommendations,” Nov 2016.
[6]
“Rhino Energy - Solution - Hardware,” https://rhino.energy/hardware/,
2018, accessed 08 Jan 2019.
[7]
“Smappee Energy,” https://www.smappee.com/be en/energy-monitor,
2018, accessed 08 Jan 2019.
[8]
NUMERON,
“Dokumentacja
NUMERON,
mReader R
⃝4,”
https://docs.numeron.pl/mreader4/, 2018, accessed 08 Jan 2019.
[9]
REDZ Smart Communication Technologies Ltd., “KMK 119 – Blue-
tooth optical probe - Smart wireless auto protocols detection probe,”
http://probeformeters.com/brochure/REDZ KMK119 Detailed Datasheet.pdf,
2018, accessed 08 Jan 2019.
[10]
M. Carrat´u, M. Ferro, A. Pietrosanto, and V. Paciello, “Smart Power
Meter for the IoT,” in IEEE 16th International Conference on Industrial
Informatics (INDIN 2018), July 2018, pp. 514–519.
[11]
E. Morin, M. Maman, R. Guizzetti, and A. Duda, “Comparison of the
Device Lifetime in Wireless Networks for the Internet of Things,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 7097–7114.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

