Design of an Acoustic Transducer Structure for Biosensing 
 
Emmanuel Attal 
MN2S Department 
FEMTO-ST Institute  
UMR 6174 CNRS 
Besançon, France 
email: emmanuel.attal@hotmail.fr
 
Sophie Sok 
MN2S Department 
FEMTO-ST Institute  
UMR 6174 CNRS 
Besançon, France 
email: sok.sophie.m@gmail.com
 
Thérèse Leblois 
MN2S Department 
FEMTO-ST Institute  
UMR 6174 CNRS 
Besançon, France 
email: therese.leblois@femto-st.fr
 
 
 
Abstract—In a biomedical context linked to the detection of 
biological particles in a liquid by a biosensor, we have modeled 
a piezoelectric transducer based on Gallium Arsenide. The 
future application will enable to evaluate the mass of biological 
specific elements present in a complex fluid. The multiphysics 
simulations of this transducer allowed us to identify a quasi-
transverse thickness mode at around 2 MHz. For this mode, 
the out-of-plane displacement is low, which is a prerequisite to 
keep the performance when immersed in a liquid medium. In 
this study, we demonstrated the effect of holes distributed over 
the structure on the in-plane/out-of-plane displacement ratio 
and on its resonance frequency.  
Keywords-Gallium Arsenide; Acoustic transducer; Holes 
numbers. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the medical field, the growing need to provide real-
time information on the presence of a specific biological 
element in a complex environment has motivated the 
development of a multitude of detection technologies [1][2]. 
Nevertheless, it is important to mention that many methods 
of detection still use culture processes before measurement 
because their limit of detection is too high. The culture of 
biological elements requires a lot of time and does not allow 
a real time monitoring of the biological liquid. The objective 
of this study is to design a transducer whose sensitivity and 
limit of detection in liquid media are at the state of the art 
[3][4]. 
For this purpose, we propose an original acoustic 
transduction microdevice to detect the immobilization of 
specific analytes. The challenge of this type of transducer is 
to maintain its quality factor Q at the value in air when it is 
immersed in a liquid medium, especially in a viscous 
medium such as blood. To get close to this result, we must 
cancel as much as possible the out-of-plane components of 
the vibration. 
Previous works [5][6] on wave propagation in clamped 
plates have demonstrated the strong attenuation that these 
embedding could generate on these waves, making 
measurements difficult when the plate is immersed in a 
liquid medium. To avoid signal losses when the plate is in 
contact of a fluid, two alternatives are studied: (1) to clamp 
the plate along two sides rather than four, and (2) to add 
holes so as to soften the structure in the plane of the plate.  
II. 
EXPERIMENT 
In this study, the considered transducer structure is a 
rectangular thin plate in the plane (x, y) made of 
piezoelectric gallium arsenide (GaAs) which size is 
3000x2000x50 μm3 (Figure 1(a)). GaAs was chosen because 
of its pure crystallinity and its knowledge in terms of 
microfabrication. The generation of the elastic wave in the 
structure is ensured by means of three gold electrodes 
deposited by sputtering on the upper surface. These 
electrodes are oriented along the plate width and separated 
equidistantly. The structure is clamped along x direction. All 
the numeric simulation are performed using COMSOL 
Multiphysics© software. 
 
Figure 1.  Clamped structure in (100) GaAs crystal (a) without circular 
holes and (b) with circular holes 
The considered mode of vibration (Figure 2) is a quasi-
thickness shear mode at a resonance frequency close to 
2MHz 
 
Figure 2.  Quasi-thickness shear mode at a resonance frequency of 2 MHz. 
(a) without circular holes and (b) with circular holes 
With this configuration, the attenuation due to the fluid in 
contact with the membrane is minimized, but not negligible. 
In order to increase the in-plane amplitude of the acoustic 
wave in the GaAs crystal, we generate several circular holes 
in the plate (Figure 1(b)). The objective of these holes 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) 
(b) 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

distributed over the plate is to increase the elasticity of the 
plate and then to improve the electrical response of the 
transducer. In this study, the effect of a circular holes array 
evenly distributed between each electrode is presented. The 
simulated results shown in Figure 3(a) and 3(b) highlight 
the impact of the size and number of holes on the in-
plane/out-of plane displacements ratio. As seen in this 
figure, the displacement ratios X/Z and Y/Z have the same 
trend. Because of the orientation of electrodes toward Y 
axis, the ratio X/Z is higher than Y/Z. The most important 
displacement ratio (in the two directions) is obtained for a 
holes number equal to 90 and a hole diameter equal to 50 
μm. Other recent simulations on equivalent models prove 
that the frequency step of the model is a significant 
parameter and impact on the displacement ratios. The 
apparent plateau observable in displacement ratio of Figure 
3(a) is due to a lack of simulation points for a given holes 
configuration. 
 
Figure 3.  Impact of a) the holes numbers (for a given hole diameter of 50 
μm) and b) holes diameters (holes array in the plate considered: 10x9) on 
the X/Z and Y/Z displacement ratios. 
Figure 4(a) displays the resonance frequency evolution 
with the number of holes for a hole diameter equal to 50 
μm. The resonance frequency shift vs the number of holes 
behaves as a linear curve. Figure 4(b) shows that for two 
different sizes of holes the behavior of resonance frequency 
with the hole diameters is non linear.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Quasi-thickness shear mode at a resonance frequency of 2 MHz 
(a) without circular holes and (b) with circular holes. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
A 
plate 
mode 
(including 
clamped), 
with 
few 
displacement, depending on the thickness, and, therefore, 
having small attenuation in contact with the fluid, has been 
identified around 2 MHz. The addition of holes has the 
effect of shifting this mode towards lower frequencies. The 
displacement ratio gives better results for a holes number 
equal to 90 and a hole diameter equal to 50 μm. Future work 
will focus on the validation of this model with different 
fluid media: air, water, ionic solution and a biological fluid. 
For this purpose, several steps will be undertaken: 
 
Finite Element Method (FEM) simulation of the 
electrical impedance as a function of the size and 
the number of holes in the plate.  
 
Microfabrication of the GaAs / electrode structures 
by wet chemical etching and measurement of the 
acoustic impedance at the resonance frequency of 
the device placed in air and in liquid. The goal is to 
validate experimentally the previous results. The 
experimental study will focus on the "solid" 
structure and then on structures with holes. Some 
of the different tests that can be performed include: 
o 
The electrical impedance measurement 
with impedance analyzer enables to check 
the resonance frequency value of the 
mode and provides the quality factor of 
the resonators. 
o 
The 3D vibration measurements enable to 
conclude on the evolution of the out of 
plane displacement of the structure 
according to the holes parameters. 
 
These experimental validations aim to conclude on the 
relevance of these microstructured devices for biosensing in 
liquid. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Lacour and T. Leblois, “Thermal and conductivity 
dependence of GaAs based acoustic biosensors,” IEEE 
Ultrasonics Symp, pp. 1-4, Sept 2016.  
[2] M. E. E. Alahi and S. C. Khopadhyay, “Detection 
methodologies 
for 
pathogen 
and 
toxins: 
a 
review,”  Sensors, vol. 17(8), pp. 1885-1905, 2017. 
[3] E. Nazemi, W. M. Hassen, E. H. Frost, and J. J. Dubowski, 
“Growth of Escherichia coli on the GaAs (001) surface,” 
Talanta, vol. 178, pp. 69-77, 2018.  
[4]  J. Chawich, P. Boiteux, T. Leblois, and C. Elie-Caille, 
“Specificity and sensitivity characterization of a gallium 
arsenide resonant bio-sensor”, IEEE International Ultrasonics 
Symp, pp. 1-9, Oct 2018. 
[5] A. Bienaimé, “Microcapteur en arséniure de gallium pour la 
détection de molécules dans un fluide, Doctoral dissertation, 
Besançon, 2012. 
[6] V. Lacour, A. Bienaime, J. F. Manceau, T. Leblois, and J. 
Dubowski, “Design and experimental studies of Gallium 
Arsenide bulk acoustic wave transducer under lateral field 
excitation”, European Frequency and Time Forum (EFTF), 
pp. 163-166, Jun 2014. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) 
(b) 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

