Testing of a Developed Multigas Sensor System for Outdoor Odour Nuisance 
Monitoring 
 
Michael Hofmann, Carlo Tiebe  
8.1 Sensors, Measurement and Testing Methods 
Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und -prüfung (BAM) 
Berlin, Germany 
e-mail: michael.hofmann@bam.de, carlo.tiebe@bam.de  
Mohammed Moufid, Nezha El Bari, Benachir 
Bouchikhi 
Laboratory of Electronic Automatic and Biotechnology 
Faculty of Sciences, Moulay Ismaïl University, 
Meknes, Morocco 
e-mail: mohammed.moufid.2@gmail.com, 
n_elbari@hotmail.com, benachir.bouchikhi@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—This work presents the testing of a developed elec-
tronic nose for outdoor odour nuisance monitoring. The sensor 
system consists of a sampling system, a measuring cell equipped 
with commercially available low-cost gas sensor elements and a 
data acquisition system. The sensor testing showed that the 
developed prototype is able to distinguish, identify and partially 
quantify individual odorous substances like ethanol, ammonia 
and hydrogen sulphide. Ethanol and ammonia could even be 
detected below or near their odour threshold. 
Keywords-electronic 
nose; 
outdoor 
odour; 
machined 
olfaction; sensor testing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Odour nuisances in outdoor air, e.g., caused by emissions 
from industrial or agricultural facilities into the environment, 
can seriously affect the well-being and health of residents. For 
the detection and evaluation of the outdoor odour immission, 
i.e. at a point of exposure to the residents, olfactometric meth-
ods exist, which are based on the human sensory perception 
of trained examinants forming a so-called qualified panel 
[1][2]. However, the relevance and the degree of odour nui-
sances are often difficult to assess, as they are only recorded 
and evaluated by persons with individual subjective olfactory 
perception, in a short time interval and in a limited spatial 
resolution. Therefore, olfactory measurements, even though 
performed with trained examiners, are subject to considerable 
standard deviations and measurement uncertainties. The ap-
plication of an objective sensor-supported measurement 
method - machined olfaction - as a supporting and comple-
mentary method is consequently of great interest. 
In a Moroccan-German research project, such a tool in the 
form of a multi-gas sensor system, also known as an electronic 
nose, shall be developed and tested under laboratory and field 
conditions. In addition, measurement strategies for odour 
monitoring in the outdoor air are to be derived from the tests. 
This paper presents the results of a proficiency test of the 
developed prototype under laboratory conditions for a 
selection of odorants and is organised as follows. In section II 
the used materials and methods are described. Section III 
obtained results are presented and discussed. Conclusions of 
the investigations are given in section IV.  
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Electronic Nose 
The prototype of the electronic nose [3] consists of a 
270 cm3 measuring cell equipped with six commercially 
available solid-state metal oxide semiconductor gas sensor 
elements (MQ-3, -4, -5, -8, -9, -135, Winsen Electronics Tech-
nology Co., Ltd, Zhengzhou, China) for the differentiation, 
identification and quantification of gaseous substances, as 
well as a temperature (LM35DZ, Texas Instruments, Dallas, 
USA) and a relative humidity sensor (HIH 4000, Honeywell 
International Inc., Morristown, USA). For data acquisition, a 
multifunction data I/O device (NI USB-6212, National Instru-
ments, Austin, USA) with 16 bit analog to digital converters 
is employed, which transfers the data to a PC running a 
LabVIEW graphical user interface. Sampling can be per-
formed either indirectly via a micro pump and 2 dm3 Tedlar® 
bags (TB) or directly at a gas flow rate of 250 cm3 min-1. 
 
B. Feature extraction and pattern recognition 
To derive evaluable information from the complex sensor 
responses of the electronic nose, characteristic features were 
extracted from the measurement signals of each gas sensor. 
These are: the initial conductance (G0), the steady-state 
conductance (GS), the dynamic slope of the conductance 
(dG/dt) and the area under curve (A). Based on these features, 
a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed for 
dimension reduction. 
 
C. Test gas generation 
For sensor testing, the Gas Mixing System (GMS) of the 
accredited test laboratory for the testing of sensors for 
determining the composition of non-explosive gas mixtures of 
BAM was used. The method bases on dilution of gas streams. 
The traceability is given by the usage of certified test gases 
from gas cylinders, calibrated thermal mass flow controllers 
into a zero-gas stream of known composition. In addition, 
volatile organic compounds (VOC) or volatile inorganic 
compounds can be added traceable to the mass into the gas 
stream via a liquid evaporator or a permeator. 
27
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

D. Sensor testing 
The basic requirements for the behaviour of the employed 
sensor elements were tested by exposure to individual test 
gases from gas cylinders containing:  
 
Ethanol with a volume fraction of 483 cm3 m-3 (ppm), 
 
Ammonia with a volume fraction of 28.86 ppm and 
 
Hydrogen sulphide with a volume fraction of 11.13 ppm 
in synthetic air. Different volume fractions were adjusted with 
the GMS of BAM by adjusting the mixing ratio. Sampling was 
performed both indirectly via TB and directly from the test gas 
stream (without the micro pump). 
In the further course of the sensor testing, the response to 
a mixture of the mentioned test gases, artificial odour of a pig 
farm, which is commercially available as "PigOdour" (Olfa-
sense, Kiel, Germany), and components identified via Gas 
Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) from outdoor 
odour samples in morocco collected by Tenax® TA filled 
thermal desorption (TD) tubes  are tested under variable 
climatic conditions. After passing the laboratory tests, the 
performance of the electronic nose is tested in the field. 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 1 shows the PCA plot resulting from the extracted 
feature datasets of the measurements of ethanol, ammonia 
(NH3) and hydrogen sulphide (H2S) for indirect (a) and direct 
sampling (b) together with the blank value of the 
corresponding sampling system. 
For indirect sampling, the cluster of the blank value 
measurement overlaps with the odorant measurements in the 
lower volume fraction range (3 ppm of ethanol, 7.3 ppm of 
NH3 and 0.1 ppm as well as 1 ppm of H2S). The measurements 
of the remaining test gas concentrations could be well 
separated by PCA. 
With direct sampling, a better separation of the clusters is 
achieved than with indirect sampling. Only the clusters of the 
blank value measurement overlap with the measurements of 
0.1 ppm and 1 ppm of H2S. 
Especially at low odorant concentrations as it is to be 
found in outdoor air, the use of TB is only suitable to a limited 
extent since the material act both as a sink and, in the case of 
inadequate cleaning, as a source of VOC. In this study, N,N-
dimethylacetamide and phenol were determined as main 
contaminants of the TB via TD GC-MS. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper describes the need for traceable test gas 
generation methods for testing of this developed multi gas 
sensor device (electronic nose). 
With very simple and cost-effective gas sensors, which are 
applicable in products for citizen science, it is possible to 
differentiate, identify and partially quantify odorous 
substances with good discrimination strength within short 
measuring times. 
For the considered outdoor air application, a direct 
sampling and thus a portable measuring device is essential. A 
corresponding adaptation of the measuring system is planned. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has received funding from the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under grant no. 
01DH16033 and Moulay Ismaïl University, Scientific 
Research under grant “Appui à la Recherche”. 
In memoriam of Dr. Thomas Hübert. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] EN 16841-1 (2017): Ambient air - Determination of odour in 
ambient air by using field inspection - Part 1: Grid method, 
European Committee for Standardization (CEN), Brussels. 
[2] EN 16841-2 (2017): Ambient air - Determination of odour in 
ambient air by using field inspection - Part 2: Plume method, 
European Committee for Standardization (CEN), Brussels. 
[3] M. Moufid, C. Tiebe, N. El Bari, T. Hübert, and B. Bouchikhi, 
“An Electronic Nose For the Detection and Discrimination of  
Environmental Pollutant Gases In the Aglomeration of the City 
of Meknes,” 8th International Workshop Biosensors for Food 
Safety and Environmental Monitoring, Oct. 2017, p 54. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  PCA plot performed on measurements of ethanol, H2S and NH3 with the electronic nose: a) indirect sampling, b) direct sampling. 
a) 
b) 
28
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

