Scale-down and Package of Wireless Sensor Nodes for Biotelemetry
Jian Lu, Lan Zhang, Sohei Matsumoto, Hiroshi Hiroshima, Ryutaro Maeda
Research Center for Ubiquitous MEMS and Micro Engineering (UMEMSME)
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
Namiki 1-2-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8564, Japan
e-mail: {jian-lu, chou-ran, sohei.matsumoto, hiroshima-hiroshi, maeda-ryutaro}@aist.go.jp
Abstract—Biotelemetry and its applications have seen an
explosive growth in recent years. This paper presents our
recent research work on ultra-compact wireless sensor nodes
from both system scale-down and packaging point-of-view for
biotelemetry and MedTech innovation. In addition to the
results
of
our
work,
we
also
present
state-of-the-art
technologies and challenges to better understand the market
needs and the essential technologies for the coming new era of
biotelemetry.
Keywords- biotelemetry; wireless sensor node; scale-down;
package; MedTech innovation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Decades before Internet of Things (IoT) and Wireless
Sensor Network (WSN) came to our field of knowledge,
biotelemetry systems have been developed for remote
monitoring and gathering of various vital signs from animals
and ambulatory patients [1]. However, the explosive growth
in practical applications has happened in recent years
because of the advances in wireless sensing technology,
artificial intelligence, smart portable electronics devices, as
well as medical diagnostic techniques. The so-called new era
of biotelemetry aims at not only sick people, but also
keeping people healthy, especially in the population aging
societies [2]. Therefore, it requires more accurate and
reliable data in real time, as well as acceptable production
cost. In addition, a bio-compatible package and a user-
friendly interface are essential requirements as well for
ubiquitous applications.
Figure 1.
Challenges and some of our related works to scale-down
wireless sensor nodes applicable to biotelemetry.
As shown in Figure 1, besides ethical and privacy
matters, it is believed that the significant and major
challenges associated with the devices for biotelemetry are
scale-down of the device both physically and electrically,
assembly of the device in a flexible and reliable way, and
package of the device with sufficient compatibilities.
In this paper, we present our recent research works on
ultra-compact wireless sensor nodes and their applications
for
biological
information
monitoring
and
MedTech
innovation. The state-of-the-art technologies and challenges
are discussed as well, along with the results of our works, for
better
understanding
the
market-needs
and
the
key
technologies for the new era of biotelemetry.
In Section II of this paper, the sensor node design and
fabrication will be presented. Then, the experimental results
will be discussed in Section III. Finally, this paper will be
summarized with conclusions in Section IV.
II.
SCALE-DOWN OF WIRELESS SENSOR NODES
System
scale-down
is
extraordinary
important
to
biotelemetry because most of the devices are designed as
implantable to secure the data accuracy, as well as to avoid
any influence from surrounding environments. Different
from electronic system, scale-down in telemetry includes not
only reducing module size and components counts, but also
using the lowest possible power, or even energy harvesting
devices, to power the system for a sufficient lifespan.
A highly integrated circuit chip, which has universal
interfaces to various sensors, power management, and radio
frequency communication functions, may contribute to
reduce the components count. However, the development
cost may exceed most of the acceptable market requests due
to the small quantity. Therefore, in our work, a commercially
available
radio
frequency
integrated
circuit
(RFIC)
transmitter (Si4010, Silicon Laboratories) with embedded
microcontroller unit (MCU), clock, memory, and general
input/output (I/O) interface was selected; by using this
sensor, the size of a wireless temperature sensor node can be
as small as 7 mm, with total component count of less than 10.
The 3D assembly of integrated circuit (IC) chips and passive
components is strongly expected to reduce the system
volume [3], while it is clearly shown in Figure 2(a) that it
may not be effective if the component count is small enough.
The carrier frequency was set as 920 MHz for the pursuit
of lowest return-loss from the skin [4]. Then, an 8.3cm-long
wire antenna was twisted round the sensor node to avoid
package difficulties of the chip antenna which requires
relatively large ground pattern. The detailed system blocks
and diagrams have been published in a previous work [3].
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 2.
Photo of developed ultra-compact wireless temperature sensor nodes (a) and their packages (b)(e) for implantation (c) and rectal temperature
monitoring, respectively. The recorded body temperature of a mouse for the duration of 3 days indicating excelllent repeatibility and accuracy (d).
By using RFIC transmitter instead of RFIC transceiver, it
may compress standby current from a few mA to a few uA.
Thus, the power consumption of the sensor node in Figure 2
(a) was measured as low as 50-100 uW depending on duty
time. To change the measurement mode and switch the
power ON/OFF especially after the implantation, a hybrid
radio
frequency
identification
(RFID)
chip
(LXMS2HACNF-165, Murata Manufacturing Co., Ltd.) was
introduced in our 2nd prototype to communicate with MCU
by shared memories, at the cost of 2 more components and
5x10 mm antenna ground pattern.
Besides saving the energy, inductive links between
power source and sensor node may supply continuous power
even after package and implantation. In our work, besides
using battery CR1025, a wireless module was developed too
for remote power delivery, in which super capacitors were
used to quickly store electricity [5].
III.
PACKAGE AND EVALUATION
The sensor node, battery, and antenna were finally
assembled into a 3D printed case, and then packaged by bio-
compatible soft-gel, i.e., silicon as shown in Figure 2 (b).
Experimental results clearly demonstrate that temperature
accuracy and communication distance were not affected by
the
package.
The
size
of
the
sensor
node
was
ɸ12mmX10mm, and the weight was around 1.6 gram. Figure 
2(c) shows that the sensor can be successfully implanted into
a mouse. Besides, as shown in Figure 2 (e), diffident package
geometries were designed in our work too for various other
applications, i.e., rectal temperature monitoring for pets.
The results in Figure (d) suggested that variation of the
body temperature in a single day was surprisingly in between
34.5 ºC and 38.5 ºC (sensor accuracy: 0.05ºC). Body
temperature is closely related to heart-rate, thus inter-
activities of multiple mice in one cage can be recorded
simply by the developed sensor nodes.
The sensor node with RFID and wireless power module
was implanted into a cow to investigate its performance. The
results indicate that the measurement mode can be changed
by using a RFID writer at the distance of ~6 cm after
implantation. Wireless power transmission module enables
1-2 weeks lifespan extension by a few minutes charge.
However, the inductive receiver coil and the super capacitor
still
need
improvements
for
the
above
applications,
particularly the size, from a system scale-down point-of-
view.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
This works summarized our recent efforts on wireless
sensor nodes for biotelemetry and MedTech innovation. The
preliminary results demonstrated its feasibilities and future
necessary improvement to meet the market needs for the
coming new era of biotelemetry.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Toyoda of Ibaraki
University for his valuable discussion and support on
implantation using mice. The authors would like to thank
Prof. Gotoh of Kagoshima University for his valuable
discussion and support on implantation using cow.
The animals used in this study were treated according to
the Guidelines for Animal Experiments in the Faculty of
Agriculture of Kyushu University (Fukuoka, Japan), Ibaraki
University (Ami, Japan), AIST (Tsukuba, Japan) and to the
laws of the Japanese Government (Law No. 105 with
notification No.6). Clearances from the ethical review board
of Kyushu University, Ibaraki University and AIST were
received before animal experiments.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Inmann and D. Hodgins, “Implantable sensor systems for
medical
applicaitons”,Woodhead
Publishing,
2013
(1st
edition).
[2]
M. Cousin, T. Castillo-Hi, and G. H. Snyder, “Devices and
diseases: how the IoT is transforming medtech: the internet of
things in the medical devices industry”, Deloitte University
Press, 2015.
[3]
J. Lu, H. Okada, T. Itoh, T. Harada, and R. Maeda, “Toward
the world smallest wireless sensor nodes with ultralow power
comsumption”, IEEE Sensors Journal, vol.14, no.6, pp.2035-
2041, 2014.
[4]
M. S. Islam, K. P. Esselle, D. Bull, and P. M. Pilowsky,
“Converting a wireless biotelemetry system to an implantable
system through antenna redesign”, IEEE Transactions on
Microwave and Techniques, vol.62, pp.1890-1897, Sept. 2014.
[5]
J. Lu, L. Zhang, M. Arakawa, and T. Harada, “Wireless
power supply for all-in-one LTCC packaged sensor nodes
applicable to infrastructure monitoring”, IEEJ Transactions of
Sensors and Micromachines, vol.137, no.9, pp.267-271, 2017.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

