 
Figure 1.  Principe of our proposed location tracking system by using 
multi-pairs electromagnetics and 3D MEMS magnetic sensors. 
Towards Real Time Imaging and Tracking of Human Organs for Surgical 
Navigation by Using Artifical Magnetic Fields and MEMS Magnetic Sensor Nodes 
 
Jian Lu*, Dapeng Zhang, Lan Zhang, Ryutaro Maeda 
Research Center for Ubiquitous MEMS and Micro 
Engineering (UMEMSME) 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) 
Namiki 1-2-1, Tsukuba, 305-8564, Japan 
*Corresponding author. e-mail: jian-lu@aist.go.jp  
Yoichi Okuda,  Masanao Kurata,  Nobuhiro Ohkohchi  
Department of Gastrointestinal and Hepato-Biliary-
Pancreatic Surgery, faculty of Medicine  
University of Tsukuba  
Tennoudai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, 305-8577, Japan  
 
 
 
Abstract— Towards real time imaging of human organs during 
medical surgeries for organ excision or tumor care, we have 
been engaged in developing a high-resolution tracking system 
by using artificial magnetic fields and 3D MEMS magnetic 
sensor nodes for years. This paper presents fundamentals of 
this approach, design and simulation of the electromagnetic 
system for the pursuit of unique magnetic fields with 
preferable spatial resolution, and configuration of the 
developed prototypes. The preliminary results reveal that 
spatial resolution of a few mm can be achieved after applying 
multi-pairs electromagnetics, which is powered by DC and AC 
signal respectively for noise cancellation as well as for rotation 
recognition. Moreover, temperature dependence, background 
noise of a surgical room, and many other specifications of the 
developed system were investigated, evaluated, and discussed 
herein. 
Keywords- surgical navigation; human organ; location 
tracking; magnetic field; MEMS sensor; MedTech innovation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Advances in electronic devices, robotics, and diagnostic 
techniques enable widely use of laparoscopic surgery for 
various diseases [1]-[3]. Laparoscopic surgery is less 
invasive to patients so quick recovery can be expected, but 
fatal bleeding may happen due to misunderstanding of 
vessels and its anatomical location by patient’s posture 
change, 
etc., 
especially 
in 
the 
hepateetomy 
and 
pancreaticoduodenectomy [4]. Then, mental pressure will be 
introduced to surgeon during the operation since it is hard to 
find remedial measures in a very short time with limited 
capabilities of actions under endoscope. Developing a real 
time location tracking system for surgical navigation is thus 
essentially important, especially for liver excisions, which is 
believed one of the most complicated tasks, i.e., it was 
reported that third party mortality and 90-day in-hospital 
mortality rates were as high as 2.0% and 4.0% respectively 
even in Japan [5].  
Trakstar® (Ascension Technology Corp.) [6] and 
AURORA® (Northern Digital Inc.) [7] are popular systems 
used for real time electromagnetic tracking of operative 
devices 
with 
imaged-guided 
simulation 
applications. 
Although there is no convincing evidence to suggest that 
exposure to high-frequency electromagnetic fields will cause 
any significant adverse health effect in humans [8], the 
system may introduce interferences to other medical 
instruments to a certain extend. In addition, due to big size 
and high cost of micro coils, which is used as the sensor to 
detect high frequency electromagnetic fields, practical 
application of above systems for human organs is somehow 
difficult. High sampling rate is required to achieve sub-mm 
spatial resolution, so wireless communication between 
sensors and the system is hard to be realized when number of 
the sensors increases intentionally. 
Figure 1 shows the principle of the proposed location 
tracking system. A 3D liver model is established prior to 
surgery by Computed Tomography (CT) and simulation 
tools. It is believed that human tissues, organs, etc., will have 
no effects to static magnetic field, therefore a few pairs 
electromagnetic are located around human body to create 
static and ultra-low frequency magnetic fields, in which 
intensity or direction is unique at individual locations. 3D 
MEMS magnetic sensors (AK09970, Asahi Kasei Corp.) are 
attached to specific points of the liver to track location by 
measuring corresponding intensity and direction of the fields. 
Tracking results from those sensors are used to update liver 
model image in real time during surgeries.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 2. Simulated distribution of the magnetic field in one pair 
electromagnetics. The measured results are listed too for comparisons. 
 
 
Figure 3. Photo of the develoepd location tracking system with 
3D robot system and 3D camera system for further evaluation. 
 
Figure 4. Maesured respponse of the magnetic field when 
ON/OFF the field by switching power supply. 
In this paper, besides fundamentals of this approach, 
design and simulation of the electromagnetic field, 
configuration and specifications of the developed wireless 
sensor nodes and the location tracking system, as well as 
preliminary evaluation results are presented in details, and 
then discussed.  
In section 2 of this paper, system configurations will be 
presented. Experimental details and the results will be 
presented in section 3 together with discussions. And then, 
sections 4 will concludes this paper with future plans. 
II. 
SYSTEM DESIGN AND CONFIGURATIONS 
To design preferred artificial magnetic fields for the 
pursuit of a few mm spatial resolution, an magnetic 
simulator was used to calculate its intensity and direction 
within the volume of 60×60×40 cm3. Figure 2 shows 
calculated results and measured results for comparisons. 
Distance of the two electromagnetics in each pair was set at 
60 cm, and a magnetic path was included in between them to  
 
increase intensity at the center of the field.  A DC power 
source was used to supply voltage up to 80 V, which insures 
that minimum vector intensity is no less than 3 mT, 2 orders 
bigger than that of earth magnetics. 
Figure 2 clearly reveals that the calculated distribution of 
the field fit well with the measured results, even though the 
individual data is slightly different due to the difference 
between model and actual profile of electromagnetics. It also 
indicates that experimental mapping of the field is essential 
to create database (also called ‘map’ in this work) for 
accurate location tracking. The measured resolution of the 
field was 76 uT/mm and 18 uT/mm in X and Y direction, 
respectively. It suggests that sensitivity (1.1uT/LSB) of 
selected 3D MEMS magnetic sensor is good enough to 
identify a few mm for surgical navigation as expected in this 
work.  
Since intensity of the field dramatically decreases when 
its distance to electromagnetic increases, i.e., 3 mT at the 
center of the field while >30 mT at the surface of the 
electromagnetics, multi-pairs of electromagnetics were 
introduced in this system to compensate location variations, 
as well as to identify rotation of the sensor nodes. Figure 3 
shows the photo of the developed 1st prototype system for 
further investigation and evaluation. To create the ‘map’ for 
navigation, a 3D robot with wooden arms were used to carry 
MEMS magnetic sensors for scanning, while a 3D camera 
system was used to record the actual location of the sensor 
simultaneously. Three pairs of electromagnetics were 
included in the system, among them, one pair was set up 
under the wooden desk for a more uniform distribution at the 
center of the field. 
ON/OFF switching of all three pairs of electromagnetics 
in turn may help to separate the magnetic field created by 
each pair. However, as shown in Figure 4, it will lead to 
difficulties in real time tracking because 2-3 seconds is 
required to stabilize each magnetic field. Therefore, in this 
system, the three pairs of electromagnetics were powered 
simultaneously, among them DC signal was used in the first 
pair to create static magnetic field, AC signals with  
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
Figure 5. Configurations of the proposed system, which include multi-
pairs electromagnetics and its power supply, 3D MEMS magnetic 
sensors and its signal processing unit, and PC. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Measured electromagnetic noise in a surgery room (a); 
electromagnetic noise when using electrical knife a few cm far from the 
sensor (b); photos of the measurement system (c). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Measured temperature dependance of the electromagnetics and 
the magnetic field when powered by DC and AC signal, respectively. 
 
frequencies of 1 Hz and 2 Hz were used in the second and 
the third pair to create ultra-low frequency magnetic field, 
respectively. Kalman filter [9] and self-developed algorithm 
were carried out to separate AC and DC signal from the 
mixed raw data recorded by MEMS magnetic sensors. 
Another advantageous of above method is to identify 
artificial magnetic field from earth magnetic field and 
background noise by their frequency spectrum. Based on the 
above considerations and design, layout and configurations 
of the location tracking system is hen shown in Figure 5. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Backgound noise 
Various types of medical devices and instruments are 
used in a surgery room to monitor physical signs and bio-
logical information of a patient. Figure 6 shows measured 
electromagnetic noise, especially when turn on electrical 
knife for organ excision. The measured background noise, 
20-30 uT (peak-to-peak value) as shown in Figure 6 (a), is 
similar or even lower than typical value of earth magnetics, 
indicating neglectable effects to the positioning system. 
Although the noise from electrical knife is 2-3 times bigger 
than background noise, it can be easily removed by using 
digital filter since its frequency (~0.25Hz) is much lower 
than that of the developed positioning system. The 
interferences of the developed positioning system to other 
medical instruments was not found yet in experiments. 
B. Temperature dependence and stabilities 
It was found in Figure 7 that temperature was stabilized 
in 15 min when AC signal was applied. Whereas, 
temperature of the DC signal powered electromagnetics was 
keep raising even 55 min after switch the power ON. 
However, the upper inset of Figure 7 clearly indicated that 
intensity of the magnetic field was stable without any 
noticeable dependence on temperatures, thanks to constant 
current mode of the power supply. Moreover, variation of the 
DC magnetic field was 300-500 ppm, which is reasonably 
good for a preferred system resolution. 
Above results also suggested that minimum vector 
intensity of the field can be as small as 1 mT, while keeping 
system spatial resolution with no remarkable change. It 
enables us to use much lower power, much smaller 
electromagnetics, and remove magnetic path to further 
improve stability of the field. These works are ongoing in the 
2nd prototype system. 
C. Location tracking accuracy 
To achieve a few mm spatial resolution, 1 mm pitch size 
is required when creating the navigation ‘map’ as described 
above. However, it may takes weeks or even months since 
there are millions of points within the volume of 60×60×
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
Figure 8. Measured and actual location in Z direction when X and Y was 
280mm and 610mm, respectively. 
40 cm3. To demonstrate and evaluate resolution of the 
system, the pitch was set to 4 mm and created the ‘map’ 
within the volume of 8×12×12 cm3. As shown in Figure 8, 
about 11 mm spatial resolution was obtained. This 
preliminary result is not good enough for a practical 
application, but sufficient to prove this approach both 
theoretically and experimentally.  
As demonstrated in 2D movement, 2-3 mm spatial 
resolution was obtained when the pitch size was set at 1 mm 
during ‘map’ creation. However, a simulation-based 
approach for quick database creation is believed necessary to 
improve efficiency, in which experimental mapping will be 
required only for system calibration. The lasted results 
indicated that 1 mm spatial resolution can be obtained, if the 
pitch size of the database is 1 mm. This work is on progress 
and the preliminary results are attractive. The details will be 
presented in future publications. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper presents the development and evaluation of a 
real time imaging and tracking system for surgical navigation 
by using artificial magnetic fields and MEMS magnetic 
sensor nodes. Spatial resolution of a few mm was achieved 
as the preliminary result. It is encouraging and promising at 
the 
current 
stage, 
while 
further 
development 
and 
improvement are necessary for practical applications.  
As the next step of this work, we will focus on 
developing the simulation-based approach for creating 
navigation ‘map’, as well as system optimization for a better 
spatial resolution. Animal test is also on the schedule to 
investigate effectiveness of the system. Moreover, the state-
of-the-art research results are not sufficient to draw any 
conclusions about potential health effects of static magnetic 
field exposure, while it needs further study to make it clear. 
This paper strongly suggested that MedTech innovations, 
which is extremely important for modern society, can be 
accelerated by the advances in MEMS and sensing 
technologies. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by Japan Agency for Medical 
Research 
and 
Development 
through 
“Technological 
development of a real-time navigation system for 
laparoscopic hepatectomy with wireless microsensor for 
tactile sensing and with position monitoring of instrument” 
project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Buia, F. Stockhausen, and E. Hanisch, “Laparoscopic 
Surgery: A Qualigied Systematic Review”, World J Methodol, 
vol. 5, pp. 238-254,  Dec. 2015, doi:  10.5662/wjm.v5.i4.238.  
[2] H. F. Roh, S. H. Nam, and J. M. Kim, “Robot-assisted 
Laparoscopic Surgery Versus Conventional Laparoscopic 
Surgery in Randomized Controlled Trials: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-analysis”, Lops One, Jan. 2018, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0191628. 
[3] L. Negoi, M. Beuran, et. al “The Lapaoscopic Approach in 
Emergency Surgery: A Review of the Literature”,  Journal of 
Acute Disease, vol. 7, pp. 15-19, April 2018, doi: 
10.4103/2221-6189.228873. 
[4] R. Miyamoto, Y. Oshiro, K. Nakayama, and N. Ohkohchi. 
“Impact of Three-dimensional Surgical Simulation on 
Pancreatic Surgery”, Gastrointest. Tumors, vol.  4, pp.84-89, 
Feb. 2018, doi: 10.1159/000484894. 
[5] A. Kenjo, et. al “Risk Stratification of 7,732 Hepatectomy 
Cases in 2011 from the National Clinical Database for Japan,” 
Journal of the American College of Surgeons, vol. 218, pp. 
412-422, Mar. 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2013.11.007. 
[6] https://www.ascension-tech.com/  
[7] https://www.ndigital.com/  
[8] Z. Sienkiewicz, “Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields 
and Radiation”,  Journal of Radiological Protection, vol. 18, 
pp. 185-194, doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/0952-4746/18/3/005 
[9] D. Loebis, R. Sutton, J. Chudley, and W. Naeem, “Adaptive 
Tuning of a Kalman Filter via Fuzzy Logic for An Intelligent 
AUV Navigation System”,  Control Engineering Practice, vol. 
12, 
pp. 
1531-1539, 
Dec. 
2004, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conengprac.2003.11.008.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

