Designing and Manufacturing of Multifunctional Nanosensors 
Using Ultrafast Laser Processing 
 
Yury V. Ryabchikov 
HiLASE Center, Scientific Laser Applications Department 
Institute of Physics of the Czech Academy of Sciences 
Dolni Brezany, Czech Republic 
e-mail: ryabchikov@fzu.cz 
 
Abstract— Ultrafast laser processing is a well-developed model 
for the nanostructure synthesis as well as for the material 
modification. Its employment for sensing applications is a 
facile route of the development of new types of multi-modal 
nanosensors with required performance whose efficiency can 
be improved due to their high chemical purity. In particular, 
pulsed laser deposition is used for the formation of 
nanosensors requiring complex synthesis conditions in gaseous 
atmosphere. In this work, pulsed laser ablation in liquids is 
employed for the easy synthesis of sensing nanoagents. It 
allows us to form single- and multi-component (also having 
semiconductor modalities) nanosensors based on different 
metallic elements, which are successfully used for biosensing 
(SERS) and nanothermometry applications. 
Keywords-nanosensors; SERS; nanothermometry; laser 
ablation; ultrafast laser processing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The development of novel multi-modal nanosensors 
allowing the detection of changes of various parameters is 
still an important application task. One of the most 
perspective scientific directions is the creation of highly-
sensitive non-toxic multi-functional bionanosensors able to 
detect slightest modifications in life organisms. Their design 
and formation is an important objective for the life science 
being still very challenging due to various complex issues. 
Ultrafast laser processing is a very promising appeoach 
that is an alternative to many chemical synthesis methods 
providing the extreme purity of the chemical content of the 
prepared nanosensors. Here, one can highlight the following 
approaches for their formation: 
1) Pulsed Laser Ablation in Liquids (PLAL) allows 
direct synthesizing of colloidal solutions of composite 
nanoparticles merging both semiconductor and metallic 
elements being a facile route to form nanostructures with 
variable chemical content [1]. 
2) Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) leads to the 
deposition of nanostructures on a substrate using a high-
vacuum or gaseous environment [2]. 
3) Laser-Induced Forward Transfer (LIFT) allows 
transferring of nanoparticles (NPs) on a substrate making 
patterns with required geometric characteristics. 
4) Volumetric Modification (VM) can also be performed 
by irradiating of a material using a high power laser source 
with ultrashort pulse duration following by further chemical 
etchning. Such a technique is used for the design and the 
formation of microfluidic channels, which are very 
promising for biosensing applications [3]. 
Thus, the combination of these techniques by employing 
only one ultrafast laser source used for the different laser 
processing lets us the design of novel multi-functional 
nanosensors. 
In 
the 
current 
research, 
multi-element 
nanostructures were prepared and successfully tested for 
various sensing applications, in particular, for bioimaging 
using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) technique 
due to the presence of a variable content of plasmonic metals 
as 
well 
as 
for 
optical 
or 
magnetic 
resonance 
nanothermometry that can be promising for cell studies. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTS 
To produce multi-element nanostructures, which can be 
employed for sensing applications, ultrafast laser sources (6 
ps pulse duration) with variable laser fluence were used. 
Colloidal solutions were formed by direct laser ablation of a 
metallic target immersed in an aqueous solution of various 
semiconductor (Si, C, SiC, Ge) NPs allowing the 
combination of different elements in one nanoparticle. The 
deposition was carried out in a high vacuum by irradiating 
corresponding metallic or semiconductor targets using the 
same laser sources. The volumetric modification was 
performed by the laser irradiation of a substrate at various 
laser parameters followed by their further chemical etching 
with the hydrofluoric acid [3]. The formed nanostructures 
were comprehensively investigated by a set of different 
methods such as UV-Vis, Raman, Photoluminescence (PL) 
or Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectroscopies, 
Transmission or Scanning Electronic Microscopy (TEM or 
SEM) and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD). 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The ultrafast laser processing leads to significant changes 
of processed materials reflecting it by changes of their 
structural and optical properties. As a base for the design of 
multi-functional nanosensors, colloidal solutions of such 
semiconductor nanostructures as carbon and silicon were 
chosen. This choice was substantiated by their successful 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

applications in bioimaging [4], optical nanothermometry [5], 
singlet oxygen generation [6][7] or non-linear optical 
bioimaging [8]. The performed 2-step laser processing 
considerably modified their properties leading to the 
appearance of strong plasmonic properties easily controlled 
by the processing time (Figure 1). Here, semiconductor NPs 
formed by either laser or chemical methods were 
successfully used for the design of plasmonic multi-
component nanostructures (Figure 1). In the case of C NPs, 
double-band absorbance was obtained (Figure 1). Besides 
the achieved plasmonic responses, these nanostructures also 
revealed strong EPR signals from unpaired electrons due to 
the presence of certain types of paramagnetic defects [9]. 
Moreover, 
X-ray 
studies 
of 
semiconductor-metallic 
nanocomposites also demonstrated that XRD patterns of 
semiconductor nanostructures gradually transformed into 
metallic 
ones 
reflecting 
several 
crystalline 
planes 
corresponded to used for the laser ablation a metallic target. 
Absorbance (a.u.)
 0 s
 60 s
 120 s
 180 s
 300 s
Si-Au NPs
C-Au NPs
 0 s
 60 s
 120 s
 180 s
 300 s
300
400
500
600
700
800
Wavelength (nm)
 
Figure 1. Laser-induced appearance of variable plasmonic sensing 
modalities in silicon (on the top) and carbon (on the bottom) nanoparticles. 
These important modifications opens up a new important 
niche for semiconductor nanomaterials in the field of 
nanoplasmonics allowing their implementation in SERS 
biosensing additionally to the aforementioned applications 
[10]. Moreover, using the photoluminescence response of 
semiconductor NPs one can apply them for optical 
nanothermometry whose efficiency will be significantly 
affected by embedded noble metal elements acting as either 
(i) plasmonic resonance enhancers or (ii) metallic quencher 
of the fluorescence. Furthermore, paramagnetic defects of 
semiconductor nanostructures can also be employed at the 
same time as temperature nanosensors for magnetic 
resonance nanothermometry. 
In summary, the design of novel nanosensors based on 
single- and multi-element nanostructures formed by ultrafast 
laser processing was demonstrated and their sensing 
performance was assessed. In particular, PLD technique was 
used to deposit different plasmonic nanostructures with 
variable size on a substrate. LIFT technology was employed 
to design sensors whose performance was considerably 
influenced by the size and composition of NPs and the 
distance between them. Moreover, composite NPs with 
features affected by PLAL conditions were also deposited on 
a substrate or were used as a concentrated colloidal solution. 
These nanosensors were used for the detection of (i) bacteria 
using SERS technique showing 105 cfu/mL detection limit 
for L.innocua and E.Coli [10], (ii) environment temperature 
by magnetic or optical nanothermometry showing 0.75 %/°C 
sensitivity. Thus, such nanosensors can be promising for 
biosensing, bioimaging and nanothermometry applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Yu. V. R. acknowledges the funding from The European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions Individual 
Fellowship (grant agreement No 897231, LADENTHER); 
the European Regional Development Fund and the state 
budget of the Czech Republic (Project No. BIATRI: 
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000445) and also thanks Prof. J. 
Behrends (FU, Berlin, Germany) for the financial and 
experimental support of the EPR measurements as well as 
Dr. A. Zaderko (ILM, Lyon, France) for carbon nanodots. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Yu. V. Ryabchikov, “Facile Laser Synthesis of Multimodal 
Composite Silicon/Gold Nanoparticles with Variable Chemical 
Composition”, J. Nanopart. Res., vol. 21(4), pp. 85, April 2019. 
[2] M. J. Lo Faroa et al., “Surface-enhanced Raman scattering for 
biosensing platforms:a review”, Radiat. Eff. Defect S, vol. 177, pp. 
1209–1221, October 2022. 
[3] K. Sugioka et al., “Femtosecond laser 3D micromachining: a 
powerful tool for the fabrication of microfluidic, optofluidic, and 
electrofluidic devices based on glass”, Lab Chip, vol. 14, pp. 3447–
3458, June 2014. 
[4] A. Kasouni, T. Chatzimitakos, and C. Stalikas, “Bioimaging 
Applications of Carbon Nanodots: A Review”, C, vol. 5, pp. 19, April 
2019. 
[5] Yu. V. Ryabchikov, S. A. Alekseev, V. Lysenko, G. Bremond, and J–
M. Bluet, “Photoluminescence thermometry with alkyl–terminated 
silicon nanoparticles dispersed in low–polar liquids”, Phys. Status 
Solidi–R, vol. 7(6), pp. 414–417, May 2013. 
[6] Yu. V. Ryabchikov et al., “Dependence of the Singlet Oxygen 
Photosensitization Efficiency on Morphology of Porous Silicon”, 
Phys. Status Solidi A, vol. 204(5), pp. 1271–1275, April 2007. 
[7] E. A. Konstantinova et al., “Electron Paramagnetic Resonance and 
Photoluminescence Study of Si Nanocrystals – Photosensitizers of 
Singlet Oxygen Molecules”, J. Non–Cryst. Solids, vol. 352(9–20), pp. 
1156–1159, June 2006. 
[8] A. Yu. Kharin et al., “Bi-modal nonlinear optical contrast from Si 
nanoparticles for cancer theranostics”, Adv. Opt. Mater., vol. 7(13), 
pp. 18011728, April 2019. 
[9] Yu. V. Ryabchikov, and J. Behrends, “Expedient Paramagnetic 
Properties 
of 
Surfactant-Free 
Plasmonic 
Silicon-Based 
Nanoparticles”, Opt. Quan. Electron., vol. 52, pp. 177, March 2020. 
[10] M. Kögler et al., “Bare Laser–Synthesized Au–Based Nanoparticles 
as Non–Disturbing SERS Probes for Bacteria Identification”, J. 
Biophotonics, vol. 11(7), pp. e201700225, February 2018. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

