Development of pH Sensor Module with Wireless Transmission Function
Lan Zhang, Jian Lu, Ryutaro Maeda
Research Center for Ubiquitous MEMS and Micro Engineering (UMEMSME)
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
Tsukuba, Japan
e-mails: {chou-ran, jian-lu, maeda-ryutaro}@aist.go.jp
Abstract— In our previous work, we developed a solid-state pH
sensor for real time pH measurement. In this work, we discuss
the use of this sensor for extension applications in the health
monitoring field. The pH sensor system needs to be super
compact in size and have a bio-friendly interface in order to
provide a good user experience. In this paper, we introduce a
smaller transistor and a new sensing material for realizing an
optimized sensor structure and measurement system. The
measured results show that the antimony-based pH sensor has
a reasonable responsivity for pH real-time monitoring.
Keywords - pH; field effect transistor; health condition;
calibration; wireless transmission.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
technology has undergone many advances, such as super
compact size, high sensitivity and high uniformity of
working functions. Based on the MEMS technique, we
developed a solid-state pH sensor that has already been used
in some application fields, not only in chemical engineering,
but also in industry and agricultural science [1] [2].
In this study, we would like extend the given sensor for
applications in the health monitoring field. Figure 1 shows
the schematic view of our proposed pH sensor measurement
system. The typical electrodes were fabricated using the
MEMS technique for realizing high dimensional and high
performance homogeneity. The sensor system combines the
measurement and transmission boards (see insert images).
The electrodes connect the gate terminal of a Metal-Oxide-
Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET). The
specific FET is loaded on the measurement board and used
to measure the pH value of target solutions. The transmission
board has a wireless or a Bluetooth module to transmit the
tested date to the user terminal devices (smart phone or PC),
respectively. Figure 1 also shows the potential application
fields of the given pH sensor: (1) the compact sensing
system unit could be set in a nappy or a diaper, for real-time
monitoring the health condition of children or old people; (2)
the compact sensor could be packaged with a bio-friendly
surface; (3) the ultra-small low-power wireless sensor node
may also be implanted into animal body to measure the urine
condition of pets.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
we are going to describe the fabrication method of sensor
electrodes and system. In Section 3, some preliminary
measurement results will be presented. In Section 4, we will
present a discussion and conclusion on this work.
Figure 1. Smartphone based wireless pH sensor system and its
potential applications.
II.
SENSOR FABRICATION AND SPECIFICATION
In our previous works, we already comprehensively
presented the fabrication processes of Indium Tin Oxide
(ITO) -based pH sensor electrode [1]. Silicon wafers with
200-μm-thick SiO2 for passivation layers were used to
fabricate the MEMS devices in this work. After under-metal
and sensing layers generation, photolithography and metal
etching methods were used to generate the sensing electrode
and the bottom electrode layers with high precision. Then, to
pattern the sensing area and protect it with a long life time, a
fluoropolymer thin film coating was fabricated on the sensor
electrode. Finally, O2 plasma was used to remove the
photoresist and other residuals. On the other hand, in this
work, the comparison sensor with the following specification
of thick film antimony for the working electrode was used:
the sensing area has a 4-mm diameter circular window.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

III.
PRELIMINARY MEASUREMENT RESULTS
A.
Metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor
measurement
To provide a good user experience, the pH sensor system
components should also be improved, because a small sensor
node can minimize the discomfort of the users. The
components on boards should be optimized with the size as
small as possible. After the measurement board can be
shrunk to a very compact size, the sensor system will also
have a tiny size. In the new sensor system, an n-channel
MOS transistor (with very low price, lower than 20 Japanese
yen) was used on the sensing board for testing the pH value
of solutions.
The performance of the small MOS transistor was
measured. The output current of the transistor has a range
from 0.875 V to 0.890 V, correspondingly to the measured
pH value from 7 to 4. The responsivity of the new sensor has
a reasonable value of 5 mV/pH.
B.
Performance comparison of different sensing electrodes
and different transmission systems
We did a performance comparison of different sensing
electrodes. Figure 2 shows the digital output of the pH sensor
with different sensing materials versus the measured pH
values. As the results show, the ITO- and antimony-based
pH sensors have similar output/pH values (the relative error
between the two sensors does not exceed 5% in average).
Both sensors can keep a linear output proportional to the
changes in the pH value. The very small different slope
between the fitting curves showed that the antimony-based
pH sensor has a relatively higher sensitivity (see Figure 2
fitting curves). However, the antimony-based pH sensor also
suffers from a larger deviation error comparison with ITO-
based pH sensor. On the other hand, some researchers prefer
the antimony-based pH sensors to apply on bio-sensing
technology, for a better biocompatibility [3]. We can
understand the merits and demerits of sensing materials,
reasonably. After correct calibration, the sensor node can be
used in field measurements to prove its stability and
reliability. We also tested the power consumption of wireless
and Bluetooth transmission systems; we found that they have
similar power consumption at the mW level, but Bluetooth
has an inner antenna, which causes the Bluetooth-based pH
sensor system to be very compact in size, with larger
application potentials.
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We developed a solid-state pH sensor for real time pH
monitoring. In this work, we extend its applications into the
health monitoring field. In order to realize the solid-state pH
sensor with super compact size and bio-friendly interface to
provide a good user experience, a small transistor and a new
sensing material are introduced for fabricating the sensor
structure and measurement system, respectively. As the
results show, the antimony-based pH sensor has a reasonable
responsivity for pH real-time monitoring. Super compact
solid pH sensors can provide mass data of target solutions
and water to help companies realize an Internet of Things
management system.
Figure 2. The output voltage of the pH sensor with different
sensing electrodes against the measured pH values.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was support by Tsukuba Innovation Arena
(Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan), collaborative research program of
"Kakehashi".
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Zhang, J. Lu, H. Okada, H. Nogami, T. Itoh, and S. Arai,
“Low-Power Highly Sensitive pH sensor with μ-dots 
protective structures for monitoring rumen in cows in real-
time,” IEEE Sens. J. vol. 17, pp. 7281 - 7289, 2017.
[2]
L. Zhang, J. Lu, H. Okada, H. Nogami, and T. Itoh,
“Development of ITO- and FET-based cow rumen sensor for
long-term pH value monitoring,” Symposium on Design,
Test, Integration and Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS (DTIP),
vol. 2016, pp.92-96, May 2016.
[3]
T. Kazuyoshi, A. Saad Mohammad, K. Daiki, K. Kagemasa,
and K. Minoru, “ Development of one electrode type pH
sensor measuring in microscopic region,” The International
Journal of Applied Electromagnetics and Mechanic, vol. 52,
pp.1417-1424, 2016.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

