Design and Optimization of Gas Sensor Testing Chamber
Fatima Ezahra Annanouch1, Nicolas Morati1, Virginie
Martini-Laithier1, Tomas Fiorido1, Khalifa Aguir1 and
Marc Bendahan1
,
1Aix Marseille Univ, Université́ de Toulon, CNRS, IM2NP,
Marseille, France
e-mail: {fatima.annanouch, nicolas.morati, virginie.laithier,
tomas.fiorido, khalifa.aguir, marc.bendahan}@im2np.fr
Gilles Bouchet2, Pierre Perrier2
2Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, IUSTI,
Marseille, France
e-mail: {gilles.bouchet, pierre.perrier}@univ-amu.fr
Abstract—It is important to size and optimize the chamber in
which gas sensors are tested. Indeed, the amplitude, as well as
the response and recovery times are very dependent on the
testing chamber. In this study, we show that by optimizing the
design and reducing the volume of the testing chamber, the
responses of metal oxide microsensors are highly enhanced and
faster, and therefore closer to the real answers of the sensor.
Keywords-gas sensor; gas testing chamber; metal oxides; tin
oxide; mathematical modeling; simulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Metal oxide gas sensors have become one of the most
active research areas, owing to their low cost and flexibility
in production, simplicity of their use and their large number
of detectable gases. They are employed in a wide spectrum
of applications, such as environmental monitoring, domestic
safety, disease detection and many more [1].
So
far,
many
works
have
been
reported
on
the
enhancement of gas sensing performances, either with
catalysts
nanoparticles
modification,
or
by
the
nano-
structuring of metal oxide sensitive material [2]. However,
few works have studied the influence of the gas testing
system on the sensors performances. Achieving a reliable
and highly sensitive sensor, with fast response and recovery
times, cannot be done without an optimized gas testing
chamber design. Such a design needs to be modeled and
simulated in terms of chamber volume, placement of sensor
and gas flow direction.
In this work we study and compare the influence of gas
testing chamber design on the sensor performances, namely
Cross chamber (old one) and Boat chamber (new optimized
testing chamber). The paper is structured as follows. Section
II describes the gas microsensor platform and the testing
chamber design. Section III presents and discusses the
obtained
results
(simulation
results
and
experimental validation of the optimized chamber). We
conclude the work in Section IV.
II.
GAS SENSORS AND TESTING CHAMBERS
A. Gas sensors
The microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) based
microsensor platform was patented by our laboratory and
fabricated using clean room facilities and various micro-
fabrication steps including photolithography, metallization
and backside etching (DRIE) of the substrate to define the
membrane as the transducer [3]. This latter has a size of
400μm × 400 μm. It carries three transducers S1, S2, S3 and 
two heaters (Fig. 1). The gap between the electrodes is 4 μm, 
the resistance of each heater is 100 Ω and the temperature 
coefficient is 3 10-3/°C. An SnO2 sensing layer (50 nm) was
directly deposited over the microsensor platform, by reactive
radio frequency magnetron sputtering technique [4][5].
Figure 1.
MEMS-based microsensor platform [3].
It
is
worth
noting
that
before
depositions,
the
microsensor platform was cleaned with acetone and then
with ethanol, dried with air, and then placed inside the
shadow mask.
B. Testing chambers
Gas-sensing tests were carried out in two different
chambers (Fig. 2).
Figure 2.
Photographs of: (a) cross and (b) boat chamber
The first one (Fig. 2.a) was made from stainless steel
with total volume of 0.3 L and gas flow range between
0.1L/min and 1.5L/min. Besides, it has an inlet, an outlet,
and the sensor optimal position is at the center, in front of the
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

gas flow direction. The second chamber (the new one) is
illustrated by Figure 2.b. It was made from polylactic acid
(PLA) with a small volume of 2.35 10-3L and gas flow range
between 0.01 L/min and 0.5 L/min. It has a boat shape with a
planar inlet and outlet. Additionally, the optimal sensor
position is at the center of the boat back-side, in the same
plan as the gas flow direction. In both chambers, the gas flow
was maintained at 0.1 L/min, the sensor response was
defined as R=Ra/Rg, where Ra and Rg are the sensor
resistances at the stationary state in air and after 1 min of
exposure to the target gas, respectively.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSIION
A. Mathematical modelling and simulation results
The flow is modeled by a finite volume method solving
the Navier-Stokes and the energy equations in the two 3D
geometries, with no-slip and adiabatic boundary conditions
everywhere, except on the inlet and outlet boundaries and on
the sensor. Velocity fields are presented in Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Velocity field of the converged flow in the Cross Chamber (a)
and in the Boat chamber (b)
As we can see, in the cross chamber, at the sensor
surface, the gas flow velocity is very important (0.1 m/s),
which leads to the creation of many turbulences and
negatively affects the sensor detection. However, in the boat
chamber, it is almost zero and the gas flow direction is linear
with the sensor position, which eliminates the creation of gas
turbulences.
The target gas is injected at the inlet (0.1 L/min during 1
min, 50 ppm ethanol in air) and the ethanol concentration is
measured on the sensor position. The gas testing transport is
modeled by a convection-diffusion equation applied to a
passive scalar. In Figure 4, we can observe that the gas
concentration in the optimized testing chamber is very
similar to the setpoint (50 ppm).
Figure 4.
Ethanol concentration simulation in both chambers; injection at
t=134s during 1 min
In addition, the speed of the filling and emptying in boat
chamber is much faster compared to the cross one. In
contrast, the ethanol concentration simulated for the cross-
chamber does not reach 50 ppm with a flow rate of 0.1 L/min
during 60 seconds, due to the greater volume of the cross-
chamber and the presence of turbulences. The simulations
show that an injection lasting 10 minutes is necessary to
reach 50 ppm with such flow rate; at the same time, an
injection with a flow rate of 0.5 L/min for 120 seconds
allows us to reach the same level of ethanol concentration
(50 ppm).
These results will be experimentally validated in the next
paragraph by measuring the electrical sensor response
towards 50 ppm of ethanol for an exposer of 1 minute, in
both chambers.
B. Validation of the optimized gas testing chamber
In order to validate the simulation results, we have
exposed SnO2 sensor (S2) to 50 ppm of ethanol, using the
same measurements parameters, in both testing chambers
(Fig. 5).
Figure 5.
Experimental sensor response toward 50 ppm of ethanol in both
chambers - injection during 1 min
Velocity : magnetude m/s
0.000
0.053
0.106
0.160
0.213
0.267
Velocity : magnetude m/s
0.000
0.201
0.403
0.605
0.807
1.009
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The results show that the sensor performances are highly
enhanced using the optimized chamber. For instance, the
response and recovery times in the boat chamber are 4 s and
89 s, respectively. However, they are five times higher when
using the cross chamber.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we have highlighted the strong influence of
the test chamber design with respect to the electrical
response of the sensor towards ethanol. To achieve our goals,
we have reduced the dimensions of the test chamber while
adapting the geometry. Besides, we have eliminated dead
volumes, obtained a homogeneous gas concentration, and
reduced the gas flow velocity at the sensor surface. The
experimental results are in agreement with the mathematical
modelling and simulation results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge NANOZ, a
company
specialized
in
gas
sensors;
SATT
Sud-Est,
"Accelerator of Technology Transfer", which is a key player
in
regional
economic
development
associated
with
innovation and Mr. A. Combes for his technical support.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. F. Fine, L.M. Cavanagh, A. Afonja, R. Binions, “Metal
oxide
semi-conductor
gas
sensors
in
environmental
monitoring”, Sensors, vol. 10, pp. 5469–5502, June 2010.
[2]
F. Annanouch et al., “Aerosol-Assisted CVD-Grown PdO
Nanoparticle-Decorated
Tungsten
Oxide
Nanoneedles
Extremely Sensitive and Selective to Hydrogen”, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, vol. 8, pp. 10413−10421, April 2016.    
[3]
K. Aguir, M. Bendahan, V. Laithier, “Gas sensor based on
heated sensitive layer”, patent N° FR 13 59494, 2013,
international extension 2016.
[4]
M. Kaur et al., “RF sputtered SnO2: NiO thin films as sub-
ppm H2S sensor operable at room temperature”, Sens.
Actuators B-Chem, vol. 242, pp. 389−403, April 2017. 
[5]
G. Sberveglieri, S. Groppelli, G. Coccoli, “Radio frequency
magnetron sputtering growth and characterization of indium-
tin oxide (ITO) thin films for NO2 gas sensors”, Sens.
Actuators, vol. 15, pp. 235−242, November 1988.  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

