Portable E-nose for Diagnostic of Inflammation and Diverse Variation in Health
Status of Humans and Animals
Anastasiia Shuba
Physical and Analytical Chemistry Department
Voronezh State University of Engineering Technologies
Voronezh, Russia
e-mail: shuba1nastya@gmail.com
Tatiana Kuchmenko
Physical and Analytical Chemistry Department
Voronezh State University of Engineering Technologies
Voronezh, Russia
e-mail: tak1907@mail.ru
Ruslan Umarkhanov
Physical and Analytical Chemistry Department
Voronezh State University of Engineering Technologies
Voronezh, Russia
e-mail: rus_270487@mail.ru
Anton Chernitskiy
Research Center for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapy,
Quality and Safety of Raw Materials and Products
All-Russian Scientific Research Veterinary Institute of
Pathology, Pharmacology and Therapy
Voronezh, Russia
e-mail: cherae@mail.ru
Abstract—This paper discusses an application of a portable
electronic nose based on an array consisting of 8 piezoelectric
sensors with nanostructured solid-state coatings to detect
volatile biomolecules secreted by nasal mucus and skin. A
fundamentally
new
approach
is
proposed
for
a
quick
assessment of the status of the human body as a whole (normal,
stress, inflammation) and the work of individual systems
(reproductive, endocrine, digestive), based on the results of the
assessment of the qualitative and quantitative composition of
the gas mixture of biomolecules secreted by the skin in the
Zakharyin-Ged zone. An algorithm is proposed for reading
and
visualizing
signals
from
an
array
of
sensors
understandable to any user. Also, a portable electronic nose
was applied in the veterinary field for assessment of the health
status of calves’ respiratory system. Unlike the traditional
approach in diagnostics using sensor array, one sample of
nasal mucus was monitored for 5-9 hours with an interval of 2-
3 hours. The integral analytical signal of sensors, in that case,
was connected to the microbiological contamination of the
sample
or
its
absence.
The
speed
and
simplicity
of
measurement using an electronic nose with nanostructured
piezoelectric sensors allow painlessly scanning the body for
metabolic disturbances and estimating the presence of certain
pathologies as well as the effectiveness of treatment.
Keywords-
sensor;
electronic
nose;
method;
volatile
compounds; skin; metabolism; respiratory disease; calf; non-
invasive diagnostic; screening.
I. INTRODUCTION
Biosamples are complex objects to analyze. The problem
of their study consists not only in the absence of a constant
composition, but also in its almost instantaneous change
when substances are excreted from the sample. Despite the
emergence in recent years of new methods for the analysis
and study of biostructures at the level of individual cells, the
scheme still remains traditional: selection of biomaterial,
sample preparation and detection of target components. The
use of highly selective and effective methods of analysis (gas
chromatography-mass
spectrometry,
high-pressure
liquid
chromatography, etc.) suggests a special sample preparation,
which can change the natural profile of the biosamples. The
method of sample preparation is determined by the purpose
of the analysis, but the integrity of the biological object is
lost. Also, the results obtained by advanced analysis methods
do not reflect the complex structure and behavior of a
biological object. Therefore, recently, in the analysis of
complex living objects (food, environmental objects, human
and
animal
biosamples),
complex
methods
with
a
multivariate analytical signal have been used more often.
Such methods, by their methodology, include systems of
artificial tongues, noses, eyes [1]. The undoubted advantage
of highly sensitive sensor systems with the rapid response is
the ability to monitor the state of small volumes and masses
of biological samples in a fairly short time (from 2 to 9
hours). Given the lack of their contact with the environment
(in
vitro),
primarily
with
oxygen,
small
volumes
of
biosamples, which means fast processes of changing their
properties,
open
up
a
unique
opportunity
to
obtain
information about the status of the studied object, even if the
specific methods for determining individual substances or
laboratory
indicators
(primarily
microbiological)
are
unavailable.
A possible approach for assessing the status of the body
in the absence of biomaterial selection is to analyze the
chemical composition of the gas, sweat of the skin in the
zones of Zakharyin-Ged. Earlier, the presence of redness,
peeling, rash, temperature changes in these areas was widely
used as an additional parameter to confirm the malfunction
of organs corresponding to these zones. The detection limits
of modern methods of analysis, the complexity of the
instrumentation of the most sensitive methods do not allow
non-invasive
scanning
and
determining
the
chemical
composition of the gas phase of secretions from the skin.
Therefore, the creation of an integrated system for scanning a
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

volatile metabolome [10] using a device with a sensitive
detection from biomolecules of normal and disordered
metabolism, inflammation, to microbial metabolites is actual
for now.
There are some state-of-the-art approaches, including
portable devices, for assessing the state of the body using
electronic noses and various data processing methods: for
exhaled breath air [2][4], for the analysis of biomaterials
(blood, urine, secrets of the endocrine glands, etc.) [5][7].
Different approaches for assessment of health status by skin
based on using electrochemical or optical methods are
proposed in [8][9]. The authors did not find in the literature
similar hardware solutions about the development of an
electronic nose for diagnosing human health by volatile
metabolites secreted by the skin.
The purpose of this paper is the development and
application of a new mobile device based on piezoelectric
sensors (portable electronic nose) for assessing the health
status of organs and systems of humans and animals by
analyzing the volatile metabolome.
We will demonstrate our approach in two ways: 1)
analysis of nasal mucus samples of calves for the diagnosis
of respiratory diseases and 2) characterizing of the health
status of humans by skin odor in the Zakharyin-Ged zones.
In Section 2, the features of the experiment, description
of biosamples and methods of analysis are presented. Section
3 contains technical characteristics of the proposed device,
characteristics of the used sensors and their coatings, and a
description of the procedure for obtaining and recording of
output data of the sensor array. In Section 4, we show the
results of the application of the proposed portable electronic
nose (e-nose) for solving diagnostic problems according to
the purpose of the work. Section 5 is devoted to conclusions
and perspective of development.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Diseases in Calves
17 samples of nasal mucus from calves (10-20 days of
life) both with signs of respiratory system damage and
conditionally healthy were analyzed. A sampling of nasal
mucus was carried out with sterile cotton swabs in individual
sterile containers. The time from sampling to analyzing on e-
nose was taken into account.
All calves were clinically studied in detail using a point
system (WI score) developed at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison (USA) [11] with mandatory laboratory control at
the All-Russian Scientific Research Veterinary Institute of
Pathology, Pharmacology and Therapy: bacteriological and
molecular
genetic
(PCR)
studies
of
nasal
swabs
for
infectious rhinotracheitis, parainfluenza-3, viral diarrhea-
disease cattle mucous membranes, rotavirus, adenovirus,
chlamydia,
pathogenic
mycoplasmas
(M.
bovis,
M.
bovirhinis), hematological indicators of inflammation in the
blood
(leukogram,
haptoglobin
concentration)
were
determined.
For
the
isolation
of
cultures
and
typing
of
microorganisms, meat and peptone broth and agar, milk salt,
enterococcal agar, Endo medium, blood agar, glucose-serum
broth and agar produced by NICF (St. Petersburg, Russia)
were used. The isolated Escherichia coli were typed in an
agglutination reaction using O-serums.
B. Characterizing the Some Deviation from Normal Status
by Human Skin Odor
The area of the forearm of human skin was chosen to
analyze the volatile metabolome by a portable electronic
nose. Over 100 conditionally healthy volunteers took part in
the investigation duration for 2 years. The volunteers
periodically
were
clinically
(visits
to
physicians)
and
laboratory (general analysis of blood, urine, biochemical
analysis of blood (glucose, cholesterol, some hormones))
tested to control health status. For conditionally healthy
volunteers, the results of laboratory tests corresponded to the
norm, and the symptoms did not match with clinically
significant for illness. Clinically not diagnosed conditions,
so-called descriptive states (tiredness, excitement, agitation,
stress, lack of sleep, spasm, pain), were recorded from the
words of the volunteers.
III. DESCRIPTION OF PORTABLE E-NOSE AND
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE
A.
Making of Piezoelectric Sensors
We used piezoelectric quartz resonators (PQR) with a
natural frequency of 14 MHz with an established linear
response with a film mass on its electrodes up to 20 μg/cm2.
The array contained 8 piezoelectric sensors with electrodes
covered by films of carbon nanomaterial, biohydroxyapatite,
zirconium salts of different mass (1-5 μg) (NANO-BIO 
array).
1)
Characteristics of the Used Sorbents
Hydroxyapatite Ca5(PO4)3OH was obtained by the sol-
gel method developed at Nizhny Novgorod State University
named after N.I. Lobachevsky and optimized by us to obtain
nanostructured coatings with good sorption properties.
The reaction was carried out according to the following
equation:
5Ca(NO3)2·4H2O + 3H3PO4 +10NaOH → Ca5(PO4)3OH +
10NaNO3 + 29H2O
To a solution of calcium nitrate (2 mol/dm3) prepared
from Ca(NO3)2·4H2O in bidistilled water has added a
solution of H3PO4 in the amount necessary to maintain the
ratio Ca/P = 5/3. The resulting solution was thermostated for
one hour at 37 °C, then its pH was adjusted to 7-8 using a
NaOH solution with a concentration of 2 mol/dm3. At pH =
4, a Ca5(PO4)3OH sol began to form. The reaction mixture
was kept at this temperature for 1 hour. Then, the resulting
gel was centrifuged and dried in air. The obtained sorbent
can be stored for at least 0.5 years in airtight conditions.
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes were obtained by gas-phase
chemical deposition during ethanol pyrolysis. Nickel was
used as a catalyst; the temperature of deposition was 450-
500
°C.
Then
nanotubes
were
washed
with
HNO3
concentrated (Institute for Extra Pure Materials of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Chernogolovka). The solvent
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

for the suspension of hydroxyapatite and carbon nanotubes
was
chloroform.
Zirconium
nitrate
(ZrO(NO3)2•2H2O),
(chemically pure) was obtained from aqueous solutions
containing zirconium and nitrate ions (Reachem, Russia).
The solvent for the suspension of zirconium nitrate was
acetone. These sorbents are selective and sensitive to
volatile metabolites of bacteria and inflammation according
to the results of a preliminary experiment [12].
2)
The Method of Forming Films on the Surface of the
Piezoelectric Quartz Resonator
To change and control the sensitivity and selectivity of
micro-weighing of vapors of organic substances, thin films
were uniformly deposited to the electrodes of piezoelectric
quartz resonators, fat-free with acetone or chloroform, by
immersion in solutions of sorbents suspended by ultrasound.
The hydroxyapatite, as well as carbon nanotubes and
zirconium nitrate, formed the sensors using the following
procedure:
Step 1 – the measurement of the initial oscillation
frequency of the piezoelectric resonator (10 or 14 MHz) F0,
Hz with an accurate record, for example, 9999280 Hz;
Step 2 – suspension was prepared in the beaker as
dissolution of sorbent (0.5 g) in 10 ml of solvent;
Step 3 – processing in an ultrasonic bath for 15 minutes
at a power of 90 W;
Step 4 – exposure of the quartz piezoelectric resonator in
suspension for 15 s;
Step 5 – drying the coating in an oven (40 minutes at a
temperature from 50 ° C) in the holder vertically;
Step 6 – the measurement of the oscillation frequency of
the sensor, calculation of the coating mass (Δm) according
to the Sauerbrey equation [13]:
(1)
where ΔF is the change in the oscillation frequency of the
quartz plate of the resonator after film deposition and
removal of an unbound solvent, MHz;
2.27•10-6 – calibration constant of piezoelectric quartz
resonator at normal condition, cm2/g;
F0 — base oscillation frequency of the PQR, MHz;
0.2 – the area of electrodes of PQR, cm2.
B.
Characteristic of Portable E-nose
The portable device for diagnosing the status of humans
and animals is a miniature case, consisting of two functional
parts (Figure 1): head 1 and the protective part of the body
6, a microprocessor 2 with terminals for sensor mount
sockets, a block for fixing and transmitting information 3 to
the recording device of any type (laptop, tablet, PC); the
sockets are located in the cover 4, into which removable
sensors 5 are mounted on the outside, separated from the
environment by the protective part of the body 6, which is
tightly attached to the head 1. Optionally e-nose is
supplemented by an internal gas-permeable gasket 7, which
separates the sensor region and the free air region of the
body 6.
Figure 1.
General view of the 3D model of the portable e-nose for
diagnostics: 1 – head; 2 – microprocessor with terminals for sensor mount
sockets; 3 – block recording and transmitting information to a recording
device of any type; 4 – cover; 5 – removable sensors; 6 – protective part of
the body; 7 – internal gas-permeable gasket; 8 – nozzles; 9 – power supply
from the electricity; 10 – removable battery.
To reduce interfering factors (external fluctuation in
airflow, temperature, air composition in the near-sensor
space), protective nozzles of various types 8 from inert
materials (fluoroplastic) are used in accordance with the
nature of the analyzed sample. The e-nose is powered by
either an electronic device, with which is combined via a
USB cable, either from electricity 9 or a removable battery
10.
The developed portable device is an electronically
counting frequency meter with 8 channels for measuring the
oscillation frequency of BAW-type piezoelectric quartz
resonators with a base oscillation frequency of 5 to 20 MHz
with a resolution of 1 Hz and a time interval (step) of 1
second. The electronic counting frequency meter is switched
on in the network (220 V); it warms up for 10-15 minutes.
In this case, to reduce measurement errors, the sensors
should be in the device. But their subsequent inclusion is
also possible. It takes about 5-10 minutes to stabilize the
baseline of the oscillation frequency of the quartz plate.
To
simultaneously
record
(read)
the
oscillation
frequency of each sensor independently of each other every
second for a certain time interval (from 1 s to a maximum of
6000 s), the device is connected to a computer via USB
cable, and other connection options are possible (via Wi-Fi,
Bluetooth).
Operating conditions and technical specifications of E-
nose:

Ambient temperature from +15 to +35 ° С. 

Increased humidity up to 98% at temperatures up to
308 K (+35 °C).

The device is powered by an alternating current with
a voltage of 220 ± 22 V and a frequency of 50 ± 0.5
Hz.

Frequency range 4 MHz – 20 MHz.

Reference frequency oscillator is 4 MHz.

Overall dimensions – 38x120x170 mm.

Weight with a cover – 0.40 kg.
6
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

C. Specification of Software
The responses are recorded in the instrument software,
which not only saves the current measurement but also
converts it into analytical information
a change in the
oscillation frequency of each resonator individually without
load or with load at each measurement moment relative to
the starting point of measurement (-ΔF, Hz). The full output
curve is displayed in the form of a set of chronograms for all
resonators installed in the e-nose (Figure 2). During the
interaction of vapors with the surface of the piezoelectric
sensors, sorption occurs on the films or electrodes, as a result
of which the frequency changes. Individual colors reflect a
change in time of the base oscillation frequency of each of
the 8 piezoelectric sensors (Figure 2). In the developed
software based on chronograms, the “visual print” is
constructed using different algorithms depending on the
purpose of analysis. The quantitative characteristic of “visual
prints”, therefore, the total amount of volatile substances
excreted by samples and sorbed by piezoelectric sensors, is
the area of “visual print” (Sv.p., Hz´s). The area of “visual
print” is calculated in software as a sum of definite integrals
of
time
dependence
the
signals
of
sensors
during
measurement (chronograms).
Figure 2.
E-nose connected with the laptop when measuring the sample of
nasal mucus.
Additionally, in software, the parameters of sorption
(A(i/j))
are
calculated,
which
can
be
used
for
the
identification of volatile substances in the gas phase over
samples [14] or to describe additional analytical information
about sample characteristics.
D. Technique of Measurement
The gas phases over nasal mucus samples were studied
with the front input method into the detection cell. For
analyzing the volatile substances excreted by the skin on the
forearm area (20 cm2) the open detection cell of device
contacted with this area. The registration time of the sorption
of volatile substances excreted by the skin and nasal mucus
was 80 s, the registration of desorption was 120 s. Thus, the
full time of one measurement was 200 s.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Diagnosis of Respiratory Diseases in Calves
Based on the results of clinical studies, the determination
of hematological and biochemical markers of inflammation
(leukocytosis, an increase in the concentration of haptoglobin
in the blood serum), pathogens of viral and bacterial
infections accompanied by damage to the respiratory system
of calves, we selected three groups: “healthy respiratory
system” (n=4), “with the subclinical course of respiratory
diseases” (n=8), “early signs of respiratory disease” (n=5).
A natural change in the composition of the mucus taken
at a weekly interval can reflect only significant changes in
the condition - for example, a vivid manifestation of the
inflammatory process. Unlike state-of-the-art approaches to
the diagnosis of respiratory diseases by one measurement of
biosamples [5-7], for the first time, it has been proposed
monitoring one sample for 5-9 hours with an interval of 2-3
hours. It allows recording changes in the state at the micro-
level associated with microbiological contamination of the
sample or its absence. The areas of “visual prints” were
calculated for all samples of nasal mucus. Early it was shown
that the values of the area of “visual prints” correlate with
biochemical indicators of inflammation characterizing the
disease of respiratory organs in calves [15].
All results of one-day monitoring of nasal mucus
biosamples can be divided into three groups (Figure 3).
1) Positive (increasing) dynamics of changes in the value
of the integral analytical signal of the sensor array (area of
“visual print”) - indicates the destruction of nasal mucus and
production of a large number of volatile compounds
including microorganisms metabolites.
2) The negative (decreasing) dynamics of the change in
the value of the analytical signal of the sensor array indicates
the decreasing of volatile substances excreted from nasal
mucus due to increasing of its viscosity by the high level of
proteins, mucin, which is observed in the acute phase of
respiratory disease [16].
Figure 3.
Total “visual prints” area of signals of the sensor array in vapors
of nasal mucus of calves with different diagnoses: 1 –healthy respiratory
system, 2- early signs of respiratory disease, 3 - with the subclinical course
of respiratory disease.
chronograms
Indicators of
sensor operating
Area of “visual print”, Hzs
τ, s
1
2
3
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

3) The almost constant value of the integral signal from
the array of sensors, which is observed at the first sign of
respiratory disease (subclinical course), indicates that the
excretion of substances at the destruction of nasal mucus and
the production of metabolites by microorganisms are not so
active. If one takes another sample of nasal mucus from an
animal with the subclinical course of the respiratory disease
within 5 minutes after the first selection, then the time
dependence of area of “visual print” for this sample will be
like for conditionally healthy (curve 1, Figure 3). It is in
good agreement with the data on the formation of local
protection of the respiratory tract of calves [16]. Thus,
several measurements of one biosample during the day allow
easy clarifying the diagnosis without multivariate analysis of
sensor signals unlike modern approaches [3][5].
B.
Characterizing the Some Deviation from Normal Health
Status by Human Skin Odor
A forearm zone of skin was chosen for scanning the
health status of the whole organism according to information
about the diagnostic significance of the Zakharyin-Ged zone.
The primary database contained the responses of 8
sensors in 200 seconds of measurement (1590-1600 signals).
Based on the analysis of the skin odor of 100 volunteers in
various states according to their words and the results of
laboratory tests, a primary algorithm of “visual print”
construction has been developed for linking the features of
the forms of “visual prints” with the human condition and
possible causes of deviation (Table 1, Figure 4). The
proposed algorithm is different from the traditional approach
to visualize the sensor signals, used in the state-of-the-art
methods [3]. Moreover, such visualization is simpler and
clearer for the user.
TABLE I.
ALGORITHM
FOR
CONSTRUCTING
“VISUAL
PRINTS”
OF
SIGNALS FROM AN ARRAY OF 8 SENSORS FOR ASSESSING THE HEALTH
STATUS OF PEOPLE
Name of an algorithm of “visual
print” construction
(characteristic)
Time of recording the sensor
responses, s / number of sensors
used to build a “visual print”
"General state"
(the most complete information
about reproductive, digestive
systems)
30, 45, 60, 80, 100, 120, 180 / 8
"Energy"
(reflects the strength and intensity
of the metabolome part, which
shows the ability of the body to
act)
110, 120, 130, 140, 150 / 3
"Endocrine system"
(reflects malfunctions of the
endocrine glands, primarily the
pancreas)
10 20 30 60 / 4
Additionally, the parameter is
calculated:
γ = ΔF4(60 s)/ΔF4(20 s).
At γ ≤ 2 pathology occurs 
"Negative"
(the severity of destructive
processes in the body)
20, 30, 170, 180 / 8
Additionally, parameters are
calculated:
β1 = ΔF4(20 s)/ΔF4(170 s).
= ΔF4(30 s)/ΔF4(180 s).
At β1, β2 ≤ 2.5 pathology occurs 
Figure 4.
Statistically significant typical changes in the shape of the
integral signals of the sensor array of the portable e-nose for different
conditions of one person (for left forearm – the blue color and for right –
red color).
Figure 4 shows the comparison of “visual prints” forms
for left and right hands, which used for visual assessment of
descriptive states. As a result, statistically reliable responses
and smell trace forms were determined, what correspond to
the physically normal functioning of the body (norm), stress,
tiredness, inflammation, headache, and weakness, in total no
less than 17 states (some of them are shown in Figure 4).
This is more than in other research [4][5]. Besides, reference
limits for the degree of its severity have been established for
each state, for example, the low level of tiredness, the middle
level of tiredness, the high level of tiredness and the critical
level of tiredness. It is established that the geometric shape
of the “visual print” is strictly individual for each person and
the calculated parameters (A(i/j)) – for health status (Figure
4, Table 2). The shape of “visual print” is influenced to a
greater extent by the health of the body, by the psycho-
emotional state during measurement, by gender, and to a
lesser extent by age. If we normalize for one person the
average quantitative parameter of the smell trace (area of
Norm
Norm, heart weakness
Warmly
Very hot
Cold
Headache, virus, hunger
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

“visual print”) according to the results of not less than 500
measurements in different periods for 2 years, then the
general nature of the displacement of this indicator will obey
the laws presented in Table 3.
TABLE II.
THE VALUE OF SOME PARAMETERS OF SORPTION A(I/J) IN
VARIOUS STATES
Parame-
ter А(i/j) 
The numerical range of parameter values
Norm
Description of the deviation state
Sector
color
green
yellow
red
burgundy
А(1/5) 
 ˂ 0.75 
0.75-0.94
Stress,
body
weakness
˃ 0.90 
Hormone
imbalance
˃ 0.81 
Stress,
weakness,
severe
inflammation
А(1/7) 
≤ 1.90 
˃ 1.9 
˃ 2.3 
Adrenaline,
severe stress
-
А(1/2) 
˃ 1.15 
0.90 –
1.14
Inflam-
mation,
very hot
˂ 0.9 
Alcohol,
Ketones
-
А(2/4) 
≤ 0.1 
-
0.25-0.30
Ketones, sugar
is above normal,
hormones are
very unbalanced
0.16-0.24
Weakness,
exhaustion
TABLE III. THE MOST TYPICAL EXAMPLES OF CHANGES IN THE AREA OF
THE “VISUAL PRINTS” WITH SOME CHANGES IN HEALTH STATUS
Person’s state
The trend of changing and the relative
difference in the parameter Sv.p.,%
Norm
Differences between the left and right hands -
5-10%, for the left more than for the right
Norm, after eat
11-30% more for the right hand than for the
left one
Norm, easy hunger
For the right hand less than for the left one by
11-25%
Norm, severe hunger
If the gallbladder is malfunctioning, a
response increase of 15-20% for the right
hand is observed due to the excreted of
propandial
Cold, temperature for
a long time 15-20C
20% (before meals) – 10% (after meals), the
shape of “visual prints” changes
Headache,
toothache,
other pain, spasm
10-35%, the shape of “visual prints” changes
Increase
the
air
temperature up to 26-
30C
10-30%, at perspiration till 500%
Virus, malaise without
fever
Decrease on the right hand to 38-40%
Menstruation
An increase in the side of the working ovary
by 15-25%.
Fatigue, heart failure
The left side is smaller than the right in
normal to 12-20%, the shape of “visual
prints” changes
Bronchitis,
inflammation
The difference between left and right
Zakharyin-Ged zone of bronchi for acute
bronchitis - 40 %, recovery – up to 15 %,
healthy lung and bronchi – up to 5 %
The electronic nose was trained by 45 individual
substances of normal and pathogenic metabolism: C1-C5
alcohols, ketones, C5-C7 cyclic ketones, aldehydes, N-, S-
containing aldehydes, C1-C5 carboxylic acids; primary,
tertiary, cyclic amines, O-containing amines. Therefore, it is
possible to evaluate the appearance of these substances in the
descriptive states (Table 2). Thereby, using portable e-nose
for
scanning
volatilome
secreted
by
the
skin
allows
determining the diverse variation in health status, including
the descriptive states, the presence of 45 individual volatile
substances at ppm-ppb level [14] in comparison with state-
of-the-art methods [4][5][8][9].
For the convenience of deciding the health status of the
organism, the state sphere is constructed using parameters
A(i/j) (Figure 5), while the color of the sector corresponding
to a certain parameter, which is determined by its numerical
value in Table 2.
Figure 5.
Example of the sphere for human health status on parameter
A(i/j) in the dialogue window of the software.
The greener the sectors in the health status sphere, the
closer it is to normal. For instance, in Figure 5 the value of
parameter A(2/6) is in the red zone accordingly to the results
of clinical and laboratory tests which are confirmed as an
inflammatory process in the digestive and respiratory tracts.
Thus, according to the parameters of sensor signals, one can
easily and quickly obtain extended information about the
work of both individual organs and the deviation of the
health status from the average norm.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
According to the responses of the electronic nose, when
monitoring biosamples of nasal mucus from 17 calves during
5-9 hours, with an interval of 2-3 hours, it is possible to
assess changes in the qualitative composition of biosamples
gas phase in an atraumatic way, in place.
For the first time, a fundamentally new approach is
proposed for a quick assessment of the health status of the
human body as a whole (normal, stress, inflammation) and
the work of individual systems (reproductive, endocrine,
Name of measurement
1_5 = 0.77
stress, weakness
1_8 = 0.52
alcohols, aldehydes, hangover
2_5 = 0.37
ketones, high level of glucose, endocrine
system disorders
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

digestive), based on the results of an integrated assessment of
the qualitative and quantitative composition of the gas
mixture of biomolecules secreted by the skin in the
Zakharyin-Ged zone.
The correct interpretation and prediction of the status of
biosamples and a person’s state have been proved by
traditional diagnostic and analysis methods (leukogram,
biochemical, microbiological, molecular genetic analysis).
An algorithm is proposed for reading and visualizing signals
from an array of sensors understandable to any user. More
information about data processing for e-nose implementation
will be in this paper [17].
The time of one analysis of volatile substances excreted
by the biosamples or skin using portable e-nose, including
visualization and processing, is up to 5 min, which is faster
than that described in works [2][5] and without any sample
preparation unlike other modern research works [2][7][8].
We believe that the approach proposed in this work for
the analysis by sensor array is appropriate for other
biosamples, such as blood, cervical mucus, exhaled breath
condensate, and urine.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
work
was
financially
supported
by
Russian
Scientific Found (grant number 18-76-10015).
REFERENCES
[1] A. D. Wilson and M. Baietto, “Advances in Electronic-Nose
Technologies
Developed
for
Biomedical
Applications”,
Sensors,
vol.
11,
pp.
1105-1176,
Jan.
2011,
doi:
10.3390/s110101105.
[2] A. T. Güntner, S. Abegg, K. Königstein, P. A. Gerber, A.
Schmidt-Trucksäss and S. E. Pratsinis, “Breath Sensors for
Health Monitoring”, ACS Sens., pp. 268-280, Jan. 2019, doi:
10.1021/acssensors.8b00937.
[3] M. Yakob, D. Mustika, R. I. Nila and R. A. Putra, “Design of
E-nose as an Instrument Identification of Diseases Through
the Respiratory Tract”, Journal of Physics: Conference Series
(The
4th
International
Conf.
on
Applied
Physics
and
Materials Application), IOP Publ., Feb. 2020, vol. 1428,
012062, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1428/1/012062.
[4] E. Kabir, N. Raza, V. Kumar, J. Singh, Y. F. Tsang, D. K.
Lim, J. E. Szulejko and Ki-H. Kim, “Recent Advances in
Nanomaterial-Based Human Breath Analytical Technology
for Clinical Diagnosis and the Way Forward”, Chem, vol. 12,
pp. 3020-3057, Dec. 2019, doi:10.1016/j.chempr.2019.08.004
[5] Y. Y. Broza, Xi Zhou, M. Yuan, D. Qu, Y. Zheng, R.
Vishinkin, M. Khatib, W. Wu and H. Haick, “Disease
Detection with Molecular Biomarkers: From Chemistry of
Body Fluids to Nature-Inspired Chemical Sensors”, Chem.
Rev.,
vol.
119,
pp.
11761-11817,
Nov.
2019,
doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00437.
[6] T. A. Kuchmenko, A. A. Shuba, V. V. Bityukova and N. A.
Matveeva, “Application of a Chemical Sensor Array to
Assessing the Presence of Neoplasms by Blood Smell”,
Journal of Analytical Chemistry, vol. 73, pp. 91-101, Jan.
2018, doi: 10.1134/S1061934817110053.
[7] Q. Gao and W.-Y. Lee, “Urinary Metabolites for Urological
Cancer Detection: a Review on the Application of Volatile
Organic Compounds for Cancers”, Am J Clin Exp Urol, vol.
7,
pp.
232–248,
Aug.
2019;
ISSN:2330-
1910/AJCEU0101247.
[8] G. E. Bergdahl, T. Andersson, M. Allhorn, S. Yngman, R.
Timm and R. Lood, “In Vivo Detection and Absolute
Quantification of a Secreted Bacterial Factor from Skin Using
Molecularly Imprinted Polymers in a Surface Plasmon
Resonance Biosensor for Improved Diagnostic Abilities”,
ACS
Sens.,
vol.
4,
pp.
717-725,
Mar.
2019,
doi:10.1021/acssensors.8b01642.
[9] S. Zhang, S. Li, Z. Xia and K. Cai, “A Review of Electronic
Skin: Soft Electronics and Sensors for Human Health”, J.
Mater.
Chem.
B,
vol.
8,
pp.
852-862,
Dec.
2019,
doi:10.1039/C9TB02531F.
[10] A. Amann and D. Smith “Volatile Biomarkers. Non-invasive
Diagnosis
in
Physiology
and
Medicine”,
Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 2013. p. 568.
[11] S. M. McGuirk “Disease Management of Dairy Calves and
Heifers”, Veterinary Clinics of North America: Food Animal
Practice,
vol.
24,
pp.
139-153,
April
2008,
doi:
10.1016/j.cvfa.2007.10.003.
[12] T. A. Kuchmenko and L. B. Lvova “A Perspective on Recent
Advances
in
Piezoelectric
Chemical
Sensors
for
Environmental
Monitoring
and
Foodstuffs
Analysis”,
Chemosensors,
vol.
7,
pp.
39-45,
Aug.
2019,
doi:
10.3390/chemosensors7030039.
[13] G.
Sayerbrey “Messung Von Plattenschwingungen
Sehr
Kleiner Amplitude Durch Lichtstrommodulation”, Zeitschrift
Fuer Physik, vol. 178, pp. 457-471, 1964.
[14] T. A. Kuchmenko and A. A. Shuba, “Informative Nature of
the Electronic Nose Output Signals Based on the Piezoelectric
Sensors”, Analitika i kontrol’ [Analytics and Control], vol.
21,
pp.
72-84,
June
2017,
doi:
10.15826/analitika.2017.21.2.001 (in Russian).
[15] T. A. Kuchmenko, A. A. Shuba, R. U. Umarkhanov and A. E.
Chernitskii “Electronic Nose Signals Correlation Evaluation
for Nasal Mucus and Exhaled Breath Condensate of Calves
with the Clinical and Laboratory Indicators”, Analitika i
kontrol’ [Analytics and Control], vol. 23, pp. 557-562, Dec.
2019, doi: 10.15826/analitika.2019.23.4.014 (in Russian).
[16] Yu. Alekhin, M. Zhukov, V. Morgunova, G. Chusova and I.
Klement’eva
“Formation
of
Local
Protection
of
the
Respiratory Tract in Holstein Calves”, Turk. J. Vet. Anim.
Sci., pp. 656-661, Oct. 2019, doi:10.3906/vet-1903-73.
[17] T. Kuchmenko, I. Murakhovskiy, R. Umarkhanov and D.
Kuchmenko, “Development of a Program for Analytical
Systems of Personal Diagnostics of People and Animals on
the Basis of Array of Piezosensors”, Proc. of Conf. "The
Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine,
and Social Medicine", IARIA Publ., Mar. 2020, in press.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

