Reduced Graphene Oxide-ZnO Nanotubes Based Binary Hybrid Structure as Room
Temperature Ethanol Sensor
Partha Bhattacharyya, Debanjan Acharyya
Nano thin films and solid state gas sensor devices laboratory,
Department of ETCE, Indian Institute of Engineering
Science and Technology (IIEST), Shibpur, India
e-mail:pb_etc_besu@yahoo.com,
iammdebanjan@gmail.com
Abstract— In this paper, we report a highly sensitive and fast
responsive room temperature ethanol sensor based on rGO-
ZnO nanotubes (NTs) hybrid structure. ZnO NTs were grown
on Indium doped Tin Oxide (ITO) substrate using a two-step
process, consisting of electro-deposition (for ZnO nanorods
deposition) and electrochemical etching (for etching of ZnO
nanorods to form nanotubes). After that, rGO layer was
deposited on top of the ZnO NTs employing a programmed dip
coating
technique.
Subsequently,
detailed
structural
and
morphological
characterizations
were
carried
out
using
FESEM
(Field Emission Scanning
Electron Microscopy),
Raman
spectroscopy
and
XPS
(X-Ray
photo
electron
Spectroscopy) techniques to confirm the formation of hybrid
structure. After that, alcohol (i.e. ethanol,
methanol, 2-
propanol) sensing properties of the device were investigated in
the
concentration
range
of
1-700
ppm
at
different
temperatures (27–175°C). ~70% response magnitude, (towards
ethanol) was observed at room temperature. Moreover, fast
response time and recovery time were also noticed (response
time:
~56
s
and
recovery
time:
~202
s
at
100
ppm
concentration
of
ethanol).
Such
sensing
performance
is
attributed to the synergistic hybridization of ZnO NTs and
rGO,
which
offer
an
extremely
large
number
of
gas
adsorption/desorption sites and high carrier mobility.
Keywords- rGO-ZnO nanotubes; hybrid structure; room
temperature ethanol sensor; fast response time/recovery time.
I. INTRODUCTION
Metal oxide based nanostructures have widely been used
in the development of solid-state gas sensors in different
application arena, such as environmental gas/volatile organic
compound monitoring, food processing, detection of toxic,
flammable and explosive gases etc. [1]. However, the high
operating temperature of such sensors inevitably increases
the power consumption, cost and hampers the long-term
stability [2]. Therefore, in recent years, the development of
room temperature gas sensors has attracted serious attention
around
the
globe.
The
room
temperature
sensing
performance can be achieved by (i) decreasing the activation,
Indranil Maity
School of VLSI Technolog, Indian Institute of Engineering
Science and Technology (IIEST), Shibpur, India
e-mail: indrnilmaity026@gmail.com
energy of sensing surface and (ii) enhancing the carrier
transport kinetics of the sensor [1]-[4]. In this context,
nanotube structure having high surface to volume ratio
(which decrease the activation energy of the sensing layer)
proved its promising candidature as a room temperature
sensing layer [4]. On the other hand, the high mobility and
intrinsic defects of rGO, make it as an essential material to
improve the transport kinetics of the sensor [1]. Now,
hybridization
of
nanotube
and
rGO
facilitates
room
temperature sensing performance as well as fast transport
kinetics. Several metal oxide based (i.e. TiO2, SnO2, WO3
etc.) nanotubes structure have already been reported for
room temperature volatile organic compound sensor [1], [3].
However, these sensors exhibited sluggish response time and
recovery time (in minutes) towards ethanol. Therefore, to
obtain room temperature fast responsive ethanol sensor, ZnO
NTs and rGO layer were hybridized in this work.
The sensing performance of the rGO-ZnO NTs structure
was carried out in the concentration range of 1-700 ppm,
targeting ethanol, methanol and 2-propanol. Alcohol (i.e.
ethanol, methanol, 2-propanol) sensing properties of the
device were investigated in the concentration range of 1-700
ppm at different temperatures (27–175°C). ~70% response
magnitude,
(towards
ethanol)
was
observed
at
room
temperature. Moreover, fast response time and recovery time
were also noticed (response time: ~56 s and recovery time:
~202 s at 100 ppm concentration of ethanol). Such sensing
performance is attributed to the synergistic hybridization
ZnO NTs and rGO, which offers extremely large amount gas
adsorption/desorption sites and high carrier mobility. The
formation of hybrid junction between rGO and ZnO NTs
possibly enhance the sensitivity as well as response kinetics
towards ethanol.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
2, device
fabrication
and
measurement
procedure
are
discussed. In Section 3, the morphological and surface
characterization outcomes, sensing performance of the rGO-
ZnO NTs based hybrid device are discussed and correlated
with
the
possible
physical
phenomenon.
Finally,
we
conclude the work in Section 4.
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 1. (a) A schematic representation of rGO-ZnO NTs binary hybrid sensor device with requisite dimensions (b) FESEM image of rGO-ZnO NTs (c)
Raman spectra of rGO-ZnO NTs (d-f) XPS spectra of rGO-ZnO NTs; (d) Zn (2p3/2 and 2p1/2) and (e) O (1s) peak (f) C1s spectra of rGO-ZnO NFs. (g)
Transient response characteristics towards ethanol, methanol, 2-propanol, of rGO-ZnO NTs (green line and red line indicate vapor on and off, respectively),
(h) Response time (in black) and recovery time (in blue) as a function of different vapors concentrations (1–700 ppm) for the rGO-ZnO NTs (i) The response
magnitude as a function of temperature for rGO-ZnO NTs at 100 ppm concentration of ethanol, methanol, and 2-propanol.
II. EXPERIMENT
In an experiment, ZnO nanotubes were fabricated on an
Indium doped Tin-Oxide (ITO) coated glass substrate (from
Sigma Aldrich, thickness: 0.9 mm, surface resistivity: ~10
Ω/sq), by a two-step process, consists of (i) electro- 
deposition of ZnO nanorods, followed by (ii) selective
electrochemical etching of those nanorods to form nanotubes
[2]. In first step, ITO was connected to the negative polarity,
while during etching of ZnO nanorods, positive voltage was
applied to ITO. In the first step, aqueous solution of equi-
molar (5 mM each) Zinc Nitratehexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2,
6H2O, 99%, MERCK) and Hexamethylenetetramine (HMT)
((CH2)6N4, 99%, MERCK) was used to deposit ZnO
nanorods. After that, the electro-deposition was carried out
for 40 minutes at 78ºC with a bias voltage of -1.8 V [2]. In
the second step, electrochemical etching of grown ZnO
nanorods was carried out for 1 hours at 65°C, using an
aqueous
solution
of
0.01M
Ethylenediamine
(EDA)
(C2H4(NH2)2, 99.5%, MERCK) with an applied potential of -
0.06V. After that, the grown ZnO NTs were annealed in a
horizontal tube furnace (heating and cooling rate of 5°C/min)
at 350°C for 3 hours. Further, on top of the ZnO NTs layer,
rGO layer was deposited employing a programmed dip
coating technique. After that, rGO-ZnO NTs hybrid device
was again annealed at 300°C for 2 hrs. Subsequently, a
planar device structure was fabricated employing rGO-ZnO
NTs as the sensing layer and palladium (Pd) as contact
electrodes. Sensor device schematic is shown in Figure 1(a).
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
FESEM image (top surface) of rGO-ZnO NTs is shown
in Figure 1(b). Raman spectroscopy of rGO-ZnO NTs is
depicted in Figure 1(c), where the presence of D band
(centred at 1334.22 cm-1), G band (centred at 1601.15 cm-1),
2D band (centred at 2705.25 cm-1) and D+D/ (centred at
2921.95 cm-1) validate the existence of rGO [1]. D band
attribute to sp3 defects at the graphene edges and G band
signifies E2g phonon [1]. Moreover, the
existence of non-
polar optical phonon of ZnO, i.e. E(high) band (centred at
432.03 cm-1) and E(low) band (centred at 532.53 cm-1)
represents the
wurtzite crystal phase of ZnO [2] which
further confirms that the wurtzite phase of ZnO unaltered
even
after
deposition
of
rGO.
Further,
to
observe
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[e]
[f]
rGO-ZnO NTs
O1s
C1s
[g]
[h]
[b]
[i]
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

morphological properties of rGO-ZnO NTs surface, XPS
characterization was carried out. As revealed from Zn (2p)
peak (Figure 1(d)) that the doublet spectral line of Zn 2p3/2
and Zn 2p1/2 were observed at 1022.35 eV and 1045.24 eV,
respectively [1]. Gaussian fitting of O1s spectra for rGO-
ZnO NTs (depicted in Figure 1(e)) revealed that the amount
of chemisorbed oxygen vacancies dominates the lattice
oxygen content of rGO-ZnO NT surface. Moreover, the
presence of C-C/C=C, C-O, C=O and C-O-OH peaks in C1s
spectra (Figure 1 (f)) confirms the existence of rGO on ZnO
NTs surface [5][6]. The sensing performance of rGO-ZnO
NTs hybrid structure was investigated in the resistive mode
with three different alcohol vapors (ethanol, methanol and 2-
propanol) in the concentration range of 1–700 ppm at
different temperatures (27–175°C). For each ppm, the
gas/vapor was exposed for ~380 sec. The developed sensor
offered higher response magnitude towards ethanol followed
by
methanol
and
2-propanol.
However,
the
optimum
operating temperature of the device towards ethanol and
methanol was found to be ~100°C and ~150°C for 2-
propanol (Figure. 1(i)). Moreover, stable transient response
characteristics towards ethanol was observed and depicted in
Figure 1(g). The operating temperature for Figure 1(g) was
~27°C (i.e. room temperature). It is evident from Figure 1(g),
that the sensor showed appreciably high response magnitude
towards ethanol (e.g. 17.37 % at 1 ppm, 70.19 % at 100 ppm
and 97.82 % at 700 ppm) at room temperature (RT). The
response times and recovery times for rGO-ZnO NTs sensor
towards
ethanol
are
depicted
in
Figure
1(h)
(in
a
concentration range of 1–700 ppm). For example, rGO-ZnO
NTs sensor offered ~56 s response time and ~202 s recovery
time at 100 ppm concentration of ethanol. Such high
response magnitude and fast response and recovery kinetics
at room temperature are far better than our previous report on
pristine ZnO nanotube based ethanol sensor [7]. Such
enhancement
in
sensing
results
is
attributed
to
the
incorporation of rGO on top of the ZnO NTs layer. ZnO NTs
radially offers higher amount of gas adsorption/desorption
sites (as target gas can adsorbed on the both inner and outer
walls). On the other hand, high carrier mobility of rGO
increase the carrier transport from the gas-interaction sites to
the collecting electrode(s), which improves the response and
recovery kinetics of the sensor [5]. To the exposure of air,
oxygen molecules are adsorbed on the inner and outer wall
of ZnO NTs and oxygen vacant sites of rGO layer, which
inevitably increase the adsorb oxygen ions (which are active
sites for gas interaction). Moreover, exchange of electrons
and holes between ZnO NTs and rGO space charge regions
are formed on hybrid surface which also penetrate towards
the core from the outer surface of the NT wall. This
phenomenon increases the barrier potential of the hybrid
structure [4]. On the other hand, with the exposure of ethanol
vapour, adsorbed oxygen species on the hybrid surface,
oxidize
the
ethanol,
which
eventually
reduces
barrier
potential at the surface. Therefore, the sensor resistance
decreased dramatically [7].
IV.CONCLUSION
Room temperature ethanol sensing performance of the
rGO-ZnO NTs binary hybrid structure is reported in this
paper. Hexagonal ZnO NTs were fabricated on the ITO
substrate employing two-step process; (i) electro-deposition
for ZnO hexagonal nanorods growth, followed by (ii)
electro-chemical
etching
of
ZnO
nanorods
to
form
nanotubes. The existence of rGO layer was authenticated by
FESEM, Raman and XPS characterizations. The sensing
characteristics of the sensor was experimented in the
concentration range of 1-700 ppm towards ethanol, metanol
and 2-propanol. The sensor showed promising sensing
characteristics towards ethanol with a response magnitude of
70.19 % at 100 ppm and 97.82 % at 700 ppm at room
temperature. However, optimum temperature of this sensor
was found to be ~100°C towards ethanol. Moreover, the
response time and recovery time were also found to be faster
than that of earlier reported room temperature ethanol sensor.
Large amount of gas-interaction sites of ZnO NTs along with
high carrier mobility of rGO layer possibly offered such
improved response characteristics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Visvesvaraya young
faculty research fellowship (DeitY) and DST-NM, India. D.
Acharyya thankfully acknowledges the CSIR, Govt. of
India, for his Fellowship for pursuing Ph.D. Authors
thankfully acknowledge Prof. Mon Shu Ho, Department of
Physics, National Chung Hsing University, Taiwan for
providing material characterization facility.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Basu, and P. Bhattacharyya, “Recent developments on
graphene and graphene oxide based solid state gas sensors,”
Sens. Actuators, B, vol. 173, pp. 1–21, 2012.
[2]
D.
Acharyya,
and
P.
Bhattacharyya,
Alcohol
Sensing
Performance
of
ZnO
Hexagonal
Nanotubes
at
Low
Temperatures: A Qualitative Understanding, Sens. Actuators,
B, vol. 228, pp. 373–386, 2016..
[3]
F. L. Meng, Z. Guo, and X. J. Huang, “Graphene-based
hybrids for chemiresistive gas sensors,” Trends Anal. Chem.,
vol. 68, pp. 37–47, 2015.
[4]
A. Hazra, K. Dutta, B. Bhowmik, P. P. Chattopadhyay, and P.
Bhattacharyya,
“Room
temperature
alcohol
sensing
by
oxygen vacancy controlled TiO2 nanotube array,” Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 105, pp. 081604 Aug. 2014.
[5]
Q. Wan, Q.H. Li, Y.J. Chen, and T.H. Wang., “Fabrication
and ethanol sensing characteristics of ZnO nanowire gas
sensors”, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 84, no. 18, pp. 3654-3656,
2004.
[6]
Y. Xia et. al.., “Confined Formation of Ultrathin ZnO
Nanorods/Reduced
Graphene
Oxide
Mesoporous
Nanocomposites for High-Performance RoomTemperature
NO2 Sensors”, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, vol. 8, pp. 35454
−35463, 2016. 
[7]
W. Li, J. Liu, and C. Yan, “Reduced graphene oxide with
tunable C/O ratio and its activity towards vanadium redox
pairs for an all vanadium redox flow battery”, CARBON, vol.
55, pp. 313–320, Jan. 2013.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

