Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging to Study the Molecular Mechanism of Alzheimer’s Disease. 
 Antonin Ollagnier, Eric Finot 
Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire Carnot de Bourgogne,  
UMR 6303 CNRS 
Universite de Bourgogne Franche Comté 
Dijon, France  
e-mail: Eric.Finot@u-bourgogne.fr  
Elizabeth Drolle, Zoya Leonenko 
Department of Biology, Department of Physics and 
Astronomy, Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology  
University of Waterloo 
Waterloo, Canada 
e-mail: zleonenk@uwaterloo.ca
 
Abstract We have developed a state-of-the-art surface plasmon 
resonance 
imaging 
(SPRi) 
apparatus 
combined 
with 
microfluidics and used it to detect the binding of amyloid beta 
peptides to the lipid membrane, an interaction known to be 
involved in the molecular mechanism of amyloid toxicity in 
Alzheimer’s disease, and to study protective effect of 
melatonin. Kinetics of binding was measured, and quantitative 
analysis was developed in order to detect melatonin 
partitioning into and amyloid binding to the membrane. We 
provided for the first time clear experimental evidence that the 
presence of melatonin in supported lipid membrane prevents 
the amyloid peptide from binding to the lipid membrane, thus 
gaining insight into the molecular mechanism of melatonin 
protection against amyloid toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. 
 
Keywords - SPR; microfluidics; biosensor; Alzheimer’s 
disease; amyloid; melatonin, lipid membrane. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
Surface plasmon resonance imaging (SPRi) is a well-
established methodology for detecting adsorption of 
biomolecules to surfaces. SPRi has sufficient sensitivity to 
detect the binding bioaffinity to chemically modified gold 
thin films at concentrations down to less than 1nM. Surface 
plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensors are widely used to 
assess various biomolecular interactions. This label-free 
technique 
enables 
real-time 
measurements 
[1][2]. 
Commercial SPR biosensors are capable of detecting 
1pg.mm2 of adsorbed analytes with sensitivities of typically 
10−5 refractive index unit (RIU), which works well for large 
biomolecules. For detecting smaller molecules at low 
concentrations, commercial SPR instrument is not sensitive 
enough. We have built a home-made apparatus in which 
SPR is combined with microfluidics and advanced optical 
imaging. We developed novel statistical data analysis and 
achieved a dynamic range of detection from 1 mg/mL down 
to 10-15 g/mL.  
Alzheimer’s 
disease 
(AD) 
is 
a 
progressive 
neurodegenerative disease associated with amyloid fibril 
formation in the brain. Amyloid beta (Aβ) is a peptide of 36 
to 43 amino acids; it is well known as a component of 
amyloid plaques linked to AD, with the most toxic effect 
being associated with Aβ(1-42) peptide and its interaction 
with cellular membrane [3]. The exact molecular 
mechanism of amyloid fibril formation and toxicity is not 
well understood. The Aβ(1-42) fibrillization, including the 
early stages of the aggregation process have been monitored 
using photonic sensors [4]. Melatonin is an important 
hormone produced in the pineal gland of the brain. It is 
responsible for regulating sleep/awake cycle and has been 
implicated in AD pathology, and has been shown to have 
protective effect against amyloid toxicity [5]. Although the 
molecular mechanism of this protection is not known, it is 
known that melatonin interacts with lipid membrane non-
specifically [6] and may affect binding Aβ to the membrane.  
We employed SPR imaging combined with microfluidics 
to investigate the interactions between the protein Aβ(1-42) 
and 
the 
1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine 
(DPPC) lipid bilayers in order to show the protective role 
played by the   melatonin in relation to AD. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 
Figure 1 shows a schematic of the SPRi set up.  The 
wavelength of the incident light of a halogen lamp was 
scanned using a monochromator, polarized, expanded and 
collimated using two lenses with focal lengths of 35 and 70 
mm. The SPR chip consisted of SF − 10 glass slides coated 
on one side with a thin gold film (1nm Cr layer and 45nm 
Au layer) deposited by thermal evaporation The expanded 
beam was coupled to the SPR chip in a Kretschmann 
configuration, through a high-index prism (RI = 1.72) 
mounted on a Newport SR50CC rotation stage, allowing the 
angle of incidence to be precisely controlled. The reflected 
light was then focused and collimated using a doublet of 
achromatic 200 mm focal length lenses onto the 
monochrome digital CMOS camera (1002×1004 pixels, at 8 
or 10 bits per pixel and with up to 50 frames per second). 
The microfluidic cell was fabricated by molding the SU8 
master with polydimethylsiloxan (PDMS) cured and baked 
at 100oC for 30 min. It was coupled to the chip by exerting a 
gentle 
pressure. 
The 
microfluidic 
cell 
was 
then 
functionalized with PEG-silane to passivate the inner 
surfaces of the microfluidic cell and all tubings, in order to 
reduce adsorption. The flow was generated using a 
peristaltic pump operating at constant flow rate of 15 
μL/min. 
Figure 1 shows the raw data acquired in reflection mode 
using the CDD camera. The reflectance R is obtained by 
dividing the intensities arising from the pixels inside the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

channel by the reference area representative of the spectral 
and temporal fluctuations of the light source. 
Since the microfluidic cell in PDMS can swell by 1% in 
volume when water is flown through the channels, the 
reference area was taken in a bare gold area, left in the air 
(R = 0.9). One pixel on the camera corresponds to an area of 
3μm×3μm on the SPR chip. In each channel, the data of the 
five central pixels were averaged to provide one value for a 
given length x. Fig 1C illustrates the colored image of R for 
three channels of 100μm width and 2mm long filled with 
distilled water (in blue). The surface of the bare gold film 
(in blue) appears to be homogeneous. This technique 
enables real-time measurements. Figures 1B and D show 
changes in wavelength with time when vesicle solution of 
DPPC was injected into the channel and lipid bilayer was 
depositing onto the gold surface.  
Supported lipid membranes were formed on the surface of 
the SPR sensor by method of vesicle fusion as previously 
described [7][8]. Lipid vesicle solutions were prepared by 
solubilizing dry powdered lipid (Avanti Polar Lipid, 
Alabaster, AL) in nanopure water and subjecting the 
solutions to cycles of sonication and mixing. Melatonin 
(Sigma) solution in water was added to the supported 
membrane at concentration of 0.4mM. Solution of Aβ(1-42) 
(rPeptide, Bogart GA), pretreated to ensure monomeric form 
[9], was solubilized in HEPES buffer for a final 
concentration 500 µg/ml and was added to the supported 
membrane with and without melatonin. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DICSCUSSION 
Preliminary experiments have demonstrated that SPRi 
device is a promising sensor strategy for detecting 
melatonin and the binding of Aβ to the lipid membrane. 
Microfluidics allows for parallel experiments at the same 
time. Four microfluidic channels were used to detect 
adsorption of a DPPC bilayer, adsorption of melatonin to 
the bilayer, and adsorption of Aβ to the bilayer with and 
without melatonin. One channel with distilled and deionised 
water was used as a reference channel.  
Figure 2A shows that the DPPC membrane absorbs the 
melatonin reaching a saturation point at around 3 hours. The 
kinetics of melatonin partitioning into the membrane was 
measured for the first time using this approach, Figure 2B. 
Melatonin saturation time is important for the next 
experiments when binding of amyloid to the supported 
membrane is measured. 
Comparison of results is shown on Figures 2 A-F. Figure 2C 
and D show the adsorption of Aβ on the surface of lipid 
membrane, and Figure 2E and F show adsorption of Aβ into 
the lipid membrane, which was saturated with melatonin. 
We can clearly see that when melatonin is present in the 
membrane amyloid binding is significantly reduced.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
These results provided for the first time clear 
experimental evidence that the presence of melatonin in 
supported lipid membrane prevents Aβ peptide from binding 
to the lipid membrane, thus clarifying the molecular 
mechanism of melatonin preventive role in amyloid toxicity. 
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors acknowledge funding from Natural Science 
and Engineering Council of Canada (NSERC) to ZL, 
NSERC graduate student scholarship and Waterloo Institute 
for Nanotechnology (WIN) Fellowship to ED, University of 
Waterloo Research Partnership Grant to ZL and EF, Invited 
Professorship Award from University of Burgundy, Dijon to 
ZL, and the funding from Council of Burgundy and the 
Labex ACTION program (contract ANR-11-LABX-01-01) 
to EF. The authors acknowledge graduate students Florent 
Martin (UBurgundy) and Youngjik Choi (UWaterloo) for 
help with literature review and some experiments 
preparation, as well as Dr. Laurent Markey (UBurgundy) for 
help with microfluidic setup. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Seigneuric et al., "From nanotechnology to nanomedicine: 
applications to cancer research." Curr. Mol. Med., 10(7), pp. 
640-652, 2010. 
[2] H. Vaisocherova, V. M. Faca, A. D. Taylor, S. Hanash and S. 
Jiang "Comparative study of SPR and ELISA methods based 
on analysis of CD166/ALCAM levels in cancer and control 
human sera," Biosens. Bioelectron. 24(7), pp. 2143-2148, 
2009. 
[3] E. Drolle, F. Hane, B. Lee, Z. Leonenko, “Atomic force 
microscopy to study molecular mechanisms of amyloid fibril 
formation and toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease,” Drug 
Metabolism Rev, 46(2), pp. 207-223, 2014. 
[4] S. Santi et al. "Real-time amyloid aggregation monitoring 
with a photonic crystal-based approach," ChemPhysChem 14, 
pp. 3476–3482, 2013. 
[5] M.A. Pappolla et al., “Melatonin prevents death of 
neuroblastoma cells exposed to the Alzheimer amyloid 
peptide,” J. Neuroscience, 17(5), pp. 1683-1690, 1997. 
[6] E. Drolle et al., “Effect of melatonin and cholesterol on the 
structure of DOPC and DPPC membranes”. Biochim & 
Biophys Acta, 1828, pp. 2247-2254, 2013. 
[7] E. Drolle, R. M. Gaikwad, and Z. Leonenko, “Nanoscale 
electrostaticdomains in cholesterol-laden lipid membranes 
create a target for amyloid binding,” Biophys. J. Lett.,  
103(4), L27-L29, 2012. 
[8] F. Hane, E. Drolle, R. Gaikwad, E. Faught, and Z. Leonenko, 
“Amyloid beta aggregation on lipid membrane. Atomic force 
microscopy study,” J. Alzheimer’s Dis., 26 (3), pp. 485-494, 
2011. 
[9] Y. Fezoui et al.,"An improved method of preparing the 
amyloid beta-protein for fibrillogenesis and neurotoxicity 
experiments." Amyloid, 7(3), pp/ 166-178, 2000. 
 
 
 
    
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
 
       
 
 
Figure 1.  A- SPR set up combined with microfluidic; B- Kinetics of the adsorption of DPPC to gold substrate ; C- SPR image of three channels, blue- gold 
sensor surface, red- covered with polymer ; D- Spectral shift recorded before and after the adsorption ; E- Kinetics of the spectral distribution showing the 
probability density function ( PDF) of  adsorption of DPPC vesicles on gold ; E- Distribution of the shift in SPR wavelength before and after the adsorption. 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
  
 
 
  
  
 
Figure 2.   A and B - Kinetics of melatonin ( 2mM) partition into the DPPC membrane; C and D – adsorption of Aβ to the lipid membrane without 
melatonin; D and F – adsorption of Aβ to the lipid membrane saturated with melatonin 
A 
B 
C 
D
E 
F
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

