Multi-Layer Printed Shear Force Sensor on Flexible Substrates 
Andreas Albrecht, Mauriz Trautmann, Markus 
Becherer, and Almudena Rivadeneyra 
Institute for Nanoelectronics  
Technical University of Munich 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: Andreas.Albrecht@tum.de 
Paolo Lugli 
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano 
Bozen-Bolzano, Italy 
e-mail: Paolo.lugli@unibz.it 
 
 
Abstract— Printed electronics technology is a promising way of 
fabricating low-cost electronics without the need for masking 
and etching. In recent years, additive printing techniques, such 
as inkjet and screen printing, have been adopted to fabricate 
low-cost and large-area electronics on flexible substrates. In this 
work, the design of a 3-axial normal and shear force sensor was 
developed, that consists of four miniaturized printed capacitors. 
The partially overlapping electrodes are arranged in a manner 
so that force sensitivity in orthogonal directions is achieved. The 
base unit of this sensor has been fabricated using inkjet-printing 
and characterized. The force response of this sensor was 
investigated in a force range from 0.1 N to 8 N, the normal-force 
sensitivity was determined to be Sz = 5.2 fF/N and the shear-
force sensitivity was Sy = 13.1 fF/N. Due to its sensing range, this 
sensor could be applicable in tactile sensing systems. 
Keywords-Capacitive sensor; inkjet printing; normal force; 
PDMS. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Printed electronics possess the advantage to reduce the 
number of production steps by applying several components 
with similar process technologies. In contrast to conventional 
electronics, sensors can be printed instead of assembled. The 
present work deals with the development, fabrication, and 
characterization of a capacitive normal and shear force sensor. 
Such sensors could be used for basic force and pressure 
measurements. They could also be part of a tactile sensing 
system in robotics. Advanced robotic systems need reliable 
information about friction and strain when interacting with the 
environment and handling objects [1]. Additionally, the 
ability of printed electronics to fabricate devices on flexible 
substrates could bring us a step closer to an artificial skin, 
which can be wrapped around the robot surface [2].  
In a previous work, we studied inkjet printing and 
photonic sintering for low-cost printing of electrodes and 
wiring [3]. Chase et al. [4] showed a parallel plate capacitor 
approach with four capacitances that change in the 
overlapping area for exposure to shear forces and in distance 
for normal forces. Khan et al. [5] presented an all screen 
printed flexible pressure (normal force) sensor with a 
piezoelectric sensing principle. Silver (Ag) based paste serves 
as a conductor, and the piezoelectric material was 
polyvinylidene 
fluoridetrifluoroethylene 
(P(VDF-TrFE)), 
which is a ferroelectric polymer that exhibits efficient 
piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties. The force response 
was characterized by the voltage readout. 
A thin-film normal and shear force sensor was designed 
by Chase and Luo [4]. Their capacitive device senses normal 
and shear forces simultaneously. The operation is based on the 
deflection of a compressible filler material, which is 
sandwiched between two electrodes of a plate capacitor. 
Making a few adjustments, this design could be implemented 
using printing technologies. A more advanced sensor design 
was reported by Dobrzynska and Gijs [6] using conventional 
semiconductor technology. Their capacitive approach is based 
on the deflection of an elastic dielectric spacer. Especially for 
shear force sensing, they used multiple small capacitor areas 
leading to a higher sensitivity. However, the fabrication of 
similarly small features is a challenging task using printed-
electronics techniques.  
In the present work, the basic idea of their sensor was 
adopted for printed electronics. The rest of the paper is 
structured as follows. In Section 2, we present the materials, 
the printing process, the elastic dielectric and its application 
as well as the characterization tools used to produce the 
presented results. Section 3 discusses the design, a theoretical 
model thereof as well as the evaluation of the print quality and 
the measured electromechanical behavior of out sensors. In 
Section IV, we summarize the main findings and conclude the 
paper. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Materials 
The shear-force sensors were fabricated on the transparent 
coated Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) film Screenfilm 
Waterbased (Colorgate Digital Output Solutions GmbH, 
Germany). The film was developed for inkjet printing and has 
a nano-porous surface coating and has a grammage of 
210 g m-2 and a thickness of 170 µm. 
For inkjet printing, we used the nanoparticle-based silver 
ink DGP 40LT-15C (ANP Co., South Korea). The ink 
contains 35 % silver nanoparticles dispersed in TGME 
(C8H18O4), which is a polar solvent. The dispersion was 
carefully shaken by hand prior to filling into the cartridge. The 
curing temperature is indicated with 120 – 150 ºC and the 
specific resistivity is 11 - 12 µΩ cm. As the dielectric spacer 
of our sensor, we used a two-component screen-printable 
silicone paste, Alpatec 30191 (CHT R. Beitlich GmbH). The 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

two components were mixed equally (1:1) in a small dish. 
After mixing, the paste can be used for one hour before 
hardening. Both components are highly transparent. 
B. Inkjet-printed electrodes 
The printer used in this work is a Dimatix DMP-2850 
(Fujifilm Dimatix Inc., Santa Clara, USA). The cartridge and 
plate temperature was set to 55ºC with a drop-spacing of 
30 µm. With these settings, the fabrication of one electrode 
took about ten minutes. By using more than one nozzle, the 
printing time can be reduced, but the probability of a failure 
due to a blocking in one of the nozzles is much higher. 
Through the heat of the platen, the pattern was quickly dried. 
To make sure that all the solvents evaporated, the samples 
were additionally cured in an oven for 60 min at 60 ºC. 
To improve the conductivity of the electrodes, we 
employed Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) sintering using a 
Sinteron 2010 (Xenon, US). A double pulse (period of 3 s) at 
2.5 kV was used. The pulse lengths were 500 µs for the first 
pulse and 1000 µs for the second pulse, which was identified 
as a good value in previous work [3]. The manufacturer 
measured a light intensity of 2.6 - 3.28 J mm-2 for a single 
pulse at 830 J. 
C. Elastic spacer 
The Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) spacer was applied 
onto the inkjet-printed silver layer on the PET film using a 
stencil made of 75 µm thick Kapton film. After applying 
PDMS on both electrodes, they were placed on each other, 
aligned using alignment marks and baked on a hot plate at 60 
ºC for about 30 min. To make sure that the electrodes did not 
detach, a slight pressure was exerted on the sample using a 
glass slide. In this way, we effectively used the PDMS both as 
an adhesive as well as a dielectric spacer of our sensor. 
D. Characterization 
Optical microscope images were taken with a Zeiss 
Germany Axio.Lab A1, equipped with a digital camera 
Axiocam 105. These images were used to assess the quality of 
the printed electrodes and to determine their lateral and 
longitudinal dimensions. Further, the drop diameter of the 
silver ink on the PET and Kapton substrate were identified. 
The thickness of our printed electrodes and PDMS layer 
were measured with a DektakXT stylus surface profiler 
(Brucker Corporation, USA). 
To generate the normal and shear force, we used the voice coil 
linear actuator V-275 PIMag (Physikinstrumente, Germany) 
with an integrated force sensor. Figure 1(a) shows the actuator 
mounted to a movable stage for the normal force application. 
The fabricated sensor was fastened to the table using double-
sided adhesive tape. To reduce parasitic capacitive coupling, 
a 2.5 mm x 2.5 mm glass slide was put between the metallic 
bar of the motor and the sensor. The capacitance of a 
fabricated sensor was continuously monitored using an 
Agilent E4980A Precision LCR Meter(100 kHz, 0 V bias, 1 V 
AC voltage). The characterization was automated by a 
LABVIEW program. 
 
 
Figure 1. Measurement setup for (a) normal forces and (b) shear forces. The 
metallic bar transfers the force generated by the voice coil actuator to the 
sensor and the cap where the sensor is fixed, respectively. 
For the shear force characterization, a different setup was 
developed and built using the same voice coil actuator. 
Figure 1(b) shows the measurement setup. The force is 
applied precisely on the sensor plane, thus parasitic forces are 
minimized. To characterize the samples from all directions, 
the socket can be rotated from -90 to +90. One side of the 
sensor is fixed (double-sided tape) to the socket and the other 
side to the cap. To route the wiring out, small grooves are 
milled into the bottom of the cap. 
For the electro-mechanical characterization, we loaded the 
sensors with forces from 0.1 N to 8 N with incremental steps 
of 20 % every five seconds, and subsequently, the force was 
reduced by the same factor. This was repeated three times. The 
time-force-signal is shown in Figure 2. For evaluation of the 
hysteresis, we differentiated between the rising and the 
declining edges of the profile. In the following, the rising 
edges are labeled with R and the declining edges are denoted 
with D. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Sensor design 
The design of the sensor was defined by the requirements 
and technical capabilities described in the previous sections. 
Thus, we were looking for a sensor, which can be fabricated 
on flexible substrates, like Kapton and PET using inkjet and 
screen printing. In literature, different capacitive sensors were 
demonstrated. For example, Chase et al. [3] presented a shear 
and normal force sensor where four squared electrodes form 
the bottom and a single squared electrode the top of the sensor. 
The operation was based on the deflection and compression of 
the filler layer between top and bottom electrodes. 
The shear force and direction were then determined by 
calculating the ratios of the four single capacities. The 
 
 
Figure 2. Force profile for normal and shear response measurements with 
increasing (R) force from 100 mN in steps of 20 % up to 8 N and decreasing 
(D) force with the same values.  
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

downside of this configuration is that one only obtains very 
small delta in the capacity, especially when measuring shear 
force. Therefore, the basic principles of the four individual 
capacitors had to be modified to achieve an improvement in 
sensitivity. 
So, instead of using square electrodes, we chose an ’E’-shaped 
pattern for both the top and the bottom electrode. This 
approach was firstly presented by Dobrzynka and Gijs in 2013 
[4]. Figure 3 shows the proposed design of our sensor. The 
benefit of these ’E’-shaped structures is that one obtains 
multiple edges, so that a deflection leads to a change in the 
parallel area of the capacitor. The top and bottom electrode are 
displaced by half of the finger width, so the initial capacity 
amounts to 50% of the maximum capacity. Two of the 
capacitors are x-axis-sensitive, and the other two are y-axis 
sensitive. 
B. Theoretical Model 
The sensor was modeled using a simple parallel-plate 
capacitor approach according to (1). The design of the sensor 
uses identical areas A and distances d of the parallel plates for 
all capacitances in the relaxed position with no applied force.   
 
C0=ε0εr
A
d 
(1) 
A force in z-direction reduces the distance by Δ𝑑𝑧, thus, 
increasing the capacitance of all capacitances. The design of 
the sensor assures that an x-force increases the area Δ𝐴𝑥 of C1 
to the same extent it reduces the area of C3 according to (2) 
and does not influence C2 and C4. Similarly, a y-force 
increases the area of C2 and decreases the area of C4 by Δ𝐴𝑦. 
 
C1/3=ε0εr
A±ΔAx
d–Δdz              C2/4=ε0εr
A±ΔAy
d–Δdz  
(2) 
The average of all the capacitor values cancels out all area 
changes due to x- and y-forces and, thus, only depends on the 
change of the distance of the parallel plates. The z-force can 
be determined by the change of Cz. 
 
Cz=
1
4 ∑
Cn
4
n=1
=C0∙
d
d–∆dz ≈C0∙(1+
∆dz
d ) 
(3) 
 
Figure 3. Design of our sensor with the four sectors that form the four 
capacitances C1 ... C4 that allow the differentiation of forces in x-, y- and z-
direction. In every sector, the top and bottom electrode is shifted in a 
different direction. 
A shear force exerted in positive x-direction causes an 
increase in capacity C1 and a decrease of C3 and can be 
expressed by (4). 
 
C1/3= (1±
ΔAx 
A ) ∙Cz 
(4) 
A subtraction of these two capacitances leads to an 
expression that reduces the z-dependence and can serve as an 
indicator for the applied x-force. Similarly, an expression for 
the  
y-force can be derived from C2 and C4 that remain constant 
for any x-force. 
 
Cx=
(C1–C3)
2∙Cz
=
∆Ax
A           Cy=
(C2–C4)
2∙Cz
=
∆Ay
A  
(5) 
One capacitor consists of 31 fingers with a width of 60 µm 
and a length of 5950 µm, the connecting bridge has an area of 
1.22 µm2, the distance between the two electrodes is presumed 
at 40 µm and the dielectric constant of PDMS is taken as 2.5 
[7]. A theoretical modeling of our sensor is shown in Figure 4. 
For a normal force, an increase in all four capacitors is 
expected according to (5) since the dielectric spacer is then 
compressed. Figure 4(a) shows a slightly above-linear relation 
between the reduction of the distance between the parallel 
plates of the capacitor and the normalized change of 
capacitance. Figure 4(b) shows the four capacitance values for 
shear forces in x-direction. C1 and C3 change linearly in 
opposite directions with the displacement of the electrodes 
that lead to an increase and decrease in the overlapping area 
of the electrodes, respectively. The change of C2 and C4 is 
remaining zero as the overlapping area of these capacitors do 
not change. Similarly, for shear force in y-direction, C2 and C4 
are increasing and decreasing, respectively, whereas C1 and 
C3 remain constant. A clear separation of the three force 
directions seems to be possible. However, a change in the 
normal force affects the change of the shown shear-force 
behavior. 
Figure 5 highlights the influence of the normal 
displacement on the individual capacitor values. Previous 
work by Dobrzynka and Gijs [6] neglected this effect. 
However, already small normal forces that compress the 
dielectric layer by a few percent can lead to a large error, 
especially when measuring small shear forces. This work 
suggests calculating the Cx and Cy values according to (5) to 
reduce this effect. 
 
 
 
  
    
Figure 4. Theoretical model of the sensor’s response on a displacement due 
to (a) normal force (z-direction) and (b) shear force in x direction.  
a) 
b) 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 5. Calculated capacitance values for the individual capacitances for a 
shear load in x-direction at different constant z-forces. 
C. Print Characterization 
The silver ink printed on the PET film resulted in drops 
with a size of 60 µm, thus we chose a drop spacing of 30 µm 
to achieve a good line formation. Optical images of the printed 
electrodes in Figure 6 show a consistent pattern for two 
different finger widths of 60 µm and 210 µm. The printing of 
the very fine patterns proved to be too sensitive to nozzle 
failures that interrupt parts of the fingers. Furthermore, the 
alignment of the top and bottom electrodes turned out to be 
more difficult than initially assumed. So, we continued the 
work with the 210 µm fingers. The sensitivity is similar, but 
the total area of the sensor is increased. 
The profile measurement shown in Figure 7 was recorded 
perpendicular to the printing direction. We measured an 
average thickness of 412 nm. The green markers indicate drop 
rows where nozzle failure occurred and the thickness of the 
film is much lower. Since these gaps only appear locally, we 
expect them to have a small influence on the conductivity of 
the electrodes. However, the thickness of the silver layer 
greatly affects the conductivity of the electrodes. At this point, 
we were not aware of the fact that the conductivity could be a 
problem for the performance of the sensor. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Inkjet printed electrodes with different finger width of (a) 60 µm 
and (b) 210 µm. The silver can be seen bright while the substrate is dark. The 
individual droplets form small bulges on the edges. 
 
Figure 7. Profile of an inkjet-printed electrode. An average thickness of 412 
nm was measured within the red marked areas. The spikes marked by green 
arrows may lead to an interruption of the conductive path. 
 
Figure 8. Optical image of one quarter of the sensor including wiring. 
The fabricated sensor was then contacted at the 
rectangular contact-pads. Therefore, the overhanging PET foil 
was cut off and the contact-pads were uncovered. Figure 8 
depicts the contacted sensor. To plug the sensor to the LCR 
meter, two small wires were attached by conductive epoxy. 
D. Electro-Mechanical Characterization 
The results of the normal force sensing experiments are 
depicted in Figure 9. The data is collected from a 
characterization cycle, including three rising and declining 
force ramps. The blue lines represent the reference force 
signal and the orange lines represent the capacity signal. In 
Figure 9(b), the solid line represents a shear force in -y-
direction and the dashed lines a shear force in +y-direction. 
The sensor responses occur almost simultaneously with the 
application of a normal force. 
Due to the viscoelastic relaxation of the PDMS, the 
capacitance during unloading of the force is slightly higher 
than at loading. Furthermore, a permanent part is remaining 
that takes more time to vanish. This viscoelastic behavior 
ismore pronounced for shear forces, for which the capacitance 
signal shows a small delay to the force signal. Especially for 
the unloading, the capacity follows tens of seconds after the 
force signal. Again, a remaining part of the capacitance signal 
can be observed. 
The response of the capacitance to different forces is 
investigated in the following. For all the following plots, the 
solid lines represent the loading of the sensor and the dashed 
lines show the unloading response. To minimize errors in 
measurements and reduce noise, the 16 capacity values which 
were measured immediately before a change in applied force 
have been considered in the analysis. Figure 10 shows that the 
response of the sensor is linear to the normal force, and it can 
be seen that the hysteresis is small. The sensitivity is 
approximately 5.2 fF/N, which is very small. The reason lies 
at the large area of the sensor. The area where the PDMS was 
printed is approximately 2.5 x 2.5 cm² large, so the maximal  
 
   
 
Figure 9. (a) Shows the capacity response (red) to a normal force (blue) over 
time. In (b) the solid red line corresponds to the capacitance change due to a 
force in –x-direction and the dashed line to the +x-direction. 
2mm 
a) 
b) 
b) 
a) 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 10. Characteristic of the sensor to three increasing (R, solid) and 
decreasing (D, dashed) cycles of normal force. A linear behavior was found. 
The drift of the signal can be explained by viscoelastic behavior of the PDMS 
and is reversed after a longer resting time. 
pressure was only about 12.8 kPa. Thus, the sensitivity to 
pressure is about 3.25 fF/kPa. 
Figure 11 shows the shear force response of the sensor for 
the two opposite shear directions. The shear response shows a 
symmetry for the two opposite directions, since the area of the 
capacitor is equally reduced or increased for a certain force. 
The slope of both curves is linear over the whole force range. 
Thus, the sensor is very close to the theoretical model. Thus, 
it can be seen that a positive or negative force results in the 
same absolute change in capacity. We measured a large 
hysteresis that is most probably related to the mechanical 
properties of the PDMS spacer. Due to the design of the 
sensor, its response for shear forces is considerably better than 
for normal forces. The sensitivity lies between 12.3 fF/N and 
13.8 fF/N. Comparing our sensor to the sensitivity values of 
Dobrzynska and Gijs [4], we came very close to their results 
for the shear response while our sensor was three times less 
sensitive to normal forces (about 11 fF/kPa [4]). 
The capacity values of the sensors are considerably lower 
than the theoretical values. From the profilometer 
measurement, we know that the thickness of the PDMS layer 
is about 40 µm and the area of the electrodes is about 
44.4 mm2. The theoretical capacity value for 50 % overlap is 
12.3 pF. Our measured capacitance value was 6.82 pF and 
only half of the theoretical value. This capacitance would 
correspond to a distance of 96.8 µm. When checking the 
overlap of our sensor, we found that the overlap in resting state 
of about two thirds (67 %) was slightly higher than the desired 
value. This should lead to an even higher capacitance value of 
16.5 pF. This significant deviation of the capacitance value 
originates most probably from some trapped air between the 
top electrode and the stencil-printed PDMS layer. Such 
trapped air bubbles are colored in red in Figure 12 and 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Characteristic of the sensor to three increasing (R) and decreasing 
(D) cycles of shear force in (a) +x direction and (b) –x direction. After the 
first force application, a linear behavior with a large hysteresis was found. 
The drift of the signal can be explained by viscoelastic behavior of the PDMS 
and is reversed after a longer resting time. 
TABLE I: COMPARISON OF THE THEORETICAL AND MEASURED CAPACITY 
VALUES, THE THICKNESS OF THE DIELECTRIC SPACER D0 AND THE 
DEFLECTION ΔD. BOLD VALUES ARE CALCULATED FROM THE OTHER 
COLUMNS. 
 
C0 (pF) 
Overlap 
𝜀𝑟 
d0 (µm) 
Δd (nm) 
Ideal 50 % 
12.3 
50 % 
2.5 
40.0 
146 
Ideal 67 % 
16.5 
67 % 
2.5 
40.0 
109 
Sensor 
6.82 
67 % 
2.5 
96.8 
635 
S. (25 % air) 
6.82 
67 % 
1.8 
69.7 
457 
 
increase the average distance, but do not explain a factor of 
2.5. Additionally, the lower relative permittivity of air 
(compared to PDMS) decreases the overall capacity. The 
trapped air acts like a second capacity connected in series. The 
capacity as a function of the fraction of air χ = d2/d and d = d1 
+ d2 is: 
 
C=
ε0εrA
d(1–χ+εrχ) 
(6) 
Here, d is the total distance of the electrodes, d1 denotes 
the thickness of the PDMS layer and d2 is the thickness of the 
air gap. For example, if the spacer contains 25 % air and 75 % 
PDMS the capacity is reduced to 72.8 % of its ideal value 
(χ = 0, no trapped air). The combination of the higher distance 
due to trapped air and a lower effective permittivity leads to a 
reasonable relation of capacitance and distance. 
The change in capacitance is originated by a displacement 
Δd of the top electrode with respect to the bottom electrode. 
Using the distances in Table I, we calculated the change in 
distance for each of the four possibilities that results in the 
measured change in capacitance of about 45 fF. The range of 
the calculated distance changes of less than a micrometer is 
reasonable since PDMS has a Poisson’s ratio of almost 0.5. 
Therefore, the PDMS is only little compressible as the lateral 
expansion is limited. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this work, a fully flexible, capacitive force sensor for 
two-axial force measurements has been developed by 
acquiring printed electronic technologies on a polymeric film. 
We successfully fabricated structured silver-based electrodes 
on PET foil by inkjet printing. We achieved a resolution with 
lines below 60 µm and an average thickness of about 500 nm. 
For a conducting layer, the inkjet-printed samples required an 
additional post-production treatment. With photonic sintering, 
an ultra-fast, selective, and cheap method was used to  
 
 
 
Figure 12. (a) Overlapping area of the electrodes colored in red onto an 
optical microscope picture and (b) trapped air in the PDMS layer colored in 
red as well for better visibility.  
b) 
a) 
400 µm 
400 µm 
b) 
a) 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
functionalize the thin-films. PDMS, which was chosen for its 
good processability and elastic properties, was found 
unsuitable for direct inkjet printing. Oxygen plasma treatment 
could be an effective way to overcome the hydrophobic 
surface properties of PDMS. But further research is required 
here. The most challenging task was to fabricate the stacked 
structure of a printed bottom electrode, a dielectric spacer, and 
a printed top electrode. The method of gluing the two printed 
sheets together to solve the problem was the best available. 
The main objective of this report to fabricate a printed normal 
and shear force sensor was achieved. By integrating this 
sensor into a 2-by-2 arrangement of four sensors, 
simultaneous normal and shear forces (three-axial) can be 
measured. Due to trapped air in the dielectric spacer, the 
experimental capacitive values were distinctly lower than the 
theoretical predictions. 
The shear force response was characterized using a self-
made setup, which was developed to minimize parasitic 
normal forces when exerting shear forces. The sensor exhibits 
a linear response to exerted shear and normal forces, operating 
in a range of 100 - 8000 mN. Under shear load operation the 
sensor shows hysteresis effects which can be ascribed to the 
mechanical properties of the PDMS layer. Through the design 
of the sensor, the sensitivity for shear forces was about twice 
that for normal forces. We calculated a shear force sensitivity 
of around Sx = 13.1 fF/N and a normal force sensitivity of 
Sz = 5.2 fF/N. All of the materials and methods used here are 
low-cost and cause a very small amount of chemical waste, 
especially when compared to conventional semiconductor 
processes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft 
(DFG) 
within 
the 
German 
Excellence Initiative through the cluster of excellence 
“Nanosystems Initiative Munich” (NIM) and the TUM 
Graduate School. The authors want to thank Prof. Cheng of 
the Technical University of Munich (TUM) for the use of their 
lab to produce the inkjet-printed patterns used in this work. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E.-S. Hwang, J. Seo, and Y.-J. Kim, “A Polymer-Based Flexible 
Tactile Sensor for Both Normal and Shear Load Detections and 
Its Application for Robotics,” J. Microelectromechanical Syst., 
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 556–563, Jun. 2007. 
[2] R. S. Dahiya, G. Metta, M. Valle, and G. Sandini, “Tactile 
sensing-from humans to humanoids,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 
26, no. 1, pp. 1–20, 2010. 
[3] A. Albrecht, A. Rivadeneyra Torres, J. F. Salmerón, A. 
Abdellah, and P. Lugli, “Inkjet Printing and Photonic Sintering 
of Silver and Copper Oxide Nanoparticles for Ultra-Low-Cost 
Conductive Patterns,” J. Mater. Chem. C, Mar. 2016. 
[4] T. A. T. A. Chase and R. C. R. C. Luo, “A thin-film flexible 
capacitive tactile normal/shear force array sensor,” in 
Proceedings of IECON ’95 - 21st Annual Conference on IEEE 
Industrial Electronics, 1995, vol. 2, pp. 1196–1201. 
[5] S. Khan, L. Lorenzelli, and R. S. Dahiya, “Screen printed 
flexible pressure sensors skin,” ASMC (Advanced Semicond. 
Manuf. Conf. Proc., pp. 219–224, 2014. 
[6] J. A. Dobrzynska and M. A. M. Gijs, “Polymer-based flexible 
capacitive sensor for three-axial force measurements,” J. 
Micromechanics Microengineering, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 15009, 
Jan. 2013. 
[7] J. E. Mark, Polymer data handbook. Oxford University Press, 
2009. 
 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

