Research on the Performance of Solid-State pH Sensor 
Affected by the Sensing Materials 
Lan Zhang, Jian Lu, Ryutaro Maeda 
Research Center for Ubiquitous MEMS and Micro 
Engineering (UMEMSME) 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) 
Tsukuba, Japan  
email: chou-ran@aist.go.jp,  
email:jian-lu@aist.go.jp 
email:maeda-ryutaro@aist.go.jp 
 
 
Hirofumi Nogami 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Kyushu University 
Fukuoka, Japan 
email: nogami.hirofumi.406@m.kyushu-u.ac.jp
 
Abstract— We developed a solid pH sensor, which can 
implement a real-time monitoring of pH value with low power 
consumption and high accuracy. In this work, three kinds of 
different metal oxide materials are used to fabricate the 
sensing electrode layers. Mechanical and functional properties 
comparisons are of material coatings on the sensor electrodes 
are comprehensively evaluated. As the results show, the given 
pH sensor based on SnO2 can keep a linear output 
proportional to the changes in the pH value and has a higher 
sensitivity of >530 µV/pH.  
Keywords- pH value test; solid state; MEMS process; Metal 
Oxide 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  AND ELECTRODE FABRICATION 
Measurements of pH are important in many fields, such 
as chemical engineering, medicine, environmental science, 
agriculture, and many other applications. Recently, Micro-
electromechanical 
systems 
(MEMS) 
technology 
has 
undergone many advances, such as super compact size, high 
sensitivity and high uniformity of working functions. As part 
of the MEMS researchers, we would like to contribute to the 
industrial revolution and improve the pH measurement 
technology.  
Recently, a solid-type pH sensor has been developed for 
real-time pH measurement. The given solid pH sensor offers 
the advantages of field effect transistor and metal oxide 
sensing techniques. The sensor system can be fabricated in a 
compact size by eliminating the reference solution. The 
solid-state sensor structure is fit for long-term pH 
measurement, and the separate sensing electrode can be 
patterned with a suitable capture structure for various test 
environments. In previous research works, the given indium 
tin oxide (ITO)-based solid-type pH sensor was used to test 
the pH value of Japanese cows’ stomach for monitoring the 
health condition of them. The ITO-sensor can keep a good 
linear output in the testing range from pH 4.5-8.0. The given 
sensor can test the pH value in cows’ stomach well [1].   
However, for realizing a trillion-sensor society, i.e., 
arbitrary distributing of the sensor node in diverse testing 
environment, the solid-state pH sensor needs a larger 
working range, higher sensitivity and longer durability. Thus, 
in this work, different sensing materials are used to fabricate 
the sensor electrode. Mechanical and functional properties 
comparisons are of material coatings on the electrodes are 
comprehensively evaluated.  
Figure 1 shows the schematic view of our proposed pH 
sensor measurement system with potential application fields. 
MEMS fabrication technology was used in this work to 
realize the sensing electrode with high dimensional and 
performance homogeneity. The given typical pH sensor 
prototype combines the functional components of sensor 
electrodes, measurement units and transmission boards. A 
metal-oxide-sensing electrode connects the gate terminal of a 
MOSFET, the specific FET was loaded on the testing board 
was used to measure the pH value of target solutions. 
Transmission board has a CPU, a wireless module and a chip 
thermometer unit to coding and transmitting the tested date, 
recording the environment temperature for calibration, 
respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic view of our proposed pH sensor 
measurement system with potential application fields. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The fabrication procedure of the pH sensor electrodes has 
been introduced comprehensively in our previous works [2]. 
By the MEMS technique, 47 die chip sensor electrodes can 
be fabricated on a 4-inch silicon wafer. The flat area of every 
single electrode can be controlled at <120 mm2.  The die chip 
of sensor electrodes was fabricated with a compact size can 
induce the packaged sensor system enjoying a high flexible 
application potential in feature works.  
II. 
PRELIMINARY MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
A. Mechanical properties comparisons are of sensing 
materials coatings 
Figure 2 shows the measured surface roughness of 
different sensing materials with arithmetical average value 
(Ra). The insets are AFM scanning images on the sensing 
electrode local area. The AFM images showed the surface 
topographies of fabricated Ta2O5, SnO2 and ITO with the 
arithmetical average roughness value of 2.5 nm, 1.2 nm and 
1.1 nm, respectively. As the AFM image shows, the sensing 
films on the electrode retained a smooth surface with less 
morphological defects after the MEMS etching processes. 
The sensing electrode enjoys uniform surface and is very 
suitable for use in the development of an electronic device, 
because, in some cases, the sensing film has a rough grain 
surface, which can completely obscure the material intrinsic 
charge transport properties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I. THE COMPARISON OF SENSING MATERIALS 
 
Ta2O5 
SnO2 
ITO 
Fabrication 
Etching 
Etching  
Lift-off  
or etching 
pH range 
2-11 
3-10 
4-9 
Surface 
homogeneity 
2.527 
nm (Ra) 
1.229 
nm (Ra) 
1.141 
nm (Ra) 
Drift 
>pH0.1 
pH0.05 
±pH0.1 
 
 
B. Functional  properties comparison of sensing metrials 
coatings 
Figure 3 shows the output voltage of pH sensor with 
different sensing martials versus the measured pH values. As 
the results show, the ITO-based and Ta2O5-based pH sensors 
have the sensitivities of 340 µV/pH and 290 µV/pH, 
respectively. The given pH sensor based on SnO2 can keep a 
linear output proportional to the changes in the pH value and 
has a higher sensitivity of 530 µV/pH. Table 1 shows the 
comparison between the sensing materials. We can 
understand the merits and demerits of given materials, 
reasonably. More detailed results and discussion will be 
presented at the conference.  
III. 
DISCUSSIION AND CONCLUSION 
We developed a solid-state pH sensor for real time pH 
monitoring. Different sensing materials are used to fabricated 
the sensor electrode. Mechanical and functional properties 
comparisons are of material coatings on the electrodes are 
comprehensively evaluated. The solid-state sensor can be 
packaged super compact size as a portable sensor device to 
test water, foods and fruits in our daily life. Moreover, in 
industrial field, many low-cost solid pH sensors can provide 
mass data of target solutions and water to help the company 
realizing an Internet of Things management system.  
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Zhang, J. Lu, H. Okada, H. Nogami, T. Itoh, and S. Arai, 
“Low-Power Highly Sensitive pH sensor with μ-dots 
protective structures for monitoring rumen in cows in real-
time,” IEEE Sens. J. vol. 17, pp. 7281 - 7289, 2017. 
[2] L. Zhang, J. Lu, H. Okada, H. Nogami, and T. Itoh, 
“Development of ITO- and FET-based cow rumen sensor for 
long-term pH value monitoring,” Symposium on Design, Test, 
Integration and Packaging of MEMS/MOEMS (DTIP), vol. 
2016, pp.92-96, May 2016. 
 
Figure 2. Measured arithmetical average surface roughness 
of different sensing materials. The insets are the AFM 
images of the sensing electrode local area.  
Figure 3. The output voltage of pH sensor with different 
sensing martials against the measured pH values.  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

