Design of Surface Acoustic Wave Motors With
Non-piezoelectric Stator Material
Richard G¨unther, Ren´e Richter and Jens Lienig
Institute of Electromechanical and Electronic Design
Dresden University of Technology
Dresden, Germany
Email: richard.guenther@tu-dresden.de, rene.richter@tu-dresden.de and jens@ieee.org
Abstract—Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW) motors are speciﬁc
piezoelectric motors that use traveling waves instead of the
stator’s natural vibration. Despite their promising potential
due to their high blocking forces, high positioning accuracy
and simple design, practical applications of these novel motors
are still missing. Hence, we present guidelines for designing
such an SAW motor. By focusing on a non-piezoelectric stator
material, a wide range of stator materials can potentially be used.
First, we introduce the structure of a Finite Element Method
(FEM) analysis, which allows for the application and design of
piezoelectric units. Furthermore, a numerical motor model is
described, which calculates characteristics of such a motor. The
focus is on expansions, considering the dynamic losses of the
motor, as well as roughness and ﬂatness of its contact surfaces.
Our ﬁndings allow the design and improvement of SAW motors
with non-piezoelectric stator material, thus contributing to their
ﬁrst practical application.
Index Terms—piezoelectric motor, ultrasonic motor, SAW mo-
tor, Rayleigh waves, PZT
I. INTRODUCTION
The availability of increasingly favorable and more compact
control technologies allows the use of actuators with complex
controls and the numerous use of small drives in general.
Thus, there is – aside from a more frequented use of electronic
commutated electromagnetic motors – a wide range of novel
piezoelectric motors presented in the literature [1]–[5]. A
special type of piezoelectric motor is the Surface Acoustic
Wave (SAW) motor, which uses traveling waves instead of
the stator’s natural vibration [6]. Due to the high operation
frequency it yields a very high power density and allows for
powerful miniaturized linear motors. The latter are used for
mirror adjusters in industrial sector or autofocus functionality
in consumer lenses. When the SAW travels over the stator’s
surface, each point of the surface oscillates elliptically. Ac-
cording to Fig. 1, this behavior allows for a relative motion
between the stator and the slider, which is pressed onto the
stator. Cylindrical projections on the slider‘s contact surface
increase the contact pressure to remove air between stator
and slider. The stator is made from LiNbO3. Hence, SAW
can easily be generated by Inter-Digital Transducers (IDT).
However, designers are restricted to a relatively expensive
brittle single crystal with this setup. In contrast, an SAW motor
with non-piezoelectric stator material allows for a wide range
of stator materials. Previously, we built an SAW motor with a
3 mm thick stator made from steel type 1.4016 and presented
SAW
Fig. 1. Functional principle of a SAW motor: SAW travels on stator (orange)
and causes a relative motion of the slider (yellow)
Movement direction of slider
External force
Fig. 2.
Basic construction of SAW motor with non-piezoelectric stator
material: Piezoelectric unit (orange block) generates SAW (orange arrow)
on non-piezoelectric substrate (grey); Pressed slider (yellow) moves towards
active piezoelectric unit
exemplary measurements of the motor characteristics in [7].
For SAW generation, normal polarized piezoelectric units with
a thickness of 200 µm are adhered onto the roughened non-
piezoelectric stator by epoxy resin as illustrated in Fig. 2.
These units are made from the material Sonox® P53 and
are excited by IDTs with 30 ﬁnger pairs and a doubled
ﬁnger spacing of λf = 800 µm. The silicon slider has 16 560
projections with a diameter of 22.5 µm and a similar setup
as the slider, described in [6]. The motor achieved a blocking
force of 0.19 N and an idling speed of 29 mm s−1 for a normal
frequency of 3.85 MHz and an applied voltage amplitude
of 50 V. Furthermore, we presented Finite Element Method
(FEM) models for the characterization of the piezoelectric
units [7]. A modiﬁed numerical motor model that calculates
motor characteristics starting from a given SAW based on [8]
was used for motor characterization.
Despite our aforementioned ﬁndings in [7], practical im-
plementations of these motors are still missing. Hence, the
contribution of this paper is to present veriﬁed guidelines
for designing such an SAW motor with non-piezoelectric
stator material. Section II explains necessary FEM models
and an improved numerical motor model in detail. Based
on this, Section III presents our derived guidelines, which
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Steel substrate
Resin
PZT
Ground electrode (not visible)
Finger electrode
Fig. 3.
FEM model for modal analysis of SAW generating unit on steel
substrate
allow the design and implementation of advanced motors
and thus support future applications of this new actuator
principle. Finally, Section IV summarizes the importance of
the presented guidelines for future works.
II. NUMERICAL MODELS
A. Finite element models
Our two-dimensional FEM models consider the elasticity
matrix, piezoelectric constants, permittivity and density for the
piezoelectric material. The remaining materials are deﬁned by
Young‘s modulus, Poisson‘s ratio and density.
1) Modal analysis: According to Fig. 3, the ﬁrst model
takes into account only a section with the length of one ﬁnger
spacing λf/2. With the constraint of preventing translation
in the direction of propagation at boundary, it describes a
stator and piezoelectric unit with inﬁnite length. It can be
used for modal analyses to determine the approximate working
frequency f, which depends on the thickness of piezoelectric
unit. The element size is λf/18 × λf/18. It is important to
set the piezoelectric constants to zero, because at resonance
the power supply provides the displacement current for the
actuator.
2) Transient analysis: A second model describes the whole
piezoelectric unit, followed by a section with exposed stator
material and a section with strong damping at each side as
shown in Fig. 4. Thus, we can describe a realistic excitation
of the piezoelectric unit and study the traveling SAW. The
damped sections avoid a standing SAW due to reﬂections at
the edges. The element size is λf/25×λf/25 at the top surface
and increases to λf/25×λf/2.5 at the bottom due to a smaller
calculation time. The time step size is 1/40f.
For excitation of the piezoelectric unit, a sinusoidal voltage
with the amplitude ˆU is applied at the IDT. A displacement
due to the SAW can be observed. Furthermore, we can read
out the amplitude ˆq and phase φq of the electric charge q of
the piezoelectric unit. This allows us to determine the electric
impedance Z:
Z =
ˆU
2πf ˆq e−i(φq+ π
2 ).
(1)
If the dielectric loss tan δ is signiﬁcant, it can be considered
as follows:
Ztan δ = ℜ (Z) + tan δ |ℑ (Z)| + iℑ (Z) .
(2)
The impedance curves of the stator, presented in [7],
are shown in Fig. 5. The higher amounts of impedance at
resonances are noteworthy. The distinctive resonance of the
simulation model is based on the absence of tolerances. The
Section for damping
Section for damping
Substrate
Piezoelectric unit
Section for SAW analysis
Fig. 4. Basic structure of transient FEM model
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
−5
0
5
10
f [MHz]
ℜ (Z) [Ω], ℑ (Z) [Ω]
ℜ (Z) simulated
ℜ (Z) measured
ℑ (Z) simulated
ℑ (Z) measured
Fig. 5. Frequency dependent simulated and measured impedances for stator
made from non-piezoelectric material; Measurement uncertainty is displayed
transparently [7]
resonance frequencies are slightly shifted due to material and
manufacturing deviations. The simulated normal displacement
of stator’s surface is 5487 pm V−1 at a frequency of 3.63 MHz.
This displacement is 17 times higher than the according
measurement, with (314 ± 76) pm V−1 at a frequency of
3.80 MHz [7]. The large difference can be explained by
the smaller real part of the impedance for resonance with
ℜ (Z (3.63 MHz)) = 45.0 mΩ, according to Fig. 5, compared
to the measured resistance of ℜ (Z (3.80 MHz)) = 3.17 Ω.
Consequently, there is a smaller difference between simulated
and measured SAW power. While the simulated efﬁciency is
30 %, the measurement shows an efﬁciency of (16.9 ± 9.7) %.
For calculation of efﬁciencies, the SAW power can be derived
from displacement equations of Rayleigh waves [9] and by the
deﬁnition of electric power:
Pel = 0.5ℜ (Sel) = 0.5ℜ
u2
Z

= 0.5ℜ
 ˆU 2
2Z
!
.
(3)
Here, Sel and u are the complex electric power and voltage,
respectively. The factor 0.5 results from the fact that two SAW
were generated by the piezoelectric unit.
B. Numerical motor model
Our numerical motor model is based on an existing model
presented in [8], which considers the contact between one
projection and the stator. This contact is described by normal
and tangential stiffnesses of the slider Ksl n and Ksl t and
the stator Kst n and Kst t, respectively, as shown in Fig. 6.
The stator‘s normal and tangential displacements dst n (t) and
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Ksl n
Ksl t
Kst n
Kst t
dsl n
dsl t (t)
dst n (t)
dst t (t)
Fc t (t)
Fc n (t)
Fc t (t)
Fc n (t)
Fig. 6.
Contact mechanics at one projection, used for the numeric motor
model
dst t (t), respectively, are given by the SAW. Furthermore,
we can deﬁne a normal offset dsl n of the slider. We can
observe a phase with contact and a phase without contact
within one period. When there is contact, the tangential force
Fc t (t) cannot exceed the normal force Fc n (t) multiplied with
the friction coefﬁcient. If the tangential force is smaller, we
notice sticking. If it is bigger, the force is limited and we
notice slipping. The average force over one period equals
the feed force of the considered projection. Deﬁning a time
dependent tangential slider displacement dsl t (t), we can con-
sider different points of the motor characteristic. Considering
all projections in a line orthogonal to the direction of SAW
propagation, we can multiply the feed force by the number of
projections in a line. Furthermore, it is possible to determine
the friction power of the projection line and substract it
from the initial SAW power. The equations for Rayleigh
waves [9] allow for determining the new SAW amplitude
at the next projection line. This procedure is repeated until
all projections of the slider have been considered. Thus, the
motor model is able to calculate velocity-force-diagrams. The
input parameters are the density and elastic behavior of the
contact materials, the normal force, the friction coefﬁcient, the
geometry and number of projections, and the frequency and
amplitude of SAW. The model shows a positive inﬂuence of a
high number of projections on the motor characteristic while
maintaining the overall contact surface [14]. Furthermore, high
friction coefﬁcients and Young’s moduli improve the motor’s
behavior.
This initial model uses an effective factor of 0.6. This
means, in one direction only 60 % of the projections will
contact the stator. Considering both directions, only 36 % of
all projections will be used. A logical explanation for that
factor would be the roughness and ﬂatness of stator and slider.
However, in this case the factor should be dependent on
the pressing force. As roughness and ﬂatness are important
parameters for motors with a polycrystalline stator, the motor
model was expanded by a realistic deﬁnition of the effective
factor in [7]. If the slider is placed over the stator without con-
tacting it, we could determine a distance for each projection
towards the stator. Shifting the slider towards the stator, we
observe a contact force when the ﬁrst projection is contacted.
Progressively more projections get in contact and their contact
forces will be added up. For a large amount of projections and
normal distributed projection distances, the total contact force
can be described as follows:
FN = nprKov n
Z dsl n
−∞
N (dn, Ra) ddn
(4)
where npr is the number of all slider’s projections and Kov n
is the combined normal stiffness of slider and stator for one
projection. The value N (dn, Ra) is the cumulative distribution
function of the distances, dn the current displacement of the
slider, Ra the average roughness value and dsl n the slider
displacement for the sought contact force. Therefore, the motor
model integrates iteratively until the sought force is reached.
Then the roughness dependent effective factor is given by:
ηro =
p
N (dsl n, Ra).
(5)
Often the ﬂatness can be described by a spherical shape, where
the corresponding distances are not normally distributed. In
this case, we can determine the amount of contacted projec-
tions by Hertzian contact theory. For a given sphere radius
Rsp, the contact radius Rc can be calculated as follows [10]:
Rc =
3
r
3FNRsp
4D⋆
,
(6)
with
1
D⋆ = 1 − ν2
st
Dst
+ 1 − ν2
sl
Dsl
.
Here, Dsl and Dst are the Young’s moduli of the slider and the
stator, respectively, and νsl and νst are the Poisson’s ratios of
the slider and the stator, respectively. Using this contact radius,
the ﬂatness effective factor can be determined as follows:
ηfl =
s
πR2c
b2
sl
=
√π
bsl
3
r
3FNRsp
4D⋆
(7)
where bsl is the edge length of the quadratic slider. Finally,
the overall effective factor is given by:
η = ηro · ηfl.
(8)
Fig. 7 shows calculated motor characteristics for several
spherical elevations and roughnesses for the mentioned SAW
motor with non-piezoelectric stator material, a normal SAW
amplitude of 3 nm at the surface, and an overall contact force
of 4 N. We can see that the ﬂatness of 33 nm for the slider
length of 4 mm, which is feasible by lapping, is uncritical.
However, we observe that the attainable roughness of 4.4 nm
on the used steel downgrades the motor characteristic.
In addition, we expand the existing motor model by con-
sidering dynamic losses. Discrete Fourier transform allows to
calculate the power of a bandlimited signal [11]. Thus, the
periodic contact force curves can be decompositioned into
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

0
10
20
30
40
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
v

mm s−1
F [N]
F (p = 1000 nm, Ra = 0 nm)
F (p = 0 nm, Ra = 10 nm)
F (p = 200 nm, Ra = 0 nm)
F (p = 0 nm, Ra = 2 nm)
F (p = 20 nm, Ra = 0 nm)
F (p = 0 nm, Ra = 0.5 nm)
F (p = 0 nm, Ra = 0 nm)
Fig. 7. Motor characteristics by motor model depending on varying spherical
elevations p and average roughness values Ra; Motor as described in [7] with
a normal SAW amplitude of 3 nm at the surface and an overall contact force
of 4 N
harmonic forces Ff by discrete Fourier transform of O-th
order [12]:
Ff =g0 +
O
X
j=1
(gj cos 2πfjt + oj sin 2πfjt) ,
with gj =
2 sin πj
np
πj
np−1
X
m=0

Fm cos 2πjm
np

and oj =
2 sin πj
np
πj
np−1
X
m=0

Fm sin 2πjm
np

(9)
where gj and oj are the j-th Fourier coefﬁcients for even and
odd functions, respectively. The value Fm is the force at the
discrete point m and np is the number of discrete points for
one period. For normal and tangential harmonic excitations
of circular regions on an elastic half space the mechanical
impedances ZM n and ZM t, respectively, can be described as
follows [13]:
ZM n =
4µRp
2πf (1 − ν)

0
5
10
15
20
25
1
1.2
1.4
x [mm]
SWR
0
200
400
d′
st n s

pm V−1
SWR
d′
st n s
Fig. 10. Measured standing wave ratio (SWR) and relative amplitude d′
st, n s
of normal displacement of substrate surface along SAW traveling direction
for SAW motor with non-piezoelectric stator material; SWR was sectionally
determined by method of least squares
1 Determination of target
values
• Motor characteristics
• Motor dimensions
2 Dimensioning
• Dimensioning by
motor model
– Operating
frequency
– SAW
amplitude and
contact force
– Geometry and
distance of
projections
• PZT thickness
determined by
modal analysis
• Dimensioning
stator by transient
FEM model
– Correction of
PZT thickness
and
wavelength
– Fitting number
of ﬁngers
3 Manufacture
• Slider
• Stator
– Steel plate
– Piezoelectric unit
– Adhesive bonding
– Polarizing
– Applying dampers
• Matching
4 Checking motor
characteristic
• Test setup
• Control
• Measurement
Fig. 11. Proposed procedure for designing SAW motors with steel stator
III. GUIDELINES FOR DESIGNING
This section presents the working steps to design and
manufacture an SAW motor with non-piezoelectric stator
material based on speciﬁed characteristics. These guidelines
are the result of experiences we gathered by developing,
manufacturing and testing the SAW motor. They are limited
to motors with a PZT unit adhered on metallic substrate and a
slider made from silicon. Refeeding of remaining SAW power
is not considered. Our presented procedure is also visualized
in Fig. 11.
1 Determination of target values
• Motor characteristics: Deﬁne blocking force and idling
speed.
• Motor dimensions: The width of the motor is propor-
tional to motor power by constant SAW amplitude. The
length of the motor results from travel range and the
dimensions of piezoelectric units and dampers.
2 Dimensioning
• Dimensioning by motor model:
– Operating frequency: Higher operating frequencies
result in higher idling speeds and lower blocking
forces.
– SAW amplitude and contact force: Here an opti-
mization process is needed. The main target is to
reach speciﬁed motor characteristic. The secondary
target is to minimize the SAW amplitude for a
higher efﬁciency.
– Geometry and distance of projections: Projection
diameters of about 20 µm and projection spacings
of about 40 µm have been found as ideal structuring
geometry in [16]. In addition, the efﬁciency of ex-
traordinary motor characteristics can be optimized
by varying that geometry.
• PZT thickness determined by modal analysis: Specify
ﬁnger spacing by operating frequency and SAW speed.
Vary thickness of PZT to reach targeted frequency for
the ﬁrst symmetric Sezawa mode.
• Dimensioning stator by transient FEM model:
– Correction of PZT thickness and ﬁnger spacing:
Vary parameters within an optimization to maxi-
mize the SAW displacement per voltage and the
efﬁciency.
– Fitting number of ﬁngers: Vary this parameter to
reach the relative SAW displacement, while re-
specting dielectric strength, tensile strengths and
depolarization. As we observed a much higher
relative SAW amplitude in simulation related to
measurements, we recommend a safety of 30 for
depolarization.
3 Manufacture
• Slider: Thin-layer technology is to be used without any
special features.
• Stator:
– Metal plate: Thickness must be more than triple
wavelength. Lap and polish the stress-relieved
plate. Roughen the bonding surface.
– Piezoelectric unit: Saw out the PZT plate. Sputter a
ground electrode on one side. Apply IDT by thick
ﬁlm technology on the other side. Both electrodes
are made from gold.
– Adhesive bonding: Ensure an electric contact be-
tween ground electrode and metal plate for later
polarization. Furthermore, a mechanical wide-area
contact with thin adhesive layer thickness is needed
for a good transmission.
– Polarizing:
For
normal
polarization
with
2 MV m−1,
conductive
silver
lacquer
must
be applied on the top surface and removed
afterwards. Correct application and removing can
be checked by resistance measurements.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

– Applying dampers: Apply viscoelastic material be-
hind the piezoelectric units over a distance of ten
wavelengths.
• Matching: Build up an impedance matching consider-
ing the measured stator impedance at operation fre-
quency.
4 Checking motor characteristic
• Test setup: Connect stator with impedance matching,
ampliﬁer and waveform generator. Stator voltage can
be checked directly by oscilloscope. Clean contact sur-
faces. Attach slider and magnets with iron counterplate
carefully onto the stator.
• Control: Depending on input power drive the motor
only in burst mode with sinusoidal excitation.
• Measurement: Measure idling speed by laser triangu-
lation sensor and blocking force by force measuring
device with force transducer crossing the travel path.
IV. CONCLUSION
We have presented detailed guidelines for designing a novel
type of SAW motor with non-piezoelectric stator material. Re-
quired numeric models are extensively described and discussed
as well. With this, we enable manufacturing and further inves-
tigations into this motor type to improve its characteristics. We
are optimistic that these improvements lead to compact linear
motors with a high positioning accuracy, high power density
and, moreover, an inexpensive manufacturing. The presented
models and resulting veriﬁed guidelines should contribute to
a market launch of SAW motors that will support the growing
demand for compact linear actuators.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Hagen Schmidt and Robert
Weser of the Leibnitz Institute for Solid State and Materials
Research in Dresden for the recurring friendly support with
measurement equipment and professional advices. We also
thank Sylvia Gebhardt and Susanne Tilke of the Fraunhofer
Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Systems IKTS for the
manufacture and mounting of piezoelectric units.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Zhang, W. Chen J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Bidirectional linear ultrasonic
motor using longitudinal vibrating transducers” IEEE Transactions on
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, IEEE, vol. 52.1, pp.
134–138, 2005. DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2005.1397358.
[2] K. Spanner, O. Vyshnevskyy, and W. Wischnewskiy, “New linear
ultrasonic micromotor for precision mechatronic systems” Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on New Actuators (Actuator 2006),
pp. 439–443, 2006.
[3] Y. Shi and C. Zhao, “A new standing-wave-type linear ultrasonic motor
based on in-plane modes” Ultrasonics, Elsevier, vol. 51.4, pp. 397–404,
2011.
[4] Z.
Wan
and
H.
Hu,
“Modeling
and
experimental
analysis
of
the linear ultrasonic motor with in-plane bending and longitudinal
mode”, Ultrasonics, Elsevier, vol. 54.3, pp. 921–928, 2014. DOI:
10.1016/j.ultras.2013.11.004.
[5] M. Guo, S. Pan, J. Hu, C. Zhao, and S. Dong, “A small lin-
ear ultrasonic motor utilizing longitudinal and bending modes of a
piezoelectric tube”, IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,
and Frequency Control, IEEE, vol. 61.4, pp. 705–709, 2014. DOI:
10.1109/TUFFC.2014.2958.
[6] T. Shigematsu, M. K. Kurosawa, and K. Asai, “Nanometer stepping
drives of surface acoustic wave motor”, IEEE Transactions on Ultrason-
ics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, IEEE, vol. 50.4, pp. 376–385,
2003. DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2003.1197960.
[7] R. G¨unther, R. Richter, and J. Lienig, “Contributions to the develop-
ment of an axisymmetric SAW motor with a stator made from non-
piezoelectric material”, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, Elsevier, vol.
295, pp. 274–287, 2019. DOI: 10.1016/j.sna.2019.04.024.
[8] T. Shigematsu and M. K. Kurosawa, “Friction drive modeling of SAW
motor using classical theory of contact mechanics”, Proc. of 10th Conf.
on New Actuators, pp. 444–448, 2006.
[9] I. A. Viktorov, “Rayleigh and Lamb Waves: Physical Theory and
Applications: Translated from Russian”, Plenum press, 1967.
[10] K. L. Johnson, “Normal contact of elastic solids – hertz theory”, Contact
Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, Ch. 4, pp. 84–106, 1985.
[11] J. L. Brown, “Sampling bandlimited periodic signals–an application of
the DFT”, IEEE Transactions on Education, IEEE, vol. 23.4, pp. 205–
206, 1980. DOI: 10.1109/TE.1980.4321415.
[12] G. Merziger, G. M¨uhlbach, D. Wille, and T. Wirth, “Folgen, Reihen [Se-
quences, Series]”, Formeln + Hilfen zur h¨oheren Mathematik [Formulas
+ Helps for higher mathematics], Binomi, Edition 3, p. 76, 1999.
[13] G. M. L. Gladwell, “The calculation of mechanical impedances relating
to an indenter vibrating on the surface of a semi-inﬁnite elastic body”,
Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 8.2, pp. 215–228, 1968. DOI:
10.1016/0022-460X(68)90228-9.
[14] M. K. Kurosawa and T. Shigematsu, “Friction drive simulation of a
SAW motor with slider surface texture variation”, Advances in Science
and Technology, Trans Tech Publ., vol. 54, pp. 366–371, 2008. DOI:
10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/AST.54.366.
[15] A. Fattah-Alhosseini and S. Vafaeian, “Comparison of electrochemical
behavior between coarse-grained and ﬁne-grained AISI 430 ferritic
stainless steel by Mott-Schottky analysis and EIS measurements”,
Journal of Alloys and Compounds 639, pp. 301–307, 2015. DOI:
10.1016/j.jallcom.2015.03.142.
[16] M. K. Kurosawa, H. Itoh, K. Asai, M. Takasaki, and T. Higuchi,
“Optimization of slider contact face geometry for surface acoustic wave
motor”, The 14th IEEE International Conference on MEMS, pp. 252–
255, 2001. DOI: 10.1109/MEMSYS.2001.906526.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

