 
 
Study on Effective Coverage of Low-Cost LoRa Devices 
 
 
Laura García, Sandra Sendra, Jose M. Jimenez, Jaime 
Lloret 
Integrated Management Coastal Research Institute 
Universitat Politècnica de València 
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: laugarg2@teleco.upv.es, sansenco@upv.es,  
jojiher@dcom.upv.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
Pascal Lorenz 
Network and Telecommunication Research Group 
University of Haute Alsace 
Colmar, France 
e-mail: lorenz@ieee.org
 
 
Abstract—The use of LoRa has extended to varied applications, 
such as precision agriculture, oceanography, or Smart Cities. 
The advertised long-range coverage is one of the main claims 
of this wireless technology. However, the effective coverage of 
the more affordable Long-Range (LoRa) devices may not 
provide the connectivity that is expected. Therefore, it is 
necessary to know the effective coverage of the LoRa devices 
available in the market in order to design a LoRa network. In 
this paper, a coverage test of LoRa with low-cost electronic 
devices is performed. The tests measured the Received Signal 
Strength Indicator (RSSI) and were performed with the 433 
MHz and 868 MHz frequency bands, antennas with gains of 3 
dBi 
and 
5dBi, 
and 
all 
the 
Spreading 
Factor 
(SF) 
configurations. The results show that bad signal quality is 
received at distances of 1 km approximately and thus, the use 
of low-cost devices for larger distances is not advised. 
Keywords- LoRa; Coverage; RSSI; Spreading Factor; Gain. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The introduction of wireless communications in varied 
scenarios, such as agriculture, oceanography, and the rise of 
Smart City solutions have led to the development of long-
range wireless technologies, such as LoRa. LoRa is the 
specification of the physical layer and determines the 
modulation of this technology. One of the key aspects of the 
LoRa modulation is the Spreading Factor (SF), which 
indicates that the signal encompasses a bigger range of 
frequencies [1]. The main LoRa frequencies are 433 MHz, 
868 MHz, and 915 MHz, which should be utilized according 
to the regulations of the location where the LoRa devices are 
deployed. On the other hand, the Medium Access Control 
(MAC) is specified by the Low Power Wide Area Network 
(LoRaWAN) protocol [2]. The nodes communicate with the 
gateway by forming a star topology. There can be multiple 
gateways to receive the data. Furthermore, three different 
device classes with variations in the amount of idle and on 
time are contemplated. However, as different technological 
solutions have different needs, new protocols and 
architectures for LoRa wireless communications have been 
designed [3]. These type of solutions substitutes LoRaWAN 
with the proposed protocols. 
The use of LoRa has been contemplated for the detection 
of forest fires with systems that display the current data 
forwarded by the deployed nodes through a webpage [4]. 
The use of LoRa networks with multiple hops for Precision 
Agriculture (PA) is contemplated as well [3]. Monitoring 
infrastructures, such as a medieval aqueduct is also possible 
with multi-hop LoRa networks [5].  Furthermore, deploying 
LoRa sensing buoys [6] allows monitoring the state of the 
seas and transmitting the data to devices located at far 
distances, such as on-land stations. In order to design a 
deployment strategy for the aforementioned scenarios, 
aspects, such as coverage or energy consumption must be 
considered. However, the advertised transmission distances 
and energy consumption may not be the effective values 
reached by LoRa devices. 
The official site of The Things Network advertises record 
LoRaWAN distances of 832 km [7]. Although this distance 
is obtained for specific LoRa settings, the advertised LoRa 
maximum distance is up to 15 km in line-of-sight 
deployments and up to 5 km in urban environments [1]. A 
few studies have been performed to determine the coverage 
of LoRa devices in different environments, such as urban 
areas with varied densities [8-10]. Some of them obtained 
results of 10 km for line-of-sight [9] or 8 km with a high 
Packet Loss Ratio [10]. However, these studies either do not 
specify the height of the transmitter and receiver nodes, or 
the node is located at the top of a building. Therefore, more 
coverage tests with other deployment configurations should 
be studied. 
Another advertised aspect is its low cost. There are 
plenty of available devices in the low-cost price range. 
Furthermore, these devices are often coupled with low-cost 
antennas with low gains. Therefore, cost-effective solutions 
may obtain less coverage when utilizing LoRa. However, 
there are no studies available where low-cost devices are 
tested to determine the coverage that can be achieved with 
the use of this type of node. In this paper, the coverage of 
LoRa low-cost nodes considering different frequency bands, 
SF, and antennas. The Received Signal Strength Indicator 
(RSSI) was measured at different distances for each of the 
configurations. The tests were performed in a line-of-sight 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
deployment where the transmitter was static, and the receiver 
moved to different measuring points. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents the related work. The description of the testbed is 
performed in Section 3. The results are discussed in Section 
4. Lastly, the conclusion and future work are commented in 
Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Although more coverage studies of LoRa devices are 
necessary, there are some studies that have evaluated the 
performance of LoRa communications. Fabrizio J. Grión et 
al. performed in [8] a coverage study of LoRa networks in 
urban environments. Firstly, coverage tests were performed 
in cities with different densities of buildings so as to develop 
a model to determine the coverage of a certain area through 
simulations. The utilized frequency was 915 MHz with a 
gain of 6 dBi for the transmission antenna and 0 dBi for the 
reception antenna. Results show a good similarity between 
the tests perform in the city and the simulations. Madoune R. 
Seye et al. evaluated the coverage of LoRa performing tests 
utilizing the 868 MHz frequency band, a spreading factor of 
12, and a transmission power of 14 dBm [10]. The emitter 
was placed at the top of a building and the receiver moved to 
different zones in an 8 km radius. Furthermore, the results 
show a packet loss ratio of 13% for distances between 0 and 
2 km and up to 70% for distances between 6 and 8 km. 
Madoune R. Seye et al. also performed coverage tests in the 
Dakar peninsula to develop a path loss model for LoRa [11]. 
The tests were performed for the 868 MHz frequency band 
and a transmit power of 14 dBm. The results showed that the 
Dakar peninsula could be entirely on the area of coverage 
with a maximum acceptable RSSI of -120 dBm, which leads 
to a 40% Packet Error Rate. Moreover, if the maximum 
admissible RSSI is reduced to -110 dBm, the Packet Error 
Rate (PER) is reduced to 20% but the connectivity is not 
provided to the entire peninsula. Lastly, Jansen C. Liando et 
al. conducted varied tests to determine the performance of 
LoRa [9]. The results showed that LoRa was able to achieve 
a coverage of 10 km in line-of-sight deployments but is 
greatly affected by obstacles. Furthermore, the authors state 
that the reduced energy consumption is only achieved with 
certain parameter configurations. Lastly, the gateway was 
able to provide support to 6000 nodes with less than 70% of 
Packet Reception Ratio (PRR). 
LoRa 
has 
been 
compared 
with 
other 
wireless 
technologies as well. Mads Lauridsen et al. compared the 
coverage provided by different wireless technologies, such as 
LoRa, SigFox, General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), and 
NarrowBand-Internet of Things (NB-IoT) [12] through 
simulation experiments. The results show the best coverage 
results and Maximum Coupling Loss performance for NB-
IoT. However, LoRa and SigFox obtained link loss results 
with an average of 3dB lower values than that of NB-IoT. 
Lastly, outage probabilities lower than 5% were obtained for 
NB-IoT and SigFox. Benny Vejlgaard et al. performed a 
comparison between GPRS, SigFoz, LoRa, and NB-IoT in 
an area of 8000 km2 [13]. Both indoor and outdoor 
deployments were considered. For outdoor tests, all 
technologies obtained more than 99% of coverage. 
Furthermore, the results showed that NB-IoT was the only 
wireless technology that provided connectivity in indoor 
settings with a failure rate below 5%. SigFox obtained a 
failure rate of 12%, while LoRa and GPRS were not apt for 
indoor transmissions.  
The interference LoRa devices cause to each other in 
multi-hop network deployments was evaluated by Guibing 
Zhu et al. [14]. Both simulations and experiments with LoRa 
transceivers were performed. The results showed that the 
higher the SF, the higher the immunity to collisions for both 
transmissions with the same SF and transmissions with 
different SF. Furthermore, the authors proposed the use of 
SF-pipeline and concurrent transmission in multi-hop LoRa 
networks to allow faster packet transmissions. 
Lastly, other uses for LoRa include deploying the devices 
on drones or floating structures. Mario Marchese et al. 
presented a proposal for a LoRa Gateway on an Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) [15]. Different scenarios were 
considered, such as transmitting to a satellite through a UAV 
gateway and deploying the gateway on the base station. The 
868 MHz frequency band was considered, and Arduino 
nodes and a Raspberry Pi gateway were the selected 
electronic devices. Laboratory tests were performed to 
determine the RSSI for different densities. Furthermore, Liu 
Xia et al. presented in [6] the Oriented omnidirectional 
perceptual coverage algorithm (VFOPCA) to increase the 
coverage of LoRa sensor buoys. Simulations tests were 
performed to compare the performance of the proposed 
algorithm to the virtual force algorithm. The results showed a 
better performance of the proposed algorithm with lower 
energy consumption and higher convergence speed. 
Albeit there are some LoRa coverage tests, the available 
studies do not compare the results for different SF values, do 
not indicate the utilized devices, or use a very high 
placement of the emitter antenna. Therefore, there is a need 
for more studies to expand the knowledge on the effective 
coverage of LoRa devices. In this paper, we address this 
need by studying the signal quality of LoRa low-cost devices 
with different low-cost antennas. 
III. 
TESTBED DESCRIPTION 
In this section, the description of the utilized devices and 
performed tests is provided. 
The utilized devices were Heltec LoRa/WiFi 32 nodes 
[16] for both emitter and receiver (see Figure 1). These 
nodes include an Organic Light-Emitting Diode (OLED) 
display and 36 pins. 433 MHz and 868 MHz nodes were 
used to perform tests with both frequency bands. The 
characteristics of the node are presented in Table 1. 
Three different types of antennas were utilized. Two 
antennas for the 433 MHz frequency band were tested. The 
first antenna has a 3dBi gain and a Voltage Standing Wave 
Ratio (VSWR) below or equal to 1.5 (see Figure 2). Its 
working temperature range remains between -40 ºC and 85 
ºC. Lastly, it has an input impedance of 50 Ω and a 
maximum input power of 10 W. 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NODES. 
Tx Power 
17 dB 
Frequency 
433 MHz and 868 MHz 
SF 
7,8,9,10,11,12 
Signal Bandwidth 
125 KHz 
Coding rate 
4/5 
Preamble length 
8 Symbols 
Height of the antenna 
1.57 m 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Utilized Heltec devices. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  433 MHz antenna with a gain of 3dBi. 
The second 433 MHz antenna has a gain of 5 dBi (see 
Figure 3). It has a Sub-Miniature A (SMA) connector, a 
VSWR ≤ 1.5, an input impedance of 50 Ω, maximum power 
of 50 W, and a working temperature range between -40 ºC 
and 60ºC. 
 
 
Figure 3.  433 MHz antenna with a gain of 5dBi. 
Lastly, the antenna for the tests performed with the 868 
MHz frequency band is presented in Figure 4. It has a gain 
of 3 dBi, a VSWR ≤ 1.5, maximum power of 10 W, and an 
input impedance of 50 Ω. 
 
Figure 4.  868 MHz antenna. 
The tests were performed on a wide street with buildings 
on one side and fields on the other side (see Figure 5). The 
satellite image of the area where the measures were taken is 
provided in Figure 6, with the street highlighted in yellow. 
The emitter was placed at the beginning of the street and the 
receiver moved to different measuring points. 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
Figure 5.  Location of the tests. 
 
Figure 6.  Satellite image of the location of the tests. 
There were no obstructions between the emitter and 
receiver nodes. The RSSI was obtained for each of the 
measuring points. Moreover, the test was repeated for each 
of the antennas and each of the SF for the corresponding 
frequency band. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this section, the results from the performed tests are 
presented. 
The results for the 868 MHz frequency band with the 3 
dBi antenna are presented in Figure 7. As it can be seen, the 
RSSI values presented fluctuations for all the SF even in the 
absence of obstacles. The SF 7 was the one with the better 
signal at close distances. However, as the distance increased, 
other SF configurations presented better results. On the other 
hand, the SF 11 was the one with the overall worst RSSI 
values. The rest of the SF configurations have obtained 
similar RSSI values. Therefore, for this frequency band and 
this type of antenna, the selection of the SF does not seem to 
have a significant impact o the quality of the signal. So, other 
aspects should be considered for the selection of the best SF. 
 
 
Figure 7.  RSSI for 868 MHz and 3dBi antenna. 
The results for the 433 MHz frequency band and the 
3dBi antenna are shown in Figure 8. In this case, it is more 
evident that the SF 7 configuration leads to better signal 
quality. Although for the last measuring point, the RSSI 
values of SF 7 are similar to those of the rest of the SF 
configurations. The SF 10 is the second-best configuration, 
with the other SF configurations having lower signal quality. 
Moreover, SF 11 would be the SF with the worst RSSI 
values. As the difference between SF configurations is more 
evident for this antenna, the selection of the SF should be 
considered when designing a LoRa network with these 
devices. However, it would apply mostly for the SF 7 
configuration, as the other SF present fewer differences. 
 
  
Figure 8.  RSSI for 433 MHz and 3dBi antenna. 
Lastly, Figure 9 shows the RSSI values for the frequency 
band of 433 MHz and the antenna of 5 dBi. SF 7 and SF 10 
have the best signal quality. However, there is not a clear 
difference between SF configurations as in the case of Figure 
8. On the other hand, SF 11 and 12 present the worst signal 
quality, with little difference between both configurations. 
The rest of the SF configurations present similar results to 
those of SF7 ad SF 10. As in the case of the 868 MHz 
frequency band, there is no highly noticeable difference 
between the different SF values, therefore, other aspects 
should be considered when selecting the best configuration.  
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
Figure 9.  RSSI for 433 MHz and 5dBi antenna. 
Figure 10 presents the average values of all SF values for 
each frequency band and antenna in order to compare the 
three studied cases. As it can be seen, on average, the two 
antennas for the 433 MHz frequency band have similar 
results. However, the average shows better results for the 3 
dBi antenna due to the less noticeable difference between the 
results for each SF. Regarding the 868 MHz frequency band, 
the average of the RSSI values shows a lower image quality 
than that of transmitting with 433 MHz.  
 
 
Figure 10.  Average RSSI for each frequency band and antenna. 
Considering the results for all the cases, we can conclude 
that the use of low-cost LoRa devices and antennas cannot 
be advised for distance requirements larger than 1 km. In 
those cases, other solutions such as multi-hop LoRa 
protocols should be employed to transmit the data to the 
desired location. Furthermore, the difference in the gain of 
the antennas for the 433 MHz frequency band was not 
reflected in the obtained results. For the case of the 868 MHz 
frequency band, the difference in SF configurations barely 
affects the received quality of the signal. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As LoRa gains more interest, the deployment of LoRa 
devices in locations such as cities, fields, or sensor buoys. 
LoRa transmissions have reached record distances up to 832 
km. Moreover, although the expected distances range from 
10 to 40 km depending on the obstructions in the area, low-
cost LoRa devices do not reach those expectations. In this 
paper, we have performed coverage tests with cost-effective 
LoRa devices and antennas. The RSSI was measured for the 
frequency bands of 433 MHz and 868 MHz, all the SF 
configurations, and antennas with gains of 3 dBi and 5 dBi in 
line-of-sight conditions. The results show that the selection 
of different SF may not affect the quality of the received 
signal, such as for the 868 MHz frequency band. 
Furthermore, the combination of low-cost LoRa devices and 
low-cost antennas does not provide coverage greater than 1 
km. Therefore, other solutions, such as multi-hop LoRa 
networks should be implemented when there is an interest in 
deploying low-cost devices. 
For future work, we will perform tests with LoRa devices 
and antennas in the medium price range. Furthermore, tests 
will be performed with different types of content, such as 
data from sensors or images so as to assess the performance 
of LoRa and the devices with different traffic demands. 
Lastly, a multi-hop solution will be created to increase the 
distance achieved by LoRa networks. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially funded by the European 
Union through the ERANETMED (Euromediterranean 
Cooperation through ERANET joint activities and beyond) 
project ERANETMED3-227 SMARTWATIR, by the the 
“Programa Estatal de I+D+i Orientada a los Retos de la 
Sociedad, en el marco del Plan Estatal de Investigación 
Científica y Técnica y de Innovación 2017-2020” (Project 
code: PID2020-114467RR-C33) and by "proyectos de 
innovación de interés general por grupos operativos de la 
Asociación Europea para la Innovación en materia de 
productividad y sostenibilidad agrícolas (AEI-Agri)" in the 
framework "Programa Nacional de Desarrollo Rural 2014-
2020", GO TECNOGAR. This work has also been partially 
funded by the Universitat Politècnica de València through 
the post-doctoral PAID-10-20 program. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] What are LoRa and LoRaWAN?, LoRa Developer Portal. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://lora-
developers.semtech.com/library/tech-papers-and-guides/lora-
and-lorawan/ [Retrieved: June, 2021]. 
[2] Specifications 
LoRaWAN. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://lora-alliance.org/resource_hub/what-is-lorawan/ 
[Retrieved: June, 2021] 
[3] J. M. Jimenez, et al. “New Protocol and Architecture for a 
Wastewater Treatment System intended for Irrigation”, 
Applied Sciences, vol. 11, No. 8, pp. 3648, 2021. 
[4] S. Sendra, L. García, J. Lloret, I. Bosch, and R. Vega-
Rodríguez, “LoRaWAN network for fire monitoring in rural 
environments”, Electronics, vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 531, 2020. 
[5] A. Abrado, and A. Pozzebon, “A Multi-Hop LoRa Linear 
Sensor Network for the Monitoring of Underground 
Environments: The Case of the Medieval Aqueducts in Siena, 
Italy”, Sensors, vol. 19, pp. 402, 2019. 
[6] L. Xia, Z. Jiandao, and W. Huafeng, “A LoRa Buoy Network 
Coverage Optimization Algorithm Based on Virtual Force”, 
2nd 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Communication and Signal Processing, Weihai, China, 28-30 
September 2019, pp. 204-209. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
[7] LoRa World Record Broken: 832km/517mi using 25mW, The 
things 
Network. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/article/lorawan-world-
record-broken-twice-in-single-experiment-1 [Retrieved: June, 
2021] 
[8] F. J. Grión, G. O. Petracca, D. F. Lipuma, and E. R. Amigó, 
“LoRa Network Coverage Evaluation in Urban and Densely 
Urban Environment: Simulation and validation tests in 
Autonomous City of Buenos Aires”, XVII Workshop on 
Information Processing and Control (RPIC), Mar del Plata, 
Argentina, 20-22 September 2017, pp. 1-5. 
[9] J. C. Liando, A. Gamage, A. W. Tengourtius, and M. Li, 
“Known and Unknown Facts of LoRa: Experiences from a 
Large-scale Measurement Study”, ACM Transactions on 
Sensor Networks, vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 1-35, 2019. 
[10] M. R. Seye, B. Gueye, and M. Diallo, “An Evaluation of 
LoRa Coverage in Dakar Peninsula”, 8th IEEE Annual 
Information 
Technology, 
Electronics 
and 
Mobile 
Communication Conference, Vancouver, Canada, 3-5 October 
2017, pp. 478-482. 
[11] M. R. Seye, B. Ngom, B. Gueye, and M. Diallo, “A Study of 
LoRa Coverage: Range Evaluation and Channel Attenuation 
Model”, 1st International Conference on Smart Cities and 
Communities (SCCIC), Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 24-26 
July 2018, pp. 1-4. 
[12] M. Lauridsen, et al. “Coverage comparison of GPRS, NB-
IoT, LoRa, and SigFox in 7800 km2 area”, IEEE 85th 
Vehicular Technology Conference, Sydney, Australia, 4-7 
June 2017, pp. 1-5. 
[13] B. Vejlgaard, et al. “Coverage and Capacity Analysis of 
Sigfox, LoRa, GPRS and NB-IoT”, IEEE 85th Vehicular 
Technology Conference, Sydney, Australia, 4-7 June 2017, 
pp. 1-5. 
[14] G. Zhu, C. Liao, M. Suzuki, Y. Narusue, and H. Morikawa, 
“Evaluation of LoRa Receiver Performance under Co-
technology Interference.”, 15th IEEE Annual Consumer 
Communications & Networking Conference, Las Vegas, 
USA, 12-15 January 2018, pp. 1-7. 
[15] M. Marchese, A. Moheddine, and F. Patrone, “Towards 
Increasing the LoRa Network Coverage: A Flying Gateway”, 
International Symposium on Advanced Electrical and 
Communication Technologies, Rome, Italy, 27-29 November 
2019, pp. 1-4. 
[16] Heltec WiFi LoRa 32 (v2). [Online]. Available from: 
https://heltec.org/project/wifi-lora-32/ [Retrieved: June, 2021]
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

