 
Strategy for the Deployment of Water Internet of Things (WIoT) in Taiwan 
*Chen-Yang Hsu, Shu-Yi Peng, Chen-Hua Chu, Fan-Lun Chen 
Green Energy and Environment Research Laboratories 
Industrial Technology Research Institute, Hsinchu, Taiwan 
e-mail: ambrosehsu@itri.org.tw 
 
Abstract—According to the advancement of information 
networks and sensing technology, the Internet of Things (IoT) 
is the new trend of future technology and information. In view 
of the increasing maturity of water quality sensor technology 
and the rapid advancement of information and communication 
technology in recent years. Previously, water quality sampling 
required a lot of labor and expensive equipment for data 
collection. This study has developed water quality sensor 
component installations in areas with potential water pollution. 
Establishing Taiwan's water quality sensing system through a 
sensor connecting network monitoring Taiwan's water 
environment and using a solution framework, and 4 strategies 
to lay the foundation for the development of smart cities. 
Keywords- Internet Of Things; Water Quality Sensing; Pollution 
Hotspots; 
Pollution 
Source 
Tracking; 
Environmental 
Governance 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In Taiwan, the water quality and environmental testing relies 
on a large amount of manpower to collect samples manually. 
The Taiwanese administration utilizes the "Sampling Unit" and 
then send them to the "Testing Unit" for testing with laboratory 
standard instruments. If it is confirmed that the pollutant 
exceeds the standard, the "remediation unit" will control the 
environment, and if it is confirmed that there was a pollution 
violation, the "environmental enforcement unit" of the 
government will inspect and punish the illegal manufacturer [1]. 
The above mentioned existing environmental testing 
industry is quite time-consuming and labor-intensive, and the 
time and spatial resolution of the monitoring data is insufficient, 
making it rather difficult to grasp the trend of water quality 
changes at any time and affecting the timeliness of back-end 
environmental governance and environmental enforcement. 
Environmental quality gradually gains awareness of 
practitioners. The usage of big data to achieve environmental 
governance, real-time monitoring, protection of water quality by 
early warning, response to abnormal situations, and to provide 
efficient solutions have become the next stage of environmental 
governance trend amongst Taiwan's smart cities [2]. 
II. 
COMPREHENSIVE WATER SENSING PLAN 
In recent years, online water quality analysis and sampling 
technologies have become increasingly sophisticated. With the 
advancement of data analysis, big data processing, and wireless 
transmission 
technologies, 
Environmental 
Protection 
Administration (EPA) Taiwan has established a set of total 
solutions for the environmental pollution monitoring ecosystem 
including the environmental survey, environmental sampling, 
environmental inspection, environmental remediation, and 
environmental enforcement. The use of smart sensing of high-
resolution water quality spatial and temporal data, low-cost 
sensing equipment, big data analysis, and automatic control 
completes the last piece of the environmental pollution 
monitoring ecosystem (See Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  WIoT Smart Monitoring Map 
With the widely distribution of Water Quality IoT (WIoT) 
sensors in Taiwan, it allows us to monitor the characteristics 
of water quality and background concentration of the sensing 
area all day. From environmental information disclosure to 
environmental governance, water quality monitoring and 
management applications are implemented to reduce the 
manpower required by the environmental protection bureaus 
in counties and municipalities, effectively improving 
environmental quality. 
III. 
METHODS AND SOLUTION 
The objective of this study was to investigate the 
establishment of the WIoT Data Analysis System and 
miniaturized water quality monitoring system device for the 
purpose of monitoring water quality in Taiwan. 
A. Miniaturized water quality monitoring system device 
Compared with the traditional water quality measurement 
equipment, the new generation of WIoT sensors are highly 
mobile and can be quickly installed for applications. There are 
two usages of fixed-point sensing and drifting downstream, 
which have the following benefits: easy to operate, low setup-
cost, and come with wireless data transmission. (See Figure 2) 
 
Figure 2.  Water Quality Monitoring System 
The measuring items include pH, EC, Temp., and 
dissolved oxygen. This method can be widely extended to 
various fields of measurement applications, such as factory 
outfalls, potentially polluted agricultural land, aquaculture, 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
rivers, sewage drains, water purification plants, etc. With 
rapid deployment and its low-cost, it can assist standard large 
monitoring stations to achieve the benefits of point and line 
sensing in water networks. 
B.  Water Quality IoT (WIoT) Data Analysis System 
In order to maximize the effects of online water quality 
monitoring, this study designed a solution framework suitable 
for an IoT water quality monitoring network (See Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  WIoT Monitoring And Management Framework  
The purposes of the framework are as flows: (1) Establish a 
systematic structure of water quality environmental governance. 
(2) Automate the tracking of data analysis. (3) Standardize the 
management of abnormal water quality incidents. This 
framework suggests systematic processes for obtaining data, 
streaming, and analyzing back-end decision-making and 
response measures. At the data acquisition end, appropriate IoT 
water quality monitoring devices must be selected depending on 
the purpose of monitoring. Also, a deployment strategy must be 
implemented to include suitable installation locations. Such 
mechanism ensures all acquired data can satisfy the purpose of 
monitoring [3]. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
EPA Taiwan is committed to promote the WIoT. With the 
development of component research and development, field 
deployment, data analysis, and value-added application. EPA 
Taiwan is aiming to deploy 170 self-developed water quality 
monitoring devices by 2023 to control the quality of water 
bodies and trace the source of pollution discharge. 
The comprehensive smart water quality monitoring system 
(See Figure 4) can also be expanded into the field of agricultural, 
industrial, and livelihood, such as industrial wastewater 
pollution sensing, potential pollution source sensing, smart 
aquaculture, agricultural water safety, irrigation water sensing, 
watergate switching, smart sewage treatment and control, and 
drinking water sensing, etc. In the future, with the gradual 
increase of demand, it is expected to drive the overall 
environmental IoT industry chain and create emerging markets. 
 
Figure 4.  Application Scenarios 
Water quality data analysis model could achieve the goals 
such as prediction and early warning, pollution traceability, hot 
zone analysis, etc. The establishment of WIoT environmental 
governance program enables analysis of water quality data 
characteristics, combined with cross-sector data analysis, it can 
determine the hot zone of water pollution and achieve upstream 
traceability and downstream warning. 
A. Selecting Monitoring Stations 
The source of the pollution analysis model consists of 3 
components including the decision support system (DSS) 
layer, the data layer, and other data connections. When the 
water quality sensors detect anomalies and issue early 
warnings, companies located in upstream areas of pollution 
are immediately identified to reduce the scope of the 
investigation and increase emergency response capability 
(See Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5.  Pollution Source Analysis Module 
Monitoring stations that require further analysis are 
selected based on analysis models of the automatic 
continuous monitoring and early warning system. The 
system utilizes Geographic Information System (GIS) 
analysis functionality to screen sections of the river close to 
the station. With this, users can confirm whether they would 
like to change the scope of analysis. 
B. Screening By Industry 
By default, the system filters factories with high pollution 
potentials within a 5-km radius of the monitoring station. Users 
can categorize the data by industry based on the type of 
pollution, such as Printed Circuit Board (PCB) manufacturing. 
The system will present an industry list that includes factory 
names, locations, and addresses on the GIS graphical layer that 
can be selected and added to the analysis list. 
C. Materials And Audit Data Analysis 
The system filters factories according to Step B to further 
analyze their basic data, status of material registration, and past 
results from the previous audits. Searches can be conducted on 
their latest data related to water pollution, waste, punitive 
actions, and registration status in the last 3 years. 
D. Pollution Hotspot Analysis Model 
The purpose of this model is to measure the degree of 
impact by water pollution in downstream areas to achieve the 
critical task of quickly evaluating early warnings. The purpose 
of this model is to measure the degree of impact by water 
pollution in downstream areas to achieve the critical task of 
quickly evaluating early warnings. There are 5 problems 
promptly following: (1) the time for pollution to reach sensitive 
downstream areas; (2) the amount of maximum pollution 
concentration; (3) the total area of pollution; and (4) the duration 
of pollution concentration; (5) the time that pollution would 
exceed the safety limitation. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Varied from traditional monitoring, this study utilizes WIoT 
technology to obtain a large amount of data, which are then used 
to build new water quality application models, including an alert 
model and forecast model, through the widespread deployment 
of sensors. 
To achieve early warning according to data anomalies, 
upstream pollution source tracking, and downstream pollution 
hotspot prediction, the deployment of large-scale is essential to 
obtain spatial and temporal high-resolution monitoring data and 
integrated data from multiple regions with the help of data 
analysis models. 
This study has deployed more than 100 miniaturized water 
quality monitoring devices and successfully applied the data 
analysis model to identify cases of data anomalies in water 
quality for law enforcement. These devices were installed in 
various locations in Taiwan with potential water pollution, and 
data collected from the devices has transmitted to a centralized 
database for analysis. 
The data analysis model developed in this study was applied 
to identify cases of data anomalies in water quality for law 
enforcement. This allowed authorities to quickly identify and 
response to cases of water pollution and improve the overall 
environmental quality of the affected areas. 
The successful deployment and application of the data 
analysis model in this case study validated the recommendations 
made in this study, proving that miniaturized water quality 
monitoring equipment can be effectively utilized for early 
warning and pollution control. 
In the future, we will continue to promote the application of 
WIoT monitoring system in wastewater treatment monitoring 
(or more) through the field of industrial, medical, and the 
general public. WIoT equipment can set up early water-quality 
warning module at the monitoring stations and the adjust the 
process and treatment unit in real time by analyzing the change 
of historical data. With the cooperation between government 
policies, big data analysis models, and the usage of machine 
learning, they can provide early warnings and smart control 
functions that would continue to further perfect Taiwan's IoT 
industry chain. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Allan IJ, Vrana B, Greenwood R, Mills GA, Roig B, Gonzalez C. “A 
"toolbox" for biological and chemical monitoring requirements for 
the European Union's Water Framework Directive,” Talanta. 2006 
Apr 15;69(2):302-22. 
[2] C. C. Tsai, F. L Chen, and B. C Yang, “Solve the problem of smart 
innovation and joyful city,” IEK Industry News Network: How to 
enhance the dynamic of an ecological environment with intelligent 
perception, pp.30 
[3] F. L Chen, B. C Yang, S. Y. Peng, and T. C. Lin, “Applying a 
deployment strategy and data analysis model for water quality 
continuous monitoring and management,” International Journal of 
Distributed 
Sensor 
Networks 
2020, 
Vol. 
16(6)
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

