Low-cost Gas Concentration Sensor System
Multi-sensor package for industrial application
Axel Kramer, Teresa Jorge, Mariya Porus, Thomas
Alfred Paul
Corporate Research - ABB Switzerland Ltd
5405 Baden-Dättwil, Switzerland
email: axel.kramer@ch.abb.com
Dieter Zeisel
Trafag AG
8608 Bubikon, Switzerland
email: dieter.zeisel@trafag.com
Abstract—We developed a novel multi-sensor system for online
measurement of the composition of a binary gas mixture. The
system provides information about pressure, temperature and
density from which the partial pressure (or concentration) of the
individual gas components in the mixture can be deduced. The
sensors are housed in a small, robust package allowing the
application in harsh industrial environments. In order to
achieve highly precise information about the gas concentration,
the sensor system is factory calibrated using a sophisticated
calibration procedure. We report both on the procedure and
theory used for calibration and on the experimental setup and
procedure to validate the sensor system using certified gas
mixtures. 
Moreover, 
the 
temperature 
effect 
on 
the
concentration output was analyzed. We demonstrate, that our
sensor can keep the concentration uncertainty as low as Δc/c <
±2.5% over a temperature range of 10°C < T < 30°C.
Keywords-Gas analyzer; binary mixture; composition sensor;
density sensor; multi-sensor system; concentration measurement.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In various industrial areas, the proportion of a component
in a gas mixture must be known for efficient, reliable and safe
operation. Here, we target the concentration determination of
the various components in a novel electrical insulation gas
[1][2]. For our and many other applications, laboratory
analysis of the gas, e.g., by gas chromatography or
spectroscopy, would be disadvantageous, since this is too
complex and time consuming. Alternatives to these high-end
solutions are, for example, systems based on acoustic sensing
principles [3][4], on thermal measurements [5], or on damping
effects of resonant mechanical oscillators [1][6]-[9].
Typically, the commercially available analyzers among these
alternatives are expensive (4-10k USD, e.g., the binary gas
analyzer 
BGA244 
from 
Stanford 
Research 
or 
the
MassSense® gas density meter (GDM) from ISS Inc.).
However, for direct online surveillance of multiple locations
in a facility, a more compact and more economic monitor
solution based on a price level of ≈0.5k USD is preferred.
Here, we report on the development of such a low-cost
sensor, its physical principle and its characterization. In
section 2, the sensor concept, package, and the calibration
procedure is outlined. In section 3, we present the results
based  on  a  gas  mixture  for  a  real  application.  Finally,  in
section 4, we discuss and conclude our achieved results.
II.
SENSOR CONCEPT, PACKAGE AND CALIBRATION
The sensor principle is based on the measurement of
pressure p, temperature T,  and  density  ρ of  the  gas.  The
knowledge of these parameters enables us to determine the
concentration in a binary gas mixture [6][7]. We emphasize
that the concept is not limited to binary mixtures. It can be
expanded to ternary and quaternary mixtures, as long as gas
species of similar molar mass can be grouped (e.g., N2 and O2)
[10]. The novelty of our work, reported here, lies in the
realization of an industry-compatible sensor system that is
low-cost, easy to use, and all sensors (p-T-ρ) and electronics
(RS485 communication) are integrated into a robust stainless
steel package (length < 90 mm, diameter ≤ 40 mm). In Fig. 1,
the sensor (cipher 1) and an experimental test setup, used for
sensor calibration, is shown. The peripheral devices, such as
DAQ (NI, USB-X-Series 6341) and computer are not required
for field application of the p-T-ρ sensor.
Figure 1.
Setup for pressure and density calibration of the p-T-ρ sensor
system. (1) p-T-ρ sensor, (2) Reference p-sensor for pressure calibration,
(3) Gas inlet and outlet, (4) Pressure vessel of 1 dm3 volume.
The gas mixture we used for calibration (prefluoroketone
C5F10O (c = 34600 ppm) in nitrogen N2) was purchased as a
certified mixture with a relative concentration uncertainty of
Δc/c < ±1%. A calibration curve is shown in Fig. 2, relating
the density ρ to the frequency f of the mechanical oscillator
(our ρ-sensor) [9]. The density is calculated from measured p
and T, using an appropriate equation of state for the used gas
mixture [7]. During the calibration the pressure is varied and
the temperature is fixed at 23.5°C. The calibration function is
found by a least-squares fit of the model function [9] to the
data, minimizing the sum of squared residuals (here, a residual
being the relative difference between the measured value and
the fitted value).
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 2.
Density (ρ) – frequency (f) calibration curve (open circles:
meas. data, full line: calibr. fct. fitted to data, (A, B, C) are fit parameters).
Gas mixture: C5F10O: c=34’600 ppm, balanced by nitrogen.
It is evident from Fig. 2, that using this calibration method,
the density uncertainty dρ can be reduced down to a few g/m3.
III.
RESULTS
After the calibration, the concentration sensor can be
connected to any gas compartment. The concentration is then
determined by an internal microprocessor based on the p-T-ρ
method as 
described 
together 
with an 
uncertainty
determination in [7]. Fig. 3 shows the result of a validation
experiment, using in addition to the calibration gas (c = 34600
ppm) two certified gas mixtures of different concentrations.
The sensor shows an accuracy of Δc/c < ±1% for the
calibration mixture. For the two other mixtures, the accuracy
was Δc/c < ±2.5% (Δc < ±900 ppm).
Figure 3.
Validation test of the sensor for different gas mixtures
(indicated is the concentration of C5F10O, balance gas is nitrogen).
We also investigated the temperature stability of our
sensor system in the range between 10°C and 30°C (Fig. 4).
Figure 4.
Temperature effect on concentration output (gas mixture:
C5F10O: c=34’600 ppm, balanced by nitrogen).
As we can see from Fig. 4, the temperature effect on the
sensor amounts to only dc/dT = 20 ppm/K or a relative
concentration error of less than 1%.
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
To achieve our price target of <500 USD, we use cheap
of-the-shelf articles. Although these individual sensors come
with rather large uncertainties, we achieve a fairly high
concentration accuracy due to our factory calibration. Of
course, in order to keep production cost low, batch calibration
of a multitude of sensors is envisaged. The accuracy of the
competitor systems (section 1) are typically better by a factor
of ten, however, they are not as compact as the one presented
here and ten times more expensive. For various applications,
it can be required to determine only a deviation from a set
concentration. Calibrating at this target concentration, we
have shown, that our sensor exhibits a relative uncertainty of
less than 1%. For other concentrations, the uncertainty is
slightly higher (2.5%). The reason for this might be the
approximations, used to describe the equation of state and the
mixing rules of the gas mixture.
In conclusion, our novel low-cost multi-sensor is
integrated in a small and rugged package and is suitable for
indoor industrial applications, e.g., online gas monitoring of
insulation gas mixtures in electrical switchgear. In particular,
our solution will be introduced further in pilot installations to
leverage ABB’s novel eco-friendly insulation gas.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Porus, A. Kramer, and T. A. Paul, “Application of a Multi-
Parameter Sensor System for Monitoring Dielectric Insulation
Gas Mixtures,” IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and
Electrical Insulation, in press.
[2]
A. Kramer, M. Porus, and T. A. Paul, “UV-LED based fiber-
optic sensor system for gas analysis,” in Conference on Lasers
and Electro-Optics, OSA Technical Digest (online) (Optical
Society of America, 2016), paper AM1J.5.
[3]
L. Henn-Lecordier, J. N. Kidder, and G. W. Rubloff, “Real-
time acoustic sensing and control of metalorganic chemical
vapor deposition precursor concentrations delivered from solid
phase sources,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. A 22(5), pp.1984-
1991,  September/October 2004.
[4]
L. Zisper, H. Franke, and W.-D. Bretschneider, “Acoustic
sensors for analyzing binary gas mixtures,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, vol.6, pp.536-541, June 2006.
[5]
C.J. Hepp, F.T. Krogmann, J. Polak, M.M. Lehmann, and G.A.
Urban, “AC Characterisation of thermal flow sensor with fluid
characterisation feature,” 16th International Conference on
Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems, T3P.021
(2011) pp.1084-1087.
[6]
O. Chetay, J.-P. Dupraz, L. Lucot, and D. Taponat, “Method
and system of non-intrusively monitoring the mixture ratio of
a gas mixture having at least two components,” US Patent,
US7184895 (B2), 2007.
[7]
A. Kramer and T. A. Paul, “High-precision density sensor for
concentration monitoring of binary gas mixtures,” Sensors and
Actuators A, vol. 202, pp. 52-56, 2013.
[8]
D. Sparks, R. Smith, J. Patel, and N. Najafi, “A MEMS-based
low pressure, light gas density and binary concentration
sensor,” Sens. and Actuators, vol. A 171, pp. 159-162, 2011.
[9]
D. Zeisel, H. Menzi, and L. Ullrich, “A precise and robust
quartz sensor based on tuning fork technology for SF6-gas
density control,” Sens. and Actuat., vol. 80, pp. 233-236, 2000.
[10] A. Kramer, T. A. Paul, N. Mahdizadeh, and N. Ranjan,
“Method and device for determining an operating parameter of
a fluid insulated electrical apparatus,” European patent
EP2844998B1, 2015.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

