Pet Food Industry: E-nose and E-tongue Technology for Quality Control  
Federica Cheli, Martina Novacco, Valentino Bontempo, Vittorio Dell’Orto  
Department of Health, Animal Science and Food Safety  
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy 
e-mail: federica.cheli@unimi.it, martina.novacco@unimi.it, valentino.bontempo@unimi.it, vittorio.dellorto@unimi.it   
 
 
Abstract — The objective of this idea is to set up an electronic 
nose (e-nose) and tongue (e-tongue) as rapid quality control 
and research & development tools for the pet food industry. 
The final goal is to integrate e-nose and e-tongue with other 
sensing and imaging devices to 1) ensure high pet food 
standards in terms of nutritional properties, palatability and 
acceptability; 2) set up an instrumental protocol with good 
correlation to animal sensory properties in order to replace 
animal preference test, chemical and texture analysis. 
Keywords-pet food; palatability; electronic nose; electronic 
tongue. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The pet food industry offers a wide range of products to 
satisfy pet’s and owner’s requirements. In pet food 
production, the development of new products must take into 
account both nutritional and palatability aspects. Pet food 
palatability is related to the pet food sensory properties, such 
as aroma, flavour, texture shape, and particle size [1]. Pet 
food formulation is one of the factors affecting its aromatic 
profile that is strictly associated with palatability and 
acceptability. Sensorial analysis of pet foods may be 
conducted by using several hedonic and analytical methods 
(Fig. 1) [2].  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Pet food sensory analysis research methods. 
 
Although taste and olfactory perceptions are not 
completely similar, dogs and cats use both taste and smell in 
food detection and selection [1][3]. Besides ingredient 
composition, pet food palatability may be affected by the use 
of palatability enhancers and food processing. Microbial 
growth, oxidation, and the presence of undesirable 
compounds 
and contaminants 
represent risk 
factors 
responsible of changes in aroma, flavours, and loss of 
palatability [4]. At the industry level, adoption of a rapid, 
low-cost, high-throughput and on-line analytical approach is 
needed at all stages of pet food production and processing in 
order to guarantee and standardize the quality of the 
production. 
The objective of this idea is to set up an integrated e-nose 
and e-tongue technology as a rapid quality control and 
research & development tool for the pet food industry. To 
develop the idea, a step by step procedure must be designed: 
knowledge of e-nose and e-tongue characteristics and 
applications in the pet food industry, proper selection of an 
appropriate e-nose and e-tongue system for the specific 
application, and analysis of the pet food industry 
requirements. 
II. 
THE ELECTRONIC NOSE AND ELECTRONIC TONGUE 
The electronic nose (e-nose) is an instrument which 
comprises an array of electronic chemical sensors with 
partial specificity and an appropriate pattern recognition 
system, capable of recognizing simple or complex volatile 
organic compounds’ (VOCs) patterns associated to a product 
odour. Researches have correlated VOCs to the sensory 
properties of a product; therefore, VOCs’ profiles can be 
used for sensory characterisation and palatability evaluation 
of pet food [4]. The electronic tongue (e-tongue) has been 
developed in the last decade to evaluate the taste of liquid 
media. The common principle of the different e-tongue 
technologies is the application of an array of non-specific 
chemical sensors with high cross-sensitivity. To analyse 
results, similar pattern recognition techniques are needed for 
both the e-nose and e-tongue.  
In literature, the applications of the e-nose and e-tongue 
in pet food analysis are very scarce. This could be attributed 
to the need to tune either the hardware and/or software to a 
specific application, or because data are kept confidentially 
by the product developers. E-nose associated or not with e-
tongue has been used in studies for the standardization of a 
product development process, and in the quality control of 
the finished product [5]-[9]. In a study carried out in our 
department on commercial dry complete and dietetic dog and 
cat pet food, the e-nose was able to discriminate samples, 
although not completely, according to the species (dog vs 
cat), to the pet food formula (complete and balanced vs 
dietetic). Interestingly, e-nose was able to discriminate 
complete pet food for puppies or adult dogs (Fig. 2) [9]. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
Figure 2. E-nose for dry pet food analysis (PC: puppy complete; DD: 
dog complete; CC: cat complete; PD: puppy dietetic; DD: dog dietetic CD: 
cat dietetic) (adapted from [9]). 
 
In a study on commercial canned dog and cat pet food, 
similar results have been reported, with no complete 
discrimination obtained with e-nose analysis. A combination 
of e-nose and e-tongue determined a better discrimination 
between samples [7].  
Although inconsistent results have been reported, e-nose 
and e-tongue may represent rapid and sensitive instrumental 
techniques for pet food evaluation. However, to represent an 
effective tool for a rapid quality control and research & 
development in the pet food industry, the analytical platform 
still needs several improvements, such as the definition of 
the best sensors’ array, the development of data fusion 
analysis systems, and a better understanding of the industrial 
needs. The final aim of this idea is to develop an analytical 
sensory platform able to ensure high pet food standards in 
terms of nutritional properties, palatability and acceptability. 
The development of an instrumental protocol with good 
correlation to animal sensory properties could replace animal 
preference test, and chemical and texture analysis.  
III. 
E-NOSE AND E-TONGUE IN AN INTEGRATED SYSTEM 
FOR PET FOOD EVALUATION 
Domestic dogs and cats have different nutritional 
requirements and feeding behaviours, are sensitive to 
numerous palatability drivers, and differ in the food 
characteristics that they find desirable. Cats are strongly 
affected by the aroma of a food, and carefully smell a new 
food before tasting it. Dogs often prefer foods that are high 
in fat and include protein from animal sources. For both 
dogs and cats, the texture, size, and shape of food pieces are 
important aspects; scientists who study palatability refer to 
this as “mouth feel”. Therefore, e-nose and e-tongue should 
be integrated in an instrumental platform to develop the full 
potential of an electronic sense analysis of pet food. Multi-
sensor data fusion is an available technology capable of 
combining information from several sources in order to 
form a unified picture that can be used as a “finger print” of 
a product. A practical and general data fusion system model 
capable of handling data from various applications must be 
established on the basis of feature extraction. The final goal 
is to create a high-level fusion, namely decision-making 
fusion, able to analyse the features from each analytical 
system first, and then to associate these features to produce 
a fused result.  
A. Set the e-nose and e-tongue for the specific application 
A proper selection of an appropriate e-nose and e-tongue 
system for a particular application must involve an 
evaluation on a case-by-case basis. E-nose and e-tongue 
selection for a particular application must necessarily 
include: the assessment of the selectivity and the sensitivity 
range of individual sensor arrays for a particular target VOCs 
(i.e., related to the target organoleptic properties of the 
products), the number of unnecessary (redundancy) sensors 
with similar sensitivities, as well as sensor accuracy, 
reproducibility, response speed, recovery rate, robustness, 
and overall performance. Most of these steps are common 
points in a validation procedure. New ways to improve e-
nose and e-tongue performance, through the use of better or 
more target-specific sensors, pattern-recognition algorithms, 
and data analysis methods will significantly amplify the 
range of applications of e-noses and e-tongue in the pet food 
industry.  
B. An eye on the pet food industry requirements  
According to The European Pet Food Industry Federation 
(FEDIAF), quality and safety, nutritional balance and 
palatability, variety and value for money, pet owner 
demands, and convenience are the important elements for 
pets and their owners. Feed material selection, processing, 
production techniques for canned or dry products, and final 
product quality and palatability control represent the critical 
processing points, which need and may take advantage from 
a real-time monitoring by the use of e-nose and/or e-tongue.  
 
TABLE 1. PET FOOD INDUSTRY: E-NOSE AND E-TONGUE FOR 
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT. 
 
Main topics 
Application areas  
Palatants 
flavour profile of new palatants for pets and 
identifications of key aromas and taste attributes 
Palatability 
Replace animal preference test, chemical and texture 
analysis 
Brand 
Characterisation of a quality brand 
 
Besides quality control, e-nose and e-tongue may be used 
for research & development purposes in the pet food.  
Regarding this point, several hot topics may be suggested 
(Table 1).  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The pet food industry may take advantage of an 
appropriate e-nose and e-tongue system as a powerful tool 
for both quality control and research & development 
purposes. Future work is needed on the materials’ side 
(sensors’ array), on the data analysis side (better modelling, 
development of data fusion analysis for the process control 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

system for a continuous quality assurance), and on the 
industrial side (better understanding of the industrial needs 
related to quality control and monitoring of food 
processing). Moreover, to develop the full potential of an 
electronic sense analysis of pet food, e-nose and e-tongue 
could be integrated in an instrumental platform including 
electronic sensors for colour, texture, size, and shape 
evaluation. Once properly set, this platform could replace 
animal preference test, chemical and texture analysis to 
assess pet food palatability. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Koppel, “Sensory analysis of pet foods,” Journal of the Science of  
Food and Agriculture, vol 94, pp.  2148-2153, March 2014, 
doi:10.1002/jsfa.6597. 
[2] G. C. Aldrich and K. Koppel, “Pet Food Palatability Evaluation: A 
Review of Standard Assay Techniques and Interpretation of Results 
with a Primary Focus on Limitations,” Animals, vol 5, pp. 43-55, 
May 2015, doi:10.3390/ani5010043. 
[3] B. Di Donfrancesco, K. Koppel, and E. Chambers IV, “An initial 
lexicon for sensory properties of dry dog food,” Journal of Sensory 
Studies, 
vol 
27, 
pp. 
498-510, 
December 
2012, 
doi:10.1111/joss.12017. 
[4] K. Koppel, K. Adhikari, and B. Di Donfrancesco, “Volatile 
Compounds in Dry Dog Foods and Their Influence on Sensory 
Aromatic Profile,” Molecules, vol 18, pp 2646-2662, March 2013, 
doi:10.3390/molecules18032646. 
[5] F. Cheli, A. Campagnoli, L. Pinotti, F. D’Ambrosio, and A. Crotti, 
“Electronic 
nose 
application 
in 
animal 
protein 
sources 
characterisation in pet food,” Proc. LXI Annual Meeting of the Italian 
Society for Veterinary Science, pp. 26-29, September 2007.  
[6] B. Oladipupo, J. Stough, and N. Guthrie, “Application of combined 
electronic nose and tongue technology in petfood flavor development 
and quality control,” AIP Conference Proc., May 2011, 1362, pp. 75-
76,  doi.org/10.1063/1.3626311. 
[7] V. Éles, I. Hullár, and R. Romvári, “Electronic nose and tongue for 
pet food classification,” Agriculturae Conspectus Scientificus, vol 78, 
pp. 225-228, September 2013.  
[8] V. Éles et al., “Electronic nose for evaluating cat food quality,” Proc. 
of the 16th International Symposium on olfaction and electronic nose, 
pp. 35-36, June 2015.  
[9] D. Battaglia, M. Ottoboni, V. Caprarulo, L. Pinotti, and F. Cheli, 
“Electronic nose in commercial pet food evaluation”. II International 
Congress Food Technology, Quality and Safety and XVI International 
Symposium 
Feed 
Technology, 
pp. 
28-30, 
October 
2014. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

