Low-Cost Energy-Autonomous Sensor Nodes
Through RF Energy Harvesting and Printed Technology
Fernando Moreno-Cruz
Inﬁneon Technologies AG
Munich, Germany
Email: fernando.morenocruz@infineon.com
Francisco J. Romero, Noel Rodr´ıguez,
Diego P. Morales and Almudena Rivadeneyra
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
Emails: franromero@ugr.es, noel@ugr.es,
diegopm@ugr.es, arivadeneyra@ugr.es
Abstract—The irruption of Internet of Things and 5G in our soci-
ety comes along with several technological challenges to overcome.
From an overall perspective, the low-cost and environmental
friendliness of these technologies need to be ensured for their
universal deployment in different areas, starting with the sensors
and ﬁnishing with the power sources. To address these challenges,
the production and maintenance of a great number of sensor
nodes incur costs, which include manufacturing and integration
in mass of elements and sub-blocks, changing or recharging of
batteries, as well as management of natural resources and waste.
In this article, we demonstrate how Radio Frequency Energy
Harvesting (RFEH) and printed ﬂexible technology (a growing
technology for sensors) can solve these concerns through cost-
effective mass-production and utilization of energy harvesting
for the development of energy-autonomous nodes, as part of a
wireless sensor network. We present as illustration a sprayed
ﬂexible relative humidity sensor powered with RFEH under the
store-and-use principle.
Keywords–Radio frequency energy harvesting; printed ﬂexible
sensors; IoT; sprayed ﬂexible technology; store-and-use principle.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The concept of Internet of Things (IoT) is merging every-
day objects, vehicles, buildings, etc., with electronics as part
of a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN), giving new perspectives
to a broad range of areas traditionally out of the innovation
scope. In the following years, while it deploys, a lot of
effort will focus on the expenses, security and energy sources
of the WSN-nodes, as they occur to be the most critical
issues. Under these circumstances, Energy Harvesting (EH)
methods and low-cost hardware techniques such as Radio
Frequency Energy Harvesting (RFEH) and printed technology,
respectively, appear to be innovations to overcome successfully
these matters and that aim at the same time at the series
production and distribution.
Depending on the application, the energetic demands of the
deployed nodes differ vastly. While the tendency in the low-
power cases is the use of non-rechargeable chemical (lithium)
batteries [1], in several situations is not an option due to:
•
Longevity of a minimum time frame of months or
years without compromising the quality of service.
•
Large-scale deployment of nodes, materialized in im-
practical maintenance.
•
Hard access to the devices (high structures, wild
animals, etc.).
•
Cost of the batteries during the whole product life.
Besides, the massive employment and disposal of batteries
cost a big price to the environment in the shape of resources
over-exploitation and wastes [2], [3].
On the other hand, EH takes advantage of the existing am-
bient energy such as thermal, solar, vibrational or electromag-
netic waves among others; providing energy-autonomous sys-
tems that do not need batteries for their operation. Speciﬁcally,
RFEH exploits the far ﬁeld region of ambient radiation whose
frequencies range between some kilohertzs and hundreds of
gigahertzs [4].
Likewise, the usage of printed sensors solves a number
of problems that often head towards an increase of the costs
in manufacturing, integration and assembly. In contrast to
traditional integrated sensors, printed ones can integrate at
the same instance a broad combination of variables like
environmental gas concentrations, temperature, human heart-
beat, relative humidity or biopotentials, among others. Large-
scale and multipurpose fabrication techniques allow as well
their manufacture in a cost-effective way. Additionally, their
ﬂexible capabilities open the doors to use-cases as wearables
whose manufacturing costs decrease, facilitating their broad
utilization.
Having these two technologies together brings low costs
in production (cheap printed materials and integration) and
maintenance (no batteries), along with respect for the envi-
ronment. Moreover, printed sensors present ultra-low power
requirements, ﬁtting perfectly with RFEH which stays in that
energetic range in most of the scenarios.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II explains the
general concepts of RFEH and ﬂexible electronics technology,
keeping a perspective under the common linker of IoT. Section
III introduces and analyzes their integration and describes the
proposed solutions in terms of hardware and working principle.
Finally, Section IV presents the conclusions.
II.
BACKGROUND
A. RF Energy Harvesting
An IoT energy harvester is a system that captures energy
from ambient sources and converts it into electricity for further
use. Normally, the goal will be powering wireless autonomous
devices like nodes part of a WSN.
The selection of the source depends only on the ambient
conditions around and on the application requirements, i.e.,
amount of energy needed, update period, part of the day of
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
Harvested Energy (µW/cm²  or  µW/cm³)
Figure 1. Comparison of different energy harvesting sources [4].
operation, among others. Figure 1 compares the most common
EH methods in terms of energy harvested.
RFEH grants clear advantages in contrast with the rest of
techniques or wired options [2], [5]:
•
Everywhere and every-time availability (unlike solar
or thermal).
•
Predictability and stability over time (unlike wind ﬂow
or vibrational).
•
Wireless nature (unlike the common USB-powered
option).
•
Low-cost implementation (an antenna and a simple
rectiﬁcation circuit sufﬁce).
•
Small form-factor (within the interest frequency
range).
However, as seen in the previous ﬁgure, the available power
presents the mayor challenge, since extremely high efﬁciencies
in the circuits are needed for its usage. Friis equation deter-
mines the inverse square relation with the distance to the signal
source and with the efﬁciency of the rectifying and converting
circuits [6]. Moreover, often the availability of the signal is
permanent but not constant, e.g., Wi-Fi router duty-cycle or
mobile phone random use [3], [7].
RFEH is usually categorized as “ultra-low power” (barely
tens of microwatts), although it can be also employed as a
wireless energy transfer technique. Using a dedicated signal
emitter unlocks a broader range of applications more power
consuming, reaching hundreds of microwatts. The advantage
against the well-known inductive coupling (including resonant
inductive) is the effective distance reached (it presents 20 dB
attenuation per decade versus 60 dB [5]), although it has much
lower source-to-load energy efﬁciency. That turns the maxi-
mum separation of a few centimeters into several kilometers.
The basic operation of a RFEH harvester (see Figure 2)
starts with an antenna (or antennas) capturing the signal carrier
of interest. A rectiﬁer follows, which converts the microwave
energy into dc, consisting of Schottky diodes or CMOS struc-
tures in diode conﬁguration in nearly all the literature. For
the best power transfer between these two stages, a matching
network tuned at the target frequency is needed.
In order to obtain an appropriate and constant voltage level,
a voltage regulation stage is essential, generally in form of a
boost converter or a charge pump. Once at the desired level,
the energy is stored in a capacitor, dimensioned according to
the application needs.
Rectifier
Energy Storage
Application Unit
Microcontroller
Sensing
Wireless
Transceiver
Vin
GND
Vref
 
D1
D4
Sign
ENB
S1
S2
D
C
ENB
RF Matching Network
Store-n-use
Converter
u1
x2
x1
* / 3,3V
Figure 2. Block diagram of a basic RFEH complete system (with
store-and-use principle).
Figure 3. Example of hybrid prototype between ﬂexible electronics (ﬂexible
Kapton printed sensor) and rigid (microcontroller).
B. Flexible Electronics Technology
Together with the EH technology, ﬂexible electronics has
attracted signiﬁcant attention in the ﬁeld of WSNs. Recent ad-
vances show promising future prospects in diverse areas, such
as wearables, electronic skin (e-skin) and even implantable
devices [8], [9], which satisfy requirements that were not
affordable with the current rigid silicon-based solutions.
In addition to its inherent properties (ﬂexibility, lightness,
transparency, etc.), the interest in ﬂexible electronics relies on
the possibility to reduce the manufacturing cost of large-area
devices, since its associated fabrication processes are usually
compatible with roll-to-roll techniques [10].
Over the years, diverse methods and materials have been
presented for the manufacturing of ﬂexible electronics, such
as screen- and inkjet-printing of conductive pastes, or spray
deposition and laser processing of nanomaterials [11]–[13].
However, the development of fully ﬂexible IoT devices is still
in early stages, and precisely because of that, most proof-of-
concept designs are based on hybrid technologies in which
the ﬂexible part is limited to the sensors or antennas [14]–[16]
and, more recently, to the energy storage devices [17], [18]
(see Figure 3).
III.
ENERGY-AUTONOMOUS AND LOW-COST IOT NODES
Within the IoT and WSN world exist several scenarios
where the application requirements are not too demanding
towards the update period or transmission range. With the
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

inclusion of printed ultra-low power sensors and if the sur-
rounding environment enhances its usage, RFEH appears as
a singular method for powering the nodes, becoming an
excellent composite for both technologies.
The complete IoT node consists of: i) printed sensor, a
capacitive structure in this case for measuring the Relative
Humidity (RH) of the air; ii) a microcontroller (µC) plus
transceiver chip, the logic and communicator of the circuit
(also able to be manufactured in bendable technology); iii)
different antennas, for communication (868 MHz) and harvest-
ing from Global System for Mobile communications (GSM)
(949 MHz); iv) RFEH block, outputting directly regulated dc
voltage to a v) storage capacitor.
In this manner, we achieve energy-autonomous and low-
cost nodes, since we avoid the use of any sort of battery and the
production, integration and maintenance phases are remarkably
cheaper.
A. Working Principle
The working principle attends to the one described in
Figure 4, commonly known as duty-cycled operation. In this
manner, after a measurement and transmission cycle, the
system will be most of its time in sleep mode (ultra-low pow-
er consumption or even disconnected), while the harvesting
electronics charge the capacitors for a new measurement.
The wake-up process can be triggered in different ways:
•
With a ﬁxed period determined by the application,
although within a certain time range where the ca-
pacitors are assured to be charged (Radio Frequency
(RF) energy available is stable and predictable).
•
With an extra wake-up radio that triggers the active
mode [4].
•
Or every time a certain voltage level is reached while
charging.
In any case, the minimum period will depend only on the RF
spectrum, i.e., how much energy is available around the node,
and of course, on the application needs.
Once a measurement is carried out and sent, the gateway
-or objective node depending on the communication topology-
will forward the message to the cloud and answer the node
in case of need. These points are assumed to not work with
energy harvesting.
B. Harvested Energy
The power levels in city open-spaces nowadays go up to
−30 dBm and even −20 dBm at bands of high usage such
as GSM, tv broadcasting, license-free bands or wireless local
networks [19]–[21]. Furthermore, with active emitting, the
levels can reach in average more than −3 dBm [5].
The losses, from the source emission until the load, can be
split in two parts. The ﬁrst and largest are the propagation loss-
es along the path, deﬁned by the Friis transmission equation,
and increased by presumable obstacles and misalignment of
the antennas. The second part is related to the efﬁciency at the
rectiﬁer-converter-storage chain. Slight drops in this efﬁciency
will stop the system from working, since the voltage levels are
close to the thresholds of the actual silicon electronics.
The current state of the art in rectiﬁcation and storage
for the power levels mentioned satisﬁes the energy needs
Tx
Time
Tx
Measuring
Active period
Sleep period
Last active period
Capacitor charge assured
Wake-up by fixed period or 
voltage threshold reached
Main Storage Cap. Voltage
Measuring
Time
Some minutes – Several hours
~15 ms
2,5 V
1,9 V
Figure 4. Working principle of an ultra-low power IoT node with
duty-cycled operation and EH.
for several IoT use-cases, although the conversion stage gets
harder to deal with due to the low levels of power and/or
voltage. Most of the off-the-shelf converters are considered
“low-power” (range of milliwatts) and are able to operate either
with extremely low levels of voltage or power, but not with
both together. This results in a harder employment of EH
techniques, as the converter stage must be custom designed
or, alternatively, this task is taken over by the rectiﬁer, being
then only valid under certain energy conditions.
Nevertheless, making use of the store-and-use principle as
an intermediate stage [22], more energetic bursts in periods can
be output to the converter. In this way, and with a favorable
environment as the mentioned before, the power harvested
from some microwatts to hundreds of them, can be stored in
the desired voltage level for its use by the application unit in
a duty-cycled fashion.
In this direction, we have developed a battery-less har-
vesting block capable of capturing RF energy while using
commercial low-power dc/dc converters (see Figure 5). Making
use of an innovative autonomous switched capacitor design,
we implemented the store-and-use principle, functioning not
only as an energy adaption phase, but also as an impedance
matching.
C. Flexible Relative Humidity Sensor
The developed IoT node integrates a ﬂexible sensor in-
tended for the monitoring of the ambient RH. The opera-
tion of this sensor, shown in Figure 6-a, is based on the
outstanding sensitivity to humidity changes of the dielectric
constant of Graphene Oxide (GO) [23], [24]. For that, a ﬂexible
PolyEthylene Terephthalate (PET) substrate was coated with a
thin-layer of GO, which was prepared at a concentration of
0.4 wt% following a modiﬁed version of the Hummers and
Offeman’s method, as described in [25]. The spray-coating of
the substrate (38.5 µL/cm2) was done using a manual airbrush
similar to the presented in [26], [27]. Finally, once the GO
layer was completely dried, a capacitive structure consisting of
16 InterDigitally arranged Electrodes (IDE) was screen-printed
on its surface using a silver-based conductive ink (LOCTITE®
ECI 1010 E&C from Henkel AG, D¨usseldorf, Germany), as
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 5. Picture of developed RFEH block.
Figure 6. a) Flexible GO-based humidity sensor. b) Dimensions of the
screen-printed pattern (W: width 150 µm, S: spacing, 225 µm, I:
interspacing 225 µm, L: length 5 mm).
depicted in Figure 6-b. We opted for this conﬁguration for two
main reasons. Firstly, to have a more uniform layer on which
the GO can be deposited with a better control of the thickness
and, secondly, to minimize the impact of the substrate on the
performance of the sensors. Electrical connections were glued
to the electrodes using silver conductive paint (186-3600 RS
Pro, RS Components, Corby, UK), following the manufacturer
recommendations, which did not affect the thermal reduction
of the GO.
The calibration curves obtained for this humidity sensor
are shown in Figure 7. The experiments were performed using
the climate chamber VCL4006 (from V¨otsch Industrietechnik
GmbH, Balingen, Germany) at a constant temperature of 40 ◦C
to use the whole humidity range of the chamber. The results
show that the impedance decreases with both increasing hu-
midity and frequency values (see Figure 7-a). These impedance
values were used to extract the equivalent parallel capacitance
as a function of the RH at four different frequencies (100 Hz,
1 kHz, 10 kHz and 100 kHz) as shown in Figure 7-b. The
sensitivity offered by this sensor depends on the frequency
of the excitation signal, being 385.53 pF at 100 Hz, 70.07 pF
at 1 kHz, 15.44 pF at 10 kHz and 1.72 pF at 100 kHz.
Figure 7. Impedance response of the sensor a) and extracted equivalent
parallel capacitance b) as a function of the RH and frequency.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this article, we introduced a solution for the use of
RFEH in conjunction with ﬂexible printed sensors as a form
of decreasing the costs of WSNs deployment. Besides the
general cost reduction due to the omission of battery-recharge
or substitution and wiring; the employment of innovative low-
cost printed sensors provides an extra boost in manufacturing
and integration savings.
The presented sprayed GO-based sensor is an example
of how this technology can achieve satisfactory measurement
results in an extremely cost-effective manner and with ultra-
low power requirements. On the other end of the system,
the store-and-use principle applied to RFEH provides lower
levels from where the energy can be harvested, through energy
accumulation and impedance matching between the rectiﬁer
and converter stages.
The future work encompasses the optimization of the
energetic sub-blocks in order to reach lower levels, as well
as the improvement of the sensor accuracy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the ECSEL Joint
Undertaking through the Electronic Component Systems for
European Leadership Joint Undertaking under grant agreement
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

No 737434. This Joint Undertaking receives support from
the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research and
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program and Slovakia, Netherlands, Spain, Italy.
In addition, the Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and
Sport (MECD) and the European Union supported it through
the pre-doctoral grant FPU16/01451 and the fellowship H2020-
MSCA-IF-2017794885-SELFSENS.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Zhou, L. Huang, W. Li, and Z. Zhu, “Harvesting ambient envi-
ronmental energy for wireless sensor networks: a survey,” Journal of
Sensors, vol. 2014, 2014, pp. 1–20.
[2]
P. Kamalinejad, C. Mahapatra, Z. Sheng, S. Mirabbasi, V. C. Leung,
and Y. L. Guan, “Wireless energy harvesting for the internet of things,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 6, 2015, pp. 102–108.
[3]
H. Jayakumar, K. Lee, W. S. Lee, A. Raha, Y. Kim, and V. Raghu-
nathan, “Powering the internet of things,” in Proceedings of the 2014
international symposium on Low power electronics and design.
ACM,
2014, pp. 375–380.
[4]
F. Moreno-Cruz, A. Escobar-Molero, E. Castillo, M. Becherer, A. Ri-
vadeneyra, and D. P. Morales, “Why use rf energy harvesting in
smart grids,” in 2018 IEEE 23rd International Workshop on Computer
Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links and Networks
(CAMAD).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[5]
X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, and Z. Han, “Wireless networks
with rf energy harvesting: A contemporary survey,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 2, 2015, pp. 757–789.
[6]
P. Nintanavongsa, “A survey on rf energy harvesting: circuits and
protocols,” Energy Procedia, vol. 56, 2014, pp. 414–422.
[7]
X. Liu and E. S´anchez-Sinencio, “A highly efﬁcient ultralow photo-
voltaic power harvesting system with mppt for internet of things smart
nodes,” IEEE transactions on very large scale integration (vlsi) systems,
vol. 23, no. 12, 2015, pp. 3065–3075.
[8]
C. Pang, C. Lee, and K.-Y. Suh, “Recent advances in ﬂexible sensors for
wearable and implantable devices,” Journal of Applied Polymer Science,
vol. 130, no. 3, 2013, pp. 1429–1441.
[9]
A. Nag, S. C. Mukhopadhyay, and J. Kosel, “Wearable ﬂexible sensors:
A review,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 17, no. 13, 2017, pp. 3949–3960.
[10]
I.-C. Cheng and S. Wagner, “Overview of ﬂexible electronics technol-
ogy,” in Flexible Electronics.
Springer, 2009, pp. 1–28.
[11]
S. Khan, L. Lorenzelli, and R. S. Dahiya, “Technologies for printing
sensors and electronics over large ﬂexible substrates: a review,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, vol. 15, no. 6, 2015, pp. 3164–3185.
[12]
V. Scardaci, R. Coull, P. E. Lyons, D. Rickard, and J. N. Coleman,
“Spray deposition of highly transparent, low-resistance networks of
silver nanowires over large areas,” Small, vol. 7, no. 18, 2011, pp.
2621–2628.
[13]
F. Wang et al., “Laser-induced graphene: preparation, functionalization
and applications,” Materials technology, vol. 33, no. 5, 2018, pp. 340–
356.
[14]
J. Bito, J. G. Hester, and M. M. Tentzeris, “Ambient rf energy harvesting
from a two-way talk radio for ﬂexible wearable wireless sensor devices
utilizing inkjet printing technologies,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, vol. 63, no. 12, 2015, pp. 4533–4543.
[15]
S.-E. Adami et al., “A ﬂexible 2.45-ghz power harvesting wristband with
net system output from- 24.3 dbm of rf power,” IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 66, no. 1, 2017, pp. 380–395.
[16]
J. Fern´andez-Salmer´on, A. Rivadeneyra, F. Mart´ınez-Mart´ı, L. Capit´an-
Vallvey, A. Palma, and M. Carvajal, “Passive uhf rﬁd tag with multiple
sensing capabilities,” Sensors, vol. 15, no. 10, 2015, pp. 26 769–26 782.
[17]
S. Lehtimaki et al., “Performance of printable supercapacitors in an rf
energy harvesting circuit,” International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems, vol. 58, 2014, pp. 42–46.
[18]
J. Maeng, C. Meng, and P. P. Irazoqui, “Wafer-scale integrated micro-
supercapacitors on an ultrathin and highly ﬂexible biomedical platform,”
Biomedical microdevices, vol. 17, no. 1, 2015, p. 7.
[19]
M. Russo, P. ˇSoli´c, and M. Stella, “Probabilistic modeling of harvested
gsm energy and its application in extending uhf rﬁd tags reading range,”
Journal of Electromagnetic Waves and Applications, vol. 27, no. 4,
2013, pp. 473–484.
[20]
A. Palaios, V. Miteva, J. Riihij¨arvi, and P. M¨ah¨onen, “When the
whispers become noise: A contemporary look at radio noise levels,” in
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2016
IEEE.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–7.
[21]
M. Yılmaz, D. G. Kuntalp, and A. Fidan, “Determination of spectrum
utilization proﬁles for 30 mhz–3 ghz frequency band,” in Communica-
tions (COMM), 2016 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp.
499–502.
[22]
G. Singh, R. Ponnaganti, T. Prabhakar, and K. Vinoy, “A tuned rectiﬁer
for rf energy harvesting from ambient radiations,” AEU-International
Journal of Electronics and Communications, vol. 67, no. 7, 2013, pp.
564–569.
[23]
S. Borini et al., “Ultrafast graphene oxide humidity sensors,” ACS nano,
vol. 7, no. 12, 2013, pp. 11 166–11 173.
[24]
F. J. Romero et al., “Design, fabrication and characterization of capaci-
tive humidity sensors based on emerging ﬂexible technologies,” Sensors
and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 287, 2019, pp. 459–467.
[25]
——, “Design guidelines of laser reduced graphene oxide conformal
thermistor for iot applications,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol.
274, 2018, pp. 148–154.
[26]
Y. Zheng, R. Wu, W. Shi, Z. Guan, and J. Yu, “Effect of in situ annealing
on the performance of spray coated polymer solar cells,” Solar energy
materials and solar cells, vol. 111, 2013, pp. 200–205.
[27]
H.-W. Hsu and C.-L. Liu, “Spray-coating semiconducting conjugated
polymers for organic thin ﬁlm transistor applications,” RSC advances,
vol. 4, no. 57, 2014, pp. 30 145–30 149.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-766-5
ALLSENSORS 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

