Demand Response Enabled Artiﬁcial Intelligence based Air Conditioning System
Kiwoong Kwon, Sanghun Kim, Jungmee Yun, Byungmin Kim, and Sanghak Lee
Energy IT Convergence Research Center,
Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Korea
Email: {kiwoong.kwon, ksh7150, yunjm, 6954kbm, sanghaklee88}@keti.re.kr
Abstract—Recently, as energy smart metering and remote control
of smart devices become possible, Demand Response (DR) in
home and small building is increasing. In this paper, we propose
a DR enabled AI based air conditioning system to overcome the
energy shortage problem in summer. It derives users’ comfortable
temperature by learning temperature and humidity, and automat-
ically controls the air conditioner based on derived temperature.
In addition, when DR is issued, the energy peak control based on
the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) is performed, thereby minimizing
the user comfort degradation and ﬁnding DR resource. The
experiment was conducted based on the test bed and we have
shown its feasibility.
Keywords–Demand Response; Artiﬁcial Intelligence; Predicted
Mean Vote; Air Conditioning System
I.
INTRODUCTION
Demand for energy continues to globally increase and a
tremendous social expense is required to recover from the
yearly arising blackouts. In recent years, there has been a
growing concern about the energy shortage, as the energy
consumption in summer and winter has increased sharply due
to abnormal climates, such as heat and cold waves [1].
Demand Response (DR) refers to a technology that bal-
ances energy demand and supply by adjusting electricity rate
and instructing load reduction when energy supply crisis arises.
Previously, DR studies mainly carry out to prevent power
outage in the factory or building. However, as remote control
of various home appliances in the smart home has become
possible thanks to the improvement of the Internet of Things
technology, DR in home and small buildings is also being
studied [2].
In this paper, we have proposed DR Enabled Artiﬁcial
Intelligence based Air Conditioning System to overcome the
energy shortage problem due to soaring energy use in the
summer. The air conditioning system predicts the Predicted
Mean Vote (PMV) [3] of each home using artiﬁcial intelligence
technology and automatically controls the air conditioner based
on the derived temperature by PMV. When DR signal is issued,
the air conditioning system adjusts the temperature of each
home according the learned PMV that reﬂects user’s preferred
comfort level. The experiment was conducted based on the test
bed and we have shown its feasibility.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes the system design, and Section III evaluates the
proposed system by conducting the experiment. Finally, we
conclude this paper in Section IV.
II.
DESIGN OF AI BASED AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM
Figure 1 outlines the proposed AI-based Air Conditioning
System. It is comprised of the air conditioner controller, the
Figure 1. Overview of AI based Air Conditioning System
database server, and the learning and control system. The air
conditioner controller plays a role in sending a control data by
the remote controller and periodically measured environmental
data (e.g., temperature, humidity, occupancy) to the database
server. Since it is equipped with an IR transceiver, IR signal
sniffed from the remote controller can be converted into a
control message.
The database server plays a role in storing data sent from
the air conditioner controller through RESTful web APIs. The
data includes temperature, humidity, and occupancy. Occu-
pancy data is expressed as 0 (unoccupied) or 1 (occupied)
to determine if the user is occupying the home.
The learning and control system learns the temperature and
humidity data obtained from the database server and generates
PMV learning model using an artiﬁcial neural network. The
temperature and humidity data is not used for learning when
the occupancy data is 0, and PMV stands among the most
recognized thermal comfort models that express satisfaction
with the thermal environment.
After the PMV learning model is generated, it derives the
current comfortable temperature of the home by assigning the
current humidity as a parameter to the PMV learning model
and sends the control message containing the derived temper-
ature to the air conditioner controller every 10 minutes. The
air conditioner controller generates IR signal corresponding to
the received control message and controls the air conditioner.
The control mode is divided into comfort and economy
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 2. Training Data and Predicted Comfortable Temperature Graph
based on PMV Learning Model
modes which are set by users’ smartphone. In the comfort
mode, the air conditioner is controlled by the derived comfort-
able temperature, and in the economy mode, it is controlled
to be 2 degrees higher. However, if the user changes the tem-
perature while the air conditioner is operating automatically,
the adjusted temperature is added to the previous training data
for the next learning. This allows the user’s intention to be
continuously reﬂected in the training data, thereby improving
the user’s satisfaction.
When the DR signal is issued, the air conditioner control
system queries the user through the smartphone whether to join
the DR. For the users joining the DR, their air conditioner
is controlled so as to minimize the difference between the
adjustable PMV and the learned comfortable PMV to minimize
the deterioration of the user comfort. This can be expressed
by the following equation;
Minimize :
N−1
X
i=0
|PMV (i) − cPMV (i)|
(1)
where PMV (i) is adjustable PMV of home i through
temperature control when the DR signal is issued, cPMV (i)
is learned comfortable PMV of home i, and N is the num-
ber of houses participating in DR. According to the above
equation, the air conditioner is initially controlled by assign-
ing cPMV (i) to PMV (i) which minimizes |PMV (i) −
cPMV (i)|. However, if the amount of energy saved is in-
sufﬁcient, PMV (i) increases until it reaches the target energy
savings. This minimizes the deterioration of comfort by DR.
III.
EXPERIMENT AND EVALUATION
Experiments based on the test bed were carried out to
verify the feasibility of the proposed AI based air conditioning
system. The test bed was constructed at a room in Korea
Electronics Technology Institute. We collected temperature,
humidity, occupancy data of the room from July 8th to 14th,
2018 and generated the PMV learning model based on these
data. Note that actual test bed will be extended in the future.
Figure 2 shows the training data of temperature for 7 days,
and the predicted comfortable temperature graph derived from
PMV learning model. The dots represent training data, and
the solid, dashed-dotted, and dotted lines show a comfortable
temperature graph in humidity 20, 40, 60, respectively. The
Figure 3. Comparison of Energy Usage in Comfort (7/15-7/21) and
Economy (7/22-7/28) modes
learning data distribution and the derived comfortable tem-
perature graph have a similar pattern, which shows that the
derived comfortable temperature reﬂects the user’s preference.
Using this derived comfortable temperature while DR operates,
the air conditioner is controlled according to the comfort
level, minimizing the deterioration of comfort in the home and
encouraging participation in the DR.
Figure 3 shows the energy usage difference between the
comfort (7/15-7/21) and economy modes (7/22-28). The left
and right bars on day of week show daily energy usage in the
comfort and economy modes, and the solid and dotted lines
show cumulative energy usage in the comfort and economy
modes. The difference between cumulative energy usage in
economy and comfort modes shows a tendency to increase
with time. Comparing these on Saturday, the economy mode
uses about 8.2 kW (= 45437-37168) less than the comfort
mode. This represents the amount of electricity that can be
saved by controlling the temperature, which can be used to
determine the amount of temperature that needs to be adjusted
to meet the target energy savings during DR operation.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have proposed the demand response
enabled artiﬁcial intelligence based air conditioning system.
The proposed system generates the PMV learning model by
learning temperature and humidity data, and performs PMV
based air conditioner control considering the user comfort level
when the demand response signal is issued. Experiments were
performed on a test bed and showed the feasibility of the
proposed system. For future research, we will apply current
work to the large scaled test bed and measure the performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Korea Institute of Energy
Technology Evaluation and Planning(KETEP) and the Ministry
of Trade, Industry & Energy(MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea
(No. 20161210200670).
REFERENCES
[1]
C. A. Craig and S. Feng, “Exploring utility organization electricity
generation, residential electricity consumption, and energy efﬁciency: A
climatic approach,” Applied Energy, vol. 185, no. N/A, pp. 779–790,
2017.
[2]
H.Park, H. Park, S. Lee, and J. Choi, “Design Analysis of Multicast
Based Lightweight Demand Response Protocol for Energy IoT Environ-
ment,” J. KICS, vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 1163–1175, 2018.
[3]
P. O. Fanger, “Thermal comport. Analysis and applications in environ-
mental engineering,” Copenhagen: Danish Technical Press, 2018.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

