 
Developing Affordable Sensors in Agriculture Based on Results Obtained at 
Embrapa Instrumentation 
 
Paulo S. de P. Herrmann1, Ladislau M. Rabello1, Victor Bertucci Neto1, Paulo E. Cruvinel1,2 
 
1 Embrapa Instrumentation (CNPDIA), 2 Computer Science Program, Federal University of Sao Carlos 
 Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil. e-mail; paulo.herrmann@embrapa.br ladislau.rabello@embrapa.br victor.bertucci@embrapa.br  
paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br 
Abstract— Agricultural sensors are crucial in improving crop 
yields and reducing resource waste. It has led researchers to 
develop affordable sensors that can be easily integrated into 
existing farming systems. Developing inexpensive sensors 
involves using low-cost materials and simple manufacturing 
methods, ensuring reliable and accurate measurements. One of 
Embrapa Instrumentation's objectives is the research and 
development of sensors applied to agriculture. This article 
briefly discusses a sensor for soil moisture measurement using 
the microwave technique; a system for measuring the apparent 
electrical conductivity of soils; a Sensor for measuring water 
and plant relationships; and the Sensor for evaluating spray 
solution concentration to control weeds to improve crop yield 
and reduce water. Using affordable sensors in agriculture can 
provide an effective and sustainable solution to enhance the 
productivity of small and medium farms, thus increasing food 
security and supporting sustainable agriculture. 
Keywords - Affordable sensors; Agriculture; soil moisture; 
soil resistance; water-plant measuring; spray quality; pest control. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The applications of sensors in general, and more 
specifically, affordable sensors, are the basis for developing 
devices 
for 
instrumentation, 
automation, 
precision 
agriculture, and digital agriculture. 
The global agricultural sensors market size was valued at 
USD 4.74 billion in 2021. It is expected to reach USD 16.83 
billion by 2030, growing at a Compound annual growth rate 
(CAGR) of 15.12% during the forecast period (2022–2030) 
[1]. 
The low-cost sensor is a technology initially developed 
for consumer and research applications. Competitive and 
low-cost due to economies of scale, these sensor 
technologies allow new applications or more economical use 
of sensors in production and environments [2]. 
Despite being used in research, most field sensors are still 
in their infancy in their commercial relationship. Soil 
moisture sensors can be mentioned, sensors that can correlate 
fertility, scales that could indicate performance, sensors, and 
indicators of pests and diseases, among others, and if they 
were present in the field, they could be connected to IoT 
(Internet of things) [3]–[5]. 
Below is a brief discussion of affordable sensors for 
agriculture, 
which 
were 
developed 
at 
Embrapa 
Instrumentation. In the next sections there are the 
descriptions of the recent development of affordable sensors, 
which are: a sensor for measuring soil moisture using 
microwaves with two techniques (waveguide and free 
space); a system for measuring the apparent electrical 
conductivity of ECa soils; a sensor for measuring the water 
and plant relationship; and a sensor to evaluate spray solution 
concentration to control weeds to improve crop yield and 
reduce water.  
The sensors listed have something in common: they are 
affordable and designed to be used in agricultural 
environments. They are capable of measuring different 
aspects of the environment, such as soil, water, plants, and 
weed control. Additionally, they can be integrated into IoT 
technologies. 
II. SENSOR FOR SOIL MOISTURE MEASUREMENT, USING 
MICROWAVE TECHNIQUES  
The content and availability of water in the soil are 
parameters of fundamental importance in the various fields 
of basic and applied science, as well as in technologies for 
agriculture, geology, meteorology, hydrology, and various 
areas of engineering. 
The most used techniques for measuring soil water are 
gravimetric, neutron moderation and gamma-ray attenuation, 
Time Domain Reflectometry (TDR), and remote sensing. 
Through the interaction of electromagnetic waves, at 
microwave frequency, with the water-soil system, greater or 
lesser attenuation of the signal is obtained depending on the 
volumetric moisture content present. Figure 1 presents a 
system for measuring soil moisture content that uses 
microwave signal transmission and reception through the 
waveguide technique, in the X band, with an operating 
frequency of 10 GHz and a power of 25 mW. In tests 
carried out at the laboratory level, we proved the correlation 
of the attenuation in dB with the volumetric humidity in 
clayey, sandy, and glass microsphere soils [6]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Presents a system for measuring soil moisture content that uses 
microwave signal transmission and reception through the waveguide 
technique. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 2 presents the results that show the influence of 
water in the water-soil system, in the attenuation of 
microwaves, through the relation of the attenuation of the 
signal in dB by the volumetric soil moisture in sandy soil 
(1.20 < soil density (g/cm3) < 1.26), clayey (0.83 < soil 
density (g/cm3) < 0.92)) and glass microsphere (1.13 < soil 
density (g/cm3) < 1.19)). The error in sample preparation 
was 4.7%. All measurements were conducted under 
laboratory conditions (room temperature ~23.0 ± 0.5 0C and 
relative humidity 36%).  
 
Figure 2.  The attenuation calibration curve in dB, as a function of the 
volumetric soil moisture of the samples 
A network analyzer, model 8510 from Hewlett-Packard, 
was used, evaluating the parameter insertion loss S21 (dB) to 
compare with the results obtained in the attenuation system 
in dB. Figure 3 presents the results for all samples with a 
linear regression where their r2 was 0.976. 
 
Figure 3.  Comparison between the results obtained with the proposed 
system and those obtained the insertion loss S21 (dB), using the 8510 HP 
network analyzer. 
Investigating the behavior of plant root system growth as 
a function of soil water is essential for studying root 
physiology. Figure 4 shows a non-invasive tool based on the 
transmittance of electromagnetic waves in the microwave 
frequency range, operating close to 4.8 GHz, which was 
developed using microstrip patch antennas to determine 
volumetric soil moisture in rhizoboxes. Antennas were 
placed on both sides of the rhizobox, and the S parameters 
were measured using a vector network analyzer.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Block diagram of the system developed to measure S21 (dB) of 
soil moisture in the rhizobox, using the Vector Network Analyzer, in the 
microwave frequency range (4.6–5.0 GHz). 
The dispersion parameter S21(dB) was also used to show 
the effect of different soil types and temperatures on the 
measurement. In addition, the sensitivity, reproducibility, 
and repeatability of the system were evaluated (Figure 5). 
The measurement was carried out three times to each dot (n 
= 3). The red dots represent the reproducibility (98.9%) 
averages, and the black dots represent the repeatability 
(93.0%) averages. The quantitative results of soil moisture, 
measured in rhizoboxes, presented in this work, demonstrate 
that the microwave technique using microstrip patch 
antennas is a reliable non-invasive, and accurate system, and 
has 
shown 
potentially 
promising 
applications 
for 
measurement of roots based on rhizobox phenotyping [7]. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The relation between |𝜀∗| versus the average of S21 (dB) shows 
the repeatability and reproducibility of the system developed were 
calculated. 
Figure 6 shows the relationship between the S21 measured 
with the developed system and the volumetric soil moisture 
θV (%) determined and calculated by the second and third-
order polynomial equation. The calibration was obtained 
using four (04) samples, which are: Cerrado Soil (squares), 
Kaktus Soil (open circles), and Glass Beads (triangles). The 
experiment was carried out at the standard laboratory 
ambient conditions (Temperature (T(◦C)) = 25.0 ± 0.5 ◦C and 
Relative Humidity (RH(%)) 30%). 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 6.  Relationship between the S21 measured with the developed 
system and the volumetric soil moisture θV (%). The four (04) samples 
used are Cerrado Soil (squares), Kaktus Soil (open circles) and Glass 
Beads (triangles). 
III. SYSTEM FOR MEASURING THE APPARENT 
ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY OF SOILS ECa 
Soil apparent electrical conductivity (ECa) originated 
from measuring soil salinity, a pertinent problem in arid 
zones associated with irrigated crops and areas with shallow 
water tables. Soil ECa is greatly influenced by a vast 
combination of physical and chemical properties of the soil, 
such as soluble salts; mineralogy and clay content; the 
amount of water present in the soil; volumetric density; 
organic matter, and soil temperature. 
The most effective application of apparent soil electrical 
conductivity is at field scale in mapping the spatial variability 
of many edaphic properties, e.g., organic matter, moisture, 
and in the determination of a wide variety of anthropogenic 
properties, such as: leaching fraction; irrigation and drainage 
patterns; compaction patterns due to machinery [8]. 
Soil ECa is a quick, more reliable, and easy tool than 
other techniques, but it only sometimes correlates with crop 
yield. Therefore, the ECa measurement is among the most 
frequent tools used in research in precision agriculture for the 
space-time characterization of edaphic and anthropogenic 
properties that influence crop productivity. 
The measurement of electrical conductivity (σ) originates 
from the measurement of electrical resistivity (ρ), which 
consists of using a sample of known shapes and dimensions 
(square, cylindrical, and others). 
The electrical resistance is then calculated by the 
following equation: 
 
𝑅 =  𝜌 (
𝐿
𝐴)  
 
(1) 
 
Where: 
 
R = electrical resistance [Ohms, Ω]; 
ρ = electrical resistivity [Ohms x centimeters, Ω.cm]; 
L = sample length [cm, cm]. 
 
For samples of undefined shapes and dimensions, the 
method known as the four-point system [9] [10] is used, 
Figure 7, which consists of using four metal electrodes 
sequentially aligned with known distances. 
 
Figure 7.  Four-point system. 
Applying electrical current I (Ampere) to the outer 
electrodes and with a voltage V (Volts) reading from the two 
center electrodes. The resistivity is then calculated with the 
following equation: 
𝜌 = 
2. 𝜋 (𝑉
𝐼 )
1
𝑆1 + 1
𝑆2 − 
1
𝑆1 + 𝑆2 − 
1
𝑆2 + 𝑆3
 
(2) 
 
Electrical conductivity, σ, is defined as the inverse of 
electrical resistivity, so we have: 
𝜎 = 
1
𝜌  
(3) 
 
Figure 8 illustrates the block diagram of the developed 
system, which uses the PIC18F258 manufactured by 
Microchip Technology [20] as its central processor. The 
system 
was 
designed 
for 
reading 
two 
four-point 
measurement systems, consisting of two voltmeters, one of 
unitary gain and the other of gain three for deeper 
measurements, an alternating voltage source of 159 Hz for 
measuring electric current, three signal filters for reading 
channels, three alternating to continuous signal converters, 
1024 bits; 1 bit resolution; 4.88x10-3 Volts dc; 32-character 
LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) for viewing electrical 
conductivity measurements and control information, four-
function keyboard for user-machine communication; 
standard RS232 serial port for communication and transfer 
of stored data and NMEA (National Marine Electronics 
Association) sentences for GNSS (Global Navigation 
Satellite System) system and flash memory for storage of 
collected data, the capacity of 64 KBytes, in Figure 9 the 
system is illustrated. 
 
Figure 8.  Apparent electrical conductivity system block diagram. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Figure 9.  Electrical conductivity measurement system. 
Figure 10 illustrates measurements taken using the 
system in an area where vines are planted in the study and 
definition of homogeneous areas for this crop. 
 
Figure 10.  Maps of homogeneous zones of apparent soil electrical 
conductivity, a - ECa at a depth of 0.3 m; b - ECa at depth 0.9 m,  
grapevine crop, semi-arid region, Brazil 
Continuing the work with a conductivity measurement 
system, we evaluated the possibilities of implementing direct 
reading of soil electrical conductivity data and making them 
available in the cloud for analysis in artificial intelligence, 
making these data available to interested parties, direct 
integration with productivity maps, soil attributes, soil 
fertility for decision-making in crop management possibly in 
real time, configurations for variable rate application 
systems, updating of the technology used due to the constant 
modernization of these technologies, making it possible to 
expand the system for the use of IoT and use of programming 
for cell phones . 
IV. SENSOR FOR MEASURING WATER AND 
PLANT RELATIONSHIPS 
Studies in water relations of higher plants often present 
many ongoing debates about the mechanisms responsible for 
the ascent of water in plants. In the 70’s, one of the most 
useful techniques to aid in direct measurements of plant cells, 
called the pressure probe [11], was developed. It consisted of 
a glass capillary connected to a chamber filled with oil that 
punctured the cell wall, thus establishing a hydraulic 
connection between the cell sap and oil content.  
Using an optical microscope, it was possible to measure 
the movement of the oil/cell sap boundary, the meniscus, and 
then by raising or lowering the oil pressure inside the 
chamber mechanically until the meniscus returned to its 
original position, one could measure the pressure with a 
sensor in the oil chamber. Through this technique, as well as 
a series of improvements (such as system automation), it was 
possible to more accurately determine how plant cell 
pressure varies under different physical conditions, thus 
enabling an understanding of the hydraulic conductivity of 
cell membranes and the volumetric modulus of the cell’s 
elasticity [12]. 
Unfortunately, there had not been a detailed physical 
model describing how to calculate measurement errors, time 
constants, dynamical behavior, and temperature correlation. 
Bertucci Neto [13] developed a physical model of the 
pressure probe and proposed an automated pressure probe 
based on thermal, instead of mechanical, compensation [13].  
The meniscus movement could be parameterized and 
correlated with the pressure applied to the capillary tip. One 
of the detection techniques developed was based on video 
image digitization. A single video line related to the 
meniscus position was striped and digitized. In this manner, 
the meniscus position is correlated to the time base. In Figure 
11 the whole video image is shown, while Figure 12 shows 
the information of a video frame and a striped video line 
related to the meniscus position. 
        
Figure 11.  Video image of the meniscus in the capillary. 
The information obtained on the single video line is 
shown in Figure 13 as well as the digitized signal. The other 
technique was based on image treatment (through LabView). 
The meniscus positional datum was used to control the 
system and return the meniscus to its original position 
through a feedback loop. Through the camera signal, it was, 
therefore, possible to select a region in the image in which a 
single video line carried the entirety of the data on the 
meniscus’ position. As predicted in the modeling study, the 
relationship between electric heating voltage and the 
meniscus position in pixels is quadratic, as shown in Figure 
14. The quadratic approximation presents a standard 
deviation of less than 10 pixels. By using a feedback loop 
and including a PID controller, it was possible to keep the 
meniscus in its original position after a pressure step input. 
This is shown in Figure 14, where the measured and 
modeling responses are compared. Although dynamical 
measurements can present large errors, primarily during 
short meniscus movements, the techniques can be 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

appropriated to measure long-term pressure variations in 
plant cells. 
 
Figure 12.  Oscilloscope signal. Above: Video signal of 262.5 lines of a 
frame. Down:  Single video line stripped from the frame in the region of 
the meniscus image. 
 
Figure 13.  Oscilloscope signal. Above: digitized signal after the voltage 
comparator. Down: voltage information of the single video line. 
 
Figure 14.  Quadratic behavior between electric power in volt and 
meniscus’ displacement. 
 
Figure 15.  Meniscus returning to the origin position after a pressure step at 
the tip of the capillary due to the PID control action. Red line: simulated 
response; black line: measured response. 
V. 
SENSOR FOR THE PH REAL TIME 
MEASUREMENTS IN AGRICULTURAL SPRAY 
SOLUTION 
The pH is a scale from 0 to 14 used to determine the 
degree of acidity of a solution, being possible to classify it as 
acidic (pH < 7), basic (pH > 7), or neutral (pH = 7). It is based 
on the degree of acidity of an aqueous solution based on the 
concentration of hydronium ions (H3O+).  
Acidic solutions have excess hydronium ions and a pH 
lower than 7. On the other hand, basic solutions have an 
excess of hydroxyl ions (OH-) and pH values greater than 7. 
In addition, solutions considered neutral have the same 
concentration of H3O+ ions and OH- ions, and their pH 
measurement is 7. 
The negative logarithm of the molar concentration of 
H3O+ ions in the form can obtain the pH measurement: 
 
pH= −log[H3O+] 
(4) 
 
Naturally when one is considering water the process of 
auto-ionization has the same amount of H3O+ and OH- ions. 
Therefore, aqueous solutions of any substance have these 
two types of ions, and the condition of acidity or basicity of 
the medium is defined by the ratio between the amounts of 
H3O+ and OH-, so as follows (Table I). 
TABLE I.  MEDIUM AND STATUS IN TERMS OF THE PH OCCURRENCE.  
medium 
status 
Acid 
excess H3O+ ions 
Basic 
excess OH- ions 
Neutral 
equal amounts of H3O+ 
and OH- ions 
 
Hydronium ions are formally represented as H3O+. 
However, it is common to find the notation H+ for 
hydronium ions or to refer to the acidity of a medium. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Pesticides, insecticides, and herbicides have their 
effectiveness modified by the pH of the solution resulting 
from the preparation of syrup that involves the active agent 
of these products and water. 
Generally, for weed control, herbicides are used, which 
work better in slightly acidic pH, around pH 4 to 6, and in 
some exceptions may act better in slightly alkaline. 
Glyphosate, for example, acts preferentially between pH 3.5 
to 5.0, being a weak acid [14] [15]. 
At this pH of the spray solution, the ions are dissociated, 
favoring the foliar absorption of glyphosate due to the greater 
ease of crossing cell membranes, increasing the effectiveness 
of the product [16]. Besides, the effectiveness of glyphosate 
is affected both by the pH of the medium and by the presence 
of cations in the spray water [17]. 
The above or below ideal range can initiate degradation 
of the molecule, or hydrolysis. For example, when a weak 
acidic herbicide is mixed in a solution with an acidic pH, it 
tends to remain intact, however if it is mixed in a solution 
with an alkaline pH, it can result in the breakdown of 
molecules. In fact, despite many pesticides having a 
buffering effect in their formulations, special attention 
should be considered in pH value monitoring. Therefore, 
regardless of the pH of the pre-existing spray solution, one 
may adjust to the pH close to the ideal of each formulation. 
This is a fact that the producer must be aware of, 
especially in mixtures with fungicides and insecticides, 
which may have negative effects on the effectiveness of other 
pesticides.  
A pH sensor has been developed to operate in real time 
directly embedded into a spray nozzle, which is located on 
the spray boom (Figure 16). 
 
Figure 16.  Technical draw of the intelligent pH sensor assembled on the 
nozzle for direct injection sprayer. 
It has been used as a Raspberry Pi (RPi) due to its 
powerful processor, rich I/O interface and Internet of Things 
(IoT) capability, which allowed the remote control across 
existing spray boom infrastructure and reduced human 
intervention [18]. Besides, the developed IoT pH system can 
gather measurements data for intelligent evaluation by 
resident software. 
The RPi is a mini-embedded computer developed in the 
United Kingdom by the Raspberry Pi Foundation in 
association with Broadcom. The model used was the RPi 3 
B+, where its specifications can be seen in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
RASPBERRY PI 3 MODEL B+ CHARACTERISTICS 
 
The internal memory is defined using a micro SD card, 
where the kernel of the operating system is also present, 
being recommended the use of at least 8 GB of memory. In 
addition, the RPi 3 B+, unlike previous family models, 
enables BCM43438 wireless LAN and Bluetooth Low 
Energy (BLE) communication, allowing wireless data 
exchange. 
 
Figure 17.  Block diagram for the fungicides, herbicides or insecticides, 
mixture control, and the intelligent pH sensor. 
When it is being applied to a direct injection sprayer it 
has a typical control loop as shown in Figure 17. In this 
figure, the upper blocks indicate the direct injection 
components and corresponding variables qhref, Vh, and qh, 
which represent the set point for the chemical flow, 
controlled, and measured variables respectively. In the lower 
blocks, at the same figure, is possible to observe the sprayer 
components, which are described as qfref, Vf, and qm, which 
represent the set point for the mixture flow, controlled, and 
measured variables respectively. In this type of direct 
injection sprayer, the injection point is located upstream from 
the sprayer pump as presented in [18], and [19]. The water 
flow qw is dependent on both the flow mixture qm and the 
injection flow qh. The intelligent sensor is assembled to 
measure the pH of the spray solution, which is proportional 
to its output denoted VpH. 
Figure 18 shows the flow-diagram of the algorithm for 
real time self-diagnostics. 
 
Figure 18.  Computational Flow diagram for the real time measurements 
and flag related to the spray solution pH evaluation. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The calibration curve for the intelligent sensor for pH 
measurements is presented in Figure 19 
 
Figure 19.  Calibration Curve and comparison with values obtained with 
prepared solutions with well-known pH values. 
Using the microwave techniques since the temperature 
affects the error of volumetric soil moisture measurements; a 
calibration curve requires information on soil temperature 
and soil water content. The distinct effect of porous media on 
the calibration curve (S21 (dB) vs θV (%)) was also observed, 
giving the opportunity to use such an approach to investigate 
plant root growth in different soil types and moisture. 
Techniques that allow deepening the study of water 
relations in plants are impacting areas of Agronomic 
Engineering in addition to cutting-edge areas such as Plant 
Phenotyping. 
The information provided by the intelligent pH sensor 
could be in the form of a flag, which shows a confidence level 
of the spray solution quality during its applications. 
Furthermore, the results show additional information than 
traditional sensors and meet prospects in practical 
applications, bringing potential benefits for sustainability, 
precision agriculture processes, and the potential to be used 
in IoT systems. His configurations will depend on demand 
and large-scale applications. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Using the sensor developed with microwave technique 
(waveguide and microstrip antenna) in the GHz frequency, is 
possible to see that the main benefits with the instrument 
proposed here, that are: the use of a non-destructive 
methodology, easy measurement of soil water, portability, 
the use of non-ionizing radiation, speed in the measurement 
and low cost.  
The use of the apparent electrical conductivity of the soil 
has demonstrated as an important tool for precision 
agricultural work, its ease, simplicity and practicality lead to 
time and cost savings in carrying out decision-making in the 
areas of management and spatial variability of study areas. 
But ECa alone does not answer all questions needed after the 
data mosaic she provides, mine that data and make it more 
user friendly. 
The physical model of the pressure probe was improved, 
and an automated pressure gauge was developed to 
investigate the displacement of the meniscus in the 
observation of the water-plant ratio.  
An intelligent sensor to measure the pH of spray systems 
based on direct injection was presented. The results have 
shown its usability in real time applications. The decision to 
embed such an intelligent sensor directly in the sprayer 
nozzle provides a scenario that can be useful to avoid losses 
in agricultural production. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the following Brazilian 
research agencies: Embrapa Instrumentation and Embrapa 
Labex – Europe 
REFERENCES 
[1] Agricultural Sensors Market Growth, Share, Forecast to 2030. 
https://straitsresearch.com/report/agricutural-sensors-
market#:~:text=Market%20Snapshot&text=The%20global%
20agricultural%20sensors%20market,period%20(2022%E2%
80%932030). 2021 (accessed in 15/02/2023). 
[2] M. Kückelhaus, and G. Chung, “Logistics Trend Radar, DHL 
Customer Solutions & Innovation”, Germany. Retrieved from 
www.dhl.com. 2013 (Accessed 03.07.2018). 
[3] T. M. Banhazi, et al. “Precision livestock farming: An 
international review of scientific and commercial aspects.” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Agricultural 
and 
Biological 
Engineering, v.5, Iss.: 3, pp. 1-9, 2012. 
[4] P. E. Cruvinel and L. Martin Neto, “Subsídios para o 
desenvolvimento do agronegócio brasileiro: o programa 
automação agropecuária, visão e estratégias. (Subsidies for the 
development of Brazilian agribusiness: the agricultural 
automation program, vision and strategies.)” Comunicado 
Técnico, Embrapa Instrumentação, n. 32, set/99, p. 1-4, 1999. 
[5] G. S. Hundal, C. M. Laux, D. Buckmaster, M. J. Sutton, and 
M. Langemeier, “Exploring Barriers to the Adoption of 
Internet of Things-Based Precision Agriculture Practices.” 
Agriculture, 13, 163, 2023, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture13010163. 
[6] P. S. P. Herrmann. "Caracterização de um equipamento para 
medida de umidade do solo através de técnica de microondas.” 
(Characterization of an equipment for measuring soil moisture 
using the microwave technique.). Eng. M.Sc Dissertation. 
Escola de Engenharia de São Carlos, Departamento de 
Engenharia Elétrica. 1993. 
[7] P. S. P. Herrmann, V. Sydoruk, and F. N. Marques Porto, 
“Microwave Transmittance Technique Using Microstrip Patch 
Antennas, as a Non-Invasive Tool to Determine Soil Moisture 
in Rhizoboxes”. Sensors, v. 20, p. 1166, 2020. 
[8] D. R. Nielsen, J. W. Biggar, and K. T. Erh, “Spatial variability 
of field-measurement soil-water properties.” Hilgardia, 
Berkeley, v. 42, n. 7, p. 215-259, 1973 
[9] F. M. Smits, “Measurement of sheet resistivities with the four-
point probe”, Bell System Technical Journal, New York, p. 
711-718, May 1958. 
[10] W. 
R. 
Runyan, 
“Semiconductor 
measurement 
and 
instrumentation.” New York: McGraw-Hill book, c1975, Cap. 
3. 
[11] D. Hüsken, E. Steudle, and U. Zimmermann, “Pressure probe 
technique for measuring water relations of cells in higher 
plants.” Plant Physiology. v. 61. p. 158-163, 1978. 
[12] D. J. Cosgrove, and D. M. Durachko, “Automated pressure 
probe for measurement of water transport properties of higher 
plant cells.” Review of Scientific Instrument. v.57. n.10. 
p.2614-2619, 1986. 
[13] V. Bertucci Neto, Modelagem e automação em nova técnica 
de medida para relações de água e planta. (Modeling and 
automation in a new measurement technique for water and 
plant relationships.) Eng. PhD Thesis. Escola de Engenharia 
de São Carlos, Departamento de Engenharia Elétrica. 2005. 
[14]  P. 
Christofolleti 
“Material 
de 
aula 
(AgroAdvance)” 
(Classroom material (AgroAdvance)). 35pp, 2021. 
[15] T. L. C. Andrade, Ação acaricida do hexythiazox, dicofol e 
óxido de fenbutatin, em três níveis de pH da calda, no controle 
do ácaro Brevipalpus phoenicis Geijskes, em condições de 
laboratório. (Acaricidal action of hexythiazox, dicofol and 
fenbutatin oxide, at three pH levels of the syrup, in the control 
of the mite Brevipalpus phoenicis Geijskes, under laboratory 
conditions.) Jaboticabal, 71 p. Dissertação (Mestrado em 
Agronomia, Área de Concentração em Entomologia Agrícola) 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

– Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias e Veterinárias, Universidade 
Estadual Paulista, 1997.  
[16] D. M. Sanchotene et al, “Influência de sais e do pH da água na 
eficiência de imazethapyr + imazapic no controle de arroz-
vermelho” (“Influence of salts and water pH on the efficiency 
of imazethapyr + imazapic in controlling red rice.”), Planta 
Daninha, v.25, p.415-419, 2007. 
[17] S. J. P. Carvalho et al, “Eficácia e pH de caldas de glifosato 
após a adição de fertilizantes nitrogenados e utilização de 
pulverizador pressurizado por CO2 (Efficacy and pH of 
glyphosate mixtures after the addition of nitrogen fertilizers 
and the use of a sprayer pressurized by CO2.)”. Pesquisa 
Agropecuária Brasileira, 44, no.6: 569-575, 2009. 
[18] U. R. Antuniassi, P.  Miller, and M. Paice, Performance 
evaluation of injection metering systems, RevistaBrasileira de 
Engenharia Agrícola e Ambiental, Vol. 6, Issue 1, pp. 159-165, 
2002.  
[19] K. P. Gillis, D. K. Giles, D. C. Slaughter, and D. Downey, 
Injection mixing system for boomles, target-activated 
herbicide spraying, Transaction of the ASAE, Vol. 46, Issue 4, 
pp. 997-1008, 2003. 
[20] Microchip Technology. htttp://www.microchip.com. accessed 
in 15/03/2023 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

