Prediction of Resident’s Outing Time for Energy Saving 
Sanghun Kim 
Energy IT Convergence Research Center, Convergence 
System R&D Division, Korea Electronics Technology 
Institute, Republic of Korea. 
ksh7150@keti.re.kr 
Kiwoong Kwon 
Energy IT Convergence Research Center, Convergence 
System R&D Division, Korea Electronics Technology 
Institute, Republic of Korea. 
kiwoong.kwon@keti.re.kr 
Jungmee Yun 
Energy IT Convergence Research Center, Convergence 
System R&D Division, Korea Electronics Technology 
Institute, Republic of Korea. 
yunjm@keti.re.kr 
Sanghak Lee 
Energy IT Convergence Research Center, Convergence 
System R&D Division, Korea Electronics Technology 
Institute, Republic of Korea. 
sanghaklee88@keti.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—By analyzing the occupancy pattern of the user, it is 
possible to find out the time when they are expected to go out. 
Based on this, if Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 
(HVAC) can be controlled in advance, energy consumption can 
be reduced. The buildings are basically equipped with 
insulation technology, so they can maintain indoor comfort for 
a certain period of time even after ceasing HVAC system. 
Therefore, by predicting the time when the user goes out and 
performing the pre-control of the HVAC, the energy-saving 
effect can be obtained. In this paper, we propose a technique to 
detect periodic and repetitive outing of the resident by 
analyzing user’s occupancy pattern. By pre-control of the 
HVAC with occupancy, the energy consumption can be 
reduced without harming the comfort of the user. 
Keywords- Occupancy Sensor; Occupancy Probability; 
Energy Saving; HVAC. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Reducing energy use is a very important issue in terms of 
economic, environmental and social aspects. Users can 
achieve economic benefits by reducing energy costs, and the 
government can realize social values by reducing the cost of 
constructing power plants and the cost of energy imports. 
This energy saving is very important because it can slow 
down climate change and protect the environment [1]. For 
this rea-son, various technologies have been developed as 
energy saving methods; however it is known that it is most 
important to reduce wasted energy. 
Some researches on room temperature control based on 
occupancy probability have been carried out [2][3]. 
However, these researches focused on the comfort of the 
users and did not consider saving energy. 
In this paper, we analyze user’s repetition pattern 
(absence and presence) by energy conservation method and 
try to find out the time of going out. By using this point of 
departure, energy consumption can be reduced by shutting 
down or lowering the output of devices, such as Heating, 
Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC). Since the 
buildings are equipped with basic insulation technology, the 
comfort of the room is not significantly degraded even after 
the cooling / heating interruption. Therefore, when the user is 
expected to go out, even if the HVAC device is shut down 
earlier, the comfort of the user is not impaired and the energy 
consumption is expected to be reduced. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes 
the outing prediction process. Section 3 describes the brief 
results obtained from our experiment. Finally, Section IV 
presents our conclusions and future works. 
II. 
OUTING PREDICTION 
The proposed method performs clustering based on user's 
occupancy data. This is because the user's repetition pattern 
changes depending on whether the day is working day or not. 
At this time, it is also possible to consider using calendar 
information, user schedule and location; however in this 
paper, only the occupancy sensor data is used. By using the 
information such as the planner and global positioning 
system (GPS) of the smartphone and Google calendar, it is 
possible to know the time when the user goes out. In this 
case, however, there are side effects such as a risk of 
personal information leakage and hardware unit price 
increase. Therefore, in this paper, we tried to predict user 
outage time by analyzing only occupancy data. 
Since the calendar data is not used in this study, data for 
each date are assigned to 7 groups in order (using the 
repetition of seven days in a week), and finally divided into 
two clusters using K-means clustering algorithm [4] 
(holidays and working days). For each of these two clusters, 
the non-parametric estimation technique kernel density 
estimation (KDE) [5] with Epanechnikov kernel is used [6]. 
Through the process, the discrete-time probability is 
converted into continuous-time probability and smoothing 
effects can also be expected. 
III. 
RESULTS 
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
technique, Passive Infra-Red (PIR) sensor is used. Data 
received from the sensors were divided into 30 minute 
intervals, and the decision whether the user is occupied or 
not was made. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

In this paper, we use three experimental rooms to obtain 
the resident’s occupancy information and to derive the 
probabilities. The list of rooms used is shown in Table 1. 
Experimental occupancy data were obtained from August 1 
to August 30, 2018 (this is the hottest season in Korea and 
has the most energy use). The clustering results were shown 
in Figure 1. Clustering results are the same in all three 
experimental rooms. Therefore, only one representative is 
shown. Data of working days were extracted from these two 
clusters. During the working days and holidays, we focused 
on working days (i.e., cluster 1 from Figure 1.). Figures 2 to 
4 show the probability of occupancy. In these figures, it can 
be seen that the probability of dropping below 0.5 is the 
estimated time of going out. Therefore, energy savings can 
be achieved by turning off the HVAC systems before that 
point. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we have performed outing time prediction 
based on the user’s occupancy probability, and found that 
energy savings can be achieved by shutting down or 
lowering the output of HVAC equipment before the user’s 
estimated time of departure. 
The actual energy saving effect is under investigation, 
and we will find out by demonstration how much energy we 
can save. In addition, although this paper focuses on offices 
only, studies on general housing will be conducted. The 
authors are preparing a paper containing these new contents. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Korea Institute of 
Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and 
the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the 
Republic of Korea (No. 20161210200670). 
The authors would like to appreciate the anonymous 
reviewers, whose comments and suggestions improved the 
quality of this manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. A. Abdelaziz, R. Saidur, and S. Mekhilef, “A Review on Energy 
Saving Strategies in Industrial Sector,” Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, vol. 15, pp. 150-168, Jan. 2011. 
[2] J. Scott, et. al., “PreHeat: Controlling Home Heating Using 
Occupancy Prediction,” in Proc. ACM Int'l Conf. Ubiquitous 
Computing, pp. 281-290, Sep. 2011. 
[3] C. Koehler, B. D. Ziebart, J. Mankoff, and A. K. Dey, “ TherML: 
Occupancy Prediction for Thermostat Control,” in Proc. ACM Int'l 
Conf. Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 103-112, Sep. 2013. 
[4] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New 
York: Springer, 2006. 
[5] J.-P. Vert, K. Tsuda, and V. Schölkopf, “A Primer on Kernel 
Methods,” in Kernel Methods in Computational Biology, J.-P. Vert, 
K. Tsuda, V. Schölkopf Ed. MIT press 2004, pp. 35–70. 
[6] A. K. Jain, R. P. W. Duin, and J. Mao, “Statistical Pattern 
Recognition: A Review,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 4-37, Jan. 2000. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Clustering results of the occupancy data. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Occupancy probability of the first experimental room 1. 
 
 
Figure 3. Occupancy probability of the second experimental room. 
 
 
Figure 4. Occupancy probability of the third experimental room. 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. LIST OF ROOMS FOR DATA ACQUISITION AND EXPERIMENT. 
Place 
Type 
Area 
Number of Usual Resident 
Room 1 
Office 
57.36 m2 
4 
Room 2 
Office 
60.66 m2 
7 
Room 3 
Office 
79.34 m2 
4 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

