Analysis of Adhesive Layer Material Influence on Transmission Characteristics of 
Plasmonic Based Biosensor with Nano-Hole Array 
Ilya Belyakov, Nicholas Pfeifle, Merhdad Irannejad, Kingsley Wong, Emma Belliveau and Mustafa Yavuz, 
Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology  
University of Waterloo 
Waterloo, ON, Canada 
e-mail: belyakov.bmstu@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Noble metal thin films have good optical properties 
as is required for Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) biosensors. 
The use of such films is often limited by their poor adhesion to 
glass substrates. It makes them susceptible to critical 
mechanical damage, creating a barrier for use outside 
laboratory. An intermediate adhesive layer can solve this 
problem but will affect the biosensor’s optical properties. 
Keywords-Surface Plasmon Resonance; NHA; EOT. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
   Thin films of noble metals are well known for their good 
optical properties for biosensors. Among these noble thin 
films, gold films are suffered from poor adhesion to the oxide 
glass substrates. An intermediate adhesive layer can solve 
this problem such as Titanium and Tantalum, but it will affect 
the gold thin film biosensor optical performance. Among 
different type of sacrificial layer Aluminum (Al), Titanium 
(Ti), Tantalum (Ta), Chromium (Cr), and Tungsten (W) are 
the most promising candidates for gold based Extraordinary 
Optical Transmission (EOT) applications [1] [2]. 
II. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS 
The Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) sensor is based on 
the interaction between light and metal nanoparticles. A 
number of numerical methods are used to solve Maxwell’s 
equations; however, a Finite Difference Time Domain 
(FDTD) method has been widely applied to study the 
interaction of an electromagnetic wave and surrounding 
medium and objects. In this study, a plane wave of linearly 
polarized light along the Y-axis (λcenter = 575 nm with λspan 
= 350 nm) which propagates along the Z-axis, was used. The 
background environment was taken as water with a refractive 
index n=1.333. A periodic Nanohole Structure (NHA) with 
hole radius of 100nm, gold film thickness of 100 nm was 
considered in this study. The effect of five different metals 
were considered as an adhesive film with different thicknesses 
in the range of 2 nm to 25nm on optical performance of a NHA 
array as a biosensor. The calculation cell was considered as 
400×400×1500 nm3, and the Periodic Boundary Condition 
(PBC) was used in the X- and Y-directions. Whilst the 
Anisotropic Perfect Matching Layer (APML) was used in the 
Z-direction as an absorbing boundary condition. The 
calculation grid resolution was as high as 1 to 3 nm in the 
calculation time was set as 200 fs. The transmission spectra 
were calculated using an X-Y monitor at 150 nm away from 
the gold NHA surface.  
III. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION 
After a series of numerical analysis by targeting different 
sacrificial layers and thicknesses, it was found that using 
chromium film has no effect on the transmission properties of 
the NHA structure, while using tungsten as a sacrificial layer 
resulted in 12% and 19% increases in the transmission 
intensity of the resonance peaks at the wavelengths of 624 nm 
and 762 nm, respectively. It was also found that by using 
tantalum and titanium sacrificial films an extra resonance pea 
was recorded at the wavelength of 720 nm with transmission 
of 18% which could be attributed to the surface plasmon 
resonance of the sacrificial layer. The sacrificial layer 
resonance wavelength of the NHA structure with titanium 
intermediate layer was recorded at the wavelength of 740 nm 
with transmission intensity of 27.5%. 
In conclusion, aluminum is a promising candidate as a 
sacrificial layer for NHA biosensors to achieve higher 
sensitivity and Figure of Merit (FOM).  More analysis on the 
effects of using aluminum as an intermediate layer is 
underway and its results will be presented in due course. 
REFERENCES 
[1] X. Fan et al., "Assembly of gold nanoparticles into aluminum 
nanobowl array", Scientific Reports, vol. 7, no. 1, 2017. 
Available: 10.1038/s41598-017-02552-z. 
[2] J. Bhattarai, M. Maruf and K. Stine, "Plasmonic-Active 
Nanostructured Thin Films", Processes, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 115, 
2020. Available: 10.3390/pr8010115. 
 
 
                     
                             
(a) 
Figure 1.  (a) Recorded transmission spectrum for various adhesive layer materials with the same geometrical properties. (b) Lumerical FDTD simulation, 
(1) NHA structure, (2) sacrificial layer (3) substrate, (4) light source, (5) T_monitor, (6) FDTD region 
 
z 
x 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-875-4
ALLSENSORS 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

