Printed Humidity Sensors And Their Application 
Zhiyi Zhang*, Mickey Chen, Salima Alem, Ye Tao*, Ta-Ya Chu, Gaozhi Xiao, Chundra Ramful, Ryan Griffin 
Advanced Electronics and Photonics Research Center, National Research Council Canada, Canada 
e-mail: zhiy.zhang@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca; ye.tao@nrc-cnrc-gc.ca 
 
Abstract—We have developed a new type of printed capacitive 
humidity sensors with stacked parallel-plate electrodes. A 
polymer sensing material with extremely low hysteresis and a 
grid top electrode design that ensures the sensor’s rapid 
response to humidity changes were used in the sensors. Screen 
printing, flexo printing and inkjet printing were used to print 
the sensors with a capacitance value of 400-2730 pF and a 
sensitivity of 1.2-11.4 pF/%RH obtained, depending on the 
printing methods. The sensitivity of the printed sensors was 
found to decrease with a raised temperature, and the 
temperature effects were attributed to the water sorption in 
the sensing polymer and its relationship with temperature. A 
method of calibrating the temperature of the sensors was thus 
proposed and implemented. With the obtained capacitance 
value over 400 pF, low-cost electronic circuit PCB boards were 
designed and fabricated to attach the printed sensors, resulting 
in standalone and functional humidity sensing units. Each of 
the humidity sensing units is equipped with light energy 
harvesting, capacitance measurement, and wireless data 
transmission, as well as the calibration capability for 
converting measured capacitance to relative humidity. The 
units were successfully applied in the building management of 
commercial office buildings. 
Keywords-humidity sensors; printing; filed application. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Printing on flexible substrates is an emerging technology 
for sensor fabrication. With the combination of new solution-
based functional materials and cost-effective printing 
processes, the technology enables large, flexible, stretchable, 
lightweight devices that were not possible using traditional 
semiconductor processes [1][2]. Various sensors were 
fabricated with the technology, and some of them have been 
commercialized with a great success. Printed glucose sensors 
alone, for example, already have annual sales of multi-billion 
US dollars. Many other printed sensors, such as temperature 
sensors, organic photodetectors, pressure sensors, humidity 
sensors have either found practical applications or showed 
promising future. 
In our work of applying printed and flexible humidity 
sensors in high performance building management, we need 
sensors that have a capacitance value of several hundred pF 
and can be measured with a low-cost DC circuit. But, the 
existing printed sensors normally have a capacitance value of 
several pF and sensitivity in fF/%RH range, and the sensors 
need a complicated instrument to analyze [3][4]. We 
therefore proposed parallel-plate structure with a grid top 
electrode to achieve high capacitance and high sensitivity, 
and studied the fundamental characteristics and temperature 
effect of the obtained sensors in detail. With these, we were 
able to bring the printed humidity sensors to standalone 
sensing units that can harvest light energy, perform humidity 
measurement and transmit data wirelessly at regular interval. 
In Section 2, experiment details are provided and in 
Section 3, the results with discussion are presented. In 
Section 4, the work is concluded. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENT 
Cellulose acetate butyrate with 12-15 wt% acetyl and 36-
40% butyryl content was used as sensing material with 
ethylene glycol diacetate as its solvent. Silver flake-based 
ink was used for screen printing electrodes and PET films for 
substrates. Silver nanoparticles-based ink was used for 
flexographic printing and inkjet printing. An EKRA X1-SL 
screen printer, the flexo unit of Testacolor 171 from NSM-
AG, and a Dimatix 2800 inkjet printer from Fujifilm Dimatix 
were used to print the sensors.  
The capacitance of the printed sensors was measured 
with Agilent 4284A LCR meter for dynamic monitoring, and 
a battery-powered circuitmate capacitance meter (called as 
DC meter here) from Beckman Industrial co was used in the 
detailed study of the sensors at various temperatures and 
under various water vapor pressures. For the packaged 
sensors, the measurement was done by the PCB boards 
automatically and periodically. The capacitance-humidity-
temperature characterization was carried out in a Burnsco B-
Series environmental chamber.  
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this work, we proposed a new type of printed capacitive 
humidity sensors with stacked parallel-plate electrodes to 
achieve a high capacitance value and high sensitivity. Figure 
1 shows the structure of the sensor. A solid conductive silver 
film is first printed on a flexible substrate PET film as the 
bottom electrode, followed by printing a layer of sensing 
material to cover the electrode with a large margin. Then, a 
grid-shaped top electrode is printed on the material. A 
capacitance value of over 400 pF as shown in Figure 2 was 
obtained for all the printed sensors when cellulose acetate 
butyrate is used as the sensing material. No hysteresis effect 
was observed from the sensors. 
c
b
a
d
 
Figure 1. Design of a capacitive humidity sensor and the printed sensor. (a), 
bottom layer electrode; (b), sensing material layer; (c), top layer electrode; 
(d), printed sensor.  
 
 
The sensor performance depends on the thickness of the 
sensing material (as seen in Table 1), and the achievable film 
thickness depends on the printing method. Screen printing is 
45
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2023. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

only good for printing thick films, and the best sensor 
performance is 435 pF and 1.2pF/%RH. Flexo printing can 
print thinner films, 725 pF and 1.8pF/%RH can be achieved. 
Inkjet printing can very thin films, 2730 pF and 11.4 
pF/%RH was achieved. As screen printing is suitable for 
volume fabrication at low cost, the process was used for 
printing all the sensors used for study and application. 
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
Cp (pF)
RH (%)
 
Figure 2. Measured capacitance of a humidity sensor as a function of 
chamber humidity. () measured when humidity was changed ascendingly; 
() measured when humidity was changed descendingly. 
 
  
TABLE 1. EFFECT OF THE SENSING MATERIAL ON SENSOR 
PERFORMANC
 
 
The performance of the printed humidity sensors was 
fund related to environment temperature. Figure 3 shows the 
capacitance-RH plots of a sensor at seven different 
temperatures. At each of the studied temperatures, the 
capacitance (Cp) of the sensor responds linearly to the 
relative humidity (RH) changes. The sensitivity of the sensor 
- the slope of the Cp-RH plot at each testing temperature was 
obtained by linearly fitting the corresponding Cp-RH data, 
and are shown in Figure 4. The sensor sensitivity decreases 
with increasing temperature, from 1.5 pF/% RH at 5 oC to 
1.0 pF/% RH at 45 oC.   
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
510
520
530
540
  5 
oC
  10 
oC
  15 
oC
  20 
oC
  25 
oC
  35 
oC
  45 
oC
Cp (pF)
RH (%)
 
Figure 3. The capacitance-relative humidity relationship of a printed sensor 
at various temperatures. 
 
 
The further study at various constant water vapor 
pressures showed that the capacitance of the sensors 
decreases with increasing temperature at a constant water 
vapor pressure, and it increases with increasing water vapor 
pressure. The reason is that the capacitance change is directly 
proportional to the water solubility in the sensing material. 
From the measurement, the sorption of water in the sensing 
materials was estimated to be from-2.9 KJ/mol to -3.0 
KJ/mol. 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Sensitivity (pF/% RH)
Temperature (
oC)
 
Figure 4. The sensitivity-temperature dependence of a printed relative 
humidity sensor.  
 
 
With a capacitance value over 400 pF and a sensitivity 
above 1 pF/%RH, the printed sensors are acceptable for the 
measurement with a simple DC circuit in practical field 
application. A Credit-Sized Printed Circuit Board (PCB) for 
measuring the sensor’s capacitance was thus designed and 
fabricated for applying the sensors in building management. 
Figure 5 shows a fully packaged humidity sensor that 
directly gives humidity reading as a standalone sensing unit. 
An EnOcean’s STM 332U device was incorporated in the 
PCB for light energy harvesting, data processing and 
wireless communication. The harvested energy from room 
light and sun light in day time provides sufficient energy for 
powering the sensor measurement and data transmission 
uninterruptedly 24 hours a day. The packaged sensors were 
successfully deployed in the humidity monitoring and 
control of an office building. In the application, the sensors 
were programed to provide humidity data very 5 mins.  
 
humidity sensor
for temperature sensor
 
Figure 5. A packaged humidity sensor with self-powering and wireless 
communication capabilities. 
 
  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Printed capacitive humidity sensors with stacked parallel 
plates were developed to achieve a high capacitance of over 
400 pF and a high sensitivity of over 1.0 fF/%RH. By 
printing a thin layer of the sensing polymer, the capacitance 
value and sensitivity of the sensors can be substantially 
increased. It was found that the capacitance reading and 
sensitivity of the sensors decrease at elevated temperature, 
due to the intrinsic decrease of water sorption in the sensing 
polymer. The printed sensors were packaged with simple DC 
circuits and energy harvesting units as standalone sensing 
units for practical field application. They were successfully 
deployed in an office building for dynamic control.   
46
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2023. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

REFERENCE 
[1], S. 
Khan, 
L. 
Lorenzelli, 
and 
R. 
S. 
Dahiya, 
“Technologies for printing sensors and electronics over 
large flexible substrates: a review”, IEEE Sensors, 15, 
pp. 3164-3186, 2015. 
[2], Y. S. Rim, S. -H. Bae, H. Chen, N. D. Macro, and Y.  
Yang, “Recent progress in materials and devices toward 
printable and flexible sensors”, Adv. Mater. 28, pp. 
4415-4400, 2016. 
[3], F. J. Romero, A. Rivadeneyra, A. Salina-Castillo, A. 
Ohata, D. P. Morales, M. Becherer, and N. Rodriguez, 
“Design, fabrication and characterization of capacitive 
humidity 
sensors 
based 
on 
emerging 
flexible 
technologies”, Sens. and Actuators B 287, pp. 459-467, 
2019. 
[4], A. Rivadenenyra, J. Fernadez-Salmeron, M. Agudo-
Acemel, J. A. Lopez-Villanueva, L. F. Capitan-Vallvey, 
A. J. Palma, “Printed electrodes structure as capacitive 
humidity sensors: a comparison”, Sens. and Actuators 
B 244, pp.  56-65, 2016.                                                              
 
47
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2023. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-083-4
ALLSENSORS 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

