Flexible Laser-Reduced Graphene Oxide Thermistor for Ubiquitous Electronics
Francisco J. Romero, Noel Rodriguez, Diego P. Morales,
Francisco G. Ruiz, Encarnaci´on Castillo
Dept. Electronics and
Computer Technology
Facultad de Ciencias
University of Granada
Email: franromero@ugr.es, noel@ugr.es,
diegopm@ugr.es, franruiz@ugr.es,
encas@ugr.es
Almudena Rivadeneyra
Institute for Nanoelectronics
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen
Email: almudena.rivadeneyra@tum.de
Abstract—This work presents a versatile sensing platform, in-
tended for ubiquitous and ﬂexible electronics based on a laser
reduced-Graphene-Oxide thermistor. This technique enables the
fast and ecological production of reduced Graphene Oxide
without the need of masks or expensive lithography processes.
The ﬁnal transducer is fabricated on a ﬂexible plastic substrate in
order to use it as a superﬁcial patch. Finally, a full demonstrator,
which integrates this ﬂexible thermistor with a low power System
on Chip with wireless transmission, is presented.
Keywords–Graphene; rGO; ﬂexible; sensor; thermistor; SoC.
I.
INTRODUCTION
After the Nobel Prize in Physics 2010 was awarded jointly
to Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov for the isolation
of single Graphene ﬂakes, Graphene has become one of the
most studied materials in all the ﬁelds of technology, in
both theoretical and application lines. This interest is due
to its unique spectrum of physical, chemical and electrical
properties [1]. However, the expectations have not been yet
materialized into end-user applications due to, among other
reasons, the difﬁculty to obtain high quality samples with
the current mass production techniques. The research activity
related to Graphene has awaken the interest in other Graphene-
like materials. One of them is the reduced-Graphene-Oxide
(rGO) which, although it is far from achieving the unique
properties of Graphene, capitalizes part of its unique features
(e.g., ﬂexibility, transparency or electrical and thermal con-
ductivity) together with the great advantage of an easier and
simpler synthesis process. Several works have demonstrated
the potential of reduced-GO as a sensor [2][3]. In this work, the
rGO’s linear conductivity-temperature dependence is exploited
to develop a ﬂexible temperature transducer (thermistor). Fi-
nally, as a demonstrator of the potential of this technology, we
present a complete ultra-low power temperature monitoring
solution based on a reduced Graphene Oxide thermistor. After
the introduction, the manuscript is divided in four sections
Sections as follows: Section II introduces the process to obtain
rGO from the GO colloid. Section III presents the design of a
thermistor based on rGO as well as its electrothermal behavior.
Sections IV exempliﬁes the use of rGO ﬂexible sensors in
end-applications. Finally, the main conclusions are drawn in
Section V.
II.
GRAPHENE OXIDE REDUCED BY LASER
The ﬁrst step in the rGO-based thermistors fabrication
process is to synthesize the Graphene Oxide colloid (GOc).
This synthesis has been based on a fast and reliable production
technique which is a modiﬁed version of the Hummers and
Offeman method [4] which consists on the oxidation and sonic
exfoliation of graphite powder. The GOc can be deposited as a
thin and uniform ﬁlm on any non-porous surface (structurally
ﬂexible or not) and turned into rGO through a reduction
process. The alteration of the crystallographic network of
carbon atoms after the oxidation process turns the GO into
an electrical insulator. However, the GO reduction process
removes the functional groups and restores partially the crys-
tallographic structure [5], returning the electrical conductivity.
The reduction procedure selected is the laser photothermal
reduction [6], which offers the following advantages:
•
Environmental friendly.
•
High precision patterns without the use of mask.
•
Conductivity control through the laser power control.
Based on this third point, we studied the sheet resistance of
the lasered-rGO as a function of the laser photothermal power.
First, the GO was deposited on a polyethylene terephthalate
(PET) ﬁlm in order to provide ﬂexibility to the sample. After
that, it was reduced at a wavelength of 550 nm, which as
conﬁrmed by Raman spectroscopy is capable to reduce the GO,
using different values of the laser power. As seen in Figure 1,
the results obtained show that an increase of the photothermal
power implies a sheet resistance exponential decay. Therefore,
once the power exceeds 90 mW, the sheet resistance remains
almost constant.
According to these results, the selection of a laser pho-
tothermal power in the range [90, 115] mW would reduce the
variability among different samples for power shifts due to the
stability of the sheet resistance in this range.
III.
FLEXIBLE TEMPERATURE SENSOR BASED ON
REDUCED GRAPHENE OXIDE
There are a lot of works focused on the study of the con-
ductivity of the rGO using different substrates and reduction
methods. However, it is most difﬁcult to ﬁnd works about end-
use applications based on this technology. Because of it, this
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Figure 1. Lasered-rGO sheet resistance as a function of the laser power
(λ = 550 nm) for a GO concentration of 70 µg/cm2.
paper presents a rGO ﬂexible temperature sensor on the basis
of its conductivity dependence with respect to the temperature.
The developed transducer, shown in Figure 2, presents a
total resistance which depends on both sheet resistance and
pattern physical dimensions (width (W) and length (L)) as
follows:
RT = ρs · (L/W)
(1)
where RT is the total resistance of the sensor and ρs is the
sheet resistance of the rGO.
Figure 2. Image of laser reduction of GO deposited on PET ﬁlm. Inset:
Final ﬂexible temperature sensor.
Once GO is deposited on the PET ﬂexible ﬁlm and
patterned using the laser, a second PET ﬁlm is used to seal
the sensitive layer in order to avoid any undesired effect due
to the contact with the the atmosphere. In the middle of this
stack, two copper strips allow the access to the sensitive layer.
The dependency of the developed ﬂexible transducer resis-
tance with respect to the temperature is shown in Figure 3. As
seen in this ﬁgure, the response is almost linear and does not
Figure 3. Representation of the ﬂexible transducer resistance as a function of
the temperature. Heating and cooling cycles are shown.
present hysteresis. On the other hand, the sensitivity obtained
in this prototype is −77.43Ω/oC for the range of temperature
studied.
IV.
A SIMPLE APPLICATION: ULTRA-LOW POWER
SENSOR PLATFORM
As a demonstrator of the potential of this technology, a
device to monitor the ambient temperature has been developed
based on the rGO sensor previously detailed. This device,
shown in Figure 4, combines the rGO sensing capabilities with
the versatility that the System-on-Chip (SoC) devices offer.
This prototype, whose controller is the low power version
of the Programmable System-on-Chips (PSoCs) by Cypress
[7], has also wireless data transmission capability. Then, the
measured temperature can be sent by Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE, or Bluetooth 4.0) to a master device, e.g., a smartphone.
Figure 4. Prototype developed.
V.
CONCLUSION
Graphene Oxide has been suited as a ﬂexible sensing
platform ready to be exported to certain end-user applications
as it was shown in this work. Once the GO is deposited on
a ﬂexible substrate, a simple process of reduction based on
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

laser gives to the GO the conductivity needed to constitute
a thermal transducer whose conductivity is completely linear
with respect to the temperature. Therefore, we advocate that
once the SoC systems become available on ﬂexible substrates,
the rGO-based sensors will take a big step forward expanding
to multiple ubiquitous applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported by the Spanish
Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport (MECD) through
the pre-doctoral grant FPU16/01451 , the National Excellence
Research Project TEC2017-89955-P and the University of
Granada through the scholarship ”Initiation to Research”.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. K. Geim and K. Novoselov, “The rise of graphene,” Nature Materials,
vol. 6, 2007, pp. 183–191.
[2]
Y. Wang et al., “Ammonia gas sensors based on chemically reduced
graphene oxide sheets self-assembled on au electrodes,” Nanoscale
Research Letters, vol. 9:251, 2014.
[3]
D. Acharyya and P. Bhattacharyya, “Highly efﬁcient room-temperature
gas sensor based on tio2 nanotube-reduced graphene-oxide hybrid de-
vice,” IEEE Electron Device Letters, vol. 37, 2016, pp. 656–659.
[4]
W. S. H. Jr. and R. E. Offeman, “Preparation of graphitic oxide,” Journal
of the American Chemical Society, vol. 80 (6), 1958, pp. 1339–1339.
[5]
S. Pei and Hui-MingCheng, “The reduction of graphene oxide,” Carbon,
vol. 50, 2012, pp. 3210–3228.
[6]
E. Kymakis, C. Petridis, and T. D. Anthopoulos, “Laser-assisted reduc-
tion of graphene oxide for ﬂexible, large-area optoelectronics,” IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 20, 2014, pp.
106–115.
[7]
PSoC R⃝ 5LP: CY8C52LP Family Datasheet, Cypress Semiconductor.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

