Sensor-Based on PbZrO3/PbTiO3 with La2O3 for Measuring the Absorbed Dose in 
Disinfection of Food Products by Electron Beam in the Agricultural Industry 
 
 
Paulo E. Cruvinel 
Embrapa Instrumentation  
Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, São Carlos, SP, Brazil  
Email: paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a thermal detector using an 
inorganic crystal based on a chemical compound prepared 
with PbZrO3/PbTiO3 with 1% of La2O3. It has been designed 
for measuring the absorbed dose due the use of an electron 
beam applied for the disinfection of food products. The 
measuring arrangements for validation of the sensor were all 
carried out based on the use of incident doses up to 10 kGy, 
i.e., using several exposure times from a linear electron 
accelerator source with selective voltage in the range of 200 kV 
to 10,000 kV. For a given energy, the detector has a linear 
response with beam intensity and an inverse response with 
chopping frequency. A calibration curve which reports the 
relation of the absorbed dose (kGy) versus the sensor´s 
amplified output voltage is also presented. The detector may be 
used over a wide range of energies either inside or outside 
vacuum, and it does not require an external bias field. Results 
have shown the usefulness of such agricultural sensor in 
applications related to food safety. 
Keywords- sensor in agriculture; pyroelectric sensor; thermal 
detector; radiation in food; radiation measurements; pulsed 
electron deposition. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of radiation in the food industry consists of 
subjecting the product to a dose of radiation from a 
radioactive ionizing source, such as the radioactive isotopes 
Cobalt-60 (Co60) and Cesium-137 (Cs137), or equipment 
capable of producing such energy. In this context, the 
elimination of microorganisms, as well as the food 
disinfection can be achieved. Today, such procedures have 
been widely used in the agroindustry, in order to improve 
public health, i.e., for reducing the number of people who 
acquire diseases caused by microorganisms. In addition, it 
can help to gain a competitive advantage, i.e., since the 
radiation extends the useful life of the food favoring the 
logistics to distant places. Besides, since radiation extends 
the shelf life of irradiated foods, it is also useful to reduce 
losses, and operates as an inhibitor of the germination 
capacity of foods that were intended for human consumption. 
Food irradiation has always been carried out in a 
controlled manner, to avoid contamination and damage to 
consumers. In general, the foods that are most susceptible to 
radiation are fruits, vegetables, cereals and animal products, 
i.e., products based on poultry, fish and beef. 
According to Fan et al. [1], the application of food 
irradiation is recognized worldwide as an effective method in 
food preservation. This technique became known in the 
1950s by the US Atomic Energy Commission, because of the 
US military's use in conserving food for use by troops in 
war. The first patent for the use of food irradiation was in 
1905 by J. Appleby and A. J. Banks for use in cereals using 
alpha, beta or gamma rays, for reducing the incidence of 
disease [2]. Over a long period, irradiated foods were 
evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and 
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) [3][4]. 
Since the 1960s, the World Health Organization (WHO) and 
the Joint Expert Committee on Food Irradiation (JECFI) 
have been adopting the use of methods base on the absorbed 
dose, mainly to evaluate the safety of irradiated foods. Such 
decision was carried out in agreement with the Food and 
Organization (FAO) and the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) [5]-[7]. 
The IAEA defines doses of up to 56 kGy to Cobalt, or 
electrons with energies of up to 10 MeV for not having risk 
to be consumed nutritionally. The JECFI documented that 
any food irradiated with a dose of 10 kGy would not pose 
any toxicological problem and that it would not lead to 
nutritional or microbiological problems. 
 These recommendations were accepted by the Codex 
Alimentarius Commission and from that time on, the number 
of countries and facilities that adhered to the use of ionizing 
radiation in food have grown [8]. Today, irradiated food is 
accepted in many countries, including Brazil [9]. 
The irradiation process comprises the exposure of food, 
either prepacked or in bulk (without packaging), to a pre-
established level of ionization radiation. It is very important 
to know the sources of ionizing radiation, i.e., how the 
energy is quantified, its limitations and advantages.  Ionizing 
radiation interacts with the molecules of materials by 
allocating or displacing electrons. This way, by creating 
negative 
ions 
(Anions) 
or 
positive 
ions 
(Cations) 
respectively, energy is transferred to the irradiated body.  
The effects of radiation on biological materials can be direct 
or indirect. One of the direct effects occurs due to the 
chemical reactions, as a result of the bombardment of 
irradiated energy in the molecule. The indirect effects are 
due to the consequences of the reactive diffusion of free 
radicals formed by the radiolysis of the water, as for 
example, the hydroxide radical OH-, the H atom and the 
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). 
In this context, several sources of radiation can be used. 
Among them, the gamma radiation, the radiation produced 
by the use of X-ray equipment and the radiation produced by 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

an electron beam are more prominent. The use of the 
electron beam machines, and also the X-rays, has the 
advantage of being able to be switched on and off according 
to the need, which leads to better compliance with security 
protocols.  
An 
electron-based 
accelerator 
machine 
uses 
electromagnetic fields to propel the charged particles to 
nearly light speed and to contain them in well-defined 
beams. However, such field of knowledge is still open to 
research, development, and innovation, i.e., in relation to the 
establishment of transducers and sensors that can provide 
conditions for an adequate evaluation of the beam for food 
quality control, as well as the doses the food is subject to.   
This work presents the use of a crystal prepared with 
PbZrO3/PbTiO3 
and 
La2O3, 
which 
has 
pyroelectric 
properties, for measuring the absorbed dose in the processes 
related to the use of electron beam for food disinfection in 
the agricultural industry.  
After this introduction, this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents the main related theoretical background 
and modelling for both the pyroelectric crystal and the 
electron beam and its interaction with matter; Section 3 
presents the materials and methods for the development of 
the sensor, and its validation when measuring the absorbed 
dose in the disinfection of food products by electron beam. 
The results and discussions are presented in Section 4, 
followed by the conclusion and future work in Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED THEORY AND MODELING 
In pyroelectric crystals, a change in temperature alters the 
lattice spacing of a non-symmetrically located ion which 
varies the spontaneous polarization of the crystal [10][11].  
This variation of spontaneous polarization produces a 
displacement current (i) parallel to the polar axis described 
by: 
 
 
(1) 
 
where p(T) is the pyroelectric coefficient evaluated at 
temperature (T) and (A) is the surface area normal to the 
polar axis. Since the field across the crystal is zero, the 
conduction current through the crystal is zero, and the 
measurement is not affected by the crystal resistance. 
Therefore, the energy deposited per second by the electron 
beam is obtained by the product of the current of the beam 
and the energy losses of the electron in the crystal. Despite 
the fact that some of this deposited energy will escape the 
crystal in different forms, such as electromagnetic radiation, 
mainly in the X-ray region, a considerable part of the energy 
will be transferred to the crystal as heat.  
The equivalent circuit for measuring is shown in Figure 
1, where it is possible to observe (Rx) and (Cx), which are the 
crystal resistance and capacitance, respectively. When 
exposed to a modulated radiation, the incident power of a 
beam which hits the crystal that presents pyroelectric 
properties can be given by [12]: 
 
 
(2) 
 
where (Pi) is the incident energy, =2f, (f) is given in Hz, 
and it can be written as a discrete sum of trigonometric or 
exponential functions with specific frequencies. 
 
Figure 1. An equivalent circuit for the pyroelectric crystal, where Rx and Cx 
are the equivalent resistance and capacitance respectively. 
 
In this context, the thermal properties for an ideal 
pyroelectric crystal can be described as follows: 
 
 
(3) 
 
where (H) is the thermal capacitance of the crystal, which 
operates as a sensor to detect the amount of radiation from an 
electron beam, (ΔT) is the temperature rise of the sensor, i.e., 
caused by an incident and modulated radiation, (GR) is the 
radiative heat conductance, and () is the fraction of the 
incident radiation that is absorbed by the crystal and 
transformed into heat [13]. Equation (3) is used to determine 
the variation in temperature. Therefore, by solving (3) in the 
steady state, it is possible to obtain: 
 
 
(4) 
 
Due to the pyroelectric effect, the variation in 
temperature T(,t) leads to the generation of surface charge 
Q(,t) on the sensor`s electrodes, i.e., when connected to 
an electric load. Then, the amount of charge can be 
determined by: 
 
 
(5) 
 
Besides, the surface charges produce a voltage in the 
equivalent open circuit board of the crystal, and can be given 
by: 
 
(6) 
where (Cd) is the capacitance of the pyroelectric sensor. 
By combining (8) and (9), it is possible to verify that, for 
an open circuit, the voltage becomes equal to: 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
(7) 
 
where (k) is the dielectric constant and (0) is the dielectric 
permittivity in the vacuum. The performance of the sensor is 
determined by the minimum radiation power it can measure. 
This minimum power is determined by the responsiveness 
and noise present in the detection process [14]. Among the 
noise to be considered, it can be: thermal or radiation noise 
[15], dielectric noise [16], amplifier noise [17], and Johnson 
noise [18].  
Now, rewriting (7) in terms of the stopping power for 
electrons, it is possible to find the output voltage as a 
function of the incident energy flow, i.e., in terms of the 
absorbed dose. For this, it is important to observe the rate at 
which charged particles lose energy as they travel through a 
given material, i.e., called the stopping power of that 
material. The stopping power, it is made up of two parts, the 
electronic stopping power due to the interaction with the 
atomic electrons of the material and the nuclear stopping 
power. In relation of the interaction of radiation with matter, 
the electronic stopping power is, in general, much larger than 
the nuclear stopping power. However, it is important to 
observe that the nuclear stopping power is not zero and 
nuclear reactions do take place even in few processes. 
Besides, a minus signal is used together with the stopping 
power to make the association with the phenomena that 
occur when an ion is losing kinetic energy. When electrons 
bombard a target, their energy is given up in the two 
processes mentioned above, which are referred to as collision 
losses and radiation losses. 
The collision losses process involves Coulomb-force 
interactions with the electrons of the atom, while the 
radiation losses process result from interactions with the 
nuclei.  
A high-speed electron will lose its energy in a target by 
many interactions of both physical phenomena types. 
Besides, each interaction will usually give rise to a change in 
the direction of the electron, i.e., resulting in tortuous paths 
in a thick target. On the other hand, if one is using a thin 
target, through which the electron pass with little energy 
loss, or even by changing direction, the deposited energy will 
escape the crystal mainly in the form  of  X-rays. 
The same situation can be faced, when using higher 
accelerating potentials, i.e., may occur above 10 MeV. In 
addition, there are some target materials that allow the 
change of incident energy into heat, i.e., for such cases one 
can use them to detect radiation, they can be recognized as 
potential material for the development of sensors, as thermal 
detectors. Then, the minimum impact parameters will 
correspond to those collisions in which the maximum 
amount of kinetic energy is transferred to target. 
Furthermore, the maximum impact parameter also has to be 
estimated from different considerations. The basis of this 
process is that the ion rapidly moves past the electrons in the 
material and delivers a sharp impulse to them. In the material 
the electrons are bound in atoms and are orbiting with their 
own characteristic frequencies or time scales. Thus, in order 
to have an adiabatic collision, the time for the ion to cross 
the atom should be less than the average time for an electron 
orbit [19]. Then, the total stopping power for a mixture with 
density () can be found based on the Bohr`s classical 
formula and using the expression presented by Bethe and 
Bloch [20]-[22]. Such concept is based on momentum 
transfer in a quantum mechanical correct formalism, i.e., 
with the expanded form of the electron number density, that 
means: 
 
 
(8) 
 
where (NA) is the Avogadro's number, (re) is the classical 
radius of the electron, (me) is the mass of the electron, (c) is 
the speed of light, (Zeff) is the effective atomic number of the 
crystals ‘mixture, (q) is the charge of the ion, (
) is the total 
mass number of the crystals ‘mixture, () is the relation 
given by the speed of the ion over the speed of light, (I) is 
the ionization potential, and the normalized total stopping 
power for the crystal is represented by (-1/(dE/dx)tt).  
From the expression (4), it is now possible to find (Pi) 
as a function of the total stopping power for the crystals 
‘mixture, i. e., given by: 
 
 
(9) 
 
By combining (7), (8) and (9) it is possible to find the 
sensor`s output voltage as a function of the total stopping 
power, which can be given as follows: 
 
 
(10) 
 
Since the pyroelectric crystal is obtained from a mixture 
of elements (Zeff) is taken as a function of the elemental 
composition [23] present in the sensor´s material. In other 
words, it is considered the fraction of the total number of 
electrons associated with each element, and its atomic 
number. Therefore, by using (10) it is possible to evaluate 
V(,t) as a function of the absorbed radiation dose.  
III. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The sensor is based on the use of a multi-component 
ceramic system consisting of Lead, Zirconium, Titanate, and  
Lanthanum oxide with a thickness of 2.2 mm, radius of 8.3 
mm, and () equal to 7.47 g/m3. It is assembled in a 
cylindrical aluminum chamber. Figure 2 shows the electronic 
circuit for signal processing. To insulate the detector from 
external noise a carbon black window was used over the 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

circular flat top surface of the crystal, i.e., to decrease the 
environmental light radiation noise. The ceramic used is a 
crystal having a 54/46 mol% of a PbZrO3/PbTiO3 mixture, 
where 1% by weight of La2O3 was added. Such arrangement 
allows properties that are quite desirable for sensors 
application, i.e., it yields a higher Curie temperature, of 
about 339°C, and substantially increases the dielectric 
constant. Table I shows the weight composition of the 
crystal, which is used as the basis for the sensor of radiation 
dose from electron beam, as well as the percent number of 
atoms/molecule. 
The electron beam doses and all the measuring were 
performed using an industrial linear electron accelerator with 
selective voltage in the range of 200 kV to 10,000 kV. This 
linear electron accelerator covers the useful energy range of 
0.3 MeV to 10 MeV, i.e., a Linac type, which is suitable for 
application in the sterilization of food products. Besides, the 
measurements were obtained with a chopper device, which 
enabled the modulation of the electron beam in a suitable 
range of frequencies, i.e., from units to hundreds of Hertz. 
 
TABLE I. WEIGHT COMPOSITION OF THE CRYSTAL, AS WELL AS 
 THE NUMBER OF ATOMS/MOLECULE. 
 
Based on the frequency used in the chopper, the input 
electron beam is controlled by periodic opening and closing 
of a switch used in its arrangement. Then, the electron beam 
can be controlled, i.e., the incident radiation flux. Therefore, 
the instruments that have been used with the signal 
processing and conditioning circuit were a variable 
frequency chopper, and an accurate voltmeter. 
The signal conditioning circuitry was implemented to 
allow adequate voltage level and a good signal/noise ratio. 
Figure 2 shows the circuit based on the use of the LF347, 
having four JFET operational amplifiers (OpAmp). This 
integrated circuit presents broad bandwidth (4MHz), high 
slew-rate (13V/μs), high impedance in their input (1TΩ), and 
fast settling time (2 µs). In addition, it has a well matched 
high voltage JFET input which provides very low input bias 
and offset [24]. Besides, a buffer circuit was also 
implemented using a CA3140 BiMOS OpAmp with a gate 
protected MOSFET (PMOS) transistors to provide input 
impedance equal to 1.5 TΩ, i.e., useful to allow a better 
impedance matching with a voltage meter [25]. For the 
implemantation of the signal processing circuit, due to the 
ability to shield from outside interferences, we used BNC`s 
connectors and coaxial cable.  
The beam chopper can be shielded with a 2.0 mm thick 
copper disk. The electron beam can be collimated to an area 
slightly larger than the area (A) of the crystal. The output 
signal from the crystal´s sensor can be connected to the input 
of the low noise amplifier, and the resulting averaged signal, 
which correspond the irradiated dose can be measured. 
 
 
Figure 2. Electronic circuit for signal processing (resistors are in  units).  
  During the measuring process, we also used an 
industrial dosimeter for the cross-calibration procedure [26], 
i.e., in order to obtain information from both the crystal`s 
sensor and the calibrated parallel-plate ion chamber [27], 
which is recommended to be used up to 10 MeV. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Figure 3 shows a photograph of the sensor`s prototype 
and the electronic circuit used for signal processing. The 
output voltage intensity from the sensor based on the 
PbZrO3/PbTiO3 with La2O3 was found to be inversely 
proportional to the chopping frequency, as expected for a 
pyroelectric response [28], i.e, because such kind of crystal 
has a longer time for relaxation at lower frequencies.  
Equation (10) was evaluated by taking into account all 
the values of the parameters as presented in the literature, 
including the stopping power values for such mixture of 
elements. The simulation was performed by using a broad 
range of ion beam energies and a computer code [29].  
The theoretical results obtained from equation (10), at 
different energy values, for an incident radiation flux of 3.5 
µW are shown in Figure 4. It is possible to observe in this 
result the dependence of the output voltage in relation of the 
stopping power values, which are function of the incident 
energy and the material of the crystal. Therefore, to operate 
as a sensor for absorbed dose measurements, the crystal must 
be enable to fully stop the electron beam. This factor is also 
dependent of the crystal thickness. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Photograph of the sensor`s prototype with the electronic 
circuit used for signal processing.  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
 
Figure 4. Theoretical results for the pyroelectric voltage at different 
incident electron energy values.  
 
Based on such results, one can assume that if using both 
an adequate beam energy and thickness of the crystal, the 
slope of the response, as well as the efficiency for measuring 
absorbed dose, become energy independent. Besides, the 
calibration in radiation dose can be obtained by taking into 
account the output pyroelectric voltage of the sensor versus 
the electron beam dose measured. Therefore, the beam dose 
was obtained with the use of an industrial dosimeter based 
on the use of parallel-plate chamber. Figure 5 shows the 
calibration curve obtained when considering an electron 
beam having an energy of 5MeV, the amplified V(,t) in 
mV, and the absorbed dose in kGy. 
The absorbed dose is a physical quantity representing the 
mean energy imparted to matter per unit mass by the 
ionizing radiation. In the International System of Units (SI), 
the unit of measure for the absorbed dose is J/kg, and its 
special name is Gray [Gy]. The calibration curve was 
obtained in the range of 0.5kGy to 10kGy, taking into 
account the variation in the exposure time.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Calibration curve for the absorbed dose in the range of 0.5kGy to 
10kGy, i.e., based on chopping frequency equal to 3.5 Hz and a 5MeV 
electron beam energy. 
This result is suitable for the application of the developed 
sensor in the area of food irradiation, where the control, 
monitoring and calibration of irradiation devices based on 
the use of electron beam is continuously required. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Due to the obtained results, it is possible to conclude that 
the developed sensor is suitable to measure the absorbed 
dose in the food disinfection processes of the agricultural 
industry based on the use of electron beam. Besides, the 
theoretical modeling of the sensor was presented, including 
the output voltage as a dependent variable of the total 
stopping power for electrons. Such model was analyzed 
taking into account the mixture of the elements of the crystal 
used, as well as its response over a wide range of energies. In 
such context, the sensor´s calibration was performed in 
relation to the absorbed dose, where the analysis took into 
account the amplified output voltage as a function of the 
incident 5 MeV electron beam, i.e., considering different 
time-windows for the exposures. For such evaluation, it was 
possible to observe a sensor output voltage in the range from 
50 mV to 1.5 V, considering the use of a crystal having a 
thickness of 2.2 mm. This validation presented a linear 
correlation coefficient equal to 0.91 for doses in the range of 
0.5 Gy to 10 kGy. Therefore, its response has been 
practically linear with respect to the absorbed dose. For such 
validation, we took into account the full stopping power for 
the electron and the crystal’s thickness. This aspect must be 
observed to guarantee the correct operation of the sensor. 
Additionally, as a pyroelectric sensor, when it was 
exposed to a radiation flux, the absorbed energy caused an 
increase in temperature. This increase in temperature was 
proportional to the magnitude of the energy absorbed and 
inversely proportional to the specific heat, i.e., as observed, 
the electrical output of the sensor was proportional to the 
amount of energy absorbed. Furthermore, in terms of future 
prospects, this sensor can be embedded with its electronic 
circuits for signal processing, as well as be prepared with the 
aggregation of smart characteristics and functionalities. In 
this context, it will be able to bring potential benefits not 
only for the calibration of the electron beam accelerators but 
also for the automation and application of a pre-selected dose 
for specific foods and related absorbed dose for disinfection. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Brazilian 
Corporation for Agricultural Research (Grant numbers: 
03.10.05.011.00.00 and 01.14.09.0.01.05.05). The author 
also recognizes the motivation received from Sérgio 
Mascarenhas for the development of sensors based on 
ceramic materials. 
REFERENCES 
[1] X. Fan, B. A. Niemira, and A. Prakash, “Irradiation of fresh 
fruits and vegetables,” Food Technology, vol. 62, no.3, 2008, 
pp.36-43.  
[2] E. S. Josephson, “An historical review of food irradiation,” 
Journal of Food Safety, vol. 5, 1983, pp. 161-190.  
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

[3] United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA): “Food 
Irradiation: What You Need to Know”. [Online, retrieved: 
January, 2018]. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/down-
loads/ Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/UCM262295.pdf. 
[4] United 
States 
Department 
of 
Agriculture 
(USDA): 
“Irradiation Resources”. [Online, retrieved: January, 2018]. 
Available from: https://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsis/top 
-ics/food-safety-education/get-answers/food-safety-fact-sheets 
/production-and -inspection/irradiation-resources/. 
[5] A. P. Almeida, “Evaluation of the influence of the irradiation 
process on spices using the X-ray diffraction technique,” 
pp.102, (Master's Dissertation in Nuclear Engineering)- 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 
2006. 
[6]  R. G. Crede, “Studies on the effects of gamma radiation and 
electron accelerators on the detection of genetically modified 
corn (Zea mays),” pp. 185, (Master's Dissertation in Nuclear 
Technology) – IPEN, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil, 2005. 
[7] A. P. Urwaye, New Food Engineering Research Trends, 
284pp., Nova Science Publishers Inc: New York, pp. 284, 
2008.  
[8] The Science of Food Standards The Road from Codex 
Alimentarius Commission, 
In: 
Food 
and 
Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations and World Health 
Organization, Rome, pp. 51, ISBN 978-92-5-109823-3, 2017. 
[9] M. Behnoush et al.,“World market development and 
consumer acceptance of irradiation technology,” Foods, vol. 
5, 2016, pp. 79-85. 
[10] R. L. Byer and C. B. Roundy, “Pyroelectric coefficient direct 
measurement technique and application to a nsec response 
time detector,”  IEEE Transactions on Sonics & Ultrasonics, 
vol. 3, 1972, pp. 333-338. 
[11] P. E. Cruvinel, S. Mascarenhas, J. Miranda, and R. G. 
Flocchini, “The use of a Perovskite crystal as a detector for 
proton beam current”, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, 
vol. 39,1992, pp. 25-28.  
[12] A. A. de Carvalho and A. J. Alter, “Measurement of X-ray 
intensity in medical diagnostic range by a ferroelectric 
detector”, IEEE Transactions on Ultrasoics, Ferroelectrics and 
Frequency Control, vol. 44, no. 6,1997, pp. 1198-1203.  
[13] J. Cooper, "Minimum detectable power of a pyroelectric 
thermal received", Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 33, 
1962, pp. 92-101. 
[14] S.T. Liu and D. Long,  “Pyroelectric detectors and materials” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol 66, issue: 1, 1978, pp. 14-26. 
[15] J. F. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals, Oxford: University 
Press, pp. 78-189, 1957.  
[16] M. Sayer et al., “Dielectric properties and electrical noise in 
ferroelectric devices,” Integrated Ferroelectrics, vol. 5, issue 
1,1994.  
[17] R. Moghimi,  “Low noise signal conditioning for sensor-
based circuits,” Applications Engineering Manager, Analog 
Devices Inc., MS-2066, pp. 1-16, 2010. [Online, retrieved: 
January, 2018]. Available from: http://www.analog.com/medi 
-a/technical-documentation/technical-articles/MS-2066.pdf. 
[18] D. V. Perepelitsa, “Johnson noise and shot noise,” White 
Paper, MIT Department of Physics, pp. 4, November 27, 
2006. [Online, retrieved: January, 2018]. Available from: 
http://web.mit.edu/dvp/Public/noise.pdf. 
[19] A. Mozumder and Y. Hatano, Charged Particle and Photon 
Interactions with Matter: Chemical, Physicochemical, and 
Biological Consequences with Applications. New York: 
Marcel Dekker, pp. 870, 2004.  
[20] G. F. Knoll, Radiation Detection and Measurement, 3rd 
ed.,New York: Wiley, pp. 830, 2000. 
[21] S. Tanuma, C. J. Powell, and D. R. Penn, “Calculations of 
stopping powers of 100eV to 30keV electrons in 10 elemental 
solids,” Surface and Interface Analysis, vol. 37, issue 11, 
2005, pp. 978 - 988.  
[22] Z. Tan and Y. Xia, “Stopping power and mean free path for 
low-energy electrons in ten scintillators over energy range of 
20–20,000eV,” Applied Radiation and Isotopes, vol. 70, issue 
1, 2012, pp. 296-300.  
[23] R. C. Murty, "Effective atomic numbers of heterogeneous 
materials,” Nature, vol. 207, 1965, pp. 398-399. 
[24] Texas Instrument, “LF147/LF347 wide bandwidth quad JFET 
input operational amplifiers”, Snosbh1d, May 1999, Revised 
version on March, 2013. [Online, retrieved: January, 2018]. 
Available from: http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/lf347-n.pdf.  
[25] Intersil, “CA 3140 - 4.5MHz, BiMOS operational amplifier 
with MOSFET input/bipolar output”, Data Sheet, File 
Number 957.4, September, 1998. [Online, retrieved: January, 
2018]. Available from: http://www.qsl.net/n9zia/spec/ca3140. 
pdf. 
[26] K. A. Johansson, L. O. Mattsson, L. Lindborg, and H. 
Svensson, “Absorbed-dose determination with ionization 
chambers in electron and photon beams having energies 
between 1 and 50 MeV”, Proc. Symp. National and 
International Standardization of Radiation Dosimetry, (IAEA-
SM-222/35), Atlanta, vol. 2, IAEA, Vienna, 1978, pp. 222-
235. 
[27] L. O. Mattsson, K. A. Johansson, and H. Svensson, 
“Calibration and use of plane-parallel ionization chambers for 
the determination of absorbed dose in electron beams,” Acta 
Radiologica. Oncology, vol. 20, 1981, pp. 385-399. 
[28] J. Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physics, Design, 
and Applications. 3rd ed., USA: SpringerVerlag, 2004. 
[29] J. P. Biersack and L. Haggmark, “A Monte Carlo computer 
program for the transport of energetic ions in amorphous 
targets,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods, vol. 174, 1980, 
pp. 257-269. 
 
 
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-621-7
ALLSENSORS 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

