On Line E-Nose Technology for Safety and Quality Evaluation in Cereal Processing  
Federica Cheli, Luciano Pinotti, Matteo Ottoboni, Marco Tretola, Vittorio Dell’Orto 
Department of Health, Animal Science and Food Safety Milano, Italy 
Email: federica.cheli@unimi.it, luciano.pinotti@unimi.it, matteo.ottoboni@unimi.it, marco.tretola@unimi.it, 
vittorio.dellorto@unimi.it 
 
 
Abstract - The objective of this idea is to set up an electronic 
nose (e-nose) for the safety and quality evaluation of cereal 
products 
and 
by-products, 
focusing 
on 
mycotoxin 
contamination. The final goal is to evaluate the potential 
application of the e-nose technology as an on-line continuous 
monitoring and controlling tool in cereal processing, in 
particular wheat milling. E-nose could be integrated with other 
on-line analysis devices in a technological platform for 
monitoring and controlling food quality. Multi-sensor-devices 
and multi-sensor-data-fusion technology have a great potential 
value to the food industry to ensure that cereal products and 
by-products meet specifications according to their specific use. 
Keywords-Food safety; Mycotoxins; Electronic nose; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
During the last twenty years, the term food quality has 
assumed a new and more complex meaning. Topics such as 
sensory characteristics of a product (odour, colour and outer 
appearance), food safety, traceability or best practice are of 
great importance to today’s food industry. Many different 
sensing methodologies represent fast and precise potential 
tools for “total quality” evaluation, assurance 
and 
compliance with labelling. The applications of the electronic 
nose (e-nose) are numerous in several areas related to the 
food industry, mainly in the field of quality and authenticity 
evaluation of fish, meat, milk, wine, coffee and tea.  
Among the most important risks associated to cereals’ 
consumption are mycotoxins. Mycotoxins are metabolites of 
fungi capable of having acute and chronic toxic effects. 
Globally, mycotoxins have a significant impact on human 
and animal health, economies and international trade [1]. 
Cereals and cereal by-products constitute a major part of the 
daily diet of humans and animals. Food processing affects 
mycotoxin distribution and concentration. Cereal processes 
reduce and concentrate mycotoxins into fractions that are 
commonly used for humans and as animal feed, respectively. 
A wide range of analytical methods for mycotoxin 
determination in food has been developed in recent years [2]. 
At the industry level, the adoption of a rapid, low-cost, high-
throughput and on-line analytical approach is needed at all 
stages of cereal production and processing in order to 
guarantee the quality and safety of the production.   
To develop the idea to evaluate the potential application 
of the e-nose technology as an on-line continuous monitoring 
and controlling tool in cereal processing, a step by step 
procedure must be designed: knowledge of e-nose 
characteristics and applications in the cereal industry, proper 
selection of an appropriate e-nose system for the specific 
application, analysis of the cereal milling process to identify 
the optimal points for the e-nose analysis, analyze the critical 
points for the use of the e-nose in an integrated system for  
quality evaluation. 
II. 
THE ELECTRONIC NOSE 
The e-nose is an instrument which comprises an array of 
electronic chemical sensors, with partial specificity and an 
appropriate 
pattern 
recognition 
system, 
capable 
of 
recognizing simple or complex volatile organic compounds’ 
(VOCs) patterns associated to a product odour [3]. The 
conventional aroma analysis by gas chromatography–mass 
spectrometry (GC–MS) is too time-consuming, complex and 
labour-intensive for routine quality application. Compared to 
GC-MS, e-nose presents several advantages (portable, ease 
to use, rapid response and low costs) which make it a 
powerful tool for screening analysis to address the needs for 
routine quality testing in the food industry. Moreover, it 
could be easily integrated in current production processes. 
Fungal spoilage induces nutritional losses, off-flavours, 
organoleptic deterioration often associated to mycotoxins 
formation. Researches have correlated fungal activity with 
the production of typical VOCs [5]. E-nose technique has 
been proposed as a new method for the detection of VOCs as 
indicators of potential grain spoilage, detection and 
differentiation of mycotoxigenic strains of fungi in 
contaminated 
grains 
and 
semi-quantitative/quantitative 
evaluation of mycotoxin contamination [4][5]. This latter has 
been done using fungal VOCs as indicators of mycotoxin 
presence. The use of e-nose as a screening tool for the 
presence of mycotoxins in food must take into accounts the 
maximum levels or guidance values established by 
legislation. Preliminary results are encouraging, showing that 
it is possible to use volatile compounds to predict whether 
the mycotoxin levels in grains are below or above maximum 
permitted levels (Figure 1) [6][7].  
 
        
 
  
Figure 1. E-nose for the recognition of durum wheat naturally 
contaminated by deoxynivalenol (CART-model performance plot) (adapted 
from [ 8]). 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
Sampling is the greatest source of error in quantifying 
mycotoxin contamination because of the difficulty in 
obtaining samples from large grain consignments and of the 
uneven distribution of mycotoxins within a commodity [8]. 
Sampling uncertainty dominates in final uncertainty result, 
and then the adoption of an on-line e-nose analysis may 
represent an interesting analytical approach to reduce this 
uncertainty.  
Many characteristics that directly determine the effective 
quality and/or safety of a food are often described by its 
aroma. The e-nose is able to provide a global aroma 
fingerprint, which reflects the aroma complexity of a 
product. Thus, the evaluation of the “total quality” of food, 
which requires the simultaneous recognition, classification, 
and/or quantification of several parameters, could be 
achieved via a method based on the features and properties 
exhibited by e-nose. Consequently, e-nose could be applied 
for both research & development purposes and in-field 
applications (e.g., in food industry contexts and in 
production plants).  
 
A. Set the e-nose for the specific application 
The suitability of an e-nose for a specific application is 
highly dependent on the required operating conditions 
(environment) of the sensor array and the composition of the 
target VOCs. A proper selection of an appropriate e-nose 
system for a particular application must involve an 
evaluation on a case-by-case basis. E-nose selection for a 
particular application must necessarily include: assessments 
of the selectivity and sensitivity range of individual sensor 
arrays for particular target VOCs (i.e., related to mycotoxin 
contamination, 
target organoleptic 
properties of the 
products), the number of unnecessary (redundancy) sensors 
with similar sensitivities, as well as sensor accuracy, 
reproducibility, response speed, recovery rate, robustness, 
and overall performance. Most of these steps are common 
points of a validation procedure. To set up the e-nose for 
mycotoxin analysis, naturally contaminated samples will be 
divided into two subsets. One of the two subsets, training set, 
will be used to calibrate the model, and the other one, 
validation set, will be used to verify the robustness of the 
established model. Pattern recognition systems (principal 
component analysis - PCA; linear discriminant analysis - 
LDA) will be employed to select variables and build a model 
to improve the sample discrimination according to 
mycotoxin contamination. Results may give crucial 
information for the development of on-line e-nose devices 
involving a reduction in sensor number (relative to larger 
bench-top laboratory instrument versions) and identifying 
specific sensor types in the array to optimize the 
performance for specific applications. An important final 
consideration for designing e-nose systems as a rapid 
screening tool for food industrial applications is the 
incidence, 
frequency 
and 
acceptable 
rate 
of 
false 
classifications. Besides mycotoxin analysis, the set up and 
validation protocol could be used for enhancing the 
performance of the sensor system for a “total quality 
evaluation”. New ways to improve e-nose performance using 
better or more target-specific sensors, pattern-recognition 
algorithms, data analysis methods, will significantly amplify 
the range of applications of e-noses in the food industry.  
B. An eye in the cereal milling process for on-line process 
e-nose analysis  
Food process control necessitates real-time monitoring at 
critical processing points. Very schematically, the chain of 
the cereal milling process includes three main steps: 
receiving and storage of grains, production (milling process) 
and storage of products and by-products (Figure 2). The dry 
milling process of wheat is a gradual reduction process by 
which wheat is ground into flour or semolina, including 
several steps, such as cleaning and sorting, debranning and 
milling. At the industrial level, several on-line technological 
solutions for rapid and non-destructive analysis and quality 
control of the grain before and after milling are available, 
such as optical sorters, near infrared (NIR)-based analysis 
technology, on-line colour, contrast and ash control of cereal 
products. 
The e-nose could be used as an on-line sensing solution 
at different point (Figure 2): 1) receiving and storing of grain 
for 
controlling 
the 
safety 
aspect 
(i.e., 
mycotoxin 
contamination); 2) at the end of the milling process for 
controlling the quality and safety of the finished product (i.e., 
organoleptic characteristics, mycotoxin contamination, etc.); 
3) after storing before products are packaged or delivered to 
ensure that they meet specifications according to the specific 
use. E-nose data may be continuously calculated, transmitted 
and integrated in the process control system. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the chain of the cereal milling 
process and the possible e-nose optimal points for product and process “total 
quality” evaluation. 
III. 
E-NOSE IN AN INTEGRATED SYSTEM FOR TOTAL 
QUALITY EVALUATION 
In order to achieve a “total quality evaluation” of cereal 
products and by-products, e-nose data should be integrated  
with data from several on-line technological solutions for 
rapid and non-destructive analysis already are available (like 
those mentioned before, i.e., optical sorters, NIR-based 
analysis technology, etc.) to create a technological platform 
for food process monitoring. Multi-sensor data fusion is a 
technology able to combine information from several sources 
in order to improve the monitoring process performance. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

Low-level data fusion (direct integration of the raw data of 
various sensors) and intermediate-level data fusion (data 
fusion after the feature extraction process to keep enough 
raw information and eliminate redundant information) will 
be evaluated for classification efficacy in food quality 
evaluation. However, the final goal is to create a high-level 
fusion, namely decision-making fusion, able to analyze the 
features from each analytical system first and then to 
associate these features to produce a fused result. For 
intelligent loops, all the data must be transmitted to the 
process control system for a continuous quality assurance. 
Alarm messages must be issued in the case of drift-away 
from the target value to advice the operators.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
E-nose represents a powerful tool for safety and quality 
evaluation in cereal processing. Despite the advantages of e-
nose analysis, there are still few applications of e-nose 
adopted in industry. This could be attributed to the need to 
tune either the software and/or hardware to a specific 
application. Therefore, future work is needed on the 
materials’ side (new material for better selectivity, design 
and development of sensors that can be used reliably over 
long temporal horizons), on the data analysis side (better 
modeling and correlation between chemical markers and the 
sensor response, development of data fusion analysis for the 
process control system for a continuous quality assurance), 
on the industrial side (better understanding of the industrial 
needs related to quality control and monitoring of food 
processing). 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. P. Wild and Y.Y. Gong, “Mycotoxins and human disease: 
a largely ignored global health issue”, Carcinogenesis, vol. 
31, Jan. 2010, pp. 71-82, doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp264. 
[2] F. Berthiller et al., “Developments in mycotoxin analysis: an 
update for 2012-2013”, World Mycotoxin Journal, Feb. 2014, 
vol. 7, pp. 3-33, doi: 10.3920/WMJ2013.1637. 
[3] J. W. Gardner and P. N. Bartlett, “A brief history of electronic 
noses”, Sensors Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 18, April 1994, 
pp 210-211, doi: 10.1016/0925-4005(94)87085-3. 
[4] N. Magan and P. Evans, “Volatiles as an indicator of fungal 
activity and differentiation between species, and the potential 
use of electronic nose technology for early detection of grain 
spoilage”, Journal of Stored Products Research, vol. 36, Oct. 
2000, pp. 319-340,  doi: 10.1016/S0022-474X(99)00057-0. 
[5] N. Sahgal, R. Needeman, F. J. Cabanes, and N. Magan, 
“Potential 
for 
detection 
and 
discrimination 
between 
mycotoxigenic and non-toxigenic moulds using volatile 
production 
pattern: 
A 
review”, 
Food 
Additives 
& 
Contamiants, vol. 24, Oct 2007, pp 1161-1168, doi: 
10.1080/02652030701519096. 
[6] F. Cheli, A. Campagnoli, L. Pinotti, G. Savoini, and V. 
Dell’Orto,. “Electronic nose for determination of aflatoxins in 
maize”, 
 
Biotechnology, 
Agronomy, 
Society 
and 
Environment, vol. 13S, 2009, pp. 39-43,  
[7] A. Campagnoli et al., “Use of the electronic nose as a 
screening tool for the recognition of durum wheat naturally 
contaminated by deoxynivalenol: a preliminary approach”, 
Sensors, 
vol. 
11, 
May 
2011, 
pp. 
4899-4916, 
doi:10.3390/s110504899.  
[8] F. Cheli, A. Campagnoli, L. Pinotti, E. Fusi, and V. Dell’Orto,  
“Sampling feed for mycotoxins: acquiring knowledge from 
food” Italian  Journal of Animal Science, vol. 8, Jan 2009, pp. 
5-22, doi: 10.4081/ijas.2009.5. 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-523-4
ALLSENSORS 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

