Design and Fabrication of Sensor Chip with Heater for Semiconductor Flip-Chip 
Package Application 
 
Boo Taek Lim, Young-Su Kim, Nam Soo Park, Boung Ju Lee 
Nano Device Development team 
National NanoFab Center  
Daejeon, Korea 
email:btlim@nnfc.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— A heat generated from semiconductor chips and 
chip packages is considered a critical issue for high-
performance and reliable device operation. In this paper we 
demonstrate a simple semiconductor chip with both heat 
generation and temperature sensor functions. By evaluating 
the relationship between the temperature of the chip and the 
resistance of the sensor, the thermal properties of the 
semiconductor package material can be determined. The heat 
generation block and temperature sensor are made of 
aluminum lines, not active circuit, so manufacturing cost is low 
and the processes are simple. 
Keywords- semiconductor; sensor chip; heater; micro-bump; 
flip-chip package; thermal reliability 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Due to increased complexity, integrity and operating 
speed, the heat generated by semiconductor chips and chip 
packages has been viewed as a problem to be solved for 
high performance and reliable device operation. The 
demand for diverse applications requiring small and high-
speed operation, such as smartphones and wearable 
appliances, has dramatically increased heat generation. For 
this reason, testing and managing the heat of the chip has 
become very important in commercial devices [1], [2]. The 
packaging technology of integrated circuits has also been 
technologically advanced. As a way to solve the 
performance degradation problem due to the heat rise of the 
chip, the underfill material is used for the flip chip 
packaging technology.  
In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a simple 
semiconductor chip with heat generation function and 
temperature sensor to test thermal characteristics of the 
packaging materials. This chip is much simpler than the 
diode temperature sensor array chip used to evaluate the 
thermal properties of semiconductor underfill materials and 
makes more profitable in terms of manufacturing cost and 
duration [3]. It was fabricated in National NanoFab Center 
(NNFC) of Korea using Complementary Metal Oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS) and Micro Electro Mechanical 
System (MEMS) manufacturing processes. The fabricated 
chips were characterized using an I-V measuring instrument 
and a temperature measuring instrument with a Thermo-
Electric Couple (TEC) controller.  
II. 
DESIGN AND FABRICATION 
As shown in Figure 1, the heat generation area (heater) 
and the temperature sensing line (sensor) are integrated on a 
single chip at the same time. The heater block is placed on 
both sides of the sensor. Each heater block is designed for 
200-ohm to generate heat. The sensor detects the 
temperature with a simple principle that the resistance 
increases when it receives heat, and it is designed 1K-ohm 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic of chip with heater and sensor. 
 
After deposit a protection layer and open the pad, the Sn/Ag 
micro-bump was formed on the chip pad with a diameter of 
70um as shown in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2. Fabricated a silicon chip. (a) Microscope image of chip, (b) 
Micro-bump array SEM image, (c) Thermal image of IR camera on flip chip 
packaged on PCB 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

The IR camera image shows that heat is generated when the 
heater block is powered up, as shown in Figure 2(c). When 
the underfill material is filled between the chip and the 
Printed Circuit Board (PCB), the generated heat is 
transferred to the PCB through the underfill material, so that 
the chip temperature does not rise. The chip temperature rise 
rate is determined by the thermal conductivity of the 
underfill material. 
III. 
MEASUREMENT 
The fabricated chip was characterized with I-V 
measuring instrument and temperature measuring instrument 
with TEC controller. First, the chip temperature is measured 
while increasing the applied voltage as shown Figure 3(a), 
then, the resistance of the sensor was measured in the same 
way as shown in Figure 3(b). When the power is supplied to 
the heater block, heat is generated in the 200-ohm aluminum 
line per block and chip temperature rises. The generated heat 
is transferred to the sensor located in the center of the chip, 
increasing the resistance of the sensor. It can be seen that as 
the voltage increases, the temperature of chip and the 
resistance of sensor increase with the shape of the quadratic 
function. Based on these results, the resistance of the sensor 
versus temperature of the chip is derived as shown in Figure 
3(c). Using this result, the temperature of chip can be 
determined by measuring the resistance of the sensor without 
measuring directly with the thermometer.  
 
 
(a) 
       
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 3. Electrical characteristics of the proposed chip. (a) Measured 
resistance of sensor, (b) Measured temperature of chip, (c) Calculated 
resistance as a function of temperature. 
 
This result is very useful for testing semiconductor 
packaging materials such as underfill. Unerfill fills the gap 
between the chip and PCB for heat transfer and bump 
protection. The higher the thermal conductivity of the 
underfill material, the more heat is transferred to the PCB. 
As a result, the temperature of the chip and the resistance of 
the sensor will not increase significantly. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We have demonstrated the relationship between chip 
temperature and sensor resistance by fabricating chip with 
heat generation and thermal sensor functionality using 
semiconductor processes. The proposed structure and 
method can be used to test the thermal properties of 
semiconductor packaging materials. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Ali, K. Sung-Mo, B. Avran, and C. Bernad, “Scanning the special 
issue on on-chip thermal engineering,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94, no. 8 , pp. 
1473-1475, 2006.  
[2] M. Toshihiro, D. Haruka, and I. Hideyuki,  “Tomoyuki H., Takashi, 
O. A test structure for analysis of metal wire effect on temperature 
distribution in stacked IC,” Int. C. Microelectronic Test Structure 
(ICMTS), 2-1, pp.22-26, 2016.  
[3] Lee. W.S, Han. I.Y, Yu. Jin, Kim. S.J, and Byun. K.Y, “Thermal 
characterization of thermally conductive underfil for a flip-chip 
package using novel temperature sensing technoque,” Thermochinica 
Acta 455, 148-155, 2007. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-543-2
ALLSENSORS 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

