A Study on Prediction Model of Energy Consumption for 
Demand Response Service of Wastewater Treatment Facility 
 
Byungmin Kim, Eunggi Lee, Kiwoong Kwon, Jungmee Yun 
Energy IT Convergence Research Center 
Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Republic of Korea 
E-mail: {6954kbm, leg429, kiwoong.kwon, yunjm}@keti.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Recently, 
high-power-demanding 
wastewater 
treatment processes have been introduced in the wastewater 
treatment facilities according to the strict water quality 
standard of the effluent water. The influent water quality of 
the wastewater treatment facilities differs according to 
environmental factors. However, the processes of the 
wastewater treatment facilities are operated with the 
maximum load to meet the effluent water quality standard. 
The wastewater treatment facilities can be utilized as a 
demand response resource by analyzing the wastewater 
treatment process and power usage patterns according to the 
influent water quality. In this study, we describe the power 
measurement system, the power usage pattern, and the power 
consumption prediction model of the wastewater treatment 
facility for the application of demand response service. 
Keywords-Demand 
Response; 
Energy 
Consumption 
Prediction; Neural Network; Power Measurement System; 
Wastewater Treatment Facility 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
High-power-demanding wastewater treatment processes 
have been introduced in the wastewater treatment facilities. 
As of 2015, the electricity consumption of the Republic of 
Korea’s public wastewater treatment facilities is 4,900 GWh, 
which accounts for 1% of total electricity consumption in the 
Republic of Korea. 
Currently, wastewater treatment facilities are uniformly 
operated to attain the quality standard of the effluent water 
irrespective of the influent water quality. However, the 
quality of the influent water changes according to the 
weather, season, and time in which people are active. 
Therefore, by analyzing the quality of the influent water and 
the power usage patterns of the wastewater treatment 
facilities, it appears to be able to avoid power-load-peak-time 
through efficient operation. In addition, it is expected that the 
wastewater treatment facilities can be utilized as Demand 
Response (DR) resource through the development of 
operational scenario for DR. DR is that a consumer adjusts 
demand to avoid power load peak according to the amount of 
power supplied to the grid [1]. 
In this study, we describe the power measurement system, 
the power usage pattern analysis, and the power consumption 
prediction model of the wastewater treatment facility for the 
application of DR Service. 
 
 
 
II. 
CONSTRUCTION OF PILOT SYSTEM 
Currently operated wastewater treatment facilities must 
ensure the quality of effluent water at the same time 
continuous inflow of wastewater, therefore it is impossible to 
change 
the 
experimental 
environment. 
Hence, 
we 
constructed the pilot system in order to analyze the changes 
of the quality of the effluent water and the power usage 
pattern of the processes due to changes in the quality of the 
influent water and operation scenario. The pilot system is 
that simplified the Sequencing Batch Reactor (SBR) process 
system. Figure 1 is a flowchart of the pilot system. 
The SBR process consists in 6 steps such as Fill, Mix, 
React (Aerate, Mix), Settle, Decant, and Idle processes in 
one reactor and adjust the condition time according to the 
quality of the influent water [2]. 
In the Fill process, wastewater fills into the reactor and 
contacted with microorganisms. In the React process, 
organic and nutrient materials are removed by appropriate 
control of anaerobic, anoxic, and aerobic conditions through 
Mix and Aerate process. In the Settle process, separate the 
mixture into sludge and supernatant. In the Decant process, 
discharge the separated supernatant. 
In order to apply DR service to the wastewater treatment 
facilities, it is necessary to analyze the power usage patterns 
of the individual devices and the overall power consumption 
measurement for the development of the operating scenario. 
The main devices of the pilot system used in this study are 
Influent Pump, Sludge Seeding Pump, Mixer, Submerged  
 
 
Figure 1. Flowchart of The Pilot System 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

 
 
Mixer, SBR Blower, Effluent Pump, and Sludge Wasting 
Pump. Therefore, we have developed a system that measures 
the total power consumption as well as the power usage of 
individual devices and stores them in a database. The power 
measurement system consists of the power meter, the 
gateway, and the server. In order to transmit and receive data 
wirelessly, the LoRa communication module is connected to 
a power meter installed in each device. The server receives 
the data through the LoRa Gateway and stores it in the 
database. The data includes voltage, current, power, and 
power factor. 
III. 
DATA ANALYSIS AND MODEL DESIGN 
The wastewater treatment process of the pilot system 
takes six hours in one cycle and proceeds in the order of Fill, 
Mix, Aerate, Mix, Settle and Decant process. Figure 2 shows 
the power usage patterns of the processes. There is no 
improvement point of efficiency in Fill and Decant Process 
because inflow and outflow of water must be fixed. However, 
Mix and Aerate process have a direct impact on the quality 
of the effluent water. In addition, the Mixer and SBR Blower 
used in the process can be variably controlled. Therefore, by 
controlling them variably according to the quality of influent 
water, it will be possible to reduce the power consumption 
and satisfy the effluent water quality standard. 
In order to utilize the wastewater treatment facilities as 
DR resource, it is necessary to predict power consumption 
according to the influent water load and judge whether the 
effluent water quality standard and the power reduction 
amount can be satisfied through the variable control of the 
devices. In this study, we used the neural network model to 
apply features such as water quality and environmental 
factors in the future. The past power usage data of the pilot 
system is the result of the general wastewater treatment 
scenario. The data was measured in 10-minutes intervals and 
the unit is watts. Therefore, 36 data is stored in one cycle and 
144 data is stored in one day. Based on this, we have 
constructed the neural network model that predicts one cycle 
(36 data) from past 24 hours data (144 data) [3]. The data 
looks like a time series. However, it showed poor 
performance when used in Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). 
Hence, we used Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) Model. 
 
  
IV. 
EXPERIMENT AND EVALUATION 
Figure 3 shows train data, actual data, and predicted data 
pattern. The left of the graph is the train and the input data 
pattern. The result of predict data by the model is on the right 
of the graph. The predicted data shows about 45.39 Root 
Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and about 1.79% Mean 
Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE). We confirmed that the 
predicted data is very similar to the actual data. Thus adding 
effluent water and influent water quality to the model will 
predict power consumption and effluent water quality 
depending on influent water quality. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, we have proposed the power measurement 
system, the power usage pattern analysis, and the power 
consumption prediction model of the wastewater treatment 
facility for the application of DR Service. The proposed 
system has collect power usage data from each device and 
predicts power usage pattern. The accuracy of the model in 
the experiments showed the feasibility of the proposed 
system. Adding the influent water quality and effluent water 
quality parameters to the model will enable the wastewater 
treatment facilities to be used as DR resource. For future 
research, we will add influent water quality and effluent 
water quality parameters to the model. We will then apply 
the model and system in large-scale wastewater treatment 
facilities and measure performance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Korea Institute of 
Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and 
the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the 
Republic of Korea (No. 20172010000780) 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. H. Albadi and E. F. El-Sadany, "A summary of demand 
response in electricity markets," Electric power systems 
research, vol. 78, no. 11, pp. 1989-1996, 2008. 
[2] S. Mace and J. Mata-Alvarez, "Utilization of SBR technology 
for wastewater treatment: an overview," Industrial & 
engineering chemistry research, vol. 41, no. 23, pp. 5539-
5553, 2002. 
[3] D. F. Specht, "A general regression neural network," IEEE 
transactions on neural networks, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 568-576, 
1991 
 
 
Figure 3. Train, Actual, and Predicted Data Pattern 
 
 
Figure 2. Power Usage Pattern of The Processes 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

