Research for Improvement of Resolution of Distance Sensor 
Using Fluctuation of Laser Terminal Voltage due to Self Coupling Effect 
 
Tatsuya Ohba, Norio Tsuda, Jun Yamada 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Aichi Institute of Technology, AIT 
Toyota, Japan 
E-mail: v18706vv@aitech.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— When acquire signal due to the self-coupling effect 
from the terminal voltage of the laser, the signal-to-noise ratio 
gets worse.  Because it is difficult to detect the signal, so it was 
impossible to measure the distance with a resolution of 1 cm or 
less. In this study, we proposed a new noise reduction method, 
that could carry out measurement for a resolution of 1 cm or 
less, which has not been done before. From the experimental 
results, we reported the factors that cause the errors in the 
distance sensor employing a self-coupling effect. 
Keywords-Self coupling effect; distance sensor; terminal 
voltage; Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting LASER. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Generally, the light intensity of a Laser Diode (LD) 
slightly fluctuates when part of the light scattered on the 
target surface interferes with the laser light on its active 
layer. Self-coupled laser sensors make use of this variation 
for distance [1], [2], micro displacement [3], [4], velocity 
measurement [5], [6] and so on. Aside from fluctuations of 
light intensity, self-coupling effect also causes fluctuations 
of the terminal voltage [7], which can be used, instead of the 
photodiode (PD), to develop a compact and inexpensive 
photodetector free sensor can be realized. Conventional, 
researches on laser distance sensors utilizing laser terminal 
voltage fluctuations caused by self-coupling effect, found 
out their wide range of applications, such as for position 
control 
of 
robot 
arms, 
collision 
avoidance, 
shape 
measurement, etc. 
A self-coupled laser distance sensor detects a signal 
called Mode Hop Pulse (MHP). The MHP changes 
proportionally with distance, and this property allows 
distance measurement to be done. MHP will be explained 
fully in section Ⅱ. 
The 
theoretical 
resolution 
of 
distance 
measuring 
equipment using MHP is determined by laser and circuit 
characteristics; in current researches, this is 0.44 mm, 
allowing a measurement accuracy at intervals of only 1cm. 
In this paper, we measured the accuracy at an interval of less 
than 1 cm. The measurement principle is shown in Section 
III, and the measurement results are shown in Section IV. 
The conclusion is described in section Ⅴ. 
 
II. 
DISTANCE MEASUREMENT PRINCIPLE 
In this section, we will briefly summarize the principles 
of the self-coupling effect, as it has been fully explained in 
the previous studies [8]. In the same longitudinal mode, the 
oscillation wavelength of a LD varies proportionally with the 
applied voltage. Moreover, when half the wavelength and the 
set of integer n are equal to the measurement distance, the 
fluctuation of the applied voltage due to the self-coupling 
effect is maximized. If a triangular wave modulation is 
applied to the LD, then a periodic fluctuation occurs, as 
shown in Figure 1. From the same figure, the dotted line 
shows the applied triangular wave voltage waveform, while 
the solid line indicates the resonance condition satisfied at 
equal intervals, thus, resulting to a step wise pulse that is 
superimposed on the applied voltage. The periodic voltage 
fluctuation due to the self-coupling effect is called MHP.  
 
Figure 1. Schematic of the MHP. 
 
The average frequency of all MHPs generated during one 
period of the modulated signal varies in proportion with the 
distance. Moreover, their frequencies are all equal when the 
total speed difference between the sensor and the object 
(Figure 1). The distance resolution of the self-coupled laser 
distance sensor is the length that the MHP changes by one, 
and the measurable distance is determined by the coherence 
length of the LD. Conventionally, the fast Fourier transform 
(FFT) is used to acquire the MHP frequency output of 
considerable white Gaussian noise (WGN), from the laser 
terminal voltage. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

III. 
MEASUREMENT SYSTEM 
Figure 2 shows a schematic of the distance measurement 
system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 2 Block diagram of distance measurement system. 
 
The Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting LASER (VCSEL) 
is a ULM850-B2-PL-S46FZP (ULM850), having a 850 nm 
wavelength, a 2 mW light intensity output, a single beam 
mode, and a circular polarization. The laser driver applies a 
520 Hz triangular wave with a 1.8 mA p-p triangular current. 
The ULM850 modulation efficiency is 0.46 nm/mA. The 
receiver is designed as a multistage band pass filter (BPF) 
with 2500 times amplification, and upper and lower cut-off 
frequency limits of 2 MHz and 100 kHz, respectively. The 
laser beam is adjusted to yield a collimated beam and the 
target object is a white paper. The comparator digitalizes the 
laser terminal voltage because the system-on-chip (SoC) 
device used only supports digital signals. 
The MHP frequency is measured using an SoC device 
named ZYBO. In the FFT using ZYBO, the sampling 
frequency is 3.2 MHz, four FFT processed spectral data 
were averaged to reduce noise.  
IV. 
MEASUREMENT RESULT 
Figure 3 shows the results of the distance measurement. 
Because the resolution of the time FFT is about 1.5 mm, the 
measurement interval was set to 3 mm.   
 
Figure.3. Result of distance measurement.  
The measurement distance was in the range 6.3 to 16.4 
cm. Ave is an experimental value obtained by averaging the 
results obtained from repeating the measurements 20 times 
in each distance. The optical path length becomes longer 
than the actual due to the refractive index of the lens. The 
theoretical value corrected by considering the influence of 
the lens is Theory, and the theoretical value not considered 
is Old Theory. From the comparison of the respective data, 
the theoretical values before correction did not match with 
the experimental values; however, the corrected theoretical 
values agreed with the experimental values.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
When the laser output light interferes with the returning 
light, the terminal voltage of LD slightly fluctuates. On the 
other hand, when the triangular wave modulation is applied 
to the applied voltage, the voltage frequency fluctuates due 
to the self-coupling effect generated during one cycle of the 
modulation signal, which varies in proportion to the 
distance. Therefore, by measuring the distance signal 
(MHP) from the fluctuation of the terminal voltage of the 
LD, the distance can be measured without PD. The 
measurement conducted for this study was for a resolution 
of 1 cm or less, which has not been verified so far. The 
results revealed that it is necessary to measure by taking into 
consideration the influence of the refractive index of the 
lens in the measurement of 1 cm or less. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Yah Leng Lim, K.Bertling, et.al,”Displacement and 
distance measurement using the change in junction 
voltage across a laser diode due to the self-mixing 
effect , Proc.SPIE Vol.6038 60381O (2006). 
[2] Gregory 
Mourat, 
Noel 
Servagent,Thierry 
M.Bosch,”Distance measurement using the self-mixing 
efect in a three-electrode distributed Bragg reflector 
laser diode”, Opt. Eng. 39(03), pp.738-743 (2000). 
[3] T. Gharbi, A. Courtevill and A. Chebbour,”Backscatter-
modulated laser diode for low-frequency small-
amplitude vibration measurement”, Appl. Opt. 36, 
pp.8233-8237 (1997). 
[4] G. Giuliani, S. Donati, and L. Monti,”Self-mixing laser 
diode vibrometer with wide dynamic range”, Proc. 
SPIE Vol. 4827, pp.353-362 (2002) 
[5] P. 
J. 
Groot, 
G. 
M. 
Gallatin, 
and 
S. 
H. 
Macomber,”Ranging and velocimetry signal generation 
in a backscatter-modulated laser diode”, Appl. Opt. 21, 
No. 21, pp.4475-4480 (1988) 
[6] L. Krehut, J. Hast, E. Alarousu, and R. Myllyla,”Low 
cost velocity sensor based on the self-mixing effect in a 
laser diode”, Opto-Electronics Rev. 11, No. 4, pp.313-
319 (2003) 
[7] J. 
Hashizume, 
S. 
Shinada, 
F. 
Koyama, 
K. 
Iga,“Reflection Induced Voltage Change of Surface 
Emitting Laser for Optical Probing”, Opt. Rev. 9 p. 186 
(2002) 
[8] Takeshi Yoshimatsu, Norio Tsuda, Jun Yamada,“Signal 
Processing for Distance Measurement Using Laser 
Voltage Fluction Due to Self-Coupling Effect”, SandM, 
Vol.29,No. 9 pp.1315-1324 (2017) 
Function 
Generator 
f = 520Hz 
500Vp-p(Triangle) 
Vias = +250mV 
Driving  
Circuit 
Receiving 
Circuit 
Biconvex Lens 
f = 21.2mm 
 
Incident 
Light 
Reflected 
Light 
Object 
 
Comparator 
ZYBO 
VCSEL 
(λ = 850nm) 
PC 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-691-0
ALLSENSORS 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing

